

1
A ,c
Ti ,1/1 • i ■ ' | '! I
—HI ' I
jlisir/ - ■-./•" jp


*i
■ -••• £%&***> s t. , y* kf^BiMa
'•; • v.- ■• />£< ''T'* *i ititMx f. £-
4 : '\y " >i— /* -.V L *»fjbs- ; 3rt^*2
9Se£i*& 'IrS■t-^T f /ir\*jj
MVJ- 5^r>\4vi_7Sfki^i i*£, ■, 1
Kf .'*• ; ' 'A. i " V* * -W' fcif/H 1 )"» "(V
jKcr- ■ '■\~f* w f W -JS» -i £, y •*. •: ,' " ■' ** -A/ -'i > " '."V .» N
- • ' JS&Siiiz \ i <i 4^,--v* ', S^pJ
/i~V* , ' /rv ' -- /*7jl, 7 f5>.--, J/ » 3*
5J5W s >Jv * \ ; k "7 , I
>;*>& C&wcr. fci V«i£ yj>
53R ■*»"■> -'' ??EfiK«iHSi®fartn


&
pgr
5p»- yf 8rjy yj0P , ■ . •




"LIGHTS OUT!"


Boys' Books of Adventure. 3/6 each.
Uniform with " Lights Out! "
AFTER SCHOOL. By ROBERT OVERTON. Illus-
trated by REINHOLD THIELE.
" Mr. Robert Overton has secured himself an assured
place as a story-writer for boys . . . Admirably
illustrated. Should prove a huge favourite this winter.''
—Bookseller and Newsagent.
LIGHTS OUT! By ROBERT OVERTON. Illustrated by
REINHOLD THIELE.
AFLOAT IN A GIPSY VAN. By E. R. SUFFLING.
THE KING'S PARDON; or, The Boy who Saved
his Father. By ROBERT OVERTON. Illustrated
W. H. MARGETSON.
REX; OR, WINNING THE VICTORIA CROSS.
By L. THOMPSON.
ADVENTURES IN NEW TEXAS. By GRACE
STEBBING.
" A well-written story, dealing with a feature of life
quite familiar to English stay-at-homes, and the story
has all the charm of reality."— Freeman.
LONDON: JARROLD SONS, IO and n, Warwick Lane.
And of all Booksellers.




/" 1
JM
''The Frenchman's guns were belching forth a terrific cannonade. —Page 198.


IGHTS OUT!"
ROBERT OVERTON
Author of '' After School Fish," «The Overton Reciter
" /WW Dozen f " Ten Minutes" The King's Pardon
ILLUSTRATIONS BY REINHOLD THIELE
SECOND EDITION
LONDON
JARROLD & SONS, 10 & u, WARWICK LANE, E.C.
[-4// Rights Reserved]




A 716/003
CONTENTS.
How CAPTAIN STAUNCHEON DID HIS DUTV - n
THE BOY WHO FORGOT HIS PRAYERS - 25
GOING TO SEA ! OR, MY VOYAGE IN THE ANTIPODES 34
THE COLONEL'S HEART - - - 46
THE HIDDEN GOLD (Part I.) - - 58
THE HIDDEN GOLD (Part II.) - - 73
BIG BEN; OR, THE BOYS WHO BOUGHT A LIFE-BOAT 84
A DARK NIGHT'S WORK - - - GS
WLLHELM - - - . IXI
V ALTER QUICKLEIGH'S FLRST DAY AT BUSINESS - IL6
PLUCK 128
"THAT'S YOUR COURSE" - - . X4O
GOD'S WIND ON CHRISTMAS EYE - - 153
ALL ALONG THE LINE! - - . 164
How I GOT MY FATHER INTO PARLIAMENT - 173


PAGE
l82
J 95
208
217
227
243
- 254
266
- 281
2S8
EXPELLED ----- 182
A TALE OF FOUR SHIPS - - - *95
SEEN AT LAST; OR, THE IDIOT LAD - - 208
A DROP AND FOUR DOGS - - - 217
LOCKED IN!- - . • - 227
SMITH'S SISTER - 243
A MOMENT'S PASSION - - - - 254
THE ADVENTURES OF A COLD KEY - - 266
THE BOY WHO WON A BATTLE - - - 281
JOE FLOTSAM - - - - 288
TWICE SAVED ... - 305


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
" Why, it's young Stauncheon" - - - 10
"Please, sir, may I sit down?" - . 24
" How dare you leave the ship without permission ?" - 35
" Llloa! Where did you spring from?" - 47
"Clear out!" - - . - 59
" I'll cut her throat! "
A huge wave lifted her for a moment -_ g-
I opened my lips, but couldn t force out any words 99
Down from out the Gates of Heaven flew the Angel - no
He seized the burglar's neck with both hands - 117
My fingers touched the "something" from which the
groan proceeded - - . - 129
He raised it openly to his lips before the captain - 141
"My lass—my dear lass " - - - 152
The Colonel falls, a lifeless corse - - x -
" I stand here to support the resolution" - - 172


We clenched the bargain on the spot - - 183
The Frenchman's guns were belching forth a terrific
cannonade - 1 94
The white, wet face of the idiot boy - - 209
My bike and I fell to the ground - - - 216
"Follow the flag!" - - - 22^
Smith fainted - ... - 242
Dead ----- 2 55
Birds'-nesting near Brentwood - - - 267
He seized his bugle - - - 2So
" Would you have gone without me ? ; ' - - 289
"They are mine, and you shall not take them 1 - 304




- .- v 2


"LIGHTS OUT!"
HOW CAPTAIN STAUNCHEON DID
HIS DUTY.
IRST, for a few words way of introduction
to these stories. I know well the large
private boarding-school Dr. Audlem's
Salwey House College—in the big dor-
mitory of which they were all originally
told. In this big dormitory are twenty-six beds, and
the twenty-six boys occupying them are marched
upstairs at half-past eight every evening. A few minutes
before nine a master enters the room to see that every
boy is safely in bed. The striking of nine is the signal
° r ' Llshts Out!" and out they go. Until ten o'clock
subdued talking is not forbidden, and the custom in the
big dormitory for years has been to use this hour
between nine and ten for the purpose of "spinning
yarns. These stories are usually told by anybody who
likes to volunteer, except in the case of new boys. New
boys have to "pay their footing" by telling a tale
whether they want to or not But a few terms ago the
edroom monitor—a rather big boy named Martin
Abbott— insisted that the story-telling should be done
more systematically. He said that every boy in the
room must take his turn regularly in spinning a yarn or


be bolstered. There were thirteen beds on each side ;
the boy in No. i, on the right-hand side nearest the
door, must start the running, the boy next him take it
up the following night, and so on till every boy on the
right-hand side had done his duty. After that the boys
on the left would have to take their turn, running the
stories "all down the line" till the last bed on the left of
the door was reached. Then it might be time to have a
rest from story-telling. _
What we have to deal with is the stories (" touched
up ") told under these circumstances " in the dark " by
the boys of the big dormitory at Salwey House.
Nine o'clock. " Lights Out!"
" Hamilton ! " said IMartin Abbott.
«Ad sum," replied Jack Hamilton from Bed No. I.
"Keep your Latin for roll-call," enjoined the monitoi,
" and get on with your yarn.
"RLht you are," was the ready answer, and Jack
proceeded 'to tell How CAPTAIN STAUNCHEON DID
HIS DUTY.
Bob Stauncheon was the son of the captain of the
revenue cutter Scorpion , in the days when smugglers
still carried on business at certain places on the coast.
Bob was always a wild and reckless, though never a
bad-hearted, sort of fellow. The fact was that his
father being almost always away, the boys early
training had missed the restraint of his strong hand.
Bob's mother was a good woman, but she lacked
strength of will to curb her son's rash impulses. From
his earliest days he was always getting into mischief,
and his happy knack of getting out of it again only


encouraged him to fall into fresh mischief. At sixteen
he was a strong, fearless, dare-all lad, who seemed unable
to settle down steadily to anything.
Captain Stauncheon's home was close to a fishing
(and smuggling) town, on a very wild part of the coast
Soon after Bob's sixteenth birthday, the captain made
a stay at home of a good many weeks, and during this
time he learnt just what sort of a boy his son had grown
into. He saw that his impulsive, generous, thoughtless
disposition was already leading him into various tempta-
tions. He objected strongly to a number of acquaintances
Bob had made in the village. He did his best to knock
some ideas of discipline into the boy's head. He talked
to him, and warned him. Bob appeared to take it all
in good part, and promised to amend his ways in several
directions, for a time he kept his word, but before
his father had been long away again, he "broke out
worse than ever." His love for loose company
increased, and in various ways he caused such grief to
his gentle mother's heart that at last she wrote to
Captain Stauncheon, and told him of her growing-
fears for their only boy. The truth was that at this
time Bob was in more danger of " going wrong " than he
himself had any idea of. But his awakening was soon
to come.
Late one afternoon he was riding along the low-lying
cliffs that stretched for several miles on either side of
Pentawen, the fishing town I have referred to. He
was riding a horse which he had borrowed because it
was known to be a vicious brute which had done no
end of damage. He had been almost thrown several
times during the afternoon, but now, in the early dusk of
the November gloaming, he was trotting quietly and


steadily home. Too quietly and too steadily for his head-
strong nature, so he gave the horse a sudden and sharp
cut with his riding whip. That did it. The animal had
borne a good deal, and was in no mood to stand an\
more. In a moment it was ungovernable. It plunged
and reared and bucked. Bob stuck to his seat sturdily,
but that was all he could do. To bring the horse again
under restraint was beyond his power. At last the
bridle-reins got twisted, and in a frantic attempt to wrest
the animal's head away from the edge of the cliff Bob
pulled it nearer. He felt the earth slipping and
crumbling beneath the infuriated creature s feet, and
knew that they were struggling on the very verge.
Then over they went in the darkness—horse and rider.
Bob had the presence of mind to kick his feet free of the
stirrups, and he struck the water below some feet from
the spot where the horse fell. The latter was soon
carried away out of sight and hearing, but the boy
managed to keep afloat near where he had made a hole
in the water. The height from which he had fallen was
not great, and before long he found his voice and
shouted lustily for help.
Rough voices hailed him in the darkness, and he heard
the welcome sound of a boat approaching him, though
where it could have come from he was at first at a loss
to conjecture. That, however, mattered nothing. A
boat was coming, sure enough, for now he could hear the
rumble of the oars in the rowlocks. Just as he realised
that he couldn't keep himself above water for many
seconds longer, the boat reached him. He clutched the
gunwale, and strong hands pulled him in. The man
who was steering bade him lie down at the bottom of
the craft, and " bale some o' the water out of him. The


boats head was immediately turned round, and the
oarsmen commenced to pull her back in the direction
whence she had come. After a short distance, however
iad been traversed, the order was given to easy up, and
she again stopped.
" Pull him up, and let's have a look at him," said the
man at the tiller; and Bob found himself hauled, not
\er> gently, into a sitting position on one of the
thwarts.
Finding his voice for the first time since his rescue he
began to splutter his thanks, but was told to be silent
till they d had a look at him." Then one of the men
lit a lantern, and, whilst they looked at him, Bob looked
at his rescuers. There were three of them The
steersman, Will Watch, Bob knew by both name and
SI S t; the other two he knew by sight only. But
evidently they all knew him, for when Will Watch
exclaimed—
latcd- 7 ' itS yOU " g StaUncheon " the other 'wo ejacu-
" So it is."
. gave a ra P ld acc °unt of how he came to tumble-
into the water, and again expressed his gratitude to his
preservers.
A thoughtful look had settled on Watch's dark face.
He was a man of notoriously evil character, being in
act, the leader and chief of the most desperate gano-' G f
smugglers and wreckers along the whole coast For a
long time he had had his eye on Bob Stauncheon, whose
wild pranks and thoughtless escapades were almost all
well known to him. If he, the son of the captain of the
dreaded Scorpion, could only be induced or entrapped
in o joining the gang, what a valuable recruit he would


be. His daring, fearless nature was the very thing to fit
him for their lawless and adventurous work, irrespective
of the value of the information he would always be able
to spy out as to the intended movements of the revenue
men. And now here he was in the smugglers' own boat,
owino- his life to the three members of the band who
were also in it.
" The chance has come," muttered Watch; and then,
louder, he said—-
"Give way for the cave. It's all right," he added,
reassuringly, as though in answer to a questioning look
on the faces of the other two ; " he's game."
In darkness and in silence, save for the sound of the
dip of the oars and the swish of the boat, they sped over
the water.
" Where are we going ? " asked Bob.
" To a safe place," was the answer.
After a very short time the smugglers headed in for
the shore, at a place where the cliff took a sudden rise.
They evidently knew their way, even in the darkness, for
just as Bob expected the boat to grate upon the beach
she shot under the cliffs instead, through a winding and
narrow channel, right into the smugglers' cave. She
was made fast, and the three men sprang nimbly from
her to a slippery ledge. Bob was ordered to follow
them, and all four walked forward. The next minute he
found himself in the midst of a large group of men, most
of them armed in some way or another. A number of
lanterns lit up the cavern.
Bob was stood a little apart, while Will Watch talked
earnestly for a minute or two with his men. Then the
leader of the smugglers turned to him, and said
heartily—


" Well, lad, you know who we are ? "
" Yes," said Bob.
"That's right Now, look here. I know you're a
plucky sort, and made of the right stuff, and I'm not
afraid of trusting you, especially after just saving your
life. Join us, and take your turn with us now and again,
and your pockets will never be empty. You've got your
first chance to-night. Our cutter's standing in now from
France, with the best cargo we've run for years, and
we're going out to meet her to arrange about running
her barrels in here before morning. You shall come
with us, share in the work, and have your part of the
plunder."
" Never," cried Bob. "Let me go. You have saved
my life, and because of that I will never betray you.
But I'll die before I join a gang of such cut-throats as
you are."
Angry shouts and threatening gestures on the part of
almost all the smugglers followed this reckless speech,
but Will Watch only laughed and said,
" Leave the youngster to me. Come and dry your
clothes, boy."
He led him away and made up a fire, where Bob dried
his clothes and rubbed himself down. All his demands
to leave the cave were laughed at, and at last he flung
himself down before the flames and fell fast asleep.
He awoke two or three hours later. Will Watch was
standing over him.
"The boat has gone to meet the cutter," said the
latter, " and we shall start running in her cargo in about
an hour's time." He renewed his attempts to entrap
Bob into joining the gang, but only with the former
result. Then he altered his tone.


" You know too much now," he said, in a low, deter-
mined voice. "If you refuse still, I shall drown you in
the very water from which I hauled you a few hours ago."
All day long His Majesty's revenue cutter Scorpion
had been beating and tacking towards Pentawen.
Arrived within some half-a-dozen miles lower down the
coast, she hove to till dark. Then, lighting no lamps,
she continued on her way; and the wind having veered
to fair, made such good progress that before the
smugglers had despatched their boat to meet their own
vessel their dreaded enemy had anchored off the coast-
line about a mile from their cave.
Captain Stauncheon—a stern, resolute-faced man
between fifty and sixty years of age —sat in his little
cabin. Cap in hand, his first officer stood before him.
" Air. Wood," said Stauncheon, " I am ordered to per-
form a special duty to-night, and I'm going to do it.
We are all on special duty, and we're all going to do it"
" Aye, aye, sir," responded the officer cheerfully.
"Information on which we can rely," continued the
captain, "was sent me a few days ago as to the move-
ments to-night of the worst gang of smugglers on this
or any other coast They are expecting a contraband
cargo to be run across to-night We are to trap them
in their own hiding-place, of which I have the exact
bearings. The entrance to the cavern is dry at low
water —about an hour's time. With the exception of
the necessary guard who will remain in charge on board,
the entire strength of the cutter will go ashore here.
We shall be met by half-a-dozen coastguard men, and
immediately proceed to do our duty. I shall lead the


attack myself. These rascals," continued the captain,
" are wreckers as well as smugglers, so in case of any
refusal to yield, the word is 'No quarter.' You will
make the necessary arrangements at once."
Mr. Wood's eyes glistened as he proceeded to carry
out his orders. All was done quickly, quietly, joyously,
and in due time almost the entire crew of the Scorpion,
fully armed, joined the waiting coastguardsmen on the
beach. An immediate move forward was made for the
smugglers' cave.
" Row him out into deep water," ordered Will Watch,
" and don't come back till you've seen him drown. Our
lives are in the young dog's hands."
Roughly some of the furious men seized Bob and
commenced to drag him out, but even quicker than they
had seized him did they loose their hold as a loud voice
rang sternly and clearly out:
"Surrender! In the King's name." And into the
dimly-lighted cave rushed the servants of the law.
In a moment the trapped smugglers grasped the
situation.
" Fight! " yelled Watch. " For your lives, fight!"
There was no parley on either side. A desperate
struggle began without another word. The revenue
men were better armed, but were largely outnumbered.
Swords and cutlasses clashed, and the smoke of firearms
filled the air.
" Drive them back," shouted Captain Stauncheon.
" Drive them back, corner them ! "
Bob found himself in the midst of the fiehtinsr
o o
smugglers, who were gradually being forced rearwards.


He struggled to push his way through them in order to
join and fight on the other side, but this he found to be
impossible, for he was hustled back and hemmed in by
the men around him.
" Strike hard, lads," roared the skipper of the Scorpion
again. " Force them back ; they're giving way."
So they were, but suddenly the attacking party were
themselves unexpectedly attacked in the rear. The boat
which had rowed to the in-coming cutter had returned,
and from her had landed seven or eight of " the enemy."
These rushed pell-mell into the cave and into the fray.
The din and confusion were now indescribable. It
seemed almost certain that the smugglers would win.
They fought with the ruthless determination of men who
knew that their all was at stake. Bob seized a cutlass
which had fallen from the hand of one of the smugglers,
and laid about him amongst them right and left. Will
Watch saw him, and with a bitter oath fired a pistol
point-blank at his head. Bob dodged the shot just in
time, and, putting all his strength into the blow, cut his
would-be murderer to the ground. Seeing that their
leader had fallen, a moment's hesitation seemed to seize
on his gang. It probably lost them the fight, for the
other side were quick to take advantage of it. With
a rushing charge they drove all before them. In a few
minutes the smugglers had been driven far back and
cornered, Bob perforce amongst them. "In the King's
name, yield—or I'll shoot down every man as he
stands."
Sullenly they obeyed Captain Stauncheon's shouted
command.
" Mr. Wood, disarm the prisoners and secure them."
This was soon done, and Captain Stauncheon, who for


the first time felt that he was slightly wounded, walked
to the entrance of the cave. Mr. Wood followed him.
"You will march the prisoners to Pentawen jail at
once, Mr. Wood."
There was a strange look on Mr. Wood's face, and his
voice trembled.
"Captain Stauncheon," he said in low tones, "your
son Robert" (he knew Bob well) "is one of them."
Captain Stauncheon started as though a sudden blow
had been dealt him. A spasm of agony seemed to
quiver through his body, and his bronzed face blanched.
He thought of the letter he had received from his wife-
had her forebodings been so horribly realised? He
thought of his son's recklessness and waywardness and
wilfulness—the bad companionships he had formed.
And so all had ended in—this! He turned aside, and
shook from head to foot.
Then he faced round to his waiting officer.
" You will march all the prisoners to Pentawen jail at
once."
Mr. Wood's face was almost ashen pale.
Sir, he said, blood has been spilt. This is a
matter of—death. I took your son with arms in his hand."
Only God heard the stifled cry that broke from
Captain Stauncheon's white lips as again he turned aside.
For the third time he spoke.
"My duty was to give you your orders. I have done
it. Your duty is to obey them. Do it"
Mr. Wood touched his gold-laced cap and retired.
Captain Stauncheon stood back as the prisoners were
marched out, and saw his only son amongst them.
Then he fainted—for the first time in his life.


Bob was discharged from custody as soon as he had
told his story. Two of the other prisoners—a shade
less villainous than the rest—corroborated it, and told
how he had sided against the smugglers in the fight.
The adventure brought him to his senses —taught him
the lesson he needed.
"Father," he said, as they grasped hands, "I know
how you did your duty. Please God, all my life long
now, I'll try to do mine."


• •


Jf\ i L
\\
**b?' F • #**
> j L '\
I jjg|k §§ ..
"Please, sir, may I sit down?"— Fage 28.


THE BOY WHO FORGOT HIS
PRAYERS.
next night Terrie Warner had to take up the
running. Considering that Terence Warner was a
minister's son, and meant going in for the ministry him-
self, it was rather expected that his narrative would be
of a religious turn. So it was, for he told the tale of
THE BOY WHO FORGOT HIS PRAYERS.
" Saying his prayers" was not only a more difficult
but a more important and serious matter with Tony
Chucks than the same thing is with many boys. But
then praying had to Tony, so to speak, the charm of
novelty, because he had only recently learnt anything
about it—had only recently learnt that a prayer from
the faltering lips of a London Arab in a garret or under
an archway has no farther to travel up to Heaven than
have the sweetly-sung petitions of cathedral choirs. A
London Arab—that was what he was : a waif of the city
streets. He lived on the few coppers he managed to
earn by doing—anything. He had been higher up in
the world once, for there had been a time when he was
the recognised sweeper of a street crossing. But there
came a spell of fine weather, and his receipts fell away
to nothing. Unfortunately it was a long spell, and in


the meantime, waiting for the fine weather—which was
to him foul weather—to give place to weather which
misguided people in general would consider foul weather,
but which would to his better regulated mind be fine
weather—in this " meantime" he was starving. And the
pangs of hunger compelled him to sell his broom and
his entire interest in the crossing to a luckier boy, who,
having several shillings to fall back upon, was able to
command all the special privileges of a capitalist.
" It's very 'ard on a cove wot's 'ad 'is own crossing to
come down to 'oldin' 'orses," poor Tony used sometimes
to complain to himself. However, he was glad enough
to hold horses, call cabs, or do anything else to earn a
copper. When he was "in luck" he shared at night a
garret with a swell acquaintance of his in the potting
flowers profession ; at other times a seat in the park, or
the stones beneath a railway arch, afforded him sleeping
accommodation. But he wasn't so miserable as you
might suppose. He had never known any other life, of
course with the exception of his crossing-sweeping days,
with which to contrast his present existence. Home,
parents, friends, loving kisses, and kind words—how
could he miss them when he had never had them ?
At the time our concern in him begins, he was—or
appeared, for there were no means of telling exactly—
about fourteen years old ; an under-sized, pale-faced, but
precociously shrewd little urchin, with quick, sharp eyes,
and with quick, sharp movements.
Now about Tony's prayers. First, living the life he
had to live, how did he learn them ?
It was in this way. One Saturday night he slept
under an archway in Whitechapel. He woke early, and
having neither breakfast preparations nor toilet to detain


him, he shook himself and sallied out He was in good
spirits that fine Sunday morning in early summer, for
safely stowed away in that pocket of his ragged clothes
which had the smallest holes in it, he was comfortably
conscious there was the sum of three-ha'pence. This
meant that he could afford to treat himself to a really
good breakfast.
Arrived at the corner of the street over which ran the
archway, he hesitated as to which way he should turn.
Towards the west he knew of a coffee-stall where the
beverage was brewed more to his liking than the coffee
at the stall down the high road to the east, because at
the former stall it always had more grits in it, and
seemed consequently more filling at the price. But, on
the other hand, the man at the other stall invariably cut
his bread and butter thicker.
Which stall should he patronise? It was an anxious
moment. Finally, the thick bread and butter turned the
wavering scale, and he set off resolutely further east.
Having finished his repast at the favoured stall, he kept
eastward still, ambling on and on without any definite
idea where he was going, for by-and-by he found he had
wandered beyond the limit of his geographical knowledge
of the district. But the sun was shining, the sky was
bright, and the air was warm, and almost all the people
who now began to make their appearance were going in
the same direction—eastward still further.
At last Tony remembered that he had heard a great
deal lately about Epping Forest, and he knew that if he
kept on he would be bound to reach it. It struck him
that he could not do better than treat himself to a
"day in the country" on his own account, and once
having resolved that the forest should be his destination,
he held on his way quite gaily.


Before twelve o'clock he found himself in a place that
seemed to him like fairy-land. Soft grass was under his
feet, leafy branches waved above his head. Like the
aisles of a mightier cathedral than the hand of man has
o
ever built, three long avenues of great trees stretched
before him, where the sunbeams played with the
shadows.
Poor Tony had never known that the world contained
such a place as this. It took his breath away. Could
he possibly have any right to be in such a beautiful
spot? Wouldn't somebody come along directly and
turn him off with a cuff or a kick ?
So thinking, he-looked warily round for the expected
apparition of a policeman to "chivvy" him on. There
wasn't one to be seen! But who was that man in
velveteen and gaiters, carrying a big stick in his hand,
and with a big dog following at his heels—a big man,
with big shoulders and a kind face ?
" Please, sir," said Tony, as the forest-keeper approached
him, " I ain't done nothink. May 1 sit down, sir, same
as some o' the other people are a-doin' of?"
" Sit down ! " laughed the big man with the kind face,
as he passed on, "why, yes. We don't charge for seats
here."
So down on the cool grass rolled the tired little
London Arab, and presently he fell fast asleep.
He woke with a start, and sprang to his feet. From
where the trees were thickest came sounds of sweet
music, the voices of men and women and children blend-
ing with the rich notes of a softly-played harmonium.
Tony crept nearer.
Filling the open space between bushes on one hand
and trees on the other stood quite a crowd of people,


surrounding the little stand on which was the harmonium.
Behind' the player stood two or three earnest-faced men
and as many earnest-faced young women. On a long
bench in front of the instrument were a lot of children,
and the men and the women and the children were
singing a hymn, many of the bystanders joining in.
One of the earnest-faced men behind the harmonium
held a banner, and on this banner (though Tony could
not read the inscription) were the words "Gospel Tem-
perance Mission."
The ragged boy listened entranced.
" Ain't I a-'avin' a day of it!" he said to himself
The hymn finished, an address was given, and a prayer
followed. Then the man with the banner announced
that he and his companions would be there again in the
afternoon, and—a third time—in the evening.
o
Tony waited till they returned. Again he listened to
the singing and reading and preaching and playing,
liking it very much, though he wondered what it was all
about.
As the afternoon gathering was dispersing, the leader
of the little band—whom Tony had heard addressed as
Mr. Holly—spoke to him. Tony shrank back frightened
at first, but—unused as he was to the tones of a kind
voice—there was no mistaking the friendly intentions of
the mission preacher. Tony and he had quite a conver-
sation together, and in the end Mr. Holly took him home
with him to tea. After this invitation had been given
him, Tony's capacities for being amazed were exhausted.
But " Oh, crikey !" he muttered, as he followed along a
little behind his new friend, " wot's a-goin' to 'appen
nex' ? "
A good deal happened, for his newly-found friend,


Mr. Holly, kept him in view, and kept him in hand.
All that poor Tony ever knew of God and goodness and
the Bible, the leader of the Gospel Temperance Mission
taught him. He taught him to pray. He taught him
the "Our Father." Just "Our Father," and a few
stammering words of his own, which he had thought out
with infinite pains and infinite difficulty—these were
Tony's only prayers. But he said them regularly, every
night and every morning.
That was what his teacher impressed upon him.
" Never forget your prayers, my boy. You'll never go
far wrong if you keep on praying—really praying.
However bad you may feel, however much you may feel
your own ignorance—never mind —don't forget your
prayers."
The "theology" of Mr. Holly and his Gospel Tem-
perance Missioners might have been summed up in one
phrase—they just loved God and hated Drink. There
were a great many things, well known to better educated
people, that they were ignorant of; but they knew that
they loved God, for His peace was in their hearts—and
there was no doubt about their hating the Drink. Most
of them knew it from personal experience as the rock
from which they must steer wide in order to avoid
shipwreck.
Poor themselves, they could do little for Tony in the
way of material help, but what they could do they did
willingly, and before long provided him with the outfit
and equipments of a shoe-black. Thus provided, he
established himself in a fine position near Stratford
Station, and soon found himself doing well. Every
Sunday till the winter came he went with the Missioners
to Bushwood, where he had first heard them. When


the open-air gatherings ceased, meetings were held in a
hall, and here Tony was just as regular an attendant.
One dark, cold, bleak November night, Tony Chucks
returned unusually late and unusually tired to the attic
which, with another boy who followed the shoe-blacking
profession at another "pitch," he now occupied. The
room contained two mattresses, and Tony threw himself
on his own particular resting-place as soon as he had
climbed up the steep stairs, and entered the apartment.
" I'll rouse up directly," he muttered to himself, " say
my prayers, and undress, and get into bed properly."
But he neither "roused up," said his prayers, un-
dressed, nor " got into bed properly." He was so tired
that he just fell sound asleep. Not even the entrance of
his fellow-lodger, Timber Joe (so called because he had
lost his right leg from the knee downwards, and had to
have a wooden half-limb substituted for the amputated
flesh and bone), disturbed the fast slumber into which he
fell, although Joe's wooden stump made an awful noise
on the bare boards.
Timber Joe had had a rather hard day of it too, and
snores from his mattress soon joined those proceeding
from Tony's.
Joe was the first to awake. He sprang from his rude
bed with smarting eyes and choking breath, for the attic
was full of hot smoke.
"Tony, Tony!" he cried, "get up —the house is on
fire!"
Together the two boys rushed to the door, and flung
it open. From the stairs and stories below, clouds of
fiery smoke were rolling up, lit here and there by red
flashes of quivering flame.


Very soon after daybreak a policeman knocked at Mr.
Holly's door.
" A boy is lying—and dying, sir—in West Ham
Hospital. He has been asking for you ever since he
recovered consciousness. Will you come?"
Few people were yet in the streets, and Mr. Holly
and his companion walked quickly along together to
where poor little Tony Chucks was lying, and, as the
policeman had said—dying. As they walked, the
policeman answered the other's inquiries, and briefly
told the story of what had happened.
"The place was in flames pretty well from top to
bottom," he concluded, "before any real help arrived, for
all the engines had been called away to a bigger fire a
mile or two away. It appears that the two boys in the
top attic —the cripple and the boy we're going to —
rushed out of their room together, and began to fight
their way downstairs through the flames. But only one
of them got clear out of the burning building—only one
of them. He stood, dazed-like, on the pavement.
"' Where's Timber Joe ? ' he cried.
"The answer was easy enough. The cripple had
been unable to struggle out. He was somewhere inside
still.
" I never saw such a thing in my life. • The little chap
didn't wait an instant. He dashed aside the hands that
were stretched out to stop him, and rushed into the
house again. Back to death to save his chum. And he
saved him. We guess he had to scramble pretty well to
the top of the house again. He found the cripple on a
landing, fainting and choking, but not much burned.
He put his own coat round him to shield him from the
flames, and then fought his way out a second time,


dragging the other with him—somehow. They both
fell down the instant they got outside on the pavement,
but the boy who was saved we soon brought round.
He's all right He'll recover. But the boy who saved
him got much more hurt, by some means or other.
And I hope you'll be in time."
Mr. Holly bent over the little white bed where lay
poor Tony. His hands held very gently those of the
little hero, who smiled every time he opened his eyes
and saw his friend still by his bedside.
Suddenly a disturbing thought seemed to strike him,
and he mo\ ed his right hand from the tender clasp in
which it was held, as he whispered quickly—
"Mr. Holly—l forgot my prayers last night!"
Xo, no, my boy ; no, no ! " cried Mr. Holly earnestly.
E\er} wound that your poor little body bore last night
was a prayer. Your self-sacrifice, the love that filled
your heart for a helpless fellow-creature—it was all a
prayer. \ou didn't forget your prayers. You said
them in a deed instead of in words—that's all."
Tony smiled as though he understood, but such a
strange look was settling on his face. ■
" And all that you wanted to pray for. . . ." Mr.
Holly was going to say, " God will grant you," but he
stopped as one long sigh passed Tony's blistered lips.
So peaceful looked the dead face as he said instead,
" God has granted you."


GOING TO SEA!
MY VOYAGE TO THE ANTIPODES.
" T'LL relate to you," announced Peter Vincent, "the
particulars of my voyage to Australia and New
Zealand."
"Why, you've never been there!" exclaimed a number
of voices.
" I will not be put down by popular clamour," said
Peter firmly.
Popular clamour' be blowed ! " cried Hamilton.
"Abbott," appealed Peter Vincent to the monitor,
" it's my turn to spin a yarn, and I claim your protection
from these unseemly interruptions. I've been reading
some Parliamentary reports lately, and I claim to be in
possession of the floor of the House."
" Everybody shut up except Vincent," commanded
Martin Abbott. "As for you, Peter," he continued,
"just stow that Parliamentary sort of jaw. We don't
want it here. Keep it till you get into Parliament
yourself."
Somewhat taken aback by a general laugh at this
sally, the occupant of bed No. 3 proceeded at once
with his yarn, which he insisted on calling " GOING TO
SEA! or MY VOYAGE TO THE ANTIPODES."


Hon dare )ou lea\e the ship without permission?"— Page 43




I am now sixteen years old, and have been at this
school, as you all know, for about six months. My
father is a large farmer in Essex, and a little more
than twelve months ago I was at home with him during
O o
my holidays from my last school. I had formed a very
special and particular wish, which might have been
divided into two parts. First, I didn't want to go back
to school at all. In the second place, I WANTED TO GO
TO SEA. Ever} 7 boy does at some time or another. This
wish is like the measles—you're bound to have it
Only, like the measles again, some boys have it worse
than others. In my case, the attack was a very bad one
indeed. I could think of nothing but splicing sails, and
taking in reefs, and shivering timbers, and saying, " Aye,
aye, sir," and bounding over the rolling seas. I pictured
myself in lovely dark-blue uniform, with gold buttons,
and with gold lace round my hat I practised hitching
up my trousers, and tried to walk with a nautical roll
of the body, as though I were so accustomed to the roll
of the ocean that I couldn't walk straight I once went
so far as to chew a piece of tobacco. Never again,
sea or no sea! No more 'baccy for me. I thought I
should never have any control over my own stomach
again.
Of course the first thing was to speak to father.
\\ hen I told him I didn't want to go back to school, but
wished to begin life at once on my own account, he
looked both amazed and amused. When I insisted that
I wanted to go to sea, and begged him to send me
on board a ship, he looked very serious. He made the
usual remarks about a sailor's life, and argued with me,
and tried to talk me out of the idea I had formed ; but
he failed. Then he put mother and my sisters on to


me, and they did their best They came nearer being
successful than he did, but in the end they too failed.
At last father went to Chelmsford to consult an old
retired sea-captain who lived there, and was an old
friend of father's. When told about my determination
to go to sea Captain Quarters said, "Tell him that if
I had a dog, and the dog came to me and said he was
coin o " to sea, I d drown him to sa\e him iiom a hie
t> &
of such misery."
There was no getting over the fact that this was
discouraging. When father triumphantly pointed out
that old Quarters knew what he was talking about, I
wavered. But in the result, I stuck to my point, though
I wavered once more when father tried on the bribing
dodge.
"If you'll give up this idea, Peter, and go quietly to
school for a few more terms, or even if you 11 start
learning some other business —if you'll just give up this
wild notion of going to sea—l'll give you the white cob
colt for your very own, and buy you a new saddle and
bridle into the bargain."
The bribe was a tempting one, and I required all my
strength of mind to resist it, for the white cob was a
beauty. But I to mind the glorious times that
everybody had on board ship, according to all the books
I had been reading on the subject, and, with an effort, I
escaped the snare, refused the bribe, and said that I felt
the sea was made for me, and I for the sea.
Father realised then that nothing remained for it but
to find me a ship. He drove over to Chelmsford, and
had another consultation with Captain Quarters, who
gave him some introductions, including one to another
old captain, named Stagger, who commanded a ship


called the Queen of tJie Age. This ship was expected in
the Thames from abroad any day, and, when she
arrived, father was to go on board, interview the skipper,
and try to arrange with him to take me with him when
the ship sailed away again.
I was, of course, all agog with excitement. Every
morning I got hold of the London newspaper as soon as
ever I could, and turned instantly to the shipping news,
to see whether the Queen of tJie Age had arrived. When
I read the intelligence that she had arrived, and was in
the East India Docks, I could scarcely contain myself.
I rushed to father with the paper, and showed him
the news.
"Very well, my boy," he said slowly, " I'll go and see
Captain Stagger to-morrow."
Oh, Peter,' sobbed my mother, " why are you so
anxious to go away from us ? "
I was further upset by my sisters beginning to snivel
a bit too ; but I pulled myself together.
" How proud they will be of me," I thought, " when I
return from my first voyage, all in uniform, and bronzed
and tanned—a regular young Jack-tar officer"—and this
thought comforted me a lot.
Father kept his word. He and his friend Quarters
vent up to town and saw Captain Stagger together
.o A O O J
instead of father going by himself with the letter of intro-
duction. And between them they settled everything.
I vas to sail aboard the Queen of the Age for Australia
and Xew Zealand in about three weeks' time.
The days passed very quickly. Father bought a
good many things for me, and mother and the girls
vere busy getting my clothes ready, and so on. My
schoolmaster was written to and my non-return
arranged for.


As the three weeks dwindled away, and came nearer
and nearer being three days, I began to feel very
queer. Everybody in the place seemed to get glummer
and glummer. I tried all sorts of dodges to keep up my
spirits, but only one had any success. That was getting
out my uniform and looking at it, and trying it on. But
I couldn't be always doing that, and at all other times —
particularly when mother kissed me good-night with
such red eyes —that funny feeling I have alluded to got
hold of me more and more. The only explanation I
could think of was that that chew of tobacco had
thoroughly upset my constitution. You will understand
what I mean when I say that —it was a similar sort
of feeling.
I want to pass as quickly as possible over the last
night at home, before I started on my long, long voyage
to the Antipodes—over the last morning—and par-
ticularly over the final parting. Have you ever had
a peculiar disease called Lumps in the Throat? Well,
we all had it rather badly, father included. He came
up to London with me to see me safely on board. I
thought that when we reached the city everybody would
be turning round to look at my uniform, but as a matter
of fact nobody seemed to take the slightest notice of me.
I was just jostled about in the crowds like anybody else.
We got to the docks and went straight to the ship,
walked up the gangway, and stepped on board. There
were a lot of sailors about, but not one of them touched
his hat to me, and saluted me as "your honour." I was
very much surprised. It seemed to me that they
couldn't have read the right books, for they actually
grinned and laughed, and made some jeering remarks to
each other about me.


Father went below, and had a last chat with the
captain, returned on deck (where he had left me), shook
me warmly by the hand, and hurried off the ship.
I was trying to persuade myself that I hadn't got
lumps in the throat worse than ever when Captain
Stagger appeared from his cabin. I touched my cap to
him and said, " Come aboard, sir," all correct, but he
didn't take the least heed of me for several minutes.
He stamped about the deck roaring out some orders.
He wasn't a bit like what I expected, but just the
most awful old man I had ever seen in my life. He
was short, stumpy, stout, and prodigiously thickset His
hair was white, and his face was red—redder than any
other face in the world, I should think, except a real red
Indian's, perhaps. The fire of his face seemed to have
got into his head, and to glow out -of his savage old
eyes —and to have got into his heart, for such a temper
as he was always in—well, well—cayenne pepper is no
word for it. When at last he condescended to notice
me, "go for'rud," he said—no, shouted—" take off those
kickshaws and get to work."
I found my way to the forecastle, and was horrified to
find that I should have to mess and berth there with the
men, for it was a low, dark, evil-smelling place. So
different from my quarters at school—such an awful
contrast with my dear old farm-home in Essex.
I got out of my beautiful uniform and into my
working clothes, and found myself put to work precious
quickly. But such work! They just seemed to find the
dirtiest jobs for me that could possibly be found on
board the ship. My arms soon ached, and so did
my heart
Almost at the last moment something happened to


prevent us from sailing for a couple of days, and I shall
never forget those two days as long as I live. Every-
thing on board seemed in the wildest confusion, and
what with the rattling of machinery, and the bumping of
great bales of goods as they were swung on board and
flung into the hold, the shouting and halloaing, the wits
were driven clean out of my head. As for the food —well
—l'd often complained of the grub at boarding school,
but I only wished I could have got a chance at some of
it then !
At last we started, getting out of dock on the evening
tide. Of course we had a pilot on board to take us as
far as Gravesend, which we reached before the morning.
But before we got there an awful adventure happened
to me. An order was given which necessitated the
hauling in of a lot of slimy, slippery cable on the fore-
castle deck. With a lot of the men, I was hauling away
with all my might when my foot slipped, I let go
the cable, and rolled backwards so violently that I rolled
right off the ship—rolled overboard into the black, cold
waves of the river. I remember the shock as I struck
the water. I rose to the surface almost instantly, and
then sunk again. For the second time I rose, and
for the third I sunk. As I rose for the last time and put
out my hands to try to swim, I felt a rope which had
been thrown after me. I needn't say that I hung on to
it like grim death, but it seemed hours before they
dragged me aboard. They bumped me dreadfully
against the sides of the vessel as they hauled me up, and
pulled me over the bulwarks amidships.
Drowned, and bumped, and bruised—more dead than
alive —there I stood, and there before me, with a lantern
in his hand, and Mr. Pettigrew, the chief officer, by his


side, stood Captain Stagger, looking redder and fiercer
and angrier than ever. He seized me by the collar and
shook me till my teeth rattled.
"How dare you fall out of my ship, sir?" he roared.
" Isn't the vessel good enough for you ? How dare you
fall overboard? How dare you fall out of my ship?
How dare you, sir? "
I was literally dumb with amazement, and could only
stare at the captain's savage form in speechless affright.
He shook me violently again, and then turned to the
mate.
"Mr. Pettigrew," he said, "you will have this boy
dried, and bring him to me in my cabin as soon as the
ship has anchored."
" Very good, sir," answered Mr. Pettigrew.
I gave way. All things considered, I had borne up
pretty well until this point, but now, in the darkness of
m > miserable berth, I gave way. The lumps in my
throat seemed about the same size as whales. Instead
of being swallowed by a whale, like Jonah, I felt as
though a whale had been swallowed by me. As I
was always fond of animals, it was a comfort to think
that I had first swallowed sufficient water for the whale
to swim in.
I heard the anchors rattling down, and soon after-
wards Mr. Pettigrew sent for me to take me into the
dreaded captain's cabin. The chief mate looked very
solemn as he removed his cap and entered, with his
hand on my shoulder, as though I were a prisoner.
It seemed like an execution.
Old Stagger opened fire at me instantly.
" How dare you leave the ship without permission,
sir ? " he demanded again.


" Leave the ship without permission, sir!" I cried.
" Yes. Who gave you leave to fall overboard ? How
dare you leave my ship in such a hasty manner without
permission ? "
He turned to the first mate, and continued, not more
angrily, for that was impossible, but certainly more
solemnly :
" Mr. Pettigrew, this is a more serious matter than I
thought. This boy evidently meant to desert the ship.
As a matter of fact, he did desert her, for he admits that
he fell overboard, and that he never even asked per-
mission so to leave the vessel. Desertion is equivalent
to mutiny. He shipped under the articles, and the
articles provide proper punishment for the crimes of
desertion and mutiny. You will keep him in irons for
the rest of the passage."
" Keep me in irons, sir!" I gasped.
"In irons, and on punishment diet," said the old
villain firmly.
"May I suggest another course, sir?" asked Mr.
Pettigrew respectfully. "Of course the prisoner's con-
duct can't be overlooked, but at the same time is it
worth while to keep such a character on the vessel? If
he's begun like this, how is he likely to end ? Why
not send him ashore with the pilot, sir?"
"He wouldn't go," said Captain Stagger, shaking
his head.
" Oh, yes, I will, sir!" said I eagerly.
" Had enough of it, then ? "
" Too much," I replied.
" Then pack up your traps, and be ready to leave the
ship in a quarter of an hour."


Late that night—l was glad it was dark—l walked
very quietly through the farmyard at home, and entered
the house. Mother screamed, and my sisters sort of
squawked a little. Father had a guilty kind of look
on his face. I sat down and ate for about an hour and
a quarter without stopping. Then I went very quietly
upstairs to bed. And I've never wanted to go to
sea again.
" That's what you call the story of your voyage to the
Antipodes, is it?" said Martin Abbott.
"Yes," replied Peter Vincent "1 went as far as
Gravesend."
" How long was it," went on the monitor, " before you
tumbled to the fact that the whole thing—the way
you were treated from beginning to end on board the
Queen of the Age —was a put-up job between your father,
his friend Quarters, and old Stagger—their object being
to sicken you of the sea as soon as possible ? "
" Not long," confessed Peter.
Profound silence reigned in the big Dormitory for
several minutes. It was broken by the voice of Jack
Hamilton.
"Peter Vincent, you said you had been reading Parlia-
mentary reports lately. So you will understand what I
mean when I say that I shall propose that a vote of
censure and want of confidence be passed upon you for
one of the worst faults a boy can possess—funkiness."
" I shan't allow the vote to be put," decided Martin
Abbott. "In the same circumstances we mDht all
o
have behaved just as Peter did. And though any sort
ot lunkiness is a sign of loss of grit, an honest account
like his is a sign of plenty of grit left"


THE COLONEL'S HEART.
boy who hesitates is bolstered," was Monitor
Martin Abbott's warning, evoked by the hesi-
tation of Reggie Warwick to begin his story. The
implied threat was efficacious, for, without more ado,
the tenant of bed No. 4 began his tale : THE COLONEL'S
HEART.
The great war with Napoleon was over, and the
soldiers were coming back. Covered with the glory of
their great victory at Waterloo, already many regiments
had landed home. The country was alive with the
movements of the military, for, from the seaports at
which they had arrived from the Continent, squadrons
and troops of cavalry, batteries of artillery, and regi-
ments and battalions of infantry were everywhere on the
march to their temporary or permanent barracks.
The 47th Regiment of the Line had been landed at
Portsmouth, and along the dusty roads and through the
leafy lanes of Hampshire were marching on Reading.
The inhabitants of every town, village, and hamlet
through which they passed, " turned out" to do them
honour, and from most places they were followed by a
crowd of cheering admirers, who accompanied them for
a mile or so on their way. We must suppose ourselves
to belong to one of these crowds, only instead of turning


.. 5 ..
•Ifili 1
18'
' \ 1 • r.v; v; .- j
.;•>.: ,;_J


I


back with the others, we must continue to follow the
regiment, for it is with the gallant 47th that this story is
connected.
Some miles had been covered without a halt, and
almost as many more lay between the tired soldiers and
the town they were bound for. Just where the hard
road before them broadened, stretched some open
meadow land, where tall trees cast cool, delicious
shadows on the soft green grass. Beyond the meadow
land was a great forest, the deeper shadows of which
were more tempting still in the burning heat of the early
afternoon. And the sun—Oh! it was tantaliziner —
o
glistened on the clear water of a bubbling brook.
Longing eyes " turned left" from the dry, bare road,
and happy ears welcomed the " Halt!" roared from the
head of the column.
The ranks were broken, arms piled, and then—■
" Dismiss." On to the sweet grass of the meadow, into
the shade of the fringe of the forest, rushed the hot,
dust-covered soldiers, throwing themselves down singly
and in groups, after refreshing their parched throats at
the brook.
Round the war-grizzled sergeant of a certain company
lay some dozen of his comrades—very much "at their
ease." They were discussing the character of their
colonel—a fertile and frequent subject of conversation.
Colonel Towers had the unenviable reputation of being
the strictest martinet in the British Army.
" However did the Colonel come to call this halt ?"
wondered Corporal Thomas Tompkins. "I didn't think
he'd got the heart to do it."
Eart!" said Sergeant Beck, who was very weak
on his aspirates ;" he ain't got no 'eart. It's been froze
into a ice-block. I tell you, you don't know him yet."


" It's time I did," replied Tompkins ; "it's more than
six months since I was drafted into the 4/th from my
old regiment."
" Six months !" sneered the other ; " why, I've served
under him six years, and been in the regiment all my
life. I remember the day he succeeded to the command,
and from that to this he's never give a sign of a 'eart.
Nobody ever saw him smile, excep' when a-going into
haction. 'E's a 'ard 'un, and no mistake."
A general expression of agreement followed this
summing up of the colonel's character, and a number of
anecdotes were related and reminiscences recalled as
examples of his severity and want of sympathy.
The current of conversation was diverted by a sudden
exclamation from the old sergeant—
" 'Ulloa ! Where did you spring from ? "
The observation was addressed to a little brown-
skinned, blue-eyed, yellow-haired boy, who had crept
close up to the group, and now stood admiring, with
unconcealed interest, the red coats and gold buttons, and
the stalwart forms which wore them.
The little fellow —who did not appear to be much
more than twelve years old—smiled brightly and
fearlessly as he replied, pointing towards the forest
behind as he did so, " From the gipsies."
" You ain't a gipsy, with that 'air and them heyes,"
said Sergeant Beck unceremoniously.
" I belong to them." replied the boy. " I don't know
where they got me from. Are you home from the war ?
What great, strong men you are !"
The soldiers laughed good-naturedly, and the gipsy
boy was soon chatting with them quite freely.
But before long the bugle sounded and the troops fell


"All ready, sir!" was reported to the stern and silent
colonel who bestrode the big black charger that was
champing its bit so impatiently.
The word of command was given, the band struck up,
and away marched the regiment again.
This time there was no crowd to follow. But the
popular sentiment had a representative—one, and a very
small one—in the person of the gipsy boy. Instead of
returning to the forest, he followed the soldiers. Some-
times he kept close to them, sometimes he lagged
behind. At others he took a short cut across the fields
and waited for them higher up the road.
On and on went the regiment ; on and on went the
boy, often turning and looking searchingly rearwards, as
though fearful that he was being followed.
Reading was reached as the shadows of evening were
falling, and then the laddie was lost in the shoutino-
throngs that blocked the street leading to the barracks.
An hour or so before the drums beat the tattoo,
Corporal 1 ompkins was inquiring rather anxiously for
Sergeant Beck, whom he found in the barrack square.
" I say, Beck," he exclaimed, "here's a rum go! That
gipsy boy has followed us up all the way and got into
the barracks. And now he won't go out. The little
beggar says he wants to see you."
" Wants to see me ? Where is he ? "
" I left him in the canteen, standing on a chair and
singing like an angel."
"A hangel in a canteen? Never 'eard of a hangel in
a drinking place before," growled Beck.
The two men walked into the canteen. There, sure
enough, was the little fellow, and, apparently, as " happy
as a king." The room was crowded with soldiers, with


whom he seemed on the best of terms and perfectly at
home. They had stood him on a chair in their midst,
and lie had sung them song after song, to the rapturous
delight of his rough audience. Was there ever a soldier
who did not love a song? He had a clear, sweet voice,
the tones of which were very pleasant to the ear. When
he had finished the song he was singing as Beck and
Tompkins entered, a big, swaggering fellow lifted him in
his arms and placed him on the floor as gently as any
woman could have done.
"Well sung, my youngster. You've got a bird in
your throat," he said. Then, as he noticed Beck's burly
form, he added, "There's the sergeant you've been
asking for."
Beck and the corporal took the boy outside.
" Don't send me away," begged the little fellow,
slipping his fingers into the old sergeant's huge hand ;
" don't make me go back again to the gipsies. They
would beat me, as they often have done before. I am
certain I was not born a gipsy, I am sure that they stole
me. I can just remember —I see still sometimes in
dreams —such different faces from theirs, such a different
home from any of their tents ! "
" But what can we do with you, my boy ?" asked
Beck.
" Take me into the band," was the eager reply. " Let
me beat a drum with the other boys. Some of them are
not much bigger than I am."
The two soldiers asked him a number of questions,
and at last Beck said to Tompkins :
" Find the boy a place in the married men's quarters
for to-nis-ht. I've got an idea. To-morrow we'll find
o o
out the tribe he's bolted from, and either get at the truth


as to the youngster's notion that he was stole or knock
their 'eads orf. What do you say ? "
"Certainly," answered Tompkins at once. The
thought of knocking some heads off evidently pleased
him very much.
Beck's idea was carried out. The would-be recruit
for the band was made comfortable for the night, and
the next day his two new friends set out to beard the
gipsies in their encampment. They were more success-
ful than either of them had anticipated. By a judicious
mixture of threats of what they would do if confession
were not made, and of promises of concealment from the
police if confession were made, and by starting with the
bold assumption that the runaway had been stolen, they
extorted the admission that the boy had been " found "
some seven or eight years ago by a since-dead leader of
the tribe. Pressed further, they named the neighbour-
hood. Pressed further still, and on further threats and
promises, they at last produced and handed over a
scarf and some of the other articles of clothing worn by
the child when he was " found." More valuable still,
they gave up a little toy-book they had " found " on the
boy—on the fly-leaf were written a few words in a lady's
hand.
The instant the two soldiers were out of sight the
encampment broke up, and before the next day the
tribe were far away.
" I don't know why we should take all this trouble,"
said Sergeant Beck as he and his companion were
returning to the barracks at Reading; " but the lad's
fairly wormed 'imself into my 'eart."
"Mine too," agreed Tompkins. "I can hear him
singing yet"


Of course the matter was promptly reported to their
immediate superiors, with the boy's still urgent appli-
cation to be taken into the band. Then the whole
subject was ordered to be " reported to the colonel."
Colonel Towers sat in his private quarters—calm,
cold, grey, and grim : the man whom many respected, all
feared, none loved. He had not always been so strict
and stern and taciturn and forbidding—there were those
who remembered him when there was a warmth in his
manner and a light in his face that had been wanting
now for years in the man who " only smiled when he
went into action."
On the wall behind him hung a single picture—the
portrait of his dead wife. As he rose to enter the room
where he was to receive the officers of the day, he looked
upon the fair face of this portrait, with hunger in his
eyes ; and for a moment his firm lips softened, but of
this softening no sign remained as he closed the door
and strode out.
The usual reports were made, the ordinary routine
business transacted. Then came up the matter of the
runaway from the gipsy camp. He listened silently to
the brief and business-like statement of the officer whose
duty it was to present it. The statement concluded
with a reference to the result of the investigation
o
voluntarily undertaken by Sergeant Beck and Corporal
Tompkins.
" Bring the men before me," was all the colonel said.
A few minutes later Beck and Tompkins stood in the
dreaded presence. Beck repeated the story from
beginning to end, taking care to use as few words as
possible.


"Show me the articles you brought back from the
encampment"
" Yes, sir;" and the old sergeant laid them upon the
table.
The colonel passed through his fingers the scarf and
the other articles of clothing, and laid them aside.
Then he opened the little book and read the words
written upon the fly-leaf.
He turned to the waiting officers :
"You will proceed to your duties."
As they left the room he
raised his eyes coldly to
Beck.
" Fetch this boy."
"Yes, sir."
Tompkins, having received
and intensely uncomfortable.
no orders, remained rigid
" Go too."
"Yes, sir."
The colonel was alone. He sat with his eyes fixed
upon the door.
When again it opened he saw the eyes, the lips, the
hair, of the beautiful face of the portrait —saw them in
the face of the child who stood between the tall forms of
the sergeant and the corporal.
Without the quiver of a muscle he had listened to the
story told him of the runaway gipsy lad ; without the
quiver of a muscle he had examined the articles that lay
upon the table before him ; without the quiver of a
muscle he had recognised the writing of the wife who died
from the grief of the loss that had changed the current
of his own life. But now his eyes were wet; now his
broad breast heaved ; now his strong hands shook ; now
his voice trembled as with open arms he cried aloud—


" My son—my boy—my boy ! "
Without waiting for either order or permission, the
two soldiers hurried from the room. Soon the tale—of
which it was easy to supply the few missing links —had
spread all over the barracks.
"Jim Beck," said Tompkins thoughtfully, "did you
notice the colonel's face at the last ? "
" I did," said Beck shortly.
"You said the other day the colonel hadn't got a
heart"
" I did."
"Jim Beck, you lied !
" I did," said Beck.
" Likewise you said that the colonel's heart was froze,"
persisted Tompkins.
" So it was," answered Beck ; " but it's melted now."
The colonel's son didn't join the band, but in due
time he joined the regiment, in which he rose to fill his
father's place. From the day he recovered his lost boy
Colonel Towers was a different man —kindlier, more
sympathetic. He saw and regretted the selfishness
into which his hidden grief had betrayed him, and
endeavoured so successfully to atone for it that he
became one of the best loved officers in the whole
service. As for Beck and Tompkins, no one had an
envious word to say against the rapid promotion that
rewarded them.


"What became of the gipsies?" inquired somebody.
" I don't know," answered Reggie Warwick.
"If anybody's hard up for a moral lesson," observed
Martin Abbott, " I can give him one from Reggie's
concluding remarks about Colonel Towers. It's this:
it's only a hidden form of beastly selfishness when we
let our own sorrows harden our hearts—they ought to
soften 'em."
And the monitor fell asleep with a snore of superior
virtue.


THE HIDDEN GOLD,
" T'VE been studying up a tale," observed Harry
Huddle, "so as to get it all perfect, till I thought
my brain would turn. Even as it is, I haven't been able
to master properly the whole of it, but I hit on a dodge
out of the difficulty. I turned over the second half to
Alf. Bell, who, you know, sleeps here next to me in No.
6. I know the first half pat, and he's splendidly coached
up in the second. So I'll tell my whack to-night, and
he'll take up the running to-morrow, and finish the
story."
" These irregular dodges won't do," said Abbott
sternly. " I suppose I must allow the yarn to be split
up between you two this time, but in future the rule of
' one boy one complete yarn' must strictly be kept to.
Begin at once, Huddle, please."
Thus adjured, Harry Huddle began the story of THE
HIDDEN GOLD.
Round a rough deal table, in their hut at Gubbin's
Creek, far up in the Australian gold fields, sat three
miners in a disconsolate attitude. We shall best acquaint
ourselves with the position of their affairs by acquainting
ourselves with the nature of their conversation.
" Well, boys," said Rube Nash, the oldest looking man
of the three, " I guess things are so bad that they can't
get much worse."


'' : ,. \




" Which cert'nly ain't no sort o' comfort to me,
remarked Sam Taylor sententiously "The question is,
what's to be done ? "
"Early and late we work, harder than any nigger
slave ever worked," resumed the first speaker. "And
what do we get for it all?—nothing. No gold, no gold."
" Then I asks again," repeated Sam, " what's to be
done ? "
Both turned to the third digger, a fine stalwart man of
about thirty-five, whose looks and manner, as well as his
speech, showed him to be possessed of a refinement and
education which were wanting in his two companions,
honest and sound-hearted though they had proved them-
selves to be.
"What's to be done, Chamberlain? We've got to the
end of our tether."
"And we can't live on air," said Ned Chamberlain
slowly, adding rather bitterly, " at all events, it isn't very
satisfying, though remarkably cheap. As for me, it isn't
that I care so much for myself, boys. \\ hat bears me
down is the thought of that dear little wife of mine "
here he pointed quickly to a little inner compartment of
the hut—"whom I married and brought here seven
years ago, and the thought also of the dear little child
we both love so well—our tiny Flossie, \\ hen I think
of them I can't help feeling down-hearted sometimes. I
can starve and die myself, I hope, like a man ; but I
can't see my wife and little one want —it breaks my
heart, boys."
"Cheer up, Ned," said Rube Nash. "Maybe well
have brighter days after all."
When Chamberlain spoke again it was with a firm,
steady, and determined voice.


"You have just asked me," he said, "what is to be
done."
" That's the question," agreed Sam.
" \ ery well, then, I have a plan ; but it can only be
carried out with the full consent of both of you, for we're
fair and equal partners in everything. Here is the state
of matters—we are in desperate straits. Now, first,
what is the cause? I'll tell you my idea of it I say
that the cause of all our trouble is to be traced to
Michael Beam and Shooting Dick, the two loafers whom
we were foolish enough, on their own false pretences, to
take into partnership last year. Those two have brought
us into trouble all round. They won't work, they won't
take their spell of hardship. They have broken diggers'
law with us over and over again. We want working
men—not lazy, drunken rascals—in this claim."
Rube and Sam rose excitedly to their feet, exclaiming
"You're right, Ned."
" Moreover," continued Ned, " I believe they're a
couple of thieves into the bargain."
" There's them in the camp as says so."
" Here have we been a month near starvation, yet
these two can go off to Harper's Gully every night and
come back as drunk as they can be. Where do they
get the dust to buy the liquor if they don't steal from
us ? Didn't we take them into partnership without pay-
ment ? "
" Yes."
" Have they had their fair share of everything?"
" Yes."
" I repeat that they've never done their share of work,
they've broken miners' law with us over and over again,
and they're always drunk and kicking up rows with the
neighbours."


"And perpetually a-shootin' somebody quite unneces-
sary," added Rube ; " pertickler Dick."
" I say they're the cause of all our troubles. Let's
remove the cause and see if things won't mend. We did
get something out of the claim, at all events, until they
came. Let's turn the skulkers out, neck and crop. Do
you agree ? "
"We do," shouted Rube and Sam, and the three men
shook hands to clinch the agreement
" A jolly good riddance it'll be too," said Sam joy-
fully.
*
"Lucy, Lucy!" cried Ned, and from the inner room
his wife came running to him.
"Yes, Ned?" she said cheerfully, though she looked
tired and weak and careworn.
" I've good news for you. We've agreed to turn out
Michael Beam and Shooting Dick at last—and out
they're going."
"Oh, I'm so glad, Ned," said Lucy earnestly; "they've
been the terror of my life."
" Heaven knows you have had enough to bear, my
lass, since I brought you here," Ned said sorrowfully,
looking round him : " a nice place to bring a girl like
you to."
" Have I ever complained, Ned ? "
" Never, lass. God bless you !"
" Well, don't you trouble about me till I do complain.
And when we get back home again in the old country,
' sweet home' will be all the sweeter for our trials and
troubles away from it. Oh, I think of it so often, Ned—
' Home, sweet home !'"
"And we'll get there yet, wife," said Ned tenderly.
' Perhaps sooner than we think," replied his wife,


moving towards the compartment from which she had
entered. " Dinner will soon be ready, Ned," she said, as
she disappeared. " But —there's very little."
The door of the hut was suddenly flung roughly open,
and two rascally-looking fellows, each smoking a dirty
pipe, lurched in. They were Beam and Shooting Dick.
"Now then, dinner ready?" demanded Michael
Beam.
" Dinner ready? " repeated Shooting Dick.
" Look here, Michael Beam and Mr. Shooting Dick,"
said Ned Chamberlain calmly and coolly, "we've just
been talking about you, and we've made up our minds,
all of us, that you two have no more dinners here. Is
that right or is it wrong, boys ? " he asked, turning to
Rube and Sam.
" Right," said they both instantly.
" What d'yer mean ? " shouted Beam.
" Think you're a-goin' to turn us out—is that your
little game ? " sneered the other ruffian.
" Precisely," said Ned. "We've borne with you a long
time, but now you've got to go."
"Wait a bit," put in Michael Beam. "If Shooting
Dick likes to go out of this claim he's free to do it; but
there's no clearing out for Michael Beam."
"Nor for Shooting Dick either," said that worthy
valiantly.
"We don't mean to waste any words about the job,"
was Ned's reply, "for dinner must be almost ready, such
as it may be. You brought nothing with you when we
took you into partnership in this claim, and you'll take
nothing out with you—excepting what you may have
stolen."
At this last remark both men started violently, and


exchanged quick glances. Ned was watching them
narrowly lest they should draw revolvers. This they
didn't do; perhaps because they knew his keen eyes
were on them. But in a corner of the tent stood some
rifles, and with a rapid dash each seized one. Ned
looked at Rube and Sam with a slight gesture, and in
an instant each of the three had brought out a revolver
and levelled it towards Dick and Beam.
"Now clear out," cried Ned, "neck and crop. And
put down those rifles."
The two rascals looked at the men confronting them.
The six eyes were very steady, the three pistols were
held very firmly. Slowly they replaced the rifles, and
slowly backed out to the door.
" Listen to me, you three," said Michael Beam.
" We're turned out now, but this shall be the worst day's
work you've ever done."
"And mark you," said Dick, "you shall pay for it
dearly."
"Go," was the only reply, and Ned, Rube, and Sam,
with the pistols still in their hands, walked forward and
watched the retreat of their late partners till they were
out of sight.
" My revolver wasn't loaded," said Ned, as he replaced
it in his pocket; " was yours, Sam ? "
"No," replied Sam.
" Nor mine either," said Rube Nash.
\\ ith a hearty laugh they returned to the middle of
the room, where a brief consultation was held between
them. Having got rid of their late obnoxious com-
panions, they decided to give the claim another chance,
going on working it for the present in the hope of better
luck. Their talk was cut short by the entrance of a


beautiful little golden-haired child, who sprang gaily
into their midst from the inner room.
"Father! father dear!" she cried: and Ned Chamber-
lain, sitting in one of the few chairs that formed the chief
furniture of the place, took her on his lap.
" Well, Flossie," he said, " I suppose dinner's ready.
Is that it ? "
" It's almost ready," prattled pretty Flossie, " only
there's such a little. Mother and I heard you sending
away those rough, nasty men just now, and we're so
glad. You'll never let them come back, father, will
you ?"
" No, darling ; they shall never come back any more."
" And when you take me far, far away from here, back
to your home in England, when you've got very, very
rich, there won't be any cruel, rough men there, father,
will there ? I shan't have to hear any rough, naughty
words there, shall I ? "
"No, little Flossie, no. Only wait till I've got plenty
of bright gold, and then I'll take you right away across
all the blue water, to a dear little village in England.
I've told you all about it, Flossie, haven't I, many a
time ? "
" Yes, papa ; and all you tell me about it I dream all
over again."
" Please Heaven, Flossie, it shall be something more
than a dream to you some day."
At that moment a stentorian voice was heard some-
where outside, singing, very loudly, but still melodiously,
one of the wild, semi-religious ditties in vogue amongst
the many negroes in the mining camp. The voice came
nearer and nearer; it was evident that the singer was
approaching the tent


" It's one of those niggers," said Ned. " There are too
many of them prowling around the camp —they're a
nuisance."
" You mustn't say that, papa," said little Flossie quite
earnestly. "There's one great black man here I'm very,
very fond of."
The singing suddenly ceased, and the next moment
first a great big black face peered through the half-open
door of the tent, and then a huge negro entered. He
looked about sixty years old, though his hair was as
black as his skin. He was more than six feet high, and
looked a regular giant.
" Chuck something at him, Rube," said Sam; and
Rube Nash at once picked up a chair to throw at the
intruder. But Flossie jumped from her father's knee
with a scream, and ran to the negro. Then she faced
the astonished Rube, holding out her little arm before
the darkie protectingly.
"You shan't throw things at him," she cried.
"Beg pardon," stammered Nash, lowering the chair.
" Didn't know he was a pal o' yours, missie."
"Well, he is a pal of mine," retorted Flossie, "and I'll
protect him !"
" Why, it's that old nigger who plays with the child
all day wnenever he gets a chance," said her father.
" What do you want, darkie ? "
" How you do, boss, eh ? " was the negro's grinning
response ; "how you do? My name Hickory Joe."
He glanced wistfully at Flossie.
" Massa, me want to kiss de little piccaninny. Me
bring her pretty flowers—look :" and he held out a
bunch of blooms which he must have wandered far
enough away from the camp to gather, poor fellow.


" What do you want to kiss her for ? " asked Cham-
berlain ; but Flossie exclaimed—
"Oh, yes; let me kiss old Hickory Joe. He often
plays with me, and tells me such funny stories. I was
beginning to tell you about him just now. I like to kiss
the pretty black man."'
Hickory Joe lifted the child in his great arms and
kissed her greedily, just as Mrs. Chamberlain appeared
again. She watched him with her little one, and spoke
very softly and kindly.
" Ned," she asked, " what does the negro want ? "
Hickory Joe answered for himself, addressing the
three diggers.
" You take me on to work wid you. Me work in dis
claim before —long time before."
" Some of these niggers know more of the secrets of
these gold diggings than all us white 'uns put together,"
muttered Sam Taylor.
Ned Chamberlain looked hard at the applicant for
work.
" You say you worked here before, a long time ago;
did you get any- gold ? "
All waited anxiously for the negro's reply.
" Yes, massa— plenty gold. We all got gold."
" Then what did you do with it ? "
" Drank him."
" Drank gold ? "
"Yes, gem'men," replied Hickory Joe. " All got gold.
Hickory Joe got gold. But in d'ose times Joe liked de
whiskey and de rum, same as de udders, so when we
started to Melbourne to take de ship, we all drunk. Me
drunk —big drunk—very long drunk—so long dat when
I wake up all my drinking comrades gone, and dey take


my gold wid dem—all gone. Poor Hickory Joe ill—
starve. Den I listen to de little voice here in my heart
dat make me remember de good words I heard long
time before—not to drink. So poor Joe starve and
starve, but he never drink, never drink any mo'.
Den I get strong again, and work. But I come back
again to look at de old spot, and I see you all work, and
I see de pretty piccaninny."
"Upon my word, boys," said Ned, "we might do
worse than take him on. We shall have work for
another hand now. But come along inside, and we'll
talk it over. Sit down, darkie, and we'll let you know."
The three men entered the inner apartment, and
Hickory Joe, with Flossie clinging tightly to his hand,
walked up to Lucy.
" Dis your piccaninny, missis?" he said; " dis your
little piccaninny ? "
"Yes, Joe, she's mine," replied Lucy kindly.
"Me love de piccaninny, missis ; me love de little
piccaninny. You know why I love de piccaninny?"
"No, Joe. Unless it be that all good men love little
children."
" Missis, I was a slave once, before I ran away to be
free. I loved my wife, I loved my child. I see my wife
beat and die ; I see my child beat and sold, and all my
heart change to stone. De day came when I was free,
but I had no wife, no little child to love. So when I see
de piccaninny, de old love seemed to come back again,
and I love your child for de sake of mine dat I shall
never see again."
" Oh, poor Hickory Joe!" cried Flossie. "You shall
love me, and I will always love you."
" Come, Lucy," her husband was heard calling, " and
bring Flossie."


The child turned round as her mother led her away,
and waved her hand to Hickory Joe, with a promise
that she would soon come back.
"Wonder if dey take dis nigger on," soliloquised the
blackamoor when left to himself. " Dey take him quick
enough if dey knew what dis nigger knows. Ho, ho ! if
dey knew what dis nigger saw one night! Saw Massa
Beam and Shooting Dick take de gold—de great big
lumps of gold, de great nuggets, out of dis very digging.
Ha, ha ! how dey creep along ! But dis nigger, he see,
he know —he know where dey hide de gold !"
" Wait till you hear my finish to-morrow night," said
Alf. Bell from the next bed.




- £ " V '^^'^
.-* ; ._ \ ' '_ ,- * : '~ '
* » ; s •
< •. • rSSr '■ '


THE HIDDEN GOLD.
(CONTINUED BY ALF. BELL.)
T TIS eyes fell on a well-scraped meat bone on the
table. This he took in one hand, and with the
other produced a pocket-knife from his coat.
" Me carve little horse for de piccaninny," he muttered,
sitting down and commencing to cut away at the bone.
"Dat please de piccaninny. P'raps she smile when I
done give her de little horse."
His quick fingers were not long in producing the
semblance of a horse from the unlikely material he held
in his left palm ; but after some minutes his labours
were interrupted by the "piccaninny" herself, who
persisted in climbing to his knee, and resuming her
conversation with him.
" What funny hair you have," was her first remark, as
her little white fingers pulled at his black wool. " It's
all such funny little black curls. And you can't think
how black your face is. Does any of it ever come off?"
" No, Missie Flossie. Dis nigger so frightened when
he born dat he done go right away black in de face and
all over him."
"Never mind, Hickory Joe. If you're very, very
good, Joe, I daresay when you die you'll be changed into
a beautiful white angel."


"You t'ink so, eh? How long de little piccaninny
been here?"
"Oh, all my whole life—seven years. But" (here
Flossie crept a little closer, and twined her arm half
round his neck) " I'll tell you a very, very, very great
secret By and by, father is going to take me far, far
away from this rough, wicked place—far away across the
great big blue waves to the little, tiny village in
England where lie was born. Oh, it's such a beautiful
o
village, Joe, you can't think. All about it are the
green fields—the dear green fields I see in my dreams.
And in the summer-time they are covered with daisies
and yellow buttercups. And father says that in the
beautiful trees the birds sing, Oh, so sweetly, all round
the little white cottages. It isn't like this rough, stony,
hot place, Joe."
" No, no," said Joe earnestly; "not like dis place, not
like dis place."
"Ah, and there's something else there, Joe," continued
the child. "There's a little church there, with green
ivy climbing all up the old grey walls. And on Sunday
all the people go there, Joe, and the minister reads
from the Bible ; and they sing hymns together, and
they all kneel down and fold their hands, and pray
together. Father cried, Hickory Joe, when he told me
how he used to go to the little village church when
he was quite little himself, like me. He cried —do you
know what made him cry, Hickory Joe?"
" Yes, Flossie, I t'ink I know de t'oughts dat make
Massa Chamberlain cry."
" The best of all will be, Joe, I shan't hear any more
bad words like the diggers use here, and I shan't
have to see all the rough sights that I can't help seeing


here. It will be all different when father takes me home
—takes me to the dear English home which the angels
bring me dreams of every night."
"When he take you?" asked Hickory Joe. "When
Massa Chamberlain take de piccaninny home ? "
"When he's found plenty of gold, Joe. He's poor,
very poor, now ; and first he must find some gold."
The negro put the child hastily to the ground, and
sprang excitedly to his feet
" Gold ! " he shouted. " Massa Chamberlain want
gold to take de little piccaninny home! I tell him—l
know—l tell him where find de gold. Missie Flossie, if
Hickory Joe teli where to find de gold, and make your
fa'der rich man, happy man, will you t'ink of Joe —pray
for poor Hickory Joe, in dat little church?"
" Yes, yes ; oh, yes, Joe."
" Den I tell where to find de gold. Piccaninny go
home now—Hickory Joe send her home—Hickory Joe
show Massa Chamberlain de gold, de gold, de hidden
gold !" he shouted.
Out rushed Ned, Rube, Sam, and Lucy.
" What on earth is the matter with you, darkie ?"
cried Ned to the gesticulating black.
"De gold, massa! De piccaninny tell me you want
de gold to take de piccaninny home. Listen, you all.
Dis was once de bed of a big river, and de gold was
washed down from de big mountain long ago, before
de world was made. De gold here is at de top, not
down where you dig and dig. Dere is little dust, but
here and dere big lumps. Dat what we find years
back—and some of dese lumps, Dick and de udder t'ief,
dey find 'em. I come to see de piccaninny, and I see
Beam and Shooting Dick, and I watch dem. In de


night time dey lift de great lumps of gold —so heavy dat
sometimes dey fall. Hickory Joe watch, watch and
follow, and he see where dey hide de gold. Hickory Joe
show you. Here, quite close."
" What ? Gold !" cried the three miners.
" Quite close," repeated Joe.
" Boys, I believe the nigger speaks truth," said Ned,
seizing a spade, Sam and Rube following his example.
' Lead on, Joe ; " and, headed by the negro, out ran the
madly excited men.
Lucy never knew how long they were absent. Clasp-
ing her child to her breast, she waited, with a heart
so full of hope and longing, fear and doubt, that it
welled over in the tears that ran down her pale cheeks.
At last a tremendous " Hurray!" burst upon her ears.
She sprang to the door and looked out Then she too,
but so much more feebly, cried " Hurrah,'' for with them
they were bringing back—the gold !
For the next few minutes the hut was the scene of the
wildest hubbub. Lucy was crying louder than ever,
though her tears were all tears of happiness now. Ned
and his partners kept on shaking hands with each other
and Hickory Joe. With everybody so happy around
her, and understanding sufficiently what had taken
place, Flossie was clapping her hands with glee.
At last the little group regained a measure of com-
posure, and hastily settled the following plans. It was
decided that it would not be safe to take the precious
earth containing the gold to Melbourne without the
protection of the armed escort provided by Government
That escort was to start to-morrow from Cedar Creek,
three miles off. Ned, Sam, and Rube, together —for
travelling in the neighbourhood of Gubbin's Creek was


notoriously unsafe—must proceed to Cedar Creek at
once, and arrange to meet the escort, with their newly-
found treasure, the next day. Till then the nuggets had
better be buried again for security's sake. Their claim
was in an isolated spot, but they were subject to visits
from the owners of other claims.
So they all set to with a will, and dug a hole under the
table in the centre of the larger room of the hut, in
which hole they put their treasure-trove and then filled
it in again. 1 his done, off started the three partners
to give notice to the escort at Cedar Creek, leaving
Hickory Joe in charge. In consequence of the number
of suspicious characters known to be lurking in the
neighbourhood of the camp, each loaded his revolver,
chiefly lest anything should delay their return till dusk.
They had not been gone half-an-hour when the negro
exclaimed to Lucy, looking towards the cluster of tents
and huts in the near distance, "What dat commotion
about? See—right away down d'ere. I believe it am
de escort come here widout being fetched. Sometimes
dey do."
"I'll go and see, Joe," replied Lucy. "If it is the
escort, my husband must have missed them, I'm afraid,
or he would be back by this time. If so, I'll hurry
on after him, and bring him and the others home."
So saying, she hastily left the cabin. She found that
things had happened as she surmised, and made the
best speed she could to overtake Ned and the others.
Hickory Joe, Flossie, and the gold were left alone
in the solitary hut. The darkie and his little " pal"
chattered away to their hearts' content.
"\ ou soon go home now, piccaninny," said Hickory
Joe. " \ ou not have to stop at Gubbin's Creek much


longer. \ou soon see de English village, and say
de prayer in de pretty church you tell me about"
" es > Joe. \\ hat a wonderful thing gold is, isn't it?
Just fancy, Hickory Joe, gold can take us all the way
from here to England."
Outside the cabin, which they had seen Xed and the
others leave, stood two evil-faced men, listening to every
word. They were Beam and Dick.
" D'yer hear ? " whispered the first, " they're talking
about the gold."
"Hickory Joe," prattled away little Flossie, "you
don t know how I love you for telling father where those
wicked men had hidden the gold they stole."
With an oath Shooting Dick muttered, " The nigger
spied on us, and has told the secret"
"\\ e'll have the gold again yet," responded Beam
fiercely, " and his black blood into the bargain. There's
not a moment to lose. Quick, Dick—seize him."
With a bound the two desperadoes sprang into the log
hut Striking Hickory Joe with all their force together
on the temples, they felled him to the ground. He rose
again instantly, and a furious struggle commenced.
But Shooting Dick spied a spade on the ground, and
with one fearful blow struck the poor African again to
the earth—this time stunned.
" Bind him, Mike," he cried ; " bind him quick."
Picking up a heavy coil of rope, they dragged the
fallen man to his feet, and fastened him securely to an
upright post supporting the roof. He recovered con-
sciousness only to find himself helpless to move hand
or foot.
"Oh, don't hurt poor Hickory Joe," sobbed Flossie;
" don't"


"Hold your tongue, young 'un," said Beam, "and let
the nigger hear what we have to say. Now then, you
black thief, time is short, so listen. It's true, is it?
We found just now the gold was gone, and when we
saw you here we guessed you'd laid your thieving
hands on it. We saw you talking to those precious
rascals, Nash and Taylor and Ned Chamberlain."
" My father is not a rascal," little Flossie burst out;
" how dare you call him one ? "
"Here, Mike," said Shooting Dick, "we'd better tie
the kid somewhere, or she'll be running to the camp
to give an alarm."
" Sling her up in there," replied Michael Beam, point-
ing to the other room ; " and tie a handkerchief round
her mouth."
Dick promptly followed these instructions, and
returned to his companion. Then they both turned
their sole attention to poor Joe.
" Where's the gold ? You've either got it, or know
where the others have put it It's too heavy to carry
far. Where's the gold ? "
No answer came from the negro's bleeding lips.
Taking each a long length of rope, they showered
blow after blow upon his head and body till their own
arms ached. Only a few low groans escaped from their
helpless victim.
" Now will you tell us ? "
Shooting Dick clenched his fist, and struck the silent
hero full in the mouth.
" Now will you tell us ? "
Faintingly came one word in reply—
" No."
" You won't tell us?"


" No."
" Then you shall die."
He retreated a few paces, drew a revolver, and faced
Hickory Joe.
" Will you tell ? Once !"
" No."
" Will you tell ? Twice ! "
" No."
" For the last time, will you tell ? "
" No."
" Then die."
And Shooting Dick fired. Joe was wounded, for fresh
blood spurted from his great broad chest.
" You fool,'' said Beam ; "if you kill the nigger how
can we get the gold ? "
With a scream Flossie ran between them. She had
freed herself, though the handkerchief with which she
had been gagged hung still round her neck.
" Oh, you wicked men, you have killed poor Joe! Oh
poor Joe —poor, poor Joe !"
Beam walked to the wounded man.
" Guess you're off your aim, Dick. You've only
wounded him." Then to Hickory Joe he said, "Will you
tell us now where the gold is ? "
More faintly than ever, but still defiantly, came the
reply—-
No."
Then, as he saw them lay rough hands once more on
Flossie, Joe cried :
" Massa, for de love of Heaven, don't hurt de child."
" What do you care about the kid for ? " asked Dick.
" Because me love her," said poor Joe simply. " For
de sake of Heaven, massas, kill me, but spare de child."


" Dick," said Beam, " I see something in this." He
took hold of Flossie, and stood with her facing Joe.
" We'll soon see how much you love her, you canting
black hound. Here's the piccaninny you say you love.
If you don't tell us where the gold is, /'// cut her
throat! "
He brought a bowie knife from his pocket and held it
to the child's white neck.
" Will you tell us now ? "
J
"Yes. To save the piccaninny me tell you. Dere ! "
Hickory Joe bowed his bleeding head towards the
table, which Beam and Dick kicked away. They
turned up again the newly-dug soil, and saw that the
truth had been told them. They gave a shout of
triumphant joy, and then Shooting Dick, speaking very
quickly, said—
" This time we'll take it farther away. But as to
the nigger and the child, it's our lives or theirs. If we
spare them they'll put the diggers on our track. We
must kill them both and throw the bodies in the river
where they'll tell no tales."
" The gold and our revenge—the two things we
wanted," returned Beam hoarsely.
"You finish the nigger, I'll kill the child."
Piteously Hickory Joe cried :
" You have de gold. Spare de little piccaninny!"
But already Shooting Dick's pistol was levelled at his
head, while Beam held again in his hand the knife he
had laid on the table.
No one saw that face at the entrance to the hut,
the face of Ned Chamberlain. Not a cry escaped his
white lips. Two reports rang out from his revolver, and
Michael Beam and Shooting Dick rolled to the earth,
both dead. F


Ned and Lucy, and Rube Nash and Sam Taylor,
were all inside a moment afterwards. Lucy caught the
fainting form of little tlossie to her heart, while the men
unlashed Hickory Joe. Ned tenderly supported his
head as he half carried him into the adjoining room, and
laid him upon Lucy's bed.
Lucy, with her child in her arms, and the other two
men, grouped around him.
" What is all this ? " cried Chamberlain. " How came
those murderers here ? "
Very slowly, very softly, and with many pauses,
Hickory Joe said :
" Massas, dey find out about de gold. Dey say to me
to tell where is de gold. But I say ' no. Dey beat me,
and hit me. But I say ' no.' Dey shoot me, but I say
' no.' Dey bring de piccaninny to me, and hold de
knife to her neck. It was de gold or de piccaninny.
Hickory Joe dying now. He wouldn't give de gold to
save him life, only give it up for de little piccaninny."
They knew too well the look that was settling on the
shivering black face, and Ned and Rube and Sam bared
their heads. Lucy knelt. Hickory Joe's shaking fingers
touched the curls on Flossie's golden head.
Still more softly, still more slowly, with still more
pauses, were spoken Hickory Joe's last words.
"Now de piccaninny will go to de English village
after all. I can see her playing in de green fields.
De piccaninny is playing in de green fields far, far
away, gadering daisies in her little hands, and hearing
de birds sing in de green branches. And she not have
to hear any rough, wicked words now r , or see any rough,
wicked sights now, and de summer sun is shining on de
piccaninny's pretty hair. See her in de little church now


—see her so plain in de little church wid de green ivy-
climbing all up de old grey walls—and de piccaninny is
kneeling on de floor praying to de Great Massa, —'bless
•poor old—black Joe.' "
" I'm saying it now, Joe," wept Flossie. " Listen."
" How brave and true a heart has ceased to beat,"
said Lucy, as Ned Chamberlain closed the patient eyes
for ever.
"Aye," said Ned ; "a Heart with Hidden Gold."


BIG BEN ; OR, THE BOYS WHO
BOUGHT A LIFE-BOAT.
" yarn I am going to spin to you," remarked
the tenant of the seventh bed, "is a splendid
one."
Five boys were seized with one uncontrollable
impulse; five pillows were hurled with one aim from
five directions. The next moment indignant howls from
Ralph Weedon proclaimed that the aim had been
reached.
" Serve you jolly well right," said Martin Abbott, as
he ordered Ralph to throw back his bolster. " Bragging
won't do here ; confine yourself to telling your story,
and leave us to decide upon its merits."
In a much more subdued voice, Ralph \\ eedon
proceeded as follows :
My last school was situated in a very wild and
romantic place called Eastborough, far up on the stormy
East coast of England, exposed to all the wild breezes
of the German Ocean.
Eastborough itself was only just a little cluster of a
few fishermen's cottages, the nearest coast-town being
Westborough, about half-a-dozen miles away.


Ih — 4 i »
'


-
"


Eastborough College was a big school, with generally
about eighty boarders in it, most of us coming from one
or two large manufacturing towns a short distance
inland. The head-master was Dr. Prestage, not at all a
bad sort of old chap, unless you rubbed him up the
wrong way, which some of us were constantly doing.
The principal boy at the school in my time, and my
particular chum, was Briggs major. This Dick Briggs
was a fellow who would be a credit and an honour to any
school. He was the biggest and the oldest boy in the
place, and took the lead in everything. He could thrash
anybody, and was our champion in football, cricket, and
everything. Whatever was on, Briggs major took the
lead in it. We got to believe in any movement being
bound to be successful so long as he had a hand in it.
But he started one scheme so big, so bold, so daring,
that it took our breath away—we couldrit believe that it
could be carried through. For days before he broke it
to us we had noticed that he looked uncommonly
thoughtful. So much so, that Jenkins remarked to
me:—
" Something's up with Briggs major."
" I'm afraid so," said I. " I noticed yesterday that he
didn't touch his second helping of pudding. I shall try
to sit next him to-day, for he might leave his pudding
again."
" Something seems weighing on his mind."
" There must be," I agreed, with a growing hope of his
pudding weighing on my chest.
That same night Briggs broached his dazzling idea to
us other fellows—Jenkins, Jawkins, Mole, Butterwick,
and myself—who shared his bedroom. We all knew
Dick to be capable of great things, but, as I said before


the idea of such an undertaking as he had thought of
now took our breath away —simply staggered us.
He began by saying what a dangerous place for all
passing ships was the craggy, rocky coast-line of East-
borough. That first point there could be no disputing.
Every winter there were wrecks. Ships got driven in,
and once they touched the far-stretching, low-lying
rocks that bristled seawards from the beach, there was
no hope for them. When the tide was out, we used to
scramble and play on these rocks, sometimes almost a
mile from the shore, so we knew all about them.
® r igg' s ' second point was that Eastborough possessed
no life-boat. The nearest was at a station miles away
the other side of \\ estborough. His second point was
as correct as his first. So there could be no doubt was
his third point, which was that Eastborough ought to
have a life-boat.
" I've made every inquiry, 1 " went on Briggs major
rapidly, "and have had a letter from the Royal National
Life-boat Institution itself. A life-boat—just the boat—
costs five hundred pounds. Then there are the fittings,
and the house to keep it in, and other things. These
cost another five hundred pounds. But if anybody gives
the first five hundred for the boat, the Institution
provides everything else, and the boat is the gift of the
chap planking down the five hundred. It's his boat, and
he gives it to the Institution, christening it by any name
he likes. Or, of course, any number of fellows may
club together, and the thing works in the same way. My
grown-up brother is in the Honourable Artillery Com-
pany, and they gave a life-boat, which is stationed at
\\ alton-on-the-Naze, a jolly little place a long way
down the coast. Well do what those soldiers did. Well


start a fmid in this school, subscribe five hundred pounds,
present a life-boat to the nation to be stationed Jure, and
call her the ' Schoolboy si"
It was a bitterly cold night in the middle of Novem-
ber, but I remember as well as possible that as I grasped
this stupendous idea I sat up in bed in a state of
bewildering amazement.
Five hundred pounds? We raise five hundred
pounds? If this was what had been weighing on the
mind of Briggs major, no wonder he neglected even his
pudding! If only this idea held sway over him for a
few weeks longer, that second helping was mine to the
end of the term.
A brief but profound silence was broken by the voice
of Butterwick, who said firmly, " Briggs major has gone
mad!"
Hear, hear, exclaimed Jenkins, Jawkins, and
Mole.
" Just shut up about being mad," roared Dick indig-
nantly, before I had time to speak myself. " I'm not
cracked, but only in earnest —-just simple downright
earnest. Lets reason it out," he went on more quietly,
and you 11 see that the thing isn't so impossible as it
looks. In the first place, a committee has to be formed,
with a chairman, a secretary, and a treasurer. Then the
subscription list is opened, and appeals made all round
for the coin. I've learnt all the ropes. Now, in our
case, lets see how much we in this room, as the prime
mo\ ers in the scheme, can make up. I've got one
shilling and sevenpence. Butterwick, how much money
have you got ? "
" Ninepence ha'p'ny," replied Butterwick.
"Jawkins?"


" Eightpence," said Jawkins, after stretching out for
his trousers and rattling some coppers as he counted
them.
"Jenkins, how's your banking account?"
"One bob," said Jenkins proudly, after going through
his pockets.
" I've got fivepence," announced Mole, after a similar
process of calculation.
" And I'm worth ten pence ha'p'ny," said I.
"Total," summed up Briggs, "five shillings and
fourpence. Well, 111 subscribe my one-and-seven and
be chairman of the committee. Jenkins, you'll have
to part with your bob and be secretary. Weedon, with
his tenpence ha'p'ny, will be treasurer. Butterwick,
Jawkins, and Mole will be the committee-men."
At last this enthusiasm carried us all away, and before
we went to sleep the Eastborough Life-boat Local
Committee had been formed, and five and fourpence
subscribed. A proposal to postpone the movement
till after Christmas was instantly crushed by the
chairman.
" Not at all," he said. " The sooner this school covers
itself with glory the better. Besides, with the fund
already started, and the names of old Prestage, the
vicar, and a few others added to the committee and
their subscriptions booked, the holidays will be the very
time to make our parents and grown-up friends shell out
to swell the amount It'll take us no end of a time to
make up five hundred pounds; but we'll collect every-
where, and do it somehow."
The next day we called a general meeting in the
hamper shed, and put the life-boat scheme before the
other fellows. Public feeling ran high in favour cf it,


and subscriptions poured in to the amount of six and
tenpence. Thirteen pocket-knives, two hundred and
ninety-seven marbles —many of 'em glass 'uns—and " a
number of other articles too numerous to mention "
my father is an auctioneer, and I've cribbed this phrase
from one of his catalogues—were also handed over
to me as treasurer, after being duly booked by the
secretary.
As soon as it was " Lights Out" that evening, we held
a committee meeting in our bedroom.
It was just the night to consider a life-boat scheme ;
black as ink, except when the forked lightning flashed
from the sky, to be followed by the rumbling roar of the
thunder. Great hailstones rattled against our window-
panes, and we could hear the wind that dashed them
there shrieking and howling outside.
The storm grew worse and worse. To go to sleep
was impossible. We all lay awake, talking in whispers
of ships and sailors at sea Every now and then Briggs
major walked to the window and peered out into the
darkness. Once he opened the window—how he
shivered as the cold wind rushed in !—and exclaimed
excitedly—" I can hear the waves beating on the
rocks!"
At last we heard twelve o'clock strike. Briggs
couldn't rest in bed. He got up and dressed himself.
Butterwick and I followed his example. The storm was
wilder and fiercer than ever.
At last, above the raging gale, we heard a sound we
hadn't heard before—a sound that was repeated once,
twice, three times—a sound that came from the sea—the
booming of a gun.
" There's a ship on the rocks," cried Briggs. " They're
firing the minute gun."


Out from their beds sprang the other three, and
bundled on their clothes. We all stood crowded round
the window. Again and again we heard the firing of
that gun. How close the wreck must be! I don't
know what time it was, I don't know how long—it
wasn't long—we talked about it before we did it —I
scarcely know how we did it; but we did do it, and
Briggs major began it.
" I can't stand it any more," he cried. " I'm going
down to the beach ! "
We all went, as hard as we could pelt. We first
made a sheet rope, and dropped safely to the ground.
Once clear of the premises, and who could stop us ?
But should we get clear? There was one danger—
one thing that might bring about detection. We should
have to pass the kennel of " Big Ben," Dr. Prestage's
huge Newfoundland dog. It he raised an alarm, we
were done for. But he knew us all well ;we used to
take him to swim in the sea and play with us on the
rocks.
" Speak to him all the time till we're well outside,"
ordered Briggs. " Good dog, good dog—Ben, Ben, Big
Ben!"
The dodge succeeded ; we spoke to him, patted him
on the head, and ordered him to lie down again. He
licked our hands, and wagged his bushy tail, and obeyed
us.
What a sight when we reached the beach ! The few
men of the place, and all the women, and even some of
the children, were clustered together. The men looked
very grim, and the women very white. All their eyes
were strained seaward, fixed on the awful sight—it
wasn't so dark now—ol a ship on the rocks. A lot of


her rigging had gone by the board ; the crew were
clinging to what remained.
" She's breaking up," said a fisherman.
" She can't last long now," added another, as a huge
wave lifted her for a moment, to dash her keel on the
crags again the next.
" Where are her boats ? " we cried.
" Washed away," somebody replied, " and one swamped
trying to make for the shore. Nothing but a life-boat
could live in a sea like this."
"A life-boat, yes," said Briggs major bitterly. Just
then his eyes fell on a large coil of life-line lying close
to the group
"Can no one swim off to the wreck with this?" he
cried. " I've heard of such things being done."
"So have we, governor," said the fisherman, with a
laugh that had no mirth in it " Three of us have tried
it already, and almost lost our lives by being dashed
against the rocks before our mates could haul us in
again."
With a strange, sudden light on his face. Briggs
turned eagerly round to me, and seized my arm with a
g ri P-
" Ralph," he said, excitedly and very quickly, " I've an
idea. You're the fastest runner in the school?"
"Yes," I said. "I won the challenge cup."
" Then run as you never ran before. Go back and
fetch Big Ben down here. Human lives instead of a
silver cup may be your reward."
Like a flash, his meaning struck me. Without a
word, I turned and was off. When I got back with the
dog, I was panting for breath. I couldn't stand. I
couldn't speak. I tumbled down.


Quick hands helped Briggs to secure one end of the
line round Big Ben's neck. Then he and Butterwick,
Mole, Jenkins, Jawkins, and several of the men waded
and scrambled along the slippery rocks—sometimes
almost washed off—till they reached the nearest
standing-point to the wreck, Big Ben running with
them. Dawn was breaking now, and the figures of the
poor sailors could be plainly seen, as they clung to the
wreck, shouting for help.
I picked myself up and joined the group around the
dog-. Thank God he understood our words and
o
gestures, he seemed to understand even those despairing
o '
shouts and signs from the men on the ship, towards
which, with a terrific bound as he rushed into the water,
he swam on and on. Sometimes we saw him, and some-
times we couldn't. Sometimes we still hoped he'd do it,
and sometimes we gave up the hope.
But at last a tremendous shout went up. Every one
of us helped to swell it into a perfect roar of joy. Brave
Big Ben had reached the wreck—a great wave had
almost washed him aboard —strong hands had seized
him, and pulled him on deck.
Our end of that line was made fast to the jetty.
What the men called a "cradle" was swung on the
stretched line, and every man on that wrecked vessel—
which turned out to be a Norwegian barque called the
Robert H. Dahl , bound for the Thames with timber,
came ashore —saved. The last man to land was the
captain; the first man to land brought Big Ben with
him.
After those bolsters that were chucked at me when I
started this yarn, I don't exactly care to describe the
scene. Briggs major was hoisted shoulder high, and so


was I. As a matter of fact, we boys and Big Ben were
the centre of a cheering crowd. As the crowd moved
up from the beach, Briggs and I almost toppled down,
for whom should we see coming towards us but Dr.
Prestage ! As he caught sight of his six pupils—in such
strange company, and all " out of bounds" without
permission—he stopped dead.
" What does this mean ? " he demanded.
About a score of voices told him. I believe that if
any suspicion had been entertained that he would
punish us, he would have been lynched on the spot.
But every one of the six out-of-bounders felt that he
had no idea of the sort. On the contrary, I was certain
that I saw lumps in his throat as he bent down to fondle
Big Ben's dripping head. As a matter of fact, he
rewarded, instead of punishing us—rewarded us by
working with us heart and soul on our Life-boat Com-
mittee. We were all sent to bed to have a sleep after
our exertions over-night, and as soon as we woke we
held another committee meeting, at which a resolution
was passed unanimously that the doctor be taken into
our confidence at once. So we sent in our names for an
interview with him, and Briggs major put the whole
thing before him.
"So you have actually formed your committee and
started the fund ? " said the doctor.
" Yes, sir."
"What is the total amount of the subscriptions
already received ? "
"Twelve shillings and twopence, sir," 1 answered
proudly.
Dr. Prestage tried hard not to smile, but he only
partially succeeded.


" You may call it fifty pounds twelve shillings and
twopence, Mr. Treasurer," he said, "for I will give the
pounds. If you will add my name and that of the
vicar to the committee, no doubt we shall soon succeed
in raising the five hundred."
As soon as we got outside his study we gave him
three cheers.
He and the vicar took the matter up, and published
an account of how Big Ben saved eleven lives. They
wrote letters to the papers, and private letters to various
big people. The money rolled in, in large sums and in
small. The captain and crew of the Robert H. Dabl
were amongst the subscribers. Every boy in the school
put his name down for something, and got more out of
his friends at home. During almost the whole time that
the excitement lasted, I came in for Briggs major's
second helping of pudding.
Soon after we returned to school from the Christmas
holidays, we had more than the five hundred pounds —
sufficient over that sum to buy Big Ben a silver collar
(with a suitable inscription) such as no dog ever wore
before. We sent the money to the Royal National
Life-boat Institution, and in due time down came our
boat. The ceremony of launching her was the grandest
sight the world has ever seen ! Briggs major, Butter-
wick, Jenkins, Jawkins, Mole, and I all walked in the
procession.
That's the tale of the " Boys who bought a Life-boat."
I could have told the story better if I hadn't been
interrupted at the start by bolsters.
"You've spun the yarn very well," said Martin
Abbott, "although you needn't have mixed up so much


pudding with it Did you christen the life-boat the
' Schoolboys' ? "
"No fear," replied Ralph Weed on ; "we called her
the 'BIG BEX.'"


A DARK NIGHT'S WORK.
» \T OW that my turn has come'" (said Arthur Barlow
from the eighth bed on the right-hand side of
the big dormitory), " I'm going to tell you of an aw fully
stirring adventure that happened to me when I went
home from this school last Christmas holidays. I've
often been tempted to tell about it before, pri\ atel\, but
I'm glad that I managed to bottle the yarn up for to-
night. Now that the time has arrived, I pull out the
cork, and pop goes the story."
"You talk like a ginger-beer bottle," criticised the
monitor.
" Let's hope his tale will be a fizzing one," said
Higgins, who was fond of a pun, however bad.
" I wish you fellows would hear my yarn first, and
make your remarks afterwards," grumbled Barlow, who
proceeded, without further interruption, with his narra-
tive, which he entitled, " A DARK NIGHT S \\ ORK.
I always think that breaking-up for Christmas is the
most exciting break-up of the year. Besides many of
the usual joys of all holidays, visions of roast beef, plum
pudding, tarts and mincepies, fill the soul.
(" Hear, hear" cried Ralph IVeedon, with much
emotion.)
As I followed my box out of Salwey House on the


' '




18th of last December, the usual pleasing anticipations
occupied all my thoughts. Between the dry bread of
past miseries and miseries to come was to be sandwiched
a delicious slice of ham in the form of six weeks'
vacation. Excuse the poetry of this idea.
( Splendid simile" murmured Weedon.)
1 had first to Set to Liverpool Street Station, and
then book again from there to Norwich. Between the
short journey and the long one I had about an hour to
wait I decided to spend it in eating something, so
made my way into the Refreshment Room.
(Ah!' exclaimed Weedon again, with a
sigh.) * a
W hen the Norwich train was almost ready to start a
porter came and warned me. I hastily finished another
pork-p.e, put a few trifles in my pocket for fear I might
suffer hunger on the journey in case the line was blocked
anywhere, and followed the porter, who had saved me a
nice corner seat in a second-class carriage. Just before
e rain started, I had the presence of mind to
remember that I had better lay in a three-shilling
ncheon basket. So I called the porter again and gave
mi the money to buy me one, with a couple more
bottles of ginger-beer.
We were soon tearing away across the country in the
" M 8 t, which rapidly darkened into night. I filled in
LOnd ° n and Chelmsford by proving
at the food basket was all right and the ginger-pop in
° condition. At Chelmsford all the other passengers
Z e , C^ rnage S°t out, so when the train started again I
- e ° ut le S s and made myself comfortable, the
rumble of the wheels gradually settling down into our
celebrated school song;;
O


" Holloa, boys, holloa, hip hurray,
For it is our going-home day !"
which those wheels seemed to sing louder and louder.
I had three things to help me bear the tediousness of
my lonely journey—a large sausage roll, one remaining
bottle of ginger-beer, and an awfully exciting book
called " Gory-handed Jack, or the Blood-covered High-
wayman," which I'd smuggled into school and brought
away with me. It was a story of murder and crime and
daring deeds of evil of all sorts, mixed up with impossible
adventures and incredible escapes from justice. I read,
ate, and drank, all at the same time —a sentence, bite,
and sip—sip, bite, and sentence. At last all three were
finished : book, roll, and bottle. But I was surprised to
find we were pulling up at Ipswich—l had been so
absorbed in " Gory-handed Jack" that I hadn't noticed
how the time had flown. Nobody got in my carriage,
so I knew that I should have it to myself for the rest of
the journey, because we weren't going to stop again till
we reached Norwich. I had nothing to occupy myself
with now, as we rushed on again, except my thoughts
and the sing-sing-sing of the wheels, which seemed to
have changed their tune, and to be shrieking some of
the wild choruses of the murdering highwaymen of my
book, and repeating the cries of their victims. My box
was in the guard's van, but in the rack above my head
the porter had placed the portmanteau which contained
the overflow of my baggage. I brought it down and
fixed it in the corner of the carriage seat, so as to serve
as a pillow. Then I laid myself out at full length upon
my back along the seat, and closed my peepers. But I
seemed, the next moment, to receive an electric shock,
which made me spring up with a start. I felt my heart


beating wildly. My eyes were glaring. My blood
seemed to cease flowing. My " fascinated gaze was
rooted with horror" (that's a quotation from " Gory-
handed Jack") upon—a human foot! Now there's
nothing very terrible about a human foot in the ordinary
way —unless, of course, it's kicking you—but to be alone
at night in an express train and suddenly to see a foot
protruded from underneath the seat opposite to you is
enough to try anybody's nerves. And that's what I had
to see—a heavily-booted man's foot thrust out into sight
from the darkness of the space beneath the seat opposite
to mine. After the foot came the leg to which it was
attached. Then another foot and another leg appeared—
and a man rolled himself from under the seat I
couldn't speak, I couldn't cry out. I could only look at
that man. I don't want to tell you what he was like—
he was just the most awful-looking villain I'd ever seen
outside the Chamber of Horrors at Madame Tussaud's.
Let that be sufficient—spare me from giving the details
of his murderous-looking face. He coolly sat in the
opposite corner, and glared at me. I don't know how
long it was before he spoke. When he did speak, it was
in a very thick, husky voice.
"Don't you ask me no questions," he said, "or I'll
chuck you out o' winder."
I opened my lips, but couldn't force out any words—
even if I'd known what to say.
" \\ hat I want you to know," went on the stowaway,
" I'll tell you without no questions. What you want to
know is what you've got to do. Just this. In the
nearest first-class carriage to this carriage there's a old
gent as looks well worth robbing—and of course
murdering if necessary. I'm going to crawl along the


foot-board to that first-class carriage, and before I leave
it that old gent's wallybles will be mine. He'll have to
be knocked on the head in any case—to kill or stun as
may be—because, after this first job's over, I've spotted
a invalid young man and two old women as'll have to
be done in turn. They're in two other carriages. Now
two chaps is always better than one in jobs of this kind,
'specially when one has been on the drink as I have.
You're a hefty young fellow and'll just suit. So get up,
open that door, and foller me."
" Follow you ! " I screamed, finding my voice at last.
" Foller me. That's your ticket. You've got to come
along o me and take part in the work. You're strong
enough to strangle both the old women, and may come
in very handy with the other pair. You can throttle
while I robs."
" You shan't stir from this carriage," I cried, and made
a dash for the bell that would stop the train.
" that bell, and I'll wring your neck."
That was all he said with his tongue—but it was
nothing compared with what he said with his eyes, the
look in which seemed to freeze my very blood. I sunk
back into my seat with a groan. I think he began talking
again, but I could only see—only see his lips moving—l
couldn't hear. The next thing I remember is making a
desperate effort to pull myself together. For the second
time I sprung on my feet and rushed for the bell.
He knocked me down, and held the glittering blade
of a long, dagger-like knife to my throat. I think I
fainted, and don't know how long it was before I found
myself listening again to his harsh, horrid, grating voice.
There seem to be lapses in my memory, and confusion,
so I must tell you what happened as it appeared to me
to happen.


He had flung the carriage door open, and now stood
over me with one hand grasping the scruf of my neck ;
in the other was the knife with which he had threatened
my life.
" I can't trust you," he hissed in my ear. " Get out
first—walk along the splash-board towards the engine.
I shall be close behind you. Stop when I tell you, and
do what I tell you, or I'll run the knife through your
body. Don't tremble like that, or I'll do it now."
My next recollection is of crawling along the foot-
board of that express train, rushing along in the black-
ness of the night. Just as I clutched hold of the handle
of the first first-class carriage I came to—to steady
myself—the ruffian robber behind me whispered,
" Halt!"
I stopped dead.
"Let's look in at the winder," he said hoarsely,
steadying himself by catching hold of my shoulder.
We cautiously raised our heads to the level of the
window and peered inside the carriage. There was the
old gentleman, fast asleep. His newspaper had fluttered
to the floor, his hands were crossed peacefully in front of
him, and over his head he had flung a silk handkerchief.
In the flickering light of the lamp, a heavy gold chain
gleamed and glittered across his waistcoat.
Prime!" muttered my brutal companion, at the
same time thrusting his open knife into my hand.
Turn the handle quietly, sneak in to him like a mouse.
Stick the blade in his heart before he can wake, and
leave the rest to me. We may as well make the job a
safe one first as last."
Before it seemed to me—l knew what I had done, I
had turned the handle and, entering, stood with the
knife between my fingers, over the sleeping victim.


" Strike!"
I need not say whose voice uttered the command. I
could never, never, have meant to obey it, whatever the
consequences of my refusal, but my hand seemed to
raise itself into the position for striking without any
exercise of my own will.
" Now!"
At that moment, without awaking him, the handker-
chief fell from the sleeper's head, and my terrified,
horrified eyes fell full upon the face of —my own father!
Surely that shriek of mine must have been heard along
the whole length of the train. Yes—for the express was
pulling up. It stopped short with a jerk. But before it
stopped the robber had dragged me out backwards from
the carriage.
We were standing again upon the narrow footway.
The train had stopped where the metals of a branch line
crossed those of the main line upon which our express
was travelling. Off to the left was a signal box, which
was shewing a vivid red light, to stop any train coming
along on the branch line and crossing the junction of the
metals till we had passed on. Just ahead of us was a
similar Signal. It was evident that it was this similar
signal that had stopped us, and not my shriek, for there
we just stood waiting for the red sign of "danger" to be
changed to the white light of "safety." No hurrying
guard came rushing to my help.
I tried to scream again, but couldn't.
" Baulked," muttered the wretch by my side; " but
not for long."
He gazed earnestly through the darkness towards
where the red light shone from the signal station, round
which the branch line took a sharp curve. For what


seemed to me a long time he kept on muttering to
himself. At last he clutched me again by the shoulder.
" We'll do it," he cried. " Listen : a train is due along
that loop line. She'll pull up when the driver sees the
red signal. But I'll jump down before she comes up,
run to the box, climb into it, kill the signalman, and
shew the white light instead of the red one. If our train
doesn't move on in the meantime, the train on the
branch will come tearing round the bend and go crash
into her. Both trains will be wrecked. We'll stand clear
till the smash has happened, and then run back and, in
the confusion, rob the dead and wounded left and right.
Foller me."
He seized the knife which I had been still holding—
seized it from me with a jerk—leaped from the foot-
board, and rushed off for the signal box. The moments
seemed like hours. He was carrying out his fiendish
scheme. He must already have murdered the signal-
man—for see! the red light has gone, a white one is
shining in its place. Hark ! the train is coming on the
branch line whose metals cross the spot where our
express remains motionless. It's coming—nearer and
nearer and nearer—and there glows the signal that the
line is clear. Nearer still—look at the gleaming lights
of her engine, listen to the panting of her piston rods !
Imagine the horrible rest—the fatal moment, the
crash, the overturned engines and carriages, the flames,
the shrieks and groans and screams.
I was alive; that was all I knew —but alive in a
different sort of world. That man, that hundred-fold
murderer, was shaking me savagely, and shouting in my
ear


Arthur Barlow paused. Twenty-five boys raised
twenty-five heads from twenty-five sets of bed-clothes,
beneath which they had hidden them.
\\ hat did he say ?" asked Higgins junior, with
chattering teeth.
"Who ? ' said Barlow.
That man, that hundred-fold murderer,'" quoted
Eaglebeak.
It wasn t that chap at all,' was Arthur Barlow's cool
reply. "It was a porter, and he was saying, ' Now then,
sir, Norwich. Wake up !
"' Where am I?' I cried."
A-lyin' on your back on the floor of the carriage,'
said the porter, ' with your portmanteau a-tumbled down
on to your chest And you're a-hollering and a-
shouting like a loonattic. Wake up !' "
The stern \oice of Martin Abbott broke the silence.
"The first remark I have to make," said he, "is a
general one, and it s just this : the next boy who tries to
palm off a mouldy nightmare as a genuine yarn will be
bolstered for six nights running. My next remark is
addressed to Arthur Barlow—and you'd better make a
note of the first part of it too, young Weedon—and it's
this : don't give way to your appetite for too many pork
pies and sausage rolls, which disorder the stomach ; and
don't read unwholesome books, which disorder the mind.
Good-night"




* \ - *1
i - ' fr" *■#* '■* . - - ••'
"Down from out the Gates of Heaven flew the Angel."— Page 114.


WILHELM.
THE ninth bed in the big dormitory was occupied by
a new boy—a German named Hans Hoffmann.
He was a strange character. " He's an awful beggar to
Think," said Ralph Weedon, who had taken him in
hand. " He's always Thinking He Thinks enough for
half-a-dozen fellows. I caught him the other day half-
dazed, with his head leaning on his hand ; and when I
asked him what he was up to, he only said ' Thinking.'
It's my opinion that he's doomed to turn out a poet
—in fact, that he is one already, only not quite hatched
yet."
He was understood to be turned sixteen. He wore
long yellow hair, and had big, blue, dreamy-looking
eyes.
"Now then, you new boy in No. 9, you'll have
to pay your footing to-night," said Martin Abbott
rather sharply.
The only word that Hans seemed to grasp in this
sentence was " pay."
" Sur," he began, but the monitor hastily interrupted
him.
" Why do you call me ' sir' ? " he demanded.
" It ees po-lite," replied the new boy.
" Polite be blowed," said Martin. " Pay your footing."
" Sur," returned the German, " I will pay dat vhich I


have. It ees t'ree ha'-pence. Ralph Weedon, he has eat
de rest He say he shall be my shum."
W hen it was explained to him that to pay his footing
meant to tell a tale, he told the strangest story ever
heard in the room. How much of it came out of his
own dreamy German head, and how much out of dreamy
German fairy-tale books, nobody attempted to guess.
He told the story very slowly and very softly, and, when
he had got over his first nervousness, in much better
English than might have been expected.
All day long fell the snow. It fell so low, from so
high. It fell from the great grey clouds that roll before
the Gates of Heaven, where Angels are, down into the
streets and alleys of the cities and the towns, where
sinners are. All day long, all day long, till the great
city where \\ ilhelm, the orphan crossing-sweeper, lived,
was covered all in white, from the gold cross on the
summit of the cathedral spire down to the slippery flags
of the pavement All day long, all day long—and ever
the winds grew colder and the heavens darker and the
streets drearier. All day long, till the Spirits of the
Night began to spread their black wings above the white
world. With the falling of the evening shadows, all the
houses and all the churches and the big cathedral burst
gradually into a blaze of light, and soon the bells
crashed merrily out, their glad notes playing in gleeful
frolic with the flakes of the whirling snowstorm. For it
was Christmas Eve, and all the bells were rinmncr
b 6
" Gloria in excelsis Deo" And out from their bright
warm homes came the people in scores, and in hundreds,
and in thousands, all wrapped in warm, rich garments,
and they made for the great cathedral. For there, on


every Christmas Eve, unseen by human eyes but heard
by human ears, an angel descended to sing the " Gloria "
with the choir. Generation after generation had this
good thing been believed, for always above the other
voices rose one of thrilling sweetness. And none dared
claim that voice for his—so the people knew an Angel
sang.
Wilhelm—ah, the poor one !—stood shivering with
cold and hunger close to the cathedral gates. Father-
less, motherless, friendless, homeless, with never a hand
to help, a heart to pity him ; all day, and all the day
before, and all the day before that, he had been out in
the wild winter weather, with nothing to eat, no fire to
warm him, no clothes save a few ragged tatters to cover
his cold and starved and shivering body—out in the
snow and the bleak, nipping air, and the slushy, freezing
streets. Even at night, only an oozing archway near
the black-rolling, half-frozen river had sheltered his poor
little aching head and his poor little weary body.
And now—this Christmas Eve —when the great
cathedral had filled to overflowing, and the voices of
priests and choir had commenced to follow the
throbbing music of the organ as it pealed forth the
notes of the solemn offices of Christmas Eve, Wilhelm
dragged his bare feet slowly towards that dismal
archway to rest there for the night. It was close at
hand, but it took Wilhelm a long time to reach it, his
feet were so numb, and his heart was so tired, and there
was so strange a whirling going on in his bare head. It
seemed to whirl around with the snowflakes. When at
last he reached the archway, the storm-driven snow had
drifted under it in great white heaps. And on one of
these he fell down, and soon he forgot his hunger ar.d
' OO


his wretchedness—forgot how tired he was, how cold he
was—forgot the snowstorm and the hard streets and the
sworded policemen who had kept moving him on,
moving him on, moving him on, moving him on, till he
could move no more. He forgot all these things, for he
fainted. But before he fainted, he thought of all the
bright, warm, happy homes in the great city all around
the dark archway. He thought of all the happy
children who had fathers and mothers to kiss them and
take care of them and love them. And as he thought
of these things he clasped his dirty hands together with
a great sob, and raised them to his dirty face to wipe
away the streaming tears that were rolling down it.
The time was near at hand for the singing - of the
o o
" Gloria" in the great cathedral. And down from out
the Gates of Heaven flew the Angel who sang it with
the choir —down through the snow-clouds to the city.
No man saw his bright and beautiful form, glowing with
the celestial light that no mortal eye may see—no man
heard the rustling of his wings. But all the priests
around the high Altar, and all the white-robed singers in
the chancel-aisles, and all the thousands of kneeling
worshippers, waited for the coming of the Angel's
presence —waited with longing hearts and open ears for
the sound of his voice in the " Gloria ." But the sweet
music of the Angel's singing was not heard that night.
For as he drew close to the cathedral with its waiting-
o
and expectant multitude, he saw the dark archway
where lay poor little Wilhelm on the snow. And the
Angel folded his wings and entered the archway, and
knelt by the frozen body of the waif of the big cit}^


whom nobody loved, nobody cared for. As he saw this
poor little lost lamb of his Master's flock, the Angel's
heart grew sad within him. One great tear lay on the
child's cheek, close to the weary eye from which it
had rolled. And the Angel bent his head, and from the
fainting face of Wilhelm he kissed away the tear. Then
he took \\ ilhelm to him, and, spreading wide his
glorious wings, bore him from the archway; bore him
up above the cruel city, higher far than the steep gold
cross that crowned the cathedral's loftiest spire—bore
him away from all the sinful world—carried him right
into " The Children's Land."
Then suddenly he remembered that he had not sung
the " Gloria " with the cathedral choir, and he began to
be afraid, for had he not disobeyed the wish of the Lord
of the Angels? But as he thought thuSj he became
conscious that in the crown upon his head was a new
jewel—brighter than all the other jewels there. And,
wondering greatly, he asked what the new jewel was
that was so rich and lustrous ?
Then it was told the Angel that the jewel was the
tear-drop he had kissed from the dirty face of little
Wilhelm.


WALTER QUICK LEIGH'S FIRST DAY
AT BUSINESS.
WILLIE HAYHOE'S STORY.
OUICKLEIGH may have been a sharp
boy; but, anyway, the events I am going to
recount prove that he wasn't so smart as he thought he
was. That's just the case with a lot of people, boys
included.
Walter was a scholar in a fair-sized school in the
suburbs of London—not a boarder, but only a day boy.
Although he wasn't fifteen yet, he'd got it into his head
that he was too old and too smart —especially the latter
—to be kept at school any longer. He was for ever
bothering his father to let him go to business.
" Do find me a place, father, and let me leave school
and go to the City."
This was his constant cry. The ambition to go to the
City every morning in a high hat and a tail coat had not
only rooted itself in his mind but kept on growing.
School was not large enough as an exercise ground for
the talents of a boy of his smartness ; only the great
City of London would give him a fair chance.
It was the wish of his father, who was a doctor, that
Walter should continue at school for a year or two


" He seized the burglar's neck with both hands." — Page 126.


*


longer; but at last he gave in, and yielded to his son's
importunity. With great reluctance, he spoke to a
patient who was engaged in one of the big London
banks, and asked him if he could find Walter a "berth"
in the office of some good mercantile firm.
Walter was overjoyed when he heard that this first
step had been taken, and waited impatiently for the
result. Within a few days came a letter from the
doctor's friendly patient, who wrote that everything was
so quiet in the commercial world that he feared it would
be a long time before a good opening could be found in
a merchant's office ; the merchants seemed to have more
clerks than they had work for. If, however, a solicitor s
office would do, his friends Messrs. Parch, Tapement, and
Co., of Philpot Lane, were willing to take Walter on
trial for three months.
"That'll do," exclaimed Walter, when he was made
acquainted with the offer. " It's something in the City,
at all events ; and it strikes me there's as much chance
for smartness in a lawyer's as anywhere else. Now,
father, won't you see at once about a high hat and a tail
coat? I can't go to town dressed like a common school-
boy."
All arrangements were concluded without loss of time,
and on the following Monday morning \\ alter Ouick-
leigh, clad in the tail coat, and wearing the high hat he
had so long coveted, sallied forth from his home to catch
the early 'bus that was to take him from Hackney to
the City, there to spend his " first day at business."
Before he reached the 'bus he attracted —or rather his
hat and coat did—a good deal of attention from a
number of ribald boys ; but on reaching town he found
that he didn't attract any attention at all ; his hat and


coat passed unnoticed in the crowds of other much
higher hats and much longer tail'coats.
He made his way to Philpot Lane. For a moment or
two he stood gazing at the brass plate which proclaimed
that Parch, Tapement, and Co., Solicitors," were on the
first floor. He began to feel just a little bit qualmish,
but he shook this feeling off, and boldly walked upstairs
and entered the office.
"Oh, you're the new junior, I suppose?" said a tall,
slim, good-natured-looking young man.
"Yes," replied Walter.
All right, come inside. Hang up your hat there.
Have you brought an office coat ? "
" No."
Better bring one to-morrow. Good gracious, what's
that?" he exclaimed, as the new junior's new hat fell
from its peg with a bang.
Its owner rather ruefully picked it up again, and
climbed on the stool next to that of the clerk, whose
name he soon ascertained to be Jobson. The other
clerks arrived in rapid succession, and by the time Mr.
Tapement hurried in and passed through to his private
room work had fairly begun.
" Parch, the head governor, isn't expected to-day,"
lemarked Mr. Jobson to Walter \ "we've a big case on,
and he's gone direct to the Courts."
By-and-by the bell rang from Mr. Tapement's room,
and Walter was told to go in.
" Good morning, sir," he said, bowing as he entered.
"Oh, you're the new boy?" remarked the lawyer,
with a keen but very brief glance. " Mr. Jobson will put
you up to your work ; you'll have to assist him chiefly.
Take these letters out, and ask Mr. Jobson to show you
how to endorse them."


In the middle of his initiation into the simple
m> steries of the process of the " endorsement" of letters
as practised in lawyers' offices, Mr. Tapement walked
into the outer office.
Jobson, he said, " that writ of ejectment must
be served on that fellow Dodgson to-day; Colonel
Scrunchem has written about it again in the most
peremptory terms. You took out the order? "
"Yes, sir," replied the clerk; "but Dodgson seems
such a slippery customer, it may be difficult to serve it.
\\ hy not send this new lad here, sir, down to Brentwood
to do the job ? A fresh face may put Dodgson off the
scent. \\ e're told he's a smart youngster, sir," he added
in a lower voice; "and I really don't see how anybody
else can be spared to-day."
All right, agreed the other; " explain the thing to
him, and send him down."
"Look here, Ouickleigh," said Mr. Jobson, "you're
going to be trusted with an important piece of business.
Colonel Scrunchem, one of our best clients—an old
Indian officer—lives at Brentwood. One of his tenants
11ere, a butcher named Dodgson, is not only in arrears
with his rent, but won't give up possession of the shop,
house, and meadow that he owes rent for. Besides this,
he's been impertinent to the colonel, who's an awful
fellow when he's rubbed the wrong way. In fact, there's
a regular and rather mixed-up row between them, but
there's no need for you to know more about it than I've
Id \ ou. Get dov n to Brentwood at once, find out
and just serve him with this ejectment order.
If he won t take it, throw it on him."
Mightily proud of his errand, Walter started for
Liverpool Street Station. Here he caught a fast train,


and within a quarter of an hour from leaving the office
was steaming away for Brentwood and Dodgson. The
only other occupant of the carriage in which he rode
was a bier burlv, red-faced old fellow, of whom at first
o' »
Walter took little notice. Drawing from his bag the
document he was to serve upon the unfortunate butcher
at the other end of his journey, he spread it open with a
pompous air, and started to read its contents from
beginning to end. The stranger watched him narrowly
from the corners of a pair of very keen, shrewd-looking
eyes, and—quite unknown by the youthful process-
server—caught a glimpse or two of the ejectment order.
As Walter finished his reading, and replaced the
paper in his bag, the stranger spoke. After a few
commonplace remarks —
"You're in the law, maybe?" he hazarded.
"Yes," replied Walter, surprised and gratified. "I'm
in Parch, Tapement, and Co.V
" Dear me !" exclaimed the other. " Why, they're my
lawyers. I'm Colonel Scrunchem, of Brentwood."
" Colonel Scrunchem ! Then you know Dodgson the
butcher, sir ? I'm going to Brentwood on your business—
2"oinsf to serve your tenant with this order to quit,' said
t> o *
Walter excitedly, bringing out again the document with
which he had been entrusted.
" Let's have a look at it."
" Certainly, colonel."
The colonel read the paper through with great
interest, and then handed it back.
"That's all right," he said; "and I'm glad they've
given the job to such a smart young fellow. You're
bound to get on in the law, you are. A cool head, and
a hard heart—they're the two things wanted in the law.


\\ hen a poor chap's come down in the world to have
writs served upon him—serve 'em. You can't afford to
think about his feelings or his family, or any nonsense of
that sort serve em. Xow as to this Dodg'son of
O J
course I know him well, and 111 point him out to you.
111 help you with this job right through. I've taken a
regular fancy to you. Xext time I see your governors
I'll speak up for you."
Walter thanked him, and thought what a jolly old
chap he was.
As the train pulled up at Brentwood, the colonel
thrust his head out of the window, and looked along the
platform.
"YV ell, this zs a slice of luck," he said quickly. "Jump
out, sharp."
Young Ouickleigh sprang from the carriage. The
other, grasping him by the arm, pointed to a gentleman
standing with several companions near the engine.
"\ou see that old fellow in a tight frock-coat, and
with a white moustache—he's talking to the vicar and
those other gentlemen ? "
"Yes—l see."
" That s Dodgson the butcher. Go and serve him at
once. Then bolt the other side, and you'll catch the
express back. She's due now. Be smart!"
Y\ alter did his duty with a rush. He walked rapidly
up the platform, and thrust himself into the midst of the
astonished little group that had been pointed out to him.
He forced his ejectment order into the hands of the
wearer of the tight frock-coat and the fierce white
moustache. In his excitement he lost his head, and said
loudly—.
" lake that. In the Queen's name! Resistance is


useless. In the law, we can't think of families and
feelings. You must get out of your happy home at
once. Take that!"
Then he "bolted the other side," and jumped into the
express as she steamed in. He beckoned a porter. It
would look fine to show that he was so well acquainted
with the colonel.
" Has Colonel Scrunchem gone ?" he asked. "Do
you see him anywhere ? "
" There he is," replied the porter ; " that gentleman on
the other side in a frock-coat and with a blue paper in
his hand—the old gentleman that's flourishing his stick
so, and looking about for somebody."
" But I didn't -come down with him" gasped Walter.
"No," said the porter, "you came in the last down
train with Dodgson the butcher. Right, forward !"
There was an awful row in the office that afternoon.
The real Colonel Scrunchem followed Walter by the
next train, and (metaphorically) set things on fire. He
brought the warmth of India with him. He banged
open the door of the clerk's office, and stalked straight
through into the private office of Mr. Tapement, whom
he addressed in a voice so furiously loud that his angry
words were heard outside.
"Told to quit my own premises, sir," he roared, "and
served with this order in the hearing and sight of the
vicar, General Stock Banger, of Warley Barracks, and
several other intimate friends ! Give me that boy, sir—
let me get hold of the boy who did it. I will boil him
alive, sir ! I'll throw him out of his own skin, sir !"
Walter felt very sick—and looked as he felt He
hastily told his friend Mr. Jobson the particulars of his
fearful mistake.


"Put your hat on," said Jobson, "and get out of it at
once. Go anywhere, and stop there an hour or two."
From three o'clock to almost six the crest-fallen junior
wandered aimlessly about the City. When he returned,
Mr. Tapement and all the clerks, with the exception of
Mr. Jobson, had left for the day.
" This is a sad mess you've made of it, Quickleigh,"
said the kind-hearted clerk, " and of course you'll hear
enough of it to-morrow. I'm going to work late to-
night, and I think you'd better stop and help me. I'll
take care that the governor shall know of it."
W alter thanked him heartily, and of course willingly
consented to stop and help him with his work, to which
they stuck steadily till about half-past seven, when
Jobson proposed that they should lock up the office for
half an hour, and go and have some tea—then return to
resume their labours till about half-past nine. At the
restaurant to which they repaired Jobson met a friend,
with whom he started "just one" game of chess, soon
becoming so absorbed in it that, handing Walter the
keys of the office, he told him to return and push on
with the work as well as he could by himself for a little
while, promising to rejoin him as soon as "mate"' was
declared.
As he reached the landing on the first-floor and
inserted in the lock the big key that opened the door of
the outer office, young Quickleigh was " taken back v to
find that the door was already unlocked J Who could
have opened it without the key ?
Cautiously and noiselessly he pushed the door more
and more widely open, and stole inside the office.
A man was there—a man had got in ! He was at the
big safe—evidently rifling its contents. His back was


to the door, his head was actually inside the safe, bent
over a bundle of papers that he had already taken from
their drawer. " A burglar," gasped Walter to himself—
" a burglar !"
Then a brilliant idea struck him. The burglar was a
little man, the safe was a very big one. It would hold
him. What a chance to wipe off the disgrace of his
Brentwood misfortune—what a chance of proving his
smartness after all, and on his very first day at business!
In a moment his plan was formed—his mind made
up: in the next the deed was done. He bounded
forward. He seized the burglar s neck with both hands,
and put his knee in the small of his back. The keys
with which the robber must have effected his entrance
and opened the iron safe dropped from his guilty hands
and fell on the floor. Ducking the thief's head and
kicking his feet forward from under him, Walter closed
upon him the massive door of the safe with a bang.
With his own hands he had imprisoned the burglar.
He had saved his masters' property —he had protected
their deeds, documents, money. Oh, what glory for a
boy of his age !
He rushed round to the restaurant to fetch Mr.
Jobson —together they rushed back.
"Seize the poker," cried Jobson, "and hit him on the
head at the first sign of resistance. We haven't time to
bring a policeman, for the man must be suffocating. I'll
open the door of the safe —stand by ! "
Open he flung the prison door. Out fell the prisoner,
back first, on the carpet. Jobson gave one look at his
face, already turning black from the want of air.
" Goodness gracious !" he yelled. " Oh, goodness
gracious ! —it's Mr. Parch, the head governor !"


That night before he left the office to which he had
unexpectedly returned, the senior partner wrote the
following brief memorandum to Dr. Quickleigh :
" On no account can we allow your son to enter our
office again. In our opinion he had better go back to
school."
He did go back to school. A few weeks after his
short but startling career in "the law," his mother
remarked to the doctor, " What shall we do with
Walter's high hat and tail coat ? "
" Burn them, mother!" said Walter Quickly quick-
leigh—no, no, I mean Walter Quickleigh quickly.


PLUCK.
L IKE
Arthur Barlow (began Morris Turle), 1 have
been keeping back a personal experience to serve
as my yarn on this eventful night, when my turn has
come at last. Just before we broke up for the last
Christmas holidays, I received, as some of you know,
an important letter from my father. As well as I can, I
will quote it from memory.
" My dear son," he wrote, " I am sorry to tell you, and
you will be as sorry to hear, that you must not come
home to spend your Christmas vacation. Your mother,
Minnie, and Bertie, are all seriously ill—your little sister
and brother with diphtheria. Under these circumstances,
my first intention was that you should remain at Salwey
House in charge of Dr. Audlem until the commence-
ment of next term, but in the nick of time your god-
father Widdrington has come to the rescue and invited
you to pass your holidays at his beautiful place on the
Yorkshire wolds, or moors. He has never seen you
since you were a baby, and I have almost lost sight
of him myself until recently, owing to an unfortunate
misunderstanding between us which has only just been
cleared up. Now Mr. Byrne Widdrington is the oldest
friend I have living, and for many reasons I am anxious


' 1
Hill j
1 £ ** • -*■ *
*3 J» V *» » *
lift:?-.. > m 1 , • • Z£




that you should create a favourable impression upon
him. He is rough-mannered but soft-hearted, and you
must try to fall in with his ways, and make him like you.
He is very wealthy and has great influence, and if
you create a favourable impression upon him he may
help you greatly when the time comes for you to start
in life."
Then followed full travelling instructions and a lot of
good advice. A liberal tip was enclosed besides the
money for my journey. I wrote a letter to Byrne
Widdrington, Esquire, J. P., Wold Abbey, near North
Allerton, thanked him for his kind invitation, and
mentioned the day I was coming and the train by which
I should arrive. I received a brief note in reply. My
godfather said very little except that as Wold Abbey
was several miles from the station he would send a con-
veyance to meet me.
By the first post in the morning of the day on which I
started I had a second letter from home, telling me that
the three patients were out of danger and going on well.
This, of course, put me in good spirits, which were added
to by the excitement of the long journey before me.
On my way to King's Cross I took out father's first
letter and read it carefully through once more. I seemed
to perceive more clearly than ever the importance he
attached to my making a good impression upon god-
father Widdrington. I flattered myself that I was just
the boy for the job—anyway, I would do my utmost
\\ ell, we got off all right from King's Cross and
speeded away north. Out in the country there had been
a lot of snow, and in some places it had drifted on the
line and almost blocked it After an hour or two I
found, by consulting my watch and the time-table, that


the train was getting behindhand, and as the snowdrifts
got worse we couldn't pick up the lost time. \\ hen
at last we reached Thirsk it was quite dark. A bitterly
cold winter's night had set in, with a lot of snow whirling
about on the piercing wind. I was sick and tired of the
journey and longed to be safe indoors. I wanted to be
seated in front of a good fire and a square meal.
When, therefore, a porter came to the carriage door and
explained that in consequence of an accident on the
line between Thirsk and North Allerton we couldn't get
along any further for several hours, till the road was
clear again, I was, to put it mildly, savage. I made
some remarks, and the porter said, very civilly—
" Where is it that you exactly want to get to, sir ?"
"Wold Abbey," I replied.
" Mr. Byrne Widdrington's ? "
" Yes."
" Then I'll tell you what I should do, sir. Of course
Wold Abbey is nearer North Allerton than Thirsk, but
it isn't more than about seven miles from this station.
You let me go and get you a horse and trap, with a
steady driver, and you can be safe inside the Abbey
before this train can stir an inch."
I thought I'd better agree to this plan, so the porter
ran off to engage a trap. In about a half hour it drove
up. I treated the driver—a nice-looking young man of
about twenty —and myself to a cup of steaming hot
coffee before we proceeded on our lonely way across the
wild Yorkshire moors. We were soon out of the town
and into the snow-covered open. I could make out no
road through the bleak expanse, but Jack Miles —as
the driver had told me was his name—kept steadily on,
evidently knowing where he was and where he was


going. He was a fine chap, and we chatted away
together very pleasantly. The night was so dark and
the snow so deep that we drove slowly.
"Do you know Mr. Widdrington, Jack?" I asked.
" He's my godfather."
" Everybody know he," replied Jack. "He be good-
hearted but wonderful hot-tempered. He ha' sentenced
mony a chap to six months, and then kept his wife and
family all t' time."
He proceeded to illustrate my godfather's character by
a number of anecdotes, but broke off suddenly as the
horse gave a quick shy and then stopped dead. At the
same moment a low, deep groan startled our ears. It
seemed to arise from the ground in front of the
frightened horse's fore-feet Down I sprang, and
rushed forward. I fell over something—something
lying in the snow. Struggling to my knees, I groped
about with my hands, for the lights of the trap didn't
reach quite so far. Just as another groan reached my
ears, my fingers touched the "something" from which it
proceeded.
"Drive on a yard or two, Jack," I shouted—but he
had already taken one of the lamps from its socket, and
was hurrying to me with the light in his hand.
" It's an old woman," he cried, as he held it above the
fallen figure over which I had stumbled. " There's been
foul play here," he went on excitedly; " she ha' been
cracked over t' yed."
The sound of our voices seemed to arouse the old
lady. She opened her eyes, looked at us with a startled
gaze, and tried to rise. I put my arm round her, and
helped her to her feet.
" \\ ho are you ? " she asked in a quavery voice.


" Friends," said I. " What has happened ?"
We soon knew that nothing less than a highway
robbery had happened. The old lady had started to
walk from a distant farm-house into Thirsk. Upon
reaching the spot where we found her, she had been
suddenly attacked, robbed, and struck. The thief had
run away, leaving her where she stumbled and fell
" What did he take from you ? " we asked.
" My purse."
" How long ago was it?"
" It seems only a minute ago, but I think I've been
unconscious."
" Which way did he run ?
" Straight up the road across the moor," replied the
old lady, who seemed rapidly to have recovered herself.
So much so, that although we offered to drive her safely
home she refused, and insisted on walking on into
Thirsk, to give information to the police, so that they
might be early on the track of the thief and the stolen
money.
A brilliant idea struck me. I took Jack Miles a step
aside, and said earnestly—
" Jack, I'm awfully anxious to make a good impression
on my godfather, and here's a chance. Whilst the old
lady—as she's all right again now—goes on to the town,
you and I will push along up the road as fast as we can
drive. We'll overtake the robber, collar the purse
back from him, lash him to the back of the trap, and
take him a prisoner to Wold Abbey. It'll be a plucky
thing to do, and certain to please the old gentleman
immensely."
"All right, sir," said Jack, "I'm game. But we'd
better take t' lady's name and address before we part
company with her."


This we did ; then sprang into the trap and drove on.
The snow had ceased to fall, and the moon was now
showing her light We kept our eyes well on the alert,
ahead, and all around. At last we came to a spot where
four roads met
"What are we to do now?" asked Jack. "He may
have gone straight on, he may have turned left, or he
may have turned right"
" Wait a minute," said I, jumping from the trap again,
and trying to find a trail in the snow, as though I'd been
an Indian. I struck one—l found marks of recent foot-
steps leading straight on up the road.
"Go it, Jack," I cried, springing to his side again;
"he's not far off now. We've got him."
Sure enough, after driving about another thousand
yards, we saw the hurrying figure of a man ahead of us.
The fellow answered closely enough to the description
of the highwayman given us by his victim; as we
saw when we arrived closer to him. He was carrying
the very stick with which he must have struck the poor
old woman.
"Now, Jack," I whispered quickly, " we mustn't give
him a chance. Drive right up alongside of him on the
off side, then give a sudden turn with the left rein, and
knock him over with the shaft Then we'll both jump
out on him."
Miles obeyed my directions splendidly—there's no
doubt he was a brick. He gave the horse a sharp cut.
The next moment we were up with the robber—a twist
of the rein, and the near side shaft had bowled him
neatly over, and I was on him before he had time to get
up, Jack jumping out after me.
" No nonsense," I cried ; " give up that purse."


"My purse—give up my purse !" cried the highway-
man, who was quite a respectably-dressed man, with
a long overcoat and a muffler. However, I didn't pay
much attention to his appearance.
" Your purse, indeed!" I said scornfully. "No non-
sense—we're two to one; give up the purse, or we'll
knock you on the head this time. Now, Jack ! "
But Jack had already unbuttoned the fellow's coat. I
shoved my hand into his pocket, and closed my fingers
round the purse, which, of course, was there all right.
In transferring it to my own pocket, I had to loosen my
hold on the robber's throat. He took instant advantage
of the opportunity; he flung me off with one hand,
and Jack with the other. Seizing his stick, which had
fallen from his grasp as we knocked him over, he sprang
to his feet and made for us. I saw that my original
programme couldn't be fully carried out; he was not the
sort of chap to lash behind the trap and carry off in
triumph to the Abbey. However, we'd done well as
it was.
" Bolt, Jack ! " I holloaed—"into the trap, and bolt."
Again we sprang into our seats, and dashed off. The
thief first made a mad attempt to seize the horse's head,
and then to cling on behind. I pushed him off, and
we rattled away. For a time he ran after us, and even
after we lost sight of him we heard him shouting.
"Push on—faster still!" I said breathlessly. In fact,
we were both almost breathless.
"Didn't we do it to rights?" exclaimed Jack, as his
wind came back.
" Splendid—splendid ! Oh, what an impression this
will make on my godfather! "
"It will so. He's a good-plucked 'un himself, and,


depend upon it, there's nothing like pluck to please
him."
" How far are we from the Abbey now ? "
"Only about a mile. Yon are t' lights."
We rapidly covered the distance, and drove into the
grounds of Wold Abbey. I found godfather Widdrington
a bluff-spoken, burly, jolly old chap of more than sixty.
He looked just the fellow to knock you down with
one hand, and give you all he had with the other. He
made me very welcome, and when he heard that I had
driven from Thirsk, told a servant to take Jack Miles
downstairs and give him a good supper. In order that
Jack might have his share of the glory before he left, I
hastened to tell the squire of our exciting adventure with
the highwayman.
I had not been mistaken in my idea of the favourable
impression that my conduct would make upon him. He
was delighted—so much so, that he sent down for my
accomplice and gave him a sovereign. My mouth
watered as I caught a glimpse of that golden "tip,"
and, on going through a rapid bit of mental arithmetic, I
calculated that as Jack Miles got a sovereign, I might
make sure of a " fiver." Godfather opened the purse and
counted out four pounds thirteen shillings.
" You're a plucky lad," said the old chap, slapping me
on the back. " Nothing like pluck, my boy. You shall
drive over with me in the morning to Mrs. Joskins's, and
restore her purse to her.
I finished the particular mouthful of cold turkey I was
engaged on at the moment, and then said—
" I hope I've made a favourable impression on you,
sir?"
" Eh?"


" Hope I've made a favourable impression on you,
Mr. Widdrington ? "
He looked a bit puzzled, and then laughed heartily, as
he almost choked me by another thump on the back.
In the morning off we went in the squire's splendid
dog-cart, to take back her purse to the old lady. When
we arrived at the farm-house we were ushered into the
best room. I felt that I was the hero of the occasion,
and when Mrs. Joskins came in and identified me as the
" brave young gentleman " of the previous evening, my
chest didn't seem the right size for my waistcoat. I felt
swollen as I put the purse in her hand.
" Four pounds thirteen shillings in it," I remarked.
" What's the matter ?" exclaimed godfather, as the old
lady gave a loud squeak.
" This isn't my purse, squire ! " she screamed.
" Not your purse ? "
" No. This is silk, mine was leather, and had only
seven shillings in it."
I particularly wish to end this tale now as quickly as
possible. My waistcoat seemed to fit me again suddenly.
From a hero I seemed to shrink into an ordinary in-
dividual —suddenly. My godfather made a number of
remarks as we drove back, but I do not think it is
worth while to repeat them.
Just as we approached the spot where Jack Miles and
I had made our gallant attack upon the highwayman the
night before, he suddenly pulled up his horse with the
exclamation —
" Here's the vicar ! "
The vicar hurried to the side of the dog-cart, and—
almost before I recognised him—poured out an excited
story into my godfather's ear.


"It happened at this very spot last night," he said.
"Two highway robbers drove up in a trap —ran into me
—knocked me over —sprang out and seized me—
threatened to knock me on the head —robbed me of
my purse, containing four pounds thirteen shillings."
Squire Widdrington produced the purse that Mrs.
Joskins had disowned.
" Was this your purse, vicar ?
"Yes—how on earth . . .?"
My godfather was very rude. Instead of waiting for
the vicar to finish his question he turned to me.
" What in the name of. . . Hulloa ! what's up now? "
" I should like to get out and walk, godfather," I
explained, with my foot on the step of the dog-cart.
" So that was how you created a favourable impression
on your godfather, was it?" said Martin Abbott—"by
committing highway robbery, with violence, on the
person of his friend the vicar! "
"Yes," answered Morris Turle.
" Did the affair blow over all right?"
" I don't think people can laugh and be angry at the
same time," said Morris; " and my godfather and the
vicar laughed so long that there wasn't time left to get
angry."
" Do you want to hear the moral of your experience ?"
asked the monitor.
"Not particularly."
"Well, you've got to hear it, anyway," said Martin
firmly. " It's this: Pluck is a splendid thing, but it's
none the worse for being mixed with a little discretion."


"THAT'S YOUR COURSE."
CONRAD LLOYD'S STORY.
I"HE schooner Lady Brooke was sailing with the
wind free. Her passage home from the Azores
was almost over. Her "desired haven" of discharge
was not many miles distant. Down to leeward on the
port beam was seen the expected pilot boat.
Captain Montague Raymond was aft, and Phil
Marston, his nephew —a bright, fine young sailor of
twenty —was at the wheel. On shore, and sometimes in
the cabin on board when Phil was off duty, these two
were uncle and nephew. But at other times, the one
was just skipper and the other just what he was rated on
the ship's books, and neither of them forgot his position.
" Ease off those sheets," cried Captain Raymond.
Then to Phil Marston, " the man at the wheel," he said—
" Starb'd your helm, lad, and let her go off a bit to
clear that rummer buoy."
" Helm's a-starb'd, sir," reported Phil promptly.
" Steady so," said the skipper ; " starb'd a little yet —
so. Steady! How's her head now?"
" Sou'-sou'-west, sir."
" Steady so. That's your course."
Forward bounded the Lady Brooke on her course
towards the buoy.


r-:"\
V
• ij ' I
"He raised it openly to his lips before the captain. —fagc 146.




By-and-by, the captain, who had been narrowly
watching the pilot boat, muttered to himself, " What's
the fellow up to?" Suddenly he shouted, "Haul in
those sheets—main sheet flat in now—port your helm,
lad, and let her come to, sharp. Now steady. Look
out, don't let her shake—you'll have her in the wind."
Again he looked towards the pilot boat. " What's the
lubber doing?" he said again; "he'll drive us over on
the sands. We can't fetch him 011 this tack." Then
loudly, " Stand by for about. Hard down your helm.
Let go those head-sheets—haul in your main-sheet.
Ease your helm. Haul in those head-sheets smart, or
we shall make a stern board."
The ready sailors were carrying out his orders almost
as fast as he uttered them.
"Steady your helm. Well the main-sheet Steady
so. How's her head now?"
" Nor'-west, sir," replied Phil.
" That's your course," said Captain Raymond.
The movements of the pilot cutter continued erratic.
Again the schooner was manoeuvred.
" Stand by. Hard down your helm, and let her
come round. Mind those head-sheets. Steady your
helm again, my lad, and steer up for that cutter. Look
out, or we shall over-run her. Haul that stay-s'l sheet
right to wind'ard. Haul in that fore-boom—keep the
helm steady."
" Aye, aye, sir."
" Now we shall run past him," said Captain Raymond
to himself. "Drop that jib down, and scandalise the
main-s'l. That'll do. Look out with a rope to leeward.
Has he got that rope ?"
"Aye, aye, sir," cried a sailor, and quickly afterwards


the pilot clambered on board, and joined the skipper
aft.
"'Afternoon, captain," he said, speaking rather un-
steadily. " Smart schooner this. Been out all last
night, sir. P'raps you've got a glass of grog handy—
hot?"
The captain of the Lady Brooke eyed the speaker
keenly, as he replied, " I don't drink myself, pilot, and I
never give drink to pilots on duty. From the way your
cutter was handled I fancy you must have drunk quite
enough already."
So saying, for a moment he turned aside.
" Put your helm up, and let her away," he shouted.
" Haul down that main tack—ease off those head-sheets.
Pull up your jib. How's her head now?" he added to
Marston.
" Sou'-sou'-west, sir."
" That's your course "
Then he turned to his companion
" Now, pilot, you can take charge,
Pilot Darley's appearance was not calculated to belie
or allay the captain's suspicions. He was a short,
thick-set, hardy-looking man enough, and the redness of
his face might be attributable to constant exposure to
the weather. But that would not account for a certain
bleariness about his eyes, and for a certain shakiness
about his hands, to say nothing of a peculiar huskiness
about his voice. He was about forty years old. It
wasn't exposure to the weather that made him appear
so much older.
He had not been on board five minutes before he
furtively produced a flask from his pocket, and furtively
took a long drink. As the cold and wintry afternoon


wore on into evening he treated himself to further drinks
—he seemed to carry spirits in every pocket His face
became redder, his voice huskier, his hands more shaky.
With the deepening shadows the chill November
breeze freshened. On rushed the Lady Brooke through
the foaming waters. Her port should be reached now
before midnight, though many a tack would have to be
made first. And the dreaded Red Rock would have to
be passed. 1 his was the most dangerous reef on the
whole coast Many a ship had struck there, to be
broken up by the waves—for no vessel that struck the
Red Rock ever got off again. Helpless wreck, hopeless
death—that is what the Red Rock meant to the
mariner and means it still. The face of Captain
Raymond grew graver as the time went on, every tack
bringing the ship nearer to the fateful spot. Several
times he had suggested to the pilot that sail should be
shortened, but these suggestions had been met with a
grunt of disapproval. It had now struck four bells (ten
o'clock;; the wind was blowing harder than ever, the
waves, all ridden by the "white horses," were rising
higher and higher. The sky was darker and stormier. *
He spoke again, for the schooner still carried almost
all sail, under which she staggered through the blackness
of the night.
" Pilot, you must be going rather near the Red Rock
nearer than I like at all events—and I tell you again
you d better get in some of those small sails."
" Never you mind the sails," said Darley roughly;
" I want to find the Red Rock Bell-buoy—the tide'll
carry her clear of the stones."
"If you won't take in sail now, I must and I will"
said Raymond sternly.
K


" Not while I'm here," rejoined Darley. " I am pilot
of this vessel."
" And I am master —and can hear the bell."
" I'll wait till / hear it," said the pilot.
Once more he brought out his flask, and this time he
raised it openly to his lips before the captain. With an
impulse of uncontrollable anger —righteous anger, to feel
which is "to sin not"—the latter dashed the flask from
the other's hand. It fell on the deck with a crash that
was not heard in the gathering storm. The pilot sprang
furiously at the captain and laid his hands upon him.
"You drunken lubber," cried Raymond, "are you
mad? Do you think I don't know how you've been
drinking ? "
He was mad—mad with drink—for he continued to
struggle furiously, though by this time the schooner was
dipping her side-lights at every plunge. But suddenly
he let go his hold, staggered to the rail and clutched it
tightly with both hands. A blinding flash of lightning
had lit up the angry sea, a terrific peal of thunder
following almost instantly. In the sudden shock the
ship shivered from stem to stern.
A silence that was awful in its intensity appeared to
follow the last roll of the thunderclap. But a sound
more awful than had seemed the silence, a sound more
fearsome far than the roar of the artillery of heaven,
struck the listening ears of Captain Raymond—the
clanging of the bell on the Red Rock Buoy close at hand
—a clanging which showed that the Lady Brooke, under
heavy sail, was now to leeward of the buoy—that the
Red Rock was right ahead ! The sound that should
have been a warning seemed now like the voice of
doom.


The pilot heard it too. He looked up with wild red
eyes. But even yet he failed to grasp the imminence of
the danger.
" How's her head ? " he shouted.
" Sou'-sou'-west," shouted young Phil Marston.
" Steady so," cried the drunken man, with a loud but
thick voice.
But already Captain Raymond was roaring out his
orders. His voice rang through the trumpet at his lips
loud and clear above the wailing and shrieking of the
wild night-storm.
"Down with those gaff top-s'ls. Let that jib run
down. Hard up your helm. Sharp, lads, or we shall be
on the stones."
The pilot seemed seized with a very fury of passion.
His spirit-maddened blood had frenzied him at last.
He was possessed by as foul a demon as ever entered
the bodies of the wretched slaves of Satan in olden
times.
" Hold on everything," he yelled ; "steady that helm.
I'm pilot of this vessel."
" Hard up, I tell you," rang out again the first voice.
" Down with those sails. Now!"
" Keep her on her course. I'm pilot."
" Hard up !"
For one moment the helmsman and the sailors
hesitated, confused by the contradictory voices. Then
over Phil put his helm and the men sprang to obey the
captain's orders with a quick " aye, aye, sir."
Another flash of lightning almost as his last "hard
up " was uttered.
Captain Raymond seized the pilot with one hand and
pointed ahead with the other to where the broken water
flowed over the very fringe of the reef.


The wretched Darley saw—and understood. The
consciousness of what he had done flashed upon his
soddened brain, and he shook from head to foot. For
those few moments he was sober again. Before the
answering thunderclap followed the flash a cry broke
from Captain Raymond's set lips.
" God help us—we're on the stones !"
The pilot heard too —he, too, knew. With a shriek
that echoed for years afterwards in the ears of all who
heard it, he threw up his arms, and just as the lightning
played once more upon the plunging vessel, he flung
himself overboard, to be dashed to death against the
Red Rock. He was found next day—a mangled corpse,
a human wreck.
Thank God Phil had obeyed already the order to put
his helm hard up, for the schooner's head was swinging
round. The only chance now was to back her off and
make a stern board.
Bravely and coolly the effort was made. Quick, loud,
but with no trace in it of the almost hopeless fear that
was in his heart, Captain Raymond's voice was heard all
over the ship.
" Keep your helm up, lad. Haul that fore-sheet to
wind-'ard —flatten in all your sheets."
A moment or two of speechless suspense—then he
cried exultantly—
"Now she moves." Then again aloud, "Ease your
helm. Ease off your main-sheet again. Right your
helm. Let that fore-stays'l draw. Steady!"
" Aye, aye, sir.
" Now how's her head ? "
" Nor'-nor'-east, sir," cried Phil.
" Thank God," said the skipper to himself. The tight


little schooner had answered the call made upon her—
the white waves that lashed in impotent fury the cruel
stones of the Red Rock were already astern of them.
In sight of the Rock, in sight of wreck, in sight of death,
the Lady Brooke and the lives she carried were saved.
" Steady so," said Captain Montague Raymond.
" That's your course."
The next evening, safe in harbour, Phil Marston and
his uncle were seated comfortably in the latter's snug
little cabin.
" Phil, we had a terribly narrow escape of going to
pieces on the Red Rock last night"
"Yes, uncle."
"\ ou know how it was we were carried into such
danger ?"
" \ es:" and young Marston shivered a little as he
thought of the drunken pilot, and his fearful end.
Captain Raymond paused, and hesitated. He had
something to say, but did not quite know how to say it
At last he spoke again :
" My lad, there's a Red Rock ahead of you —ahead of
every young man—the rock on which that pilot
foundered—the Red Rock of drink. Don't try how
close you can steer to it—try how far you can steer from
it If ever you see that Red Rock across your bows, if
ever you see it "
Quite seriously, though with a smile of quick humour
upon his face, Phil Marston quoted rapidly those orders
of his uncle the night before, which had brought the
Lady Brooke completely round in the nick of time—
" Hard up with the helm. Haul the fore-sheet to
wind ard ; flatten in all the sheets. . . Ease off the


main-sheet. . . Let the fore-stays'l draw.
Steady."
" THAT'S YOUR COURSE ! " said Captain Raymond.
«That's a prime story, Conrad," said Abbott; " and
worthy of almost the biggest boy in the room."
" I am almost the biggest boy," said Conrad Lloyd.
" Quite so," replied Martin. " That's what I say."
" It's got a tremendous moral too, after all," muttered
Bob Newbegin.
" What do you mean by ' after all' ? " demanded the
narrator of the tale.
"Well, we had an idea you'd spin us a blood-and-
thundery sort of yarn without much of a moral hanging
to it."
" Then that's just where you were wrong. I've come
to the conclusion at last that a rattling good story can
be told without ' piling on the agony' of clap-trap, and
also that a sound moral chucked in with an exciting
adventure is not a drawback."




V ' ' ' " " ~ SB*: f 1 /
JjB(Hjl>**J5£5^^ * It* . N(yj/


GOD'S WIND ON CHRISTMAS EVE.
DY Martin Abbott's " special dispensation" George
Macdonald, of bed No. 13, was allowed to read the
following story, by the aid of a candle surreptitiously
lighted.
December 24th, 188—.
Past four o'clock, and the early shadows of Christmas
Eve are falling on land and sea. The lights of the
harbour of Sheerness fall on the rushing waters of the
turning tide ; the street lamps shed their flickering glow
on the snow and slush of road and pavement. A cold,
keen wind blows gustily from the sea, wreathing with
white foam the tops of the angry waves, shaking the
windows of the houses in the town, and whirling the
light snow that covers the open country behind.
By-and-by, though it will be a rough night for the
journey, we shall have to go to sea, for our story takes
us there. But first let us turn into the neat and
comfortable little cottage where Annie Morrison is
preparing for the return of her husband and her only
boy.
How busy she is ! How happy she looks ! She has
plied the fire with fuel till it fairly roars with content-
ment : she has lit the lamp, and placed it on the table
before the window, where it can be seen from the very
end of the street The materials for a tremendous meal


are all on the dresser, waiting to be popped into the
oven; the kettle is ready on the hob, prepared to
sing at a minute's notice. Some dry clothes are hang-
ing over the back of a chair, a huge pair of slippers
warming on the fender; they are for her husband,
skipper and part-owner of the little fishing-smack
Daisy. With Sam Collins, who lives next door, Ben
Morrison went fishing yesterday, to return this evening
to spend Christmas Eve at home. There's his portrait
over the mantelpiece—a great, big, burly fellow in the
prime of life, large-handed and broad-chested, with
honest eyes and open countenance. Those who know
Ben best say that he's "as brave as a lion and gentle
as a lamb." What better character can any man have
than that?
By-and-by Annie moves to a chest in the comer of
the room, and opens the top-drawer, from which she
takes a new brass-bound Bible and a little leather case.
She puts them on the table, to which she brings a chair
and sits. Opening the case, she lifts carefully out a
brightly glittering silver watch and small gold chain,
admiring them as they flash in the warm light of the
cosy room. She puts them tenderly down, and opens
the Bible, in the fly-leaf of which she prepares to write
something, handling a pen with evidently unaccustomed
fingers. It takes her several minutes to write the few
words she has in her mind, but at last there they are—
" To my dear son Chris on his birthday,
December the twenty-fifth!'
Then the book and the watch and chain are for him,
her boy. There's his portrait on the wall near his
father's —the portrait of a bright-faced sailor-lad of
fifteen. But that was taken three years ago; he's rated


as a man now on board the man-o'-war Viking. It's
eighteen years ago, " come to-morrow," since the day of
his birth. "God's present," Ben and Annie called him
in their simple piety, and named him " Christmas,"
though now all shorten the name to " Chris."
The Viking is homeward bound. She is almost
home; to-night she is only a few miles off, if all has
gone well, for she is to be in Sheerness harbour, and her
crew paid off, by Christmas Day. She may even now
be entering port —and surely they will let her Chris
come home to-night. Whose step will she hear first?
Whose face will she see first? To whose lips will hers
first be pressed ? Who will be first home this Christmas
Eve—father or son ?
Now we know why Annie Morrison has been so busy
and why she looks so happy. But it is getting late
slowly as the time has passed. The night, as it grows
older, grows darker and more cheerless, and the snow
has begun to fall again. From her seat to the window,
from the window to the door, over and over again walks
the anxious wife and mother, peering into the darkness,
straining to pierce with her eyes the white veil that
hides the end of the street from her view. No sight of
form, no sound of voice or footfall, though now the long
minutes have numbered hours.
" They are late—both late," she murmurs.
She takes the Bible from the table, draws her chair
closer to the fire, and begins to read. But soon the
book slips from her fingers, her eyes close, her tired
hands droop upon her lap. In her sleep—if sleep it be
—she sees—or dreams she sees—her sailor-boy, not as
he was when he sailed away three years ago, but bigger
and stouter. What a fine, manly fellow he has grown ;


how brave and strong he looks! She hears his voice;
how full and round and cheery it sounds!
But—the water's round him now—he's in
oo O
it, battling in it and with it for dear life! His face—the
tanned, brown face that has changed so white—is raised
above the cruel waves that leap around him and beat
upon him—beat upon him and press him down, down,
down !
His eyes—wild and despairing eyes, eyes with death
in them—are looking into hers. His voice is calling to
0 o
her—calling her " Mother ! " Only his hands are above
the water now—they are stretched towards her in dumb
appeal. But still she can see those eyes, still hear that
voice.
With a scream and start she wakes. The clock is
striking twelve. Again to the window, once more to the
door; then again to her seat by the now dying fire in
the lonely room—lonely still. The light has all faded
from her face—a sickly fear possesses her heart. She
falls upon her knees, and clasps her hands in prayer.
" O God, Who sent Thy Son into the world to-day,
send me my boy—send to me safely from the sea my
husband and my son !"
The latch of the door is lifted. How sweet the click
sounds in poor Annie Morrison's ears.
She springs to her feet
" A merry Christmas to you, Annie," says the voice of
Mrs. Collins, her neighbour, who enters the room.
" Our sweethearts haven't come back, so the Daisy is out
all night But I suppose you know the Viking is in ? "
" The Viking in ? "
" Hours and hours ago. One of the dockyard men
told me so."


Annie hastily throws a shawl over her head and
shoulders, and hurries to the dockyard gates. A
friendly watchman may give her news.
Sunset at sea—the last sunset of the voyage for the
gallant officers and crew of her Majesty's ship Viking.
As the red sun dips, down is hauled the Union Jack, but
the "homeward-bound" pennant still stretches its long
length in the breeze.
The Foreland is rounded. Ahead, on the port bow,
shine the lights of Heme Bay, gleaming brightly
through the darkness of the snowy air. The throbbing
engines speed the good vessel swiftly towards her
" desired haven," against the impetuous tide beneath her
keel. Landmark after landmark has been passed—
almost to a minute eager hearts on board are calculating
0 o
the hour at which Sheerness will be fetched. Nearly
home at last!
Down comes the darkness—on drives the gallant
o
vessel.
The officer of the watch casts his keen eye aloft,
where the rigging is silhouetted against the wintry sky.
The breeze has fallen, and the pennant has fouled a
backstay.
" Lay aloft a hand," he orders, "to clear the pennant
from the main-royal backstay."
" Aye, aye, sir."
Up springs a smart young topman. The height is
soon gained, and the pennant disentangled. Is it that
he is reckless with the joy of being so near home? or is
it because spars and rigging alike are slippery with sleet
and snow, that his feet lose their hold and his hands
their grasp ?


" Man overboard !" is cried, almost before his body
strikes the water.
The mighty engines are stopped—a boat is lowered.
Seaward and shoreward pull the strong arms that ply
her oars. Far beyond the man-o'-war's white wake
search the shipmates of the lost topman. But no hail
answers theirs—no struggling swimmer can they find,
long and far as they row and seek. They reach again
the vessel's side, and with saddened faces climb on
board.
Again the mighty engines throb, the screws revolve.
Again the Viking is borne over the surging tide.
Sheerness is in sight
" Poor Chris," murmurs a messmate —" drowndcd on
Christinas Eve."
The wind is N.X.E., and the sails of the Daisy are full
as she heads pluckily in the gloom for the mouth of the
river.
"Tide's running against us very strong to-night, Ben,"
says Sam Collins.
" Never knowed it stronger," agrees Ben. "If it
worn't for this fair wind a-blowin' more than ekally
strong for us, we should never make home to-night."
" That we shouldn't."
" And of all nights," continued Ben, " I shouldn't like
to lay out here this Christmas Eve. You know we
promised our old women faithful to be home, whatever
our catch o' fish was—and in my case there's an extra
special reason for to be thankful that the wind's fair and
strong to take us up against tide. For by the time I
fetch home, all being well, I shall find my boy Chris
there. The Viking was due to-day. I ain't set eyes on


that boy for 'most three years. As for his mother, she's
been crazy for a month past, ever since she knowed he
was on the way —fair crazy with hope and joy."
" Quite nateral with a woman, Ben," says Sam Collins
philosophically ; " 'specially a mother."
" I ain't been much better myself," Ben Morrison
confesses; " only, of course, I ain't showed it so much.
We're reg'lar bound up in that boy. Born on Christmas
Day, he was—eighteen years ago to-morrow. And as
fine a lad, and as smart a lad, and as good a lad, as ever
trod a deck—though I says it myself."
" Three hours will run us up, now," says Sam after
a pause—" if the wind holds."
"If the wind holds!" cries his companion almost
angrily. "Of course it'll hold. Why, I'd rather chuck
every fish overboard than lose this wind. Ain't my wife
waiting for me—ain't the fire blazing, and the lamp
a-glowing in the window—don't I tell you my BOY will
be home? Of course the wind 'll hold. Just haul in
that fore-s'l a bit."
Neither man speaks again for a long time. Only the
sound of the bounding waters and bowling breeze is
heard, as the Daisy keeps steadily on her course.
YY ith a loud and bitter exclamation, Ben springs
suddenly to his feet. The white foam no longer drips
from the smack's bows, the water no longer pours from
her scuppers—her sails flap uselessly against the mast.
7lie wind has dropped !
The waves subside. The boat is still. Not still
now—for already the ebb tide is bearing her astern.
THE WIND HAS GONE !
Poor Ben thinks despairingly of the bright, warm,
happy home he will never reach that night. The


Daisy must anchor till the flood tide of Christmas
morning.
" A plague on the wind !" he cries as the cable rattles
over the little smack's bows.
Fair and clear and crisp breaks the Christmas dawn.
As the sun rises higher the waves sparkle out at sea ;
and on land the roofs of houses and of churches, and all
the trees, and all the broad fields around, glitter and
shine as though diamonds and crystals had fallen from
the sky, instead of snowflakes.
J '
The early bells are crashing out the glad message that
Christ is born. The early risers already abroad give
each other greeting.
With the earliest turn of the tide the Daisy comes in
at last.
As Ben Morrison and her husband step ashore, Mrs.
Collins meets them. She and Ben converse earnestly,
and as the latter turns and sets out with eager steps for
his cottage-home, Airs. Collins calls to him—
" Break it to her gently, Ben—tell her slowly."
As he reaches his little house, Ben Morrison sees that
the lamp is still burning in the window—burning though
the sun is shining so brightly.
Noiselessly he lifts the latch, noiselessly enters the
room.
With her hands spread out before her and her face
lowered upon them, Annie is seated at the table, upon
which are still the Bible and the watch and chain.
Ben enters so quietly, closes the door behind him so
quietly, that not until he speaks is his wife aware of his
presence.
" My lass—my dear lass ! "


She lifts her tear-dimmed eyes—rises with a great
cry—flings her arms around her husband's neck, and
clings despairingly to him.
"Do you know, Ben ? Do you know ? "
"Yes," says Ben ; " I know—all."
" Oh, Ben ! Our boy—our son !"
" My lass—my dear lass."
Tenderly his great, coarse, rough hands release her
clinging fingers from his neck. # Gently and so lovingly
he seats her in the chair again, bending over her, with
his big arms around her.
"My heart is broken, Ben," she wails; "broken,
broken, broken."
" My dear lass."
" He was so young to die—our boy was so young to
die. I can see it all—l saw it last night I can see him
battling in the cold sea—he's holding his hands out
towards me—he's calling me ' Mother!' I see it all,
just as they told me it happened."
" Annie. . . "
" Here's the Bible we bought for him—and the watch
and the gold chain : our present for Christmas—and
his birthday. I can't look at them now, Ben. They
hurt me. Take them away."
Ben's hand touches them to obey her. But she stops
him as he lifts the brass-bound Bible.
No, Ben,' she says; " leave that There's God's
comfort for wounded hearts in His Book."
\ es, my lass—my dear lass. And I 'umbly thank
Him that He's let me bring comfort. Listen, my girl.
Last night as we were running up with the wind against
the tide, the wind fell. Only the wind could bring us
home. Twas only because it fell that we had to


anchor. Annie, my lass, as we lay at anchor I heard a
faint, far-away sort o' cry—heard it again, nearer—heard
it a third time, nearer still. 'Twas the cry of a drowning
lad, Annie. He'd been carried so far by the current and
the tide, that he couldn't be found by the boat sent after
him from the ship he fell from. His strength was all
gone. He couldn't swim any longer, he couldn't keep
afloat any longer."
" Go on—go on ! "
"He was washed almost against the Daisys bows.
He was just able to clutch our cable. We dragged him
aboard—in time. We saved his life."
With a strange look in her eyes, Annie Morrison
raises them to her husband's face. She doesn't hear
that soft click of the latch again—she doesn't see that
someone outside has partly opened the door.
" Ben, Ben," she cries, " what do you mean ? What is
it you are telling me ? "
" My lass—my dear lass—we brought him ashore with
us. Won't you give him these things, Annie ? Won't
you throw your loving arms round him! Won't you
take him to your heart ? "
" Won't you— MOTHER ?"
Chris —big and brown and bonny Chris—Chris, saved
from the sea —Chris, alive and hearty—Chris, with love
in his eyes, and joy in his smile—stands at the now wide
open door. Only for a moment —the next he is locked
in his mother's arms.
" Annie," says Ben very slowly, later on, "if the wind
hadn't dropped last night—and I almost cursed it when
it did—we shouldn't have anchored. If we hadn't
anchored where we did, how could our boy have been
saved ?"


"We should never have looked upon him again, Ben
—till the sea gives up its dead."
" And now he's with us, safe and sound—making this
Christmas time the happiest in all our lives—just because
the wind fell."
"Yes, Ben," says Annie thoughtfully. "Jt was GOD'S
WIND, and HE let it fall."


ALL ALONG THE LINE!
A BALLAD OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
" WATE, it's your turn. And Fred mustn't
zvait ," added Martin Abbott.
When the groan that greeted the pun had subsided,
Freddie Wate remarked steadily—
" I can't tell a story, and I'm not going to tell a story
—that is, an ordinary story in the ordinary way—but all
the same you needn't get your bolsters ready, because
I'm going to substitute for an ordinary yarn something
that not even Abbott can object to."
" What is it ? " asked the monitor suspiciously.
" A recitation," answered the other.
" Recitations are allowable," decided Abbott promptly.
Without further parley, Fred Wate recited in fine
style ALL ALONG THE LINE ! A BALLAD OF THE
AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
The Sabbath bells were chiming in our dear homes far
away,
As o'er the list'ning field rang out the summons for the
fray:
Oh, brightly in the morning sun our spangled banners
gleam'd,
And fearless every warrior's eye with dauntless courage
beam'd ;


"The Colonel falls, a lifeless corse." — Page 168.




For tho' the foe in strong array had mustered for the
fight,
We knew we fought in Freedom's cause—for Freedom
and the Right—
And Glory follows close where'er the Flag of Freedom
goes—
As moved our Van of Battle on loud cheer on cheer
arose
All along the Line.
Hard by a rugged ridge we men of Vermont had to stay,
The ground to hold till orders came—ours only to
obey—
But as the battle's tide swept on, and regiments hurried
past,
As thro' the drifting smoke we saw our comrades falling
fast,
And heard their piercing death-shrieks rise above the
conflict's din,
Hard work our leader had to hold the Boys of Vermont
in.
In strong, extended ranks we stood that rising ridge to
keep,
But burned our hearts so fiercely that rose murmurs loud
and deep
All along the Line.
At last, O God ! we see our men are falling, falling back,
The Southern hosts are stealing on, our guns are firing
slack!
But now across the reeking field a mounted soldier rides,
His panting charger wild with fear, a red stream down
his sides.


With eager, throbbing, burning hearts, our eager eyes
we strain,
As on, still on, the rider comes across the bloody plain.
"'Tis Colonel Gray!" is shouted, "from the Staff our
orders brings—
Our orders come at last—Hurrah !" and joyous shouting
rings
All along the Line.
We know him well, and love him well, this brave young
Colonel Gray,
Our ranks triumphant he has led on many a well-fought
day.
On, on he comes until we see his face is ghastly white—
His steed is close upon us now: why checks he not his
flight ?
The charger halts, and at our feet, fast streaming life's
red tide,
The Colonel falls, a lifeless corse, with one white hand
stretched wide.
A paper, see! that dead hand clasps, with these words,
written large—
" The General bids you ride and tell the Boys of
Vermont charge
All along the Line !"
The words were read ; one look upon the dead man's
face we gave—
Then " Charge!" our leader shouted, and a glittering
long white wave
Ran down the rising ridge which we throughout the day
had kept,
As forward, forward, on, on, on, our line impetuous
swept;


To roll the tide of battle back, to win the half-lost
field—
To win it yet, or every man resolved dear life to yield.
It seem'd as though that dead white face our fearful
onslaught led,
And soon our bright steel's rolling wave bore crest of
bloody red
All along the Line.
And as we charged our troops re-formed, and joined on
every hand —
Our charge was like the whirlwind that sweeps Death
across the land ;
And ere upon the western heights the sunset glow was
seen,
The Stars and Stripes waved proudly where the rebel
camp had been !
When we death's roll have answer'd, and our children's
sons are old,
The gallant deeds of North and South that day will still
be told,
For long 'twill be before the fame of such brave deeds
shall fade—
But, chief of all, they'll tell the charge we men of
Vermont made
All along the Line.
Next eve, when peaceful starbeams gleam'd the field of
battle o'er,
The corse of gallant Colonel Gray with tender hands
we bore:


A soldier's hasty sepulchre some sad-faced warriors
made —
Where friend and foe together lie our valiant dead we
laid.
No costly monument we rear'd to mark his place of rest,
But just these words we wrote upon the slab above his
breast:
" He, being dead, yet speaketh "—and our meaning well
they know
Who hear how by a dead man's word we charged
against the foe
All along the Line.
My brothers who are fighting for the Right against the
Wrong,
My brothers in the battle for the Weak against the
Strong,
My brothers who are fighting for the Rights God meant
for all,
When those who give our orders in the raging struggle
fall,
No dimmer in our stricken hearts must glow Faiths
sacred flame —
The Foe is still before us, and the Cause remains the
same :
In death our leaders speak to us as plainly as in life
"Charge, comrades, Charge! close up your ranks, and
carry on the strife
All along the Line !"
" I think we shall understand the meaning of that last
verse more fully when we are grown-up," said Martin
Abbott thoughtfully.


— I


,»& ' .' ' '••'.'■* " ■ "'"V /•' W
"I stand here to support the resolution!"— Page 180.


HOW I GOT MY FATHER INTO
PARLIAMENT.
T N a voice that carried with it a conviction of his
own gravity and earnestness, Bertie Perkins
commenced his yarn by giving utterance, in a some-
what sententious manner, to the following original
reflections:
" We hear a great deal about the gratitude that boys
ought to feel as regards their fathers. There is no doubt
that boys owe their fathers a good deal, but it some-
times strikes me that there is something to be said
in favour of putting the boot on the other foot. \\ hat-
ever our fathers do for us, surely we do a great deal
■for them. In this way: there is no doubt but that as a
rule we are, in one way and another, a constant source
of anxiety to the authors of our being. Quite so—
but that anxiety prevents them worrying themselves too
much about other troubles, and sort of draws them
out of themselves. Having us to think of and to
provide for, they can't bother so much about them-
selves as they would do otherwise. We save 'em from
it. Again :we are an expense to them. But I have
been reading lately of the mischief that arises from
too much wealth accumulating in single hands. By
being such an expense to them, don't we save our


fathers from the danger of getting too much money, and
very likely getting too fond of it ? And as the vicar
said the other Sunday, the moral dangers arising from a
love of filthy lucre are . .
" Perkins ?" interrupted Martin Abbott sharply.
" What ? " asked Bertie.
" We don't want a sermon, or a lecture, or anything of
the kind, but a good solid yarn, and the sooner you
begin one the less danger you're in."
" By referring to our general services to our fathers,"
explained Perkins, " I was only leading up to an account
of my special service to my special father in getting him
into Parliament."
" I don't believe you did anything of the kind,"
remarked the monitor emphatically.
" Hear, hear," exclaimed a number of voices.
" Open your ears and shut your mouths," retorted
the story-teller of the evening, "and I'll soon show you
that I did."
" Silence, then, everybody," commanded Abbott.
And Bertie Perkins plunged boldly into his yarn.
My father is a Member of Parliament, and I got
him his seat. The whole circumstances of the case were
peculiar, from beginning to end. Owing to the resig-
nation of the former member for Nethercliffe—where
I come from—there had to be what is called a " bye-"
election. I was at home at the time, and, from the
moment when a deputation of voters waited upon father
to persuade him to stand, took the greatest and most
active interest in all the proceedings. I am bound to
tell you that even before he was returned to the House
of Commons, my father was almost the most important
man in Nethercliffe.


(I fail to understand what all that sniffing is about.)
After his election, of course he became the most
important man in the place. He is a shipbuilder at
Netherclifife, which is a rising seaport on the south-west
coast The only other shipbuilder there is Mr. Keale.
Father and Mr. Keale are now on the very best of terms
—so much so that I have heard some talk of uniting the
two businesses under the style of " Perkins and Keale."
But at the time when the election began, they were
what they had been for years—jealous rivals and bitter
enemies. There's no use in disguising the fact, little
credit as it reflects on either of them. Our elders are
very smart in telling us boys to be all sugar-sticky
sweetness towards each other, but they often forget to
keep a sugar-stick in their own tempers towards each
other.
(" Leave our fathers alone," said Abbott sternly ; " and
get on with your story. Any moral remarks that are
called for I'll make myself afterwards.")
This rivalry and jealousy entered into everything
they did. If Keale built a big boat, father built a
bigger. When father started a one-horse carriage,
Keale bought a two-horse one. When Keale enlarged
his business premises, father added about another acre
to his. To go longer back, when my father was filled
with natural pride and joy at the arrival into the world
of myself, his son and heir, what do you think Mr. Keale
did ? Why, he had twins within a month.
One of these twins—Daisy Keale—is mixed up with
my yarn. At the age of eleven, I fell in love with
her, and my affection was returned. To such an extent,
that at the present time we are secretly engaged. \ou
will hear plenty more about Daisy before I've finished.


The day after father agreed to stand for election,
the printers and bill-posters set to work. " Vote for
Perkins !" was stuck up everywhere. The very next day
the place was flooded with placards exhorting every-
body, in flaming characters, to "Vote for Keale !"
True to the old and mutual animosity, Josiah Keale
had decided to enter the lists against the candidate
already in the field.
Public feeling soon began to run very high—all the
higher because the feeling was more personal than
political, for the two rival candidates, instead of differing
in politics, were on the same side. So as there was
no " party " question to be considered, all father's friends
rallied round him, and of course all Mr. Keale's friends
rallied round Mr. Keale.
What with rival pamphlets, rival meetings, rival
addresses —and a few rival free fights—the general
excitement was kept at fever heat. Everybody seemed
to go mad—and, in my father's cause, of course I was
proud to follow the general example, and go mad too—
for the time being.
(" Never got over it," muttered a voice in the darkness
of the big dormitory.)
I squeezed into all the meetings I could, and shouted
" Vote for Perkins !" till I was hoarse. I looked out for
Keale's boy—the other twin—to give him a hiding,
but he was away at boarding school.
Daisy was at home. One day I met her in the street,
just after I had heard father deliver a stirring speech
to a crowd of working men in their dinner hour.
" Vote for Perkins ! " I cried.
"Never," said Daisy.
" Then all is over between us," I said in my excite-
ment


" Certainly it is," Daisy replied.
" Then give me back all the presents I promised you,"
I demanded indignantly. You must remember that my
brain was upset by several weeks' Parliamentary excite-
ment.
Daisy walked on without a word. I felt that I was a
martyr and a Trojan—a Trojan and a martyr rolled into
a single boy. I had done more for my father than my
father had ever done for me—for his sake I had given up
my future wife. Several times during the next few days
Daisy and I met and passed each other—like perfect
strangers.
At last the day of the election was only a week off.
The excitement was madder than ever. It was said
at home that I holloaed, "Vote for Perkins!" in my
sleep. No wonder if I did—for next week would
decide who should be " M.P." for Nethercliffe. The end
was drawing near. The daughter of my father's rival
would soon know now whether she had or had not lost
for ever the son of a live member of Parliament.
The result of the election hung in the balance. V hat-
ever our side said in public, in our hearts we knew that
Keale was strong, very strong. So strong, that every
hour of the remaining time must be used to the greatest
possible advantage. We must strain every nerve. V e
must leave no stone unturned.
For that last Saturday night before the eventful day, we
had managed a splendid public meeting. A celebrated
speaker from London had promised to deliver an
address. We had advertised the meeting well, and felt
certain of a successful and exciting night. Father had
been practising a blood-curdling speech for days before-
hand.


In the afternoon I thought I would prepare myself for
the turmoil ol the coming meeting by taking a stroll by
the sea. A quiet walk might help me to get my voice
in good order for shouting "Vote for Perkins!" in case
the other side invaded our meeting—or for practice if
they didn't
From the cliff I descended to the beach, and by-and-
by found myself on the pier. Amongst the little crowd
of promenaders upon it were old Keale, Mrs. Keale, and
Daisy. As I passed them I moved aside to hiss in
the opposition candidate's ear—(of course he knew me
veil) or rather as close to it as I could reach—"Vote
for Perkins!"
The wind was blowing hard from the shore, and
the tide running out fast. The waves eddied and
swirled at the harbour mouth, and the sea was thick
with " white horses."
I stood at the pier-head. On the landing below were
the Keale party, fishing. Every now and then I heard
Dais\ s merry laugh. But a sudden piercing scream—
one piercing scream—rang through the air. The next
moment—the same moment —I saw the body of Daisy
Keale strike the water. By some mishap or another she
had fallen from the slippery stage. There she was, in
the sea, her white hands held up despairingly—every
moment, every fraction of a moment, she was drifting
farther and farther away. \\ hen I rushed on to the
landing below I just had time to see that Mrs, Keale
was clinging to her husband, holding him back, and
shrieking—
" No, no—the boat! the boat! "
I hadn t time to notice any more, because I fell into
the water too, and was striking out for Daisy.


(" Very good indeed," said Martin Abbott approvingly.
" Very modestly put. Bravo, Bertie !")
I can swim—l can, indeed —and I soon reached her.
I think she'd only sunk twice. I got a good hold on
her, and headed round. But you see there were four
things against us—wind, tide, undercurrents, and rocks.
I got knocked about a bit, which wouldn't have mattered
so much if I could only have got nearer. But I couldn't.
I tried hard and I kept on—which is about all that any
fellow can do in any sort of difficulty.
I couldn't do it. The pier, and the beach, and the
town, and the bye-election—everything —seemed to be
fading away farther and farther—fading out of sight—
fading out of mind as I became unconscious. I didn't
see the boat that was being Irantically pulled towards
us —Mr. Keale at one scull and a fisherman at the
other. I don't remember anything of the boat reaching
us, or of being pulled into her. Daisy does—and she
says we were more than a mile out at sea.
But I remember that as my senses returned to me Mr.
Keale was bending over me in the boat, supporting my
head and crying aloud—
"He saved my child. What can Ido for him—what
can I do ? "
My senses couldn't have returned properly yet —my
wandering mind had got back to the election —for I
instantly replied—
" Vote for Perkins ! "
" I WILL ! " cried Josiah Keale.
I thought that if they knew at home that I had been
drowned in the course of the afternoon, I shouldn't be
allowed to attend the meeting in the evening. So I


gladly allowed myself to be driven first to Mr. Keale's
house, where I had a good rub-down, and changed my
clothes for a suit of his son's. I got inside our own
house without being observed, and changed my clothes
again. By these dodges I escaped detection, and cut off
for the meeting in good time to get a seat at the back of
the platform before the front doors were thrown open.
I shall never forget that meeting. As soon as the
doors were opened, in rushed the people, filling every
seat, every nook in the great hall. It was soon evident
that it was a mixed crowd, some cheering for Perkins
and others for Keale.
The popular politician from London made a terrific
speech, and wound up by proposing a resolution in
favour and support of the candidature of Mr. Albert
Perkins. The resolution was seconded in " high-falutin'"
language by a local orator, who owed father some
money, and spoke of him as a man who would be, in
Parliament, a living proof of the discretion and sound
judgment of the constituency that elected him, and
an ornament to the Senate-house itself. He sat down
mopping his brow, and no doubt feeling that father
wouldn't ask him for the money just yet.
Then arose a commotion. A man was seen pushing
his way to the platform. Some of the people shoved
him back, and others thrust him forward again. Any-
way, he was getting nearer, and at last he leaped on
to the stage. He was Josiah Keale, the rival candidate!
In the midst of the uproar he appealed to the chair-
man, who gave him permission to speak, and asked
everybody to hear him quietly.
" I stand here," shouted Mr. Keale, "to support the
resolution ! "


HOW I GOT MY FATHER INTO PARLIAMENT. ISI
A burst of exclamations was followed by a profound
silence. Mr. Keale stepped to the back of the platform
and pulled me with him to the front.
(" I say, Martin," broke off Bertie Perkins, " that chap
Keale called me a lot of names before he finished, and I
don't like to repeat them for fear of being bolstered."
" You mean such as ' brave,' ' gallant . . ."
"Yes," said Bertie hastily.
"Just substitute for such words the word 'blank,'"
decided the monitor after a pause.
" Right you are," agreed the story-teller.)
" I repeat," said Daisy's father, " that I stand here
in support of the resolution pledging this meeting to
do all that is possible to secure the return to Parlia-
ment of Mr. Albert Perkins. This afternoon this blank
boy, his son, saved the life of my daughter in a blank
and most blank blank manner. Listen, and I will tell
you the story of his blank blankism."
The rest was all blanks, till he reached the end.
" I have been thinking that I ought not to have come
forward at all in opposition to Mr. Perkins—l have been
thinking that it was an ungracious and unneighbourly
thing to do. Anyway, I now retire from the contest in
favour of the father of this blank blank little blank.
Vote for Perkins ! "
" And he did retire," said Abbott, as the yarn ceased,
" and in consequence your father had a walk over ? "
"Just so. Now then, didn't I get him into Parlia-
ment ? "
"It seems very likely that you did," was the ready
response ; " at all events you made his election certain."


EXPELLED.
SAY, Benyon," observed Abbott to the occupant
of the sixteenth bed, " I've heard a very serious
thing about you."
" What is it ? " asked Archie Bem-on.
" Why, that you were expelled from your last school."
" Quite true —so I was, and another boy with me.
But we were both innocent."
" What were you dismissed for ?" demanded the
monitor. " I consider we have a right to know."
" Certainly," cried a number of boys.
"You're quite welcome to know, all of you," returned
Benvon. "In fact, as it's my turn to spin a yarn, I
thought of telling the story to-night. Poor old Bunnie
Laws and I—'Bunnie' was the other chap's nick-name,
though I never knew how he came by it—Bunnie and I
both got chucked out of boarding school for playing a
game—playing at Heroes."
" Playing at Heroes ! What do you mean ?" asked
Martin.
"Just what I say, we were dismissed for playing at
being Heroes. But I'll just tell you the whole yarn
straight away, and to begin with, will christen it
EXPELLED.' "


■ - -$}
° t , «$, . - "r.^l
., I i S ■ t




The boarding- school was Milton House, situated near
the Thames side between Gravesend and Greenhithe.
The head-master was a nice old chap, named Professor
Smoale. For a schoolmaster, his character was very-
satisfactory. He was about sixty, and chock full of
learning and experience. He was very tender-hearted
and emotional. Any story of suffering, and particularly
any tale of devotion and unselfishness and heroism,
would touch him up like anything. Things like
Horatius keeping the bridge, soldiers dying in face of
fearful odds for the sake of duty, sailors standing by
their ships in storm and stress —tales of that sort used to
get into his eyes, so to speak. He had a terrifically big
head, but I really believe that his heart was bigger still,
though he did unjustly dismiss Bunnie and me. What
used particularly to delight him was to get hold of cases
of heroism in modern life, instances of somebody giving
up all to save another. You know the kind of thing
I mean. Why, I remember when a case was published
about a fireman rushing into a burning house, and bring-
ing out a little child wrapped in his own coat—the child
living, and the fireman dying—old Smoale read out
the account to the entire school. I told Bunnie he
would cry before he finished, and so he did.
It was all on account of his own character that I got
hold of the brilliant idea that ended in expulsion. The
idea was all right, it was the way it worked out that was
all wrong. My fellow victim of a sad failure on our
master's part to understand my scheme properly, was
the only chap in the school I took into my confidence.
"Bunnie," I said, "old Smoale is a brick."
"He is," agreed Bunnie. He always agreed with any-
thing I said or proposed.


" You see how he dotes on heroism."
" He does, indeed," replied Bunnie.
" I'd do a good deal to please him," I went on after
a pause.
" So would I," was Bunnie's reply.
" How that rescue of a child from the fire stirred
his heart. Why, they ought to send him to the next fire
and remind him about that fireman, and get him to shed
his tears on the flames to put 'em out," I cried elo-
quently. " Bunnie, what would his feelings be if he
found that he'd got two real live heroes right here, in
his own school? What would he say, do, think, if he
had a case of real life-saving heroism in Milton House ?"
" Two heroes here ! "
" Yes. Bunnie, I've got a dazzling idea. Help me to
carry it out, and you shall share the glory. You and I
will be those two heroes ! "
" But we ain't heroes," said Bunnie.
Not yet," said I ; "but we soon will be. We'll save
old Smoale from a fearful danger."
" What danger's he in ? " asked Laws, with wide-open
eyes.
" None. That's just where the first part of my plan
comes in. You and I want to save him from a fearful
danger, and to be heroes. Now, as he isn't in any
danger, what follows? Why, clearly, that he must be
put in danger. It stands to reason that with all our
heroism we can't rescue him from danger without putting
him in danger first. For instance, if we gallantly plunge
into the Thames and save him from a watery grave, he
must first be chucked into the Thames. It is impossible
for us to pull him out, Bunnie, if he isn't in."
Bunnie Laws saw the force of this reasoning clearly.
I continued my argument.


" Again. If Milton House is in flames, in the middle
of the night, and you and I rush into our beloved
master's bedroom, tear off our own night-shirts, wrap
them round him, carry him out in our arms, and place
him tenderly 011 the ground in face of the cheering
multitude, the laws of logic require that we first set
fire to Milton House."
Bunnie was losing heart. He looked thoroughly
frightened.
" The risks are too dreadful," he declared.
" All heroes must face risks," I said, " or how can they
overcome them ? "
" True," said he, evidently coming round to my way of
thinking again.
I went on talking, and succeeded in getting him more
and more into sympathy with my splendid plan, until I
had completely won him over. At last he became
regularly enthusiastic.
" Let's decoy him down to the water-side," he cried,
" when the tide's up. Then you rush forward and pitch
him in, Archie. I'll be in hiding. As he strikes the
water I'll rush forward with a shout, knock you down,
and plunge in with a life-belt and save his life."
" No," said I, "that won't do. It would make you far
too prominent in the matter, Bunnie, and you know that
heroes are always modest and retiring. It will look far
better for you to keep more in the background.* Now if
we could only arrange for you, say, to set our kind
schoolmaster on fire, and for me to be standing handy
with a bucket of water. . .
" Ridiculous," pronounced Bunnie ; " you would have
all the glory to yourself."
At last we decided that whatever was done must be


done together throughout We must mutually contrive
the danger and mutually effect the gallant rescue.
After several confabulations we finally settled as
follows :
The fact that we were both good swimmers naturally
led us to give the preference to a water rescue, and
in this direction we were also led by the fact that
the professor was in the habit of crossing the river to
visit a friend who lived on the other side. To save him-
self the walk of quite a mile to the nearest steam-ferry,
he used to go over the water in a row-boat belonging to
a man named Bill Chalks. Bill Chalks used to bring his
boat up the little creek that ran close to the school,
embark Mr. Smoale, row him to the Essex shore of the
Thames, and return there for him when he wanted
to come back. \\ ednesday or Saturday was generally
selected for these visits, the afternoons of those days
being half-holidays. We decided to get Bill Chalks to
upset his fare from the boat the very next time he
was taking him across. The accident was to take place
two or three hundred yards from the bank on our side.
\\ e would be strolling along, witness the sad affair, and
plunge in to the rescue.
Off we started to interview Bill Chalks at once. We
were delighted to find that Smoale had engaged the boat
for the usual trip, the very next afternoon. But we were
taken aback by Bill's reluctance to undertake his share
of the work. We explained the whole idea to him, as
fully as I have explained it to you, but he couldn't or
wouldn't see it in the riqht lierht
o o
To upset a aged bloke in the water," he urged, " is to
danger my character."
"Well," I suggested candidly, "suppose we consider
your chamr£ter worth five shillings ? "


<£ Cash down," added Bunnie.
The boatman hesitated, and then expressed a doubt
whether we possessed five shillings. Convinced on this
point (for we showed him the money), he still hesitated
a lot more.
" I'm a-thinkin' about it," he said at last, " only I
thinks slow."
Whilst lie went on thinking, we went on talking and
chinking the money. The result of the three operations
was that he declared—
" This here murdering deed can be dood at the price.
Money down."
We clenched the bargain on the spot, and settled every
detail for the grand event.
"Just think, Bunnie," I said as we walked back to
Milton House, "how splendid our position will be as the
heroes of the school! What privileges we shall be able
to collar—for how can a man punish two gallant boys
who have saved him from a watery tomb ? "
We were both in a fever of excitement till the follow-
ing afternoon arrived. After dinner we dressed in our
oldest suits, and made off for the river-side. We saw
Bill Chalks row up the creek—and then we waited and
watched.
By-and-by—but quite half-an-hour later than we
expected—we heard the splash of the sculls again. It
was all right—there was the boat—there was Bill—there
was the doomed professor seated calmly in the stern.
Little did he dream of the rescue in store for him !
They reached the mouth of the creek, and stood across
the river.
" Off with our boots, Bunnie!" I cried in an agitated
whisper. " The moment is at hand."


Just the distance from the bank agreed on had been
reached—every instant we expected to see good old
Professor Smoale floundering in the water. But with
a vigorous pull of his bowside scull, Chalks suddenly-
shot the boat out of our sight behind a barge. From
Chalks' own boastful account afterwards, we know
exactly all about the dark deed of treachery and deceit
that went on behind that barsre.
o
Bill Chalks ceased sculling, and glared at his fare full
in the face.
" Pertessor, he said, "this here's the wery identical
spot where two of your young gennelmen has paid me
five bob to chuck you overboard."
" Chuck me—throw me—overboard !" cried our head-
master.
"To do that wery deed," insisted Chalks. " Listen to
me, Perfessor, and I'll tell you hall."
He told him " hall." But no doubt he failed to make
clear the purity of our motives.
Professor Smoale gasped for breatlu Then he said—
" I refuse to believe you —I refuse to believe you.
Row me back to the shore instantly, and we shall
find no two young gentlemen waiting to carry out
this fiendish plot Their absence will prove the falsity
of your story."
" I seed 'em lurking 'andy as we come out o' the
creek—seed 'em with my own lieyes," said Chalks.
" Row me back instantly," repeated Mr. Smoale.
" No, Perfessor. We'll play a better dodge than that.
rm a-goin' to jump overboard out o' sight, behind this
here barge. / makes a tremenjious splash, and you
'oilers 4 ' Elp!' in your own natural voice, only louder.
Then you see if them two murdering young gennelmen


ain't waiting on that there bank to jump in for to
pretend to save you. I don't mind a ducking no more
than a porpoise. Five shillings will dry vie —which you
can give me the same, Perfessor, when I've proved as my
words is true."
Up sprang Bill Chalks from his seat. The next
moment—before another word of objection could be
uttered—he dived into the Thames with a truly " tremen-
jious " splash.
" Help! help ! help ! " cried the terrified voice of old
Mr. Smoale.
Bunnie and I heard the splash, heard the shout for
help.
" Now for it," we said—and plunged boldly into the
tide, like the heroes we were, striking out towards the
barge with might and main.
" Hold up, sir," I yelled : " I will save you ! "
" So will I, sir ! " screamed Bunnie.
" I'm Benyon, sir !"
"Soam I, sir! " roared Bunnie—" I mean I'm Laws."
I swam round the bows of the barge, my fellow hero
swam round the stern. We caught sight of the struggling
o 00 o
figure in the water at the same moment. At the same
moment we reached him, and made a grab at him. He
dived out of our clutch and out of our sight—but not before
we had each looked at his face—the grinning face of Bill
Chalks, the boatman. We each saw also another face—•
the awful face of Professor Smoale, who was seated,
of course, safely in the boat.
I felt my heroism go out of me. So did Bunnie, I'm
certain. We both ceased to swim. The tide swept us
down the river—the half-hour's delay I have alluded to
made all the difference in the strength of the current.


Then we cried " Help ! '
I can finish in a few words. Chalks clambered into
his boat again, pulled after us, and picked up Bunnie
Laws a few hundred yards away. I was carried farther
and was saved by a shrimp-boat. Off the Nore!
They said it was about half a mile from where Bunnie
was saved, but in my opinion it was off the Nore.
The next day we were both expelled.
" Served you both jolly well right," was the quick and
uncomplimentary comment of Monitor Martin Abbott.
" There's quite enough shamming in the world without
boys trying it on. Let's all try to be real. An ounce of
true and well-won honour is worth anything—a cartload
y o
of the false article is worth nothing. And don't you
forget it, Benyon."




jj' j|,
>,
"The Frenchman's guns were belching forth a terrihc cannonade." — Page 198.


A TALE OF FOUR SHIPS.
TOLD BY CLAUDE FARMAN.
TT IS Britannic Majesty's sloop-of-\var Ripple was
cruising in West Indian waters. Her general
object was the suppression of piracy—the particular
object of her cruise, known to everyone on board, was to
find, fight, and capture the Black Angel , a pirate vessel
that had long been the dread, scourge, and terror of the
West Indies. The RJpple had been knocking about the
station so long that she was in anything but first-class
condition, besides being rather seriously undermanned.
In fact the pirate was known to be not only faster, but
more strongly manned and more formidably armed than
the man-o'-war in pursuit of her ; being, indeed, a giant
of a pirate in every respect. But British seamen were
not then, and are not now, in the habit of counting the
odds in a case of duty. They have never been taught
that sort of arithmetic.
" Sail on the larboard bow," roared the look-out man
one morning.
" Sail on the larboard bow," repeated the officer of the
watch, who almost immediately went below to report
the sail to the captain. Quickly as the latter made his
appearance on deck, the news that a strange sail was in
sight spread amongst the entire crew of the Ripple like


wildfire. The hope beat high in every breast that at
last the pirate had been sighted, and would be brought
to bay.
"If that's the Black Angel" remarked Stanley Vane,
the senior "middy"—a lad of about seventeen or
eighteen—" I only hope he won't show us his heels."
"That's the danger, Mr. Vane," grumbled Jack
Quarters, the acting bo'sun's mate. " The Black Angel—
she did ought to be called the Black Devil by rights—has
got wings against our flappers, and if she chooses to use
'em the Ripple couldn't catch her in a year o' Sundays."
This lurking fear that the pirate craft would prefer
flicrht to fisht had rankled in the breasts of the sailors
o o
for a long time. However, everything had been done to
make the man-o'-war look as much like a peaceful
merchantman as possible. If the pirate fell into the
trap, she would be certain to come to close quarters in
the expectation of finding an easy prey. Long and
intently gazed Captain Jardine through his glasses at
the distant sail.
" What do you make of her, Mr. Steel ? "
" Man-o'-war, sir," replied the lieutenant promptly.
" You are right," agreed the captain after a pause.
" She has the wind, and if it freshens will outsail us
rapidly. You will see that preparations are quietly
made, Mr. Steel, in case she should hoist the enemy's
colours."
" Very good, sir."
The wind was already freshening, and the strange
frigate soon proved the correctness of Captain Jardine's
estimate of her sailing superiority.
" She ain't the Black Angel," muttered Jack Quarters,
e: but she sails like her." His intense disappointment


that the stranger, whoever she was, was not the longed-
for pirate was shared by all on board.
As the morning wore on, the distance between the
two vessels lessened, till the stranger's advantage in
both size and armament was plainly apparent The
frig-ate had been so steered as to make it evident that it
o
was her intention to intercept the course of the sloop.
Captain Jardine had remained on deck ever since the
strange sail had been reported to him, his anxiety
gradually increasing the whole time. Stanley Vane was
on duty as signal midshipman, and could overhear the
remarks that passed between the captain and Lieutenant
Steel.
" The sooner we find out what she is the better," said
the former at last. " Hoist the English colours."
In a few moments they were fluttering proudly in the
breeze. With eaqer interest the officers and crew of the
Ripple waited the answering ensign of the stranger,
which was run up quickly enough.
The French tricolour!
"Mr. Steel," said Captain Jardine, quickly but coolly,
" I should have no right to pit his Majesty's sloop
against that fellow by choice. But the action is
inevitable. We'll keep afloat as long as we can, and if
we can't beat him off we'll go down with the colours
flying. Order all hands aft."
"Aye, aye, sir," was the lieutenant's cheerful reply.
The next moment the bo'sun's shrill pipe communicated
the order to the ship's company.
" My lads," said the captain, " yonder vessel is a first-
class French frigate, but this sloop is not going to strike
to her, for we're English. The greater the risk the
greater the honour. The longer the odds the more the


glory. Beat to quarters!" A tremendous cheer
followed this brief but stirring address.
Quietly, but very quickly, arms were served out;
every man took up his post. The ports were opened
and the guns run out. The Ripples course was altered,
so that when the two vessels should come abeam of each
other the first broadside exchanged would be with the
starboard guns of each.
The Frenchman's guns were the first to fire, belching
forth a terrific cannonade. The broadside was instantly
returned. The action had commenced.
For more than two hours the little British sloop
engaged the Ville de Rouen. Her hull battered, her
r igg' n S shattered, the majority of her officers and almost
half her crew dead or wounded, the Ripple kept her
colours flying still. But the odds were too unequal.
Into the gallant hearts that still beat aboard of her, the
sullen conviction was becoming irrepressible that she
could not continue the fight much longer. Some of the
frigate's shots had passed through her bulwarks and
topsides, and one or two had penetrated below the
water-line. The pumps were kept working, but another
raking or two and she must sink. It was a comfort to
think how much the frigate must have suffered also!
The sloop lying so much lower in the water, the enemy
must have been badly hulled.
It was becoming more and more difficult to manoeuvre
the Ripple in her disabled condition, but the order was
given to put her about once more, and she passed under
the frigate's stern, letting fly a staggering fire as she did
so, receiving herself a rain of bullets from her opponent's
r '&gi n g- Almost at young Vane's feet fell both the
captain and the first lieutenant—dead. As the smoke


cleared off, the Englishmen saw a sight the) \v ere little
prepared for. The V ille de Rouen had put her helm up
and was running away before the wind ! Incredible as
this appeared, the next few minutes proved it. If the
sloop had had enough the frigate had had too much
she was off and away. Although pursuit was impossible,
the fight was over ; and though the Ripple hadn t made
a capture she could claim the victory. A deafening
" Hurrah ! " was raised by her survivors as soon as their
astonishment allowed them to use their throats.
For a little while the utmost confusion prevailed.
Some of the dead and wounded were carried to the
already crowded cockpit, men sprang aloft with axes to
clear the entangled rigging, efforts were made to wash
and clear the decks, but everybody seemed to be acting
without orders. Instead of the stern silence which
discipline would have imposed upon them, the men were
shouting loudly to each other. Contradictory commands
were bawled in different voices.
With dizzy brain, and with a sickened heart as he
looked at the scene of carnage all around him, Stanley
Vane—unhurt, unwounded —leaned against the taffrail.
That the captain and Mr. Steel, and other officers, were
killed, he knew; but the command of the sloop must
have devolved upon somebody. Then why was he not
at his post to control the growing disorder ?
Emerging quickly from the cockpit, where he had just
carried the second lieutenant, Jack Quarters hurried up
to the young midshipman, touching his cap respectfully
as he said—
" Beg your pardon, Mr. Vane, will you give your
orders ? I'm afraid the ship can't float long unless
something is done."


" Give my orders ! " exclaimed the lad. " What do
you mean ? "
"The second lieutenant has just died, sir. All the
other officers have been killed too. You are in
command of the sloop, sir, and I am now chief petty
officer. The casualties have been heavier than I ever
heard of before."
For awhile, Stanley was unable to realise the responsi-
bility that had fallen upon him. As at last he grasped
the fact that he was actually in charge of the vessel, and
realised all that the fact meant, he pulled himself
together with a tremendous effort
"That's right, sir," said Jack, with whom he immedi-
ately held a hurried consultation. Then in a loud, clear,
ringing voice, he gave his orders. At first the sailors
looked amazed, but as they too realised the position,
they obeyed with cheerful alacrity, and everything on
board rapidly assumed a more ship-shape appearance,
though the day was almost over before the first tasks
were accomplished. Then the youthful commander
called the company aft.
"My men," he said, " the sloop is badly injured. The
shots below her water-line are serious. The pumps
must be kept going all night, while carpenters' repairs
are proceeded with. By the morning she should be
watertight again."
He ended with a few words of appreciation and
encouragement, which put fresh heart into the brave
fellows upon whose exertions the fate of the ship
depended. But in the night one of the sudden, brief,
furious storms common to the region sprang up. The
sloop lived through the storm itself, which ended almost
as suddenly as it had begun, but when morning dawned


and revealed fully the further damage she had suffered,
all hope of keeping her afloat had to be abandoned.
Gallantly and resolutely young Vane faced his duty.
His first thought was to bury the dead before leaving
the sinking ship. " But no," he reflected : " the living
first."
The sloop's two cutters were the least injured of her
boats, and these he ordered to be prepared for launching.
Provisions were placed in them, and everything got
ready, and he gave the order to lower away. The
wounded were all put safely in them first, and then he
told off the crews, which numbered together about forty
powerful fellows. Into the first cutter, after a little
consideration, he had the arm-chest lowered. Before he
himself sprang into her, he saw that the bodies of the
dead to be left on board the doomed vessel were all
decently and reverently laid out.
In sad silence the two cutters pushed off, rowing the
minute stroke, in honour of the gallant officers and men
who had found their coffin in their ship. At a distance
of about eight cables the boats were rounded to head
the poor old Ripple , and the men lay on their oars, while
Stanley produced and opened a prayer-book. All eyes
were directed to the sinking sloop, and all heads were
uncovered, as he commenced to read the solemn service
for the burial of the dead at sea. As he reached the
words "we therefore commit their bodies to the deep,"
the Ripple was seen to give a sudden lurch, and
immediately afterwards she slowly sank below the
waves, every oar of the two cutters being up-raised in a
last salute as she disappeared from view for ever.
Stanley Vane's plan was to steer straight for Cape
Haytien, distant about three hundred miles, and this


intention he had communicated to his men. But in
the middle watch of their first night in the cutters, they
found themselves almost under the bows of a large brig.
" Ship ahoy ! "
" Boats ahoy! What boats are those ?
" Cutters of his Britannic Majesty's sloop Ripple,"
roared Stanley. " What ship is that ? "
" The Mary Mildred, merchant brig, for Jamaica."
" Heave to ! "
In the course of a few minutes the survivors of the
Ripple found themselves safe on board the English
merchantman, whose commander, Captain Xeal Fyne,
listened with eager interest to Stanley Vane's strange
story. He accommodated the middy and the surgeon
of the Ripple in his own cabin. Every attention was
paid to the wounded, and the cutters' crews were
quartered as comfortably as possible with the cfew of
the Mary Mildred, Yane having instantly decided to
proceed with the brig to Jamaica, there to report himself.
As she was carrying several passengers and a draft of
twenty soldiers for one of the regiments stationed at
Jamaica, the Mary Mildred's resources were taxed to
the uttermost by the unexpected addition to her com-
pany.
At daybreak of the second day a sail was sighted
about three miles off.
" Mr. Yane," exclaimed Captain Fyne excitedly, " I
know that ship. She's the BLACK ANGEL ! "
He was not alone in identifying the long, low-lying
schooner, with clean-cut bows and tapering masts.
There were men in his crew who had met her before.
She was the Black Angel, and was heading for the brig,
with a light wind all in her favour. Any lingering


doubt was dispelled as she came up, and fired a shot as
a warning- to the merchantman to heave to.
o
Jack Quarters fairly danced with glee.
" What a glorious trap she's fallen into ! " he cried.
" The brig herself is well armed and fully manned, and
she's got forty man-o'-war's-men aboard her, with the
Ripple's arm-chest—to say nothing of the sojers. Before
the day's out she's ours, and every mother's son of her
murdering crew will swing at the yard-arm."
" She'll be called to account at last, Mr. Vane," said
Captain Fyne quite as joyfully though less demonstra-
tively. "We won't try to run away this time."
" And we'll take care that she doesn't run away if we
can help it," said Stanley. " Our plan will be to hide
our strength until she runs alongside us, or we run
alongside her. We're strong enough not only to resist
her boarders, but to board her ourselves."
" The wind's too light to force a fight just yet,"
rejoined the skipper; " and what there is is falling."
Nevertheless the brig was promptly prepared for
action. But the breeze died away so quickly, that soon
scarcely a breath rippled the surface of the water. The
vessels slowly drifted, separated by a distance of about a
couple of miles.
" This will mean a night attack," said Fyne earnestly.
"In the darkness they'll send their boats to board us.
They'll find a little surprise prepared for them."
" Captain Fyne," exclaimed Vane, " I have a plan to
propose, by which we can make sure of a capture.
There can be little doubt but that they will try the night
attack you speak of. Although we can repulse that
attack easily, some of their boats will get away, and if a
breeze springs up, the pirate herself will up sail and give


us the slip, having discovered what a Tartar she has
fallen in with."
" True—but what's your plan ?"
" Simply this. You have your crew, soldiers, and
male passengers. I'll leave you besides half my men.
\\ hen darkness falls I'll put off in my cutter with the
other half. I shall lay-to off the pirate. The attack of
her boats on you will be my signal to run the cutter
alongside her—board her, overpower the watch, and take
possession of her."
In his excitement, Captain Fyne grasped the mid-
shipman's hand.
" She's as good as ours," he cried.
While daylight lasted, everybody was busy. The
men's stations were arranged, the brig's guns carefully
overhauled, the small arms cleaned, swords and cutlasses
sharpened; precautions being taken to hide all these
preparations from the pirate.
At last down fell the darkness. The cutter was
silently lowered, and pulled off with muffled oars.
Every man was armed to the teeth, Stanley—in addition
to a brace of fine pistols—wearing a sword instead of his
accustomed dirk. He had carefully noted the exact
position of the Black Angel, and laid a course that took
the cutter about a mile astern of her. Then followed a
long spell of waiting, seeming all the longer because of
the feverish excitement that filled every heart.
" Oh! ain't it glorious, sir?" whispered Quarters ;
"ain't it glorious, Mr. Vane? The poor old Ripples
done for, but here we are a-waiting to seize after all
the very pirate she was looking for. Oh! ain't it
glorious ? "
" Silence," said Stanley sternly. " I see a moving


light on her deck—it's overside now—they're getting
o
the boats ready. Now the light's hidden again."
It was impossible for the cutter's waiting crew to
know at what moment the Black Angel's boats left her
side, and stole rapidly away for the merchantman, but
there was no mistake as to when they arrived close
alongside their expected prey. Flashes of light from
the Mary Mildred's cannon, and from the muskets of
the men-o'-war's-men, soldiers, and crew aboard of her
were followed by a roar that awoke all the slumbering
echoes of the ocean.
" Not a shout, not a word, lads," Stanley Vane said
hoarsely. " Don't fire a shot without my order. We
must get aboard in silence, and give the watch cold steel.
Now, my lads, give way."
" Oh ! ain't it glorious?" muttered Jack, as the cutter
leaped through the water.
They ran alongside the pirate's starboard bows
undetected, for the watch were eagerly listening to the
sounds of the conflict raging to larboard.
" Follow me," whispered Vane, as he seized the chains
and clambered to the deck, the others swarming rapidly
after him.
The watch were overpowered almost without a
struggle, and the gallant little party of the Ripple's
survivors were in complete possession. The midship-
man's next care was to open his prize's cunningly
concealed ports, and run out her guns in preparation for
the proper reception of any of the boats that might
escape from the brig. That a furious fight was proceed-
ing was plain enough, but after about half an hour the
firing ceased.
" Ready, my men," said Vane, " for if any of the boats


are returning, they're coming now. Be handy there
with the lanterns and torches."
By-and-by the splash of hurrying boats was plainly
heard. Judging his distance, Stanley suddenly ordered
the lanterns to be flashed across the water, and all the
huge torches he had prepared to be lit. Two of the
pirate-boats were plainly visible, rowed close to each
other as hard as they could be pulled.
" Now, lads—fire and sink 'em !"
Bob Simmons was directing the fire of one of the
guns. The shot struck home, sinking the leading boat
° o
Screams and oaths and curses arose from her wounded
and drowning men. A wild hail arose from the other
boat.
"No quarter for pirates !" shouted Stanley. " Fire!"
A flash, a roar—and down went the second craft. It
was all over. A few of the drowning rascals struck out
for the schooner, and were helped aboard—and saved
for hanging.
The next morning a fresh breeze enabled the Black
Angel and the Mary l\lildved to continue their passage
in company for Jamaica, with the crew of the former
reinforced. But one more adventure was to befal them.
A large frigate was seen flying signals of distress, and as
the schooner and brig bore down upon her, what was
the general wonder and delight to find that she was the
Ville de Rouen ! After her fight with the Ripple , the
storm that sealed the fate of the sloop had played havoc
v ith the fiigate also, and in obedience to the summons
of Stanley \ ane from the deck of his prize, she
instantly struck her colours. The youngster was rowed
aboard the Frenchman to receive the captain's sword.
"Am Ito surrender my sword to a boy ?" he asked
indignantly.


" I am the sole surviving representative of the officers
of the ship that fought you," said Stanley, proudly but
sadly.
" Then, sir," the Frenchman replied, with the inimitable
grace of his countrymen, "accept with my sword an
enemy's compliment to their memory."
The Ville de Rouen was taken safely, with the other
two vessels, into Kingston. Here the inquiry was held
which the rules of the service rendered imperative.
It need not be said that Stanley Vane, and all
concerned, came out of it with flying colours. Within a
week he received his commission, and the subsequent
distribution of prize money was eminently satisfactory
all round.
"Ain't it glorious?" remarked Jack Quarters, as he
pocketed his share.


SEEN AT LAST! OR, THE IDIOT LAD.
RECITED BY FELIX WESTON.
OT, night the boys in the big dormitory of Salwey
House went to bed very, very quietly. Everyone
remained on his knees a little longer than usual that
night. Those who spoke, spoke very softly. There
was no romping, no laughter. For earlier that evening
Death had entered the school. At the far end of the
building lay a schoolfellow whose tasks were all ended
now. He would never work with them, never play with
them, any more.
He had been ill for several weeks. He was better
now. He was well now. For he had gone where pain
and sickness are unknown.
" I didn't intend to call on anybody to take a turn to-
night," sa id Abbott in a low voice. " But I've seen a
poem that Felix Weston has been learning. It will be
better than anything else could be—to-night Say the
verses slowly, Felix."
The big dormitory was hushed from end to end as
Felix recited SEEN AT LAST ! or, THE IDIOT LAD.
The vesper hymn had died away,
And the benison had been said,
But one remained in church to pray,
\\ ith a bowed and reverent head.


3 f '
✓




He could not frame in words the prayer
Which reached the Throne of Grace,
But the Love and Pity present there
Saw the pleading of his face.
In many curls hung his hair of gold
Round a brow of pearly white ;
His face was cast in a graceful mould,
And his eyes were strangely bright
Gentle his white hand's touch—his smile
Was tender and sweet and sad :
Nought knew the heart of fraud and guile
Of poor Dick, the idiot lad.
My boy," I said, " the tired sun
Sinks low on the west sea's breast;
The shades which fall when the day is done
Woo the weary earth to rest.
In the vesper zephyr's gentle stir
The sleepy tree-tops nod—
Why wait you here ? " And he said, " Oh, sip
I would see the Face of God !
If the sun is so fair in his noon-day pride,
And the moon in the silver nisfht:
O 7
If the stars which by Angels at eventide
Are lighted can shine so bright ;
If wood and dell, each flow'r and tree,
And each grass of the graveyard sod,
Are of beauty so full, Oh, what must it be
To look on the Face of God !


" I have sought for the vision wide and near,
And once, sir, I travell'd far,
To a mighty city long leagues from here,
Where men of the great world are.
But the faces I saw were false and mean.
And cruel, and hard, and bad ;
And none like the Face the saints have seen
Saw poor Dick, the idiot lad.
"In the night, sir, I wander away from home ;
Down the lanes and the fields I go—
Through the silent and lonely woods 1 roam,
Patient, and praying, and slow.
In the early morn on the hills I stand,
Ere yet the mists have past;
And I eagerly look o'er sea and land
For the wonderful Vision at last
" When the lightnings flash and the thunders roar,
And the ships fly in from the gale ;
When the waves beat high on the shrinking shore.
And the fishing boats dare not sail;
I seek It still, in the storm and snow,
Lest it may happen to be,
That then it will please the great God to show
His beautiful Face to me.
" I seek It still when God's gleaming pledge
In the bright'ning sky appears,
And from tree and flower and sparkling hedge
Earth is weeping her happy tears ;


For I sometimes think that I may behold,
After yearning years of pain,
The Face of my God in the quivering gold
Of the sunshine that follows rain.
When the fishers return on the homeward tide,
I ask them nothing but this :
' Have you seen It out there on the ocean wide,
Where the sky and the waters kiss ?'
But they smile, and ' Poor Dick ' I hear them say,
And they answer me always ' No'—
So I think It must be still farther away
Than even the fishing boats go."
That night while the simple fisher-folk slept,
From the dreams of the mighty free,
Down to the beach the Idiot crept,
And launched on the summer sea.
And the boat sped on, and on, and on,
From the ever-receding shore,
And brighter and brighter the moonbeams shone,
Which for him were to shine no more.
Far out at sea his boat was found,
And the tide which bore to land
The village fleet from the fishing ground
Laid softly upon the sand
The white, wet face of the idiot boy—
Not yearning and wistful now,
For perfect peace, and rest, and joy
Were written upon his brow.


In the poor lad's eyes seemed still the glow
Of a new and wondrous ■
o J
And down on the beach the women knelt low,
While they gaz'd on the holy sight
As the fishermen walk'd to the smiline dead.
o "
Softly their rough feet trod ;
And bared was each head, as one slowly said,
" He has look'd on the Face of God !"


-


" My bike and I fell to the ground."— Page 223.


A DROP AND FOUR DOGS.
A "TEETOTAL" TALE BY OSWALD DONE.
T AM a pledged abstainer —a Teetotaler of the
deepest dye. And after my experience—after what
I am going to tell you about—it is no wonder that I
take strong views on the subject of strong drink.
The awful adventure I am thinking of took place
on the fourteenth day of April this year. \ou will
remember that we broke up for the Easter vacation on
the tenth of the month, on the evening of which day I
arrived safely home at my father's house in Bow, not far
from the famous West India Docks, where my father,
who is a Custom House Officer, goes to business. Next
day—lest they should forget it—l took care to remind
people that my birthday was on the thirteenth. Till the
dawn of that eventful anniversary, time seemed to pass
very slowly. I was chiefly concerned as to what father
was going to give me. I had dropped some delicate
hints about the improvement that a bicycle is calculated
to effect in a boy's health and spirits, on which his
progress at school so largely depends. I mentioned
specially that I had learnt how to ride one well. But I
couldn't tell whether these hints had struck home.
Some fathers can stand a deal of hinting.
The eleventh and twelfth passed duly away. I got


up early on the thirteenth, and hurried downstairs. I
found that I had been very liberally treated in the way
of birthday gifts. There seemed to be something for me
from everybody—except father. I didn't say anything,
but I felt bad until I caught sight of a quizzing sort of
look on his face. Then I guessed that it was all right,
and went on with my breakfast with a better appetite.
When we had finished, father said, " Come outside,
Oswald." I followed him gleefully into the garden.
My wildest hopes were realised, for there stood father's
present in the form of one of the finest bicycles I had
ever seen. Everything about it was tip-top. A prince
might have been proud of such a machine. With
glistening eyes I expressed my gratitude and delight.
Now parents, when they make a fellow a present,
have, too often, a bad habit of bothering him with a lot
of good advice at the same time, mingled with reproof.
I call it taking a mean sort of advantage. My father
was guilty of this fault upon the occasion I am speaking
of. He began by saying that he hoped my next school
report would be a better one, and proceeded to give me
a regular lecture. Now I ask any candid mind what
was the use of talking like that to a boy whose legs
were itching as mine were to mount that bicycle ?
I listened with all the patience I could command—
namely, none. Then, the instant he had started off for
business, I got the machine to the front of the house and
went off for a spin till dinner-time. She was a ripper,
and no mistake—as good to ride on as to look at. I
returned in a perfect ecstacy about her. That evening
father took me to hear our new minister—who is also a
celebrated lecturer—hold forth on Total Abstinence. I
didn't feel much like going, but could scarcely raise any
objections.


This lecture forms, so to speak, the second stage of
my story. It took a great effect upon my mind. The
speaker described so graphically the horrors attending
intoxication, the fearful and terrible effects of drink
upon mind and body, and told such frightful anecdotes
by way of illustration, that I went to roost quite scared,
and feeling almost inclined to look under the bed to see
if there were any stray snakes there. He made every-
thing so real that I had no taste for supper. Several
times I woke up in the night, dreaming that I had the
delirium he said so much about. At last, however, I fell
into a sound sleep, from which I woke up quite late
in the morning. I was sorry for this, because I had
resolved on having a long day on my new bicycle.
Lying by my plate on the breakfast table was a letter
from my particular chum Jimmy Bates, who wrote from
Chingford, in Epping Forest. Now Jimmy Bates's
family had been neighbours of ours at Bow for years,
but Air. Bates, having retired from business, had at last
gone away from the neighbourhood to live in the
country, of course taking all his family with him. As
they had only moved into their Chingford house at
Lady-day, Jimmy had never been there before the
holidays we were then enjoying. He wrote about his
new home, and Chingford itself, and particularly about
the Forest all round it, in the most enthusiastic terms.
He said that, compared with London, Epping Forest
was a perfect paradise.
" And you step from the house right into it," went on
his letter ; " and once in it you never want to come out
again. It stretches for miles on every hand. Within
sight of our house is a big beautiful lake, with rowing
boats waiting to be hired."


After a page or two of description, Jimmy asked if I
would go to Chingford and spend the day with him?
" The Great Eastern Railway will run you here from
Liverpool Street in no time," he urged, "and I am sure
you will say that the Forest is the jolliest place you
ever spent a day in in your life. Come to-morrow. I
shall expect you. \\ ell shin up no end of trees, and
go for a row on the lake. However hard up you may
be," he concluded pointedly, " the fares are so low that
you can easily raise the capital for a ticket."
I instantly made up my mind to accept the invitation,
and to start almost at once. But as for the railway—
bah ! \\ hat did I want with a railway when I had my
bike? Jimmy Bates little knew the surprise I would
treat him to. He little knew that the great ambition of
my life had been gratified, and that I was the proud
possessor of a brand-new bicycle. Wouldn't he open his
eyes when I dashed up to his house on it! What had
fares, whether high or low, to do with a boy who owned
such a machine as mine? I should, of course, make the
journey to Chingford in the saddle.
It was past ten o'clock before I made a start, but,
once on the way, I soon made up for lost time. It was
a bright, warm spring morning, and I felt remarkably
jolly as I bowled along down the broad Bow Road, the
route I had selected being by way of Stratford and
Woodford.
I rode very fast, and every minute the sun seemed to
grow warmer. I passed 'buses, tram-cars, cabs and carts,
tearing on like a regular John Gilpin.
When I reached Stratford I found myself remarkably
thirsty. With every turn of the wheels I seemed to get
thirstier and thirstier. Just ahead of me, its heavy old


wooden porchway stretching out on to the pavement, was
a quaint, cosy-looking inn. In gold-coloured lettering
the parlour window bore the inscription "Sparkling Ales."
My thirst became uncontrollable, and also, so to speak,
took a definite direction. That " direction " was towards
a glass of sparkling ale. It seemed to me that nothing
but a "drop of beer"—just a drop —would satisfy my
thirst. Gincrer-beer and lemonade had no attractions for
me. Those words " Sparkling Ales " had fascinated me.
Suddenly I thought of the warnings of that lecturer the
night before. But " Oh, bother !" I said to myself, "he
exaggerated frightfully. Besides, I'll only have a drop.
That can't hurt me. I've ridden a mile or two, and I've
got a good many miles ahead of me. I'll have just a
drop, to see what it's like " —for I'd never tasted ale in
my life.
To cut this part of my yarn short, I pulled up, dis-
mounted, and went inside that inn. Marching boldly
up to the bar, I demanded a glass of "sparkling ale."
Bright and foaming and tempting, it was put before me.
I tasted it, smacked my lips, and finished the glass.
As I re-mounted my bike, I felt a delicious glow
beginning to suffuse me, and almost made up my mind
to have another drop later on.
In five minutes' time I reached the long High Road
that leads through Leytonstone to Snaresbrook and
Woodford. I headed gaily on. I'd only gone a few
hundred yards when I saw on the pavement to my left a
I Vhite French Poodle Dog.
You will say that there was nothing very remarkable
in seeing a white French poodle dog, and I quite admit
that there wasn't Only please remember that I did see,
and happened particularly to note, that particular white


French poodle dog. There are four dogs in my story.
That was the first.
I wheeled on about a quarter of a mile, and then the
second dog made his appearance. He ran across the
road in front of me, from one side to the other. As my
eyes fell upon him, I felt a sudden spasm from head to
feet, and my hair seemed to be rising on end. In three
respects the animal was like my description of the first—-
he was a dog, he was French, and he was poodle. But
he was more. He was something that no other dog
ever seen by mortal eyes had ever been—he was some-
thing weird, wild, unearthly, unnatural. He was Green !
A GREEN FRENCH POODLE DOG!
Oh, that glass of ale ! But who could have supposed
that it would have such a fearful effect upon me, and so
soon? The thought of the awful illustrations scattered
through that Teetotal lecture flashed into my mind as I
made a convulsive effort to recover myself. My brain
was in a whirl as I rode on—away from the spot where
that green dog was wagging his green tail. I don't
know how long it was before the third dog appeared
upon the scene. He was waiting for me higher up the
road, seated on the kerbstone of the right-hand pave-
ment I shrieked when I saw him. That "drop of
drink" had indeed done its fell work. My lingering
hope that the green poodle was alone in the world as a
supernatural animal vanished, for the creature on the
kerbstone was A BLUE FRENCH POODLE DOG—a
bright blue, a vivid blue ! All was blue !
My feet slipped off the pedals, my fingers relaxed
their clutch of the handles. My bicycle swayed and
swerved, and I was almost run down by a cab. Turning
my horrified eyes from the blue spectre on the pavement,


I gazed shudderingly ahead. The next moment I felt
my hair turning white. Oh, the curse of drink! Ambling
down the road—in the centre of it—approaching me— ■
was a PINK FRENCH POODLE DOG WITH A YELLOW
TAIL !
Only one thought possessed me—just the wild
delirious longing to get away before the street became
a menagerie of coloured canines. On—on—on ! In the
Poorest there would be some ponds. I would alight at
the first deep one I came to, and hold my head in the
water for a few hours.
Riding like the madman I now knew myself to be—
all through that glass of ale—l neared Leytonstone
church.
I turned my head, and gave one furtive, frightened
glance behind me. They had all met each other, and
were running up the road together—running after me !
the White French Poodle Dog, the Green French Poodle
Dog, the Blue French Poodle Dog, the Pink French
Poodle Dog.
It was too much. My bike and I fell to the ground
with a great crash, just outside a chemist's shop. Into
that shop I rushed. I grasped the counter with both
hands convulsively, and held the chemist with my
glittering eye—no, glaring.
" Give me something at once," I cried.
" What's the matter with vou ? " said he.
*
"' Matter' ! What's the matter with me ? " I yelled
indignantly. " How dare you mock me by asking that,
when the street is alive with coloured animals? I've
seen 'em—a green dog, a blue dog, a pink-and-yellow
dog—running about before my intoxicated eyes—
wagging their brilliant tails. I've seen 'em. What but


one thing can be the matter with a boy who sees green
and blue and pink French poodle dogs. I've seen 'em, I
tell you—l've seen 'em."
"So have I," said the chemist—"often. They belong
to Mr. Dipps, the dyer. He has four of 'em. He
colours three of 'em up like that in the dye tubs, and
turns them out in the streets as an advertisement"
I didn't reach Chingford that day. My beautiful new
bicycle had been injured in its fall, and I left it to be
repaired. I came home by train.
All was explained. The mystery was solved. But I
had had a fright. I had learnt a lesson. I would
regard those dogs as a warning. I resolved that it
should be for ever impossible for me to have a second
dose of my feelings that day.
" Where are you going, Oswald ? " asked my father as
he saw me preparing to leave the house as soon as tea
was finished.
" Round to the new minister's, father—who gave that
lecture on Teetotalism on the night of my birthday."
" What for ? " asked father.
"To take the pledge, sir," I answered




"Follow the flag!"— Page 237,


LOCKED IN!
A VERGER'S STORY, REPEATED BY MONITOR
MARTIN ABBOTT.
TT was Monitor Martin Abbott's turn. Naturally
enough, something striking was expected from
him. It was afterwards agreed that he did remarkably
well. He must have studied pretty hard to have com-
mitted so much to memory, and, as for his delivery, it
was pronounced perfect.
"When I was home for the Christmas holidays"—
he commenced his preamble—" I got put down to take
part in an entertainment in aid of a fund for raisin"-
e)
money for Free Breakfasts for the starving poor in our
part of London. I entered into a conspiracy with my
two particular chums, Willie and Sam Garwood, who
agreed to appear with me. We arranged the stage to
look as much as possible like the scene of the recitation I
had selected. I dressed up in a long black gown as the
Verger, and carried a wand. They dressed up as visitors
to the Minster, and I was showing them round. They
sat down soon after I began to talk, and at the proper
place I handed Willie a paper, and retired a little into
the background while he delivered the ballad, which he
gave in fine style. To give proper effect to the last
, exchanged the paper again. You'll


understand what I mean when I've finished. Of course
I'm going to give the piece now straight off, all by
myself. But before I begin I'm going to say that
personally I don't quite like the poem part being written
so much in sympathy with the Royalists. I've a fancy
myself for the Cromwellian side in the great Civil War.
But that's neither here nor there. There's no doubt but
that there were some grand chaps on both sides, and the
hero of the poem was one of 'em. Attention, please.
Here I go."
Now, gennelmen, we come to one of the most inter-
estin' stattoos in the minster. You pucceive in this here
niche the heffigy of a hancient cavalier of the days of
Charles the Fust, the ill-fated monarch what lost his head
in a-quarrellin' with Parliament, and then went to war
with Holiver Crommle. The unfort'nit king lost his
head a second time at \\ hitehall when the war was done,
Crommle esclaiming as the sufferin's neck was laid on
the block, " Take away that borble !" That, gennelmen,
is a matter of 'istory which I have throwed in—this
here heffigy hadn't nothink to do with it. But one of the
battles in the war was fought near here, and this here
gennelman in marble bore a hactive part in the conflick.
He kinder led '"em on, like the Dook of Cambridge with
his umbrella at a review. You pucceive he is mounted
on a beautiful white charger ; he is in full armour of the
period, as would fetch a good price even second-'and. In
his right 'and he carries a flag, from which 'eavy drops of
water is a-drippin' free.
As you can read at the foot of the peddlestall on which
the charger and the gennelman is a-standin', the stattoo
is erected in memory of Reginald, Lord de L'Arge, as


—though a Englishman—is a French name with a
soft "g."
A story associated with the stattoo ? Certingly there
is, and there's another story as is associated with the
story as is associated with the stattoo, and in tellin' one
I tells the others.
You must know, then, that in the season we have a
very large number of wisitors to the minster. They
comes from London, for the sake of the hozone in the sea
hair, and for the bathin' and promenadin' and flirtin' and
sich, and of course they pays a wisit to the minster, and
I'm the only werger allowed to show 'em over. There's
a art in showin' wisitors over a place like this as ain't
easy acquired. My own opinion is as a respectable
werger is born sich, and not made sich. A minster, as a
minster, is nothink without a werger to show it over.
One old lady went so fur as to give me five shillin's—five
shillin's, gennelmen—and to call me the " minsterin'
angel" of the place. Five shillin's she give me. The
people I shows over in the course of the season is warious.
They comes in parties, and they comes by theirselves, and
they comes in pairs—mostly young pairs and unmarried.
No less than seving young men have I knowed in one
season to be so overcome by their feelin's and the
stattoos as to pop the question by a-squeezin' 'ands in
the porch goin' out Then the young ladies tells their
lady friends, and they bring their young gennelmen here
to see if it's true as the place has a influence of that sort
Some wisitors is 'igh, some low—as 'igh as five shillin's—
and a few—a sir—as low down as a shillin'. Some
is solemn and some is too light; some hurries through as
though dinner was waitin', and the pertaties gettin' cold :
and some takes their time. But however warious, they


all stops at this here stattoo, and gen'rally asks me
whether there ain't a story about it.
Three years ago, just before the reg'ler season set in
and rents was ris as usual in consequence, there come
a-knockin' me up in my cottage one day two wisitors—
a young gennelman and a young lady. The young
gennelman's apperiance were wild. He was a tall, thin,
lamplighter's ladder style of young gennelman, with long
straight hair hangin' down his neck, and a very pale face,
with eyes as didn't so much look at you as through you
and beyond you into—into Space, and no end of other
places. He looked like a poet without no reg'ler salary.
The young lady were pretty and sweet-lookin', and with
a more mortial apperiance. I thought at first the poet
was a proposin' gennelman, but from somethink as was
said between 'em I found they was brother and sister.
" I want," he says, a-fixin' his gaze through me on to a
planet seving million miles the other side of the sun, and
a-graspin' somebody there by the button-hole, " I want
the man who conducts strangers over the minster."
"What you wants," I says, "is the werger. Hi ham
the werger !"
Without givin' him time to recover the shock, I pro-
dooces the keys. The rattle seemed to bring the poetical
gennelman down from that planet. He gives his arm to
his sister with a pleasant smile, and says to me, "Very
well, friend, lead on ;" and he follers me into the minster
just like a ordinary wisitor. But soon as ever we got
inside, and he looked up at the great carved roof, and
saw the light streamin' in from the painted windows,
showin' the shadowy aisles stretchin' to the chancel, and
fallin' here and there on the still, white, marble stattoos,
up he jumped into the planet again. I could tell it by


the change in his face. And when we stopped here by
this heffigy of Lord de L'Arge, and I read him from the
Guide Book the story as is associated with it—well,
gennelmen, he just stepped out of that planet into a
neighbourin' one fourteen million miles further away
There he met a old acquaintance, and stopped to have
a cup of tea with him—at all events, he never come out
of that planet during that first wisit to the minster. He
was actually a-walkin' off without givin' me nothink, and
when I were took with a sewere cough, it were his sister
as cured it, not the poet.
After that, even when the reg'ler season had set in,
that young gennelman were always a-wisitin' the minster.
Sometimes he come with his sister, and sometimes with
parties of wisitors, but what he liked best was to wander
round the place by himself, and his favourite spot was
where this stattoo stands. While other folks was bathin'
and boatin' and what not, this here was the place
for him. I soon got used to him and to his strange
ways, and a very nice generous young gennelman he was
when he got out of them planets. But at times I used to
hear him a-talkin' to himself in werse, and then see him
writin' in his pocket-book. At other times he'd touch
his forehead—so—and mutter, " Not yet —it will come—
but not now. I must wait."
One day I said to him, "If it's undisgestion, sir,
I've suffered myself, and can enter into your feelin's."
But I saw by the flush that come into his cheeks, and
the angry stride with which he walked away from me,
that I'd offended him, and as any little unpleasantness
which he might have with his disgestion were nothink to
me, I never ventured into sich conversation with him
again. One night, after a very heavy number of wisitors


had been showed over during the day—but mostly in
parties, which is a dead loss as compared with the same
number of indiwiddles as indiwiddles—l sought my
wirtuous couch unusual early. I'd slept maybe about a
couple of hours, and had just fell into a lovely dream. I
dreamt that I'd showed a party over—a party of one,
that is—as was most unusual mean when the time come
—in fack, he come it so low that I don't like to mention
lion] low, to gennelmen like you. I espostulated with
the party without no effeck, when all the stattoos put
their 'ands in their trousers pockets in wirtuous indig-
nation at being showed over to sich a mean party, and
held out to me—each indiwiddle stattoo —a shillin' piece.
Just as I were calculatin' how much it would come to,
stattoo number one drops his shillin' on the floor with a
bang, then number two and number three, and so on.
One after the other, they was all droppin' their shillin'ses
on the floor, and the noise woke me up.
J {'as it a dream?" I says at first, for sure enough I
heard the noise that really woke me. It was somebody
at the door of my cottage —tap, tap, tap, —knock, knock,
knock.
\\ ho could it be ? Surely not a party as wanted to be
showed over at that time of night—impossible, for just
then I heard the church clocks chime twelve.
The sound of the chimin' woke me right up. A
wisitor at midnight! I got out of bed and opened the
window, and there by the door, with a shawl thrown over
her head and shoulders, I see the sister of the poetical
young gent, along with a servint girl. " Miss," I says at
once, " down direckly. But what's wrong ? "
"My brother," she says—"he has never been home
since this morning."


" Down direckly, miss," says I again ; and in a minute
or two down I was.
Then she told me how her brother had gone out by
himself soon after breakfast. She expected him back to
lunch, but lunch-time come and dinner-time come, but no
brother. When the evening wore on, she began to get a
little anxious, but nothink serious, a-thinkin' as he'd got
out into the country, or gone p'r'aps on the sea, and
would be back before bedtime. But bedtime come and
no brother. In fack, he'd never come home at all.
" Have you been along the beach, miss?" I says.
" Yes," she answers ; " and questioned all the sailors we
could find. Nobody has seen anything of him since
this morning, and then he was seen coming towards the
minster. Have you seen him?"
" I saw him this morning in the minster," I says.
Then a sudden idea flashed into my head ; " and that's
where he is now," I says.
" In the minster now !"
" \ es. I never knowed a man so unnateral fond of
a stattoo in my life as that young man is of the heffigy
of the cavalier with the drippin' banner. He's always
at it"
"Yes, yes," says the young lady, eager; "he was
trying to write a poem on the story of it"
" I see him come into the minster, miss, but never see
him come out; and if so be as he were writin' a pome
about that stattoo, it's my opinion as he got himself
locked up a-purpose, so as to get what poets call a
afflutus. I thought it were undisgestion," I says ; " but
it were evidentially a afflutus."
\\ ith that I gets my keys, and we all three walks up
to the minster. Quickly I opens the door, and very


quietly we walks up the aisle, all flooded in the summer
moonlight.
Here—here, where we are standing—just inside this
pew at the foot of the marble, was the lost brother. The
light was fallin' very bright and soft on his pale face and
closed, sleepin' eyes. So calm and white and peaceful
he looked that he might have been mistook for another
s:attoo. Between his fingers was a pencil, and at his
feet—the open pages covered with writin'—was his
pocket-book. His sister stoops, picks it up, and reads.
" You were right,'' she says ; "he has finished his poem
at last."
Then she leans down over him very gently, and kisses
her brother on the brow, and wakes him.
I never see anythink took more quietly than that
young man took the fack of being found locked up in a
minster, fast asleep, at midnight.
" It's all right," he says, to his sister. " I was deter-
mined to finish it, and I took the best way to do so.
Don't look so scared," he says to me, half laughin'; " it's
all right"
" Is it all right, sir," I says solemn, "for poets to be
found intrudling into minsterses at midnight without
bein' showed over by the werger?"
" Yes," says he, " when they give him a sovereign after-
wards."
And a sovereign he gave me, sure enough, then and
there. Finishin' the pome seemed to have fetched him
right away from them planets.
" Come on," he says, and out we all went.
What become of the pome ? Why, there were a rage
for it. The lokill paper printed it, and since that pome
wisitors to the minster has been more numerous and


more warious than ever. Of course I've got a copy of it
I've told my story now, and the pome's got to tell
the other story. Here it is ; you see I'm put in the very
fust werse:—
THE KING'S COLOURS!
I walk'd in the shadow'd minster,
With the verger by my side,
And I gaz'd on a sculptur'd statue,
Standing in lonely pride.
" What is the story, tell me,
Of this mounted Cavalier?
W hat deed of gallant daring
Is kept in memory here ?
Y\ hy holds he a dripping banner ?"
To the waiting guide I said.
Then from a book he brought me
This tale of the Knight I read.
Royal in the glitter of armour,
Royal in soldier mien ;
Royal in the shimmer of sunlight
On sword and on halberdine ;
Royal in the flashing of pennons,
Bright as the wild bird's wing ;
Royal in the banner they carry—
The Colours of Charles the Kin cr .
o
With never an eye that flinches,
With never a heart that fears,
On to the leaguer'd city
Ride the Royal Cavaliers.


Around her walls the Roundheads
A year have sat them down ;
With blood her stout defenders
Pay tribute to the Crown.
Starving and worn and dying,
Oh ! eager eyes have scanned
From the rise of sun till the day was done,
O'er all the wasted land,
For sight of the goodly troopers
Who are only coming now ;
The troopers who ride with steady stride
Over the far hill brow.
Over the hill, across the plain,
With never a rank that breaks ;
Never a man who dreads the fight,
Never a hand that shakes ;
With white plumes nodding proudly
O'er heads held proudly high,
On to the town the troops march down,
To rescue or to die.
And the stateliest form among them,
In manhood's young bright spring,
Is Reginald, Lord de L'Arge, who bears
The Colours of Charles the King.
O
On past the flooded river,
Which rolls its swoll'n tide
Fast to the sea between the cliffs
Which frown on either side—
On they come, and the citizens now
Behold the brave array;
And the men begin to man the walls,
While the women begin to pray.


And the ready rebels see them,
And form on left and right;
In silence stern their ranks they turn,
And move to offer fight
Then Lord de L'Arge his Colours
Clutches with tightening hold,
As rear'd aloft in the summer breeze,
Shakes every gleaming fold.
He turns to the list'ning soldiers
Who wait for the word to charge •
o /
In ringing tone these words alone
Speaks Reginald, Lord de L'Arge—
"If ever a heart be flinching",
o >
If horse or rider lag,
Think of the King and your honour—
Cavaliers, follow the flag I"
Then in the shock of battle
Meet rebels and the leal;
For every man a man goes down
By musket, gun, or steel.
None asks for mercy—no one
Evades his death by flight;
" \\ e'll save the town ere the sun goes down,
For the King and for the Right!"
So cry King Charles's soldiers—
Scornful the one reply :
" \ e shall surely yield, and this bloody field
Shall tell the reason why!"
Brighter and brighter above them
God's blessed sunlight gleams ;
The trampled heath their feet beneath
Is red with life-blood streams.


Wherever the fight is fiercest,
Wherever the maddest charge—
o
Where Death reaps the thickest harvest-
Rides Reginald, Lord de L'Arge :
And tho', torn and shot, his banner
Is now but a fluttering ra<r,
O O'
Still rises high his battle cry,
" Cavaliers, follow the flag ! "
But, alas ! who are left to follow ?
For still the foe close round,
And quicker and thicker fall man and horse
On the redly-oozing ground.
Till, with a shout for Cromwell,
Is made the last attack,
And the day is lost, for the Cavaliers
Can move not, front or back.
Now to De L'Arge the rebels
In boastful triumph cry,
" The Lord has given thee up to us—
Yield us thy flag or died
One piteous gaze around him,
One piteous stifled moan—
'Midst comrades dead and living foes
Stands young De L'Arge alone.
Then flames his eye with passion,
His cheek with hot blood burns ;
\\ ith gasp of wild defiance,
His charger's head he turns :
He kisses once the Colours,
Then flaunts them high in air ;
Gives rein with the shouted challenge,
" Follow the flag who dare I "


Oh ! never man rode so madly,
Ne'er follow'd pursuit so fast;
On and on, up hill, down dale,
Till the Cavalier at last,
Panting, reaches the river bank,
Where the black waves hiss and surc:e ;
O J
The thud of the rebels' hurrying hoofs
Seems beating his funeral dirge.
Nearer and nearer and nearer yet,
From his gallant hand to drag
The Colours of Charles the King—but hark !
" Rebels, follow the flag ! "
And as rings out the haughty challenge,
He drives his spurs well home;
And down plunge charger and gallant
Into the river's foam.
Is there a rebel to follow ?
No ! no !—see the Colours wave
On the crest of the black deep billows
\\ hich bear to his ocean grave
The first in a host of heroes,
The last of a noble race—■
\\ ith the Colours press'd against his breast,
And a smile upon his face.
Last year that young gennelman came down again.
When he found I were so proud of bein' put into the
very fust werse, he gave a laugh, wrote somethink in his
book, tore out the leaf and gave it to me, sayin', " Well,
then, there's a special werse written for you alone."
Wisitors roars when they reads it; but I don't see
nothink to laugh at. Here it is—


My heart beat high within me
As I laid the book aside:
And I rais'd a hand that trembled
My swimming tears to hide.
And tho' old to him the story,
Yet methought the verger's heart—
Tho' it beat in a rugged bosom—•
Bore with my own a part,
In the pray'r I breathed for the spirit
Of the brave young Lord de L'Arge-
For he bow'd his head as he softly said,
" There ain't no reg'ler charge.




j ~~ y -S
furs
■ S
m A


SMITH'S SISTER.
13EF0RE I tell you the story about Smith's sister in
particular (said Stanislaus Yarrow), I wish to make
a few remarks about sisters in general.
Sisters are of two kinds —your own and other fellows.
There are boys—especially older ones —who consider
their own sisters worse than other fellows' sisters.
(" Hear, hear," cried Martin Abbott, who was strongly
suspected of having fallen in love with Dr. Audlem's
maiden aunt, who was not much more than forty.)
But the general opinion amongst boys is that all
sisters—all girls, in fact—are muffs and nuisances.
(" So they are," agreed a number of voices cordially.)
I thought so myself once. But Smith's sister taught
me to take a higher view of girls. I admit that they
have defects—they can't help 'em. There are times
when I doubt if even boys are perfect. I freely admit
that there is a certain amount of idiocy in the ways and
manners of girls in general. Far be it from me to deny
that they squeak and squeal when there is no occasion
for squeaking and squealing. There is no use in
denying that they are afraid of mice. Even Smith's
sister visibly shuddered when I offered to give her my
biggest piebald rat, to be her very own for ever. But we
ought to be charitable and try to overlook these things,
for, as I said just now, they can't help 'em.


What I insist upon is that there's real grit in girls all
the same. This is how I work it out: Smith's sister
was a brick—Smith's sister is a girl—therefore, as one
girl can be a brick, so can other girls, other sisters, be
bricks.
Now for my true yarn. To separate the circumstances
of the story from the story itself, I will first give you the
circumstances.
Smith and I lived next door to each other, and were
close chums, especially at intervals. He was a very
generous chap—he'd give a friend anything he'd got
When he was laid low with illness last summer, I slipped
in to his bedroom by way of the verandah, to have a look
at him, and he gave me the scarlet fever. He was such
a very generous chap that he never wanted to keep
anything all to himself. The fever stayed with both of
us as long as it could, and left us a good deal weaker
than it found us. Finding us both in need of a long
and thorough change, Smith's father and mine put their
heads together, and finally decided to send us to North
Wales for the rest of the summer and the autumn. The
idea was promptly carried out.
They didn't, strictly speaking, "send" us, for they
came with us. In fact, it was quite a carriage-full of us
that steamed away north-west from Paddington—namely,
Smith, myself, Smith's father and mother, my father and
mother, a number of boxes, portmanteaux, and parcels,
and Smith's sister. I put her last because at the time
she was last in my estimation.
We had a lovely journey, to a lovely little out-of-the-
way and out-of-the-world station, which was spelt with
all consonants, and pronounced with three sneezes, a
cough, and two gasps. From the station we had a long


drive to the remote farm-house in which our fathers had
taken apartments.
In this delicious old farm-house we soon made
ourselves —Smith and I—quite at home. It was in a
beautiful valley. Tremendous hills rose all round it. On
the very tops of some of the mountains there was snow
almost all the year round. Glens, and brooks, and
streams, and waterfalls simply abounded.
After a fortnight our two fathers had to return to
London, leaving behind them our motheis, us, and
Smith's sister.
Oh, what a time we had then ! Smith shot me by
accident in the leg with the farmer's gun—Smith
himself got almost drowned in two different streams, and
was once carried over a waterfall, and dashed against the
stones. On all three occasions he was getting black in
the face when pulled out. I fell down a precipice in the
mountains, and was rescued with the greatest difficulty.
On another occasion a neighbouring farmer caught us
trespassing, and thrashed us with a stick till he vas too
tired to hold it any longer. Smith got bitten by a dog
supposed to be mad, and a horse kicked me in the
stomach.
All was gaiety and excitement. Ah! when shall we
have such times again? We made enquiries as to
whether we were likely to catch scarlet fever a second
time.
Now Smith's sister screamed at our accidents ; she
was afraid to join us in any of our adventures. She was
as old as myself, and only a year younger than Smith,
but as timid as a chicken—or so we thought her, for so
she seemed. We tried at first to encourage her, to bring
her out a little; but it was no good—we just had to
leave her to herself.


" She hasn't pluck enough to come with us," Smith
used to say as we set off on our rambles—" let her stop
at home and play with the fowls."
You must understand that we didn't dislike her—we
simply despised her. I think contempt is worse than
dislike—at all events, it is harder to bear. Week after
week passed away, till at length the end of September
approached. In a few days we were to go home
again.
Now high as all the hills were, there was one that
towered above the others. From the very first, Smith
and I had been warned not to attempt to scale this
monarch of the mountains, whose crown was sometimes
visible, sometimes hidden in the clouds. Being warned
not to do it, we naturally wanted to do it. We had
made, in fact, several tries, but had always been
frustrated. Once or twice Mr. Griffiths—the farmer at
whose house we were staying—caught us starting, and
turned us back.
"Up towards the top of that mountain," he said, on
the last occasion, " is a place so difficult of access, except
by one way, that it is called the ' Eagles' Home.' Lives
have been lost there. The hill is dangerous—the clefts
are steep and deep. Leave it alone. There are plenty
of other hills to climb that are not so dangerous."
That reference to the Eagles' Home was more than
we could stand. We could make out the very spot he
meant. Fancy being up there with the eagles near the
sky—fancy birds'-nesting in the clouds !
" \ arrow," said Smith firmly, " we must do it."
"Or perish in the attempt," I agreed recklessly,
quoting from a book I'd read.
What we meant was, of course, that before our visit


ended we must climb that hill, at all events as high as
the Eagles' Home.
Our approaching return to London left us with no
time to lose. We had only four clear days before us.
"We'll make the ascent immediately after dinner
to-morrow," said Smith.
" Right you are," replied I.
The next day arrived. Dinner was always over soon
after one at the farm-house, and by two o clock, ha\ ing
slipped quietly and secretly off, we were beginning our
climb up the hillside. For more than an hour \\ e made
slow but easy progress, taking a rest every now and then
for a minute or two. We must have got up a considerable
distance, but neither the mountain-top nor the Eagles
Home seemed much nearer. On and up ve trudged,
walking faster and determined to take no more rests.
We noticed how much colder it was, and cast uneasy
glances at the dipping sun.
We met a shepherd going down, and stopped him to
ask some questions. He told us that there was an easy
way and a hard way to reach the Eagles' Home. The
easy way was to follow the path worn up the hill to the
left. That would take us above the spot. Still following
the path as it curved round to the right, we should find
a comparatively easy way down to the " home of the
easles," unless we lost the road, and tumbled down one
& '
of the many steep declivities.
" Which was the hard way ? " we asked.
With a smile, he pointed straight up the mountain-
side. It wasn't far that way, he said —only that way
would take us farther than we wanted to go. \\ e looked
up the frowning pathless mountain —and knew what he
meant We must take the safer and longer way.


" Not that we're afraid of the other," said Smith.
" Of course not," I replied.
In vain the shepherd tried to dissuade us from going
any further in the failing light: in vain he told us of the
dangers we should run. We thanked him, put him off
with some excuse about going "a little" further, and
turned resolutely on up the " path " he had pointed us
to. It was by no means the sort of path we were
accustomed to.
On and on and on—l don't know how far we went
But the farther we went the more silent we became.
Each knew the other knew that he was getting more
and more uneasy at every step. Each knew the other
wasn't going to be the first to admit that he was
funky.
It grew so awfully cold. It became so awfully
dark.
" The moon will be up by-and-by," Smith said.
" Yes," said I;" we shall be all right then. What's
this ?"
It was too dark to see it, but we felt it in our faces.
We put our hands on our sleeves and felt it there.
Snow!
We both gave in then, and funked it without disguise.
\\ e turned to go down, to get home. We tried at first
to disbelieve it, but it wasn t long before we both gave
up the pretence.
" We're lost! " we cried together.
That was just our position. In the cold, dark night,
in the midst of a rapidly-rising storm and fast-falling
snow, we were lost on the wild Welsh mountains.
\\ e stumbled about. For a long time—l don't know
how long, but it was a long time—we stumbled about.


That is the only expression I can use, for soon we didn't
know whether we were moving up or down, left or right.
We were so numbed, so bewildered. It was so cold up
there, though October had not yet set in, that we had
a vague idea that if we didn't keep on moving, we
should be frozen still, meeting the fate of many other
mountaineers.
You must bear in mind that we had nothing to eat,
nothing to drink, and only our summer clothes on.
Neither of us had a watch, so we could only judge what
the time was. Smith's hope that the moon would soon
rise hadn't been realised, for everything above was as
dark and black as everything was beneath.
At last a frightful thing happened. Our feet slipped
at the same moment, and the next moment we were
both falling through space. My previous slip down a
precipice was nothing compared with that awful fall in
the darkness. Only one thing saved us. Before we
struck the ground, we managed to break the full force of
our fall by grasping the roots and branches of some
low-growing shrubs and bushes which we felt without
o o
seeing. We slipped then less rapidly from hold to hold,
until, with a thud, we struck the earth. It seemed more
like the earth striking us.
Smith gave a loud scream of pain—then all was silent
Smith fainted. I cried. Smith recovered and cried.
I left off crying, and took his turn at fainting. There's
nothing like telling the truth. We both prayed. I
won't tell you about that, because praying is a thing to
do , not to talk about.
We didn't move about any more. That fall proved
that moving about was too dangerous. Poor old Smith
couldrit move. He couldn't even stand up. He tried to


once, and sank down again with a yell. He had sprained
his ankle.
Please imagine for a moment that this adventure is
being played on the stage, and let the curtain fall. Now
imagine the curtain raised again.
In the meantime, the storm has died down. The
winds are not howling now, the snow is not falling. The
heavens above us are not so black—we can see parts of
the mountain that drops from our feet into the deep
invisible valley below. We can see enough to make out
where we are. We are in the Eagles' Home. Our
ambition has been realised—but in what a way! We
reached the spot neither by the pathway nor up the
rugged steep —we rolled from the top ; we came through
the air with the snowflakes.
Pretty snowflakes ! Smith is hopelessly crippled, and
I—the other snowflake—am simply a living collection of
bumps and bruises. We must spend the rest of the
bleak night strung up on this dizzy height. We must
wait till the morning—if we can live through the night
What's that, down there—far away down there ?
A light! a number of lights. They're moving—moving
up. They've reached the spot where we met the
shepherd who told us of the two ways.
They've stopped. Hark! What's that?
A shout—a hail—loud and long continued, as though
a lot of people are calling together.
Hurrah! We're saved. The farmer has turned out a
rescue party to find and save us. Hurrah!
Gathering all my strength—all I have left—l answer
the hail. Smith joins me as well as he can. Once,
twice, thrice we shout We catch the distant cry that
tells us we have been heard.


For a minute the lights are stationary. Then their
bearers sending up another great hail as though to tell us
they know where we are and are coming—we see the
lanterns flashing forward up the track which leads above
our heads, and then round to the Eagles Home. Mr.
Griffiths, who knows the hills as well as he knows his
own farm lands, has told them where we are from the
direction of our frantic voices.
So cheer up, Smith —they're coming.
But they'll be such a long time coming—and we're so
cold and numbed. Smith is fainting again. So am I,
I'm afraid—you must remember I am knocked about.
It will be such a long time before the coming help
reaches us.
Will it ? Then what's that solitary light stealing up
the jagged steep below us? Who is it coming to us by
the " hard " way, straight up the precipitous mountain-
side? It must be Griffiths —he's crawling up the rough
boulders —he's clinging hold of roots and branches,
swinging himself over the clefts. The shepherd said it
couldn't be done—but Griffiths is doing it How torn
his hands must be.
I can't be quite fainting, because I can see that
Griffiths' lantern is coming nearer and nearer.
Listen ! I can hear his voice—only it sounds such a
weak voice. That is because lam getting so weak now
myself, though I manage to call back, that Griffiths may
know just where we are
Griffiths has reached us. Griffiths is attending to
poor old Smith. Now he's got his arm round me.
Griffiths is pouring a cordial down my throat that
brings life back into me. I can feel my heart beating
again. I'm better now. I'll shake Griffiths by the hand.


I dare say I shall by-and-by. But this is the hand of
SMITH'S SISTER!
The strain of this theatrical style, and of the present
tense, is more than I can stand any longer, so I hope it
is quite clear to you what had happened. Just a few
words to sum up.
When the rescue party formed by Mr. Griffiths —as
soon as it was obvious that Smith and 1 had lost
ourselves—set out, Smith's sister set out with them.
Griffiths ordered her back. She went back, collared a
lantern and a flask all to herself (in view of the party
separating—what a thoughtful girl !), followed and re-
joined them. When they stopped and halloaed to find
whereabouts we were, he ordered her back again, but not
until she had heard the hasty consultation which resulted
in the party sticking to the safer way to us. She heard
about the " two ways," and she dared the one that
everybody else was afraid of. The ascent up the
mountain's face was suggested, but only Smith's sister
had the pluck to make it This was the girl we had
scorned and laughed at This was the girl whom we
had told to stop at home and play with the chickens!
About an hour after she reached us with the " first
help " that may have saved our lives, we saw the lights
of Griffiths' party on the crest above us. We exchanged
shouts, and they let down a rope at once, and hauled us
up. Long before this, Smith's sister had bound up his
injured ankle neatly and lightly with her own hand-
kerchief and our handkerchiefs.
You should have seen the farmer's face—and, indeed,
the faces of all the others too—when they realised how
she had reached us.


It is all very well for her to say that she didn't know
what she was doing—that she couldn t have done in the
light what she did in the dark. All I am concerned with
is the fact that she did do what I have told you she
did.
Referring to the proposition I laid down soon after I
started—about there being real grit in girls after all —
you will understand what I mean when I wind up my
yarn with the familiar quotation, Q. E. D.


A MOMENT'S PASSION,
is an island in the Mediterranean,"
fluently began Frank Foster. "It is situated
between the island of Sardinia and the Genoese coast.
It is of irregular form, its greatest length being 116
miles, its greatest breadth about 5 1 miles, and its area
3,380 square miles. It lies between 41 0 20' and 43 0 O'N.
latitude, and 8° 32' and 9'33 E. longitude. Seneca, who
"was exiled to Corsica, epigrammatically wrote of it
thus :
" Corsica, terribilis quum primum incanduit astas,
Savior ostendit quum ferus ora canis !
The mineral productions . . . ."
A cloud of bolsters whitened the darkness of the big
dormitory. Twenty-five boys flung twenty-five bolsters
with unerring accuracy of aim. The voice of the speaker
was smothered.
" How dare any boy in this room," demanded Martin
Abbott fiercely, " trot out his mouldy old guide-book
quotations by way of beginning a yarn ? Are we living
in the nineteenth century, or have we gone back to the
middle ages, that a human boy in this school should
chuck Latin lines in our faces at this time of night ? "
Foster cleared himself from the avalanche of bolsters
beneath which he was buried, and proceeded to vindicate
himself in vigorous language.


f




" Some preliminary particulars, especially historical
ones, are necessary," he declared ; "or my story will not
run smoothly when I get into it. Why should I be
attacked like this when I am simply clearing the ground
for a fair start ? "
" There can't be any occasion to go back to old
Seneca," said Abbott in a somewhat mollified voice.
" I'll leave him alone, then, and pledge myself not
to give you the interesting general particulars about
Corsica I've been studying up. I'll confine myself to
only necessary information before I come to my story
itself."
On the distinct understanding that this engagement
would be adhered to, the bolsters were collected, order
was restored, and Foster allowed to proceed.
In 1768 Genoa ceded the Island of Corsica to France,
and a large French army occupied the place. The
natives, led by a patriot named Paoli, made a desperate
resistance, but were overpowered, Paoli making his
escape on board an English vessel. When the French
Revolution broke out, he proceeded to Paris, and
eventually returned to his island home as its military
governor. When, however, the French legislature pro-
posed to cede Corsica to the Duke of Placentia, he again
rebelled, and put himself at the head of a formidable
faction. These malcontents asked the aid of Lord
Hood, the Admiral commanding the English fleet in the
Mediterranean. This aid was given them, and in 1794
General Dundas landed with five regiments. Some of
the French troops evacuated and others surrendered,
and by negotiation between the British Government and
the Corsicans the island became part of our empire till


1796, when we abandoned it, partly in consequence of
the bitter feelings which had sprung up amongst the
natives against us.
So much at present for the facts of history: I will
now proceed with some facts mingled, perhaps, with
fiction, in the shape of the story I am going to tell you
about A MOMENT'S PASSION.
The natural elation of Colin Joscelynne upon being
gazetted as ensign in the —th Foot was only damped
by the circumstance that that gallant regiment was
doing duty in Corsica. He would have preferred to
have commenced his military career where, in the
stirring times of '96, there were the chances of quicker
promotion in the certainty of immediate fighting.
However, it was with pride and high hope that he
hastened to join his regiment. He received a hearty
welcome from his brother officers, and was soon a
favourite both with them and the rank-and-file. He
was a dashing, high-spirited young fellow, tall and well-
made, though still wanting a year or two of the number
of years that legally qualify the hitherto " infant" to
claim to be a " man."
At the time of his arrival on the island the relations
between the Corsicans and the representatives of England
were " strained," the former strongly resenting the action
of the British Government in its dealings with Paoli.
The commandant of the occupying troops had strictly
enjoined his officers and the soldiery to be as con-
ciliatory as possible in their demeanour towards the
natives, and to avoid as far as possible either giving or
taking offence.
"Mr. Joscelynne," he remarked to the young ensign


one morning, after the latter had informed him that he
had accepted an invitation to a ball which was to be
given by a prominent citizen of Porto Vecchio that
night—"Mr. Joscelynne, do I do you an injustice when
I fear that you have a very hot temper, under very
imperfect control ? "
" I'm afraid you don't, sir," was Colin's candid answer.
"Then let me ask you to be very careful. It is our
policy just now to keep on smooth terms with everybody
here. The Corsicans are quick to take offence, and
bitterly revengeful. Don't forget that any want of dis-
cretion on your part may compromise all of us."
" I am sorry you appear to be afraid to trust me,
Colonel Halhead," said Colin, rather warmly, and
flushing a little as he spoke.
"No man is to be entirely trusted, Mr. Joscelynne,"
rejoined the colonel kindly but firmly, " who cannot
trust his own temper. You'll be a better man, as well
as a more valuable soldier, when you get the whip-hand
of yours."
The ball was a very brilliant affair, most of the
dancers being in fancy dress. Heated and a little
excited, Colin strolled from the ball-room. In the
vestibule his progress towards the verandah was im-
peded by a man in what Colin took to be the attire of
a native peasant. Wondering at the intrusion of the
peasant into the house at such a time, the youthful
officer somewhat haughtily ordered him out of his way.
The man resented his manner, as well as his words, and
retorted in a way that brought the quick blood into the
Englishman's face. He put out his hand to thrust the
Corsican aside, but the instant he perceived the gesture,
the latter drew himself up, and deliberately planted him-
self directly in Colin's front


" When the English officer has apologized, he may
pass," he said, with a sneer upon his swarthy face.
In a moment the temper, the passion, that his parents,
his teachers, his friends—even the colonel that morning
—had warned Colin Joscelynne to master, mastered
him. His eyes blazed, his very lips trembled. For-
getting everything, forgetting himself—even forgetting
the uniform he wore—he struck the Corsican full in the
face.
Almost instantly he realised what he had done ; and
realised, too, that the man he had struck in that moment
of mad passion was a Corsican of rank, dressed in
masquerade.
A number of Corsicans who had witnessed the blow
immediately stepped up. Colin was informed of the
name and position of the man he had assaulted, and
corresponding information on his part was demanded.
Immediately after morning parade the next day he was
waited upon by two strangers.
"You will not be surprised, sir," said the spokesman
of the couple, "to hear that we present ourselves on
behalf of Monsieur Buonaveno, whom you affronted last
night. I may say at once that our principal declines to
listen to any explanation, or to accept any apology.
If you will honour us by presenting us to the gentlemen
who will act on your behalf, the meeting can be arranged
for to-day, before sunset."
" I was prepared for your visit," replied Colin, "which
will be returned by my friends Captain Masters and Mr.
Mostyn in the course of the morning. I leave myself in
their hands."
Buonaveno's seconds bowed haughtily, and withdrew.
To the two brother-officers (both attached to his own


company) whom he had mentioned to them, the hot-
headed ensign had already spoken of the atfair, and in
the course of the morning the preliminaries of the duel
were settled. Colin had the choice of weapons, and
decided without hesitation upon pistols. The place
selected was a secluded spot just outside the town, and
the time a little before the hour of sunset.
During the afternoon young Joscelynne wrote several
letters in view of his falling in the approaching meeting,
and then waited, as calmly as he could, for the summons
of his seconds. That he was in the wrong —that, even
had he been correct in his hasty belief as to the social
status of Buonaveno, he had no more justification for
striking a " peasant" than a " gentleman " —that he was
breaking God's law in going out to slay, or to be slain
by, this man he had insulted and assaulted—all this he
knew. But according to the false code of honour
prevailing at that time—particularly in the military
caste —he could see no alternative. Even at the risk of
bloodguiltiness he must fight this man—he must abide
by the consequences of that moment of mad passion last
night.
With a firm step and erect carriage, he accompanied
Masters and Mostyn to the ground. Almost at the
same moment arrived the other party. The seconds
stepped aside and held a brief consultation, at the close
of which Captain Masters walked to his waiting prin-
cipal.
"Joscelynne," he said, "Buonaveno insists on a
peculiar condition. Both pistols are to be loaded, but,
instead of a simultaneous exchange of shots, lots are to
be drawn for the right of first fire. If the man who wins
the first fire drops the other man, all right; if he doesn't


he has to stand fire in his turn. It's a murderous way
of fighting, and I've declined to agree to it without your
consent."
" I consent," said Colin shortly. " Let the lots be
drawn. Toss a coin if you like," he added recklessly.
Again the seconds drew together. He watched them
coolly, though his face was growing very white. Lieu-
tenant Mostyn hurried to his side.
" I've won first fire for you," he whispered joyfully.
" Take care not to miss him, and it's all over."
Twelve paces were quickly measured, and the two
men faced each other.
"You will fire at the word," said Masters.
It wasn't long before that word was given—scarcely
half a minute. But brief as was the space of time, it
was long; enough for Colin to come to a determination
o o
in. Now that the moment had actually arrived—now
that he was face to face with his adversary, and that
adversary practically at his mercy —he could not do it,
he would not do it. A hundred memories of old-time
teachings of the sacredness of human life seemed to
wake within him : his heart softened, his vision cleared—
the glamour of man-made principles of " honour " ceased
to bewilder him, and he saw everything in a truer light.
Though in all probability he would forfeit his own life—
though the muzzle of his pistol was already covering the
heart of his antagonist and he knew that his aim was
sure—he could not do it, he would not do it.
" Fire!"
Sharp on the word, Colin Joscelynne raised his pistol
and fired harmlessly and deliberately into the air.
The hasty expressions of his surprised seconds
were instantly followed by a loud exclamation from
Buonaveno.


" It is my fire," he cried.
With flushed cheeks and flashing eyes he looked
exultingly, gloatingly, at the poor doomed young
Englishman.
" It is my fire."
" I'm waiting to receive it," said Colin.
But just as the revengeful Corsican was raising his
weapon, a party of gendarmerie burst in upon the group.
The two principals were instantly surrounded, and
Buonaveno's pistol was wrested from him as he was on
the very point of firing it.
" You, monsieur," said the leader of the gendarmes to
him, "will accompany us. The English Commandant
—turning to the three British officers —" will deal with
these gentlemen upon our report."
The duel was over. Colin's party marched off in one
direction, the Corsicans in another. To the last day of
his life, Colin never forgot the look on the face of
Buonaveno at the moment of parting, as, turning his
fierce black eyes full upon him, the Corsican uttered the
warning—
" Remember — it is my fire ! "
As they were re-entering barracks, the captain, lieu-
tenant, and ensign were met by their colonel.
" The man-o'-war that entered the harbour this after-
noon," he said, "has brought me my long-expected
dispatches. The English occupation of the island is at
an end. Amongst the companies to leave at once is
yours. You will embark at daybreak, and sail with the
morning tide."
Almost twenty years passed away—for England,
twenty of the most momentous years in all her stormy


history, for they assured her position as a Great Power
on land, and established her supremacy at sea. Napoleon
was at last overthrown, his power humbled to the dust.
Once again English soldiers landed on the island of
Corsica—this time simply to hold it on behalf of the
restored Bourbons of France, pending the conclusion of
the general European settlement that was following the
long years of general war.
For the second time in his life, Colonel Colin
Joscelynne —now at the head of the regiment he had
joined as ensign in '96 —entered Porto Vecchio.
Shortly after mess one evening—very soon after his
arrival—he retired to his private quarters in order to
prepare a dispatch. In this labour he was interrupted
by the arrival of a packet of letters, which had been sent
ashore from a sloop that had just reached the port.
The first communication he opened informed him of
the death of the Earl of Ingatestone, his uncle. Between
the earldom and himself was now only one life—that of
his cousin Alfred, serving the king in the Royal Navy.
He opened a second letter. It contained the intelli-
gence that two days after the decease of the late Lord
Ingatestone, the Honourable Alfred Joscelynne had died
on board H.M.'s frigate Syren.
For some minutes Colonel Joscelynne was lost in
thought His memory flashed back to the time when,
nineteen years ago, he had stood in that very room
before Colonel Halhead—an ensign-stripling of less than
twenty. The intervening years had brought him rank
and fame, love, a fair wife, a bonny boy. And now,
while still less than forty, he had inherited the title,
wealth, and broad estates of an historic earldom, and he
had a son to inherit them after him. Into a future


where other laurels were to be won he carried the glory
of an honourable past Who might not have envied
him ?
Not another letter did he open. Flinging a light
cloak over his shoulders, he walked from the room, out
of the barracks, into the city, his agitation calming as he
walked. Soon he found himself in the outskirts of the
place, and—why did the spot seem familiar? When
was he here before ?
Suddenly he remembered. This quiet spot that he
saw now in the moonlight he had seen before in the late
sunlight. It was the scene of his duel.
Here, just where he was standing now, he had stood
then, and over there, twelve paces off, had stood. . . .
Who was standing there now ? Whose was that
cloaked figure that had approached so silently ? Who
was standing now almost exactly where the Corsican
had stood in that mad adventure of his hot-headed
youth ?
The stranger halted, and spoke quickly.
" I know you. I have followed you. lam Buonaveno.
IT is MY FIRE!"
A flash, a loud report, and Lord Ingatestone fell to
the ground. Dead.


THE ADVENTURES OF A
COLD KEY.
" T T is eighteen months since I was taken to V arley
Lunatic Asylum !"
Such was the startling commencement coolly made by
Gus Hardacre. Up sprang Martin Abbott into a sitting
posture.
"I've suspected it all along," he exclaimed —"ever
since you came "to the school. You're dotty still. What
are things coming to ? Is Salwey House to be turned
into a place of refuge for escaped lunatics ? Are insane
boys
"Hold your row, Abbott," said Gus; "and don't
holloa till you're hurt. I'm no more insane than you are,
and I never was insane."
"They all say that. If you weren't mad, what were
you taken to the Lunatic Asylum for ? Why was it ? "
" That's just what I'm going to tell you, in my own
way. As soon as you shut up," added the yarn-spinner
of the evening.
Martin Abbott did " shut up," and no one interposed
any more remarks until Gus Hardacre had finished his
Story of THE ADVENTURES OF A COLD KEY.
Charlie Caldecott was a born doubter. I never knew
such a beggar to doubt in all my life. It wasn t that he






actually disbelieved—he doubted. Nothing could dis-
sipate his doubts but proof—demonstration. It was his
great delight to demonstrate himself the truth or
falseness of anything he considered doubtful —and as a
matter of fact, he began by regarding almost everything
as doubtful. If I may dare to drift into Latin, he always
said " dubito " before he would say " credo."
I remember that in the course of a lecture which we
both had to attend on Chemistry, the professor said that
the joining together of certain easily generated gases
would result in an explosion.
" I doubt it," said Charlie.
The next morning he came to me with one arm in a
sling, and his face and head wrapped round with linen
bandages.
" That chap was quite right about those gases ex-
ploding," he remarked in a pleased sort of voice. " I
tried the experiment last night—and look at me now !"
I ought to tell you that we were at school together, a
mile or two from Brentwood, about eighteen miles from
London. Brentwood itself is on the left of the line from
town, and is joined by Warley on the right of the line.
In Warley are some big Barracks, and the County
Lunatic Asylum, which I have already referred to.
Brentwood being such a jolly place to live in—being
right out of the noise and bustle of London, and yet near
enough to it for City men to get to their offices in about
half-an-hour—both Charlie's family and mine had
removed there, our fathers having to go to town every
day. At first we went to a very good school in
Brentwood itself as day-boys ; but the fact is we got
into awful trouble there by playing the truant —or rather
by being found out in doing so. lam sure there was


every excuse for us, for the country round Brentwood
and Warley is so delightful, as to tempt anybody to
chuck up school now and then for the sake of a glorious
ramble.
But no excuses were made. Poor Charlie and I were
punished by being sent away as weekly boarders to
another school, where we were kept very strictly in
hand.
"This'll be an awful change for us, Charlie," said I,
before our first week was up.
" I dorit doubt it," said Charlie, for once in his life.
However, going home every Saturday until the
Monday, made a pleasant break in our new lives, and
by-and-by we managed to enjoy ourselves pretty well.
People can always manage to enjoy themselves pretty
well if they make the best of things, and look at the
bright side of everything.
In an evil hour somebody told Charlie Caldecott that
in cases of fainting, a cold key slipped down the back
of the fainter by way of the neck, was an excellent thing
to restore consciousness, or to prevent the fainter from
going " right off."
Now I don't know what led up to this information
being given to Charlie, any more than I know why the
matter should have lingered in his mind ; but it did
linger.
" I doubt it," he said—of course—and added, " I'll test
the dodge the first chance I get"
That chance came all too soon. For being late at the
roll-call one Monday morning (it was entirely the fault
of a sudden hard frost, for we merely stopped on the way
from home to have some sliding), Charlie and I were
sentenced to be kept within bounds for three days. This,


of course, meant that for the period named we could not
go outside the playground walls. Now we shouldn't
have taken our punishment so much to heart if it hadn't
been for the circumstance that on Wednesday afternoon
a splendid football match was going to be played at
Warley. A crack team was coming from London to play
the soldiers, and all our fellows—Wednesday being a
half-holiday—were going to see the game. Owing to
our unjust punishment, we must stop behind.
As soon as dinner was over, off started the others,
some of them mockingly remarking to Charlie and me
what a jolly match it would be.
Left to our solitude, we tried in vain to soothe our
spirits on the giant-stride, and to find an interest in
marbles. It was no go !
If it had been possible to scale the walls without
detection, we should certainly have done it. But the
only safe way out of the premises was through the locked
gate at the end of a covered alley, that led from the
playground on to the pathway at the side of the house.
We could walk up to the gate but not over it. We
couldn't climb over, for there wasn't enough space
between the top of the gate and the roof of the alley.
Nothing but the key of that gate could help us.
Naturally enough, the hopelessness of our position
increased the charms of that forbidden football match
two miles away. Oh, for that key!
But it was kept with all the other keys in the porter's
lodge. The porter —as he was called—was an old Irish
soldier, named Tom O'Falvey. He was a tender-
hearted old chap who pretended to be crusty and strict.
On the sly he did us many a good turn with a bad
grace.


"Gus," exclaimed Charlie, "let's have a try at Torn,
and see if he won't lose that key for us. Pile on the
blarney," he cried, as we hurried together to the lodge to
put his idea into execution.
"Tom," he asked in a strikingly friendly manner,
"wasn't it you who charged the Russian guns at
Balaclava ? "
"And won the battle of Inkermann?" I put in with
flattering anxiety.
" Besides being the first man to enter Sebastopol ?"
continued Charlie.
" Ah, thin," replied Tom, "maybe it was. But shure
that's no reason why I should lind ye the loan of the
key that ye're wanting, or the use of it aither. 'Tis I
that knows the pair of ye. Clear out now."
With a longing look at the key we wanted —we knew
where it hung—we left the lodge.
We were foiled, but not defeated.
The next idea was mine. The key of the hamper-
shed was in its lock : it was not unlike the key of the
gate. I proposed that we should pocket it, and return to
the lodge. Whilst one of us distracted Tom's attention,
the other —unperceived —was to slip off from its nail
the gate-key, and slip on the hamper-shed key in its
place.
It was only half-past two. We could bolt down to
the barracks by three, see the match for an hour, and
bolt back again. The object was a great one ; the risks
comparatively slight.
The ruse succeeded. Within a few minutes of its
conception, its execution was an accomplished fact.
We noiselessly opened the gate, re-bolted it behind us,
and made safely off. In less than a quarter of an hour,


we broke into the top of the High Street at a smart trot,
and as warm as though it hadn't been one of the coldest
days we'd had that winter.
We were brought to a halt by a little mob that had
gathered on the side-walk.
"What's the row?" we asked, so as to feel justified in
joining in it if there was a scrimmage on.
" This old gent slipped, and knocked his head on the
kerb," said a man who was supporting a white and
scared-looking old gentleman in his arms.
" He's fainting!" cried somebody.
"Fainting, is he?" said Charlie, just as we were about
to trot on, having satisfied ourselves that the fall hadn't
been a serious one. " Fainting—here, Gus, where's that
key?"
I was carrying it in my hand—so it was cold enough.
He snatched it from me, and the next moment slipped
it neatly down the old gentleman's back from behind his
collar.
Whether it was because of the cold key or not,
Charlie's " patient" pulled himself together. He recovered
himself wonderfully. He thanked, very courteously, the
man who had been holding him up; and picked up the
little black bag he had been carrying. Seeing him about
to walk on again, the crowd melted away. Only Charlie
and I accompanied him down the street.
" Do you feel better, sir ? " enquired Charlie.
" Oh, yes, my boy," answered the old gentleman. " I
think I suffered more from fright than anything else.
When you get to be my age, you'll find a sudden shock
to be a nasty thing. Where are you two young gentle-
men hurrying to ? " he asked pleasantly.
He seemed a good deal interested when we told him


about the football match, and asked us various questions.
Looking at his watch, he exclaimed—
" I must hurry up now, for it's past three o'clock, and
I have a call to make before I catch my train."
"Well, we'll run on," said we. " Good-bye, sir."
" Good-bye, boys, good-bye."
Off we went at a rattling pace down the hill leading
to the station. Over the bridge we sprinted, and into
Warley.
Suddenly and excitedly Charlie seized my arm, and
came to a full stop. I had never seen him look frightened
before.
" Gus," he gasped, " where's that key ? "
We glared at each other in dismay. We'd had a lot
of warnings, and only one fate awaited us if we were
found out this time. If we couldn't get back inside the
school premises without the discovery being made that
we had broken bounds, we were doomed boys. Our only
hope, our one chance, of returning safely, was in that key.
Where was that key ?
Down the old gentleman"s back !
It was our turn to feel like fainting now. But there
was no time to lose. Where was the old gentleman ?
We both remembered that he'd said he had a call to
make in the town before he caught his train.
" Gus," said Caldecott quickly, " you watch the station.
I'll take the town. We must find him between us or
we're done for."
The awful situation was too plain to require any more
words. Silently we turned and rushed back. When we
got to the railway bridge Charlie shot on ahead, and was
out of sight almost directly.
I pulled up, hesitating which platform to try first—the


up or down. A train might come alongside either at any
moment. The old chap with our key might be at the
station already.
Horror! A train was coming. No—two trains were
coming—one on the up line, the other on the down.
They were both in sight—both rushing into the station.
I felt that I was rapidly losing my head.
A rough-looking man was lounging near me on the
bridge, eyeing me curiously. I seized hold of him with
one hand, and pointed with the other down the incline to
the up platform.
" Run down there," I blurted out as well as I could.
" Stop any old gentleman you see with a key in his hand,
and a black bag down his back. Hold him. Don't let
him go. Knock him down till I come !"
Then I tore frantically across to the other side. The
train was in—going to start again. The ticket collectors
wouldn't let me go on the platform. They shut the door
in my face.
By this time I had lost my wits completely. I kicked
and thumped at the door with all my might, and
yelled :
" I want the old chap with a key down his back. Stop
him! Stop thief!"
Just then, through a window, I caught sight—as I
thought—of the old gentleman, seated comfortably in
the corner seat of a carriage almost opposite to the very
spot where I stood howling " Stop him ! " I cracked my
fingers on the glass with all my might, and roared to
him :
" Gi' me that key. Please get out at once and undress
yourself!"
" Right, forward ! " called the guard—and off went the
train.


" Look 'ere," said a voice behind me, " the old bloke
you want ain't t'other side, nor 'e ain't this side. And e
ain't been t'other side, nor 'e ain't been this side. I know
where 'e is. You come along o' me."
" You know where he is ? " I cried delightedly. " With
our key !"
" Yus. I know. You come along o' me."
Trying to collect my wits again as well as to get
back my wind, I accompanied my " friend in need."
We made for Warley. Outside the Asylum my guide
halted, and shouted " Gate ! "
" What does this mean ? " I demanded. " This is the
County Lunatic Asylum."
"Thought you'd know it agin," grinned the fellow,
grabbing hold of me tight by the collar. " This is the
'Sylum right enough, and you're a-goin' in. A-yellin' at
Railway Stations like that," he went on indignantly,
" and a-tellin' me to knock down a aged gennelman with
keys and black bagses down 'is back. Come on, you
mis'rable loonattic —Gate ! "
The gates swung open. The next moment I was
inside them —inside the gates of Warley Madhouse,
rapidly closed again by their liveried keeper.
" Here," cried my captor to him proudly—"a escaped
loonattic for yer ! You've lost one of 'em, ain't you—a
young 'un ? "
" Yes," was the answer.
" Well, I 'eard so, and I've caught 'im. 'Ere 'e is.
Asked a wenerable old bloke to undress 'isself on the
platform—in weather like this !"
Of course I wasn't in long—l was out again in a few
minutes. There was nothing to do but to m<pt Charlie
and tell him that the key had gone travelling on the


down line—for I was certain now that I had not mistaken
the identity of the gentleman in the railway carriage.
I met my fellow unfortunate near the station. Of
course he had had no luck in the town. I told him how
I had " seen the old gentleman off."
" Gone," he groaned : " prigged our key and gone !"
Slowly and mournfully we trudged back to school to
give ourselves up. At the gate —that gate —we found
old Tom O'Falvey. We made a clean breast of it.
" 'Tis mesilf that pities the pair of ye when I tell the
masther," said Tom, as he opened the gate with a
duplicate key and let us in.
We prepared for the worst that very evening, but it
didn't come. Tom evidently hadn't split yet, and the
affair hadn't been found out without him. But he was
at the foot of the stairs as we went up to bed, and
whispered in our ears (just to help give us a good night's
rest):
"'Tis in the morning I'll be telling the masther."
But the Thursday morning came, and he didn't tell:
the afternoon and evening came, but still he didn't tell.
Poor old Tom ! what a brick he was—he never told at
all.
After morning school on Friday, he beckoned us
towards his lodge.
" Come here now," he said, "and look at this."
He spread out that day's " Essex County Chronicle
and pointed his finger to an advertisement:
" The gentleman Zi 'ho met with a slight accident in the
High Street, Brentwood, on Tuesday last, and was in
danger of fainting, finds himself in possession of a key
that is not his property. It will be restored 011 application
to Mr. Walter Benham, Solicitor, Dovercourt."


We wrote to Mr. Benham, and the key was returned to
us. We handed it to Tom, with every farthing that the
two of us could club together. The good old chap took
the key, but wouldn't take the money.
" 'Tis not I, indade, will take the money of bhoys who
are going to the gallows as fast as the pair of ye," he
said. Then he added :
" Take heed to what I say now. This last prank ye
got up to in laying ye're hands on my key might have
sot me into throuble as well as yourselves, and lost me
my situation intoirely for not taking better care of it
'Tis mesilf that doesn't mind bhoys getting into a bit of
fun and mischief, but be careful now, when ye have ye're
fun, to have it without running the risk of getting other
people into throuble and danger."
" Charlie," said I to my chum a few days afterwards,
" I've been thinking a good deal of the fright we got into
over that key."
" So have I," said Charlie.
" The origin of the whole thing was our breaking of the
rule about punctuality. We are always getting into
trouble, because we are always breaking rules. I'm
groins to turn over a new leaf. In future I'm going to
o O
keep all the rules laid down for us."
" I doubt it!" said Charlie Caldecott
" A very laughable yarn," remarked the monitor.
" But I don't know that you gave it a very apt title, Gus.
It wasn't exactly about the adventures of that key, but
the adventures into which the key led you."
" It was my yarn," returned Gus Hardacre, " and I had
a risrht to call it what I liked."
o
"' I doubt it,'" quoted Martin Abbott




■*m
t ' - 3/K '


THE BOY WHO WON A BATTLE.
TAAVE WATSON prefaced his yarn by saying, "At
my last school we had as our Drawing and German
master a chap named Thiele. He was a very good speci-
men of the sons of the Fatherland, and we all liked him.
On his side, he seemed to like us as heartily as we liked
him. The fact is, he shared in our sports as well as our
studies, and took as much interest in us in the cricket-
field as in the class-room. His character—especially as
an all-round cricketer and a clever athlete—was beyond
reproach; which, I'm afraid, is more than can be said of
most masters, from our point of view. We were all
sorry that he was a German ; but he couldn't help it
" One fine August half-holiday we were to play the
second eleven of a neighbouring school. The match was
to come off in our field, and there we were, waiting
for the representatives of the rival club, nick-named the
'Wasps' C.C., on account of sporting black-and-yellow
colours. Either we were early or the Wasps were late.
Mr. Thiele was in charge of us, and to beguile the time
of waiting we got him, as we often did, to spin us a
yarn. The particular yarn he spun us, on that afternoon,
is the one I'm going to treat you to. Here goes for the
German master's story without further introduction."
This beautiful summer day (he began slowly) is the


anniversary of one of the great battles of the Franco-
German War, twenty years ago. The battle lam think-
ing of was fought on just such a beautiful day as this.
It began in the morning, raged through all the lovely
afternoon and sweet evening, and only ended at night
Through the hours of glorious sunshine, in the softer light
which came when the white moon rose, and the Angels
lighted the silver stars, French and Germans fought on
and on.
Of all the tens of thousands of men engaged on both
sides, our chief concern is with a German bugler, whom
we will call Reinhold.
He was only a lad, this Reinhold, a lad of about
eighteen, but strong and big for his age.
When the war broke out—when the French armies
marched to invade the sacred soil of the Fatherland—he
was at school at Hameln—or college we might call it
here.
Hameln is a quaint old historic town, on the banks of
the W 7 eser, in Hanover. Browning calls it Hamlin in his
celebrated poem of the " Pied Piper," who first piped away
all the rats, and then all the children, hundreds of years
ago. Reinhold was one of the youngsters who have
come there since. It was his birthplace—l wish I had
time to give you a description of it; but I haven't, for the
Wasps may arrive at any minute. Generally, it is a very
sleepy, Rip-van-Winkle sort of place. But the fever of
patriotism that—when France declared war against her—
heated all Germany, as though a great wave of fire had
passed through her every province, roused the sleepy
burghers to enthusiasm. All the men of a fighting age
marched away to fight. All the old men cheered them
as they went; all the women prayed for them when


they had gone. Schoolboys called themselves young
men, and begged to be sent away with them. Big boys,
of Reinhold's age and size, were allowed to go, for
the country had need of all her strength. Of the cadet
corps at the school, Reinhold, who was very musical, was
bugler. He pressed eagerly forward to be taken into
one of the regiments that were going to swell the
innumerable ranks of the armies in the field. Great was
his joy when he knew himself " passed " —proud, indeed,
was his heart when he donned his uniform as bugler
in the "crack " regiment of his dear native town. Play-
ing at being a soldier was all over for him now—he was
o o
one!
And soon he knew, in his own experience, the stern
realities of a soldier's life in war-time. The huge hosts
of the invader and the invaded soon got touch of each
other, and the series of victories began that rolled the
former back across the frontier, and carried the latter, in
triumph, to the gates of Paris.
After the first battle in which his regiment took part,
Reinhold formed a strange friendship. Several thousands
of the French were taken prisoners. As, rank after rank,
they were marched through the German lines to the rear,
the young bugler watched them. Some looked defiant
still, others sullen, and very, very sad. Some were
whole, others wounded ; amongst the wounded, though
he tried hard to carry his head high, and tread with
steady feet, was a trumpeter of cavalry, of not much
more than Reinhold's own age. Their eyes met, and
somehow the hunted look in the Frenchman's face
seemed to haunt the German bugler for hours afterwards.
By what men call " chance," Reinhold was employed,
that night, on duty in the prisoners' quarters. There he


and the French trumpeter fell into talk. Each talked to
the other of his own country. Besides the similarity
in their ages, a certain similarity of tastes was soon
discovered, which drew them to each other more and
more.
Next day they renewed their talk. We—l mean the
Germans—were waiting for reinforcements, and it was
several days before an escort was formed, under which
the prisoners were finally marched away. During this
time Reinhold and his French friend, Alphonse, "im-
pro\ ed their acquaintance. One of their mutual tastes
was for music, of which they were never tired of talking.
Each taught the other, what were to the learner, new
and strange airs. Prom Alphonse, for instance, Reinhold
learnt quickly some of the French cavalry calls.
W hen the moment of parting arrived, the eyes of each
were wet " Enemies " though they were, their hands
lingered together in a loving embrace as they said fare-
vell farewell for ever, for they never met again. As
the long column marched away, Alphonse turned and
waved a last salute.
The days went on—days of fierce and mad excite-
ment. Their story is written in blood on the pages
of the world's history.
At last was fought the battle of which this is the
anniversary day. Ihe Germans were flushed with their
recent triumphs—the French were stung by their defeats.
The desperate valour with which the former attacked
could onl) ha\ e been equalled by the death-scorning
bravery of the latter in meeting that attack.
Prom an eminence behind the approximate centre of
his forces, the King of Prussia, surrounded by a small
staff, watched the conflict From only such a spot,


so extended was the line of battle, could the varying for-
tunes of the day have been followed. Those taking an
actual part in the fighting knew little of how the day was
going save in their own neighbourhoods. This was par-
ticularly the case with Reinhold's regiment during the
greater part of the battle. They were engaged, with other
regiments, in clearing a series of wooded heights, held by
the enemy in great force. It was warm work, for every
inch of their advance was stubbornly contested. Day-
light had faded away, and the autumn stars were shining
in the skies above the smoke-covered earth, by the time
their last assault succeeded. Scarcely half of the regiment
were left to take part in it. The others—wounded, dying,
dead—strewed the way behind.
The breathless survivors of the force halted at last.
Before them stretched a wide plateau, where whole
masses of troops were fighting in the starlight.
The pause was brief. Upon this plateau Reinhold's
regiment, with the other regiments co-operating with it,
were ordered to deploy. On and down they rushed
to join the massed battalions on the open plain.
The issue of the battle was still uncertain. It hung- in
o
the balance.
Suddenly the French made a last desperate charge of
cavalry. The blast of their bugles was followed by
a mad rush of their impetuous horsemen. Rained on
by rifles, stormed on by our artillery, forward they charged.
Heavy cavalry and light—cuirassiers, lancers, hussars,
dragoons, chasseurs d'Afrique, and the savage Turcos—
their sabres and swords and lances a whirling sheet of
light—on they rode.
They carried everything before them. A panic seized
the Germans. Their cavalry, their artillerymen, even their


solid squares of infantry, went down before the furious
whirlwind.
So far as Reinhold was concerned, it seemed to him
that it was all over in a moment. One instant he
saw them coming, the next instant they had ridden over
his square.
A sabre-cut had slashed open his forehead, his right
foot had been crushed beneath the hoofs of a charter.
o
He raised his wounded head, dashed from his eyes
with a trembling hand the warm blood that was pouring
from his forehead down his face, and gazed after the
charging enemy. They were advancing still—the Ger-
man line was giving way—the tide of victory was setting
against his countrymen. All was lost—and he was lying
there, bleeding and wounded and helpless ! Nay—was
he helpless ? A sudden wild thought nerved his hand.
He seized his bugle and raised it to his lips. From
it the next moment rang out the French cavalry
" Retreat! " —one of the bugle calls he had learnt from
poor Alphonse.
Loud and clear the sharp notes rang out.
Those charging Frenchmen heard them. A few rode
on still—some drew rein, and wheeled—all the others
wavered. In the very moment of victory their awful
charge was broken. The Germans heard that " Retreat!''
too, and saw its instant effect—and their retreat was
stopped. With a ringing cheer, they regained their
formation.
Back turned the French—on came the Germans. In
a few minutes all was over. The enemy had made their
last attempt. The battle was over. The boy-bugler,
whose ruse had won it, lay fainting on the ground, wet
with his own blood.


That night the King slept in a peasant's hut near by.
The next morning he rode to the hospital into which they
had carried Reinhold, and with his own hands presented
him with the Iron Cross. For the story had been told
him of what had been done by the Bugler of Hameln.
« Mr. Thiele," said I, " don't you walk lame still—with
your right foot ? "
"Ye-es," he replied.
" You have a scar on your forehead."
" Have I ? "
" Is your Christian name Reinhold? "
" Yes."
" Are you the boy who won that battle? " I continued.
" Here come the Wasps!" answered Mr. Thiele.


JOE FLOTSAM.
TT was the turn of Younge Fallow, nick-named
Eaglebeak.
" Last summer," said he, " father and I took the rest
of the family to Clacton-on-Sea for a month's holiday."
" That's a cool way of putting it," remarked somebody
in the darkness.
" Very well, then," Eaglebeak corrected himself hastily,
" father took me and the rest of the family to the jolly
little place I've just mentioned."
" That's better."
It's the same thing. Well, along the coast at
Clacton are several Martello Towers. I suppose you
know that most of the Martello Towers on the English
coast were built for purposes of defence during the great
Napoleonic scare. Similar Towers are found along the
shores of the Mediterranean, where they were built
against the pirates. An alarm-bell, or martello, used to
be rung from them as a warning when an enemy was
seen approaching. From this word martello all the
Towers are named.
One of these Towers at Clacton was occupied by a
coastguardsman—a splendid chap called Joe Larty. We
got to be great chums, Joe and I. He used to let me
go up to the top of his Tower, and there, with his
telescope, I got a magnificent sweep of open sea and






pretty country, and drank in enough ozone to last me
till we go there again.
Like all coastguardsmen, of course Joe had been a
man-o'-war's-man. He'd been in all sorts of dangers,
and had had some jolly shipwrecks and narrow escapes
and fine wounds. My great delight used to be to get
him to tell me of some of his adventures. The funniest
thing about him was that he appeared to be half
ashamed of himself for not having been killed.
" Better men than me," he used to say, " and plenty of
'em, who were never in half my scrapes, lost their lives,
while I never got killed in all my life. There never was
such a beggar for living as I've been. Cats ain't in it
with me."
One morning father came with me to see Joe, and on
that occasion he spun us a yarn into which he couldn't
work this rummy idea of apologizing for not having got
killed, because the story was not about himself at all,
but about Joe Flotsam of Audley Cove. My father was
so much interested in the tale that he afterwards wrote
it out in his own style instead of my chum Larty's, and
the version of it I'm going to give you is the former.
There's only one thing I'd like to say first
"You've said a good many things first," observed
Martin Abbott
" I consider that remark uncalled for. What I was
about to say was this : we've had one story about a
Life-boat, and two stories in which Christmas Eve was
referred to. Now my yarn is also about a Life-boat, and
a part of it is timed on Christmas Eve. These points
of resemblance I can't help. In all other respects my
story will be found quite different from the stories I've
referred to."


" Life-boats are good things and so are Christmas
Eves," said the monitor, " but they must be kept out of
our yarn-spinning after this tale. Now then, Eaglebeak,
go it."
Younge Fallow "went it" without more ado.
A sweet September morning, and plenty of it.
Plenty of it? Why, it just seemed filling the world
with its brightness and sweetness and gladness, and to
have enough left to give away some to any unfortunate
neighbouring worlds that might have run short.
Sunshine? Plenty. Sunbeams in the air, on the
land, on the sea ; round the tops of the tallest trees on
the highest hills; in the lowest valleys, bathing the
fields in a glamour of gold richer than the lost glory of
their harvest beauty ; on all the little gleeful child-waves
that rip-rip-rippled on the margin of the yellow beach,
and the big billows that tumbled about in ecstacy
farther off. Early morning sunbeams that melted the
hearts of all the birds into song—that made the fishes in
all the flashing brooks and streams so merry that they
jumped up to swallow them, as if they felt that a little
sunshine inside would do them good.
What a grand thing it would be if we could all get
more (or some) sunshine—moral sunshine—inside us !
There wouldn't be so many cross looks and snarling
words—all the nasty, angry, bitter thoughts would go
cowering away, like shadows into corners.
Such a soft, soothing, luscious breeze tempered the
sunshine that the flowers couldn't contain themselves—
they flirted so with the willing wind that he kissed them
by thousands at a time, and bore away such a tell-tale
fragrance that all the world could tell what he had been


doing. Not that he was ashamed of it—not a bit of it!
Why, the rogue was telling the tree-tops all about it till
they shook with laughter, and when he tojd the rivers
they thought it was such a good thing that they bounded
away quicker than ever to tell old Neptune, and he
laughed till all the ships and yachts and fishing boats
above him rolled in the commotion he caused.
Not that it was a frisky, flighty morning, mind you—
like a morning in early Spring-time, whose mood is no
more to be depended on than the mood of a maiden of
sensitive seventeen. Not a morning liable to sudden
tears and petulant changes of every sort, but a more
staid, middle-aged sort of sweet September morning,
certain to keep all its promises till the shadow-time.
Even that fluttering wind would be quiet in the quiver
of noon.
("Good," said Abbott approvingly, "very good indeed.
I mean good of your father—l couldn't have done that
description better myself. And good of your memory,
Seth.")
Hut look here (went on Seth quickly). Oh, this is
outiagcous for a staid September morning. Actually, as
he lies in bed, here's a sunbeam jumping about right on
Joe Flotsam's nose. His blinds are up and the windows
open, and that sunbeam has come right in, and is
shining on old Joe's nose, as though it considered his
proboscis the proper place for a halo.
Joe was an old "salt" whose years were nearer
seventy than sixty. After a long "life on the ocean
wave," he had returned to Audley Cove, his birthplace,
to end his days. He had saved exactly one thousand
pounds, and enough besides to purchase an annuity of a
sovereign a week—facts of which he made no secret


whatever. In fact, a secret of any sort would have
comported ill with his honest, open, ingenuous, rough,
red, rugged,. weather-beaten face—the face with the
tender lips and kindly eyes that everybody in the place
knew so well—the face that all the children loved. He
lived all by himself in a little white cottage on the brow
of the " Brow" just beyond the town.
The sunshine was rousing up other people beside Joe
Flotsam—sunbeams were flashing upon all sorts of
windows where they couldn't get in, as though they
wanted to enter in order to tickle the sleepy occupants
into wakefulness and life. They seemed to know, those
sunbeams, that everybody ought to be up and about,
because that was going to be the biggest day for Audley
Cove that Audley Cove had ever known.
A few minutes after the sunbeam that had selected Joe
Flotsam's nose for sudden glorification had commenced
touching it up, the proprietor of that nose " tumbled
out," satisfied himself as to the exact direction of the
wind, and dressed himself—with an eye rather to the
reception of breakfast than " company." Having pre-
pared and eaten a tremendous meal, he dressed himself
again—this time with elaborate and most unusual care.
Then he sallied out.
What a lot of fishermen there were already about the
beach, and how smart they all looked! They greeted
Joe with excessive heartiness, and to every salutation he
returned one as cordial.
A general move was made towards a prominent object
on the shore just above the highest tide-mark. It was
not what (at all events at that time) could be called a
" common object of the sea-shore," I am sorry to say—
sorry, for it was a very pleasant object Such an object


whatever. In fact, a secret of any sort would have
comported ill with his honest, open, ingenuous, rough,
red, rugged,. weather-beaten face—the face with the
tender lips and kindly eyes that everybody in the place
knew so well—the face that all the children loved. He
lived all by himself in a little white cottage on the brow
of the " Brow" just beyond the town.
The sunshine was rousing up other people beside Joe
Flotsam—sunbeams were flashing upon all sorts of
windows where they couldn't get in, as though they
wanted to enter in order to tickle the sleepy occupants
into wakefulness and life. They seemed to know, those
sunbeams, that everybody ought to be up and about,
because that was going to be the biggest day for Audley
Cove that Audley Cove had ever known.
A few minutes after the sunbeam that had selected Joe
Flotsam's nose for sudden glorification had commenced
touching it up, the proprietor of that nose " tumbled
out," satisfied himself as to the exact direction of the
wind, and dressed himself—with an eye rather to the
reception of breakfast than " company." Having pre-
pared and eaten a tremendous meal, he dressed himself
again—this time with elaborate and most unusual care.
Then he sallied out.
What a lot of fishermen there were already about the
beach, and how smart they all looked! They greeted
Joe with excessive heartiness, and to every salutation he
returned one as cordial.
A general move was made towards a prominent object
on the shore just above the highest tide-mark. It was
not what (at all events at that time) could be called a
" common object of the sea-shore," I am sorry to say—
sorry, for it was a very pleasant object Such an object


had never been seen in Audley Cove before—thank God
it can be seen there now to this day. It had not sprung
up in a night —it had been gradually growing to
completion, and every day it had been watched with
eager interest. Women had brought their little children
to watch it—and had watched it themselves. The
fishermen had fallen into the habit of making the spot
which it occupied a sort of general meeting place when
they were not at work ; and all the old men who would
never go sailing and fishing any more had day by day,
all day long, burned tobacco incense before it—they had
regularly crawled to the spot and solemnly smoked and
watched from their seats on the nearest upturned boats
they could find.
It was a Life-boat House.
His companions kept a few paces behind as old Joe
drew a big key from his pocket and opened the door.
There, on a neat, new, unused carriage, stood a Life-boat
No honourable scars, no marks of hurtling storms, bore
she yet —in pride of model lines of unimpaired beauty,
in glory of bright varnish and fresh paint, she stood as
though consciously waiting in seemly dignity the coming
great ceremony which was to float her upon the
congenial element man's partial triumph over which her
comely strength represented.
(" Bully for Burdekin's father!" murmured Martin
Abbott "He can put things together.")
How lovingly those rough men eyed her, how fondly
their great, red, agile hands felt her smooth hull, and
toyed with her exquisite fittings.
Everything was there, either on board, or ranged with
true sailor-man neatness round the walls of the house—
cork life-belts, anchors and cables, grapnels and lines,


life-buoys, lanterns, rockets, and many other articles of
which landsmen never even heard the names, together
with portable or launching skids.
A commandingly given order by Joe Flotsam was
obeyed with a hearty cheer—willing hands drew the
carriage and boat out on to the beach, and arranged
everything for the launch in workmanlike fashion.
Then a signal was run up, and in response to it a
number of fishing boats and yachts began to make their
way shorewards over the glittering sea.
The morning wore on. As the clocks struck twelve
everybody seemed bound for the station. All the streets
v ere hung with flags, and a triumphal arch spanned the
entrance to the railway yard. Two gentlemen were
coming from London by the train due in at one o'clock,
representing respectively the Royal National Life-boat
Institution and the Shipwrecked Fishermen and Mari-
ners' Society.
Hark—the band of the local Volunteers ! They were
coming, merry fifes sounding, stirring drums rolling and
throbbing. Up the High Street, gay with its fluttering
banners, round the corner—there they were: and a
gallant-looking, well-set-up lot of fellows too.
After a few moments' conversation between Flotsam
and the members of the Local Board (who had all now
arrived and were expressing their appreciation of the
importance of the occasion—and their own—by breath-
ing very hard), everybody went through the trying but
inevitable ordeal of waiting.
One o clock. Train signalled. Excitement intense.
Train in. Local Board gasping. The " gentlemen from
London " promptly identified.
This was the order of the procession as it marched


from the station down to the beach. How the people
did cheer—how those flags did wave to be sure.
The Band of the local Volunteers.
The Coastguard Crew.
The Gentlemen from London.
Joseph Flotsam, between them.
The Local Life-boat Committee.
The Local Board (breathing very hard indeed).
Distinguished Individuals, unsorted.
The well-known Messrs. Tag, Rag, and Bobtail.
Very sweet and nice looked all the Sunday and day
school children on the beach as they welcomed the
processionists with a ringing cheer. There, too, were all
the teachers, and the Vicar in his robes. He, "the
gentlemen from London," Joe Flotsam, and the com-
mittee ascended a platform, while the others took up
appointed places. The official crowd was fringed by
sightseers of all sorts, shapes, and sizes.
Joe Flotsam made a speech—a more public one than
he had ever delivered in his life. For a reason which
will be sufficiently obvious directly, it was his function
formally to hand over the Life-boat to the representative
of the Life-boat Institution.
Addressing that gentleman by name, Joe said :
" Mr. J. Hee Farman. Sir. It is my pleasin' dooty
for to hand over to you this here Life-boat. All I can say
is, you're hearty welcome to it. As is well beknown, I'd
saved a annuity and a thousand pounds. I've got the
annuity still, but the thousand pounds is busted on this
Boat and the Boat-house." ( Wild cheers.)
Then his voice suddenly altered its tone.
" 1 here's a lot of us here, sir, standin' by this Boat, as
knows what shipwreck means —we know what it is that


word stands for. And we feels what we're wishin' for
when we 'umbly prays that this here Boat may bring
Hope, and Life, and Shore to many a poor sailor and
traveller who thought soon to be going down for the last
time—and, please God, it shan't be our 'ands and 'earts
as shall be back'ard in 'elping her so for to do.
(Tremendous applause, in which the speaker heartily
joined.)
" I made my money on the sea, sir—l lived on the
sea—all them what was nearest and dearest to me is
wider the sea. Now I gives to the sea this here Life-
boat, as I'm going to name after the day, and the time,
I was born on ; and the day—and the time —as I hopes
to die on. (Loud but inappropriate cheers.)
"Take this here Boat, sir—and God bless her! She's
a beauty ! (Steady, lads, or there'll be a run on artijieial
ear-drums, and a rise in the price.) She's a Boat as any
man might be proud to live near. (Cheers.)
" I've said my little whack, sir, and, thank goodness, I
ain't a public speaker to say a word more than my
feelings. Mr. Farman. Sir. I will now resoome my
silence."
Formally accepting the gift with warm-hearted words
of thanks, Mr. Farman explained that what "Mr. Joseph
Flotsam " had done was to endow Audley Cove with a
Life-boat, a boat-house, and every accessory for ever.
Whatever might become of that particular boat, Audley
Cove would nevermore be without one.
The voices of the school children rang out in a hymn
with the plaintive refrain :
" Oh ! hear us when we cry to Thee,
For those in peril on the sea."
And the waves rippled " Amen."


Then the Vicar folded his white hands and prayed,
saying finally :
" For the help of the helpless we launch this boat
upon the waters which Thou holdest in the hollow of
Thy Hand. To the cause of Humanity we dedicate her
■which is Thy cause, O Lord of earth and sea."
For the first time in Audley Cove the command was
given to man the Life-boat. In sprang the crew. Joe
Flotsam walked to the bows, where hung the im-
memorial bottle of wine. Broken by his hand, the rich
liquid bubbled over the prow. And a mighty shout
from all the people on the shore, and all the people in
the boats that clustered in the bay, proclaimed a minute
afterwards that the ceremony was over which launched
"THE CHRISTMAS EVE."
The bells are chiming from the storm-beaten Tower
of Audley Church—chiming, on Christmas Eve, the old
sweet Christmas story. But their tempest-driven echoes
—the echoes of the chimes that tell the tale of Infinite
Pity, the story of Divine Love—clash with the echoes of
another sound—the sound of Nature in her Infinite
Pitilessness, her direful Wrath—and the sound of the
wailing that is bore shoreward from the sea. The Storm
King is lashing the waters with his heavy sceptre, and
has called his myrmidon winds to their fell work of ruth
and wreck and death. They howl exultantly as they
hurl the wreck-laden billows on the shrinking shore.
They fling into the souls of the horrified crowd upon the
beach the cries of the hapless ones on board that
doomed vessel on the rocks—those men and women and
children.


The Life-boat is ready. So are her men. Already
she is moving on the skids when a quick shout is heard,
and Joe Flotsam is seen approaching.
He has aged even in the short time since that bright
September day which was so different from this wild
December night. He comes quickly, but even in the
extremity of the occasion he cannot move so quickly as
he could only a few months ago. Bleak weather has
allied itself to his weight of years, and helped to weaken
his limbs and stiffen his joints.
On he comes, straight for the Life-boat and her waiting
crew. He joins the silent men, and turns angrily to
their captain.
"Would you have gone without me, Bill Burneigh?"
Sorrowfully but firmly—so kindly but so firmly—
replies the stalwart young fisherman.
"Joe, mate," he says, "it's a toss whether we can do it
as it is. One pair of weaker arms in the boat, and we
couldn't do it. You can't come, Joe."
" I will come," is the fierce reply. " Where's the man
who will stop me ? "
"Here, Joe. I will."
And Bill Burneigh plants himself before the old man
squarely. But he holds out his hand as he speaks—
speaks very quickly.
" I must do it, Joe. I must refuse you, for 'tis my
duty. One pair of weak arms—only a couple of old
hands—and the job can't be done. Good-bye, Joe."
Joe Flotsam dashes away the offered hand, and
springs for the boat. But a shouted order rings out
from Bill Burneigh's firm lips, and the Christmas Eve
glides down into the sea. As Bill leaps on board Joe
curses him, for the bitterness of his weakness—the
weakness of a strong man grown old—fills his heart


"My Boat!" he cries—" the Boat I gave them—and
they have turned me away."
For a few minutes the boat is seen struggling in the
wild turmoil of the waves. Then for a time she dis-
appears in the blackness.
Over and over again that wailing cry:
" My Boat, and they have turned me away !"
A flash of lightning! Surely Nature rends the sky
with that vivid light in mockery of the horror of the
scene, in mockery of the woe in the eyes of those who
look upon it. There is the wreck, her wave-washed
decks crowded; there is the Life-boat, labouring
apparently in vain to gain her side ; and there, closer
in, first driven forward and then driven back, but setting
towards the pier-head, is something else. It is a life-
belt, and clinging to it are a man and a child.
Blacker the darkness after the momentary light. A
second flash !
The man has gone from the life-belt, but the child
clings to it still—tied there. First driven forward, and
then driven back, but setting still for the pier-head.
Can it be darker than ever now ?
The third flash of lightning! Close in now, though
first driven forward and then driven back, and setting
always for the pier-head—to be dashed against it or
drifted out of the Bay—the life-belt and the child are
floating still. And Joe Flotsam is swimming towards
them.
"They're both living, but there's blood on Joe Flot-
sam," said the man who threw from the pier the ropes
by means of which they drew the old man and the


young child from the water. "He struck against the
piles."
He had just had life enough to grasp, but there was
no sign of life in the scarred face now. They bore them
both to the cottage near the pier gates —Bill Burneigh's
cottage.
The life-saving work of the Christmas Eve was over,
and the captain of the crew stood beside the white bed
wherein lay Joe Flotsam. In a little cot nearer the fire
lay the boy-child he had rescued—sleeping peacefully.
But not so peacefully as Joe was soon going to sleep.
" Bill," said the captain's wife, " I've sent for the
parson."
" He'll come too late. But Joe saved the life of yon
child, and . .
The clock on the chimney-piece commenced to strike
the midnight hour.
the Child Who was born
The twelfth stroke sounded, and between the first
stroke and the last Joe died.
". . . to-day —and the CHILD Who was born
to-day to save the world will look after Joe Flotsam."






TWICE SAVED.
WITH great gravity Monitor Martin Abbott ad-
dressed the tenant of the last bed.
« Thomas Frederick Sanderson," he said, " you have to
tell to-night the concluding yarn. A heavy responsibility
is upon you."
" I'm equal to it," returned Tom Sanderson con-
fidently.
"I hope you are, Tom—l hope you are," Abbott
remarked dubiously. "But with twenty-five such
yarns as we have had spun, in this room, to beat, or
e q Ua l — for no inferior story will do for the last—all I can
say is that you have your work cut out for you. Are
you ready ? "
" Yes."
" Then ' go !'"
Sanderson began by explaining:
" The scene is the encampment of a body of British
troops during the 'Autumn Manoeuvres.' The time
is late in the evening or early at night—whichever
way you like to put it. Inside the tent of Sergeant-
Major Rippon, seated in easy attitudes around him, are
five or six other 'non-coms.' It is Rippon vho is
speaking. He is telling his comrades how the Colours of
the good old 47th were TWICE SAVED."


Ensign Travers lost them. I brought them back.
Sister Grace saved them a second time, and I did salute
that Sister of Mercy whose appearance you smiled at as
she passed by the camp, and if she passed me a thousand
times I should salute her a thousand times, in memory
of what that other black-dressed Sister did. She saved
them a second time. The Colours of the 47th Regi-
ment
It was at Inkermann. Very cold and gloomy was the
dawn of that fifth of November«of which so many gallant
fellows never saw the sunset, and a thick and cold and
gloomy fog hung over the camp. Muffled in the misty
veil, the enemy's guns boomed an awful warning of the
unexpected fight Then the drums throbbed and the
trumpets sounded—guns were limbered and chargers
mounted, and swords and rifles and bayonets grasped in
eager haste, as from tent to tent, from man to man, rang
the cry, " The Russians are on us ! "
Almost before we had time to arm and form, we
heard the solid tramp of marching men, and saw, through
the yellow mist, closing in around us the grey-coated
masses of the foe. Then it was bayonet to bayonet,
sword to sword, man to man.
In such a fight as fell to the 4/th's share that day,
hours pass like minutes, and how long we had been
fighting before we lost the Colours I don't know. But I
know we had been getting fewer and fewer. We had
managed to keep pretty well together, close to the
Colours carried by Ensign Travers, but many had been
beaten back, and many a poor comrade had lost the
number of his mess. At last only eighty or a hundred
of us remained together, when a mounted officer dashed
up crying—
" Look out, 47th —the enemy's cavalry is on you !"


Even as he shouted we heard the thunderous thud of
hoofs upon the turf, and the jingling of spurs and bits.
A moment afterwards they were close upon us—a small
but solid square kneeling round the Colours. A volley
emptied many a saddle, but like a whirlwind they were
on us. Our square was broken, and the Russian troopers
rode in—rode on us, and over us. Sword in one hand
and the Colours in the other, grasped as with the grasp
of death, his crisp curly hair fringing his bared and
smoke-grimed forehead, a passionate light glaring on his
face, stood Travers. A couple of months before he was
the pet of ladies' drawing-rooms —a curled and scented
darling of the parks and Rotten Row—a budding dandy
with a fine taste in gloves and neckties. But there was
no fear in his eyes, no trembling of his lips, no shaking of
his hands, as he stood there facing death. He had grown
since then. He was "a man now !
Only for a second he stood, for like a lightning flash
fell a sabre, cutting a ghastly wound across his head.
He fell, and the man who smote him carried off the
Colours!
With a red rain of blood dripping from his brows, he
raised his wounded head from the sodden grass, and
stretched blindly out his twitching, eager hands.
" Bring me back the Colours ! "
All around him lay helpless the faithful fellows who
would have died a dozen deaths to place that flag in his
hands again—wounded, dying, dead —never to " receive
cavalry charge" any more. Who was there to bring
back the blazoned silk that bore the record of our
regiment's honour ? Only one man remained unwounded
of the square over which the Russian horsemen had
ridden—that man myself


Again the cry, again with the same agony and
despair:
" Bring me back the Colours, or"—reaching out for his
broken sword—" kill me ! "
But before the words were finished I had leaped upon
a riderless steed hard by, and thrust the jagged point of
a bayonet into his side.
On, on after the flying troops —a mad, wild chase to
win the Colours back or die. A sudden fire from the
French (for our allies were now in the field) played upon
the Russian horsemen, and the sight of a British cavalry
regiment, preparing to charge, dispersed them in every
direction, and the man who had taken the Colours—our
Colours—was cut off from his comrades. Wild with
hope, I tore on—nearer and nearer, stride by stride, foot
by foot, to the man I pursued—till at length we were
level. A short, sharp struggle, and the Colours were
mine, the Russian trooper was dead. Then I rode back,
and put them, torn and tattered and bloodstained, into the
hands of Ensign Travers.
o
Some one was kneeling by his side, bathing and
dressing the poor boy's wounded head, staunching the
blood which was pouring down his fair young face,
wiping it—Oh, so tenderly, so gently—from the brave
blue eyes and away from the white, pain-shivering lips
which said so fervently as his eager fingers took the
Colours from me, " God bless you, Sergeant-major! "
Her eyes were full of pity, but they didn't turn from
the sight of his gaping wound ; her face was full of holy
light like an angel's, pure and delicate, but it didn't
flinch, though it whitened, at sight of the blood ; her
hands were frail and very small, but they didn't tremble
as she bound up the torn flesh. Under her black and


ugly dress beat the bravest heart of all the brave hearts,
living and dead, on the field of Inkermann.
She was a Sister of Mercy. She was Sister Grace.
Travers got hold of my hand. Poor boy —he —I don't
like to tell you—he kissed it!
Looking at me as he did so, and feeling something
falling upon him, he cried out in sudden terror:
" Sergeant-major, you're wounded ! "
" I know I am, sir," I said ; and fell by his side as
helpless as he was.
What! what! what is that? Two Russian cavalry
officers are riding for us—they must have seen the flag
re-captured, and they're coming to take it from us once
more. What do they care for the risk they run ?—the
Colours of the English 47th Regiment are worth any
risk!
Look, look! They're spurring—on they come, on
over the bodies of friend and foe—on, on—coolly,
steadily on. Look at the triumph in their eyes—look at
the light in their faces, the smile on their lips.
We're cut off from help—we're both wounded—we
can't fight; we can't rise. Curse them ! they know it
Their tired chargers are spurred again, and now they're
on us!
Travers clutched his splintered sword, and tried to
struggle to his knees.
" The Colours are theirs again," he moaned ; " but they
shall kill me for them !"
•" No, they shan't 1"
Oh, the light on the pale face of Sister Grace as she
said it! Snatching them from the arms of Ensign
Travers, she tore the Colours from the broken flagstaff,


and bound them round her body—folded them tightly
round her heart 5 and the crucifix she wore around her
neck gleamed upon them. Then she took a few steady
paces fi om our bodies, and halted as the Russian officers
drew rein.
" They are mine, and you shall not take them !"
I can see it all again, just as my straining eyes saw it
then. I can see her face, and her black nun's dress with
the Colours wrapped round it, and I can see those two
uplifted sabres above her gallant head.
" They are mine, and you shall not take them from
me!"
How long it was those two threatening sabres were
upheld to strike I don't know; —nor how long it was
before that strange look came into the fierce faces of the
two Russiansbut I know that all the time she didn't
flinch. I know that she fixed steady eyes on the angry
men who grasped the shining blades, and that with
steady hands she pressed the Colours tighter and closer
to her heart. And I know that none the less were those
two officers of the enemy's cavalry brave soldiers and
gallant gentlemen when they lowered their sabres and
turned and rode away—not from a park of artillery, not
from a cavalry charge, not from a bristling line of British
bayonets—but from Sister Grace and— her Colours !
\ es, chums ; I won the Victoria Cross. And Sister
Grace ? The veneration of every man, the love of every
soldier, who hears her story—and the highest place for
ever in the history of the 47th Regiment of the Line.
As Sergeant-Major Rippon finished, loud and clear,
over the white-tented plain rang the bugler's sharp notes
sounding the
"LIGHTS OUT!"


"' Here endeth the twenty-fourth story,'" said Martin
Abbott
" Which has been the best of the whole lot ? " queried
Eaglebeak.
" Let's put that to the vote," suggested Bob Newbegin.
" A good idea," agreed the monitor. "So that
nobody's opinion shall be prejudiced by the opinions of
another, let everyone write on a piece of paper the title
of the yarn which he considers to be the best of the
twenty-four stories told in this dormitory since I started
the idea of having tales told in regular order."
A candle was produced from under somebody s mat-
tress, and lit. A pencil was found and a sheet of paper
torn into twenty-four pieces, and distributed. Then the
pencil travelled from bed to bed, till every boy had
written down the title of the story he considered the
best The twenty-four slips of paper were handed to
Martin Abbott, who read what was written on each, and
announced the result of the polling.
" The selections number twenty-four," he said slowly.
"The two fellows who told about 'The Hidden Gold'
between them have voted each for his own half. Counting
their selections as two, every boy has voted for his own
story! "
An "eloquent silence" followed. It was broken
the voice of Eaglebeak, who made a proposition that was
immediately carried into effect.
"We oughtn't to forget," he suggested, " that we owe
the spinning of these splendid yarns to Martin Abbott
Let's give him three smothered cheers under the bed-
clothes ! "


Selections from Jurrotbs' JTcm Books.
BLACK BEAUTY.
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A HORSE.
120 Entirely New Illustrations. 4to, Cloth Elegant,
5l- ( Postage 4\d.)
" Had the Society
for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals
published this, we
should say it had
published its best
work."— R evievj.
"It would be diffi-
cult to conceive one
more admiiably suit-
ed to its pu-pose."—
A l oncon/omi ist.
" The story is sim-
ply told and cleverly
put together, and
while it may be read
with pleasure and
rrofit by educated
people, it is an excel-
lent book to put into
the hands of stable-
boys, or any wh i
have to do with
horses.''
Essex Standard.
"As a book for
young people it will
he popular for its
picturesque illustra-
tions of all possible
aspects of a horse s
career."
Ipswich Journal
Of this book 180,000 have been printed in this country alone. it hi, also
been very extensively reproduced in the United States, and Editions have been
published in France and Italy.
The present 4to Edition has been produced at great expense. It contains
120 Illustrations by that eminent Artist, JOHN EEER, ESQ., facsimiled by
the half-tone process, with beautiful results. It is artistically bound, and
will no doubt be highly appreciated as a suitable gift book by many of
the thousands who have been delighted with it in its cheaper form ; for as the
Editor of The Animal lb or Id says, 44 The more often we have turned over the
leaves of ' Black Beauty,' the greater has been our delight."
The Popular Editions at 2/- and 1/- are still on Sale.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


1 / |
; -M# ■
* '
■ \ ( , ■ • -,• '.'• 7 '". -
B . - V ' ' " " ?"'••/ ... ;>•'" J&~.^, ■■'.:■%
i -** : ' -* " V • ;•", 0-: : 'ti
> ■ . " • %
. -a
■ - . _' - - ' .- ..i ■■■ -: ■ ■ -" ■■ ..i ; -at«
Selections from Jarrot&s' TTern 15oof;s.
BEAUTIFUL JOE.
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A DOG.
BY MARSHALL SAUNDERS.
Illustrated, 3/- (Post 4£d.) Gilt Edges, 3/6.
The Countess of Aberdeen writes of the Canadian Edi'ion of "Beautiful Joe":—"I am
sure that all lovers of animals \v. 11 welcome this book with eagerness as being eminently
calculated to spread that knowledge and thought for dumb beasts which will lead to
their humane treatment.''
"The narrative is admirab'y conveyed and interesting from every point of view. If we
had our wish and our way, the book should be in every school and in every house. — The
World.
" The book is charmingly got up, and would make an excellent school-prize.''— British
Weekly.
" It is a capital story, and is certain to be popular among all lovers of animals." — Sheffield
Daily Telegraph.
" For Sunday-s-bool libraries and for reading alike in families, it is a most appropriate
volume, sure to draw out the sympathies of young readers to th ir four footed companions,
and to teach them valuable lessons as to the right and kind ticalment of dumb creatures."
The Freeman.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


r _ ..
i. r/ A
i v
\ M
,1—.—
Selections from jarroli>s' Hem 2500f;5.
BOOKS OF ADVENTURE FOR BOYS.
Crown Bvo., Illustrated, Handsomely Bound, Cloth, Olivine Edges.
Price 3s. 6d. ( Postage 4id.)
After School. By ROBERT OVERTON. With 24 Illus-
trations by REIXHOLD THIELE. 2nd Edition. 3s. 6d.
Twenty-four complete short stories of
school-life, home-life, and later-life, deal-
ing largely with the experiences and
adventures of the two boys Higgins and
their companions, the scrapes they got
into, and how they got out of them,
ith twenty-four full-page illustrations.
'' Schoolboys never tire of readirg stories in
which their fellows play the chief parts, ar.d they
will find a delightful collection of fresh tales in
'After School,' hv Mi. Robert Overton, who
knows the English public schoolboy so well
that it is at tirr.es difficult to believe that he is
not one himself at the present moment. There
are 24 stories, chiefly the work of Higgins sen.
and Higgins jun., and they are all so full of
merriment, and are all such perfect pictures of
school life that it is difficult to determine which
is the best amongst them. Birchingham Hall,
the school these two delightful boys turn topsy-
turvy, will remain a pleasant recollection long
after the stories in which they relate their many
deeds and misdeeds have been read and laid
aside.'' - The Star.
-I :ie fariniest, most en ertaining, and most w'holesome collection of stories ever written. r
—Christian Age.
" It contains a number of short stories, describing incidents of school-life, and purporting
to he the work of the boys themselves. Some of them are highly laughable."— Morning
"It is clever, and the tales amusine and serious by turns. Indeed the stories are very
suitable for boys."— Belfast Evening Telegraph.
The incidents are to'd with considerable cleverness, and there is a freshness about
the whole story that every reaoer will appreciate."— Christian World.
" We consider it as the funniest, the most entertaining, and the most wholesome collection
of stor.es for boys ever written."— Christian Age.
A book to delight all schoolboys. It is full of merriment, and of mischief, and of rattle
and go.'— Glasgow Herald.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


h f ft
| ppSjj ■
■ f
m- ■
' KII-I
Selections from 3 arr °tbs' 23°°^
BOOKS OF ADVENTURE FOR BOYS.
Crown Bm, Illustrated, Handsomely Bound, Cloth, Olivint Edges.
Price -\s 6d. ( Postage \id.)
Lights Out. By ROBERT
OVERTON. With twenty-six full-
page Illustrations by REINHOLD
THIELE. 3s. 6d.
Twenty six complete short stories,
"Told in the dark by the Boys of the
Big Dormitory —Tales of the Playground
and the Camp, of ' the Battle and the
Breeze.' of young boys and old boys,
from grave to gay, from lively to severe.
The King's Pardon; OR,
THE BOY WHO SAVED HIS FATHER.
A Story of Land and Sea. By RO-
BERT OVERTON. With twelve Illus-
trations by W. H. MARGETSON. 3/6
Being the recital of the perils and
escapes of Bart Arber in finding and
saving his convict-father, assisted by his
faithful chum Bob Simmons, A.B. Stir-
ring adventures afloat and ashore, in war
and peace, at home, in the V\ est Indies,
and the far Australian Bush.
True to the Core. By
W. C- METCALFE. Author of
" Rogues' Lland," " Steady Your Helm," &c. 3s. 6d. Illustrated
by G. GRENVILLE MANTON.
An exciting story of the trials and temptations of a boy during his first
voyage at sea. shewing that true religion is the foundation of all true manli-
ness and nobleness of character.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


Selections from jfarrotbs' Hem 25oofcs,
BOOKS OF ADVENTURE FOR BOYS.
Crown Svo., Illustrated, Handsomely Bound, Cloth, Olivine Edges,
Price 3s. 6d. (Postage 4\d.)
Afloat in a Gipsy Van.
By E. R. SUFFLING. Author of
il Jzthou; or, Crusoe Lfe in the
Channel Islands," &c. With beau-
tiful Illustrations by PAUL HARDY.
3s. 6d.
Being the wanderings and adventures
of three lads under the care of one,
"Uncle Rue." It shows how a Gipsy
Van is made to float safely down the East
Coast and across the North Sea to
Holland, and recounts the experience
of the quartette both on sea and land.
Rex; OR, WINNING THE VIC-
TORIA CROSS. By L. THOMPSON.
Illustrated by W. B. WOLLEN, R.I.
An intricate plot, full of adventures
by sea and land. Thrilling account of
the rescue of the captive heroine—a unique and unprecedented wedding—the
young couple taken prisoners—court martial of the young "General."
Though the hero, through a mistake runs away, he takes with him the tender
home-training which in its unconscious power over others constitutes the deep
under-current of pathos through the story, showing how there are more
ways than one of winning the Victoria Cross.
Adventures in Texas. BY GRACE STEBBING. illus-
trated by PAUL HARDY. 2nd Edition. 3s. 6d.
Adventures in Texas," being a graphic description of the experiences
r u- } ■ co | onist on l^e . shores of the Mexican Gulf, with some account
of his friends and enemies. The book is especially designed for readers
from twelve to eighteen, but many older folks may find interest in its
numerous incidents.
£ 'uU Cap ' tal boolc for boys wh 'ch we are glad to commend to our young readers "—John
an'rlTh 113 ! IS a capita l ' for b 2 ys - The incidents of the story are deeply interesting,
and the lessons inculcated a-e such as we should like all 'our boys' to learn. The illustra-
tions are really good. Christian Age.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10, and 11, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls,


; -■ — —tJ
Selections from Jctrrolbs' Hem 25oofcs.
ATTRACTIVE BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
Handsomely Bound, Cloth Boards, Illustrated, 3/6 each.
Old Caleb's Will. By Miss E. ARMSTRONG. With
Twelve Beautiful Illustrations by G. DEMAINE HAMMOND. 3s. 6d.
The hero, Robert Cardew, meets with
a friend in need, and long years after is
able in return to hold out the hand of
friendship to the prodigal son of his
benefactor. He and his sister Janet for-
get themselves in their brave effort to save
Their young brother and sisters from the
consequences of their father's self-indul-
gence.
"Miss Armstrong's latest work is, in short,
of such excellent quality, that it must be read
vith pleasure, and can scarcely be laid down
without regret.''— Daily Telegraph.
'"Old Caleb's Will' is full of interesting situa-
tions and inci ents from beginning to end; and
there is an ease about the style which is very
refresb ng.' Cornish Post.
A Charge to Keep. By
P. A. BLYTH, Author of " Paul
Porter and His Brothers," &c. Illus-
trated by PAUL HARDY. 3s. 6d.
"This is a powerful, earnest piece of fict'on,
of strong and sustained interest, abounding in
lessons to be laid to heart " - Christian Age.
"A Charge to Keep" is a book with
a high ideal. It is based upon the maxim
that it is love that saves. The reader's
attention is kept unflagging from the first
page to the last. The book contains
some clever sketches of character, the
religious tone is healthy and cannot fail
to do good, especially to young people.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane, E.G.
CJ all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


Selections from jurrotbs' Jiero Books
ATTRACTIVE BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS.
Handsomely Bound, Cloth Boards, Illustrated, 3/6 each.
The Maid of London
Bridge. 3s. 6d.
This is an historical romance dealing
mainly with "Old London Bridge," and
events that happened on and near it,
and also with Norwich and the neigh-
bourhood during Kett's rebellion. The
story being full of adventures will prove
acceptable to young readers, while adults
will find in it accurate pictures of the
manners, customs, modes of life, and
incidents of the period treated.
"This story is full of life and movement, and
deals with those stormy seen s of rebellion and
unrrst which were enacted about the midd e of
tde sixteenth century. Full of exciting incident
and historical detail, and brightened by the
glamour of the inevitable ' affair of the heart
as the title sufficiently indicates, the story can-
not but p ove attractive, and even instructive
to the general reader." Eastern Daily frcss.
" It is just such a story as Harrison Ainsworth
mieht have written " — The Scotsman.
The Wild Ruthvens. By
dCURTIS YORKF.. Author of '■' Du-
ley;' "Once," "Hush," "A Ro-
mance of Modern London," &c.
Illustrated by PAUL HARDY. 3s. 6d.
A story illustrating the mistakes, failures
and successes of a family of unruly but
warm-hearted boys and girls. They are
ultimately softened and civilized by the
influence of an invalid cousin, Dick
Trevanion, who comes to live with them.
He recovers, and, years later, marries
the most rebellious and unruly (formerly) of all the family, Nancie Ruthven.
. ' enchanting work. The s'ory runs on with happy blithesome tread to the end, which
is reached all too soon."— St. Stephen s Review.
The book is most amusing."— Manchester Guardian.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and u, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls•


% him,
Selections from jarrotbs' View Soofes.
POPULAR BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRuS.
Uniformly Bound, Small 4to. Cloth Elegant, Price 3'6.
Shireen and Her Friends. The Autobiography of
a Show Cat. By GORDON-STABLES, M D., CM., R.X. Illustrated
by HARRISON WEIR. Uniform with " Sable and White ." 3s. 6d.
••Sable and White" and "Shireen" are two of the author's own favourite
books and written in his best vein of pathos and humour. This form of
autobiography is eminently readable and devoured by children. The author s
well-known love for the lower animals is well-shown throughout.
Wooing of Osyth. A
Story of the Eastern Counties
in Saxon Times. By KATE T.
SIZER. Author of " A vice Ten-
tt ant's Pilgrimage, ' " Die ken o'
Greenwood " &c., &c- 4S Illus-
trations by M. M. BLAKE.
3s. 6d.
The heroine is St. Osyth, of the
famous priory in Essex. Betrothed
to King Sighere, on the wedding day
she refuses to marry him. He en-
dows her with the convent, where
afterwards she is martyred by the
Danes. Sighere marries Osyth's cousin
and fights under King Alfred. The
scenes are laid at Ely, Bures, in Suffolk,
St. Osyth, Wantage, Athelney.
"As a presentation volume for boys and
girls it de«eives and will doubtless attain wide
popularity. 1 ' — Arm is A Observer.
11 This very readable boolc should become a favorrnte. It is illustrated very fully by
M. M. Blake, whose work is uniformly excellent.' — Northern U hig.
"Readers who like to feel as if they were sympath'sing nobly with beauty in distress,
will read the book with some enjoyment."— The Scotsman.
•• Boys and girls will enjoy the book, and be the better for reading it. .1 tethodist
Recorder.
" An excellent book for girls."— Glasgow Herald.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane.
0/ all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


*>sr • 1
Selections from jarrolbs' Hem 25oofiS.
POPULAR BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS.
Uniformly Bound, Small 4to, Cloth Elegant. 3s. 6d.
Lord Lynton's Ward. By HELENA BROOKS. Author
of " Jack's Watchword., " "In the Shadow of the World"Bessie's
Mission," " The I ictoiy Won," &c With 36 illustrations by PAUL
HARDY. 2nd Edition. Small 4to. Cloth Elegant. 3s. 6d.
"Lord Lynton's Ward" is the story of a little boy who, at an early
age. was left to the guardianship of a cold stern man. whom, though all
respected, none could love. Norman Rosslyn's sole •im was to do right, and
how he did this, even under circumstances where many an older boy would
have tailed, the reader will find out if he peruses the story.
" We have no hesitation in placing this charming
booh in the hands of the children, and we corcialiy
recommend it as a most suitable gift-book."
Schoolmaster.
" Just the th-ng to place in the hands of young
peop.e."— The Slews agent.
"The young f lk who do not grieve, but rather
are glad, when in a story there is a parallel to
some otner story they have enjoyed, will say that
this is one of the right sort, as their interest is
maintained from the Deginning to the end.''
Norwich Me> cury.
" Singe Mrs. Hodgson Burnett wrote ' Little
Lord Fauntleroy' few more pleasing children's
books have seen the light ttan 'Lord Lyi tou's
Mard,' a s ory by Helena Brovks, just issued by
Messrs. Jarrold & Sous."
"The illustrations are plentiful and well-
des'gned."—The Sun.
" Miss Brooks' charming picture of juvenile pre-
cocity in the person of Lord Lynton's wee ward, a
li« tie fellow of some eight year*, the soul of honour
and tru'h, is intensely pathetic, and powerfully
stimulates the better part of one's nature. Our
young friends will, we feel sure, find the story
irresistibly attractive, ard tske keen delight in
Paul Hardy's beautiful illustrat.ons."— Christian
n*e-
Among the many valuable books for young people, this is one of the best. Its admirable
story is told in graceful style, ard the type of boyhood exhitiiea in it is ahegtther attractive
and noble the very pattern indeed, which a father would wish to commend to his sons."—
Aberdeen. Daily Tree Press.
" A good healthy tone runs through the story."— Glasgow Herald.
' It is an attractively written story for boys and girls."— Scottish Leader.
London: Jarrold and sons, 10, and 11, Warwick Lane, C.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bo.kslulls.


.


Mr I; M !§' • H1 k
'
-jy Jgf- t|^T^ f \ ■ .Hfrr {Vj
883 • 8
' ', # ■ "' . V a'jfl+L " V ■ «#* -**
BSfr -' 9 3. »V "3S f* §4'5 -4 :> • •"g-^
gpPflEr .
\ i
Jmsl -




