

Sf Theory (f Sn n Life in retail in to
(T Planetary . jj
(*u s"sr
% A. M. OAMEEON. P
i ?
Printed by: SAMUEL CARMICHAEL, “News” Office,




-\*s .
Preface,
In explanat'on of the manner in which this subject is rendered, I fed
it necessary to state that it is portion of a *>cene from a play.
Why a would-be dramatist before you in this poor painphleted
garb as a theorist of the Universe is attributable to the fact of there
bein'? 116 admittance to the council chambers of theatrical managers ex-
cept on business ; and also because a gentleman in this country who is
high y as ociated in astronomical pursuits.was pleased to favourably
count.ni. nee t, and suggested to me that it might not prove uninteres*
ing to the gen ral public.
The quoumon heading the appendix renders it unnecessary to enter
into any prefatory detail relative to ic, beyond an expression of regret
for the necessitous imposition upon our abilities to do within the possi-
bility areas of what could be done.
Tee Auteoe.
Walgett,
October Ist, 1888.
* * * b
gold S. J. Kirby’s George-st., Sydn y.


LiffM Phenomena.
Scene. Night Time.
Enter Lord Chumley alias Jim Laxter, new chum stockman,
Tom Somers, manager of cattle station.
Tom—l say Jim, can you enlighten me at ad of what they stars
scoot about the sky so much are said to be ?
Ehumley—Well no, I cannot. lam sorry Tom
I’m no authority from which to glean
Facts of the Science of Astronomy,
For my own knowledge of that, noble branch
Is very limited. But tell me Tom
your own ideas of the meteor light,
Tom—Well I’m hanged if I know Jim.
I’m such a dunderhead I daren’t speak.
Th’ most I dare do is to think a hit.
But I’ve been thinking it might be a fiako
Of fiery substance from a burning world—
Become detached—like and gone flaring out.
But no. that’s too unfeasible! It could’nt bo
Chumley—No Tom. The law of gravity forbids
Such an occurrence while the world’s mass
Retains cohesiveness.
Although if there were from volcanic depths
Huge messes hoisted with such power of force
As to give brilliancy in their ascent
For some few seconds to our wondering grze,
Then what seemed to us to dissolve in nigh£
Would l>e the fact of their descending to
From where they came from. But .that notion’s crude.
And has no basis of researc h beyond
What simply proves it an absurdity.
* * * * •»
Perhaps the the ory most clear to us—
At least the one most feasible to me—
Is that accounting for all errant lights
Bv the disruption of a burning world,
Whose masses gravitate as they are caught
While whirling through immensity of space,
And our fair Earth goes angling it seems,
And lands a few of them, all those (hat have
Sufficient density or power of weight
To pierce the density surrounding her,
That is, (he air or atmosphere in which
She is enveloped, and through which they pass
With such velocity, that fire ensues
From force of friction.
The lighter masses- (he mere grain and dust—
Rink in proportion to their weight, that is,
Float in proportion as the air is dense ;
And there the lesser to the greater tend


Re- olve in rank sedition, as it were—
nv r the glories of our mother Earth—-
Tn fact to cogitate another sphere
Of greater empire and a mightier away
In their embodiment, oblivious quite
'Of all the big policemen about.
Those elemental ollicers of air
That we call vortices disperse them, to
Their great disquietude and our delight,
Lift them to great al itudes ; and then
All the additional density acquired
While in their state of buoyancy, is speed
430 much accumlative as in heights they are
Above the regions of that buoyancy,
To where descending, there again ensues
The trail of friction on the wing of speed,
Apparent to us in the meteor light.
i>ut this effect would be produced the same
By the eruptive agencies within
The vast volcanoes of the atmosphere
That arc experienced to us by winds
Or air in motion, as in thunderstorms ;
While earth volcanoes we perceive by shocks,
Or matter moving as eruptions tend ;
And thunders are but the internal shock
Of air volcanoes, as eruptions are
External evidence of earthly ones.
Thus:—an eruption in the upper air
Breaks the air stratum or thin layer of air,
And belches out gre.-t pyramids of tire
No less than wholesale lightning in fact—
W hile the concussion in the air so caused
Vibrates to us, and depresses on
The under strata or thick layers of air,
Air currents as more commonly they’re termed,
And these depressions are the curse of storms
And calms, coi relatively great as are •
The air convulsions that so causes them.
I bus : —a great storm at a given point
Of the earth’s surface is a stated calm
At another point correspondingly great;
And all the rumbling noises that we hear.
And christen thunders, are made simply plain
By saying airquakes that rift fissures in
The layers or densities of air through which
Run the electric fluids or the fires
We christen lightnings. In simple truth,
The earth we walk on is the air «e breathe;
A nd Nature’s cunning is in simply all
As simply treated in the all we know
Of all that’s knowable.


F'liVft’rial matters in the chaos rrmdo
Bv air volcanoes are dispersed throughout
The ambient rev ions of the earth, not forced,
But. horn * like feathers ;
And as in nearness to the earth they’re placed,
And in what state of density they are,
Fo the earth draws thorn, and so they resist,
And that resistance we ppvee.'vo in streaks
Of tire th it varying fr mi faint to strong
Pro -1 rim the density that causes them.
Sub-reml matters have no power to spread
Out in the currents of the air, because
Air force is greater as it nears the earth :
Nor leave these matters got the power to rise,
Because (he counter currents of the air
Prevent them. Likewise in a quiescent state,
Sub-aerial matter would sink slowly down
In its proportion of increasing weight.
Till from the radius altitude swept off
In lessening curvatures to mother Earth,
An ignominious fire hall, no more.
Meanwhile the particles and dust all tend
To where the rarity of air is most,
Where it is oblate or flattened down,
As at the poles, then particles and dust
Pass through the same vicissitudes, as do
Their bigger brethren. The rustling sounds
There l»eard in unison with lights
Are but the in ises made in the descent,
And proof that air height in the frigid zones
Is less by far than in the temperate ones ;
Still less as nearer to the Pules we get.
In like degrees is Gravitation less
And power of Magnetism more and nm-c
Which caust s there those phantasies of light
From the aid -lerial substances being drawn
Through the gyrations of the Polar air.
p is in these gyrations that are seen
The finest of all spectacle's of light,
Or Light Phenomena. Aurora? named,
Put more significant the Polar lights.
These I ghts depend entirely upon how
The earth’s position to the. sun may be,
And how and where the particles of dust
May in the ait he floating at the time
The sun beams glance upon their'varying forms,
Aurora? landscape is the only form
Of these phenomena we see from here,
Which the Aurora Australis we name.
Put of the myriads it is only one
That gladden eyesight in the w ondering world


They as numerous in the Polar air
As the gyrations of that air may be
In strength and number.
Air is the ambient properties of earth,
And all is of it what is in it seen.
The lovely spectacle of Eve and Dawn
Is when air strata are right angled to
The rays of sunlight, and when that occurs
Is when the Sun in the horizon dips,
Or rises out of as the case may be.
The deep rich tintedness of eve and dawn
Depends on force of the air currents—
Just as they may happen to be. or strong,
So are the sunsets in their varyjngs from
Light amber mellow to deep golden hue,
Blent in the vermeil of chameleon air,
And the cerulean atmosphere we name
The sky or heaven’s, is the boundary line
Of air depicted in the serial blue
Upon the background of unfathoraed space,
O the great glories of the earth and air !
How man can know them and demur at God,
Is the new fangled fashion to sound fool
By every way that he may write his name,
In every way he may articulate ! There Torn,
You have my notions on the theme
Of all the aerial and sub-serial lights,
* * * ♦ *


Appendix.
a We require for any theory which shall he accepted as generally true
that while it shall explain * * * connection between streams of bodied
producing falling stars and certain special comets, it shall also be able
to account for all comets as possibly associated with meteor streams,
and for all meteor streams as possibly associated with comets. No
general theory of comets and meteors can possibly be accepted which,
fails when thus tested, trying though the test may be.
From E. A. Proctor,
Popular Science Monthly ,
May 188.7.


IPlieory of Sa:i Life in relation to Planetary
We all know that the sun is the centre of our planetary system
which implies all life therein to be dependant on him for light and
melioration of heat.
We understand by the word centre that it is the point from where a
circle is described, and by the word circle that it is that which is dis*
tribed from a given point. What a circle is to its centre, then our
planetary system must be to the sun, inasmuch as he is called the
centre of that system ; and as a centre must be fixed before a circle can
be disoribed, he must therefore be the elder body and governing power,*'
so the relationship between that power and the star, or planetary world
is the true starting point. What I mean by the term relationship is,
Is it by the affinity, implied by the word “gravitation”? Inputting
this question I have not forgotten what gravitation is. But the fact
that comets in the domain of scientific research remain phenomena is
only smudging our higher intelligence with the sweat of herculean
drudgery in persisting to maintain, that a universal power which in the
Universe is mocked to scorn, as witnessed in that portion of it detail-
ing the eccentricity of comets in our system. The meaning of the
term “ gravitation,” is altogether too loosely applied, and as pr ofessor
Huxley has put it is a record, not a reason ; th it is, is a record, in its
passive state, but in its active a reason, because activity implies reason.
I am not aware that the relationship between the sun and planetary
system is explained in any other way than that afforded us by the term
‘•Law of Gravitation. It seems to me to be given and taken as expres-
sive of all the governing powers by which our sun’s influence is ex-
ercised on, and in all planetary life. Take the meaning of the word
“ gravitation” in its true sense, and it implies no such powers as I un-
derstand are attributed to it. Gravitation is concentrated Magnetism,
that is, the bulk or body of matter wound on the magnetic pole by the
rotatory and repellant, therefore concentrative power of Magnetism.
This establishes gravitation as a power to be within the limits of
material planitary life, and that power actively, is the counter of the
ejective power of volcanic force, and passively is the record of decay.
I must now refer to some of Mr. Proctor’s statements, and in doing
so I wish it to be understoo I that I am only quoting them in the spirit
in which they are rendered by him. He svys we must not forget that
the sun is a star, and continuing therefrom speaks of our earth in her
“sun-like days,” from which is to be reasonably inferred that the Sun,
the centre of our planetary system, will, in some period of futurity bo
as the earth is now, and tint chain of reasoning however excellent from
a negatively placed point of view, is from an affirmative one, of no
validity beyond determining the next question in the order of that
chain And that system is the planetary life of the sun revolving in ?
It is quite obvious that is the wrong track because it is going away
from the earth which to us is the immediate and primary basis of
material life, and also one of the primary bodies revolving icund a com-
mon centre within the radius of which from our point of is de-
monstrable the phenomena of all other systems and therefore to pass in-
to them out of our own ii only gizmg into interstellar space, only


wondering in the approximate when we ought to be more com mend.ably
endeavouring in the fact. Determining then the solar system a minia-
ture of the Universe, I maintain that the Universe as detailed to us
by the Solar System is a finite subject, and no mystery other than is oc-
casioned by the mists of conjectural matter in which it is enveloped by
the over-reaching of scientifically applied methods which wrought within
the Law of Gravitation or material planetary life must necessarily be
subject to that law, and therefore when applied beyond it, are conse-
quently found wanting in effect to determine what Universal Phe-
nomena are as intelligibly noted to our understanding in the nomen-
clature of comets, Magellan Clouds, Milky Way, Nebulae, Sun Spots,
Markings on Planets, Plan ts Phases, and Rings of Satrn. Most
humbly purposing this theory then to an explanation of these phe-
nomena. and still remembering Mr. Proctor’s statement, we will povr
pass to the question of air height, of tho aerial system of planets,
It is well to remember that air is the ambient propel ties of earthj
that there is not one grain of the v istness of the earth not represented
in its aerial system. Bub it must also be remembered that the air ia
continually passing in and out of the earth, otherwise this would bfc *
very misleading statement; because taken literally as the ait from every
grain of matter, it would leave no sustenance in the earth, therefore
would be the death oi all animil, vegetable, ami mineral life. Air
height conjecture ranges from about twenty to five hundred miles, tho
former considered the approximate. Now is it a reasonable thing that
either twenty or five hundred miles can represent the air system of a
solid compact mass whose diameter is eight thousand miles"? It is for
the mathematical scientist to determine the approximate from this basis,
duly considering the air pressure occasioned by the envelope of the
earth’s Etherisrn, but it is perfectly safe to say that it is thousands of
miles high—higher of course in the Torrid Zones, and lesser in degrees
from there to the Poles.
We must now return to Gravitation, remembering Mr. Proctor’s
statement that the sun is a star, “ and can eject matter from his in-
terior with velocities sufficing to carry such matter for ever away from
him.’ He goes on to say : —“ What our Sun with his vaster energies
can do ejectively to overcome the withdrawing power of his own much
mighter mass we may well believe what our earch in her sumlike days
could do to overcome the attraction of her smaller mass/’ Now the at-
traction or power which that ejective force would have to overcome is
Gravitation. And we all know that it has not been ‘overcome, Tho
proof is within ourselves. After great physical or mental strain, what
remains of our vigour but the lifeless, shattered, and decaying remnants
of an extinct force. This proves conclusively that the conjecture will
not bear any reasonable investigation from our star basis, and the Sun
being a star in a proportion of magnitude, to the, earth as is only
rendered vaguely conceivable, to us by the statement that it would taka
nearly 1|- millions of Earths to make a globe about as large as the Sun,
is it reasonable that what the earth could not do the sun can, that is
eject matter through his immense anial system and the Ether of
Space in which all planets are enveloped ! It is impossible. We will
not trouble about this conjecture any further than to say that every


link of the chain of evidence that could he forced would demonstrate
wore and more clearly the fallacy of any sbatem; it assart’ irS ju life to
he no more than that of any other planet within that Sun’s system. I
assert that the Sun is not a star in anysan.se of the word as intelligibly
rendered to us from the Helds of either ancient or modern scienuti ; re-
search. Neither is it to he regirded as *• a globe of the fiercest lire” in-
asnuish as we have no reliable evidence either by analogy or otherwise
through which to regird it as such. The enormity of the Sun’s heat is
a myth. We have no heat from the Sun, light only. Heat is an in-
herent property of material life, and the misapprehension of its being
generated by the Sun’s influence in our system arises from the coinci-
dence of our being more susceptible to its presence in the rays of the
Sun, therefore we say the Sun generates heat while unwittingly exper-
iencing the qualifying property of his benilicent power in and around
us anielorutiug the conditions of an entire system to the necessities of
our being. And now for the chain of reasoning to our earth level, the
application of which to all other planets must necessarily be the same.
Every planet is surrounded by what I have termed the Ether of
Space which is the boundary lino of material planetary life described in'
the aerial hue that is commonly known by the name of the “ bine sky.”
Remember that there is Space and Ether of Space. Taking the word
Space in its very literal sense there is no room for such a thing in the
Universe ; bub as a distinction from the Ether of Space, it implies that
portion of Infinitude bounded therefrom by the planetary life of our
Solar System. And what is the relationship of the Ether of Space to
planetary life ? It is the buoyancy within which planetary life is en-
veloped, and floating on the great sea of Infinitude. The next question
is: Where does the Ether of space come from? for from where it comes
the planets must also come, inasmuch as they are enveloped by and
floating within it. And tins now brings us to the question of—Where
and what is the Sun ? The Sun is in the Field of the Ether of space,
the manufactory of planet life —-the great workshop of the Upiverse,
and he is the representative guarantee for all work turned out of the
establishment. And how is planetary life turned out? Planets are noi
shot out, but are passed out from the Sun’s system in a systematic
manner, and are perfected to their motions before they leave the Sun,
The tendency of the Ether of Space being to the Sun, it is the repellant
power of Magnetism that forces it from the Sun’s system into Infini-
tude. The larger, and more dense the planet, the greater the distance
it is forced away j and the moment it passes the boundary of Space into
Infinitude, that moment the tendency of the Ether of Space is asserted,
paid then is the commencement of the planet’s true orbital career. No
secondary planets or satelites, are immediately passed from tho sun’s
system. I cannot do more here than simply make this statement re-
specting Sateli es.
We will now pass to the cometary system. Comets are remarkable
for their tails, because they look contradictory of what any of us much
prepared to swear to respecting other tails ; that is the. head has as
often the appearance of following the tail as the tail has of following
the head. Yet for all that the head is tending in the right direction,
ftnd although tho tail is not always following it, there is no prerogative


to be attached to the apparency of that precedence, because it i; always
behind it. By the aid of our splendid mechanical appliances it has been
unmistakably proven *diat the heads of comets are transparent, because
stars have been seen through them. The statement lam now about to
make respecting cometary life is the kej'stone of the whole material of
this bridge from our Planet to the Sun, and is borne witness to by the aid
of Spectroscope. Comets are the Magnetic Ethers and Ethers of Space of
a disrupted planetary life returning to the Sun from whence they came ;
or, to use a metaphor, the souls of the departed planets. The head of
the comet is the Magnetic Ethers forming the lens through which the
rays of the Sun form the tail. The reflective properties of Magnetic
Ether would account for the presence of the reflected light said to be
mingling with the Sun’s rays. And the magnetic influence that in the
life of the planet was seconded by the aid of the mass to overcome the
tendency of the Ether of Space, now tempers that tendency in the re-
turn journey to the Sun, where it will again enter into the Field of the
Ether of Space, after traversing its eccentric orbit in the ratio of as
many time as its rotatory momentum has increased from severance of
the planet’s restraint. The immense velocity of comets is acquired by
the additional rotatory power freed from the encumberance of planet
life, being then only exercised in a greater orbital eccentricity which
naturally gathering them in on one side of the Sun ultimately occa-
sions them into the Sun’s system. And this now bring us to the ques-
tion of Light Phenomena which, as is shown in the preceding dialogue,
is to be largely attributed to the presence of the fragmentary drift of
disrupted planetary life within the order of the realms of the Law of
Gravitation or Concentrated Magnetism.


SUMMARISED THEORY OF UNIVERSE AND PROOFS
ADDUCED.
‘GodTne Infinite.’
From the Great Central Sun, Suns may he resolved as delegates of
Light, freighted as ships with the fluidity of Planets and Satelites, and
destined to their respective centres in Infinitude hy the repellant power
of Magnetism, having that power as multiplex in them, as there are
Planets and Satelites in their respective systems.
Etherism is the High Law of the Universe, subordinating within its
limits the Law of Material Planetary Life, Gravitation ; hub in nowise
further exercising its power within that Law than is commensurate
with the needfulness of necessitous life.
Etherism athough inseparable in its being is to be divisibly deter-
mined in its functions as Magnetic E:her and Ether of Space. Mag-
netic Ether is the rotatory, repellant, and reflective newer. Ether of
Space is the light giving, limiting, and conjunctive power of the respec-
tive systems.
Nebulae, as seen in interstellar space, are simply the Magnetic Ethers
and Ethers of Space of disrupted planetary life returning to the Sun
system of their respective centres, as we see comets in our system,
traversing its space to the Sun, or their immediate centres. It is not
improbable that extensive Nebulm may be the Magnetic Ethers and
Ethers of Space of an entirely disrupted system, traversing The Great
Central Sun space of Infinitude to the ultimate of The Great Central Sun.
No body can float in the Ether of Space wanting an air system.
Direct affinity between Sun and Planets.
No direct affinity between Sun and Satelites.
No direct affinity between Planets and Planets.
Apparent or optical affinity between Planets and Planets.
Direct affinity between Planets and Satelites.
Planets are in distances from Sun, according to their densities.
Thus—Taking Earth’s distance from Sun as proportionate standard
of Extreme Infinitude, a planet ten times the weight of the earth will
be ten times as far from the Sun, From the order prevalent in all
ascertainable things it is to be reasonably inferred that primary planets
have like densities ; therefore if Jupiter is now 480,000,000 of miles
from the Sun he has yet to accomplish 445,000,000 of miles, direct dis-
tance, before reaching Extreme Infinitude ; and the inclination of axis
commensurate with his now given distance is 12°, or if 4° as it is stated
to be, then he is not much'more than 157,000,000 of miles distant
from the Sun.
Asteroids most dense bodies in sytem.
Planet’s true orbital career commences in Extreme Infinitude, which
is the utmost of a planet’s distance from the Sun.
Inclination of Planet’s axis is the immense rotatory power of Magne-
tic Ethers, exercised upon planet’s mass, and thereby causing Obliquity
of the Ecliptic,


Satelites are reflective bodies.
Earth’s Sat-elite, the Moon,
Moon a reflective body.
Moon has an air system.
Moon light is not the reflected light of the Sun, but the reflected
light of the earth’s envelope of Echerism.—Eclipsf s, and Moon’s phases
testamentary evidence of such, they answering in the dorn lin of
Optics to the simple law of Reflection, which in Moon-light as the re-
flected light of the Sun they do not answer to.
Distance of Earth from Sun in Glacial Age.
During earlier period of Earth’s history another attendant Satelite
beside the Moon. Magellan Clouds and Milky Way testamentary
evidence of such, they being respectively the Magnetic Ethers and
Ethers of Space of the earth’s disrupted Srtelite,
Error in determining Milky Way caused through over-focussing of
telescopic power to hundreds of millions of miles beyond its location,
which mty he inferred from analogy to lie not m ire than 4300 miles
away, hut its distance may be approximately determined by correct
focussing power.
The Rings of Siturn a-e the Magnetic E-heps and Ether of Space of
three of his disrupted Satelites.
All cornets tending to the Sun evidence disruption of Planet System.
Comets of more than one tad evidencing a once Planet System with
as many Satelites are there are tails. Example: Six tailed Comet
of 1744.
No heat from Sun, Light only. Heat is an inherent, property of ma-
terial life generated hy Electricity, which un ler the modification of Light is
life, hut apart from is death. Decay being death of particles, and Death
entire disruption of system. If suddenly cut off from Light wo would
be destroyed bv Fire, the devouring principle of Electricity, hut which
under the modification of Light is nullified and made life even unto
death.
Neither the Sun nor Moon influence tides. Repulsion of the Great
Waters of the earth by its heat causes the tides, which is simply exem-
plified by the fact that a cubic inch of water may 1 he expanded to fill a
space of 1987 cubic inches. The whole proof of this question is so much
involved in the primary powers of the material system that to try and
entertain it within this limited area would only be uselessly crippling it.
Probabilities of air height being greater in earlier periods of Earth’s
history than now.
Primary Universal power divisibly determined—Etherisrn — Sun,
Mof/netic Ether , and Ether of Space.
Primary Material power devisiUly determined —Light — Magnetism,
Electricity , and Gravitation.
Light is the intelligence of the material system, and therefore not
amenable to analysis. .
Disruption of planets are occasioned by the exhaustion of Moisture
from interior of planer’s miss ; Moisture throu jli the agency of Light
being the conveyancer of Electricby to the upper regions of the air,
where increasing in the proportion of its displacement from mass exer-
cises a proportionate pressure upon air density, consequently the elec*


trical displacement now occurring some few miles from the earth’*
surface will eventually occur there, and from then will date the com-
mencement of the planet’s actual disruption. The appearance will ha
that of the phenomenal star of 1572, first seen hy Schuler, and after
wards hy Tycho Brahe seen and noted to its ultimate disappearance in
1574. This fact will he illustrated to the understanding hy the disrup-
tion of the Moon, whose air density is now so very lew as to give rise to
the assertion that she has no air system, because the electrical disolace-
m'Mit in her is so close to the surface that no clouds can he seen. There
will he no apparent disrup ion until every atom of moisture in her ma~s
his had electrical displacement, then her gruvitatory power gradually
yielding, thedisiupted mass will pass through her envelope of Etherism
which relieved of the encumbrance will commence its cometary career,
traversing in eccentric orbit to the earth’s centre. During the disrup
tive action or burning of Moon, no heat will he felt from it, nor will
any particle of its disrupted mass necessarily enter into the earth’s
system.
Electricity from mass does not pass out of negative state until at ex-
treme height of air density.
Magnetism is the serial form of t’ e Magnet or loadstone, located
under the Magnetic Ethers immediately over the Poles, and there exer-
cising those functions in the serial system that are so adequately proven
to us in the material one. By it the serial properties of iron are con-
centrated, and conduct the surplus electricity or lightning of the serial
system into the Magnetic fields, where in conjunction with sub-serial
substances, the electrical overplus is harmlessly exercised, and bril-
liantly evidenced to our understanding in the presence of auroral
phenomena. Iron throughout the aerial system is evidently inducted
into streams or currents, and thence flows into the Magnetic fields.
This is a fact analogically determinable from the variation of the corn-
pass hy means of which the locations of the main magnetic currents
may he accurately staled.


