

dEUI* I ouS PAM»
&OA / ___
MIKE A FLOWER,”
A SERMON AND SKETCH
Delivered 30 Ih August, 1868,
TO THE PRESBYTERIAN CONGREGATIONS OP' DONNYEROOK AND
WALLAN WALLAN,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE WIFE OF
THE REV. A. McNICOL, THEIR MINISTER,
ROBERT HAMILTON,
Minister of the United Presbyterian Church , Fitzroy, Melbourne.
UUUlbowni.c:
PUBLISHED BY GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCCCLXVIII.




“LIKE A FLOWER,”
A SERMON AND SKETCH
Delivered -yplh Avgust , 1868,
TO THE PRESBYTERIAN CONGREGATIONS OF DONNYBROOK AND
WALLAN WALLAN,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE WIFE OF
THE REV. A. McNICOL, THEIR MINISTER,
ROBERT HAMILTON,
Minister of the United Presbyterian Church, Fiizroy, Melbourne.
xuvnu:
PUBLISHED BY GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
MBCCCLXVIU.


MELBOURNE:
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS,
99 BOURKE STREET WEST.


TO THE
/Minister and
OF THE
FIR ESBYTERIAN CHURCHES
OF DONNYBROOK. AND WALLAN WALLAN ;
THIS DISCOURSE,
PUBLISHED BY THEIR SPECIAL DESIRE, AND, WITH EVERY WISH THAT, UNDER
GOD’S BLESSING, IT MAY CONDUCE AT ONCE TO HIS GLORY AND
TO THEIR SPIRITUAL AND ETERNAL GOOD,
RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY
iutjroT.


Vital spark of heavenly flame.
Quit, 0 quit this mortal frame.
Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
Oh the pain, the bliss of dying.
Come, fond nature, cease thy strife,
And let me languish into life.
Hark ! they whisper, angels say,
Sister spirit, come away.
What is this absorbs me quite,
Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
Drowns my spirit, draws my breath :
Tell me, my soul, can this he death ?
The world recedes, it disappears—
Heaven opens on my eyes; my ears
With sounds seraphic ring.
Lend, lend your wings! I mount, I fly.
0 Grave, where is thy victory ?
O Death where is thy sting ?
Pope.


“LIKE A FLOWER,”
A SEEMON AND SKETCH.
Job xit. 2.—“ He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down ;
he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.”
The Book op Job is generally regarded as the oldest in
the world. It contains evident marks of inspiration. There is
here, doubtless, a genuine record of facts as they occurred.
Its design is in perfect harmony with the great objects of a
Divine revelation. It reveals clearly some of the fundamental
doctrines unfolded in other parts of Scripture, as well as the
duties enjoined. There is made known, the natural depravity
of man, —the source of deliverance to mankind solely in the
wisdom, power, and mercy of the Almighty, —the sovereignty
of (rod, and, consequently, His right to deal with His children
in the way of chastisement, in any form and to any extent
He pleases;—the duty of unqualified submission on the part of
G-od’s people to the dispensations of a wise and over-ruling
Providence, —and the confidenthope which believers are warranted,
even in the midst of the heaviest tribulations, to cherish, that
they are the objects of their Heavenly Father’s tenderest care;
and that they shall in due time be assuredly saved —possibly
in this life, but certainly in the world to come —when “ their
Redeemer shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and in
their resurrection state they shall see (rod ” —when, after “ they
have lain down, they shall rise, when the heavens are no
more ; when they shall awake and be raised out of their sleep.”
Never, perhaps, was a man so tried as Job. He occupied, at
one time, a distinguished rank, and was possessed of extensive
property in the northern part of Arabia. He was remarkable at
once for his piety and his benevolence. His principles and
character were fit to stand the most rigid scrutiny. For wise
and even gracious purposes (rod permitted that, by means of
robbers, whirlwinds and thunder-storms, he was stripped, in a
single day, of all his possessions, and of all his family. With
unmurmuring submission he said, “ Naked came I out of my
mother’s womb and naked shall I return thither ; the Lord gave
and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.”


Another fearful trial awaited him. He was smitten with boils
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head. His wife
tempted him to curse God and die. His meek and simple reply
was, —“ Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh.
"What! shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we
not receive evil P”
A number of his sincere and godly friends came to comfort
him, believing him to have been “ a perfect man and upright, one
that feared God and eschewed evil.” But when they beheld his
extremely abject condition they were confounded. They could
not account for God’s dealings with him on a principle of equity;
and, rather than charge the Almighty with injustice and
oppression, they came to the unwarranted conclusion that Job
must have been insincere and ungodly. In his replies, Job, amid
various infirmities of temper, maintained the perfect righteous-
ness of God’s dealings, His sovereign right to do as He pleased,
and the duty of man to submit; and at the same time vindicated
his own character as conscientious and faithful.
Most important lessons, therefore, are herein taught that God’s
people, in all ages, may know how to demean themselves under
severe and trying dispensations. An inspired Apostle holds up Job
for imitation in respect to patience and resignation in trouble, and
teaches us to learn from the extraordinary prosperity with which
God blessed him before he died, that our Heavenly Father, even
when he smites most sharply, does so in tenderness, and is
entitled to absolute confidence, even when His ways seem most
mysterious.
What a privilege to have this divine teaching ! Were it not
for the lessons of inspiration, and the help that is from above,
our hearts would most likely entertain hard thoughts of God
when we are plunged in calamity and distress. In the exercise
of that short-sightedness which sin has entailed upon us, we are
of ourselves incapable of forming a right judgment, regarding the
providential government of God. The spirit of evil would rock
us into fatal slumber, so that we might be insensible to the grand
cause of the evils which assail us, and the disposition with which
they should be borne. Equally unconscious are we, till scrip-
turally enlightened, of the evils to which we are exposed, as
offenders amenable to avenging justice; and ignorant are Ave of
the way by which they must be warded off, till we feel the sharp
strokes of some fatherly chastisement, —or it may be the electric
shock of bereavement, coming out of the dark thunder-cloud of
righteous administration, threatening to blast every hope, and to
inflict irretrievable ruin. Then, like the old eastern patriarch, Ave
are aroused, under a sense of our true position, as at once guilty
and helpless, to adore that sovereignty Avhich determines Avhen
and hoAv both to give and to take, to restrain every syllable of
complaint, to take refuge in the stronghold of consolation
revealed in the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and “ not to sin Avith our
lips, nor to charge God foolishly.”


It is my object in this service to improve the bereaving
dispensation, which, while it has fallen with peculiar severity on
your Pastor, has at the same time deprived this congregation
of one who was thoroughly devoted to its interests, and who,
by her Christian sympathy and friendship, might be said to
have belonged to the various families of which it is composed.
In her decease, there is not one family, not one individual,
indeed, that has not lost a friend; and in the midst of the gloom
which the righteous, but painful, dispensation has cast over you
all, allow me to direct your attention to some of the solemn
lessons taught in my text.
There are several doctrir.es which we learn from this passage.
I. Our humble origin— u Man cometh forth like a flower."
The language which the patriarch employs in this chapter to
describe the exceeding littleness and frailty of man is beautifully
poetic and exquisitely touching. He was overwhelmed with the
severest bodily trouble, as well as crushed by the previous losses
which suddenly fell upon him. He was distressed by the falsa
principles avowed in the reasonings of his friends, whereby they
not only did him great personal injustice, but, what grieved him
most, greatly dishonoured the Most High. Besides this, hs
had evidently but faint views of the future world, with its glorious
rewards for the righteous, and its perfect correction of all tho
inequalities which prevail in the present temporary state. In
addition to all, his mind may be supposed to have been enfeebled
in some measure through his heavy tribulations, and unfitted to
follow out, at least as he would wish, a severe argument on a
difficult subject. Hence he seems here to give way to great
despondency, and he paints the condition of mankin i in very
gloomy colours, though not without some bright glean s of hope,
in reference to the world to come. In describing mar’s humble
and transient being, he makes a delicate but significant illusion to
woman as the mother of all living. Having sprung from the weaker
sex, how can man be strong? In another place, whi'e viewing
man as coming forth from woman, he, in the same sentence,
speaks of him as returning whence he came, as destitute, helpless,
and insignificant as when he was born. He grows up like a
flower which originates from the earth, which exists at once
above and below the earth, and which, as soon as it is rooted out
of the earth, withers and dies, and goes back to its native
element.
Salutary yet humbling thought to man ! No flattery of human
pride here. Only think, vain man, your origin is the clay. You
crawled into existence from beside the worm. The dust you
tread under foot enters into your composition, and after time has
done its last work on your poor frame, there will remain of you
nothing more than a little dust, not distinguishable from the
surrounding earth. How men boast sometimes of their pedigree !


If they can only trace the faintest connection with some dis-
tinguished progenitor, through many generations back, how care-
fully they will preserve, as sacred treasure, the genealogical tree,
and point with pride to the proof of the all but imaginary, and
certainly at best, unimportant relationship! Very different is the
teaching of Scripture. Here we are not allowed to trace our
descent from any sublime or glorious object in nature, but only
from the earth. You do not derive your being or any part of it
from the sea, the air, the sun, the stars, or any celestial con-
stellation. You must look to nothing of magnificence or
sublimity in creation, beneath, around, or above, as if it could,
contribute greatness to your present being, but only to the soil
you tread, and learn to be humble. And there is no family
extraction, were it ever so highly aggrandising, which could ever
make your real origin anything better than it is, or exempt you
from the common lot of guilty and perishing humanity.
You do not spring from any thing beautiful or precious about
the earth, more than from anything grand. It is not from the gold,
the silver, or any of the precious stones, you derive your nature,
but from the vile dust. Neither is it from.the flower of any plant
or tree in the vegetable world, so full of gorgeous hues and
exquisite beauties, that you are taught to trace your existence.
It is only as the flower comes forth, so do ye. From some,
insignificant seed hid beneath the surface, the flower springs, but
no created intellect can describe how. Might and wisdom,
goodness and greatness may be seen in its production, its
expansion and its varied array of beauty. But its origin remains
the same, —humble, mysteriously bumble. So there are similar
mysteries, though more impressive and sublime in the constitution,
growth, and various qualities displayed by man, but the lowli-
ness of his origin remains an unalterable truth. And as in the
flower there is but a short space from its first to its last, so, dear
hearer, as soon as you begin to be, your end is near, and your
ending like your beginning is equally lowly and equally
humiliating; indicating clearly that you have only a short
period to prepare for an elevated and a glorious life above,
and that if you do not, while that poor mortal life con-
tinues, secure an interest in the blessings of redeeming
grace through Jesus Christ, “the resurrection and the life,” you
must utterly fail in enjoying the fruits of immortal edness,
which shall spring from that new and engrafted union required
in the Gospel. “Ye must be born again.”
11. Our exceeding frailty.
“ Like a flower is cut down.” “He fleeth as a shadow.” The
frailty of man could not have been put with greater simplicity
and beauty. The same images are frequently employed in
Scripture to teach man the poverty, —the nothingness of his
earthly life. Isaiah says, “ The voice said, Cry ; and ie said,


What shall I cry ? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness
thereof is as the flower of the field. The grass withereth,
the flower fadeth, because the spirit of the Lord bloweth
upon it; surely the people is grass. The grass withereth,
the flower fadeth; hut the word of our Glod shall stand for
ever.” “As for man,” says David, “ his days are as grass, as
the flower of the field he flourisheth.” “ They are like grass
that groweth up, in the morning it flourisheth and groweth up,
in the evening it is cut down and withereth.” “They shall
soon be cut down as the grass, and wither as the green herb.”
How brittle and transient is the flower of the field! A single
night’s frost withers it, and it is gone. A blast of wind lays it
prostrate in ruin. The traveller unconsciously treads upon it,
and it is blighted for ever. The stalk, the leaves, the delicious
scent, the beauteous combination of colours, the delicate organi-
sation, the marvellous union and harmony of its various parts,
all are in an instant, and with the utmost ease, hopelessly
destroyed.
So it is with man. His life is brittle in the extreme. The
slightest accident may launch him into eternity. It does not
require the force of the thunderbolt to expel him from time.
The lightning’s flash is far more than sufficient to consume the
tie that binds him to the present sphere. The earthquake is not
necessary to drive him out of his earthly being. His bodily
frame is so exceedingly frail, no matter how young, robust, and
healthful it may appear, as not to be able to resist for many days
the effects of breathing a small portion of unwholesome air. On
such subtle and impalpable influences does man’s life depend, that
even the fresh and invigorating current which brings health and
energy to one, will be the occasion of death to another. When
his powers appear most likely to last, and to resist for a lengthened
period the assaults of evil, and when they do successfully remain
in force till a hoary old age, yet the very years themselves seem
to be a burden, and death becomes desirable as a relief from the
load. And does not the very longest life, as well as the shortest,
resemble a flower ?
“ This is the state of man : to-day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope, to-morrow blossoms,
And hears his blushing honours thick upon him,
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And—when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a-ripening—nips his root,
And then he falls.”
So says the poet. But the Bible speaks with far greater point
and beauty. It is doubtless on account of the frail character of
man’s life that the Scriptures represent it so often as consisting
only of days, and these extremely few. The prayer of the psalmist
was, —“ So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.” “ Lord, make me to know mine end, and
the measure of my days, what it is, that I may know how frail I


am. Behold, Thou hast made my days as a handbreadth, and
mine age is as nothing before Thee ; verily, every man at his best
state is altogether vanity.” “My days are consumed like smoke.”
“ My days are like a shadow that declineth, and I am withered
like grass.” Job says, —“My days are swifter than a weaver’s
shuttle.” “ O remember that my life is wind.” “ Let me alone,
for my days are vanity.” “Now my days are swifter than a
post, they, flee away, they see no good.” “ Are not my days
few ?” A peculiarly touching representation of the shortness
and frailty of human life, is that which was given by the patriarch
Jacob, Avhen presented to Pharaoh by his son Joseph. When
the monarch of Egypt, doubtless struck by his venerable and
extremely aged aspect, asked him, —“ How old art thou? Jacob
said unto Pharoah, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are
a hundred and thirty years ; few and evil have the days of the
years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days ot the
years of the life of my fathers, in the days of their pilgrimage.”
In all ranks and conditions of life, —in all circumstances
even the most favourable in which man can be placed, —in all
kingdoms and climes, and under all dispensations, —in conse-
quence of the blighting influence of sin, —life is equally short, and
transient. Our Lord and Saviour, in teaching His disciples to
pray, puts this petition into their mouth, “ Give us day by
day our daily bread.” Most strikingly does He instruct them
to ask not for yearly, for monthly, or for weekly, but simply
for daily bread. “ Take no thought for your life,” was Christ’s
command, “what ye shall eat, neither for the body, whgt ye
shall put on; the life is more than meat, and the body is more
than raiment.”
How many instances are constantly occurring in providence
to teach us that the thread of our life is so frail that at any
moment it might be snapt asunder ! You can never calculate
on another day, not even another moment, except as the Lord
may will. The present is all you can with certainty call jour
own. There are always multitudes to whom the spring is suc-
ceeded by no summer, the summer by no winter. Every day
that dawns, and hour that strikes, is the last to many. The
morning comes and also the night, continually, to thousands for the
last time. No one is sure when he rises, that he shall ever lay
down again, unless it be in death. When you leave home you
are never certain that you shall return. In parting with a
friend, it is always uncertain whether you shall ever again
enjoy his fellowship. The sabbath is fast coming to
you,* that shall not be followed by another on earth.
Soon, very soon, the last sermon, you shall ever hear
in the courts of the earthly Zion, shall be preached. The offers
of mercy, that are now made through the merits of the Redeemer,
are doubtless made to many this day for the last time. The
invitations of divine love are doubtless now being presented to
some who must very quickly pass away into eternity. Yea, to


all now hearing the gospel throughout the world, it is
emphatically true, that “ The Judge is standing at the door.”
“ To-day, then, if you will hear His voice, harden not your
hearts.” “Now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation.” Never dream of having other opportunities of
embracing Christ and salvation, and. so put off the present calls
of grace. Always act on the principle that you are on the
brink of eternity. Flee at once to Jesus, the stronghold, from
the wrath to come, as if another call of grace might never be
heard. Renounce at once the devil and sin, and flee for safety to
the arms of the loving Saviour. Make haste, as if there was
awful danger of your life being brought to an abrupt termination.
With all speed, enter into covenant union with Jesus, lest you
should be left to be confirmed in the slavery of sin and you
should perish eternally. Cases are continually transpiring to
remind us of the danger of delay. Three young men, brothers
in the same family, recently retired to rest in their usual health,
but never rose, life having been brought to a sudden close, by an
insidious and noxious gas. A man, the other day, riding
through the street in the city, was thrown from his vehicle
and precipitated into eternity. Truly man is cut down
like a flower and fleeth away as a shadow. How evanescent
is the shadow! And yet such is your life. It is like
a little piece of unsubstantial vapour. It appears for an
instant, and then it disappears, leaving behind no trace of its
existence. By no skill or power can you fix the shadow,
or give it power or substance. It is only an airy appearance.
So is your life. And yet, what interests for immortality are
dependent on your present doings! O the egregious thought-
lessness and infatuation of man in neglecting the great salvation!
He plans and executes with a view to long life, and lives only to
find his schemes abortive, and in too many instances to see at
last that he has bartered his immortal interests for the merest
shadow. 0 what awful criminality to care so much for the body;
and so little for Christ, for the soul, and for eternity ! “ What
shall it profit a man if he should gain the whole world and lose
his own soul ? ” “ Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die ? ”
Akin to these lessons which the text so plainly and forcibly
teaches, respecting the humble origin and exceeding frailty of
man, are various other truths which are rather suggested than
directly taught. One of these is,
1. God's Sovereignty.
There is a solemn mystery hanging over our life, from begin-
ning to end. The rise, duration, and termination of life are
manifestly dependent on arrangements over which we have no
control. Everything affecting our existence is subject to the
absolute sovereignty of the Almighty. "When we speak of God,
it is to be remembered, we speak of an infinite mystery, and we


are not to expect to be able either to understand or to explain
the attributes of His marvellous nature. In asserting the
sovereignty of the most High, without presuming to make it
plain to your capacity, we simply mean His unquestionable and
perfect right to do all things according to the pleasure of His will.
So exalted are the perfections of His eternal Being, that it is
His prerogative to govern the world as He pleases ; and it is not
the province of any created intelligence —not even of the most
exalted —to prescribe how He ought in any case to act. It
peculiarly belongs to Him to deal with all matters affecting the
life of man, as He Himself sees fit, without any obligation to
assign reasons or to account for His doings. It is His absolute will
that determines when any man shall come into existence, and
when his being shall cease. Not only the period of life, but all
the elements in our constitution, and in our condition, are ordered
by Him in the exercise of His own unaided wisdom. If He has
ordained that man’s life should be brittle and evanescent; that it
should be spent in the midst of sorrow and suffering, and that it
should expire amid the throes of dissolution, then there is a good
and sufficient cause, notwithstanding that the phenomena may
seem to militate against His infinite goodness and love. Whatever
difficulties we may feel in accounting for the events of an
inscrutable Providence, there is not—there cannot be—any
contradiction among the attributes of the Eternal; more especially
between His justice and His mercy. The death of Christ at once
reveals and explains the harmony that reigns. The difficulty
which we experience, in harmonising human suffering with
divine love, is incidental to our imperfect and sinful state. Yet
it has often led men into daring presumption in sitting in judg-
ment on G-od’s works and ways. In the pride of their hearts,
they have imagined they could find fault with the divine govern-
ment, and they could prescribe a better mode of acting. They
have forgotten their total inability to form right notions on
account of the blinding influence of sin, and that even if they
were in a perfect state, it would be their duty to worship and
adore, when they could not understand.
When God bestowed on man, in the constitution of his being,
an independent will and freedom of action, He is not to be sup-
posed to have parted in any degree with His own supremacy.
In the exercise of His sovereignty He interferes with the affairs
of men, affects them in their vital interests, and disposes of their
business, their property, their time, their health, their life,
without consulting them. He removes the infant of a span long,
or He spares to an extreme age. He, and He alone, determines
the bounds beyond which no one can pass. This absolute power
G-od never exercises in an arbitrary, a capricious, or a despotic
manner. So far from this, He always acts on a principle of
grace, in all His dispensations among men. When He removes a
child by death, no matter in what circumstances, and takes the
soul to Himself, can we fail to see love and grace ? Does He


not take him away from the evil to come, and transfer him to
Paradise, to live in immortal beauty and bliss. The child was
His own, at once by creation and redemption, and shall He not
do what He will with His own ? The pangs of separation borne
by the parents may be bitter, but if they loved their infant
sincerely, would they not rejoice in his well-being with Christ,
and strive to say, “ Thy will be done ” ? Would they ever wish to
snatch him from the celestial mansions, and bring him back again
to this sinful and sorrowful scene ? Does God call away, from the
outer court of the temple on earth to the inner court in heaven,
a member who was distinguished for piety and eminent in useful-
ness ? It is in love—love to the soul of the departed, in
translating to unbounded holiness and joy,—love to the friends
bereaved, that they may be chastened, so that they may not
be condemned, but be purified and ripened for glory, —
love to the sorrowing church, that they may learn humility,
spirituality, and submission, and be fitted also for the
bosom of Abraham, —love to the unbelieving around, that
may be aroused to rise and call upon God, to repent, believe, and
prepare for eternity. When the Almighty removes a wicked
man, is there mercy here ? Even to this inquiry, we must
reply, there is. Is there not mercy to the man himself, in stopping
his career in unbelief and disobedience ? The shorter his course
in sin, the less aggravated his guilt and his punishment. Is there
not mercy in the case to those who survive ? To them he was a
living plague before he died, tempting the good and making the
bad worse. Now his evil influence is brought to a close. A
spirit, then, of unmurmuring submission to God’s afflictive dealings
becomes our position. Unquestioning resignation to the severest
bereaving dispensations is no more than simple duty. “ I was
dumb; I opened not my mouth, because Thou didst it.”
2. Man’s responsibility.
Were God to render man free of responsibility, it
would amount to a resignation of His own independent
sovereignty. If man is not accountable, then he is not
a creature, indebted and dependent. On this supposition,
if not superior, he would be equal to God. But in the nature of
things, there cannot be two absolutely independent intelligences.
The idea involves contradiction and impossibility. Hence the
clearly revealed and fundamental doctrine of Scripture regarding
God’s unity, “ Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord.”
Hence the infinite and matchless nature of Jehovah, and the
necessary subordination of every creature. On the grand
principle of God’s perfect sovereignty, all created beings of every
rank are dependent, under obligation, and bound to give an
account of all they do. The blessing of life is a treasure from
God, for the use of which we are all necessarily responsible. Life
is God’s gift, bestowed upon us to be in a sense our own peculiar


property. The life we enjoy is a power to exist, —a power which
we cannot, if we would, lay aside, not through immortal ages.
We can never cease to think, never cease to will, never cease to
be. By no skill or power could we possibly destroy our being.
The inherent power is given us to live, but never, by any possible
agencies, to annihilate life. While the conditions under w’hich
we live are, that we must, according to the will of God, exist
through everlasting years ; at the same time He maintains His
own supremacy, and claims that life be spent according to His
revealed pleasure. He has not by any means parted with His
right, to lay down unalterable rules, by which life should be
governed. To surrender His absolute claims to obedience from
man, would be to resign an essential attribute of His infinite nature
aud government.
More especially, as we have forfeited all right to life on account
of sin, it was His prerogative to say, whether we should all have
been consigned, not to annihilation, for that would have been no
punishment, but to the destruction to which devils are doomed,
for whom there is no saviour. Blessed be God, He has been
pleased to redeem by the blood of His son the life which we had
thrown away, aud thereby has made known His claims to our
confidence, love, and submission in the very highest degree, and
has asserted with peculiar force His absolute right to have our
time exclusively spent in His service and to His glory. In His
holy Word, He has been pleased to lay down the only way in
which we can act in harmony with our accountability, and at the
same time honour and glorify Him as our God and our Redeemer.
In what a solemn light do our responsibilities appear when we
consider that although we were justly condemned, “ God so loved
us, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.” Under the old
dispensation, “ If the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and
every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect the great salvation ?”
“ See that ye refuse not Him that speaketh, for if they escaped
not who refused him who spoke on earth, much more shall not
w r e escape if we turn away from Him that speaketh from heaven.”
“We must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.”
3. The Vanity of the World.
When God takes to Himself the tender infant, that never
actually offended, —when He smites down to the dust the
promising youth, with his enlightened principles, holy dispo-
sitions, and eminent attainments, giving promise of a bright
career of honour and usefulness in the church and in the
community, —or when He cuts off a servant of mature years,
of ripened experience, of genuine piety, and of extended


benevolence, in tbe very midst of plans, which are being success-
fully carried on, for the advancement of the cause of Christ, we
are very apt to entertain doubts as to the wisdom of the Divine
arrangements. But it affords to every child of God, a satisfac-
tory reason for the bereavement sustained, to remember that this
world is not a sphere in which any believer can have a permanent
or satisfactory home. “ Flesh and blood cannot inherit the king-
dom of God,"neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.” The
world as now constituted, defiled as it is by sin, and loaded with
the curse, cannot be a proper abode for God’s redeemed. The
earth is not yet changed. All things have not yet become new.
“The Avhole "creation still groaneth and travaileth in pain toge-
ther.” Why then should fault be found with God, when He
does with His own according to His wisdom and choice P “Is our
eye evil, because His is good ?” There is an absolute incompa-
tibility in the people of God having a permanent residence on
the earth as it is now. No Christian desires it. “ O that I had
the wings of a dove that I might fly away and be at rest.” “ I
would not live always.” Hence, “It is appointed to men once
to die, but after this the judgment.”
It is only in the higher sphere, where “ there is nothing that
defileth,” and “no more curse” —where there is no physical
feebleness and no spiritual defect—where the inhabitants shall
never say I am weary or I am sick —Avhere are the robes of
brightness, the palms of victory, the crowns of righteousness,
the rivers of pleasure, and the tree of life —where Jesus is, who
leads to “living fountains of water,” and the Lord God “wipes away
tears from off all faces ;” —it is not here, in this vain cold world,
only there, that the permanent happy home of believers can be
found. Consider, then, that “our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding eternal
weight of glorv, while we look not at the things that are seen,
but at the things which are not seen ; for the things which are
seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal.”
4. The glory of the heavenly world.
When God, by His bereaving strokes, casts contempt before
our eyes on the glory of this world, it is that He may fix our
affections on the glory of another and a better. He does not,
therefore, in an improper, unreasonable, and unwarranted manner
cut asunder the ties that bind us to those who are near and dear.
When He ripens for the glories of heaven those who are “ the
desire of our eyes,” and calls them away amid tears and regrets,
He doubtless takes them to the better land. In such a case, who
can doubt that He displays in a peculiarly striking and impressive
manner, His tenderness and love both to them and to us ? Who,
among the men of this world, does not rejoice when a beloved
friend is elevated to high rank and power in the state? And


shall not Christians rejoice, though in the midst of tears, when a
relative endeared by tender association and spiritual excellence
is exalted to the mansions above, to dwell with Jesus the good
Shepherd in glory everlasting ? A new tie is formed between
the surviving Christian and the realms of bliss, when a familiar
friend is known to be there. We have not seen Jesus in tho
body. We do not know His personal features. “ Whom having
not'seen, we love; in whom, though now we see Him not, yet
believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.”
But we do know' the friend snatched from our side, to dwell with
Him whom our souls love most, and who sheds over all His
redeemed the glory of His own infinite effulgence. We are
familiar with the voice, the features of person, and the habits of
life of the departed. We have there now', in the unseen glory,
a vivid embodiment of a well known person and character,
whereby heaven is invested with fresh interest, and the fellowship
of Christ and His ransomed, presents new and stronger attrac-
tions. Pre-eminent in alluring power in the celestial habitation,
doubtless, must Jesus ever be to the Christian. All the stars
that sparkle in the firmament of heaven, must ever pale their
splendours, in the presence of the Sun of Righteousness. It can
never be forgotten by the believer that Christ is, both in the
world of grace, and in that of glory, the brilliant centre ; and
that all the saints, as little luminaries, however dazzling, reflect
a borrowed light. Jesus is all, and in all, and so exuberant is the
grace, and so wonderful the wisdom, of God, that wre are
encouraged to regard the Paradise above w T ith peculiar intensity
of interest, because we can number among our personal acquaint-
ance, some of those who walk the golden streets; whojbave “washed
their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb
who are “before the throne of God, and serve Him day and
night in His Temple,” who eat from the tree of life,
and drink from the “ pure river of the water of life, clear as
crystal which proceeds from the throne of God and the Lamb.”
We love Jesus because He first loved us, and pardoned and
blessed us in turning us away from our iniquities. We love Him
with increasing warmth, when know He has loved and saved
our friends on earth. Our affection burns with an inteuser glow
when we see those we love rejoicing in the light of God’s reconciled
countenance. But when with the eye of faith we see them taken
up to be eternally with Jesus, who is_ “ glorified with the Father,
with that glory which Pie had with Him before the world
was ” surely we must rejoice in Him with an affection all the
more ardent. We cannot but desire His fellowship with daily
increasing fervour, when w r e are assured that those we love are
with Him, where He is, to behold His glory which the Father hath
triven Him ” “ Seek, then,” bereaved Christians, “those things
which are above where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.
Set your affections on things above, but not on things on the
earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.


When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with Him in glory.” “Whom He justified, them He
also glorified.”
Before concluding, allow me to urge upon you some of the
duties which plainly arise out of this subject: —
1. See that your heart le taken out of this world.
There is nothing here to satisfy your immortal soul. Why
persist in the vain attempt to extract something substantial out
of a shadow ? “ All nations before Him are nothing, and they
are counted to Him less than nothing, and vanity.” Your
undying nature can never be satisfied with the perishing things
of time. There is nothing better than husks in the power of
the world to give to your deathless spirit; and it is not in the
nature of these to impart true satisfaction. How strange, that
any one, possessed of reason, should weary himself trying to
work impossibilities—endeavouring to convert dross into gold,
to extract wheat from chaff, or to draw water from empty cisterns!
This is the foolish and fruitless effort of your life, so long as you
seek substantial good from this world. Believe the testimony of
God : “ The world passeth away and the lust thereof.” “ The
friendship of the world is enmity with God; whosoever, there-
fore, will be the friend of the world is the enemy of God.” What
a contradiction to make yourself an enemy to Him who is your
very best friend! The world was the great antagonist of Christ;
but of this, as well as of every other foe, He proved Himself a
glorious conqueror. Jesus came into the world to conquer our,
as well as His own, implacable adversaries ; and, though He
gained the victory over them all, He has required at our hand
that we fight, and conquer too. He only prescribes that we use
the armour he has provided, fight in his name, and overcome by
His blood, giving Him all the glory. We have the fullest assurance
that, as He triumphed, so shall we. “In the world ye shall
have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.” This in some respects is the most dangerous form, in
which the enemy presents himself, to obstruct your path to glory.
He comes to you with the sweetest attractions, and the most
winning smiles, to gain your confidence, put you off your guard,
and induce you to swallow the poisoned bait. It is indispensable
therefore that you be hearty and determined in your renuncia-
tion, —that you watch against the blandishments of the insidious
foe, —that you never bow the neck to his enslaving power, for he
betrays with a kiss, and stabs when he smiles. And there is only
one way whereby you can effectually renounce and overcome the
world; —
2. You must believe in Christ.
Without faith in Jesus you have no moral power. Giving the
heart to Christ secures the assistance, in every time of need, of
His Almighty Spirit. You are tinder His protection from the


moment you enlist in His service. All the resources of His
great dominion are at your command, and you can never fail in
your warfare, so long as you trust in His promise. United to
Him, you have pardon, peace, reconciliation, and a title to live
through immortal ages in infinite joy. If you have not yet
believed with all your heart, your condition is inexpressibly
dreadful. All the sin of your life hangs about you, clamoring
to justice for your destruction. No power in the universe
can take away that sin except the power of Christ.
And, blessed be G-od, He is willing. He is here for the
very purpose. He simply asks your heart, and the
instant you surrender the boon is yours. He now offers freely
a full salvation. He does so with deep and solemn pathos,
knowing the interests at stake, the danger of delay, and the
infinite importance of present decision. If ever earnestness was
painted in the features of an intelligence, it is to be seen in the
face of Jesus as He speaks to sinners. Hear Him crying, “My
son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.”
He appeals with all the impassioned solemnity of dying love, and
says, —“ To you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of
men.” “ 0 that they were wise, that they understood this, that
they would consider their latter end ! ” “ Look unto me, and be
ye saved.”
He brings in His hand the glittering prize of immortality, the
only antidote to condemnation and death, and the pledge of bound-
less happiness. He tenders the offer of this infinite treasure without
money, —without price, through His own atoning merits. Heknows
you are a sinner and hell-deserving. He sees the wickedness,
and apostacy of your nature better than you do yourself. But
He would have you pardoned and purified for His own name’s
sake, that you might dwell with Him and serve Him day and
night in glory evermore. He waits your decision. Accept, 3
implore you, His offers. Receive salvation as His gift,—take
Him at His word, —and believe the gift is yours. Then at once
and for ever your pardon is sealed. You become a child of
grace and an heir of eternal happiness. Do not think it is too
late to accept of mercy. Jesus says, “ To-day, if you will hear
His voice, harden not your hearts.” Imagine not your sins are
too aggravated. He knows these to be tar more heinous than
you can understand, and yet He says, “ Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool.” “ Let the wicked forsake his
way and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return
unto the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, for He will abundantly pardon.” His work at the right
hand of God is that of pleading for sinners. His very office is
to intercede for the guilty, the hardened, the ruined, the lost.
He knows the depths of your spiritual maladies, and sees that
death and judgment are staring you in the face. Only come to
Him and prove the skill of the great Physician. Take and


faithfully use all His prescriptions, and though disagreeable to
the natural taste, the result will be glorious. “ Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt he saved.”
3. Live in constant readiness for eternity.
Trusting with the whole heart in the merits of Jesus, you
are at once prepared to enter into Paradise. An illustration
of this is to he seen in the case of the thief on the cross.
It is a mystery to some professing Christians, how any
one can know that he is prepared for heaven, and it is
regarded as presumption to entertain an assured hope of
its joys. This knowledge you can obtain only from one source.
God’s testimony is that alone on which dependence can be placed
in a matter of this kind. And His testimony is to be found in
His Word. You know when you believe and appropriate the
promise of God’s mercy, trusting in the sacrifice of Christ; and
you know that, according to the declarations of inspired truth,
pardon and peace must be the instantaneous result. Receiving
Christ is, as God testifies, receiving salvation, and therefore
fitness for heaven is an immediate and necessary consequence.
“ Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.” This
readiness for glory resulting at once from faith, and from faith
alone, is a truth to be believed, because God says it is the case,
according to the plan of salvation by grace through the merits of
His only begotten Son. Thus the feeling of gladness, peace, and
joy which springs up within the heart after believing, is the
inward witness of the Holy Spirit, and always follows, never
precedes, the reception of Christ, readiness to die, and to be
raised up to glory.
Realise, then, believing sinner, your happy position. Be assured
upon the plain witness of God Himself, that you are now fit to
meet the King of Terrors, and to be admitted into the realms of
bliss, simply through believing the Gospel. If the Almighty says
this is your blessed state the moment you embrace the Saviour,
then believe His Word. Surely it becomes you to rejoice that,
through the power of Christ, death is now to you a conquered
foe, the grave a bed of rest, and heaven a glorious home. Look
forward, then, believer, into the future with bright, animating,
and purifying hope. Lace the last enemy with courage, triumph
in the prospect of eternity. Looking to Jesus as your unchange-
able friend, anticipate the judgment with calmness and joy.
Stand ready, full of rapturous expectations, to join at any moment
the ransomed throng above. Every hour wait with solemnity,
and yet with gladness, the throwing off of the earthly tabernacle,
and the being clothed upon with your house which is from
heaven.
“ Rejoice in glorious hope;
Jesus, the Judge, shall come,
And take the servants up,
To their eternal home.
Soon shall we hear the Archangel’s voice;
The trump of God shall sound rejoice.”


It may be expected that I should on this occasion say a few
words respecting the character and happy death-bed experience
of her whose removal has plunged your pastor and his family
into the profoundest grief, has stirred up painful emotions in all
your hearts, and has left a serious blank among the warmest
friends and most useful members of the Church. I must cast
myself on your indulgence on account of the great prostration
from which I am suffering, while I endeavour with faithfulness,
though it may be with the fondness of friendship, to present as
concisely as possible some of the more prominent lineaments in
her Christian life. Margaret (Hamilton) McNicol was born in
Stevenston, Ayrshire, Scotland, on the 23rd August, 1817. She
was the eldest daughter in a family of ten. Her father still
survives, in his 79th year, while her mother died in the end of
1836. Like Timothy, “ from a child she knew the Holy Scrip-
tures, which are able to make wise unto salvation through faith
which is in Christ Jesus.” Throughout her whole life she was a
constant and devout reader of the Bible, and exemplified in her
daily walk the power of the truth on her heart. Her gracious
dispositions, and conscientious regard to principle and duty at
an early period, proved that she had “ not received the grace of
God in vain.” Love to the Saviour was doubtless the grand
regulator of her conduct, in the various spheres in which she
moved. The parental example which she daily witnessed, and
the Christian training which she had the privilege of enjoying,
was manifestly sanctified to the formation of her character for
future usefulness. Her youth was spent in active domestic
work in her parents’ home. While her mind was
cultivated with the enlightened truths and holy pre-
cepts of God’s Word, she was at the same time taught the great
importance of diligence and thrift in household management.
At an early period, when, indeed, quite a child, on the occasion
of her maternal parent being laid prostrate under severe and
distressing illness, she gave remarkable proof of persevering
skill, energy, and faithfulness in conducting family affairs.
Home was the centre of all her interests, and her mother, with
whose cares and infirmities she tenderly sympathised, was to her
like an only and much-loved companion. Early and unusual
responsibility called forth, through the grace of God, uncommon
wisdom and ability.
In consequence of the removal of the family to Paisley, she
had superior opportunities for advancing in spiritual attain-
ments. No sooner was a settlement effected here, than she
became connected with the Canal-street congregation, under the
ministry of the Rev. James Banks. She joinedthe Bible-class before
she was seventeen years of age, and shortly afterwards made public
profession of her faith in Christ, and devotedness to His service,
by joining the membership of the Church, and consecrating
herself to the Lord in the observance of the Supper. By her
exemplary walk and conversation, she may be said, without any


undue commendation, to have “adorned the doctrine of God
our Saviour in all things.”
On the 11th August, 1836, she entered into the marriage
relationship, a few months before the death of her mother. Now
she had fuller scope for having all the graces of the Holy Spirit,
both in her heart and life, brought into lively exercise, amid the
cares, the hardships, and the trials of her earthly lot. And, with
God’s help, nobly did her principles stand. Many were the
shocks of trouble to which she was subjected, but they only
served the purpose of driving her nearer to her God and Saviour,
and in Him she found a never-failing source of solace and
strength. The heaviest portion of her burdens she voluntarily
assumed, in love to Christ, and with a view to the advancement
of His cause. If she might be the means of contributing
towards the salvation of only one soul, she grudged no pains.
If a single sinner should be saved, as a brand from the burning,
through her instrumentality, directly or indirectly, she said “she
would be amply compensated for all the sacrifices she couldmake.”
And the sacrifices she did make were of no ordinary character.
These were, sometimes, of such a kind as might have been expected
to appal the stoutest heart. But, in proportion as the storm of
trial raged, so did theLordbrace her for the conflict, andher courage
rose to more than equal the emergency. Only the great day
of judgment can reveal the patience, the perseverance, the self-
denial, and the undaunted heroism, with which she was enabled
to endure her self-imposed hardships, in order that she might be
honoured in helping forward the cause of Christ in the world.
In the midst of all her struggles, there was no murmur or
discontent. She was always lively, cheerful, and happy. And
when the aspects of providence were most threatening, she
knew it was only a trial to her faith. She always cherished a
very strong trust in the infinite care and loving-kindness of God.
When called to suffer most severely from her self-denying policy,
she would constantly affirm, “ I am sure I shall never want.”
“ The Lord will provide.” God was faithful to His promise, and
in due time gave her to see the desire of her heart, in her
husband’s ministerial settlement and usefulness.
The great secret of her perseverance under the formidable
difficulties of her position, was her trust in the Lord, her spirit
of prayer, her abhorrence of evil and love to all that is good,
and her thorough conviction that she was seeking to honour her
redeeming God. While energetic in her action, skilful and
sagacious in planning, diligent in the improvement of time, and
aspiring to a prominent position of usefulness in the Church of
Christ, she knew she could succeed only by humble dependence
on God’s will and holding on consistently in the path of duty.
Hence her character, which was early based on sound principles,
continued to evince sanctified thoughtfulness, tender conscien-
tiousness, earnest piety. She hated sin in all its forms. She
was a rigid and consistent Sabbath-keeper, and a regular


worshipper in the sanctuary. Not only was she in the habit of
offering the weekly sacrifice in public on the Lord’s day, but
she always contrived so to arrange her household duties, that she
might be able to attend the prayer-meetings which were held
during the week. Like all true Christians, she habitually
breathed the atmosphere of prayer, not only in public and at the
family altar, but also in private. The morning dawn witnessed
her hallowed offerings of prayer, and the curtains of night fell
around her, while sending up to the throne the breathings of her
devotional spirit.
Soon the cares of a family, in addition to other anxieties,
pressed upon her mind, but under all she was abundantly
supported by the grace of God. Whether as a wife or as a
mother, she was equally enabled to combat with difficulty, and to
feel, that, in proportion to her responsibilities, so was the honour
of faithful and devoted service. After a number of years’ residence
in Paisley, the family removed to Glasgow, where she enjoyed
the ministrations of the Rev. Dr. Anderson, of John-street.
Tljeir eldest child they left in Paisley, in the city of the dead,
awaiting the resurrection of the just. In their new abode she
had similar trials, but just as before had equal cause to see the
hand of God, in many remarkable ways, interposing for her
comfort and encouragement. She now indeed was peculiarly
cheered, in witnessing the fruit of her faith and self-denial, in her
husband’s eminent usefulness in mission work, in the destitute
parts of that populous city, and in his successful prosecution of
study with a view to the holy ministry. After he had pursued a
course of preparation, various circumstances concurred to point
the way to Australia, as a highly desirable and very needful field
on which to expend his energies in evangelistic and pastoral
work. After prayer and counsel, it was decided they should
embark. Accordingly she left Glasgow for this colony in the
beginning of November, 1849, and, together with her husband
and five children, landed in Melbourne in February, 1850.
Three months after arrival she left for Bacchus Marsh, where
she greatly assisted her husband in the Lord’s work. It was
shortly after her settlement there, she was visited with severe
illness, which necessitated her removal to town for medical skill
and attendance. So obstinate was the attack, that after six
week’s treatment, she was found exceedingly exhausted, and her
friends despaired of her recovery. It would appear as if this
trouble laid the foundation of the disease of which she died.
Notwithstanding that so little hope was entertained of her life,
she did not believe in the nearness of her dissolution. In answer
to fervent prayer, like good king Hezekiah, she believed she had
a message from God, that her life would be prolonged. “ The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him ; and He will show
them His covenant.” Of the truth of God’s promise to “ deliver
those who call upon Him in the time of trouble,” her experience
furnished on this occasion a striking illustration. One morning,


in the midst of her great weakness and distress, while all was still
and quiet, she was pouring out her heart in prayer to God. In
immediate answer to her earnest supplications, the following
passage from the 118th Psalm, came with irresistible force into
her mind: —
“ I shall not die, hut live and shall
The works of God discover.
The Lord hath me chastised sore,
But not to death given over.”
In accordance with her faith in the divine goodness, truth, and
love, she forthwith began to rally, and in a short time was restored
to health and usefulness.
So soon as her usual strength returned, it was unreservedly
consecrated to the two great subjects of interest —the church
and the family. Her energies were devoted to the education,
comfort, and advancement of her children. She watched over
their spiritual progress with constant anxiety, endeavoured to
instil into their minds the truths of the everlasting gospel, and
sought carefully to train them up in habits of obedience to the
Lord Jesus Christ. While her teaching was authoritative and
firm, it was, at the same time, always mixed with such wisdom,
affection, and grace, that all looked up to her with the greatest
respect and confidence. Her word was law. Under her influence
and management, peace and comfort reigned, and she reaped a
rich reward in filial devotedness and love.
The Church of Christ had her constant prayers, and abundant
labours for its peace and prosperity. Having the honour of
aiding in the formation and establishment of various congrega-
tions, she had ample opportunity of exercising her peculiar skill,
energy, and resolution in overcoming difficulties, and in
encouraging others in the way to success. The managing and
building committees, and the congregations, first of Bacchus Marsh
and of Geelong, and latterly of Eushworth and of Donnybrook,
and Wallan Wallan, can bear ample testimony to her efficient
skill, and her valuable, earnest and vigorous co-operation. In
all her movements she was kind and cheerful, loving and
social, —large-hearted, generous, and heroic. Hence wherever
she was known, and especially where she was best known, she
was highly respected and beloved by all. The description given
by Solomon (Prov. xxxi. 10-31) of a model married woman,
viewing her as a wife, a mother, and a labourer in the household
of the Lord Jesus, is by no means an inaccurate delineation of
her whole life, and the fruit of her labours in these different
localities, and the regard, with which her name is mentioned, will
long proclaim the truth of scripture, that “ The memory of the
just is blessed —“ The righteous shall be in everlasting remem-
brance.”
The most useful labours, however, in the Church of Christ on
earth, must come to a close. About ten months ago, after prayer
and consultation, it was deemed essential that she should undergo


a severe operation in order, if possible, to prevent a cancerous
affection of the breast. Much mercy was seen in answer to
prayer in connection with the ordeal. Though her health rallied
wonderfully for a while, yet there seemed to remain an
unsoundness which baffled all skill and effort. Two months ago
it was found necessary, from alarming symptoms, that she should
repair to town to be under regular medical advice. Everything
that means could accomplish were tried in vain. While
she felt it a duty to do her utmost to secure restoration, it was
at the same time in humble submission to the divine will, and
also with a deep impression that death was in the cup. It was
not, however, till within four weeks of her decease that, after
special consultation among the medical advisers, the announce-
ment was made that there was absolutely no prospect of
recovery. She was not taken by surprise. Her mind all along
had been seriously apprehensive of the result. She was, there-
fore, as calm and resolute as ever. The God and Saviour, whom
she had loved and trusted for half a century, could not leave her
now. He had strengthened her for many a conflict, and He
would nerve her for the last. There was, therefore, the same
staid demeanour, the same unwavering trust in Christ, the same
cultivation of communion with her Lord and Saviour, the same
patience under suffering, and the same humble but confident
hope of glory she ever displayed, though now, doubtless, in an
intenser degree. She had long enjoyed very clear views of the
Gospel. Her Christian profession was based on a thorough
knowledge of the plan of salvation by faith in Jesus, and with-
out the works of the law. The sacrifice and substitution of
Christ were doctrines exceedingly precious to her soul, and
proved the source of her confidence, joy, and hope in the pros-
pect of eternity.
Notwithstanding the fatal character of her trouble, yet,
through the grace of the prayer-hearing God, she was not
tortured with acute and agonizing pain. Her suffering was
more of an oppressive character, and while it did not hinder her
being exercised very constantly both in reading and prayer,
conversing about the things of God, and hearing the suppli-
cations of others, yet it doubtless depressed her, and hindered her
joy from being more lively. She often spoke during the progress
of her illness of the love of Jesus. This was the favourite theme.
The atoning blood He shed was her only hope. In speaking of
the finished work on the cross as the only foundation on which
she could safely build for eternity, she frequently remarked,
“Itis a sure foundation and will never shift.” Eepeatedly, also,
she would say, “None but Jesus, none but Jesus can do helpless
sinners good.” Again and again she seemed to feel her heart so
full of Christ, that she could not help saying, “ Christ is all—all
and in all.” Her thoughts seemed to be continually revolving
around Jesus and His love, and particularly His love displayed
in His sufferings and death. On one occasion, while bearing


considerable pain, she remarked, “My pain is as nothing when
compared with the great sufferings which Jesus endured for
me; and He was altogether free from sin, while I am a poor
helpless sifner.” At another time, when perspiring very
heavily, she said, “ My heavy sweatings' are little in comparison
with those of Jesus, while suffering for my sins, for He sweat
great drops of blood.”
While she appreciated the perfect righteousness of Christ, she
renounced all dependence on her own. She was fully sensible of
her own unworthiness before G-od. Never did she mention any
of her useful labours in the cause of Christ, as affording her
consolation, in the prospect of her soon appearing before the
righteous Judge. Once, when speaking to her husband, she
said, “ My dear, I fear that we have been too fond of each other;
I fear that you have made me an idol, and now that G-od is
going to remove me from you, I hope you will give your
whole heart and undivided energies to the service of Christ.
You may do more good after my death than ever you did before.”
She felt as if her interest in the prosperity of the Church could
never cease, and she could not fail to give expression to her
earnest desire that although she was removed, the work of God
might go forward more effectively than ever.
She did not always enjoy the same lively sense of the
Redeemer’s presence and love. She never lost her confidence in
the Saviour’s infinite grace and unchangeable faithfulness, but
she sometimes expressed a wish that she had more sensible tokens
of her Saviour’s reconciled countenance. Her faith, however,
never failed. Her footing on the rock was firm, and she never
doubted her interest in the great salvation. At one time when her
husband said, “ I hope to meet you in heaven,” she promptly
and confidently replied, “ I have no doubt of it.” Only once
did her mind seem to lose its habitual dependence and comfort.
It was, however, when her energies were very low. It appeared
as if the great adversary had been permitted for a season to
overwhelm her with darkness, and to fill her with a distressing
sense of sin. It was only for a brief season. It was, doubtless
the last desperate effort of the enemy to gain the victory.
Soon the Saviour appeared, and with His almighty voice quelled
the waves and storms, and then a heavenly calm and composure
ensued, which remained unbroken to the end.
The Word of God was her anchor of hope. It was her
unwearied study,—and when unable to read for herself she would
have it read by others. She had her favourite chapters in
Isaiah, in John’s Gospel, and in the Epistles. The Psalms
too afforded rich consolation and support. Many of the
promises scattered throughout the sacred volume, she listened
to with unabated interest. There were other precious helps
to her devotions which she valued much. She prized amongst
these in a special manner the writings of McCheyne, but
above all, she relished the pure manna—the unadulterated milk


of the Word. She never loathed the bread of heaven, as if it
were stale and tasteless. “ I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee” (Hebrew xiii. 5), always came to her with a never-failing
freshness. “ Fear thou not, for lam with thee ;be not dismayed,
for lam thy God. I will strengthen thee ; yea, I will help thee;
yea, I will uphold thee, by the right hand of my righteousness”
(Isaiah xli. 10), no matter how often repeated, was like the
widow’s cruse of oil; it yielded abundant comfort. So also with
Isaiah Ixiii. 2 —“ When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee ;
when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee” (John xiv. 2) ; “In my
Father’s house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would
have told you, I go to prepare a place for youand with a great
variety of others equally sweet and precious, and all sustaining
in their influence.
Next to the importance of the Word, in her estimation, was the
exercise of prayer. That which had proved in so many instances,
all her life, the means of consolation and courage, could not fail
her now in her greatest need. Feeling her absolute dependence as
a guilty sinner on the mercy and grace of God, and believing that
prayer was the divinely prescribed means of obtaining promised
blessing, she was aften asking others to engage with her in
supplication at the throne. To the last did she feel the import-
ance and recognise the privilege of drawing near to God. At one
time, when her mind had become weak through exhaustion of
bodily strength, she desired, when unable for the task, to go to
her knees to pray. When reminded that the posture of the body
was nothing with God, she poured out at once her earnest
supplications.
Besides the inspired writers and a few uninspired authors of
high spirituality and devotion, she bad her favourite poets.
Among these were Wesley, Toplady, McCheyne, Watts, and
Doddridge. One of the hymns in which she had great delight
was —
“ Jeaus, lover of my soul,
Let me to Thy bosom fly,
While the billows near me roll,
While the tempest still is high,” &c.
Another, which came home to her heart with power, was —
“ Rock of ages cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in thee,
Let the water and the blood,
From Thy riven side which flowed,
Be of sin the double cure,
Cleanse me from its gilt and power,” &c.
These hymns she often repeated. She found in them the
essence of the gospel. They helped to bring her soul nearer to
the Saviour, and to strengthen her faith in His all-sufficiency.
When at any time her heart overflowed with gratitude and love


to Christ, she found her feelings fitly [[expressed in the one which
begins —
“ 0, for a thousand tongues to sing
My great Eedeemer’s praise !
The glories of my God and King,
The triumphs of His grace,” &c.
The experience of the sweet singer of Israel, as expressed in
the 23rd Psalm, was always highly prized by her, and much more
now when sh® was so soon to pass through the valley of the
shadow of death. As expressive of the believer’s experience in
coming out of darkness into the marvellous light of the gospel,
she delighted in the hymn commencing—
“ I once was a stranger to grace and to God ;
I knew not my danger, and felt not my load :
Though friends spoke in raptures of Christ on the tree,
‘ Jehovah Tsidkenu ’ was nothing to me,” &c.
Again, as she thought of her glorious prospects as a sinner
saved by grace, she found suitable expression to her deeply
interested, if not enraptured feelings, in the words of the hymn
founded on the description in the Revelation of the redeemed—
“ How bright these glorious spirits shine!
Whence all their white array ?
How came they to the blissful seats,
Of everlasting day P ” &c.
The prospect of leaving a family of nine, only one having been
married, and all so affectionate, naturally gave her considerable
thought. To meet this formidable difficulty, grace enabled her
to cherish entire resignation. She could trust them to the care
of Him who had cared so much for her. She recognised the
special grace of Grod in sparing her to watch over them so long.
Her parting counsels were becoming a dying mother and Christian.
Upon each and all she pressed the necessity of seeking an interest
in Christ, as sinful, guilty, and perishing. She urged upon them
the duty and the privileges of prayer, and not to rest till they
obtained the new heart which Hod had promised to them that
ask. She would have them to love Jesus, who first loved them,
and so to live that she should meet them all in heaven. To the
only one, who, on account of distance and affliction, did not see
her on her deathbed, she sent a special message, “not to injure
herself by coming to see her; that she could be benefited by her
prayers as much as by her presence, that she was going to meet
her departed child, and that they should both be waiting for her
when she should arrive at the better land.” With affectionate
forethought she committed the youngest to the special care of
the eldest, and enjoined upon all to be kind to their father when
she was gone.
As she approached her last hours she was not able from
exhaustion to speak much. While her strength continued, she
used it in speaking to friends who came, in many instances, con-


siderable distances to see her, in tendering suitable counsels, and
in discharging her duty faithfully to every one according to
circumstances. Every thing that a tender conscience could
suggest as necessary was done while ability lasted. And anything
which she could not see done, she left as a sacred charge that it
should not be omitted. She warmly thanked the medical atten-
dant for his kind, skilful and unwearied attention, and was
exceedingly grateful to all the friends who in any way had
ministered to her comfort.
At length all seemed done, but just to die. For about a whole
day her mind, through the worn-out frame, ceased to hold inter-
course with the outer world. What transpired in her experience
during that solemn interval can be known only to Giod. The last
words of sensible intercourse were very sweet and encouraging.
On one of her last nights, at midnight, she said to her husband,
“My dear, I wish I could sing.” She was asked what she would
like to sing P She replied, “ Oh, for a heart to praise my Gbd.”
On one occasion when speaking to her husband regarding Christ,
she said, “He is precious, very precious, very precious.” The
night before she died, she said, when able to do little more than
articulate, “ Victory, victory; lend, lend your wings,” but could
say no more. Afterwards, she several times repeated the word
“happy,” and this appeared to be the last word spoken by her on
earth. As if in quiet, undisturbed and refreshing repose, she
spent the whole of the last day of her life, and in the presence of
herhusband and all her family, with one exception, and a number of
friends, at half-past twelve on the morning of the 20th of August,
1868, like an infant going to rest in its mother’s arms, she, in
spite of the exhaustion of death, and just as the soul seemed
quitting the mortal tabernacle, gave a sudden enraptured-looking
gaze, and fell asleep in Jesus.
I shall conclude by simply reading the following lines, which
were sent a few days after the death, anonymously, through the
post, addressed to your pastor. You will appreciate the kind
feeling and the Christian sentiment expressed, as well as the gifts
displayed.
ODE TO A DEPARTED SISTER IN CHRIST.
Gone, with heavenly guides attended,
Sister dear, ’tis well with thee;
Pilgrim, now thy days are ended,
Safely over life’s rough sea ;
See thy Hope, with arms extended
Sweetly whispering, “ Come to me.”
Gone to join the choir of glory,
There to breathe the holy song;
Gone to realise the story,
Thou didst tell to old and young ;
Now to know Him, gone before thee,
Gone to join the ransomed throng.


Death’s dark iron gates are open,
(Jordan’s stream appears in view),
Oh ! rejoice, its hands are broken,
Lo ! the Conqueror has gone through ;
Victory now o’er nature’s passion;
Hail, glory! see the crown for you.
Tremble not to ford the river,
Death has lost its pois’nous sting ;
Triumph, sister, now for ever,
Hear those voices how they sing ;
He is mighty to deliver ;
Hark ! how heaven’s portals ring !
Soar away, thou deathless spirit,
Swift on wings of love Divine,
Trusting to the Saviour’s merit,
Brighter still thy light will shine;
Though the way be dark He’ll clear it,
With the promise, “I am thine.”
Now, in glory, oh, the greeting!
Angels strike their harps of gold;
Heavenly hosts in concert meeting,
Sing the song no tongue hath told ;
There abiding, no time fleeting,
Safe within our Shepherd’s fold.
Now, I turn and say, farewell!
Comfort ye who weep and mourn,
Do your bosoms throb and swell ?
Why like those who are forlorn ?
Friends, rise now, for all is well;
Christ is near with you to dwell.
Death may separate awhile,
Father, Mother, children dear;
Oh! look upward to the smile,
That wipes away the mourner's tear;
And while months or days beguile;
Kemember, —He who wept is near.
Wipe away those tears of sorrow;
Lean on Christ the aching head;
Soon you’ll see the blessed morrow,
When the trump shall wake the dead;
On to glory, on and follow;
Christ can cheer the dying bed.
With esteem and respect, yours, &c., A. T.
Another poetic tribute to the memory of the deceased was for-
warded to the bereaved husband since the above was delivered.—


It is written in the native dialect of Scotland, and is worthy of
being recorded, both from its merit, its scriptural truth, and the
tender sympathy it manifests :
In iEemortanu
Died at her Brother’s Residence (Rev. Robert Hamilton), Nicholgon-street,
Fitzroy, on Thursday morning, August 20, 1868, Margaret, the beloved
wife of Rev. Alexander M‘Nicol, Presbyterian Ministar, Donnybrook
and Wallan Wallan, in her 51st year.
HER END WAS PEACE.
When nicht’s darkened mantle had covered the earth,
An’ sleep had closed mony an e’e;
Her spirit burst forth frae its frail boose o’ clay,
Tae the hame o’ the happy an’ free.
Whar the wicked dae noo frae a’ troublin’ cease —
Whar the weary an’ laden fin’ rest—
Whar the slave an’ the pris’ner thegither are fra# —
Whar the puir noo nae mair are opprest.
Her lamp she kept burnin’ a’ ready tae be
When the summons at midnicht should come ;
“ Arise ! go ye forth, meet the Bridegroom wi’ joy,
An’ enter the feast)while there’s room.”
Below she had trials, afflictions, an’ cares;
Abuve she is free frae them a’;
Below she shed mony a sorrowfu’ tear,
Abuve they are a’ wiped awa’.
Her pairtner in life, an’ her offspring sae dear,
Noo miss her sweet form that’s laid low;
She was a gude mither, a true Christian wife,
Respected by a’ here below.
Sae gentle, an’ meek, like the Saviour she lo’ed,
Aye willing tae dae gude tae a’;
She passed frae this earth, tae her glorious reward
In the heavenly Jerus’lem sae braw.
Then dinna weep, luved-anes, for her gane before,
She noo is an angel sae bricht,
Arrayed in the garment o’ Christ’s righteousness;
An’ praises Him baith day an’ nicht.
She touches the strings o’ her sweet gowden harp,
In praises tae Grod an’ the Lam’,
Wha ance bore man’s burden o’ sins on the tree ;
But is noo at His Faither’s richt ban’.
There she stan’s wi’ the myriads o’ heaven’s great host,
Wha cast doun their croons at His feet:
They clap their glad wings, an’ wi’ ane voice burst forth
Intae singin’, sae rapt’rous an’ sweet.


“ Oh, worthy the Lam’ ! wha on Calv’ry was slain,
An’ noo has ascended tae heaven;
A’ glory, an’ honour, an’ riches, an’ power
Tae Him, noo an’ ever he given.”
Then dry up yer tears, for it winna be lang,
An’ the Saviour will tak’ ye safe hame;
There ye’ll meet her, an’ mony luved-anes gane before
Ascribin’ their praise tae the Lam’.
J. R. A.
August 26, 1868.
Fitaroy.
It remains only to be noticed that the churches in Donnybrook
and Wallan Wall an have evinced their respect for the memory
of the departed wife of their minister, by covering the pulpits
with mourning drapery, and that the sympathy felt and expressed
towards their mourning pastor and his family, is deep and genuine.
As an illustration of the tender and affectionate feeling cherished,
the committee of St. John’s Presbyterian Church, Donnybrook,
on the Bth September, 1868, passed the following resolution—and
there can be no doubt that the committee of the Wallan Wallan
Church give it their cordial concurrence, —and transmitted a
copy to Mr. McNicol: —
“That the managers of this church desire to place on record
their truly heartfelt sympathy with their esteemed pastor, under
the trying bereavement he has sustained in the loss of his beloved
wife, who for thirty-two years ably and cheerfully aided him in
his great Master’s work, —to whose energy and perseverance this
congregation is much indebted for its present position and
prospects —and whose amiability and affectionate nature endeared
her to every individual thereof. —D. R. McGbegob, Secretary.”
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOUEKK-BT. WEST, MELBOURNE.






