

WHITCOMBE'S STORY BOOKS
LIKE
ENGLISH
GENTLEMEN
FOR AGES 8 TO 10 YEARS


WHITCOMBE’S STORY BOOKS
LIKE ENGLISH
GENTLEMEN
BY J. E. HODDER WILLIAMS
For ages 8 to ic _
WHITCOMBE AND TOMBS LIMITED
AUCKLAND, WELLINGTON, CHRISTCHURCH, DUNEDIN
INVERCARGILL, LONDON, MELBOURNE, SYDNEY




NOTE
This story of the glorious last days of Cap-
tain Scott and his heroic comrades has been
specially prepared for schools.
Robert Falcon Scott was born in 1868 and
entered the Navy at the age of fourteen. In
1900, with the rank of commander, he started
on his first voyage of discovery in the Antarctic
Ocean. It lasted four years, and in 1905 Scott,
now captain, published the story of his adven-
turous expedition in The Voyage of the Dis-
covery. In June 1910 he set out in the Terra
Nova as leader of a second expedition, with the
object of discovering the South Pole. He
succeeded in this, only to find that he had been
preceded by the Norwegian explorer Roald
Amundsen; and it was on the return journey
that misfortune befell him.


LIKE ENGLISH GENTLEMEN
Let me tell you a tale of glorious adventures.
It’s only a little story, but it’s about great
heroes. Through the long years, across the
wide, wide world, their names will live for ever.
You remember how Peter Pan, after fight-
ing the pirate Hook, stood alone on the rock,
over which the waves were quickly rising, with
a smile on his face and a drum beating within
him. It was saying, “To die will be an awfully
big adventure.” You remember, too, how,
later, Hook told Wendy to give a last message
to her children, for they were to die. And
this was her message: “We hope our sons will
die like English gentlemen.”
How do English gentlemen die ? Is dying,
which seems sometimes, as we lie awake at
night, so awful a thing, a big adventure?


I have often wondered what Peter and
Wendy meant. Now I know.
Let me tell you the story of heroes who died
like English gentlemen, to whom death was
the biggest adventure of all. '


I
Some years ago there lived a hero of heroes
who said to himself, “I’m going to find the
South Pole.” Men who never talk to them-
selves are seldom worth listening to when they
talk aloud. Every big adventure starts with
a man saying something to himself.
Now it does not much matter to you or to
me what this South Pole really is, except that
everyone agrees that to find it is about the
most difficult thing in all the world. For
hundreds of years men have tried and failed.
To reach it you have to cross miles and miles
and miles of snow and ice. There are no men,
no trains, no shops, no trees, no flowers, in all
that wild land. Nothing but snow and ice,
and ice and snow. And the cold is much
colder than the coldest you have ever even
dreamt of.
You wonder why people should try so hard
to get there. I think it is just because it has
never been done before. When you and I


stretch out our arms as high as we can, there,
just beyond our reach, is a world above this
world where we stand. It’s called The Land
of Things Not Done Before. It’s a fine and
splendid thing to climb and climb up towards
that land, and even if we stumble and fall and
fail, it’s worth while. This country of ours is
so great, its Empire so wide, because, through-
out the long years, Englishmen, everywhere,
have fought and struggled and died to possess
that unknown land, and to plant their flag on
its topmost height.
■ So this hero of heroes said, “I’m going
to find the South Pole. It will be a big
adventure.”
For years and years he made ready, made his
plans, for that is the way to start on a great
adventure.
i Many people think that all they have to do
is to sit in an easy chair and say some magic
word like “ Nowornever,” and they will be
ready to start. They are all wrong. You
have to work and toil for ever so long if you
are not to fail when the great moment comes.


When this hero had done everything he
could think of to make himself fit and able for
the great adventure, and had mapped out the
journey step by step, and planned when and
how he should feed himself and his men on
the way, he set out.
They sailed far across the seas until they
reached the shores of the unknown land, and
there day after day he and his companions
battled with snow and ice and ice and snow.
Night after night they shivered and froze in
their tents. And every morning they rose to
fight again against the same enemies, snow
and ice and ice and snow, storms, and tempests,
and blizzards.
At last they reached a mighty barrier of
rock and ice. Somewhere, far beyond it, was
the Pole, but the hero could only look and
long. He was beaten back by want of food,
by the death from cold of the dogs that drew
his sledges, and by the sickness of his com-
panions. He had to come home again.
“Give it up,” said his friends. “You will
never climb those giant hills of rock and ice
*


that guard the South Pole. It can’t be done.
The risks are too great. You have done all
a man can do. You have done better than
anyone else. Be satisfied.”
“I have not done my best jet,” answered
the hero. “I’ll make new plans and then I’ll
try again. And this time it is not going to
be only a journey to see what the land is like.
I know just how wild it is now. lam going
to find the South Pole.”
That is the end of the first great adventure.
II
Day after day he worked again at the old
plans and made fresh ones, thinking of every-
thing that had kept him back on his last
journey, and how he might better this and alter
that in his next. He knew now a great deal


about this Land of Things Not Done Before,
for he had travelled a long way where no man
had ever been, but he could not rest until he
had planted his flag right on top of the land,
at the very South Pole itself.
In those days many said, “You have done
enough, rest now ” —people who do nothing
and spend their lives resting say that. But
he went on thinking out new ways of carrying
food across the ice, new ways of keeping his
men well and warm in the awful cold, new
tracks for his ponies and his dogs and his
sledges.
His room was like a museum, —full of tins
of food, ropes and straps, and boots and furs,
which he was always trying or testing.
Sometimes he said, “ I wonder if I shall ever
reach the Pole.” Even heroes, when they are
tired, lose heart just a little. Then the lady
who stood beside him said, “ I know you will.”
All the time he hoped that was what the
answer would be. It is a wonderful thing
when you have someone beside you whom you
can count on to say the very word, the only


word, you want to hear. So he found heart
again at once and went on joyfully with his
planning.
Later on as he worked, two were always
beside him, the one who had,helped him for
so long, and with her a baby boy.
“ Come back to us both soon,” they said, as
the day drew near to say good-bye. That was
all they could do to help then, —just to say,
“ Come back soon.” That is the splendid part
they play in this great adventure. Not a very
big part, you think? Why, the memory of
“ Come back soon ” is often the only thing
that brings us home in the end when we are
so weary that it seems hardly worth while to
struggle on.
When the hero had made everything ready,
he sailed away on the old whaling ship that was
to carry him and his brave men across the
Arctic seas to the shores of the unknown land.
Everybody wondered at all he had thought of
and planned, and said, “He has left nothing
to chance this time. He has thought of every-
thing that could possibly happen in that long


journey, and is ready to meet every danger and
every difficulty.”
Once again he and his chosen comrades
began their fight against snow and ice and ice
and snow. It was harder work than ever this
time, for the wind blew fierce against them,
but step by step they won their way, over the
cruel cold miles, into the very heart of that
unknown land. They conquered the mighty
fortress of rock and ice that had stopped them
on their first journey,—not in a day or a night,
but slowly, inch after inch, resting here,
battling there, stumbling, sliding, storming
over the peaks, across the chasms, conquering
always. Over the barrier they passed, and
then on, on until at last they reached so near
the South Pole that they unfurled the flag they
had carried all the way from home, so eager
were they to see it wave on the top of the
world. And then, and then. . . .
Yes, they reached the Pole in the end, after
such a fight that it makes one ache and tremble
all over to think of it, and . . . found that
another traveller, from some other country,


had been there just before them —only a few
weeks before them —and had planted his
country’s flag, instead of theirs, right at the
South Pole itself.
And that is the end of the second great
adventure.
So the other man who got there first was the
great hero after all?
Wait!
11l
“Come back to us soon,” said-she who had
stood beside the hero at home.
“We’ll get back home as soon as we can,”
said he as he stood with his friends at the South
Pole, “ and let everyone know that though we
did find the Pole, as we said we would, the
other fellow found it first. There are sure to
be lots of mean people who will say he’s made
the whole story up. We know it’s true. Let’s


get back and tell the world that the other flag
waved there first.”
That, you see, is the way with heroes.
There were four men with the hero at the
South Pole, and their names are worth remem-
bering. There was Petty Officer Edgar Evans,
a big brawny seaman who had been with him
for many years and had been chosen for this
great adventure out of many hundreds who
wanted to come, because he was so strong.
There were Dr. Wilson, Captain Oates, and
Lieutenant Bowers, —two sailors (for the hero
was a Captain in His Majesty’s Navy), two
soldiers and a doctor.
When they had planted the flag of England
beside the other man’s flag at the very top of
the world, they all started for home.
At first things went well. All the plans
worked. It seemed that they would be back
home in no time, now. Then the clouds and
mist crept round them. The snow fell with-
out ceasing. Their eyes were blinded and
their faces cut with the cruel stinging icicles
that the wind flung at them like thousands of


sharp-pointed darts. They sank deep, deep
into the soft snow at every step. Wearily,
painfully they dragged themselves along,
through walls of snow and over crags of ice,
pulling the sledges which carried their food and
firing, the records they had made and the won-
derful things they had collected as they jour-
neyed, while the wind howled and shrieked and
screamed about them, cutting its bitter path
through their thick furs. Every day they
woke to the same fierce battle, and every night
they slept, those five men, all alone in a vast
freezing world of white.
Snow and ice, and ice and snow, every-
where !
The wind blew harder and the cold grew
more bitter; and though they talked so
brightly of the wonderful time they would
have when they all reached home, the hero
began to feel a heavier load of care. It’s a
tremendously hard thing to fight your way
across this white waste when the weather is
fine and when you carry no great weight on
your back, but it is hard beyond words when




the storm beats down upon a back bent with
anxiety.
The food and firing were getting very low.
They had just enough when they started, but
if it was to last till they reached another store
which they had left behind them, they had to
coyer at least nine miles every day. Only
nine miles! At first it had been easy, but in
this battle against the storm the hero knew
they had only done eight,—seven,—six miles
in the day.
He flung back his shoulders and laughed
aloud as he watched his comrades ploughing
through the snow.
“Cheer up, boys,” he cried. “It’s slow
work, it’s hard work, but we’ll just manage it,
never fear. We’ve got enough to see us
through to One Ton Depot, where there’s a
regular feast waiting for us. Just think of
the dinner we’ll have then. Push along, push
along, I want to get home.”
He felt sure that to-morrow would be fine
and bright, and they would do eleven or even
twelve miles, and so make up what they had lost.


And for a few hours the load of care seemed
so light that he scarcely felt it. That’s the
way with every man who thinks, in the day’s
long march, of the happy fireside he will reach
when evening comes. I told ypu that the
“ Come back soon ” part was a big one in the
great adventure.
But Evans, the man of mighty muscles,
seemed to have lost his strength. He was
always a little behind the others, found it even
harder than they to pull himself out of the
snow drifts, sank down more tired than they
at the end of each climb.
He stopped dead. “I’m done,” said he.
Once more he dragged himself up and tried
to walk. He fell again. “ I’m done,” said
he.
It’s not always the big man, you see, who
lasts the longest. This was not in the hero’s
plans at all. But there is always something
outside every plan we make, something we
can’t make ready to meet, for we don’t know
what or where it is. It sounds hard, doesn’t
it? But there would be no great adventures


without this unknown, unplanned-for some-
thing.
The load of care was heavy again upon them
all.
If Evans could not walk alone, he must be
helped, dragged, carried along somehow.
Each of the four had just, and only just,
enough strength left to carry himself, to pull
his own share of the weight on the sledges,
none, not a single ounce, to spare for Evans
if he was to cover those dreadful nine miles
across the snow every day, day after day. If
he did not, they would never reach home.
And yet each one gave him freely of what he
could not spare.
It was their life blood that the heroes gave
for this simple seaman.
Evans was dying. He had fallen on his
head and was very badly hurt. The doctor
watched him and knew that nothing could
save him. If they left him behind he would
die a little sooner. That was all. And they
might save themselves and reach home safely
at last. With Evans to drag and carry along


with them, weak as they were, they could only
go such a very little way each day.
Six miles, five miles.
“Come home soon! ”
Evans would die soon in any case. They
could not hope to bring him back to England
with them. If they left him he would only
die just a few hours sooner, and they would
be safe. But they were English gentlemen,
these four, the hero, and Dr. Wilson and
Captain Oates and Lieutenant Bowers, and so
such a thing as leaving Evans behind never
came into their heads. If, when panting,
sobbing for breath, as they pulled and pushed
the sledge which sank deep under the sea-
man’s great weight, the thought stole up
behind them and peered over their bent
shoulders, with all their might they flung it
from them and crushed it under their tired
feet, and started to pull and push and drag
Evans along again, cheering him and pouring
their own courage into his sinking heart.
Every minute they waited for him, every
time they heaved him out of the snow, every


step they carried him was pain untellable for
them. They knew exactly what this delay
meant. If things had gone as they had
planned, they had exactly enough food and
fuel left. They had nothing to spare. But
this was outside the plans, it was the unplanned
part of the adventure. They counted the
cost. They were willing to pay the price,
even if the price was to be their own lives.
The hero, the doctor, the captain, the
lieutenant, were English gentlemen, you
know. “Our sons,” said Wendy, “will die
like English gentlemen.” Now we are begin-
ning to understand —you and I,
In spite of all they could do, after many
days of this fearsome struggle, Evans died, as
they knew he would. They buried him under
the snow, and after they had read prayers over
lllhs white grave, they turned their faces once
more towards home.
Poor Evans ! If he had not fallen! If his
strength had not failed! If only they could
have left him where he fell. Poor heroes!
But they were four English gentlemen.


Hope grew again. They had only them-
selves to carry now. Nine miles did not seem
quite impossible. It was hard enough, but
not quite so hard as when Evans had to be
carried. On, on they struggled, over the
snow and the ice. The wind still beat down
upon them, food and fuel were giving out,
but there was still a hope.
The way grew rougher still, the wind
keener, the cold still colder.
Then Captain Oates fell and could not rise
—Oates whom they called “No Surrender
Oates,” because he had fought in the Boer
war and refused to give in, in face of an over-
whelming foe. His friends had watched him
anxiously for days. They had seen the deadly
white patches on his face, cut and bleeding
where the cold had cracked it; they had seen
how at every step the lines of agony scored/
deep across the frost-bitten patches. Through
the thickest furs the frost had bitten him with
its icy teeth. His hands, his feet were almost
dead, nothing but lumps of pain. In turns
the hero and Dr. Wilson and Lieutenant


Bowers helped him up and across the storm-
swept snow.
“I am tired,” said Captain Oates. “You
leave me here a bit. I’ll rest a little and follow
you on in a bit.”
They laughed at him, for they knew he knew
better than that. If you once stop in that
snow world you stop for ever.
“Well, then, I’m done,” he said, “save
yourselves. You may just manage it without
me, but we shall all die here, if you wait for
me or drag me on, and I can’t move a step by
myself. Nothing can save me now. My
legs, my arms, are frozen stiff. What’s the
good of losing your lives waiting for me, when
you know you can’t save mine ? I’ve done the
best I could. Now leave me and save your-
selves.”
They shook their heads, the hero, Dr.
Wilson and Lieutenant Bowers, and took him
between them, dragged him, pulled him be-
tween them. Slowly, oh so slowly, for they
were very, very weak.
Four miles!


All 44 No Surrender Oates ” said was true.
They knew that well enough. But they were
three English gentlemen, and they knew how,
when the time comes, English gentlemen die.
Another day, another night, a day of horror
now, a night of anguish now. Just a mouth-
ful or two of food now, just a flicker of warmth
at night.
All day long, Oates begged them to think
of themselves, of those in distant England who
loved them and needed them. And in the
night, in that tent pitched in the waste of
snow and ice, he prayed that he might not live
till morning, so that his friends might be
forced to leave him at last, and, without him,
might win their way to safety and home. He
was a very brave soul.
But every morning he woke to a new day
of pain.
Three miles!
Then a great and wonderful thought came
to him. “If,” said he to himself —didn’t I
tell you it is the big things men say to them-
selves? —“they won’t leave me, I will leave


them. They are still able to walk alone, but
my work is done. If they won’t save them-
selves I’ll save them in spite of themselves.”
He stood up and struggled by himself to the
tent door. The wind howled more wildly than
ever. The snow swished past,—fine, powdery
snow, that blinds and chokes and smothers in
an instant—the ice cut like knives, the wind
was blowing a blizzard.
“I am just going outside,” said Captain
Oates, “and I may be some time.”
They understood. He had chosen to walk
to quick and certain death that he might try
to save them. They wanted to hold him back.
But he had strength for this last fight of all.
He went out into the snow, and they never
saw him again.
As they lay there waiting and waiting for
his return they remembered that Christ once
said : “ Greater love hath no man than this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends.”
He died as an English gentleman,—a very
gallant gentleman.
Once more they struggled on, now three




heroes only, until they were but eleven miles
from One Ton Depot, the place where food
and firing and shelter waited them. They
never reached it. The blizzard came again
upon them with double fury. They could not
stir from the tent which barely sheltered them
from the rage of those winds of death. They
were so very weak—starving, freezing. In the
tent they had fire for one hot meal and food
for two days. That was all that was left now.
If only the sun would shine !
The blizzard lasted for nine whole days.
And that was the end of the third great
adventure.
IV
As they waited to die, the hero and his two
companions went over the long journey in
their thoughts, though it was very hard even


to think, and the hero wrote in his diary so
that some day men might know how the end
came to them. This is what he wrote :
“ For my own sake I do not regret this
journey, which has shown that Englishmen
can endure hardship, help one another, and
meet death with as great a fortitude as ever in
the past,
“We took risks —we know we took them.
“ Things have come out against us, and there-
fore we have no cause of complaint, but bow
to the will of Providence, determined still to
do our best to the last.
“ Had we lived, I should have had a tale to
tell of the hardihood, endurance and courage
of my companions which would have stirred
the heart of every Englishman.
“These rough notes and our dead bodies
must tell the tale.”
The hero’s two companions, Dr. Wilson and
Lieutenant Bowers, starved and frozen, slept
in their furs, and did not wake.
After the hero had finished his writing, had


planned everything ready for those who some
day should find the tent and those within it,
he propped himself against the tent pole, and
like an English gentleman, without complaint,
without fear, waited, too, for the coming of
kindly death.
Death is very kind to heroes who look upon
their last journey as the greatest adventure of
all.
Is that all? Ah, no, but the rest is so
sacred it hardly bears telling. All through
the long days and long nights the herb had
carried with him the lovely memory of those
he had left behind him in the land of home.
Now at the last, in his fur sleeping bag, only
half awake, so near was he to his last sleep, the
canvas walls of the tent were like a screen
upon which picture after picture passed
before him.
Much that he saw in those pictures of the
loved ones at home I may not tell. But I
should like to tell you how he lay there and
watched his son grow up, — he’ll be the only
man in the family soon. How he longed to see


him in his first sailor suit, to play with him his
first game of cricket on the hall floor, with
wickets chalked on the door — we must pack the
things tidily away and ruh the marks off, hoy,
before Mother comes home —to take him for
the very first time to see Peter Pan — yo ho, yo
ho! How he saw him win his first race at the
school sports, watched him take his first prize—
every inch an English gentleman —laughed
at him over his first high collar, planned all
kinds of fun and sport for him, and then
heard him say, “What I like best of all'is
just to be with Mother and you —we three
together.”
It was bitterly cold in the tent that last night
of all, but as the hero lay there thinking and
waiting, with nothing to do but think . . .
and wait . . . slowly, very gently he felt the
one he loved put her arms round him and hold
him close; then the other one, his little boy,
snuggled close down inside his furs, and slowly,
very slowly, he began to feel beautifully warm.
For neither snow nor ice can chill love, and
love is stronger than death.


So it was that this great hero started out on
his last adventure, warm as if he had just left
his dear home fireside.
And that was the beginning of the biggest
adventure of all.
REPRINTED 1937 IN GREAT BRITAIN BY R. CLAY AND SONS, LTD.,
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.


WHITCOMBE’S STORY BOOKS
AGES 8 T
835 Life In Cold Lands, 7d.
336 The Grey Tails of Mouseland,
4d.
339 Ginger for Pluck, sd.
342 The Old Nurse’s Stocking-
Basket, 1/3
343 On the Great Black Rock, 1/3
344 The Old Brown Book, 1/3
345 Like English Gentlemen, sd.
346 The Children’s Brer Eahbit,
1/-
AGES 9 T(
401 The Plant Hunters, 6d.
402 The Cottage in the Forest, sd.
403 Coral Island, Bd.
404 Masterman Ready, Bd.
405 The Light Princess, 6d.
406 The Enchanted Packman, 9d.
407 Ralph in the Bush, 3d.
408 King of the Golden River, sd.
109 Toilers of the Reef, 6d.
410 Little Shepherd, Bd.
411 Jock Whitehead, Bd.
412 Ali Baba and the Forty
Thieves,-6d.
413 The Dog Crusoe, 6d.
414 What Katy Did, Bd.
415 Alice in Wonderland, sd.
416 Deerland, 6d.
417 The Snow Queen, 6d.
418 The Enchanted Doll, 6d.
419 The Three Sisters, 9d.
420 Tales of the Maori, lOd.
421 The Sea Folk, Bd.
422 In King Alfred’s Day, Bd.
428 Legends of the Maori, Book
I, 1/-
10 YEARS
347 Milly-Molly-Mandy Stories,
1/6
348 More of Milly-Molly-Mandy,
1/6
349 Further Doings of Milly-
Molly-Mandy, 1/6
350 Old Fairy Tales Re-told as
Health Stories, 6d.
436 Pictorial Story of New Zea-
land, Bd.
438 Child’s Garden of Verses, 1/-
10 YEARS
425 The Young Crusader, 6d.
426 Fairy Tales from the South
Seas, 9d.
427 The White Cat, and Other
Stories, 6d.
428 Tales of Maori Magic, Book
I, 9d.
429 Donal, the Briton Slave, 6d.
430 Willie Wagtail, 7d.
431 Lizzie Limpet, 7d.
432 A Son of Merrie England, Bd.
433 What Katy Did at School, 9d.
434 Silver Lake, 4d.
435 More Tales of Maori Magic,
9d.
437 Brown Man and White Man,
9d.
439 Yappy Dingo. ’<l.
441 Black Beauty, „cl.
443 Through the Looking-Glass,
6d.
444 Pictorial Story of Australia,
lOd.
445 The Music Man, 6d.
446 Heidi
WHITCOMBE AND TOMBS LIMITED
