



Linking up of the Pailway Systems of Australia
Trans Australian Railways Break of Gauge problem
B y
George Anthony Lefroy. A.M.I.C.E.of Guildford West Australia
First


4 s y /- /. c W~


LINIKG UP of the RAILWAY SYSTEMS of AUSTRALIA
TRANS-AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY T S BREAK OF GAUGE PROBLEM
By
GEORGE A. LEFROY A.M.I.C.E. of Guildford, Western Australia.
LtJyA A S uj^u^> / jj
"This most Important question to Australia as a whole
has occupied my attention ever since the matter of linking up
the chief Cities of the Australian Commonwealth by Hallways has
been mooted, because it must be recognised in Australia that it
would be a good thing to simplify the gauges for various reasons.
But at the same time it must not be lost sight of that Australia
is a country, of which a very large portion will not be able to
support, for many years, any other but a cheap form of railway.
" Taking Australia as a whole and from
Brisbane to Adelaide, the country between that line and the south-
east coast would contain all that portion of eastern Australia that
is likely to carry a population of a density comparable with the
density of the white population of Europe. Then if you draw a
similar line in the west from Geraldton to Havensthcrpe, you would
find in the south-west angle all the country likely to carry a
similar population. The rest of Australia outside these two
areas, which are probably not more than one-eighth of the total
area, would be more or less sparsely populated, and would only
be able to afford a cheap form of railway. Consequently. I
think that if the one gauge were adopted for the south-east
corner suitable for the present and future requirements of the
population, then a cheaper line would be acceptable for the rest
of Australia.
"In the south-east corner, you now have two gauges of
4ft. and sft. 3in, with a short length of 3ft 6in. running


into Brisbane. If the gauge of 4ft. Biln. be adopted then all
that is necessary is to reduce the wider gauge in Victoria and
South Australia so as to give a through communication on a com-
mon gauge from any point on the present Kew South Wales system
to the present sft. 3in, gauge railways of Victoria and South
Australia, and if a short-line were constructed from the northern
boundary of Dew South Wales on the 4ft. Sfcin. gauge into Brisbane,
then the four principal capital cities would be connected with
the one system on the broad gauge.
REASONS FOR A 3ft. 6in. GAUGE.
”1 think that the rest of the railways outside that
area should he on the 3ft. Gin. gauge, for the reason that there
are at the present tine between 8000 and 9000 miles of 3ft. Gin.
gauge railways in the country, and the railways of that gauge
exceed in mileage the present sft. Sin. and 4ft. lines
combined. If the country north-west of the line between Brisbane .
I
• ' «
and Adelaide, or, say, the country north and west of the Darling '
fc
Hiver, were treated as the dividing line between the two gauges, £
a
a
and the 3ft. Gin. line be continued from Brokenhill west of the I
C
Darling Hiver to connect with the Queensland system of railways, *■
those railways would be connected by the transcontinental railway
to the system of 3ft. Gin. lines, say about 3000 miles now in
operation in West Australia, and which, it is certain, will be
greatly extended within the next two years. If the transconti-
nental* line be built on the 3ft. Gin. gauge, then any rolling-
stock of that gauge in Queensland could be transferred to the
3ft. Gin. gauge in West Australia. But if any other gauge
than the 3ft. Gin. be adopted, then it is impossible that there
oan be any interchange along the route between the Queensland
railways and the West Australian railways. Queensland at the
present time has pledged itself to a policy of linking up the
west ends of its railway system by a railway which is designated


the Great western railway of Queensland, which will terminate at
Camooweal. If the railway were extended across the interior,
via Powell's Greek and Hall’s Greek, and then about south-west
to ioin with the extension of the Port Hedland, Marble Bar rail-
way line to NullAgine, and then south to link up with the Fest
Australian system at Meekatherra, there would thus be a circle
of 3ft. 6in. around Australia that would enable troops to be
moved without any fear of intervention on the part of a maraud-
ing sea enemy.
"Of course, it would be necessary to connect this circle
of railway with the principal ports on the north and north-west
coasts of Australia, such as Port Darwin, Uyndham, Derby, Broome,
etc., with the railways referred to about the 3ft. Bin. gauge.
Under this plan you would have, in addition to securing military
connection in the interior of Australia, a coheme which would
open up an enormous amount of country now useless which might
be rendered valuable for pastoral purposes, by means of thid
railway connection with the coast. All these railways might
be constructed with the money which would otherwise be required
to convert the present 3ft. Bin. lines to the common gauge of
4ft. B£in.
THE COST OF ALTERATION
"Ihe cost attending the alteration of the lines of
Australia to a common gauge is one of very much more importance
prohahly than most Australians realise. In the ’Commonwealth
Year Book' for 1301-10 it is stated in a report which was made
for the Commonwealth Government that the sft. Sin. gauge rail-
ways at present in existence might be reduced to the 4ft.
at a cost of about two and a half millions of pounds, but as
these railways now approximate nearly 4000 miles, and as pro-
bably any conversion undertaken will extend to 4300 miles in
length, it is, in my opinion, highly impossible that it can be


oarrled out for less than £4,000,000, that being at the rate of
£IOOO per mile for conversion of road and rolling stock from the
sft. Sin. to the 4ft, 8-|-in, gauge. Phis operation would be com-
paratively easy, because the reduction would be from the broader
gauge to a narrower one, where everything is in favor of the opera-
tion of conversion. If all the railway lines of the 3ft. 6ln.
gauge in Australia were to he converted to the standard 4ft, 8-|-in.
gauge - and, unless this is done in toto, the people who use those
lines not converted will have all the disadvantages and annoyances
of break of gauge forced upon them - the operation will he a very
expensive one, indeed; because the 3ft. 6in. lines are to a very
large extent at present furnished with weights of rail from 20
to 35 lb. lighter par yard than the lightest rails at present
used on the sft. Sin. and 4ft. Biin. railways of fictoria and
New South Wales. If the 3ft. 6in. lines are to be brought up
to the general standard of New South Wales, so that there might
he a complete interchange of rolling stock from any one portion
of Australia to another, it will necessarily follow that the 3ft.
6in, lines will have to be very largely reconstructed and remodel-
led to meet the conditions. Assuming that no further railways
than those on hand at the present time are built on the 3ft. Sin.
gauge, it would mean that 9000 miles of 3ft. Gin, line would have
to he converted to the 4ft. 83 in. gauge. At the most moderate
estimate,'even allowing something to be realised on scrap rolling
stock and rails, it will probably average £2OOO per mile or a
total of £18,000,000. Add this to the £4,000,000 necessary to
convert the sft. Sin. lines to the 4ft. Siln., and you would have
a total cost of £22,000,000 for the conversion of all the rail-
ways in Australia to the common gauge of 4ft, B£in,. If all the
railways on the country north-west of the Darling Hiver, or the
lines between Brisbane and Adelaide on the side of the line we
have drawn, ware loft on the 3ft. Sin. gauge and not converted.


then the money which would thus he saved would carry out the work
of connecting up the railways,already referred to.
THE QUBSTION OF SPEED.
"I believe two reasons have been put forward generally
by those desirous of pinning Australia to the enormous attendant
expenditure of conversion to a common gauge. fhe first is that
with the 4ft. e*in. gauge, they will be able to get a very high
rate of speed that will be of great assistance to them in milit-
ary transport. How, with regard to the question of speed, gauge
is only a minor factor in determining the speed at which trains
oan.be run in a railway system that is to be worked successfully
from a commercial standpoint. If there is no object in making
railways self-supporting, then, of course, it is quite possible
that trains may be run at a very fast rate, q.aite irrespective
of cost of running; and that would apply to either the 3ft. Gin,
or the 4ft. ajrin. gauge. But in practical working there is not
very muoh difference in the spaed which may he attained on a rail-
way, which is attributable solely to its being on a 3ft. 6in» or
a 4ft. B§in* gauge.
"At the present time in Australia the express making
the long single-line Journey between Sydney and Melbourne has
an average time-table speed of 3,4 6-10 miles per hour, and this
on a heavy and well-built road, with rails of a weight of from
80 to 100 lb per yard. On the west coast of Australia the daily
express from Berth to Kalgoorlle, which travels a distance of
375 miles along a 3ft. Gin. gauge over a light pioneer line, with
heavy grades and sharp curves, with rails not exceeding in weight
60 lb per yard, averages a speed of Just within a point of E 4
miles per hour, and, comparing the speed of a train on the light
pioneer line between Kalgoorlle and Perth with the speed attained
on the Sydney-Melbourne line, with 80 to 100 lb rails, is very
much like comparing the speed of a butcher's pony with that of a


racehorse. But if the Perth-Zalgoorlie 3ft. 6in, line had the
same weight of rail and the same curvage and same grade, etc., to
travel over as the Melbourne-Sydney express has, I have not the
slightest doubt that, without exceeding commercial limits in work-
ing, the speed could be worked up to 30 miles per hour. If you
take the Journey of the express from Melbourne to Adelaide, on
the sft. 3in. gauge, you will find that E 8 miles per hour only
is the average speed, Just four miles per hour faster than the
Perth-Zalgoorlia train on its 3ft. 6in, gauge. If gauge was the
only factor governing speed, of course the Melbourne to Adelaide
train should make a much better average than it does.
SPEED IN CANADA AND INDIA.
"In Europe averages of 45 and 60 miles an hour are a
common thing, hut this high rate is attained, not so much on account
of the gauge being 4ft. 8$ln» as by the initial long distance
runs which are made, and are only possible where the lines are
duplicated with fast and slow roads, and there are facilities
for watering on the route. I have myself travelled on a train
which made a speed of nearly 60 miles an hour over a run of 170
miles. The same engine and train, however, after it had made
its first atop, with about another 30 miles to its terminus,
made an average of about 30 miles per hour. I have not enumerat-
ed all the factors governing high speed, but there is one feature
which I would like to lay stress upon, and that is, it is only
the country which has the large population that can furnish the
travellers necessary to make a very fast train pay. As an il-
lustration of the speed which is attained on single lines of
railway, I may mention the Canadian-Pacific, which is a 4ft» 8-|in.
gauge, and which is probably quite equal in standard of construc-
tion with the line between Sydney and Melbourne. On this line
between Quebec and iTancouver, a distance of 3070 miles, the fast-
est time on record was made by the over-sea mail, which did the


distance In 87 hours 45 minutes. This gave an average of 35
miles an hour, and it was largely assisted by the fact that 547
miles of the distance was double-tracked. Ihis run from Montreal
to tancouver - £897 miles - is usually negotiated at the rate
of about 29 miles per hour.
"If you go to India, where nearly all the main lines of
railway are on a sft. 6in. gauge, and of a high standard of con-
struction, and where the country is generally favoffablieto fast
running, tho best spe'eds are maintained between Calcutta and
Bombay - about 1400 or 1500 miles - i# by the weekly mail train,
the fastest train in India, which just averages 35 miles an hour.
If you take the Siberian railway where the gauge is sft. you will
find that up till quite recently the average speed on the differ-
ent sections varied from under 23 miles upon the European end,
and under 12 miles an hour through Manchuria. If it is neces-
sary to have high speeds, and to be economically worked, lines
must be duplicated, and given facilities for making long distance
runs. If 3ft. 6in, lines in Australia, even if only built at
the present standard, were duplicated over suoh a distance as
from Kalgoorlie to Port Augusta, they would he capable of giving
as fast a speed in working as any similar lingth of single line
of 4ft. 8-jSrln. gauge built to the same standard, and worked on
commercial principles. As a means of transporting traffic of
goods a duplicated 3ft. 6in. gauge line of present standard of
construction would have a greater carrying capacity than any
similar length of single 4ft. gauge line as at present
worked and constructed in Australia. therefore, by duplicat-
ing all the main lines of the 3ft. 61 ru gauge systems of West
Australia and Queensland, they could he made more efficient as
a moans of transporting the produce of the country, or for mili-
tary operations, than any system of single 4ft. Bsin. lines ooulf
be worked commercially, other conditions being equal.


"If the trans-continental line from Port Augusta were
to be built on a 3ft 6in. gauge, the break of gauge, as between
West Australia and the States of Tiotoria and New South Wales,
would be somewhere north of Adelaide, and it would enable all
the West Australian system to meet eventually, with the eastern
system, and there would be only one break of gauge at Adelaide,
between the 3ft. 6in. and the 4ft. &gin.. Thus there would be
only one break of gauge between New South Wales and the West Aus-
tralian railways, in plaoe of one at Salgoorlie, one at Adelaide,
! r '
one at Albury, and ene at Wallangarra, going on to the Brisbane
system, whan the sft. Sin* gauge was reduced to tha 4ft. 8-gin.
"If this section (trans-continental) were built on the
came standard as regards grade, rails, and curvature, as that pro-
posed for the 4ft. 8-gin. gauge, a speed of 30 miles per hour might
easily be attained. If the West Australian Government were to
duplicate its line all the way from Kalgoorlie to Perth, and also
improve the road by increasing the weight of rail from 601 b, to
801 b., a through service from Perth to Port Augusta, at an average
speed of, say, 30 to 33 miles an hour, might be achieved. This
would give an average speed of two miles per hour faster than that
attained now between Adelaide and Melbourne.
"A QUIXOTIC COMPACT"
"The West Australian Government, I understand, has enter-
ed into some quixotic compact with the Federal Government to the
affect that if the line is constructed from Port Augusta to Kal-
goorlie on a gauge of 4ft. Bsin«, the West Australian Government
will then construct another 4ft. 8-J-in. line from Kalgoorlie to
Fremantle, to run alongside their present 3ft 6in. gauge line.
Thus they would have two single lines of different gauges, running
side by side on different road beds, which would he necessary if
any higher speed is to be attained by tha train running on tha 4ft
B£in. gauge than that made by the present 3ft. 6in gauge train running


from Perth to Kalgoorlie. To get a higher speed from the 4ft.Bgin.
gauge line the present Perth,to Kalgoorlie line - assuming that the
majority of the '.Teat Australian people would put up with a break
of gauge - would very largely have to be abandoned, as they could
not get a fast rate of speed on it. I believe that this is re-
cognised in the proposal to build an absolutely independent line
from Kalgoorlie to Fremantle. This line will be at least 400
miles long, and if it is to perform the duties expected of it, it
will cost at least £7OOO per mile to construct, or £2,800,000 in
all. If a similar class of line to that at present existing,
3ft. 6in. gauge, were extended from Kalgoorlie to the boundary,
it could be done for about £1,500,000, and the completion of the
duplication of the line between Perth and Kalgoorlie could be *
ss
done for about £600,000, making a total of £2,100,000, so that, |
as things have been arranged, if West Australia wore to stick *§
to its own gauge and build the line itself as far as Eucla, it g
£
might save at least £700,000 of the amount which would be neoea- *
sary if it carries out its compact with the Federal Government. |£
m
&
Which oompabb, if carried out, would put all those using the §
H
other railways on the north and west systems on a break of gauge,
or else the West Australians must put up with the cost of running
two lines of different gauges side by side, and this would result
in one or both being worked at a considerable loss. West Austra-
lia has one "white elephant" to carry in the Goldfields Water
Supply Scheme, and until that has been got rid of she will do
well not to create another.
[?]
A.M.I.C.E
