

1879-1929
“FIFTY GOLDEN MILESTONES
LISMORE’S JUBILEE"
The
STORY
of
LISMORE
4-10 MARCH 1929.
PRICE 3-


Dediration
* o the pioneers of yesterday ,
L witn. indomitable will and
Q° aa vision encompassed ; to
those of to-day, carrying on with
courage unabated ; and to the
unknown of to-morrow, with their
wonderful heritage of yesterday
and to-day, —this work of love is
reverently dedicated.


Commemoralinq
Anniversary o Lismore's
Incorpor alien as a
municipality
Jlnd
Describing by Word and
Picture the Development
Jrom its Earliest Days of
the Queen City of the north


ALD. AND MRS. C. McKENZIE. Mayor and Mayoress of Lismore, 1929.
ALD. MCKENZIE HAS BEEN MAYOR OF LISMORE FOR ELEVEN TERMS


MUNICIPALITY OF LISMORE
Incorporated March 5th, 1879.
MAYORS
Aid. James Stocks, 1879-80-81.
Aid. E. W. Allingham, 1882-83.
Aid. Ja.s. Barrie, 1884-85-92-93-190 ■.
Aid. L. Bernstein, 1886-87-94.
Aid. A. J. Simpson, 1888.
Aid. R. S. Wotherspoon, 1888.
Aid. J. F. O’Flynn, 1889-90-91-96-97-98-99.
Aid. J. W. Coleman, 1895-1900-01.
Aid. W. Lockett, 1902-03.
Aid. R. S. K. Balmer, 1904.
Aid. C. McKenzie, 1905-16-17-18-19-20-21-22-27-28-29.
Aid. Hon. G. Nesbitt, M.L.C., 1906.
Aid. J. Quilty, 1907.
Aid. R. J. Spinks, 1908-09-10-12-13.
Aid. J. B. Carlton, 1911.
Aid. R. White, 1914-15.
Aid. R. Brewster, 1923-24-25.
Aid. R. Kellas, 1926.


Lismore Muniripal Counril
Aid. C. McKENZIE (Mayor)
Aid. SAMUEL ARTHUR
„ IP. H. CATERSON
, E. J, EQQINS
„ IPILLIAM FRITH
HARRIS QREEN
Town Clerk :
JUO. TP. NELSON. F.L.C.A.
Accountant:
R. E. IPEBB, A.A.8.1.
Aid. D. McA. ROSS (Deputy
Mayor)
Aid. S. J. HOSIE
~ F. L. HACKINQ
„ R. KELLAS, M. 8.. Ch.B.
~ N. IP. SIDNEY
.. ROBERT IPHITE
Engineer :
H. Q. MURRAY, B.E.
manager Qas IPorks DeplJ:
IPILLIAm IPATERS
Manager Electricity Supply Dept, and IPaler IPorks Engineer :
T. L. QRIFFIN
Health mspectorl: JOHTI STEIPART, Cert. R., San. I. (London)
Lismore Jubilee Celebrations Committee
Chairman :
THE MAIJOR. Aid. C McKENZIE
Honorary Secretary :
JIIO. IP. NELSON, F.L.C.A.
Reu. Canon A. Q. MOORE
Th. Schol., L.Th. (Dur.)
A\d. R. IPHITE
m. MACKinnon, b.a., b.sc.
Honorary :
IP. A. TAILOR, Esq.
IP. F. McDERUIOTT, Esq.
IP. E. BRIfATIT, Esq.
C. M. ROBERTSOU, Esq.
A. T. STRATFORD, Esq.
R. BREIPSTER, Esq.
Organising Secretary
and Director of Publicity :
IP. H. LEIPIS


Foreword
LISMORE, the Queen City of the North —Lismore to-day and
Lismore fifty years ago ! What a change ! In those days
it was a real sleepy hollow. To-day it is a hive of in-
dustry, a bustling centre of commerce. This change is due
to many things. First, the introduction of refrigeration into the
dairying industry, which brought into use all the wonderful land
which surrounds it and made it the finest dairying centre in the Com-
monwealth. Its geographical position is unique. North, south, east
and west- —all the land is highly productive. From the whole of
the fertile district business gravitates to the natural centre —Lis-
more, and a keen lot of business people have not been slow to
recognise this fact, and to-day practically every requirement can
be met by them. Another factor is that Lismore has always been
blessed with public men who saw the potentialities of the district,
and administered the town affairs with vision, imbued with progressive
ideas and knowing that the town would be worth it. They strove ever
to keep it in the front rank —their motto, “Excelsior.’’ In this book an
attempt has been made to recognise their work and to place on
record Lismore’s debt to them. It deals with the past; but it also
looks to the future.
Nature has endowed this district bountifully with plenteous
rainfall and fine streams of water. What more is necessary ? Only
that her people should have an abiding faith in the future and
work with a set purpose for the common good. A happy and pro-
gressive people is a community’s greatest asset.
Lismore —beautiful Lismore —is our home. We are proud of
it. Let us emulate the deeds of the men of the past —be stimulated
by their enthusiasm, follow their example, and profit by their mis-
takes. Nothing, we believe, can prevent Lismore’s progress, and the
city of fifty years hence will justify our optimism.


The Story of Lismore
SIMULTANEOUS DISCOVERY OF THE RICHMOND
■TI FTER an exhaustive inspection of early papers, maps, and'
documents in the Mitchell Library, and also in the Lands
L Department, it is evident that accuracy as to dates was not
considered an absolute essential by oiir first historians.
This may be partly explained by the fact that explorations and sur-
veys were feats not to be accomplished in a. few months or even in a
year. Then, after their return to civilisation, the explorers and sur-
veyors had to write their official despatches to the Governor, who in
turn forwarded them to England. Thus, though we read that the Rich-
mond was discovered by Captain Henry John Rous in August, 1828,
and this appears to be takem as official, there was published in the
“Australian Journal” of January, 1828, a short description of the
Richmond, stating that there was 12 feet of water at half-flood,
and from 14 to 20 feet at the mouth, with a constant ebb tide. The
editor of the “Australian Quarterly Journal” (now housed at the
Mitchell Library) was the Rev. Charles P. N. Wilson, master of the
King’s Female Orphan Institute of Parramatta.
In Governor’s despatches (Mitchell Library) there is to be seen
the original of Allan Cunningham’s letter to Governor Darling, dated
December 16, 1828, in which he tells of his journey of the previous
year, during which he discovered the Darling Downs, explored the head
of the Richmond, and reached Mount Warning, which he described
“as seen daily from the seaboard by passing mariners.” It was on
this journey that Cunningham discovered the famous “Gap” in the
Great Dividing Range. So that it is practically certain that while
Allan Cunningham was exploring the head of the Richmond, Cap-
tain Rous was discovering the Richmond River. Cunningham in his
despatch mentions Rous’ discovery, as the “embouchure of the Rich-
mond.” This also explains the map dated 1827. Cunningham’s ex-
plorations were of the greatest importance to the eastern portion
of Australia, and were the means of establishing an enormous
cattle and sheep industry. His official position was that of His
Majesty’s Botanical Collector.


FIRST SETTLEMENT
To a grandson of the first Surveyor-General Townsend, and
a lineal descendant of Viscount Sydney, after whom Sydney is
named, we are indebted for the information that Admiral Rous
named the Richmond after his great friend and patron, the Duke
of Lennox and Richmond, and also named Lennox Head after the
Duke.
The first survey on the Richmond was carried out in 1818,
and was, of course, confined solely to exploration work.
The earliest map of the Richmond in the Lands Department
was drawn in 1843, but shows no settlement whatever. What is now
known as Wilson’s Creek is shown as bearing the native name
“Moomunna.” In subsequent maps it is called “Boatharbour Creek.”
The map of 1843 also shows “Kareela Creek,” which is now part
of the Clarence District, with Elliott’s Station marked thereon.
Another map of the Richmond River, drawn by Assistant-Sur-
veyor J. C. Burnett in 1845, shows two huts to the north of Pimlico
without the 1 name of the owner of either being given. The mouth
of the river is marked with the native name, “Bul-loona.” This
should finally decide the long-argued question as to whence
Ballina 'derived its name
In 1844 Clark Irving took up Tomki Station, and Burnett’s
map shows a general store at Coraki kept by one Ritchie. This
map also shows for the first time on any map Boatharbour Creek
and Rosehill Creek, now called Wilson and Leycester Creek re-
spectively.
In 1843 William Wilson made application to purchase 163 acres
of land on tbe Richmond. The application was eventually granted,
and a map dated 1845 shows “Wilson's Station, Lismore,” thus show-
ing that Wilson was the first settler at Lismore. A map by Sur-
veyor Frederick Peppercorn, dated 1855, shows a reserve set apart
f 0" “The Village of Lismore,” with tentative sites for a lock-up,
public school, cemetery, and allotments for Anglican, Roman Catholic
and Wesleyan Churches. The same map shows Brown’s public
house 1 as being than in existence.
The design of the town of Lismore was laid before the Exe-
cutive Council in ]856, accompanied by a letter from the Surveyor-
General to the Colonial Secretary bearing the date of January 12
of the same year, and was approved. In 1865 a map drawn by Sur-
veyor Donaldson shows the township of Lismore with Molesworth,
Woodlark, Keen and Bounty streets already named.


LISMORE HOUSE, HOME OF THE WILSON AND GIRARD FAMILIES
LATE W. WILSON
First Lismore Settler
CLARK IRVING, M.P.


THE GIRARD FAMILY.
Mrs. Mary Girard, who died at Lismore House in 1876, pur-
chased the Lismore Station from the Wilson family in 1865, and
immediately entered into occupation. William Wilison lost no time
in selecting, under the Robertson Act, the property known as Inver-
cauld. His daughter, the late Mrs. Teresa Watt, selected Monaltrie,
and R. E. de B. Lopez, who subsequently married Miss Mary Wilson,
selected Koolool, on the borders of Gundurimba, then a much more
important settlement than Lismore. The Girards also selected all
round the Lismore Station, otherwise with the advent of many other
selectors they would have had no run for their cattle. The Girards also
acquired Dungsrubba, which was for many years a large cattle run.
In 1875 Miss Emma Girard married Mr. John Homiman, manager
of the newly-established branch of the Commercial Bank at Lismore.
The ceremony took place in the drawing room of Lismore House,
the officiating clergyman being the Yen. Abbe Schurr. Mr. Arthur
Horniman, Chief Engineer of the Main Roads Board in the North
Coast District, and Mr. John Horniman, of the Commercial Bank,
Goulburn, are sons of the marriage. Mrs. Horniman, senr., who
lives at Bondi, Sydney, is now 85 years of age. She is as tall and
as straight as she was at 20, and her faculties are remarkably keen
and bright.
The Girard' family were noted for their hospitality, and were
regarded as leaders in social matters. Mr. A, M. Girard was a
Justice of the Peace, and took a deal of interest in sporting mat-
ters. In addition to owning Lismore station, they were also hold-
ers of Dungarubba, but in the 1870 flood they lost a lot of valu-
able cattle, and never recovered from the loss. They boiled down
cattle for tallow, the Lismore slaughter yards being in the centre
of what is now Lower Molesworth Street, near Stocks Park. They
owned the land now bounded by Conway and Cathcart Streets to
Albert Park boundary. This land was subdivided, and sold by auct-
ion when the station business failed.


THE AMENDED DESIGN OF LISMORE
The “Village of Lismore,” as it was then called, was originally
planned and laid out by Surveyor Frederick Peppercorn, the first map
of the village-being drawn by him in 1855. However, ten years later
the then Surveyor-General, W. R. Davidson, wrote the following
memo., which is to-day in the Lands Department (Alienation
Branch) : —“The design of the town of Lismore appears to me in
several instances to be unsuitable owing to the features of the
ground. Mr. Surveyor Donaldson may be instructed at his con-
venience to examine into it, and suggest amendments.”
Mr. Donaldson carried out these instructions in the following year
(1866), and the following quotation is from his letter to the Sur-
veyor-General written in the same year : —“The whole of the town
to the east of Dawson-street, except section 28 and part of 29,
being deeply inundated in flood water, is unfit for building purposes
and should be subdivided into suburban allotments. I have made the
street from the bridge in Dawson-street to follow the 'direction of
the road to Ballina, which has recently been cleared through the
bush. The land above flood is so limited in extent that I have divided
sections 34 and 35 into allotments of five chains by one chain for
building, but with a portion of flooded ground, and the crown on
the rid'ge being very narrow I have not thought it necessary to leave
a lane, as by so doing'l should limit the extent of building ground.
I have taken the road to Bald Hills, along the ridge on the site
of the present track. I have made one church reserve on the ridge,
and would have recommended another, but the quantity of building
ground would) have been limited thereby.”
THE FIRST AUCTION SALE recorded in the Lands Depart-
ment, as having taken, place at Lismore was on December, 1875, of
13 to 16. Instructions were issued from Sydney that the sale be
advertised (the only North Coast papers then in existence being
the “Clarence Examiner,” established 1859, and the “Casino Ex-
press,” established 1870), and that the sale should take place at the
Temperance Hall. Previous sales of Lismore lots had taken place
at Casino, and the name of Surveyor Richard Barling, as veil as
that of Mr. Donaldson, is to be found on old documents relating to
those and other district land! matters.
In searches in the Lands Department there appears the
original of a letter from Patrick Molony Ryan (a noted builder in
Lismore’s pioneer days), dated November 21, 1874, asking that the
land at the corner of Keen and Zadoc streets (now the site of the
Court House Hotel) be put up for sale, also sites in Keen-street
fronting the Anglican Church. These lots were eventually pur-
chased by Mr. Ryan, and remained in possession of the family until


recent years. The land in Zadoc-street had been reserved by
Surveyor Peppercorn as a water reserve, but Mr. Donaldson decided
that it was not required for such purpose.
In a supplement to the “Grafton Argus” some years ago the
late Thos. Bawden gave the history of the various stations. In
this he stated that Lismore Station was taken up by Ward Stephens
for Scott, of Glendom, in 1842 or 1843. This has never been dis-
proved. In fact there are several other records to show that under
the pre-emptive right system, which then prevailed, the country
where Lismore is now was first taken up by a Cuptain Dumaresque,
after whom the Dumaresque or Severn Grand River was named.
He was the father of Commodore Dumaresque, who was on the
Australian Naval Station ten years ago.
A station in those days had to be “occupied” with six months
of selection or else it was forfeited. As a matter of fact, it was
never occupied by him. In 1842 Ward Stephens, who had taken
up Runnymede, came along. Proofs exist that Ward Stephens had
10,000 sheep on Lismore Station before Wilson bought him out,
which, according to Bawden, was in 1843 or 1844.
Furthermore, in the “Richmond River Express” in 1897 E. D.
S. Ogilvie stated that when he and W. C. Bundock, of Wyangarie,
visited Lismore in 1843 there was a shepherd there in charge of a
flock of sheep, which were badly infected with fluke and footrot.
From this it would appear quite certain that Wilson was not
the first man to occupy Lismore, but it might be a pity to destroy
popular tradition.
Taking the North Coast it may not be generally known that
the greater part of the Upper Richmond River country was, in the
forties, heavily stocked with sheep, but the results were so discour-
aging that the enterprise was soon abandoned and the runs were re-
stocked with cattle. This also occurred to some extent on the
Clarence.
As a signal instance of this failure it was told, years ago by
“old hands” that one William Maister late one autumn camped at
a spot beside the Lismore road on the Casino side of Naughton’s
Gap with 16,000 travelling sheep. A wet winter set in and pre-
cluded further travelling. The delicate merinos died like flies from
fluke and footrot, and, by early spring, there was but a wretched
remnant of 3000 to 4000 left. The scene of this pastoral tragedy
was subsequently known as “Maister’s Camp.”
Writing in August, 1879, the late W. C. Bundock, of Wyangarie,
said that when in 1843 he first visited’ Lismore with Mr. Ogilvie,
the only tenement there was the tent of the manager of a flock of
catarrhed sheep. l .


Herewith is a list of early cattle stations on the Richmond', from
Government records (Mitchell Library) :
Tomki, near Casino, was taken up in 1840 by Clay and Staple-
ton, but after a few years of financial trouble they disposed of the
run to Clark Irving.
Busby’s Flat, Tuckombil, was applied for by Busby in 1844,
the former being incorporated with Wyan, and afterwards worked
with Wooroowoolgen through Mr. Barnes.
Tunstall Station was* taken up by Shaw and Leycester in 1843.
They are said to have been the first white men to pass through
Casino. It later passed to Henry Garrard, thence to Turnbull and
Flood, and finally to A. Campbell.
Tatham was taken up by the trustees of Dr. Mackellar, the
manager being Machattie, who acted thus for a number of years.
Bungawalbyn was taken up in 1847 by Mr. Barnes as an out-
station of Tomki for and on behalf of Clark Irving.
Gibberagee (part of the Broadwater run) was taken by Sande-
man in 1845 and passed to Clark Irving.
Lismore was applied for in 1843, and permission to purchase
granted to William Wilson in 1845.
Boorie. Permission to purchase granted to Henry Garrard
1865.
Bentley. Selected by Robert Barrington Dawson 1870, a son of
the first agent for A. A. Co, at Port Stephens.
In 1860 the area of land occupied on the Richmond was 363,563
acres, while the number of occupiers of land exceeding one acre was
23 only.
Dr. Lang, who visited the district in 1865, severely commented
on this state of affairs. For some considerable period country for
stock was occupied under license by squatters. No land could be
purchased by any one, not even by squatters under pre-emptive
rights. The chief industry at this time besides stock raising was
timber cutting, chiefly cedar, but pine known as “hoop” pine and
also Moreton Bay pine, as well as white beech, were obtained in
considerable quantities.
In 1852 the number of cattle grazing on stations was computed
at 70,000, and at this time the Richmond also supplied most of the
timber required for Sydney and Melbourne markets. In 1851, as the
result of the gold rush throughout N.S.W., cattle jumped from 10/-
per head to £B, tallow was worth £3O per ton, and cedar 80/- per
hundred feet. A ton of flour on the river was worth £BO.
As to who was the first to arrive on the Richmond from the
Clarence it is claimed by his family that in 1838 George Olive in


charge of a- drove of cattle, and in search of new country for Mr.
Busby, settled at Tuckombil Creek, near the present town of South
Woodburn.
In 1843, according to papers in the Mitchell Library, land was
taken up midway between Casino and Coraki by Stapleton, McDonald,
and P. J. Campbell. Nearby on a map drawn that year by Assistant
Surveyor Burnett, appears the name of Ritchie’s Stores (Coraki).
Except for the cattle industry nothing was done on the Rich-
mond until the timber getters pitched their first camp in the country
round Alstonville and on to Ballina and Blackwall (Wardell). A
steady stream (after 1839) then began to come in from the Clarence.
Then came the Kings, Oliver Jones, the Extons, Y. J. Norris, W. T.
Yeager, Wm. Yabsley, John Sharpe, Archie Mclnnes, J. E. James,
Carter, etc.
The river and its tributaries bore the logs to the booms, and
many were the sawmills —Glasgow’s at Lismore, Breckinridge at
Wyrallah, Yeager and Yabsley at Coraki, Inkpen and Carter at War-
dell (or Blackwall) and James on the other side of the river. The
finest cedar perhaps in the world was turned to commercial account,
though much of it was laid waste, and the roaring days of rum
and hard living of that period are still the subject of legend and
story.
In 1870 the total population of the valley of the Richmond was
said to be 4000. Of these Casino (then the chief town) was credited
with 300, Ballina. with 300, and Lismore with 275, though Lismore
was at that time the centre of the timber industry. There was no
school in Lismore till 1868, and the one created that year was
everything a school ought not to be.
Mails were conveyed in those days by the squatters from
Grafton to Casino, and there was no time table.
The Robertson Act (selection before survey) became operative
in 1862. Mr. Hugh Livingstone, of Codrington, who came to the
Clarence in 1855, and removed to the Richmond in 1862, claimed
to have taken up the first selection under the Robertson Act. The
late J. E. Glasgow claimed to have drawn up the first application
and that the selection was at Codrington, so presumably it was
for Livingstone. The latter came from Scotland, in 1849, and was
a shipmate of the Rev. Duncan Mclnnes, who for 40 years was the
Free Presbyterian Minister at Maclean. The Robertson Act gave
an immense fillip to closer occupation, and maize, sugar, bananas,
vines and other sub-tropical products were introduced, and except
for flour, the district began to be largely self-supporting.
The first selector in the Big Scrub was Andrew Freeborn in
1861. He came from Kiama in search of gold, the gold fever having
caught the Richmond as well as other parts of the State, but none


is chronicled as having been discovered except about the Upper
Richmond. However, the high prices which were at once attainable
for cattle, tallow, cedar and other timbers brought gold to many,
though not directly from the gold mine. In making these researches
many contradictory statements regarding the date on which the
Richmond was discovered have been met with while it is also evident
that much of the so-called history of the Clarence and Richmond
is to a certain extent legendary. As to the date of discovery in-
formation is takeri from maps actually seen in the archives of the
Lands Department. From there it is gleaned* that the first survey
for exploration work was made in 1818. At the Mitchell Library is
a map dated 1827 showing the Richmond with Lennox Head. To
the north-west of the Headland is shown a creek with Mangrove
Swamps, the creek flowing into the Richmond. Inside Ballina Heads,
the map shows a sandy beach. Thd river must have been navigated
for either bank is marked “long bushy grass,” “fine timber.” Also
to be read thereon : —“This map was constructed by various ob-
servations, taken during progress of a journey which was per-
formed in the winter months of 1827 by Allan Cunningham.”
In 1850 the river banks from Ballina to Lismore were covered
with dense scrub, the only clearing being at Rocky Mouth, after-
wards well known as the Gollan Homestead, near Woodburn.
Some schooners trading to Richmond 1850 : —The Josephine,
Margaret Mary, Sallie.
The aboriginal name for what is now North Lismore was
Boyam, Lismore or that part of it centred round the juncture of
Wilson and Leycester Creeks was called “The Rope,” because of
tne ease with which the cedar cutters could stop their floating
logs there.
Bexhill, then known as Bald Hill, was a more important settle-
ment in the fifties than was Lismore, because it was from there that
much cedar was drafted. There is an authentic story as to how it
got the name of Bexhill. A young German named Beck, together
with a Swede who in his own country was a barrister, named
Crozenbatter, while working one day at Big Grass (afterwards the
property of the late Sir Thomas Ewing) met a surveyor who pressed
Beck into his service for a few hours, holding the surveyor’s chain,
etc. When finished he asked his assistant’s name, and on being told
Beck, said : “Well, we’ll call this Beck’s Hill.”
In “Discoveries in the N.E. Portion of New South Wales”
(Mitchell Library) it is stated that the first name given to Ballina
was Depford'—afterwards altered to the aboriginal name, which,
however, is improperly spelled. It was originally “Bulloona.”


REPRESENTATIVES IN PARLIAMENT.
Clark Irving was the first Parliamentary representative of the
Richmond, sitting in 1856-7. His constituency included the Clar-
ence and the Darling Downs, Queensland not then being a separate
colony. The next representative was Arthur Hodgson, who sat in
two Parliaments, viz., from January, 1858, to April, 1859, and from
1859 to 1861. In the latter year the electorate of which the Rich-
mond was a part was called the Clarence, and Clark Irving again
represented the constituency from 1861 to 1864. He was. succeeded
by John Connell Lay cock, who was replaced in 1866 by John (after-
wards Sir) Robertson, who in turn was superseded by Thos. Baw-
den, who sat until 1880, and was then succeeded by Charles Hugh
Fawcett. Fawcett only sat from April to November, when the Rich-
mond and the country north of it were declared a seperate electorate.
Fawcett was elected to the new constituency. In November, 1882,
he was succeeded by Samuel William Gray, who was replaced in
1885 by T. T. Ewing and Patrick Hogan. In 1887 the increasing
population and 1 importance of the district raised the status of the
Richmond to a three-member representation, the elected being F.
G. Crouch, Thomas Thomson Ewing and Patrick Hogan. Those
three sat till 1889. From the latter year till 1894 the constituency
was represented by Sir. Thos. T. Ewing, B. B. Nicoll and John Perry.
A change to single electorates in 1894 resulted in Ewing being elected
fori Lismore, Robert Pyers for the Richmond, and Perry for Rous.
In 1901 Ewing was electedi to the first Federal Parliament as member
for the Richmond. He was followed in the State House by John
Coleman. In 1904 there was another shuffle of seats, and the name
of Lismore was changed to Rous, the change involving the addition
of Murwillumbah and the Tweed to Lismore. J. W. Coleman was
elected to the new constituency. He died in 1905, and was suc-
ceeded by the late G. T. Hindmarsh, who retired in 1913. In that
year Lismore again became a single-seat electorate, and Mr. G.
Nesbitt was returned. Seven years later proportional voting became
law, and Lismore was absorbed in the new electorate, to which
was given the name of Byron. The successful contestants were
George Nesbitt, R. S. Perd'riau, and T. J. Swiney. In the election
of 1922 W. T, Missingham replaced Swiney. In 1925 Nesbitt retired,
and the members elected were W. T. Missingham, Stuart and R. T.
Gillies. Two years later there was another turn-over to single seats,
and Missingham was elected for Lismore.
On the next page are photos of Mr. C. H. Fawcett, who was
the first member for this district after its separation from the 1
Clarence, and Sir T. T. Ewing.


MR. C. H. FAWCETT, M.L.A.
SIR T. T. EWING, M.H.R.
SIR THOMAS EWING.
Sir Thomas Thomson Ewing was a native of Pitt Town, Haw-
kesbury River, New South Wales, and came here as a young sur-
veyor in 1880. He was elected to the State Assembly in 1885, and
sat until 1901, when Federation was accomplished and he was
elected to the first Federal Parliament. He held office under Mr.
Alfred Deakin as Minister for Home Affairs and Defence 1906-
1907, 1907-1908. He was knighted in 1908. He was possessed of
great natural ability, was a splendid speaker, with personal gifts
of no mean order. He came into public life at a most opportune
time for us. The railway from Lismore to Murwillumbah is his
monument. He was a great man, and to him this district owes
much. He died on September 16th, 1920.
*
MR. JAMES STOCKS.
The first Mayor of Lismore, Mr. James Stocks, was a striking
figure in the early days of L’smore and district. An Englishman
by birth, he came here when the district was very young. A chemist
by profession, he for many years was the only medical man avail-
able, and’ rendered yeoman assistance in that respect. A very
eloquent speaker and a keen administrator, he was just the man to
steer a young council through the many shoals that beset it. Lis-
more owes much to its first Mayor.


MR. JAMES STOCKS


QUEEN VICTORIA
KING EDWARD VII.
KING GEORGE V.


MR. E. COLEMAN
One of the first Aldermen of Lismore, and a pioneer storekeeper
and shipowner. Father of J. W. Coleman, M.L.A, Mr. Coleman opened
Newtown Stores in 1857.


MR. JAS. BARRIE
MR. E. W. ALLINGHAM
(Still living.)
TWO OF THE FIRST ALDERMEN


MR. A. CURRIE
One of the first Aldermen
MR. G. LARKIN
One of the first Aldermen.


DR. L. BERNSTEIN
A Pioneer Medico and good Public Man.
MR. V. J. NORRIS
First Auditor for Council.


ME. W. LOCKETT.
ALD. R. WHITE.
LATE J. F. O’FLYNN.
ME. E. J. SPINKS.
Four men who did much' to make Lismore. Each has been Mayor for
many years.


MRS. c. McKENZIE
Mayoress.
ALD. c. McKENZIE
Mayor, 1929.


MR. C. A. BARHAM
Town Clerk for 37 yeans.
MR. J. W. NELSON
Town Clerk


LISMORE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, 1929.


LATE MR. St. H. PEARD
Former Town Clerk.
ADMIRAL ROUS
Discovered the Richmond River in
1829.
LATE W. YABSLEY
Coraki,
Pioneer Ship Builder.


COUNCIL CHAMBERS, LISMORE, 1929


THE FIRST COUNCIL.
(See Pages 17-18-19-20.)
The first municipal council of Lismore was composed of six
aldermen : —James Stocks, James Barrie, Edmund Coleman, Archi-
bald Currie, E. W. Allingham and George Larkin. Of these, Mr.
Stocks has otherwise been dealt with in this book.
Mr. James Barrie, father of many present Lismore residents,
was a fine speaker, who left 1 a big mark in Lismore’s history. He
was Mayor on several occasions, and for many years was in busi-
ness as a general storekeeper.
Mr. Edmund' Coleman was another prominent business man, hav-
ing opened the Newtown Store near the Church, of England in 1857.
He was a ship-owner also, and dealt largely in cedar. A ruggedly
honest and upright man, he left a very fragrant memory behind
him. His son, Mr. J. W. Coleman, was also Mayor and M.L.A. for
some years.
Mr. Archibald Currie was a storekeeper in North Lismore. He
originally came here as a mate on a schooner. His family still
live in North Lismore, He was one of the best.
Mr. George Larkin was also a well-known storekeeper. His
premises were in Molesworth-street, and are now McLean’s. A
keen business' man, he was always in every movement for Lismore’s
good.
Mr. E. W. Allingham, the only survivor of the first team, is a
solicitor by profession. He was a well known figure, and was at
one time Mayor.
*
LISMORE’S EARLY MEDICAL MEN.
The first record of a doctor is furnished by a headstone in
the North Lismore cemetery of Thomas Barker, M.D., who died at
Gundurimba in 1858. Dr. Lock was here in the very early seventies.
He was then an old man, and died shortly after. Dr. D. G. Row-
lands, a young Welshman, was here for some years, and died at
the age of 36 in 1878. Dr. J. W. Walker was here in the very early
days, went away, and came back about 1877, remaining until his
death. A son was Mr. J. P. F. Walker, chemist an'd later printer.
Dr. J. Foreman, now well-known in Sydney, came here in May of
1877 and remained for a short time. Dr. L. Bernstein, who figured
so prominently in our public life for many years as Mayor, etc.,
came here in December, 1878. Then came Dr. A. F. Parker, in Feb-
ruary, 1879. He died quite recently. A few years later Dr. R. N.
Gaggin settled in Lismore. The rest of the story is quite modern,
and requires no elaboration.


S.S. AGNES IRVING AT FOOT OF WOODLARK-STREET, 1877.


EARLY SHIPPING.
The wonderful red cedar along the banks of the Richmond? at-
tracted a number of adventurous souls who came in little crafts,
which brought their own timber-getters. These felled the trees
close to the water and used hand winches to load the timber into
the schooner. The first record we have of a vessel is that of the
“Sallie.” It is said that she came to somewhere about Wyrallah
but on a subsequent trip the river was somewhat brackish owing
to drought, and she came on to Gundurimba, where she loaded,
and some of those who came on her remained' there and founded
a settlement, and for many years, in fact up to the eighties, it
was as important a place as Lismore. It had one hotel and two
fairly large stores —Barker and Harrison. Mr. F. E. Scrivener,
now of South Lismore, was manager of Harrison’s. Soon a large
fleet of vessels came along and many fine ones were built at Coraki
by the Yabsley family. The fleet was a quaint one, of all rigs and
types and the masters and owners as quaint as the ships. Owing
to the fact that there were no tugs in the beginning they were at
the mercy of the winds to get in and out of the rivers. They came
in batches, as many as a dozen being here at one time, and then
possibly a couple of months would elapse before another lot came.
As they carried supplies for the settlers, there were many lean times
between their visits. Flour was often at a premium and was eked
out by maize meal, which was ground in small hand mills. Some
early ships were the Josephine, Sallie, Victory, Commerce, Wallace
and Bruce, Alpha, Policeman, Saucy Jack, Bonnie Dundee and
Wallaby. Later some small steam craft came along at intervals,
such as the Susannah Cuthbert, Culloden and Waimea, and then the
Clarence and Richmond Steam Navigation Company —the fore-
runner of the North Coast Company —sent the Agnes Irving and
Ballina, but the first regular boat was the Platypus, Captain John
Magee. This was about 1876. Since then they have maintained a
regular service. In the seventies Messrs. G. and B. Nicoll came
along with a line of steamers, the first of which was the Bonnie
Dundee and later the Richmond, Lismore, Truganini, Alice, Helen
Nicoll and Wyrallah. This firm also pioneered the Byron Bay trade
with the Cavanba and Newrybar. Captain Hunter, now of the Wol-
longbar, was their commodore. Mr. W. T. Yeager, of Coraki, also
ran a line of steamers to Lismore for many years. They were
absorbed by the N.C.S.N. Company. His boats were the Oakland,
Wyoming and St. George. Two noted skippers on boats trading to
the Richmond were Harry Jackson and Ben Alley.


SCHOONER AMPHITRITE AND TUG INDEX.
Coleman’s Point, 1877.


S. S. RICHMOND, COLEMAN’S POINT WHARF, 1877.
Church of England on Hill.


LISMORE’S NEWSPAPERS
“THE NORTHERN STAR” was founded in Lismore in May,
1876, by Mr. William Kelleway, whose photo appears in this book.
The office was then at the lower end of Molesworth-street, opposite
Mr. C. Balzer’s residence. The paper afterwards became the pro-
perty of Mr. T. G. Hewitt, and is to-day owned by a limited liability
company, it is issued daily, and employs 68 hands in its pro-
duction. It is recognised as one of the best, if not the best, country
daily in the State.
THE LISMORE “CHRONICLE,” a bi-weekly was produced by
Mr. R, G. Balmer in the early seventies, and continued for up-
wards of 20 years, when it ceased publication. Mr. Balmer died
in 1899.
“THE NORTH COAST DAILY NEWS,” Lismore’s first daily
paper was first published in may, 1907, and ceased in 1914. The
Directors then issued the “North Coast Weekly News,” which lasted
only a few months.
MR. JOSEPH IVESS, who hailed from New Zealand, where he
was well known in the journalistic world as “the Ragplanter,”
came to. Lismore in 1900, bringing his own printing plant (which
was very obsolete). He had already started over forty papers in
New Zealand and New South Wales, and he conceived the idea of
giving Lismore a daily evening paper. For several months he con-
tinued to print the “Lismore Evening Times,” which was published
in the afternoon, but owing to insufficient staff and probably also
the lack of funds, Mr. Ivess moved on, taking his plant with him
to try his luck elsewhere.
MR. ROBERT MICHAEL O’HALLORAN, also bearing the soubri-
quet of “Ragplanter,” started the “Northern People,” which had
a short and stormy career during war time, and finally ceased pub-
lication about 1916.
THE LATE MR. J. P. F. WALKER published a small weekly
called the “Standard” in 1887. It only lasted a few issues.
MR. JUSTIN McCARTHY for a few months in 1926 issued a
*
very fine paper called “The Northern Weekly,” which soon ceased
publication.
The first newspaper on the Richmond was the “R.R. Express,”
founded in 1870 by Mr. R. G. Balmer, before he came to Lismore, at
Casino, and still being published in the sister town.


LATE WILLIAM KELLEWAY,
Pioneer Journalist
LATE R. G. BALMER,
Of the “Lismore Chronicle”
Of the life of the late Mr. William Kelleway, the founder of
the “Northern Star,” we have not been able to glean any partic-
ulars other than those known of him for many years. Mr. Kelleway
was a former employee of Messrs. John Fairfax and Sons of the
“S.M. Herald.” After leaving that paper he fulfilled a 12 months’
engagement with the “C. and R. Examiner,” where he conceived
the idea of launching a newspaper in Lismore. He was a man of
broad’ views, and during his thirteen years’ residence here he won
the esteem of all sections of the community. He resided at Goonel-
labah, where he experimented with tropical fruits and new grasses.
His home was afterwards destroyed by fire, but the site to-day is
marked by mango and persimmon trees. He did much to advance
the Richmond River district when the North Coast was young and
battling for its very existence. He was another of the pioneers
who went through storm and stress, but left the district much better
than he found it. If he did not altogether achieve much financial
success with the “Star,” he did more —he deserved it. Returning
to Sydney he continued in press work, and had a long and useful
career. His death occurred at Balmain about 1913 at the good age
of 84 years.


LATE T. G. HEWITT.
MR. T. GERAGHTY,
Of Boatharbour, Age 92.


History of the Churrhes
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND
IN 1824 by Letters Patent of George IV., New South Wales
was created an archdeaconry of the Diocese of Calcutta. Rev.
T. Hobbis Scott was appointed Archdeacon, and worked for a
short time in Sydney. In 1829 at the request of the Duke of Wel-
lington a young clergyman named Broughton was appointed, who
seven years later became the first Bishop of Australia. In 1842
the Bishop appointed the Rev. John McConnell, 8.A,. to take
charge of the settlement (Grafton), and to Mr. McConnell belongs
the honour of having officiated at the first religious service both
on the Richmond and on the Clarence. In 1844 he officiated at a
service at the home of Mr. W. C. B. Wilson, at Lismore House, situ-
ated at the foot of the present Molesworth-street. He was suc-
ceeded by Rev. Coles Child, M.A., who visited Lismore as often as
possible. He was accompanied by Dr. Tyrrill (Bishop of the new
diocese of Newcastle). Dr. Tyrrill secured the site of St. Andrew’s
Church and Rectory, subsequently making the latter a gift to the
Parish. The Church owes him a debt of gratitude for his foresight.
Mr. Coles Child was succeeded by Rev. A. E. Selwyn, M.A., who
subsequently became Dean of Newcastle. He was followed by
Rev. R. Winterbotham. Later on (1865) Casino became the centre
of a new parish, with Rev. G. Head Shaw as vicar. He was
followed by Rev. W. H. Dunning, who was assisted by Rev. F. R.
Newton, who took up his residence in Lismore. In 1871 Rev. W.
H. Dunning presided at the first meeting of parishioners in Lismore.
Mr. Newton also being present. It was decided to build a church,
the committee of lay men being Messrs. John Peate, Edmund Cole-
man, Wm. Smith and F. Fredericks. At the Easter meeting Messrs.
S. Garrard, John Peate and E. Coleman were appointed church
wardens. In 1878 the church was enlarged, and in 1882 it was
decided to build a rectory. Lismore became a separate parish in
1883, following the ministries of Rev, W. F. Harris Walker (locum
tenens) and Rev. H. Porter. The Rev. A. Poole was actually the
first vicar. From the original Parish of Lismore the parishes of
Woodburn, Murwillumbah, Ballina, Byron Bay, Eureka, Coraki,
Bangalow, Mullumbimby, Dunoon, Nimbin, Clunes, Alstonville,
Tweed Heads and Upper Tweed have since been formed.
Rev. A. Poole was succeeded by Rev. H. Jobson, then
came Rev. A. W. King (for a short time), Rev. Canon
R. K. Ewing. Aftefi the death of Canon Ewing the Rev.
A. W. Johnstone became vicar, and in turn he was sue-


ceeded by Canon R. A, Whyte, B.A. Then came Rev. A. R. Ebbs,
Rev. F. W. Tugwell, 8.A., then the present rector, Canon A. G.
Moore, Th. Schol. In Canon Whyte’s time the beautiful Parish
Church of St. Andrew’s was commenced, and completed to its
present stage. New Churches have also been erected at Forth and
South Lismore. A Children’s Home is well established, as is the St.
Andrew’s Hostel for girls. It is impossible in the brief space avail-
able to mention the names of many lay men and women who have'
made the wonderful progress possible. The present church wardens
who carry on the work of those appointed in 1871 are Messrs.
W. C. Tippett, J. R. Ball, and J. Storey (junr.). The Bishops under
whose guidance the parish has been fostered are 1 Bishops Broughton
(Australia), Tyrrill (Newcastle), Sawyer, Turner, Green, Cooper
(Grafton and Armidale), C. H. Druitt and J. W. Ashton (Grafton).
It has been predicted that in the course of a few years. Lismore
will be a separate diocese with its own bishop, and this is not an
impossible development judging from past progress.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
The 1 beginnings of the Presbyterian Church in this district
are somewhat obscure. The Presbyterian charge of Lismore was
originally known as the Richmond River Parish, and embraced the
whole district from the Richmond to the Tweed Rivers.
The Rev. John Thom, M.A., who arrived in the colony from
Scotland in 1856, was the first minister. After a successful ministry
Mr. Thom was drowned in the Richmond River on September 2, 1869.
The centre of the charge, which was formed in 1864, was
Coraki, but the Rev. Daniel Blue, who was inducted in 1870, made
Lismore the headquarters. He was succeeded in November, 1877,
by the Rev. W. F. Fraser, M.A.
The Rev. R. Inglis, M.A., was inducted early in 1886, the Rev.
W. F. Craigie on October 21st, 1891, the Rev. James Gray on May
20th, 1896, and then the Rev. M. Kirkpatrick, M.A.
Succeeding ministers were Revs. A. M. Gauld, Alan MacKillop,
8.A., 8.D., David Galloway, and the present minister, Rev. A. J.
Parker, B.A.
The congregation at first worshipped in the Temperance Hall
and afterwards in the Protestant Hall. In 1881 a substantial brick
church was built to seat 250 people.
The present church was built in 1907, and the old church was
demolished in 1921 to make room for the Memorial Hall, which is
used for the Sunday School. Last year the beautiful kindergarten
hall was built to accommodate the growing primary department
of the Sunday School. The valuable Manse property is situated
on a large area of land between Leycester and High streets.


During the ministry of the Rev. Alan MacKillop Presbyterian
services were inaugurated in South Lismore. A cottage was pur-
chased in Casino-street an'd altered so as to accommodate a Sun-
day School. In 1928 a small weatherboard church was built and
Sunday School and regular worship are now conducted there every
Sunday.
ROMAN CATHOLIC HISTORY.
As mentioned elsewhere in this book, the Roman Catholics
were served* by Priests travelling here from the Clarence, and the
names given are Fathers O’Connell, Johnson and Healy.
The much loved Abbe Schurr arrived in 1871, and remained here
till his death over 40 years after. He was everyone’s friend, irre-
spective of creed. He did much to establish the culture of sugar
cane on t the Richmond.
At first services were held at Lismore House, the home of the
Girard family, and later in the Court House, now the fire station
site in Molesworth Street.
Father J. J. Doyle arrived to take charge of the Parish on
July 3rd, 1878, and remained here till his death in 1909. The
Catholic Church in which he celebrated Mass on the following
Sunday was a wooden building 20ft. by 20ft. It occupied a. site
where the late Bishop now lies buried in the Lady Chapel of St.
Carthage’s Cathe'dral. After travelling his whole district, Father
Doyle selected Lismore as the best centre, and the town most likely
to develop, though at that time, it was only a village.
In the same year a Catholic school, taught by Miss M. Crow-
ley, was opened, between 60 and 70 children attending. In 1882
Father Doyle was promoted by the Bishop of Armidale to the
dignity of Dean of Lismore. The districts about Casino were also
constituted a separate parish.
In 1886 Dean Doyle founded St. Mary’s Convent, and brought
the Presentation Sisters from Lucan, in Ireland, to conduct the
Catholic Schools.
On July 29th, 1887, Dean Doyle received the Apostolic Brief
from Rome that constituted him Bishop of Grafton to rule the newly
established diocese of the North Coast. The boundaries of the new
diocese extended from the Tweed River to ten miles below Port
Macquirie. The Bishop decided to build his diocesan Cathedral in
Lismore. On May 31st, 1905, the Bishop laid the first brick of the
new Cathedral on the completed foundations. On June 11th he
laid the foundation stone of the new 1 Convent. He died on June 4th,
1909. The outside general dimensions of the Cathedral are : Length
165 ft., width 72ft., height 80ft., length of transepts 112 ft. The
Cathedral was consecrated on August 15th, 1919.


In Lismore Catholic Education is provided by St. Carthage’s
Primary School, in charge of the Presentation Sisters, by St. Carth-
age’s Boys’ School, and by the South Lismore Convent School, in
charge of Sisters of St. Joseph. Secondary education is provided
by the Marist Boys’ School and by St. Mary’s College. The total
enrolment of Catholic pupils amounts to 622. There is already in
hand a project to build a Boys’ Boarding School near Lismore.
THE SALVATION ARMY.
The Lismore Corps was officially opened on April 2nd, 1891, but
before this two Salvationists came from Kempsey. William Gray
and George Guy opened fire on Lismore. This was the commence-
ment of the organisation which has been such a power for good in
our midst. The first officers appointed to command' Lismore were
Captain Maggie Poland and Lieut. G. Gayland. Huge crowds were
attracted to the Army. These two lasses did a wonderful work,
and quite a number of their converts still stand to-day.
METHODIST CHURCH HISTORY.
Methodism in Lismore was born amidst pioneering conditions.
The Methodist services held at that time were those conducted' by
the Rev. Glasson, who used to ride across from Ulmarra, a dis-
tance of over 100 miles. These were held in the Temperance Hall,
which then stood on the hill at the end of Keen Street, within a
short distance of the Catholic Cathedral. This hall was later blown
down during a storm. In 1878 the Richmond River district, extend-
ing from Ballina to Casino along the river and across country from
Casino to the Tweed, was formed into a circuit. The first minister
appointed was the Rev. Mr. Hotston, who travelled on horseback
over this large area, and instituted a series of monthly services.
Mr, Hotston was followed by the Revs. E, King, Dunstan, Scot-
ton, Curwood, Tarn, Lewin, Boyer, Cooper, Reeve, Lane, McCal-
lum, Orr and others who are known to men of the present day. A
small wooden church was erected on the site of the present fine
structure about 1877. The present building was erected during
the ministry of the Rev. B. Dinning.
BAPTIST CHURCH.
The decision to commence Baptist services in Lismore was made
on September Ist, 1913, at a meeting in the home of Mr. W. Ban-
nister, South Lismore. Rev. W. H. Wingfield, then of Casino, Rev.
A. J. Waldock, then Home Mission Superintendent, and three local
Baptist families were present. The first service was conducted by


Mr. A. Cane at Mr. E, A. S. Thompson’s residence, North Lismore,
on Sunday, September 7th, 1913.
On March Bth, 1914, Mr. Wm. White, then President N.S.W.
Baptist Union, and Rev. A. J. Waldock, at a meeting held in the
Temperance Hall, North Lismore, formed the Church with 16 mem-
bers. Of those foundation members Mrs. W. Bannister, Miss A.
Bannister, Miss Ethel Bannister (now Mrs. G. Baxter) and Mrs.
Arnold are still in active membership. Mr. E. A. S. Thompson and
Mr. A. Cane were appointed Secretary and Treasurer, respectively.
Rev. John Complin arrived* May 16th, 1914, and commenced ser-
vices in the Octo Pavilion, now the New England Co.’s garage, South
Lismore. The successful establishment of the Baptist cause in
Lismore is largely attributed to his earnest and faithful ministry.
The site occupied by the present South Lismore Church was
given by two Sydney B'aptists, Mr. (later Sir) Hugh Dixson and Mr.
W. Buckingham.
Rev. John Complin was succeeded by Rev. G. Stanley Cox, dur-
ing whose ministry the South Lismore Church was opened for wor-
ship on June 16th, 1915. Mr. Cox was followed by Rev. J. H. Baker,
who had served the Church during his student days, Rev. D. F. Mit-
chell, Rev. Jas. Johnston, and Rev. Joseph Hunter, who all minis-
tered faithfully and well. After a brief pastorless period Pastor J.
J. Weller conducted a vigorous evangelistic campaign. Considerable
progress was made, and* additional property acquired in Magellan
Street. This building, now known as the Central Church, was
opened for worship in May, 1926.
The present officers are Pastor S. G. Tomkins, who commenced
his ministry in July, 1927, Mr. D. A. Collins, Secretary, and Mr. H.
Larkin, Treasurer.
CHURCH OF CHRIST.
The history of this local Church is amongst the unique, with
other congregations, who have served some of the vital needs of
Lismore for nearly half a century. In April, 1884, Mr. John Newby,
from the Manning River, visited the Richmond, and arranged a
meeting of “Christians,” at the home of Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Stew-
art, at Bungawalbyn. Mr. and Mrs. L. H. Robinson and Messrs.
L. and J. Patch were among the first new members received into
fellowship. In July the late Mr. Geo. Day, of Sydney, who had been
preaching at Bungawalbyn, paid a visit to Lismore, and meeting
with two immersed believers, the late Mrs. Burtinshaw and the late
Mr. J. P. F. Walker, meetings for worship were commenced on the last
Sunday in July, 1884, in an “upper room” over the Crusade Print-
ing Works in Woodlark Street.
In March, 1920, the site of the present new Temple at the corner


of Keen Street and Magellan Street was secured, and in November,
1922, a contract was let to Messrs. Brown and Jolly, of Lismore.
The “Northern Star” of July 17th reports : “The Church, which
was designed by Mr. F. J. Board, A.1.A., is a handsome structure
of a design suggesting the Flemish style of architecture, and is a
♦dignified addition to the town.” The membership of over two hun-
dred has many isolated, and includes many pioneers of the town and
district. Several active auxiliaries —the Bible School, Ladies’ Guild,
Endeavour Societies (2), Devotional and Choir Service —sustain
and enlarge the sphere of activity. The official Boards of Elders
and of Deacons and Deaconesses have assisted' to guide the work
over the years.
The following gentlemen have ably ministered to the congre-
gations at the local Temple : —Evangelist G. B. Moysey, Pastors
Morrison, F. J. Saunders, Thos. Bagley, S. Stevens, Thos. Dagger,
T. B. Fisher, G. Chandler, P. J. Pond, 8.A., W. J. Way, and N. G.
Noble.
ST. PAUL’S PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH


ST. CARTHAGE’S R.C. CATHEDRAL.
LATE BISHOP DOYLE
RIGHT REV. J. CARROLL,
Present Bishop of Lismore


ST. ANDREW’S CHURCH, 1874.
ST. ANDREW’S CHURCH, 1929.


METHODIST CHURCH
CHURCH OF CHRIST
BAPTIST CHURCH


SALVATION ARMY HALL
LATE J. E. GLASGOW,
SEVENTH DAY ADVENTIST
CHURCH
LATE L. G. SNOW,
Pioneer Sawmillers


LISMOEE BAND, 1882.
LISMORE JOCKEY CLUB COMMITTEE, ABOUT 1887.
J. McLennan, Dr. Bernstein, N. J. Simmons, T. C. Lodge, E. W.
Bentley, G. Larkin, G. West, S. Garrard, C. White.
At Rear.—T. Exton and F. Fredericks.


POST OFFICE STAFF, 1885— (All Living).
Back Row (left to right). — G. Burley, W. Exton, J. Carolan, J. Burtin-
shaw, J. Birmingham.
Middle Row. — A. Cottee, J. Anschau (P.M.), W. Smythe.
Front Row. — D. Raynor, E. Glasby.


RIVER MAILS.
Mr. John Anschau, postmaster from 1882 to 1896 at Lismore
writes : “I organise'd’ the Lismore Fire Brigade, and was captain
until 1896. When Lismore became a municipality in 1879 I was post-
master at Woodburn, which was then the distributing office for the
Richmond.
The Lismore portion of the mail was sent on to Lismore by
pack horse on Mondays and Fridays; on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and
Saturdays iti was not necessary to send a pack horse. Contractor
Ross put the Lismore bag in front of him. In 1880 the mail matter
grew very heavy, and the roads from Lismore to Woodburn were
very bad, and a contract was made with Davis and Sons. In any
case Davis took a contract to run the mail by steam launch, this
launch reaching Lismore usually about midnight. The mail was
sorted and given out to callers usually about 1 a.m. The rapid
growth of the mail soon made it impossible for pack horses to carry
between Woodburn and the plarence River. The Clarence bar was
very bad. Steamers were often delayed for days, holding up the
mails. James Barrie, James O’Flynn and Dr. Bernstein went to
Sydney to try and get a mail service via Tenterfield and a coach
service was started. My recollection of the date is not clear, but it
was about 1884 when the coach started to take the mails via
Casino to Tenterfield. Regarding the first telephone for public use
not only in Lismore, but as far as I can find, the firsi public tele-
phone in the State of N.S.W., I do know that there was no telephone
for sale in this State, and we had to send to Melbourne for
the two instruments, hence my opinion that ours was the first public
telephone in this State. Mr. Beaumont built the Royal Hotel on
the corner of Woodlark and Molesworth streets, and owing to the
very uncertain time mails would arrive, also steamers, Mr. Beau-
mont thought a telephone service between the post office and his
hotel would be a great convenience. He applied for a set, but the
P.M.G. could not supply them. Beaumont wrote to Melbourne and
got the set. We had no law to regulate the traffic or to make any
charge, so after a lot of official correspondence it was decided that
we would charge B'eaumont £5 p.a. for the use of our telephone
poles, and he could do what he wished about the ’phones, and so
the first telephone service in New South Wales was started, but it
was a failure. The telephones were like “Baldwin’s ghosts,” some-
times they worked and sometimes they did not. Beaumont’s tele-
phones mostly did not work. The original Court House and lock-up
stood where now the Fire Brigade Station .stands, and was built of
cedar„ lock, stock and barrel. Daniel Hogan was the first full-time
police officer stationed at Lismore. He was pensioned off in 1880. He
died in the early eighties, and is buried in the Roman Catholic


cemetery. He was a good, kind-hearted man, and did much to help
the early settlers on the Richmond River. Abbe Schurr, a French
priest, had much to do with introducing sugar cane, and the first
sugar mill I know of was out at Alstonville, ‘near John Perry’s
farm.’ McCann Bros, had four acres of cane, and they made a mill
by felling a tree; rounding off: the stump, in a root of the stump
they made a socket, and by means of a heavy iron strap at the top
they fixed a roller. At the end of this roller there was a long lever,
to which they hitched a horse. The horse walked round the stump.
The cane was passed between the roller and stump. The juice was
caught in a tub sunk in the ground. The juice was boiled in half
of a ship’s tank, and when granulated the treacle was squeezed
out through a bag. I saw this mill working. George Larkin bought
the first four bags of sugar. I cannot say if he ever sold it again.
I should* say he did not, because after it would be in a bag a few days
it would be one consolidated mass. The first sugar mill spoken of was
Baillie’s mill, South Lismore. Just about that time sugar mills
were starting all over the river. William Gollan, Woodburn;
Buchanan, Swan Bay; MacPherson, Swan Bay; Poolman and Co.,
Kilgin; Thompson, Broadwater; Thompson, Wyrallah; James
Bryant, Rous; McKinnon, Coraki; Staines, Rous; and the Bi<? Mill
at Broadwater, started 1880 and cost £300,000. It was in its time
the largest sugar mill in the world, and it knocked all the small
mills out.
POSTAL STATISTICS.
(Statistics for year ending June 30, 1928.)
Registered articles posted, 14,341; registered articles received,
14,971; parcels posted, 8458; parcels received, 6422; telegrams
despatched, 42,895, value £3183; telegrams received, 41,386; tele-
grams repeated for other offices 202,390; money orders issued, 7586
—value £43,189; money orders paid, 8658 —value £66,082; postal
notes issued 30,308 —value £13,738; postal notes paid, 26,085; old
age pensions paid, 6042; war pensions paid, 5543; trunk line calls,
179,644; local calls, 703,854; private bags for mail, 10; private
boxes for mail, 325; requisitions for postage stamps, £14,394/2/11;
duty stamps, £2207/14/5; salaries to staff, £15,537; temporary staff,
£2336.


THE SUGAR INDUSTRY.
(Compiled from the “Encyclopedia of N.S.W.” in the Mitchell
Library.)
The sugar industry was introduced into the Richmond River
district by the Rev. J. Thorn. In 1869 Lismore grown sugar com-
manded £36 per ton in the open market, and at the Intercolonial
Exhibition held in 1870 Mr. John Sharpe, of Richmond River Heads,
exhibited specimens of sugar from Violet Ribbon plants, realising
£3B per ton. But while the growing proved profitable the crushing
could not be successfully (that is financially) worked, and one by
one the small isolated mills were obliged to shut down. It is
probable that amongst the latter category the manufacture of sugar
by the late Mr. W. Yabsley under the tutelage of the Rev. Edward
Holland, Presbyterian Minister of Port Macquarie, may be included.
The C.S.R. Co., in which Clark Irving was then the largest
shareholder, began its crushing operations at Broadwater in 1881,
cultivation work in connection with the growing of cane having been
commenced in 1879. The first manager was Mr. Jas. Wyness. The
area under sugar cane was 455 acres, and the quantities of cane
treated during the first season numbered 12,126 tons, the yield being
26.7 tons per acre. The plant was increased from year to year, till
it became eventually the largest and best equipped sugar mill in
the world at a cost of £750,000.
In 1869 Mr. Robert McKenzie, father of the present Mayor
of Lismore, had a small sugar mill at North Lismore, just a few
chains beyond Muldoon’s mill. It was worked by horses, and the
cane was grown by the late C. White at South Lismore.
Mr. Jas, Baillie, another of Lismore’s early pioneers, erected
a similar mill at “Cadzow,” South Lismore. B'oth these mills had
open pan boilers, and were not of a, style that could turn out the
best sugar. At one time there were 40 sugar mills on the Richmond,
but finally the C.S.R. Co. froze them out, and for many years past
has had a monopoly.


EARLY STORES.
It is hard to determine who opened the first store in Lismore,
hut it is quite clear that the late E. Coleman opened the Newtown
Store, opposite the Church of England, in Coleman Lane, in 1857.
On the river bank at the rear of the present Freemason’s
Hotel, a store was kept by a man named; O’Nines, and at one time
by G. Morris. This later came into the possession of Mr. J. E.
Glasgow, who combined with it a saddlery business, and kept the
Post Office before it became an official position. Mr. George Larkin
came from the South Coast and opened in Molesworth Street, very
early in the seventies. This position is now in the occupation of
Mr. S. McLean, but this business was sold by Mr. Larkin to the late
A. G. Robertson, who with Mr. S. Woodward conducted it for some
years before transferring to premises across the street.
Mr. John McLennan soon after opened a general store, where
the* Star Court now stands, and failing, the stock and business was
purchased by Mr. Jas. Barrie, who afterwards removed to Wood-
lark Street, on the spot now held by Maloney and Son and O’Connor.
Mr. Andrew Wotherspoon, who retired from the Education De-
partment about 1876, built a store in Zadoc Street, on the river
side of the Courthouse, and conducted a store there.
Mr. A. Currie opened at North Lismore, and conducted a fine
business for many years. Mr. Denis Hogan had a business at the
corner of Pine Street and Terania Street at an early date.
«
SCHOOL TEACHERS
The first record of a school in Lismore that we can discover
the Bark Hut, on the site of the Boer War Memorial (a draw-
ing of this building appears in this volume). A Mr. Rankin was
teacher, who was drowned when the “Rainbow” was wrecked at
Ballina, and was succeeded by Mr. Andrew Wotherspoon, who in
turn was succeeded by Mr. G. H. Daniel (see photo of old Lismore
School). These were public schools, but Miss Staff taught a private
school at a very early period in Lismore history. Mr. W. 0. Har-
man established a private school, “The Commercial,” on Coleman’s
Point, on the western side of the southern approach to Simes bridge.
This was in 1875.
Mr. Harman was the first official Council Clerk —it was then a
part time job. A photo, of his school appears in this book also ;
the adult figure on the left is Mr. Harman. Among the pupils in
this photo, are Aid. R. White, T. Exton, S. M. Cottee, and H.
Knight.


CHRISTMAS IN LISMORE 30 YEARS AGO.
Christmas 50 years ago was not like Christmas to-day. There
were then three hotels —Dean’s, on the site of the present Hotel
Ryan; Freemasons’ and Commercial. Stores —George Larkin, now
McLean’s, James Barrie, where Maloney’s and Mason’s buildings
are now, and Edmund Coleman at Newtown. There were no
crowds perambulating the footpaths, for there were no footpaths,
and no crowds to walk on them. There were no motor cars in the
middle of the street. There were two reasons for this. One was
that cars were then unknown, and the other that the middle of the
street was not fit to put a car on. Boats and horse flesh were the
means of locomotion. Everyone living on the river bank (and most
people did that) had a good boat, and Dad and Mum and the family
came to town a week or so before to get the Christmas supplies,
and the boys and girls had unfamiliar elastic side boots on, cost-
ing 8/6, and worth half of it. You could tell by their limp that
boots were not a< regular thing with them, and something to be dis-
carded as soon as they got a chance. They were mostly taken
home slung over their shoulders. Dad went to see a man about a
dog while Muml did the shopping. In fact, as far as I remember he
saw several men about several dogs, and when it came to going
home his attempts at rowing the boat caused Mum to say some-
thing cutting, and she took the job on herself, for all women could
pull a boat —they had to. But before Dad got that far in the day’s
enjoyment he had a game of quoits, then as popular as football) is
to-'day, and not nearly so rough. This game was played in Moles -
worth-street in front of Dean’s Hotel, and after every game an
adjournment was made to see another man about a dog, and then
the quality of the game deteriorated somewhat. Being near Christ-
mas most work was suspended, and the men from the mill (Glas-
gow’s) at the rear of what is now A. G. Robertson’s—Bob Knight,
the Browns, Ted Wren, Sam Wamock and Charlie Callard, drifted
along and discussed the topics of the day (chiefly beer) to their
own satisfaction. Towards evening the horses that had made the
journey were hauled out of the hotel yard, the saddle bags filled
with the day’s purchases, including liquids, and soon all were home-
ward bound, and thanks to the instincts of the animals, they mostly
got there. Santa Claus was just as regular in his visits then as now.
The old chap doesn’t seem to have aged any, but he didn’t carry
the class of goods that are in vogue to-day. Chocolates at 4/- per
lb., bless your hearts ! The whole Christmas outfit for a child
did not cost that, but they were quite as happy and much more con-
tent than the spoilt darlings of to-day, who turn up their noses
at anything less than 10/- toys. Why, Mum didn’t get 10/- to
spend on her dear old self, and Dad would have had a rough spin


if he told Mum that his day in town had cost him that much. How-
ever, they had a good* time, and on Christmas EvO they sang songs
learnt in a land far away and amid their joy many a sigh escaped
when they thought of that dear land, and Mum’s eyes glistened sus-
piciously at times when she thought of those she would never see
again. Heigho ! it is a long way to look back —50 years —but
some fragrant memories of it linger. Dad and Mum are all gone to
the Land o’ the Leal, but we remember them. Oh, yes !
THE FAMILY CAR 50 YEARS AGO.
LISMORE’S FIRST SCHOOL.


COMMERCIAL SCHOOL, COLEMAN’S POINT, 1877.
Mr. W. O. Harman, Teacher.
Mr. Harman was the first Town Clerk.
MR. A. WOTHERSPOON, A PIONEER SCHOOL TEACHER AND HIS
FAMILY. Mr. Wotherspoon retired in 1875.


PUBLIC SCHOOL, MOLESWORTH STREET, LISMORE, 1876.
Mr. Gr. H. Daniel, Teacher.
Mr. G. H. Daniel writes School house and school were under
one roof, and for a short time Mr. Lockett occupied the house, I
being single, boarded with Mr. and Mrs. McKenzie on the river bank
opposite the school. The school ground then occupied l a square of
about two acres, having for one corner Nesbitt’s new store. The
attendance increased so rapidly that the next year saw the whole
building converted into school, and later a tent to accommodate 70
op 80 was added to it. When I married a residence was built, and
when the new school was erected on a site I recommended, the old
school and residence were sold to the Municipal Council for, I think,
£lO, and they were removed bodily to a position near the old Police
Station (Senior Constable Hogan in charge), and became School
of Arts and caretaker’s residence for many years. I took charge
of Lismore Public School in 1875, succeeding Mr. Wotherspoon.
The following year a travelling photographer took a photo of the
Lismore Public School. Considering its age the work was excel-
lent, for I can recognise and name about half of the children.
The four big boys next to me are Tom Brandon, Peter McDonald
(fighting Mac), Howard and Peter Hewitson. In the second row
the second boy is Robert White (late Mayor), and the last boy in
the front row next to the girls is Charles McKenzie (your present
Mayor). He was my youngest scholar, and I have carried him
many a time to school, for in those days of constant rain and paddy-
melon, holes it would have been dangerous fofi him to venture alone.


LISMORE HIGH SCHOOL, 1929.


LISMORE RURAL SCHOOL, 1929.


SOUTH LISMORE PUBLIC SCHOOL, 1929.
LISMORE TRADE SCHOOL, 1929.


NOTES FROM “NORTHERN STAR’
JANUARY, 6th. ,877 -
Butcher’s Prices : JAMES BRYANT.
Fresh and salted beef, 3|d lb., Sausages, 5d lb.
by the quarter 3d lb. Terms Cash Monthly.
SELECTION FARM.
For Sale —4 miles from Lismore on a navigable creek, emptying
half into the main river. Farm, 80 acres, on which is erected a
four-roomed cottag.e and kitchen, land rich and securely fenced,
orangery, garden, etc. Price £l2O.
Ladies’ Clothing :
Chemises, 1/11 to 3/11. Lace Stockings, 1/- to 2/6.
Nightdresses, 3/11 to 10/6. Muslin Costumes, 17/- to 30/'.
Camisoles, 1/11 to 7/6. Alpaca Costumes, 30/- to 40/-.
White Stockings,) 6d to 2/6. Black and Coloured Silk Dresses,
£2.
Men’s Wear :
Cotton Shirts, 2/6 to 3/6. Bacon, 9d lb.
Wool Shirts, 4/6 to 8/6. Butter, lOd lb.
Tweed Coats, 14/6 to 25/-. Cheese, 8d lb.
Overcoats, 18/6 to 35/-. Potatoes, £6 ton.
Boys’ Complete Suits, 15/- to Bark, £6 ton.
35/-. Pine Logs, 7/3 to 7/-.
Maize, 2/8 bushel. Pine Flooring, 13/6 to 16/6.
Hides, 3d lb. Good Cedar, 14/’ to 18/-.
Pigs, 6d lb. Beech, 12/- to 13/-.
JANUARY 20th.
Public Notice. —A public meeting will be held in the Lismore
Court House on Monday, January 22, at 7 p.m., to take steps to
petition the Government for the erection of bridges at the junction
of Wilson and Leycester Creeks; also to get the Casino and Ballina
road, via Lismore, made a first class road, and for the transaction
of other important business. James BaiJlie, convener.
JANUARY 27th.
Another meeting called, re Wilson and Leycester Creek bridge,
etc.
FEBRUARY 17th.
Advance Lismore ! On Sunday afternoon there were four
steamers in port : “Agnes Irving,” “Jabberwock,” “Index,” and
“Lismore,” besides the sailing vessels “Amphitrite,” “Rob Roy,”
and) “Margaret Jane.”


FEBRUARY 24th.
To the Hon. Minister of Justice, Sydney. Memorial to cause
steps to be taken to establish a District Court and Court of Quarter
Sessions at Lismore and for the appointment of a Land Agent.
James Baillie, chairman.
MARCH Bth.
The “Barque Peony,” Newcastle, with coal, bound north, sprung
a leak and was ran ashore five miles south of Richmond River
Heads. Captain and four hands drowned'. Captain’s wife and five
hands saved. Ship total wreck.
At this time J’s.P. were : —H. S. Eliott, P.M., J. Stocks and
A. M. Girard.
MARCH 171 h.
On March 11th, Miss Josephine Girard died at Lismore Station
following shortly after her mother’s decease. All business places
in town were closed for the funeral.
MARCH 24th.
Mr. J. Horniman, first manager Commercial Bank, left by
“Agnes Irving” for Sydney.
APRIL 21st.
J. B. Moorcroft, Woodlark-street, had on view a carpet snake
measuring 14 feet in length, captured about 20 miles from Lismore
by two blackfellows, whilst tracking a stray bullock belonging to
some cedar cutters up the creek.
MAY sth.
Notification of appointment of Dr. John Govett Smith, of Graf-
ton, as Government Medical Officer and Vaccinator for Richmond
River district.
The electoral lists at this time showed the number of electors
in Casino 666, Lismore 492, Ballina 489.
Dr. J. Foreman settled in Lismore.
MAY 19th.
Purchase of s.s. “Victoria” by James Webster for passenger
and cargo trade on the Richmond River. She was a screw boat,
fitted with direct-acting 15 h.p. engines, made by Hilton, of Lon-
don; length 75 feet. 14 feet beam, sft. 6in. depth of hold and register
20 tons, license to carry 175 passengers, speed 8 to 10 knots, and
calculated to make the trip from Lismore to Ballina in a day.
JUNE 2nd.
Mr. Neil Sharpe was appointed post office stationmaster, vice I.
M. Hyam, resigned.


JUNE 16th.
The first bootball club in Lismore was formed at the Com-
mercial School Room; captain, R. Dawson; secretary, W. 0. Har-
man. £6OO was allotted by Postmaster-General for a telegraphic
wire between Lismore and Ballina and Warded.
JUNE 22nd.
The new Court House was started by Mr. J. Perry, in which
100,000 bricks are to be used. Mr. Johnson had just started' the
brick making industry.
JUNE 30th.
On Sunday, July 1, the new Roman Catholic Church was opened
by Rev. Father F. Schurr and Rev. Father Sheehan.
First meeting held in Lismore petitioning for incorporation as
a municipality was held’ on Tuesday, July 3, at the Court House.
It was thought by some that discussion was somewhat premature.
E. W. Allingham was chairman. H. S. Elliott, P.M., read' the adver-
tisement calling the meeting. W. English moved and J. Stocks
seconded the motion. J. Sexton said the settlers in his neighbour-
hood were not disposed to be rated under the municipal scheme.
R. Gibson; said the whole thing was five years too soon. A. Mac-
Donald thought no benefit would be provided to outside settlers.
The meeting adjourned without definite results.
JULY 14th.
A receiving post office was opened at North Lismore, with Mr.
D, Currie in charge. A meeting was called at Mr. C. Dean’s Hotel
for the formation of a Building Society.
Mr. Davis, of South Lismore, had on view at Larkin’s sioie a
cabbage weighing over 13 lbs.
JULY 28th.
On July 23 the “Bonnie Dundee” arrived in Lismore from
Dundee. She was a little screw steamer of 45 h.p., with an estimated
speed of 9 knots.
AUGUST 4th.
Another meeting was held at the Court House to petition the
Government for the erection of a bridge at the junction of Wilson
and Leycester Creeks. Convener was Andrew Wotherspoon.
AUGUST 22nd.
The death occurred of Spencer Cottee at the age of 44. Mr.
Cottee came to Lismore in 1869, assisted in the building of E. Carter
and Co.’s sawmill, and subsequently built the Freemasons’ Hotel,
Molesworth-street.
SEPTEMBER Ist.
The “Northern Star” had a leader on the necessity of Lismore
having a hospital.


SEPTEMBER Bth.
The first art union in Lismore was advertised' by J. B. Moor-
croft to take place on October 12, on Mr. Campbell’s “Golden
Barrel” principle. Four hundred prizes were advertised, among
which were stuffed' birds, a silver watch, 9 volumes of scientific
works, five tubs, etc.
SEPTEMBER 15th.
Steamer Notice ; Richmond River fares by s.s. “Victoria” at this
time were as follows :
Lismore to Ballina—B/6. Lismore to Swan Bay—4/6.
Lismore to Warded —7/6. Lusmore to Coraki 3/6.
Lismore to Broadwater —6/6. Lismore to Wyrallah —2/-.
Lismore to Woodburn —5/6. Lismore to Gundurimba —1/-.
OCTOBER 6th.
A meeting was held at the Court House to consider advisability
of promoting the sugar cane industry in Lismore district.
OCTOBER 17th.
A political meeting was held at Court House for the purpose
of taking steps to secure the return of C. H. Fawcett to represent
the Clarence and Richmond River district in the coming Parliament.
Mr. W. English was in the chair. Sub-committee appointed con-
sisted of J. Currie, G. Larkin, E. Coleman, J. Baillie, A. Currie', E.
W. Allingham and J. Perry.
DECEMBER Ist.
As a result of the Clarence and Richmond River election Thos.
Bawd'en defeated C. H. Fawcett by 30 votes. Meeting at Court
House was held for the purpose of forming a Free Selectors’ Associ-
ation. W. English was in the chair. There was a very small
attendance.
DECEMBER Bth.
Charles Nicholas started a new industry in Lismore, that of
basket making from the lawyer-cane grown in the scrub around
Lismore.
DECEMBER 15th.
The metalling of Woodlark-street was nearly completed by
the contractor, Mr. O’Keefe. The road superintendent, Mr. R.
Donaldson, intends to give the contract to continue the metalling
right through to the Big Scrub and right down to the wharf. Only
a short time before this Woodlark-street was covered with foxtail
and sometimes knee d'eep in mud.
A meeting held at Temperance Hall to advocate the objects of
the Liquor License Amendment Association, viz., “tp procure su<?h


a change in the law as will effect the transfer of the power of
granting licenses from the magistrates to the people, and the closing
of public houses on the Sabbath.”
1878.
JANUARY 2nd.
J. C. Vesper, coach proprietor, drove a two horse coach from
Lismore to Ballina, and found the road practicable for traffic.
The Lismore Public School at this time had 186 scholars —61
boys, 75 girls. The master was G. H. Daniel.
JANUARY 26th.
Lemuel Grigg Snow exhibited five varieties of well-grown sugar
cane, of high density, grown by Francis Morrish at his farm at the
Big Scrub, where he owned 13 acres.
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 13th,
The funeral of John Clegg Taylor, Woodlark-street, was largely
attended*. Mr. Taylor, who had been a resident of Lismore for 20
years, died at the eftrly age of 33.
MARCH 11th.
Meeting at Woodburn Hotel for the purpose of petitioning
Parliament for the separation of the' Clarence and Richmond River
electorate.
Laying of foundation of Protestant Hall in Magellan-street.
MARCH 30th.
A meeting was held at the Court House to petition the Govern-
ment for a portion of Jand for a new cemetery. G. Larkin was in
the chair, and Mr. E. Coleman acted for Mr. T. Bortgn, secretary,
who was away.
MAY 10th. ,
The electoral roll at Lismore at this time showed 543.
MAY 11th.
Death at the age of 33 of Mrs. Stocks, daughter of William
Yabsley, and wife of Mr. James Stocks, who became first Mayor
of Lismore.
JUNE 17th.
Meeting at Paulson’s Hotel for the purpose of forming a
Masonic Lodge and petition to the Grand* Lodge was accordingly
drawn up.
JULY 10th.
At the old Court House a meeting was held to form an Agricul-
tural, Horticultural and Industrial Resources Society. There was
a small but influential attendance. Mr. George Larkin was in the


chair, and among those present were E. W. Allingham, W. English,
E. Coleman, W. Kelleway, J. Perry, Mr. Sohn, J. Baillie' and A.
Currie, Subscriptions were to be £1 per annum. Mr. E. Coleman
was selected as secretary and Mr. E. W. Allingham was hon.
treasurer.
JULY 13.
The newly-appointed Clerk of Petty Sessions (Mr, W. Carson)
and the accountant of the new branch of the Bank of New South
Wales (Mr. G. Laman) arrived from Sydney.
JULY 27th.
There were over 200 people present at the opening of the
Protestant Hall, Magellan-street, in which was held a tea meeting.
AUGUST 3rd.
Mr. J. J. Anschau, afterwards postmaster, joined the post
office as probationer, first resigning his position as constable.
The “Northern Star” of September 14 said : “We are happy to
say, as it is a great saving of labour to a newspaper man, that
for the last few weeks there has been little or nothing to do at the
Lismore Police Court, and we 1 are glad to find that our residents
are so busy in taking up land and otherwise making the best of
the times, that they have no leisure for anything. May such a
state of matters long continue, so that all the judge have to try
(on) at the next sitting will be a pair of white kid gloves.”
OCTOBER 12th.
A cricket match was played on the Lismore ground between
teams of the married and single of the Wilson’s Creek and Rich-
mond River Clubs, which resulted in the single men winning in
one innings.
OCTOBER 19th.
Mr. J. D. Forbes opened a new photographic gallery in Wood-
lark-street.
NOVEMBER 23rd.
After being out for 12 days a party, prospecting for gold,
returned to Lismore with some rough specimens. Consequent upon
the low prices of timber and the prevailing drought it was thought
a gold field would be just the thing required to keep matters going.
DECEMBER 14th.
Dr . L. Bernstein arrived from Tenterfield and commenced
practice in Lismore.
A counter-petition against declaring Lismore a municipality was
presented to His Excellency the Governor on the ground that the
time was premature, the' proposed area too large, the population


too sparce, and that a number of signatures on the original petition
were obtained by misrepresentation.
Lismore at this time had about 50 houses, and a population
of 200 in the municipal district.
FEBRUARY Ist. 1879 -
Dr. A. F. Parker, formerly of Coraki, took up his residence
in Lismore. There were now three medical practitioners in Lismore.
MARCH Bth.
Although Lismore was declared a municipal district on March
5, nothing was done until March 29, wMn a meeting was held at
Mr. C. Dean’s Assembly Rooms for the purpose of fixing a date
for thej first election of aldermen and auditors, and to nominate a
returning officer. Mr. E. W. Allingham was the convener of this
meeting.
Mr. J. Barrie moved that the third Saturday in May be fixed
for ( the elections, and Mr. Paulson seconded the motion, which was
carried.
Mr. A. Currie moved that the election take place in Mr. Dean’s
Assembly Rooms, which was seconded by Mr. T. Exton. An amend-
ment by Mr. L. G. Snow, seconded by Mr. J. Wotherspoon, that the
election be held in the Court House was lost by two votes.
It was moved and seconded by Mr. G. Larkin and J. Baillie
that Mr. H. S. Elliot, P.M., act as returning officer. —Carried.
On March 26, Sir Henry Parkes, in reply to Mr. J. Davies,
announced in Parliament that Lismore had 1 been proclaimed a
municipal district, the petition for incorporation having 191 signa-
tures and the counter-petition having 93.
APRIL 12th.
A public meeting was held at Paulson’s Hotel on April 19, to
take steps to form a M.U.1.0.0.F. Lodge.
MAY 28th.
At Mr. Dean’s Assembly Rooms a meeting, lasting three hours,
was held calling for nominations for aldermen and auditors for
the municipal district of Lismore. Returning officer, H. S. Elliot,
P.M., read the proclamation authorising the meeting. The nomina-
tions consisted of 16 names, one of which was informal, and two
received too late. Two names were later withdrawn. The nomina-
tions for auditor consisted of four. It was announced that the
elections were to take place at Dean’s Assembly Rooms on Satur-
day, May 31st, the 1 polls being open from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. The
official declaration of the poll was to take place on the following
Monday, June 2, at 12 noon. Candidates then addressed the
meeting.


JUNE 2nd.
The election for aldermen and auditors for the municipal dis-
trict o£ Lismore took place on this day. Out of 179 people justly
entitled to vote 174 voted. The returning officer was H. F. Elliot,
P.M., poll clerk, A. S. Meares, and the scrutineers were J. Currie,
R. MacKenzie ; G. W. Paulson, A. Rose, J. Wotherspoon and T.
Exton. Result of the poll was declared as follows :
FOR ALDERMEN :
G. Larkin, 114 votes. A. Wotherspoon 45 votes.
H. Currie, 87 votes. J. Brvant, 26 votes.
J. Stocks, 82 votes, J. E. James, 34 votes.
E. Coleman, 82 votes. L. G. Snow, 45 votes.
E. Allingham, 68 votes. W. English, 61 votes .
J. Barrie, 68 votes. J. E. Glasgow, 39 votes.
J. 25 votes. E. Carter, 48 votes.
FOR AUDITORS :
V. J. Norris, 74 votes. S. Beardow, 43 votes.
J. R. Stocks, 72 votes. E. Carter, 28 votes.
Accordingly, Messrs. G. Larkin, A. Currie, J. Stocks, E. Cole-
man, E. W. Allingham and J. Barrie were declared elected as aider-
men, whilst V. J. Norris and J. R. Stocks were declared elected as
auditors.
JUNE 2nd.
Meeting for Mayor. Returning Officer H. S. Elliot, P.M., in
the chair. Aid. Coleman proposed, and Aid. Currie seconded, Aid.
J. Stocks for Mayor; Aid Stocks proposed Aid. Allingham. Aid.
Allingham desired not to stand for proposed office, and spoke highly
in favour of Aid. Stocks, and the latter was consequently elected.
First meeting of the new city council was held the same evening
at 8 p.m. at Dean’s Assembly Rooms. Discussion centred around
the framing of by-laws, appointment of town clerk, rate collector,
assessor, a suitable building for council meetings and temporary
loans. The meeting adjourned to Monday, June 9, at the same place.
His Worship the Mayor afterwards invited the aldermen to
dinner at Dean’s Hotel, to which the press were not invited, and
proceedings were strictly private.
Meeting of City Council June 9, at old Court House. At this
meeting the committee of the School of Arts offered the use of
their building for six months, accommodation free. The duties of
the town clerk were defined, and salary fixed at £5O per annum.
The services of Mr. W. Carson, who had arrived last year from
Sydney to act as Clerk of Petty Sessions, was secured as tem-
porary town clerk.


JULY 30th.
At the instance of 89 signatories a public meeting was called:
for August 4 by the Mayor to urge upon the Government the neces-
sity of establishing a Land Office, District Court and Court of
Quarterly Sessions at Lismore.
AUGUST 3rd.
The official opening of Loyal Richmond River Lodge,
M.U.1.0.0.F. took place at Paulson’s Commercial Hotel.
AUGUST 11th.
At City Council meeting held this day the assessors reported
that the unimproved value of property within the municipality was
£5849, the rate whereon was 1/- in the £l, realising £296, which
with the Government grant would bring municipal income up to
£6OO.
SEPTEMBER 6th.
Tenders were invited, closing August 23, for the erection of
police quarters at Lismore, plans of which could be seen at the
Court House.
SEPTEMBER Bth.
At a council meeting of this date the Mayor moved that future
meetings be held at the School House of W. 0. Harmon until
matters connected with the assessment notices and payments of
general municipal rates for current year were completed. Motion
resulted in a tie'.
SEPTEMBER 20th.
In this issue of the “Northern Star” a paragraph appears
complaining of that paper being called upon to pay rates amount-
ing to £2/12/- and “yet we have not had dry feet in going to and
from business the last three months.”
SEPTEMBER 22nd.
At a meeting of City Council held this day it w r as moved and
seconded that rates due and payable, shall be payable at the office
of the council clerk, Municipal Council Chambers, at ihc Commercial
School House, Molesworth-street, on Mondays from 4 to 6 p.m.,
and Saturdays from 10 to 12 a.m.
OCTOBER 11th.
A Government “Gazette” of this date contained a notice of
the appointment of James Stocks, J.P., as coroner for the Richmond
River district and the colony generally.
OCTOBER 4th.
The Municipal Council meeting of this date lapsed because
of lodge meeting and one alderman being in Sydney.


LISMORE AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL
SOCIETY.
The first exhibition of the Lismore A. and I. Society was held
on January 26th, 1885, and all the exhibits that could be shown
indoors were on view in the Albert Hall, or Albert Theatre, as it is
variously mentioned in the old papers. The pound yard, where the
horses, cattle and other outside exhibits were on view, is described
as the part of the town now occupied by the' Lismore Memorial
Baths.
The officials of the Society were : —President, Mr. Thos. T.
Ewing ; Vice-Presidents, Messrs. Jas. Barrie and Geo. Larkin; Treas-
urer, Mr. E. B. Backhouse ; Secretary, Mr. A. J. Simpson ; Com-
mittee, Rev. W. F. Fraser, and Messrs. E. Carter, G. T. Hindmarsh,
S. Garrard, Jas. Anstey, D. McDonald, F. Fredericks, J. J. Bever-
idge, A. Currie, W. Lockett, J. Harrison, G. F. Laman, Jas. Biallie,
J. E. Glasgow, J. P. F. Walker, J. O’Flynn, J. Glasby, L. Bernstein,
E. W. Allingham, M. Hindmarsh, J. M. Fegan, J. R. Stocks, C. E.
Taylor, and W. Northcott.
In the horse section Messrs. S. Garrard, G. McLean and J.
Webster judged the bloods, and Messrs. W. McLean, J. J. Beveridge,
C. Robson and J. White, the draughts and hackneys.
The show of horses was described as “very large.” Mr. C.
Robson’s “Osman” received the award for the best blood stallion
(any age) and champion blood stallion ; Messrs. M. and G. Hind-
marsh’s “Sir Robert” secured the champion draught prize, with Mr.
C. H. Stanford’s “Young Thunderbolt” second ; champion blood
mare, J. English’s “Miss Quinton.” In the horse and pony sec-
tions there were 220 exhibits.
In the cattle section there were 70 exhibits, the judges being
Messrs. F. Fredericks, H. O’B'. Wilson, J. Glasby, C. White, J.
White, D. McDonald, and S. Garrard.
Poultry and pigeons were judged* by Messrs. C. A. Barham, J.
T. Cockerill, R. Fraser, C. White, and A. H. Leu. There were six
classes.
Dogs were judged by Messrs. J. Glasby, T. J. Cockerill, L. Bern-
stein, and W. Smith, there being 24 entries.
SOCIETY’S FINANCES.
A statement by the Treasurer (Mr. E. B. Backhouse) showing
the finances of the Society was as follows : —Members’ sub-
scriptions, £147 5s Od special prizes, £5 Is. Od ; donations, £2 16s
Od ; sale of timber, £2 2s Od ; receipts of show, £62 17s lOd ;
Government subsidy, £145 Is Od ; total, £365 3s 8d ; paid away,
£l4O 3d. Balance, £224 10s sd. Of this £2OO was placed in the
bank as a fixed deposit.


WOODLARK STREET, SOUTH SIDE, 1879.
Now Skype’s Chambers to Royal Hotel. Lismore Hotel (now Hotel
Ryan) at extreme right hand.


MOLESWORTH STREET, LISMORE, 1879.
Now Wicks and Co’s., McLean’s and others.


COMMERCIAL HOTEL, 1878.
G. W. Paulson, Proprietor.


S.S. PLATYPUS, 1878.
First Regular Trader (steam).
A PIONEER’S HOME IN THE BIG TIMBER.


SOME OF LISMORE’S PIONEERS
LATE EDWARD HOWELL.
A. A. LEYCESTER,
Of Boorie.
LATE H. GARRARD,
Of Boorie, P.M. in 1860


MR. JNO. MAHER,
Of South Lismore. Age 95 years,
67 years in Lismore.
LATE MRS. H. BROWN
North Lismore
LATE
MR. & MRS.
J BAILLIE
Pioneer
Sugar Miller
and
Blacksmith


MR. AND MRS. C. BALZER, Lismore.
MR. F. FREDERICKS, Gundurimba.


LATE CAROLINE GREENHALGH, SON AND GRANDSON,
Messrs. J. Greenhalgh, senr. and junr.


MRS. R. McKENZIE.
LATE R. McKENZIE.
LATE C. WHITE,
Father of Mrs. McKenzie.


MR. AND MRS. JOHN PEATE.
These worthy pioneers have many descendants in the district.
Mrs. Britt and Mrs. James McKenzie, whose photos appear on this
page, are daughters, and both are still living in Lismore. Mr.
and Mrs. Peate were the first couple married in Lismore. This was
in the middle forties.
MRS. G. C. BRITT.
Age 80.
MRS. JAS. McKENZIE,
Age 79. Residing in Lismore.


LATE DR. J. W. WALKER,
A Pioneer Medico.
LATE W. AND MRS. MURRAY,
North Lismore.
MRS. F. FREDERICKS,
Of Caniaba.
LATE A. P. GOODWIN,
Early Naturalist.


Mr. Thomas Borton was mail contractor for 34 years (with
two short intervals). In 1865 he was a member of Mr. John Barl-
ing’s survey party, who went with pack horses from Casino to
Kynumboon, and measured the first lot of selections taken up on the
Tweed River —under the Land Act of 1861 —free selection before
survey. Included in those blocks were what is now the site of the
township of North and South Murwillumbah.
Mr. Borton was the first hon. secretary for the Lismore Hos-
pital, and in conjunction with the late Mr. Edmund Coleman secured
a grant of 171 acres of land for that institution, thus providing a
small revenue for the hospital, and ample room for extension, as
proved’ by the fine lot ofi buildings now erected thereon. He was also
the first hon. secretary for the Lismore School of Arts. On Ist
January, 1870, he opened a new line of mail from Ballina to Yamba
(Clarence Heads), via Warded and Woodburn —by rowing boat;
previous to this all mails for the Richmond were carried up the
Clarence to Lawrence and from thence to Casino by pack horses.
Ho was the first to convey the mails from Lismore to Ballina
by coach, having a horse back contract at the time, the through
road not being tratfickable previously for wheels. Mr. Borton is
in his 85th year.


MR. AND MRS. A. J. BROWN, LISMORE,
Age 83. Natives of Lismore.
LATE JAS. AND MRS. GRIFFITHS,
North Lismore.


LATE T. EXTON.
MRS. EXTON,
Now residing in Lismore.
MRS. AND MR. G. DAVIS,
Now of Boatharbour.
Mr. Davis came to Lismore in 1854, and is 84 years of age.


WOODLARK-STREET, 1883.
Next Richmond Hotel. These premises were destroyed by fire in 1884.
SITE OF A. G. ROBERTSON’S BULK STORE, 1876.
The figure on horseback on the left is Mr. T. Atkin. Blakebrook.


LATE D. MCDONALD.
LATE P. McDONALD.
The McDonald family —Duncan, Alexander and Peter —all now dead,
were among Lismore’s pioneer farmers. They were all fine specimens of
Scotsmen, and their memories are revered by all those who knew them.
They all lived at Maizegrove, about three miles out of Lismor.
LATE A. McDONALD and WIFE, Lismore’s Pioneer Farmers.


MRS. W. SOMERVILLE,
of Lismore, 83 years of age.
LATE W. ENGLISH,
Founder of the Municipality.


FRIENDLY SOCIETIES IN LISMORE.
The first Friendly Society formed in Lismore was the “Hand
of Friendship’’ of the Sons of Temperance. The date of founda-
tion was October 13, 1866. The next was “Loyal Richmond River”
Lodge of the M.U.1.0.0.F., which was founded on August 3, 1879.
Then followed the Protestant Alliance, which was established on
July 10, 1890. Followed the H.A.C.B.S. with September 12, 1900,
as its foundation date. The Ancient Order of Foresters was next,
with December 20, 1904, as its foundation day. The very next
year, on June 20, 1905, the Grand United Order of Oddfellows was
established:. June 24, 1910, was the inception of the Ancient Order
or Druids. After a lapse of two years the Independent Order of
Oddfellows w T as founded on June 17, 1912. The Independent Order
of Rechabites was established on November 10, 1914. The last
Friendly Society to be established in Lismore was the A.H.C. Guild,
which was on December 11, 1920.
LISMORE’S SHARE IN THE GREAT WAR.
This is modern history, and it is only necessary to briefly
refer to it as something of which we are proud. Our young men
gave of their best. Many gave their lives, and sad hearts mourn
them to-day. Our people gave of their money, and our women folk’s
share is beyond praise. More need not be said. Let the sore
wounds heal. The best monument the fallen can have is theirs —it
exists in the grateful hearts of our people.
LATE T. BRANDON, P.G.
Founder of M.U.I.O.O.F. in Lismore.
BOER WAR MEMORIAL,
Lismore.


OUR STAPLE INDUSTRIES FOR SIXTY YEARS.
First. —Red Cedar, which grew along the banks of the river
and the creeks, and in the red soil of the Big Scrub.
Second. —The hoop pine, which covered all the hill lands.
Millions of feet of this were cut every year and sent all over
Australia.
Third. —Sugar cane, which at one time reached from Bexhill to
the sea., along the river. Upwards of forty sugar mills were in
existence, some steam, some horse, and some bullock-power.
Fourth —Dairying—at one time carried on in the homes en-
tirely; hand milking, milk set in dishes, skimmed and churned by
hand and put in wooden kegs and sent to Sydney.
THE DAIRYING INDUSTRY.
The dairying industry was started in New South Wales in, 1820
in the vicinity of Parramatta and soon extended to the South Coast.
The separator was introduced in 1880, and the first consignment of
butter for export was 400 tons in 1890. To the late D. L. Dymock
was due the introduction of the separator. After the death of the
late Alexander Berry he visited Holland and Denmark in search of
information on the dairying industry, and there became aware of
the value of co-operation and made his first acquaintance with the
Alfa-Laval separator. Returning to New South Wales he visited the
Richmond in 1885 and preached the gospel of co-operation and
the virtues of the separator, meeting with extraordinary success.
The North Coast to-day produces more milk and more than double
the quantity of butter than all the rest of the State, while the
South Coast produces 55 per cent, of the output of cheese. The
dairy and farmyard industry for 1926 was estimated at £14,712,000.
The dairy herds in the district are among the best in the
Commonwealth, all the leading breeds being represented. These
herds are replenished' at intervals with importations of the world’s
best. The result of this is shown in the repeated fact that the
North Coast of New South Wales produces half of the State’s
output of butter. Of, this amount Norco Ltd., the big Co-operative
Company, produces 50 per cent.
There are two factories (butter) in Lismore, with a peak out-
put of 140 tons per week.
The bacon industry is a corollary of dairying, and is fast be-
coming only second in importance to the latter. There is a fine
factory at South Lismore, but most of the pigs in the district
are sent to Norco, Ltd., Byron Bay, while upwards of 24,000 per
year pass through the Lismore Municipal Saleyards at North Lis«*
more, buyers from Sydney, Newcastle, and Brisbane firms operate
at these yards.


LATE JAS. JOHNSON AND MRS. JOHNSON,
Aged 83 years, of Gundurimba. Born, in Lismore.
LATE MRS. S. BEARDOW.
LATE MRS. EXTON.
Grandmother of the Exton Family.
Arrived in Lismore 80 years ago.


LISMORE MEMORIAL BATHS.
LOOKING UP BRIDGE-STREET, NORTH LISMORE,
From Coleman Bridge, 1929.


ROBERT WHITE BRIDGE,
Wilson-street, South Lismore.
RAILWAY STATION, SOUTH LISMORE.


SPINKS PARK, LISMORE.


BIRDS-EYE VIEW OF LISMORE, LOOKING SOUTH.


EAST SIDE OF MOLESWORTH-STREET, LISMORE,
Looking South.


OPENING LISMORE-TWEED RAILWAY, 1893.
By Hon. W. J. Lyne, Minister for Works. Lismore Station.


LISMORE COUNCIL’S ROAD-MAKING PLANT, 1929.


LISMORE MUNICIPAL POWER HOUSE, 1929. SWITCH BOARDS.
BACON FACTORY, SOUTH LISMORE, 1929.


JOINERY WORKS, SOUTH LISMORE, 1929.
FRONT VIEW OF LISMORE MEMORIAL BATHS.


INTERSECTION MOLESWORTH AND WOODLARK STREETS, 1929.
Looking South and East.


OPENING PRESENT LISMORE HOSPITAL, 1906.
Governor-General (Lord Northcote) in foreground.


LISMORE SHOWGROUND, 1929.


LISMORE’S EARLY HOTELS.
On a map of Lismore, dated 1855, is shown Brown’s public
house. This was at the intersection of Woodlark and Molesworth
Streets, now the site of the Australian Bank of Commerce. The pro-
prietor was Mr. H. Brown, father of Mr. A. J. Brown, now of
Hunter Street. This gentleman afterwards conducted a wholesale
license on the spot now occupied by A. G. Robertson’s bulk store.
In 1870 Nathan Taylor had an hotel,. “The Horseshoe Inn,” at
South Lismore, on land occupied by Foley’s Butter Factory ; he
also kept a general store. Mr. Taylor’s descendants are well known
in Lismore. At this time a boat ferry was established there, run-
ning from Elliott Road to Ballina Street. Later this was removed'
to the junction of Leycester and Wilson’s Creek, at the foot of
Woodlark Street, and a punt worked by hand was built for the pur-
pose. Shortly afterwards the late Chas. Dean built the Lismore
Hotel, on the site of the present Hotel Ryan, and so far as can be
gathered, the license from the “Horseshoe” was transferred to it.
The Dean family are also well known.
The next hotel was the Freemason’s in Molesworth Street,
built and kept by the late Mr. Spencer Cottee. A reference to 'the clip-
pings from “Star” files in this book will give the date. This was fol-
lowed by the Commercial, by G. W.. Paulson, a very fine old gentle-
man, who was a keen musician, and was founder of the Lismore Band.
His photo is contained in the picture of this band. One rarely saw
his without a cigar. Forty years ago there were several hotels
that have now passed out. C. Hiscock had a license for a house
in Casino Street, South Lismore, at the intersection of that street
with Edwards Street, and 1\ miles out. A. H. Leu kept an hotel
on the top of the Ballina Road cutting, just inside the municipality.
Dan Duffy had one at North Lismore, corner Tweed and Terania
Streets. John Cusack kept the Australian Hotel, corner Pine and
Terania Streets, North Lismore.
In addition, Mr. James Geraghty conducted a hotel at what
was known as the Island Grass, a short distance beyond the race-
course, on the Woodlawn Road. This old building is still in exist-
ence, and is occupied by his widow, now Mrs. Peterson. The Win-
some, lately delicensed at Tuncester, was built by . the late Mr. D.
Harley.
MR. J. E. GLASGOW.
Mr. Glasgow was one of the pioneers in the sawmill industry.
He built a mill on the river bank at the rear of the present Bank
of NeW South Wales. A really good public man, of a most genial
disposition, he, while conferring benefits on others, did not accumu-
late much of this world’s goods for himself. For a short time he
was an alderman of the Lismore Council.


MORE EARLY SHIPPING.
Another authority states that the “Waimea” was built at Car-
eening Cove, Sydney, by Mr. J. E. Manning, and was first intended
for the coal trade. It came for a few trips to this river, and was
lost on the bar.
The “Culloden” was brought here by Captain Johnson ; she was
originally a Tyne trader in England. She was a pa'ddle boat, and
was in charge of Captain Callaghan, a member of the Callaghan
family, now well known in Ballina. She was also lost on the bar.
The “Susannah Cuthbert” was owned by the Clarence and New
England Steam Navigation Company,” and was commanded by
Captain Sullivan. She was afterwards used as a coal boat, and
was an auxiliary screw boat with three masts.
Then Captain Mclntyre brought a tug boat, the
“Challenge,” to the river. She was a very powerful paddle wheel
boat. The first steam boat on the river was a little stern wheel
boat, the “Keystone,” owned by W. T. Yeager, of Oakland. A
steamer known as the “Queenslander” ran here a couple of trips.
HOW THE PIONEERS CAME
The story of the arrival of our pioneers reads queerly to-day,
and it is hard in these times of rapid* travel to realise their diffi-
culties. In the year 1866 a man with his wife and family left
Sydney on the little schooner, “Commerce” (Capt. Robert Drewell),
afterwards of the ill-fated Hector. The schooner had no cabins or
berths, and the passengers had bunks on the ballast and cargo in
the hold. The weather was rough and the hatches were kept on for
most of the time. What a joyous time they had ! Ballina or the
Heads —as it was mostly called then, was sighted* 6 days later,
and finally the Commerce crossed in and lay at the wharf. Imagine
the feelings of city-bred people, who saw a little village with none
of the comforts they had left, and then to be told that that was
Heaven compared to where they were going. Well, the schooner had
to sail in and be towed up the river to Lismore, (70 miles) by row-
ing boats, and as Dad was in a hurry, he took two of the boys with
him, an’d they walked through the big scrub towards Lismore, and
when the family arrived they settled in a slab hut to make a home
in the wilderness. Brave hearts and strong muscles carried them
through. The family was reared well; all hands were strong and
healthy. The conditions of a clean, open air life helped in this.
The women folk were brave. The women folk among the pioneers
we re all brave ! We should lift our hats to them. They
made this country possible for us. They have all gone to their long
homes. Let us hope that their rest is sweet and peaceful, for they
earned it.


A QUINTETTE WHO FIGURED IN A NOTED EPISODE IN 1887.
Back (left to right): Messrs. H. A. Garrard, C. Hetherington, H. Thor-
burn. Front: A. Staff, R. S. Wotherspoon. All are now dead.


MASONIC ORDER.
The first Masonic Lodge in the Lismore district was formed*
early in 1879, Wor. Bro. G. W. Paulson having inspired a number
of Freemasons living in the Richmond River district with the de-
sirability of forming a Lodge. A meeting was held, at which the
following brethren were present : Wor. Bro. G. W. Paulson, Bros.
J. Barrie, L. Bernstein, J. McLennan, G. C. Bfitt, G. Larkin, W.
E. Reed, J. J. Moore, J. R. Stocks, G. E. Perry, E. Wren, and J.
Perry. It was decided to apply to the Grand Lodge of England,
through the Provincial Grand* Lodge, for a Charter or Warrant.
This was eventually granted, and the Lodge No. 1844 worked under
the English constitution. As the brethren were living in differ-
ent parts of the district, the name “Richmond River” was adopted,
and the meeting place decided on was Lismore. On March 26,
1879, the new Lodge was dedicated by R. W. W. H. Simpson,
assisted by W. Bros. H. Perdriau, E. Simpson, and G. W. Paulson,
District Grand Lodge Officers. On January 22, 1880, the Lodge,
which up to that time had been holding its meetings at the Protestant
Hall, moved into a new hall provided by Bro. J. E. Glasgow, the
number on the roll at that time being 44. In July of 1887 it was
decided to commemorate the amalgamation of the constitutions and
the formation of the United Grand Lodge of N.S.W., by a monster
demonstration and the laying of a foundation stone! on the block of
land* which had been purchased some years before. During the
years 1892, 1893 and 1894, when new members joined, the sugges-
tion of having a hall owned by members met with much favour.
On August 5, 1896, the new hall was opened and dedicated*, and
the ; largest number of Masons ever meeting in the district was pre-
sent. On September 4, 1903, another branch, “Lismore Temper-
ance,” No. 237, blossomed. In 1921 “Lismore Loyalty,” No. 276,
was opened, followed by “North Coast United Service,” No. 459,
opened in February, 1923, making four Lodges meeting in the 1 Lis-
more Temple.


LATE ABBE SCHURR
A Pioneer Priest
SHIPPING AT LISMORE, 1929.


ABORIGINAL NAMES.
Almost without exception, the aborigines named' a place by
the word in their language denoting some physical peculiarity in
the place, or by something that had occurred, belonged to, or had
been seen at the place. Thus Tuckurimba, the correct name for
Lismore, denoted a glutton, aboriginal tradition having it that at
one time a blackfellow on the bank,of the river killed' a native dog
and ate of it until he was ill. A burning was an instrument of war-
fare, and also had its peaceable uses. It was made of wood, and
was shaped like a battle axe. From it there came Burrungbar, or
Burringbar. The native name for a hole in the ground was a
wollong, and hence, from the depression which is still to be seen at
Wollongbar, it gained its name. The affix “bar” indicated that a
thing was there to be found. The original name for North Lismore
was Boyam, signifying a sleeping lizard. Booyong was the name
given to the iron-wood tree, which grew plentifully in the scrub
near the part still named’ thus. Similarly there was Binna Burra,
meaning beech tree; Bangalow, the bangalow tree; Piccabeen, the
piccabeen tree; Goolmangar, the water gum tree; boi boi gar (the
true name for Rosebank), meaning apple tree; Gerrange (true
name for Bexhill), meaning red gum tree. Coondoorimba (now
Gundurimba) was the aboriginal name for a man with a palsy or
crossed eyes, so evidently a man with one of these afflictions re-
sided in that locality. Bulloona, now known as Ballina, meant the
outlet of a river.
“LET’S CONSIDER THE PAST WITH A
LINGERING GAZE.”
4/2/95. —First District Court held in Lismore, Judge Murray pre-
siding.
5/1/95. —The Council decided to erect a 2in. Douglas Pump (hand)
at the foot of Woodlark Street to pump water into carts.
(Lismore’s first water supply).
29/8/87. —An attempt was made to curtail the boundaries of the
Municipality. It was found that a special Act of Parlia-
ment would* be necessary.
1884. —Fawcett’s Bridge over Wilson’s Creek, Lismore to North
Lismore, opened for traffic.
20/3/91. —First sod of Railway to Murwillumbah turned by Hon.
Bruce Smith.
24/3/90. —Cost of Waterworks, first instalment gazetted £12,395
8s sd.


FIRST BANK IN LISMORE (COMMERCIAL OF SYDNEY), 1877. NOW LATE DR. PARKER’S HOUSE.


LISMORE'S MILESTONES OF PROGRESS.
GAZETTED MUNICIPALITY, 1879.
GAS WORKS Established 1888, First Light January 2nd. £6OOO
borrowed. Aid. Bernstein, proposer.
WATER SUPPLY, 1888. Aid. Bernstein, proposer.
SEWERAGE, Lismore proclaimed* Sewerage area 1901. Aid. J.
F. O’Flynn responsible. (This matter was under discussion for
10 years.)
ELECTRIC LIGHTING (present system), established 1927. Aid R.
White moved resolution to establish.
Before the Gasworks was proceeded with it was found neces-
sary to obtain a special Act of Parliament empowering Councils to
borrow to establish Gasworks. This cost £52/10/-, of which Lis-
more paid £l7/10/-, December, 1886.
On September 12th, 1887, a number of ratepayers petitioned
the Council to reject the proposal to establish a water supply.
The establishment of the Gasworks caused a long wrangle in
the Council, culminating in the prosecution of Aid. Bernstein and
the broker who obtained the loan on a charge of misappropriation.
This charge was dismissed. Later Shorter and Stocks, Solicitors,
put a, bailiff into the Council Chambers, to recover their costs, but
they withdrew him, and their costs being taxed, they made a sub-
stantial refund.
December 16, 1889. —Alfred Poolman appointed Water Engin-
eer. Salary, £3 per week.
June 15th, 1891. —3,700 acres, Parish Whian Whian, reserved
for water supply for Lismore.
May 30, 1892. —Patrick Quinn appointed Inspector of Nuis-
ances, Inspector Public Vehicles, Inspector of Dairies, Bailiff, and
Officer under the Impounding Act, and Rate Collector.
MR. J. F. O’FLYNN.
Mr. O’Flynn, who died two years ago, was one of Lismore’s
stalwarts. Seven times Mayor, he was always a fighter, with pro-
gressive ideas, and at all times a tower of strength. 3 The Lismore
Foundry was established by him.


MUNICIPALITY OF LISMORE.
CURRENT STATISTICS.
Total estimated revenue for the 1929 £115,958
Total estimated expenditure, inclusive of loan moneys
and advances from blew South Wales Government £151,000
Quarry Output for 1928 —
Metal 16,383 tons
Metal screens 8,807 „
Gravel 9,260 „
Total 34,450 tons
Sanitary and garbage services rendered for the year 1928 —
Sanitary 60,098 services
Garbage 74,836 „
Gas works trading undertaking, 1928 —
Number of consumers, 1400.
Gas manufactured, 45,000,000 cubic feet.
Miles of reticulation, 25 miles.
Electricity works trading undertaking, established 1928 —
Number of consumers, lighting 750
Industrial and domestic power . . , , 160
Miles of street reticulated 12
Connected Load 400 k.w.
Number of units sold, 1928 —
Lighting 226,976
Power 110,021
Street Lighting—
Number of lamps and candle power . . 9 —500 watt
79 —300 watt
340 — 80 wdtt
Water Supply—
Estimated population supplied .. . . 9,000
Number of premises connected .. .. 2,034
Annual consumption 166,000,000 gals.
Annual consumption, railway purposes 8,650,000
Annual consumption, other industries 16,558,000
Sewerage—
Number of premises connected 1,100
Public Cattle Markets —Returns for year 1928 —
Horses 68
Cattle (over 2 years) 8,387
Cattle (under 2 years) 3,613
Pigs 24,494
Total fees collected £441/4/9


LISMORE IN 1929.
Lismore has a population fast approaching 12,000, and is set
in a district with a population of 60,000. This district is the
finest, largest and richest dairying centre in the Commonwealth,
indeed it is doubtful if the big scrub country is excelled for this
purpose anywhere in the world.
North Coast butter and bacon are known everywhere as tbe
standard of what such goods should be. In Lismore, Norco, Ltd.,
the big co-operative Concern, has its largest branch with a peak
output of 80 tons per week, and Foley Bros, turn out over 60 tons
in the same period. The surrounding rolling country is of Ihe
highest fertility, and is densely covered with a beautiful crop of
paspalum grass,; while smiling homes dot the country s’de. Surely
Dame Nature has treated us well.
Lismore’s position at the junction of the Richmond River with
Wilson and Leyeester Creeks, is an ideal one, the stream being
navigable for 1000 ton boats right into the town. These boats
arrive three times per week, and keep us in close touch with the
Sydney markets.
In addition a daily mail and passenger train leaves and arrives
from Sydney, while a train service, at least twice daily, connects
with Murwillumbah, at one end, and Kyogle on the other.
Fine roads radiate from Lismore into the country centres like
the spokes of a wheel, and ’bus and car services trade on these
daily, while there is a fine daily service to and from Brisbane, via
the Tweed River.
A road map will be found at the end of this book, which shows
at a glance the geographical position.
From a tourist and scenic point of view, Lismore and its sur-
roundings offer many attractions, the beautiful grass clad hills and
fertile slopes and plains provide a panorama of surpassing loveli-
ness, stretching from Nimbin to the sea.
The city of Lismore itself has done much to make the lot
of its people a comfortable one. It has most of the services
which go to make a healthy and progressive community—water
supply, electricity for light and power, gas, sewerage, clean streets,
bituminous roads, municipal aerodrome, and footpaths, parks,
swimming baths, bowling greens, tennis courts, golf links, musical
-societies and first-class educational facilities are all here', with
many others that need not be enumerated.
In business matters stores of all kinds and hotels are quite
up to date.
Within twenty miles of the sea, the climate is pleasant and
healthful, a study of this book will reveal the fact that there are
scores of people living here over eighty years of age, who are


natives, or came here over sixty years ago. Surely a sufficient
proof of the healthy condition of life in Lismore.
Our people are ever ready to offer a warm welcome to visitors,
and to assist them to enjoy their sojourn amongst us. Tourists
will always find' it easy to get any necessary advice.
Surrounded as it is by a veritable Garden of Eden, the rapid
progress of the last fifty years is not surprising, but who would
be so rash as to forecast the result of another such period ? We
can hope for much more expansion, and with display of wisdom
for the future, similar to that of our pioneers, our fondest hopes
should be realised, and Lismore of half a century hence should be a
wonderful monument to its pioneers.
MUNICIPAL SALEYARDS, NORTH LISMORE, 1929.
BRIEF PARAGRAPHS ABOUT OLD LISMORE PEOPLE.
The late C. E. Taylor taught in a school at Pinegrove, South
Lismore, about 1877. This veteran has left a mark as an e'duca-
tionalist in this district that has no equal.
Mr. E. M. D. Spring, father of Miss G. Spring, also conducted a
school at Yenrebar, Three Chain Road, South Lismore, for many
years, commencing in the very early seventies.
An, interesting contribution from Mr. G. H. Daniel, who is re-
ferred to above, appears elsewhere in this bouk.


“A HUSKING BEE”
Corn growing on the Richmond River 50 years ago was not
a matter of disc ploughs, but the scrub was just felled and fired,
and the seed put in with hoes, and when it grew it was picked and
carried over the logs', in bags to the barn.
It was husked on wet days, and o’ nights; lucky was the farmer
who had an attractive daughter or two, for there was always help
at husking time for him. It was remarkable how many young fellows
had business along this way on wet days, or on moonlight nights. Of
course the business may have been real, or on the other hand they
might have called to see the girls. However, they often gave a
hand to husk the corn for an hour or two, the girls doing their share,
and giant cobs flew over\ the straddle* and white husks accumulated
in piles and sometimes almost covered the buskers; a whisper —the
husks covered many a sly squeeze, which was only manifested by
the heightened colour of the maids’ cheeks, and then, to make the
work go with a swing, songs and choruses almost raised the rafters
of the old barn. Some of their songs (do they stir your memories
you old timers ?), “Ben Bolt,” “Love Amongst the Roses,” “A Flower
from My Angel Mother’s Grave,” “Red, White and Blue,” “Walk-
ing Home with Angeline.”
By this time mother came out and cried a halt, as tea had
been prepared, and the buskers repaired to the house and regaled
themselves with her scones, when this was done one of the
visitors discovered that his concertina was at hand, and after some
finessing on the part of the girls, father’s consent was obtained
and the table and chairs being cleared out of the kitchen, the fun
began in earnest, for then, as now, the young folk liked nothing
so well as a dance, and they did dance, not a shuffle round the room,
nor was it jazz, but a fine wholesome affair that required some
skill.
And their waltz tunes ! Do you remember “Ehren on the
Rhine” and “Sweet Dreamland Faces” ? and the old stuff they
played for the Lancerc ? Phew —it stirs my blood now to think
of it all. The horses used to get terribly tired tied up to the fence.
They would rest first one foot and then the other, and occasionally
whinney to catch the attention of their owners, but the owners
were busy on more important matters, and until father and mother
made it clear that it was time for Lothario to get off home' the
horses got no relief. You have heard of the “good-bye at the door”
no doubt, but it was nothing) to the good-bye at the fence after the
husking bees. Ah, well, I’ve been back to a pleasant interlude in
a long life, very pleasant indeed, and —oh yes —that’s my grand-
daughter and her “boy” just come in, and yes —scones and tea. It
seems this sort of thing is both ancient and modern, and boys and
girls are much the same as they were 50 years ago.


A STORY OF 1863
In the year 1 1865 Jack an'd Mary Thomson, of Bald Hill (now
known as Bexhill) spent many an anxious hour. Their daughter
Nellie, married a year before to young Barrett, had gone to live at
Simpson’s Town, at the mouth of the Brunswick River, where the
young husband was engaged in cutting cedar logs for a Ballina
timber merchant —Charles Jarrett. The first baby was expected,
and there was not a white woman living anywhere near the ex-
pectant mother. The parents could not bear to think of their
daughter being left to the care, of some black gin, but the distance
that separated mother and daughter seemed prohibitive. The older
people came to the Richmon'd River from London, and the task
of riding 40 miles through jungle and over flooded creeks seemed an
impossible one to them.
They talked the matter over with two neighbours, hard work-
ing and hard drinking bachelors, and pointed out that their girl
should not be alone in her hour. The neighbours, B'rian and Dan,
did not know much of such matters, but they did appreciate the
mother’s feelings. They owned a stout boat built of red cedar,
made by Fred West, of Gundurimba, 12ft. long, and designed to
stand the wear and tear of running out log timber from the creeks.
To Brian and Dan the matter seemed simple—they owned a
rowing boat, and Simpson’s Town was at the mouth of a river,
Bexhill was' on another river, the miles of open Pacific between the
river entrance to them appeared of no great consequence. Next
morning Brian and? Dan, with young Sandy Brown as a companion,
and with Mrs. Thompson, were on the river at Lismore, bound for
Ballina, 70 miles away.
Each of the men had a pair of oars, and all day long they
pulled steadily, with only one halt Tor food. River reach after river
reach was left behind as the four oars dipped in unwearying monot-
ony. The party left Lismore with the tide, but before they had gone
far this changed, and checked their progress slightly. For many
miles the thick scrub lined the banks of the stream, broken here and
there by a swamp, occasionally the party saw by some cleared patch
where someone was struggling to make a, home, but they saw none
of the men responsible for the clearings. At first they talked
freely, but as the sun rose higher and beat down more and more'
strongly on the people in the boat, Mrs. Thomson became drowsy,
and snatched a sleep, the oarsmen dropping their conversation for
fear of waking her. Later, the woman and the boy tried a few
songs to vary the tedious way. After a mid-day meal the “voyage”
was continued, the men pulling with the same tireless stroke. A
breeze sprang up and, as the sun began to sink, the millions of
brightly plumage-d birds that habited the scrub set up their calling.


Camp was made for the night, and, after an early breakfast, the
journey was resumed. Throughout another long day the oars dip-
ped and rose till, in the evening, the last bend was rounded and
Ballina came in sight.
At Ballina they stayed for the night and, with next morning’s
ebb tide, pulled out over the bar and headed theiit boat north. Once
again they pulled all day up the lonely coastline, never a sign of
habitation, and then, as the sun was sinking, crossed the bar of
Brunswick. There old Jack Simpson piloted them in to a safe
anchorage, and then guided them to a slab hut in the trees.
It was some reward for the labours of Brian and Dan, who
did not look for a reward, to know that they were just in time. It
was no wonder that the boy who first saw light the next morning was
christened Brian Daniel by Abbe Schurr. Hard drinking, hard liv-
ing days, hard working, soft hearted men. With the man newly
entitled to the title of father the event was fittingly celebrated with
some Jamaica rum. Mrs. Thomson was left to stay with her
daughter and grandchild till some suitable opportunitv of return
presented itself, and Brmn and Dan returned next day, by the same
route they came. —R.W.
BUTTER MAKING, SOUTH LISMORE, 1929.
Output of this Single Factory is 80 tons per week.


MOLESWORTH STREET, LISMORE, EAST SIDE, LOOKING SOUTH,
1877. Note Waterhole.


A GREAT BATTLE IN LISMORE.
There was a dispute between aborigines about the year 1858,
the council of the offending tribe declining to give the satisfaction
demanded, the result being the severing of diplomatic relation-
ship, and the formal declaration of war. Then great preparations
were made for the battle, and each tribe was joined by other tribes
from every part of the Big Scrub, all preparing* their weapons and
adorning their persons with fantastic colours in hot haste. The
news of the impending hostilities spread like wild fire, and in an in-
credibly short time detachments had arrived' from as far away as
Brisbane and Mount Lindesay (Unumgar). At length, when the
armies were mobilised they took up positions on what is now the
Court House Hill and the Hospital Hill, the surrounding locality as
far , out as Goonellabah being alive with dizzily excited natives. In
all, the actual belligerents numbered about six hundred, fairly evenly
divided, fearsomely 'decorated and armed to the teeth. All at once,
with hoarse yells and piercing battle shrieks, the armies were seen
to be moving, and soon afterwards as they charged along the flats
the withering showers of spears were exchanged. As the deadly
weapons hissed through the air, with almost superhuman agility, the
blacks leapt into the air as high as three feet, many of the spears
passing harmlessly beneath them, while some had such force that
they pierced two men at once. Yet on they came in undaunted
ferocity, until at last, despite the storms of spears, boomerangs,
and other missiles, the tribes met in ghastly hand to hand conflict.
Tomahawks were aimed with terrible precision, and the scene be-
came one of indescribable savagery, but both sides displayed mar-
vellous skill in warding off the blows. Of all the combatants, the
fiercest of all were the women, who fought with the sticks, six or
seven feet long, which they used for digging up yams, but now sharp-
ened to a razor’s edge. And so the fight proceeded with unabated
energy. When one side seemed to be getting the worst of it one of
the tribes assisting the other side would go over, again equalising
the respective strengths.
There would be a slight retreat, and then at each other again,
veritably with tooth and nail, in the sweltering heat of the day,
the dense scrub on all sides echoing and re-echoing the wild shouts
of agony or demoniac glee, a weird and terrible sight. When noon
came and the sun was at its height both sides were well nigh ex-
hausted, and an armistice was proclaimed, the armies retiring to
their respective hills, and resting and refreshing themselves under
the cool trees. This primeval warfare did not mean appalling
slaughter, and we are not quite certain if any were actually killed,
but fearful wounds were inflicted, and at midday many were hors
de combat. When the combatants had conquered their weariness,


two or three of the more daring warriors from the Hospital Hill
raced down to within earshot of the camp of the Court House Hill
and made unpleasant jibes. This was the signal for the recom-
mencement of hostilities, and soon the battle commenced again in
full force, and was waged with terrific energy until sundown. Then
was the battle lost and won, then was the Bullen Bullen done. Cer-
tainly the battle was done, but which side won it was hard to say.
However, they knew and recognised the victors, and that was quite
sufficient.
It was evident that in the young days of the elder blacks
terrible ravages had beefi worked by an epidemic of smallpox, and
it was said that the infection was brought to them by a runaway
convict from Brisbane, who was making his way along the coast,
and made friends and stayed with them. In the early days the
blacks were good workers, but had developed a rather disconcerting
partiality for white man’s cattle, and depredations were frequent,
a significant fact being that they never seemed to lack a good round
meal of beef. They were not cannibals. Usually the aboriginal
men were not clean shaven, the beards of some reaching a length
of two feet. When they did perform this attention to their toilet,
however, it was not inspired' with a view to improving their personal
appearance, but for the purpose of making a waist belt to hold
weapons, etc. The process was rather more laborious than was
really necessary, the practice being to wax the beard with black bee’s
wax and then pluck it out. When at war, the aborigine tied his
hair into a knot and secured it with a native dog’s tail.
Besides being highly superstitious, these people had many
peculiar customs and amongst others, the system of scarification,
so prevalent amongst coloured races, was quite universal. When
a youth reached man’s estate, and the time for his scarifications
arrived, of his own free will he immersed himself in the cold water
of a creek (generally in the winter time), and', upon coming out,
he was held down by several other men, while others beat his
chest with nettles, and then one took a sharp flint and drew it
across the young man’s chest, inflicting a deep cut. Contrary to
supposition, no preparation was placed in the wound, but the young
man was placed in the charge of two of the boldest old blacks in
the tribe and at once removed to a fire, where the wound was dried,
but until it was quite healed he was no-t allowed to converse with
anybody. In its healing stages it would be doctored with ’possum
fat. This unpleasant custom, known as Cumbungerry, practically
died out about 20 years ago.


COMMITTEE LISMORE JUBILEE CELEBRATIONS, 1929.
Front Row (left to right: Aid. R. White, Aid. C. McKenzie (Mayor), Chairman, Jno. W. Nelson, Hon. Sec.
(Town Clerk), Canon A. G. Moore.
Back Row (left to right): W. F. McDermott, R. Brewster, W. A. Taylor, (Hon. Treas.), A. T. Stratford, C. M.
Robertson, W. H. Lewis (Organiser).


EARLY POLICE HISTORY
From information supplied we gather that the first police offi-
cer in Lismore was a Mr. Hughes, father of Mrs. T. Exton, subse-
quently followed by Messrs. Whatham and O’Rourke. It is quite
possible that these were what was known as constables, i.e., not full
time men, but had’ other occupations, and were simply used to main-
tain order when required ; but later Mr. D. Hogan, the much loved,
handsome Irishman, came along, and put in all his life on the
Richmond. A kindly man, many good stories are told of him. He
rarely locked a man up, and was most forbearing, but when neces-
sary he was a rough customer. He was in charge in Lismore in the
seventies, and was for a while assisted by Mr. Jno. Anschau, after-
wards Postmaster.
MR. JAMES BAILLIE.
The late Mr, Baillie was one of Lismore’s first blacksmiths,
Mr. J. Simes being the other. An up-to-date, progressive man, Mr.
Baillie did much to forward Lismore’s interests, and at one time
owned the corner now occupied by the Royal Hotel. A reference to
the old files of the “Northern Star” shows that he was always in the
forefront in public matters. He established a sugar mill in 1873 on
Leycester Creek.
MR. R. J. SPINKS, J.P.
Mr. Spinks sat in the Council for some years, an'd was Mayor
on seven occasions. He worked hard and faithfully to push Lis-
more forward. Mr. Spinks now resides in Manly.
MR. W. LOCKETT, J.P.
Mr. Lockett came to Lismore in 1877, and was a blacksmith
by trade. From, his arrival here he interested himself in all public
matters, and was for over 20 years an alderman. He was twice
Mayor. The School of Arts, A. and I. Society, an'd Lismore Hospital
owe much to him for his efforts on their behalf. He was for many
years President of the Hospital. Mr. Lockett, who is now 80 years
of age, resides in Diadem Street, Lismore.
MR. C. A. BARHAM, TOWN CLERK AND CLERK
OF WORKS, LISMORE. 1888 TO 1924.
Mr. Barham, who was associated with the timber industry at
Lismore and Sydney, was appointed Town Clerk and Clerk of Works
in 1888, and retired as Town Clerk in 1924. During that time he
saw the Municipality of Lismore grow from its humble birth to
the bright and progressive town it is to-day. Gas undertaking,
water, sewerage, sale yards, fire brigade and station were all started
during his official career.


ENTERED on Record by me in Register of Patents, No. 8. Page 424,
this fourteenth day of July, One Thousand eight hundred and sixty.
W. ELYARD,
For the Colonial Secretary and. Registrar.
By His Excellency Sir William Thomas Denison, Knight Commander of the
Most Honorable Order of the Bath, Governor General in and over ail
Her Majesty’s Colonies of .New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria, South
Australia, and Western Australia, and Captain-General and Governor-
in-Chief of the Territory of New South Wales and its Dependencies,
and Vice-Admiral of the same, &c., &c., &c.
To Henry Garrard', Esquire, one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace for the Terri-
tory of New South Wales :
TT'NOW YOU, that I, Sir William Thomas Denison, the Governor General and Gover-
'lV nor-in-Chief aforesaid, Do, by virtue of the power and authority in me vested, and
with the advice of the Executive Council, hereby appoint and assign you to be and to
perform the duties of Police and Stipendiary Magistrate for the Town of Casino, and
Police District of Richmond R’iver, together with such other duties as are, or shall be,
from time to time directed to be performed by Police and Stipendiary Magistrates
within their respective Districts, under the authority of any Act or Ordinance in force
within this Colony ; and to suppress all tumults, riots, affrays, or breaches of the
Peace, all public nuisances, vagrancies, and offences against the Law within the said
Town and District ; and to keep, and cause to be kept, all Acts, Ordinances, and Regu-
lations for the good of the peace, and the preservation of the same, and for the quiet
rule and government of the Liege Subjects of Our Sovereign Lady the Queen, in all
and singular their articles in the said Town of Casino and Police District of Richmond
River, according to the force, form, and effect of the same ; and therefore I command
You that to keeping the Peace, Acts, and Ordinances, and all and singular other the
premises, you diligently apply yourself, and perform and fulfil them in the aforesaid
form, doing therein what to justice appertains, according to the law and form of the
said Acts, Ordinances, and Regulations, as aforesaid.
GIVEN under my Hand and the Seal of the Territory, at
(SEAL) Government House, Sydney, in New South Wales aforesaid,
this Thirteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and sixty. W. DENISON.
By His Excellency’s Command, CHARLES COWPER.
Copy of certificate of appointment of late Mr. Garrard, of Bowen Creek, Police Magistrate.


POLICE MAGISTRATES.
The first record of a resident Police Magistrate is contained in
the certificate of appointment of Mr. Henry Garrard, illustrated in
this book. He was appointed in 1860, but there is no record of a
court being established here then. Those invoking the aid of the
law had to go to Casino.
Mr. H. S. Elliott was here in 1878. He lived at South Lismore,
and died there. Elliott Road is named after him. He acted as
P.M. at Lismore for some years.
The first official C.P.S. here was Mr. W. Carson, who was for
some time secretary of thq Lismore Hospital. Mr. Elliott was the
returning officer at the first election of Aldermen, and Mr. Carson
opened the first council books, and acted as Town Clerk until a
permanent appointment was made.
THE PIONEER AS WE KNEW HIM.
A man of strong physique, mostly one who worked hard, drank
hard, and fought hard, by the force of circumstances he had all
these qualities, be they good or bad. No man or woman, weak
either in body or mind, could have survived ; if such appeared on
the scene, it was but a passing phase, they soon left for they
could not earn an existence, and hard work was the only means
that counted ; drones and spongers soon got short shrift, and were
forced to find other fields for their talents, then all that survived
were strong and vigorous, and many of them became noted “char-
acters” in our small community.
Hard heads, hard fists and soft hearts were their chief attri-
butes. We will never see their like again for conditions now are
vastly different. Other times, other men and other methods, but
memory lingers with the men and women of the past, they did
their duty well, and to them we owe much of our present comfort
and prosperity. Just a silent toast to the “Memory of the
Pioneers.”
This ends our story of the past 50 years. May those who com-
pile the history of the next half century have as pleasant a task.
THE END.


LISMORE, PRESENT AND FUTURE
The foregoing pages tell a story of rapid development that is
a veritable “romance of progress.” The facts are simply set out,
and there has been no attempt at elaboration. A vast amount of
work was entailed in the collection of the data and, though no
trouble was spared to verify facts and dates, it is realised’ that
some of the statements are bound to be questioned. However, it
is hoped that any criticisms offered will be of a constructive nature,
tending to increase the knowledge of the rise and growth of the
town. In a, work of this size it has not been possible to do more
than touch upon the salient features of the story —possibly not
all of those —and to those who may be inclined to criticise the
book? on these grounds the limitations of space are offered as the
reason for curtailment.
So much for Lismore of the past. A creditable past, when the
foundations were laid for present prosperity and future progress.
The present generation is not unmindful of the debt owed to the
men who built so surely; and the example they set, the 1 standard
they reached, has been maintained in more recent times. The town
has never lacked men willing and able to steer progress along
sound lines, and, like the tottering steps of the infant change to
the quick paces of youth and then to the sure and steady stride
of maturity, Lismore has passed through the infant and transition
stages and; is now planted firmly on the road of progress, and each
year advances steadily at a greater speed.
POLICY JUSTIFIED
Life in Lismore is as many-sided as in any of the great centres
of population, and it is not possible to do more than indicate a
few of the many activities in this brief conclusion to the story of
its growth. Early in the field with municipal services, making life
easier and more comfortable to residents, Lismore intensified its
effort to be regarded as the most modem country town in the
Commonwealth as soon as the dread shadow of the Great War
was lifted. Despite the increased cost of establishing such ser-
vices the town was represented by men who had the courage of
their convictions and believed that “nothing was too good for
Lismore. 7 That their faith was justified has been abundantly
proved, and the last three years have been an era of progress never
previously equalled. Municipal services, such as electric and water
supply, gas and sewerage, have been remodelled to such an extent
that they may be said to have been transformed. Roads have been
reconstructed and modern labour saving machinery installed wher-
ever possible. The cost has been high, but it has been worth while,


for the “hand” of progress has revivified dormant potentialities
and private enterprise has responded with astonishing vigour to
the encouragement of progressive administration. Business has
expanded, houses and population increased, and Lismore has become
widely known as a “good town in which to live.”
TENTACLES OF TRADE
One of the features of present-day Lismore is its ever-lengthen-
ing tentacles of trade, reaching further and further into a pros-
perous countryside. Commerce is the life blood of a nation, of a
State,, and of a town, and it pulses steadily and ever more strongly
in the arteries —the crowded streets —of the “Queen City of the
North.” Though the progress made has been great, it iSj still true
that the potentialities of the closely settled Valley of the Rich-
mond have not been more than scratched, and Lismore is so situated
geographically that it has been and always will be the key town
to the commercial possibilities of the North. The' fact is recognised
by keen business brains, and there is a continual and? steady growth
of trade. Yearly, almost daily, the town expands. A mere 1 two
years have seen a complete street of modern shops added to the
mam business block, almost the entire remodelling of another
section, and scores of individual buildings. Bricks and mortar are
tangible evidences of development.
Though to the unthinking majority the celebration, of a jubilee
may mean principally mirth and merriment, there is a section of
the community that will join in the mood of the moment, but, at
the same time, will give more than a passing thought to deeper
things, will pause to give thanks to the God Who has so abundantly
blessed a town and district that it has never ceased to advance.
Religious beliefs have exercised a wonderful influence over Lismore’s
population since the earliest days, but never more so than in 1929.
If concrete evidence of abstract truth be possible then Lismore’s
many churches, all with increasing congregations, substantiate the
claim that citizens recognise the necessity of placing “first things
first.” Most of the denominations have acknowledged that Lismore
is the natural centre of their work in the district, have appointed
able and earnest men in charge of that work, and 1 the future holds
still greater possibilities along these lines.
EDUCATION
Education is now given its proper place as one of the essentials
of modem life, and Lismore offers its citizens educational facilities
unequalled among the country towns of the State, for it is the
only one to possess ai first class High School and first class Rural
School. Both the schools draw pupils from a wide area, and the
enrolment at the High School is verging on the 400 mark, and that
at the Rural School exceeds 1250. The latter school will this year


REV. F. R. NEWTON,
First Anglican Clergyman
RICHMOND RIVER STEAMERS TO-DAY


secure an additional block of buildings, costing £20,000. Technical
education is offered per medium of the Trades School, costing
more than £IO,OOO, to be opened this year. An additional primary
school at South Lismore has an enrolment of several hundred, and
Roman Catholic schools have more than 600 pupils enrolled.
Statisticians say that every child has a definite calculable value
to a, nation what is the value in, terms of money of the thousands
of children now attending schools in Lismore ? But little thought
is required to show that these citizens-of-to-morrow mean con-
tinual progress to the town, for, in a comparatively few* years the
majority will be enjoying the full rights of citizenship, each with
their own particular niche in the life of the town, all proud of their
birth place and anxious to help further progress.
SCENIC BEAUTIES
Lismore is such a busy commercial centre that its claims for
attention as the hub of a district possessing great attractiveness
by reason of its scenic beauty, are not emphasised to the extent
they deserve. As the spokes of a wheel radiate from the hub, so
do the many roads radiate from Lismore and on every one of
the roads there is much for v the tourist to admire. Panoramas of
fertile, beautiful countryside, intersected by scores of streams run-
ning to the main river, may be obtained from the numerous hills.
Superb scenic vistas of smiling farms and golden beaches may be
seen where the roads approach the coastline; inland there are spots
of surpassing loveliness where waterfalls in the virgin, sub-tropical
scrub, cascade into deep pools mirroring the staghorns that cling
to lofty giants of the scrub, tangled glades where orchids and rare
ferns mingle in the beauty of Nature undefiled. In the town the
severely practical considerations of earlier times have been re-
placed in more recent years by a sense of the fact that practical
progress and town adornment can work in harmony. The result
is that avenues of shady trees line the residential streets, parks
are' always being improved and additions made to provide foi* future
needs. Almost in the centre of the town a beautiful park has re-
cently been enlarged, and the fine new Town Halt built at a, cost of
£17,000 stands out from a fitting background. A recent addition
to the park will set off a unique memorial to the men of the district
who laid down their lives in the Great War. The memorial takes
the form of one of the most modern swimming pools in the Com-
monwealth, entered through an imposing memorial building of dis-
tinctive, modern design. Parks are provided in North and South
Lismore, a recreation ground is laid out with all the equipment
necessary for sports of all kinds.
SPORTING ACTIVITIES
Sport plays an important part in Australian national life, and


Lismore is well catered for in this respect. Every branch of sport
has its devotees, and many hailing from Lismore have become
known far beyond’ the boundaries of their town. As the natural
centre of the district Lismore is the headquarters of many North
Coast organisations controlling various sporting activities, and its
sporting arenas attract teams of Empire-wide renown. Football
and cricket, as the national games, are numerically strongest, and
in the past few years sound administration in Lismore has given
the town and district an honoured place in the State. On the
river bank near the heart of the town the 1 Lismore Bowling Club has
thrived and increased in membership, boasts one of the best greens
in the State, and intends to construct another during jubilee year.
Adjacent to this green the council is building a croquet lawn, and
this “infant’ 7 promises to become a lusty one. Six tennis courts
visited and praised by Commonwealth champions constitute the
grounds of the Lismore Tennis Club, and there are numerous courts
in other parts of the town. Golf is making an increasing appeal to
the community, and the Lismore Golf Club recently transferred its
links, by permission of the council, to a park on the outskirts of
the town, and already has one of the best links in the country
parts of the State, and is improving these so rapidly that the? claim
will soon be extended to include the metropolitan areas. Two race
clubs stage periodical meetings, attracting patrons from all parts
of the district; swimming, rifle shooting, hockey, athletics, these
and many other branches of sport have their followers, who are
yearly increasing in numbers.
PUBLIC BODIES
A phase of Lismore life that would need many pages to do
it justice is the interest taken in public affairs, evidenced by the
many public bodies. Where their interests touch the administration
of civic affairs they work in harmony with the municipal council,
and also devote much time to their own special interests or to
national questions. Public spirited men are pleased to give their
time and energy to use the organisations to advance the best
interests, of the town and to press Lismore’s claims upon Govern-
ments. In this section of their activities they have been assisted
by sympathetic members of Parliament. Senator Massy Greene,
formerly member of the House of Representatives for Richmond,
and acknowledged to be one of the ablest men in the Common-
Parliament, did yeoman work for Lismore that will not soon
be forgotten. He was succeeded by Mr. R. F. H. Green, M.H.R.,
elected (unopposed) for the third time in 1928, who has always
evinced a willingness to attend to matters of local importance.
With many years of experience of local conditions and acquainted
with local government in all its branches, Mr. W. T. Missingham,


SPINKS PARK AND POST OFFICE
A VIEW OF SOUTH LISMORE


M.L.A., has proved his worth to the town and district, of which
he is proud.
Prominent among local organisations by reason of the varied
nature of its work is the Lismore Chamber of Commerce. Its
membership list includes all the prominent business men of the
town, and the list and the enthusiasm of members grows with the
passage of years. The North Coast Chamber of Manufactures set
out to foster the infant industries called into being by the growing
population of Lismore, and the increasing prosperity of the country-
side', and has more than justified its existence. In the past Lismore
has given the world some musicians of outstanding ability, whose
names have become known on the concert platforms and in the
theatres of the world. The musical talent of the town has been
fostered and encouraged by the Lismore Musical Festival Society,
an organisation known far and wide in musical circles, and still
developing on sound lines. The Lismore Agricultural and Industrial
Society, Orchestral, Philharmonic and Choral Societies, Lismore
Horticultural Society and the newly established Hlorticultural
Society of South Lismore, the 1 various citizens’ associations con-
cerned with some specific activity, Country Women’s Association,
Returned* Soldiers’ League, all unite to form a homogeneous many-
faceted gem in ther crown of the “Queen City of the North.” All
have one thing in common, and that is that they are not mori-
bund, but vigorous growths of a virile public life.
PUBLIC HEALTH STUDIED
Earlier in the book the story of the town’s interest in public
health has beeil outlined, and it is an interest that has not waned
with the passage of years. A wealthy community is not neces-
sarily a happy community, but a healthy one usually is. The
Municipal Council has recently intensified its efforts in this direc-
tion, and plans have been laid for further improvements that will
make it outstanding in the State. Apart from the council’s
efforts to secure a healthy community by minimising possible
dangers, the citizens support two hospitals by public subscription —
Lismore District Hospital and St. Vincent’s Hospital —and many
private hospitals care for the well-to-do. The Lismore District
Ambulance Service is a lusty infant that has grown in a year
from nothing, and this year, still suffering with growing pains,
will add a third motor ambulance to the two at present owned.
The town has always been fortunate in its meldical practitioners,
but now, though medical men are always reticent on the subject,
it is apparent to any layman that the sick and suffering of the
North Coast are turning more and more towards the well-equipped
surgeries of the town in preference to the far away cities. The
North Coast Children’s Home serves a district much larger than


Lismore, and no citizen acquainted with this institution would
hesitate to praise the work of Canon Moore and his committee of
enthusiasts.
IDENTICAL INTERESTS
Through all the years that have passed the men guiding the
destiny of the town have never forgotten that its growth was due' to
the surrounding Countryside. Lismore has progressed in con-
formity with the development of its surroundings. There has never
oeen a marked division between the townspeople and the farming
community, in fact the two have to a large extent been interchange-
able. Their interests are identical and must remain so. Primary
production in the Valley of the Richmond has seen great changes
m the past, it is not stationary to-day, and will continue to
develop. Changes, almost unnoticeable from year to year, are taking
place and, as the economic pressure intensifies, primary production
alters to meet the altered requirements. Compared with countries
that have been settled and intensively farmed for many hundreds
of years the Richmond River district, although one of the most
closely settled in the Commonwealth, is only sparsely inhabited.
Present indications are that time will change this. The acreage
of farms will shrink and more intensive farming will follow. Side
by side with this development Lismore, too, will continue to grow.
Part of its growth will be due to natural increases of population,
an assumption supported by the present attendance at schools;
part will be due to the growing rural population; part of its
growth will be due to. modern scientific advances in transportation
tending to widen its trading radius; and still a further reason for
growth will be the town improvements and: 1 extension of municipal
services that will go to make life more enjoyable. All these and
some, others that will occur to persons interested in particular
branches of human endeavour will play a part in the development
to come.
Lismore has been well built. The men of the past built for to-
day; the men of the present are building for the future. The past
has been good, the present is better, but the future, beyond that
it will transcend anything previously known —who can say ? When
Lismore celebrates its centenary the men of to-day will be
gone, but they will not be forgotten. To-day we look back over
the fifty golden milestones on the pioneers, and say : “Honour
these men, they built well.” The citizens of the future will look
back as we do to-day, will con the records of the men of the
jubilee year, of the 1920’5, and say : ‘“Honour these men, they
even surpassed their forebears.”






Acknowledgment of Chanks and Apology
<There have been so many people mho have
supplied old-time photographs and contributed
historical data to this scuuenir booklet that the
Committee finds it impossible to personally thank
everybody, and this is by may of a collectiue
grateful acknowledgment to all such for their uery
valuable advice, co-operation and assistance.
Quite a number of the photos supplied mere
very old and faded, and therefore necessarily
difficult of reproduction, but their inclusion is because
of their historic value and interest, even at the
expense of the blockmakers art and technique.


LISMORE
IDhollij sel up, blocks made and
Printed bij
NORTHERN STAR LIMITED
Modern Photos bij ID. Q. Parker
and "Northern Star”
