

, * ■ * 0 (i
~s j iiai. 644/ '
fiu- (X-H h\A
LIST OF LAND SHELLS
COLLECT ED ON
FITZROY ISLAND:
WITH NOTES ON THEIR GEOGRAPHICAL RANGE.
JOHN BRAZIER, C.M.Z.S.
Member of the Royal and Linnean Societies of Neav South I rales,
Corresponding Member of tht Koval Society of Tasmania.
Extracted from the “ Quarterly Journal of Conchology, :
No. 13, Nov., 1877.
LEEDS:
TAYLOR BROS., PRINTERS, ST, ANN STREET.
XB7B.




[Extracted from the Quarterly Journal of Conchotogy, Nov., iSf/i]
Published by Taylor Bros., Leeds, England.
LIST OF LAND SHELLS COLLECTED ON FLTZROY
ISLAND; WITH NOTES ON THEIR GEOGRAPHICAL
RANGE.
By John Brazier, C.M.Z.S.,
Member of the Royal and Linnean Societies of New South Wales,
Corresponding Member of the Royal Society of Tasmania.
Fitzroy is a small granitic island on the North-East Coast of
Australia, near Cape Grafton, and about one mile off the main-
land ; it is nearly two miles long North-East and South-West, and
two-thirds of a mile broad ; it rises to a peak 860 feet above the
level of the sea, and is well wooded right to its summit. Among
the most luxuriant tropical growths, which are of great frequency,
the familiar Eucalypti rear their not always graceless stems. One’s
progress is very much impeded in the valleys by prodigious
climbers with stems 200 to 300 yards long (Calamus Australis).
In June, 1848, when the island was visited by my friend Mr.
John Macgiliivray, in H.M.S. Rattlesnake, he ordy records two
species Bulimus Tuckeri and Papina Thomsoni.
When I visited the island in December, 1871, with the
Australian Eclipse Expedition, I obtained at or near the watering
place on the west side of the island 7 species of LLelix , 1 Heli-
carion, 2 of Pupa , 1 Diplommaiina , 1 Leptopoma , 2 of Bulimus
(including Tuckeri ), 1 Ditropis , 1 Georissa (these two are forms
quite new to Australia), and 1 Truncatella. 1 now add 3 species
of Melampus , 1 of Pythia and 1 of Cassidula, which I collected
in one day, during my second visit on June 6th, 1875, though
only on the island for a few hours. 1 also obtained another species
of Helix , making, with the Land and Amphibious species, the
total of 24. They are as follows :


Helix Macgillivrayi, Forbes , Voyage of H.M.S. Rattle-
snake, vol. ii, p. 377, plate 3, fig. 1.
Found on the trunks and limbs of trees in the valleys,
at an elevation of 456 feet above sea level.
The type specimens were found by Mr. Macgillivray on
the Frankland Islands, some three miles south of Fitzroy.
Only a few months back my friend Mr. C. E. Beddome
obtained specimens on the mainland, 28 miles inland from
Cardwell, Rockingham Bay, at an altitude of 3,500 feet.
Helix Frankiandiensis, Forbes , Voyage of H.M.S. Rattle-
snake, vol. ii., p. 372, plate ii, fig. 2 a.b.
Found under decayed wood at the roots of trees in
the valleys, at 300 feet.
Also collected by Mr. Macgillivray, at the Frankland
Islands. Cardwell, Rockingham Bay, in the bushes under
leaves (Mr. C. E. Beddome).
Helix Aridorum, Cox, Proc. Zook Society, 1867, p. 924.
Found on the flat near the watering place, under coral
and decayed wood.
This is the same species found by Mr. Macgillivray at
the Frankland Islands and quoted by the late Professor
Forbes as Helix similaris, Fer. I have seen some of the
original specimens from the Franklands, and have com-
pared them with what I collected at Fitzroy, under the
lens. They are all finely granulated, characters not to be
found in Helix similaris , Fer. Helix aridorum is also
found at the Clarence River, New South Wales, Brisbane
and Burnett River, Queensland. The only locality in any
part of Australia where H. similaris , Fer., is found is in
Guilfoyle’s Nursery Double Bay and Elizabeth Bay, near
Sydney, New South Wales. They were introduced with
plants from the Mauritius. After rain I have found them


in vast numbers, crawling on the trunks of fruit trees and
on the ground under Samphire and Dianthus. It is quite
improbable that Helix similaris has ever been carried on
floating timber to Australia.
Heiix Elieryi, Brazier , Proc. Zool. Society, 1874, p. 668,
plate Ixxxiii, figs. 3-4.
Found under decayed leaves, near the watering place,
A small, conical, very thin, pale brown shell, having the
periphery sharply keeled and spirally striated.
It is also found on the Barnard Islands No. 111, North
East Australia, under drift coral, thrown up, one time or
another, during some terrific gale.
Helix Russelii, Brazier , Proc. Zool. Society, 1874, p. 668,
plate 13-14.
Found near the watering place, under leaves at the roots
of trees.
A small, turbinately globose, thin, shining, horny, brown
shell, with elevated spire.
On my way to New Guinea, in 1875, I found it on
Barnard Islands No. Ill; liome Islands, off Cape Gren-
ville, North-East Australia; Cape York, North Australia;
Bet and Darnley Islands, Torres Straits; Cardwell, Rock-
ingham Bay (Mr. C. E. Beddome).
Helix turriculata, Cox, Proc. Zool. Soc., 1867, p. 724.
Found with Helix Elieryi and Russelii.
It does not differ from the type specimens from Port
Curtis.
Also Barnard Islands No. 111,


7. Helix pampina, Cox, Monog. Aust. Land Shells, 1868,
p. 3, plate xix, fig. 9,
Found on the leaves and trunks of trees, at an elevation
of 456 feet above sea level. I include this as I obtained
it during my second visit of a few hours, in 1875, to the
island, on my way to New Guinea.
I also obtained specimens at the Great Palm and
Barnard Islands No. 111, North-East Australia; Albany
Island and Cape York, North Australia. The typical
specimen in my collection was obtained at Wide Bay,
Queensland, Bowen, Port Denison (Mr. A. Simson).
8. Heiix rustica, Pfr., Zeitschr. f. Malak., 1852, p. 112.
= H. inconspicua, Forbes.
= H. impexa , Reeve.
Found under decayed wood and leaves, at the roots of
trees, near the watering place.
9. Bulimus Tuckeri, Pfr., Proc. Zool. Society, 1846, p, 30.
= B. Walli , Cox.
Found in crevices of coral, at the roots of trees.
Also on Barnard and Home Elands, North-East Aus-
tralia; Albany Island and Cape York, Noith Australia;
Sue, Warrior, Bet, Long, Dungeness, and Cocomut
Islands, Torres Straits. These last localities I visited in
1875. Sunday, Lizard, and Sir Charles Hardy’s Islands
(Macgillivray). All these islands are inside the great Aus -
tralian coral barrier.
10. Bulimus pacificus, Pfr., Mon. Helic. Viv., 1859, Vol. iii,
p. 414.
= Pupa pacifica , Pfr.,] Proc. Zool. Society, 1846,
P- 3i-


Found with B. Tuckeri, and at the whole of the above
islands.
ii. He’icarion Brazieri, Cox, Proc. Zool Society, 1873,
p. 15 1.
Found at an altitude of 456 feet above sea level, crawl-
ing on the trunks of trees and on large granite boulders, in
the dark and thickly wooded virgin forest.
12. Vertigo Macdonnehi, Brazier, Proc. Zool. Society, 1874,
p. 669, pi. Ixxxiii, figs. 22-23.
Found under leaves and at the roots of trees.
Also No. 8 Island, Claremont Group, off Cape Sidmouth,
Barnard Islands No. 111, North-East Australia; Cape
York, North Australia.
13. Vertigo Scotti, Brazier, Proc. Zool. Society, 1874, p. 669,
pi. Ixxxiii, figs. 24 —26.
Only one specimen found at the watering place, under a
bit of wood.
14. Diplommatina Gowllandi, Brazier, Proc. Zool. Society,
1874, p. 670, pi. Ixxxiii, figs. 19 —2i.
Found at the roots of trees, crawling upon the grass
during a heavy rain. On my second visit to the island, in
1875, I only obtained 3 specimens, no rain having fallen
for some months. Everything appeared to have been
burnt up with the warm weather.
15. Cydophorus (Ditropis) Whitei, Brazier, Proc. Zool,
Society, 1874, p. 669, pi. Ixxxiii, figs. 5 —7.
Found under wood near the watering place.
Barnard Islands No. 111, North-East Australia; found
under coral at the edge of the brushes.


1 6. Leptopoma vitreum, Lesson, Voy. de la Coq., p. 346,
pi. 13, fig. 6.
Dermatocera vitrea, H. & A. Adams.
Found on the leaves and trunks of trees and small
bushes, at the altitude of 456 feet.
Also found at the whole of the Solomon Islands, New
Britain and New Ireland. They are brought off by the
natives in small-sized baskets, three or four quarts in each.
The Rev. George Brown, on his return from New Britain
and New Ireland, brought with him to Sydney some
bushels of them. Dunk, Frankland, and Green Islands,
North-East Australia (Macgillivray).
17. Pupina Thomsoni, Forbes, Yoy. H.M.S. Rattlesnake,
App., p. 381, pi. hi, fig. 2.
Found at the roots of trees in shaded places. Living
specimens are only to be procured during rain; in the dry
season one has to scrape and dig in the loose coral that
forms the high flat before one can get perfect and dead
specimens.
18. Georissa multilirata, Brazier , Proc. Zook Society, 1874,
p. 670, pi. Ixxxiii, figs. B—lo.
Found crawling on the roots of grass during a heavy
rain.
19. Truncate!la teres, Pfr., Proc. Zool. Society, 1856, p. 336.
Found under wood at the watering place, and near the
coral sand beach, under drift timber and weeds.
Also found on Barrow Island and Cape Grenville, North-
East Australia.
20. Melampus pulchellus, Petit, Proc. Zool. Society, 1842,
p. 202.
= Auricula pulchella. Petit.
One specimen found up the valley at the watering place.


2i. Me lam pus trifasciatus, Kuster, Auricula, p. 38, pi. v,
figs. 15—17.
One specimen found at the watering place.
22. Melampus parvulus, Nuttall in Pfr. Mon. Auricula, 1856,
p. 24.
One specimen found at the watering place.
The aperture is lighter in colour than in the specimens
from Oahu, Sandwich Islands.
23. Pythia Argenviliei, Pfr ., Zeitschr. f. Malak., 1853, p. 191.
Found in vast numbers in shaded places up the valley,
near the watering place, under decayed wood and leaves.
24. Cassidula angulifera, Petit , (Auricula), in Revue Zool,
1841, p. 101.
= Auricula subrepta , Homb et Jaq.
= Auricula angulata, Forbes.
= Mdampus anguliferus , Chenu.
= Rhodostoma bidentata , Swainson, Proc. Royal Soc.
Tasmania, 1854, vol. hi, p. 45, pi. vii, fig. 4.
One specimen found near the brackish water.
I have also found it on the mainland at Cardwell, Cape
Sidmouth, North-East Australia; Mud Bay, Cape York,
North Australia; and Katow, South New Guinea.
It was described by Swainson as Rhodostoma bidentata ,
and appears to have been overlooked by authors.
TAYLOR BROS., PRINTERS AND LITHOGRAPHERS ST Ann’s STREET, LEEDS.


LIST OF LAND SHELLS
COLLECTED ON
FITZROY ISLAND:
WITH NOTES OH THEIR GEOGRAPHICAL RANGE.
JOHN BRAZIER, C.M.Z.S.
Member of the Royal and Linnean Societies of Nerv South Wales,
Corresponding Member of the Royal Society of Tasmania,
Extracted from the “Quarterly Journal of Conchology,”
No. 13, Nov., 1877.
LEEDS:
TAYLOR BROS., PRINTERS, ST. ANN STREET.
1878.
