





LIST OF TOWNS
NEW SOUTH WALES,
GIVING THE DISTANCES FROM SYDNEY, WITH SOME
DESCRIPTIVE PARTICULARS.
Reprinted from the “Australian Handbook ,” for 1885,
PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. GORDON GOTCH.
IfNniEßici^
iv 4>
ISSUED GRATIS
FOR THE INFORMATION OF INTENDING EMIGRANTS AND OTHERS,
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES,
5, WESTMINSTER CHAMBERS, VICTORIA STREET,
LONDON, S.W.




LIST OF TOWNS
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ABERDEEN, a township on the E. bank of
the Hunter river, 159 miles N. of Sydney, the main
line of road between Muswellbrook and Scone pass-
ing through it. Scone is 8 miles distant. It has a
postal, savings bank, telegraph, and money-order
office, and a railway station. It is in the county
of Brisbane, and police district of Scone, and
stands 610 feet above sea level. The route
from Sydney is by steamer to Newcastle, 87
miles, thence Great Northern Railway; fares to
Newcastle, 15s. 6d., 10s. 3d. Population, 130. There
are several small stores in the township, a steam
flour mill, one large hotel, “ The Australian Arms,”
and a smaller one. There are also Episcopal and
Presbyterian churches, and a public school, with
average attendance of 43. The district is a pastoral
one, with plenty of good agricultural land. Forma-
tion : micaceous conglomerates, comprising granite
and felsparic trap, with quartz ridges. There are
some alluvial diggings at Denison, about 40 miles
distant.
ADAMINIBY, sometimes called Seymour,
is a pastoral and agricultural township 285 miles
SW. of Sydney, on the main road to Kiandra, from
which it is distant about 20 miles. It is in the
county of Wallace, police district of Cooma, and
electoral district of Monaro. It lies on high ground,
being some 3,000 feet above the sea-level. Popula-
tion about 200, of district 1,100. It has a post,
money-order and savings bank office, and telegraph
station, a public school (average attendance 48),
three places of worship, three stores, two hotels,
and a court-house. A shaft has been sunk near the
town and copper ore obtained, and the same will
be worked immediately the railway is extended to
Cooma. There are some diggings on the Eucumbene
river, a few miles distant, otherwise it is a farming
and pastoral district. Conveyance to Sydney—private
coach to Cooma, thence by mail coach ; fare, £3.
Upper Tarago is the nearest railway station.
ADAMSTO WN, a village adjoining Hamilton,
about 4 miles from Newcastle and 80 miles N. of
Sydney : it is in the county of Northumberland and
police district of Waratah; it has a post-office, a
public school, with average attendance of 237
scholars, a mechanics’ institute, with 345 vols.,
and one place of worship. Principal hotels : Royal
Crown, and Royal Standard. The water supply is
derived from underground tanks. Population of
district 560.
ADELONG- , a township on the creek of the
same name, 273 miles (311 miles postal) from
Sydney SW. ; rail to Cootamundra, thence coach
are the means of conveyance (coach fare, 255.). It is a
postal, telegraph, Government savings bank, and
money-order station. It is in the county of Wynyard,
and police district of Gundagai. Population is up-
wards of 760 ; with vicinity it is 2,000. There are five
hotels in the town; the Commercial Hotel is the
coach booking office, and four stores. Banks :N. S.
Wales and Commercial. The other noticeable building
are ; Court house, public school, (average attendance
251); literary institute, and four churches—Episco-
pal, Wesleyan, Presbyterian, and Catholic. Societies :
Masons, Oddfellows, Sons of Temperance, Good
Templars, and a Reading Room with 400 vols.
Local newspapers : the Adelong Miner, and Adelong
Argus. The district is a mining one, among the
oldest in the Colony, the quartz reefs being
numerous and rich ; and the creek beds and banks
have been found to contain very valuable alluvial
deposits. The Great Victoria Claim is down up-
wards of 1,000 feet, at which level payable gold has
been struck ; the Government award of £l,OOO for
the first discovery of payable gold at a greater
perpendicular depth than 800 feet has been secured
by this mine; several other claims are 600 feet
and upwards in depth. At Reedy Flat there are
sluicing claims of great extent and value, some
promising looking quartz reefs; also a number of
reefs at Tarcutta and Mount Adrah. The yield of
gold from this district for 1883 was 12,099 ounces,
valued at £47,418 18s. sd. Formation ; granite.
ALBION PARK, a post town on the Mac-
quarie rivulet, in the police district and electo-
rate of Kiama, county of Camden, centrally
situated between Kiama and Wollongong, about
14 miles distance from each, five miles from
Shellharbour, and 81 miles SBW. of Sydney. It
has three churches, Episcopal, Presbyterian, and
Roman Catholic ; one hotel, “The Albion Park,” a
post-office, and a public school, with average at-
tendance of 36, two stores, and a convent.
Coal and shale exist, but the district is chiefly
farming. There is good pasturage, and the land
is well fitted for tillage. Formation : carboni-
ferous ; surface chiefly trap. Population 150, with
district 600. Mode of conveyance to Sydney is
by coach to Campbelltown, fare, 13s. 6d., thence
per rail, fare, 3s. lOd.
ALBURY, sometimes known as the Federal
City, an important and flourishing town on the
confines of N. S. Wales and Victoria, county of
Goulburn, police district of Albury (36° 5' S. lat. and
146° 55' E. long.), situated 531 feet above the sea
level on the right bank of the Murray river, which
is spanned here by three viaducts, one the old
wooden structure, another a temporary railway
bridge, also of timber, and the third a handsome
iron lattice bridge for the double railway. Albury
was proclaimed a municipality on June 4th, 1859,
There are 65J miles of roads and streets in the
district; value of rateable property is £315,000.
Its founding dates from Nov. 17, 1824, when Hume
and Hovejl encamped on its site. The tree is still
standing, and is now fenced in. The railway from
Melbourne to Wodonga, on the opposite side of the
Murray, was opened in November, 1873, and the
* It is perhaps necessary to mention that, in many instances, places designated officially as “post
towns” are really, and would be more correctly described as, “postal centres.” The distances from
Sydney vary according to the route, and in some cases are approximate only.
b 2


railway communication with Sydney was completed
on February 3rd, 1881; fares, 645. 9d. and 445. The
3 mile break between Albury and Wodonga was filled
in on 14th June, 1883, when the completion of the
through railway communication between Sydney
and Melbourne was celebrated by a grand demons-
tration at which the Governors of both Colonies,
and upwards of 1,000 representative gentlemen were
present. The N. S. Wales trains running through
to Wodonga and the Victorian trains to Albury, there
being shunting yards, <fec., at each station. The
Albury station ground is 68 chains in length and nine
in width, and within its boundaries are the following
buildings :—A large and handsome passenger station,
an imposing building, 300 ft. in length by 46ft. in
width, built of red and white bricks with cement
dressings; in the centre of the edifice is a clock
tower 80ft. high. The platform is 400 ft. in length
by 20ft. in width ; a goods warehouse, engine-shed
for 12 locomotives, a turn-table, stationmaster’s
house, engine-drivers’ quarters, porters’ cottages,
&c., and there are aboui
crossings in the yard. 1
in the township are tl
which a chapel has been
tute, with large hall
the Oddfellows’ Hall,
Church of England (St. Matthew’s), Presbyterian,
Wesleyan, Independent, and Roman Catholic (St.
Patrick’s), a large and massive structure; the
banks—Commercial, Australian Joint-Stock, a fine
building; Australasia, and N. S. Wales, and the
Post Office. The principal hotels are Globe, Club,
Rose, and Albury. Dean, Smollett, Olive, Town-
send, and Kiewa are the leading streets. Popu-
lation of census district (1881) 5,715. The Botanical
reserve is being improved, and promises to be a
useful and ornamental breathing place. The schools
comprise a grammar, public, and denominational
schools ; the public school has an average attendance
of 333. The district surrounding Albury is prin-
cipally agricultural, with some quartz mining.
The latter is carried on at the Black Range and Hawk’s
View. Grapes and tobacco are largely grown, and the
Albury wines have made themselves famous. Mr.
Fallon’s vineyard, the Murray Valley, has 120 acres
under , vines. In 1884 the produce of the district
was 63,315 gallons of wine, and 115 cwt. of
tobacco. Stock returns for the Electoral dis-
trict, 1,877 horses, 5,875 cattle, 86,280 sheep, 888
pigs. The newspapers are the Albury Banner
and Border Post. One member is returned to
the Assembly. It has telegraph, money-order, and
Government savings bank facilities, and a School
of Art with 700 volumes. Albury lies 351 (386
postal) miles to the SW. of Sydney, and 190 miles to
theNE. of Melbourne. During the season the Murray
is navigable to here by steamers, Albury being about
300 miles from its source, and about 1,800 from its
debouchure in Lake Alexandrina. The first steamer
brought up the Murray to here was the Albury,
Captain George Johnston, in the year 1855. The
town is now lit with gas. A system of water supply
from the Murray (to be tapped at Mungabarena,
about 4 miles above the town), is shortly to be in
operation. Formation ; schistose, with granite and
whinstone near the tops of the ranges.
AIiSTONVILIi-E, a post town in the county
of Rouse, and police district of Richmond river, in 28°
45' S. lat. and 153° 30' E. long., 367 miles BNE. of
Sydney, coach to Ballina, thence by the river
steamers, running daily, being the means of com-
munication. A public school, with average attend-
ance of 30, aWesleyan and a Presbyterian chapel, and
two stores, two hotels, with some small sugar mills in
the vicinity, also a large mill and sugar estate known
as the Alstonville Sugar Company, comprise the social
and industrial features of the district, which has
a population of about 500 persons. The formation
is trap and slate, the country is surfaced with dense
cedar scrub, the soil is that known’as chocolate,
and has an average depth of ten feet.
ANVIL CREEK, a railway station and post
town, with money-order, Government savings bank,
and telegraph office, in the police district of West
Maitland, electoral district of Lower Hunter, 32
miles from Newcastle, and 104 J miles N. of Sydney,
on the creek of the same name. It has four
hotels, a Church of England and Wesleyan
church, a School of Arts, with library of 350
volumes, and two stores. It is principally a coal
mining district; the seam of coal at the Anvil
Creek Colliery, known as Farthings, is 14J feet
thick, of a hard splinty nature, and suitable for
household and commercial uses. It is now worked
by a tunnel, and the coal is conveyed to Newcastle
by the Northern Railway, and shipped at the
Government cranes. Population of district 2,000.
APPIN, a small post town, county of Cumber-
land, and police district of Campbelltown, 42 miles
S. of Sydney, and 10 miles S. of Campbelltown,
the nearest railway station, to which a coach
runs daily, fare, 2s. 6d. The district is purely
agricultural. It has a money-order office and
telegraph station, and contains two hotels—
Bourke and Imperial, two stores, three churches
—Church of England and Roman Catholic church
(built of stone), and Congregational church (of wood),
and a public school, with average attendance of
38. Population 300. Formation : iron and slate.
A.EAKOON, a money order and telegraph
station, with savings bank, 325 miles N. of Sydney,
county of Macquarie, electoral district of the Mac-
leay. Communication is by theMacleay river steamer.
It has one hotel, one store, a public school with
average attendance of 8, a police-station, and a
population of about 40. Formation : white granite.
ARALiUEN, a mining, agricultural and pas-
toral township, on the river of the same name,
county St. Vincent, electoral and police district of
Braidwood, 209 miles SW. of Sydney; rail to Goul-
burn, and Upper Tarago, thence coach (coach
fare, 275. 6d.), or steamer via, the Clyde river,
being the means of communication. Braidwood
is 15 miles distant N. The diggings are almost
all alluvial ; the country surrounding Araluen is
exceedingly mountainous and picturesque, but
ill-adapted for agricultural purposes. The town-
ship itself is located in a valley on the
banks of the Araluen creek, and is consequently
liable to flood. The country is granite in the
upper portion, comprising the table-land where
the river runs ; about 15 miles down it is clay-slate,
with quartz veins known to be auriferous. The
principal hotels are the Araluen Arms, the Star, and
the Perseverance. Churches; Church of England and
a Union church. Three public schools, with average
attendance of 149,and one Denominational R. C. There
is also an Oddfellows’ Hall. It has postal, telegraph.
Government savings bank, and money-order offices,
and several stores. The gold yield for 1883 was
2,252 oz., valued at £7,743 4s. Bd. The reefs contain
payable gold, but mixed with baser metals, which
cannot be divided by any process known in the
district. Coaches run to Moruya, Goulburn, and
Coast districts. Geological formation: principally
granite. Population 880.
ARMIDALE, 30° 31'S. lat., 151° 42' E. long., is
situated on the Dumaresq creek, on the main
Northern Road, 313 miles N. of Sydney, whence it
is reached by steamer to Newcastle, thence per rail.
The extension north of the railway to Tenterfield
passes through Armidale. It is 260 miles from
Newcastle, fares, 475. 6d. and 31s. 9d., and lies
3,313 feet above sea level. It was proclaimed
a municipality on November 13th, 1863. There
are miles of roads and streets in the dis-
trict ; value of rateable property is £250,000. It is
in the county and police district of Sandon, and
electorate of New England, and has a money-
order, savings bank, and telegraph office. Popu-
lation about 2,180, that of the district being 9,760.
Under the New Electoral Act New England returns
two members; there are over 3,000 voters on the rolls.
The leading buildings are the New Post Office, Free
Library and Town Hall, the Hospital, the Gaol,
Police barracks, and the Court-house. In addition to
these there are several substantial stores and hotels,
and a brewery. The Commercial, Joint-Stock, and
N. 8. Wales Banks have branches here, and the
principal insurance companies have agencies.
The hotels are Exchange, Tattersall’s, New England,
St. Kilda, Commercial, Court House, and others.
Newspapers: the Armidale Express, and Armidale


Chronicle. The literary institute has 2,000 volumes.
The district surrounding Armidale is principally
pastoral and agricultural, with some alluvial gold
diggings, within a few miles of the town. The
scenery in the vicinity is rugged and picturesque,
from the prevalence of mountains, among which
arc to be found several waterfalls of con-
siderable height. Armidale is the see of a Roman
Catholic bishop, and forms part also of the Anglican
Episcopate of Grafton and Armidale. The cathedral
church'(St. Peter’s) is one of the most beautiful of its
size in the colony. The Roman Catholics have also a
fine cathedral. Presbyterians,Wesleyans and Baptists
have also places of worship, and there are five schools.
The public school has an average attendance of 247.
Formation ; trap and clay slate near the town, fur-
ther away, granite and ironstone. Antimony in almost
unlimited quantity has been found at Gara falls,
near here.
ASHEIELD, a municipal borough, and post
town, has Government Savings Bank, money-order,
telegraph office, and railway station on the Great
Southern Railway; about five miles W. of Sydney,
lying 86 feet above sea level. It is in the county of
Cumberland, and electoral district of Canterbury.
Trains run frequently, fares, 6d. and 4d., also omni-
buses. Population upwards of 1,700. Hotels:
Adams’s Terminus, Ashfield, and the Plough. There
are three places of worship, Church of England,
Wesleyan, and Presbyterian, one public school, with
average attendance of 390, a Denominational (Episco-
pal) school, five private schools, and a School of
Arts, with 1,600 volumes. Municipal affairs are
under the control of a mayor and eight aldermen.
It was proclaimed December 28, 1871. It has
38 miles of roads and streets ; rateable property
valued at £1,000,000. Much of the land here
was formerly used for agricultural and market-
gardening purposes ; but it is now taken up
for building, and residences of a superior order
are erected in every quarter of this healthy and
favourite suburb, the facilities for reaching Sydney
being so great—adapting it for the residence
of merchants and others engaged in business.
The railway station is a conspicuous building,
and is considered one of the finest on the line.
The Infant Horae here, a large villa of brick,
stands on grounds of 4 acres in extent, with weather-
board cottages or huts in small paddock-like enclo-
sures.
ASHEOBD) a small township and money-
order station on the Frazer creek, near its junction
with the River Severn, 389 miles N. of Sydney, and
37 miles N. of Inverell. It is in the county of Arra-
wata, and police district of Inverell. There are
through means of communication to Queensland.
From Sydney the route is by steamer to Newcastle,
rail thence to Armidale, from there coach and
conveyance. Hotel : Carroll’s. Public building:
the Court-house. The country is taken up by farms
and stations, but is well suited for wine-growing.
Population about 100. Formation : trap.
AVISFORL, a postal town, on the Meroo river,
in the county of Wellington, and police district of
Hargreaves, and electorate of Mudgee, 186 miles
NW. of Sydney. It has a Provisional school,
average attendance 20, and a population, includ-
ing Chinese, of about 150, scattered over the dis-
trict, which is a mining one. Coach from the
Mudgee railway station is the moans of access.
Formation : granite, slate and sandstone.
BACK CREEK. See Copeland North.
BALLINA (28°50'S. lat. 153' 30' E. long.) is a
seaport town, situated on the north side of the
entrance of the Richmond River, 330 {364 postal)
miles N. of Sydney, and 30 miles N. of Clarence
river, in the police-district of Richmond river, county
of Rous. Population of town and neighbourhood
about 800. The river was opened upwards of 40
years ago, by sawyers adventuring into the dense
brushes in search of cedar ; and, until a few
years since, little was exported except cedar, tallow,
and hides, which were shipped to Sydney by sailing
vessels, of which there were then about twenty em-
ployed. Since that period a large trade has sprung
up with Sydney, Victoria, Adelaide, and New Zealand
for the supply of cedar, pine, and beech ; and it is esti -
mated that the cedar brushes of the Richmond have
produced some of the finest supplies of the timbers
enumerated, as well as a larger quantity than has
been shipped from all the other rivers _ of the
colony. A pilot with a crew of four men is here.
On the North Head is exhibited a revolving white
light from a substantial stone tower, with light-
keeper.-,’ quarters. There is direct communication
with Sydney by steamers, which run up to Coraki
and Lismore weekly ; river steamers from the
former, taking on the goods for Casino and the
Upper Richmond. Steamtugs under Government
subsidy tow vessels in and out over the bar (which
is constantly shifting ; the average depth being eight
feet). Several river steamers are employed, some
of which run daily up to Lismore, a distance
of seventy miles. Mail communication with Sydney
by steamer, and also twice a week vid Woodburn
and Clarence river heads. There is a telegraph station,
post-office, with money-order office and savings bank
attached ; branches of the Joint-Stock and Commer-
cial Banks, a Church of England, capable of ac-
commodating 140 persons, a school of arts with
library of 550 volumes, a court-house, with lock-up.
Masonic Hall, and a public school, with an average
attendance of 103. There are six hotels, Commercial,
Star, Royal, and others, and several good stores,
also several insurance agencies and a marine sur-
veyor. Large quantities of maize and sugar are
now sent from the river, and the latter industry is
largely on the increase,—there being six steam mills
on the North Creek, eight more at Woodburn, eight
in the Big Scrub, the large mill belonging to the
Colonial Sugar Company at Broadwater, besides
others higher up the river, all of which have been
erected by private enterprise, while others are pro-
jected in several directions. The road between Bal-
lina and Lismore, a distance of twenty miles, and
passing through the Big Brush, is travelled over by a
mail coach, affording an agreeable drive to those who
wish to see the country and some of the finest land
in New South Wales. The climate of Ballina is cer-
tainly second to none in New South Wales, and especi-
ally suitable to the sugar cane. Land is now much
sought for in the Big Scrub ; the same description of
rich brush soil extends some thirty miles north, past
the Brunswick, —in some of the creeks running
into which river gold was found lately, but,
with the appliances to hand, they could not be
properly prospected, in consequence of the diffi-
culty of keeping down the water. Gold reefs are
known to exist in the Big Scrub, which only
await enterprise and capital to turn them to ac-
count Along the coast, both north and south of
the Richmond, very fine gold, in payable quantities,
is washed from the sand and gravel for a short dis-
tance beyond high-water mark, leading to the sup-
position that gold-bearing quartz reefs are covered
by the sea in the neighbourhood.
BALMAIN, a populous suburb of Sydney, on
the western shores of Darling harbour, which is here
from one to two miles broad. Steam ferries ply
throughout the day, fare, 3d. There is also land com-
munication, though by rather a circuitous route, over
Pyrmont Bridge. From its picturesque situation
Balmain has long been a favourite residence with
the citizens of Sydney. Some of the most extensive
workshops 1 of the colony are located here- Mort’s
Dry Dock, chemical and gas works, and numerous
ship and boat-building yards. There are upwards
of 20 hotels, branches of the N. S. Wales and
Australasia Banks, a school of arts with 550
volumes, a working-men’s institute with 550
volumes, three large public schools, with average
attendance of 1.734 scholars, Episcopal and
Roman Catholic schools, several religious edifices,
and a telegraph, money-order and savings bank
office. There is also a convent, with chapel
and school. Newspaper : Balmain Independent.
The area of the municipality of Balmain is under
a square mile. It was proclaimed February 21,
1860 ; it is divided into four wards, and has 50
miles of roads ; rateable property is valued at
£2,000,000. Population (census 1881) 16,928.
BALRANALD lies on the north bank of the
Murrumbidgee, 054 miles (591 postal) to the SW. of
Sydney, the route to which is via Hay, from


which there is a bi-weekly coach, fare, 605., or it can
be arrived at by way of Melbourne and Denili-
quin. It is about 120 miles distant from the
two terminal railway stations. It is in the
county of Caira, and police district of Balranald.
The district is mainly a pastoral one, but some por-
tions are being brought under cultivation. In 1884
the stock returns for the electoral district were 8,538
horses, 18,468 cattle, 3,354,975 sheep, and 943 pigs.
The population of the township is 640, with neigh-
bourhood it is 1,200. It has a postal,[telegraph, savings
bank, and money-order office, and is a principal coach-
ing centre. Hotels: Royal, Carriers’ Arms, Balra-
nald, Commercial, and Bridgehouse. Banks : Aus-
tralian Joint-Stock and London Chartered. It has
■Episcopal, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian and Wes-
leyan Churches, a public school (average attendance
58), a court-house (where court of petty sessions is
held once a week), police barracks, a hospital, and
numerous stores. Newspaper: The Riverina Recorder.
Formation: limestone.
BANDON GROVE) a post town in the county
of Gloucester, electoral and police district of Dungog,
in 32° 25' 8. lat., and 151° 42' B. long., 138 miles N. of
Sydney. It lies on the E. side of the river, at the
junction of the Chichester and the Williams, and con-
tains one Dissenting place of worship, one store
and a public school, with average attendance 34,
but no public buildings. Population of town and
neighbourhood about 250. The traveller reaches
Sydney by horse to Dungog, or via Clarence Town,
thence per coach to Maitland, or by way of Morpeth.
The surrounding land is rough, rugged, and scrubby,
of sandstone and granite formation, but fitted for
agricultural and pastoral pursuits. Coarse nuggety
gold has been found on the Little River, 7 miles
away.
BANKSTOWN, a post town in the county of
Cumberland, electoral district of Central Cumber-
land, and police district of Liverpool, 12 miles dis-
tant 8. from the Sydney post-office. The George’s
river is 3 miles from here, and the Burwood railway
station 5 miles. .In the township are two churches
—Roman Catholic and Church of England—one store,
a public school (with average attendance of 33), and
two hotels. Population of the district within a mile
radius, 300.
BAEADINE, a postal, telegraph and money-
order station, 240 miles (408 by rail) N. of Sydney, and
30 miles NW. from Coonabarabran; communication is
by coach and rail from Gunnedah and Wellington.
It is on the creek of the same name, in the elec-
toral and police district of Namoi. Surrounding
country used for grazing; good agricultural land on
the bank of the Creek. Hotels : Telegraph, and
Briggs. Public school, with average attendance of
11, and three stores. Population 80, of district 170.
Formation : new sandstone ranges.
BARMEDMAN, a postal, money-order, and
telegraph township, 306 miles SW. of Sydney, and 22
miles NW. of Temora, in the electorate and police
district of Grenfell; mail coach runs three times a
week to Cootamundra railway station. The only in-
dustryis quartz mining. Hotels are the Queensland,
Barmedman, and Melbourne Club. There is a public
school here, with average attendance 27, also a court
house and police barracks. Population about 350.
BARRABA, a postal township in the county
of Darling, electoral and police district of Tamworth,
has telegraph, savings bank, and money-order office,
311 miles N, of Sydney on the Manilla river. Tam-
worth, the nearest railway station and place of im-
portance, is 60 miles distant SB.; daily coach com-
munication ; coach fare, 87s. Hotels : Court House
and Royal. Bank: Commercial. Public school,
average attendance 24, four stores and one church
(Episcopalian). There are some alluvial and quartz
diggings a few miles off, but the district is mainly
occupied by farms and stations. Population about
230. Formation : principally blue slate intermixed
with quartz.
BARRINGTON, a postal centre in the county
of Gloucester, electoral and police district of Cope-
land North, 160 miles N. of Sydney, on the Barrington
river. Communication is by coach, fare, 18s. 9d. to
Raymond Terrace, thence per steamer, or via Hex-
ham. It has one school (average attendance 35).
Mountainous and rocky district, with some patches
of alluvial soil, held principally by farmers on lease.
The Copeland gold fields lay about six miles north.
BARRINGUN, a border township, post, tele-
graph, and money-order station, in the county of
Culgoa, electoral district of Bourke, and partly in
Queensland territory 640 (698 by rail) miles NW. of
Sydney. Mode of conveyance per coach via
Bourke and Nyngan, thence per rail. Barringun
is situated on Barringun creek, a tributary of the
Warrego, two miles E. of the Warrego, on the
29th parallel of latitude—the boundary between
New South Wales and Queensland. The buildings
on the New South Wales side are composed of
bonded warehouse, post and telegraph offices, two
hotels—Royal Mail and Queensland, branch of Com-
mercial Bank, a brewery, two butchers’, shops, and a
few private cottages. There are two hotels and a
Custom station on the Queensland side of border.
Mr. Cameron, the geodetic surveyor from Syd-
ney, defined the boundary— i.e., the 29th parallel
of latitude to the South Australian territory, a
distance of 285 miles to the west of this place—by
cutting a breach of about one chain in width in the
timbered country and placing adzed posts at each
mile, showing the distance from the Warrego, the
starting point; every ten miles is marked by an
obelisk made of mortar, 18in. high and securely
fenced in. Barringun is the point at which it is
proposed to connect the Western Railway of
N. 8. W. with the South-Western of Queensland,
and the principal stock route from Queensland to
Southern markets. The country around is well
grassed, and is noted as a good camp for travelling
stock en route from Queensland to the Southern
markets. Population about 200.
BATEMAN’S BAY, a seaport, postal village,
telegraph and money-order town, in the county of
St. Vincent, situate on the Clyde river, near its
entrance into the bay, 130 miles (200 by the railway)
S. of Sydney, and 20 miles N. of Moruya. Steamer
communication with the metropolis once a week.
Goulbum is the nearest railway station. The ex-
tensive saw-mills of Mr. P. Guy and several others
afford constant trade to three or four vessels.
Population about 260. Churches : English, Pres-
byterian and Roman Catholic. Hotels; Union and
Mariners. There is a public school here, with
average attendance of 43, and three stores. The
bay forms a fine harbour of refuge, two large islands
protecting it from the S. and E. Formation ; pud-
ding stone and gravel. The district is noted for
its fine quality of timber, oysters, wattle bark, and
fish.
BATHURST (33° 25' S. lat., 149° 42' B. long.),
so named by Governor Macquarie on May 7th,
1815, in honour of Lord Bathurst, then Secretary
of State for the Colonies, is the principal town
in the western district of N. S. Wales. It is
situated on the south bank of the Macquarie river, i
on high ground, 2,153 feet above the sea-level, sur-
rounded by hills, and is distant from Sydney 144
miles, nearly due west. It is in direct communica-
tion by rail with Sydney, two trains daily ; fares,
255. 3d., 16s. 9d., and also with Nyngan via Dubbo.
Bathurst may be considered the third town of the
colony, and its importance is steadily increasing. It
has numerous well laid-out streets of ample width
(1J chain), crossing each other at right angles,
with a square in the centre planted with trees.
The principal thoroughfares are George and
William Streets. The public buildings are very
numerous, and metropolitan almost in their cha-
racter ; they comprise several places of worship—the
Anglican Cathedral, a brick building with a peal of
bells, the Wesleyan Chapel, the Roman Catholic
Cathedral and Convent (Sisters of Mercy), the Pres-
byterian Church, Congregational Church, Baptist
Church, and others; two large and commodious
Government buildings—one for a post-office and the
other for a telegraph-office ; court-house—a massive
pile of buildings—gaol and Town Hall; numerous
schools, a School of Arts, having a library of 7,709
vols., and a good lecture-hall; the Joint-Stock, N. S.
Wales, City and Commercial Banks ; the Hospital (a
new building, the largest out of Sydney, “ a splen-
didly placed and handsome structure ”), the hotels


(the Royal, Metropolitan, and Club House being
the leading), and very many well-built and hand-
somely fitted up stores and business premises. The
city possesses a good cricket-ground, a fine reserve for
horse-racing, and well laid-out Agricultural Society’s
ground. The cemeteries for the various denomina-
tions are in the neighbourhood of the town.
Bathurst was erected into a municipality on
November 13th, 1862. There are 40 miles of roads
and streets in the city; value of rateable
property is £1,000,000. Population 7,221. The
country surrounding Bathurst may be described
as agricultural and pastoral, consisting of extensive
fertile plains, very productive, and especially suited to
the growth of cereal crops, but mining is also very
largely carried on, though not in the immediate vici-
nity. Valuable slate quarries are worked within 13
miles of the city. By a late return 22,374 acres of
land in the district were under cultivation, the pro-
duce being 126,870 bushels of wheat, 10,304 of maize,
2,734 of barley, 5,286 of oats, 612 tons of potatoes,
124 cwt. of tobacco. Stock returns were, 6,359 horses,
13,442 cattle, 131,458 sheep, 2,386 pigs. The yield
of gold for 1883 was 883 ounces, valued at £1,877
Bs. Id. In the neighbouring gold-fields of Wattle
Plat and Sofala, Hill End and Tambaroora,
Chambers’ and Cheshire’s Creeks, Newbridge,
Trunkey, Tuena, the Abercrombie, Caloola, and
Rockley, as well as at the copper mines of Cow
Plat and Campbell’s river, a large number of per-
sons are resident. Newspapers : Bathurst Free
Frees, Bathurst Times, Western Independent (daily,
printed by steam power), Record, and Sentinel.
The manufactories in Bathurst are several tan-
neries, coach factories, Government railway
workshops, breweries and five flour mills. Soap,
candles, glue, boots and shoes, and furniture are also
manufactured extensively in the town. Since June,
1872, the city has been lighted with gas, and prepara-
tions are being made for a permanent water supply
to the city. There are Anglican (Dr. Marsden) and
Roman Catholic (Dr. Quinn) Bishops of Bathurst.
The city is better provided with colleges, schools,
and other educational establishments than any
other town of the same population in the colony.
The public school has an average attendance of
835. A High School for advanced pupils has been
added.
BEGA is situated on the banks of the Bega
river, 10 miles distant from the seaport of Tathra,
with which there is telegraphic communication, and
256 miles SW. of Sydney. Coach to Tathra and Eden,
thence by steamer, are the means of communication
with Sydney. The journey can also be performed by
coach to Upper Tarago, and thence by railway. It has
a postal, money-order, and Government savings bank
office and telegraph station, in the county of Auck-
land and electoral district of Eden ; has daily mail
communication with Sydney. There are four places
of worship—St. John’s (Church of England), St. Pa-
trick’s (Roman Catholic),' a Presbyterian church,
built of stone, and a Wesleyan chapel of brick.
The Church of England is a handsome brick edifice
erected at a cost of about £3,000. It affords ac-
commodation for nearly 300 persons. Each of.
the other edifices has accommodation for 150 to
200 hearers, and with the exception of the Episcopal
Church are all in Gipps Street. Other public build-
ings comprise the Court house, a handsome build-
ing, which cost £3,000 —the Public School, in Auck-
land Street, with average attendance of 272, School
of Arts, built of brick at a cost of £1,700, with
library of 2,140 vols., a convent school with an at-
tendance of 150, and seven inns—Commercial, Bega,
Club, Royal, Bank, Queen’s, and Imperial. The Bank
of N.S. Wales, Commercial and Australian Joint Stock
Banks have branches here, and there are 7 stores. The
district is largely occupied by farms, and the export to
Sydney of dairy produce is considerable, and on the
increase. The Bega Gazette and Bega Standard are
the local papers. The population numbers 2,050 ; in-
clusive of the district, there are 7,000 persons. Two
tan yards, a brick yard, soap and candle works, and
three saw-mills represent the industries. In addition
to these several large cheese factories are in operation.
The cheese from these factories commands a high
price in the market. Thousands of pigs are yearly
exported via Eden to Melbourne, cattle and pigs to
Tasmania, and hams and bacon to Sydney. Twenty-
five miles N. is the settlement of Cobargo, the
centre of the “wattle bark” industry. Bermagui
is the port for this township. South-West, 15 miles,
is Candelo, which is on the high road from the
coast to Monaro. Twelve miles further on is Tanta-
wangalo, where the ascent of the mountain leading
to the Monaro table-land commences. Magnificent
scenery here greets the eye of the traveller, and the
flora is remarkably comprehensive ; musk, ferns,
wild flowers, and splendid “stringy bark” timber
clothe the hillsides. Most of the country is “free
selected.” Bega is reputed to be one of the prettiest
and most healthy places in the colony. Formation :
granite.
BELFORD, a post town on Jump-up Creek, in
the county of Northumberland, and police district
of Singleton. It is situated in 32° 30' S. lat. and
151° 15' B. long., 115 miles N. of Sydney, 39 from
Newcastle, lies 169 feet above sea-level, and is a plat-
form on the Great Northern Railway. Fares from
Newcastle, 6s. 6d., 4s. 3d. It has two public schools,
average attendance 29. Population about 220. The
country around is sandy loam overlying yellow clay,
below which is slatey rock mixed with pipeclay;
its features are undulating and pleasing; on one side
the Bothbery mountain shuts in the view, brush land
bounding the other sides. The soil is poor and im-
pregnated with nitre. The vine is largely cultivated
by the German portion of the inhabitants.
BELMONT, a post town, with Government
savings bank and money-order office, situated on
the shores of Lake Macquarie, 93 miles N. of Sydney,
and about 12 miles from Newcastle, of which it is
destined to become the Brighton. It is in the
county and electoral district of Northumberland,
There is an hotel here, the Belmont, several board-
ing-houses, and a public school, with average attend-
ance of 28. Services are held regularly by Episco-
palians and other denominations. Population
about 150.
BENDEMEEB, a township on the banks of
the Muluerindie river (which is crossed by a hand-
some bridge), on the main Northern Road, distant
from Sydney N. 273 miles, and from Armidale 45
miles, in the county of Inglis, electoral district of
New England, and police district of Armidale.
Communication is by coach to Moonbi(fare, 12s. 6d.),
thence rail to Newcastle, and steamer. The town
contains a few stores, two hotels (Glover’s and the
Telegraph), a public school, with average attendance
of 50, Presbyterian and Roman Catholic Churches,
and Court House. The surrounding country is more
or less auriferous. There are numerous stations in
the district; farming is not much followed. It is a
telegraph, money-order, and postal station, and is a
place of petty sessions. About 220 persons represent
the population. The Giant’s Den tin mine, 14 miles
distant, is now at work, also Watson's Creek mine,
12 miles distant.
BEKRIMA is a township, and has a telegraph
station, Government savings bank, and money-order
office, on the Wingecarribee river, on the main Southern
Road, at an elevation of about 2,300 feet above
sea-level. It is 83 miles distant from Sydney SW.,
with which the connection is by coach to Moss Vale
railway station, distant four miles. The buildings
comprise two stone churches. Episcopal and Roman
Catholic ; two hotels—Commercial and Surveyor-
General ; a commodious court-house, a large gaol (con-
ducted under what is known as the “ silent system ”),
a branch of the Commercial Bank, a public school with
average attendance of 53, and several stores and well-
built houses. Population about 450 ; of the police dis-
trict (census 1881), 7,196. A rich mineral district sur-
rounds Berrima. Some promising seams of coal have
already been opened out, about four miles from the
town, and a company has been formed called the
Berrima Coal and Railway Company, Limited, with
a capital of £lB,OOO, to work a coal mine and con-
nect it by tramway to Moss Vale. The mine was
formally opened on March 18, 1882, the yield for 1883
being 13,341 tons, valued at £6,670. Enormous
deposits of the best kind of iron ore exist in the
district, and in the neighbourhood of Goulbum
there are beds of copper which, with the iron ore.


rima, by the Kerosine Shale Company. The company cial Bank has a branch here, there is a flour mill,
have about 40 retorts at work, and a large plant eight stores, a gaol, and a saw mill. The public
connected with the G. S. Railway at Mittagong by a school has an average attendance of 89 scholars,
tramway (locomotive) 16 miles in length. The Churches: Episcopalian, Roman Catholic, and Wes-
mineral is reputed to be one of the best of the kind leyan. The district abounds with gold, copper, and
in the world. Much land in the police district has diamonds. The ;search for the latter has not been
been taken up for agricultural purposes, and the soil great, but large numbers of small ones have been
in some parts being very suitable, the district will found. Population, 420. Local newspaper, Bingera
in time become one of the most productive in the Telegraph.
colony. In 1884, 23,663 acres of land were cropped, BLACKTOWN, a post and telegraph township
the produce being 1,584 bushels of wheat, 5,070 of in the county of Cumberland, electorate of Central
maize, 384 of barley,J 2,335 of oats, and 1,786 tons Cumberland, and police district of Parramatta, 22
of potatoes. Stock returns (1884) —3,654 horses, miles W. of Sydney. It is a station on the Great
30,943 cattle, 18,752 sheep, 4,975 pigs. Western Railway (fares, 2s. 2d., Is. 3d.), being the
BETHUNGKRA, a small postal town, with junction of the Western with Richmond line, and
telegraph and money order office, in the county of has two hotels, a public school, with average attend-
Clarendon, 268 miles S. of Sydney, on the main road ance of 48 scholars, two or three stores, and one
between Junee and Cootamundra (1,051 feet above place of worship (Church of England). The sur-
sea-level). Public school here, with average atten- rounding country is mostly laid out for vineyards
dance of 23 scholars. It is a station on the Great and fruit and orange orchards. Formation : clay.
Southern Railway ; fares, 475. 6d., 31s. 9d. Popula- BLANDPOED, a small postal township and
110. telegraph station in the county of Brisbane, police
BIBBENLUKE, a post town in the county of district of Murrurundi, and electoral district of
Wellesley, situated on the river whose name it the Hunter, on the Page river, 188 miles N. of
bears, about 307 miles (322 postal) S. of Sydney. Sydney, about 4 miles from the Murrurundi rail-
Hotel: the Bibbenluke. The district is both of a way station, and is itself a railway station; fares
pastoral and agricultural character. The township to Newcastle (115 miles), 20s. 9d., 13s. 9d. It lies
proper is on the east side of the river, and at present 1,382 feet above sea-level. It contains a post
contains but few buildings. Public school here, office, one inn (Plough), two wine shops, a de-
average attendance 22. The Bibbenluke station is nominational school (R.C.), one store, a brick
on the west side of the river, where accommodation Episcopal church, and a public school, with average
is given for church purposes. Population of the attendance of 20. The surrounding district is good
neighbouring farms and stations is about 100. Com- grazing, agricultural and vine-producing country,
mumcation is vid Merimbula, Cooma and Goulburn. well watered, and encircled by lofty ranges. Popu-
Upper Tarago is the nearest railway station. lation about 50, of the district 200. There is a kero-
BILLABONGr is in the county of Ashbum- sine mine within 8 miles of the township, and a
ham, electoral and police district of Forbes, 250 silver and lead one within 12 miles; copper has been
miles WNW. of Sydney, 2£ miles from Goobang found in the neighbouring hills, but notin paying"
Creek, on the main road to the Bogan, and 2 miles quantities.
N. of Parkes, whence the metropolis is reached. BLAYNEY, a telegraph, savings bank, and
Ihe formation of the district is principally trap and money-order township, 172 miles W. of Sydney,
slate, and allows of farming, grazing and mining and 22 miles SW. of Bathurst, situated on the
operations being carried on with success. The au- Belabula river. It is elevated 2,841 feet above the
nferous ground extends over a very large area. The sea-level, and is a station on the Western line ;
agricultural land is unsurpassed, and is also un- fares, 30s. 3d., 20s. Bank : Commercial. Hotels :
equalled for fruit vine growing. The timber is Royal, Criterion, Exchange, and others, and there
principally box, currajong, myall, and pine. are six stores. Places of Worship: Anglican,
BILLABONG, LITTLE. See Little Billa.- Presbyterian, Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic. News-
B °TiTn.T a t rvxr. papers : The Advocate and The Argus. Public school
BUM ALONGr, a postal township, with savings has average attendance of 148 scholars. The soiliswell
bank, money-order office, telegraph office, and rail- adapted for agricultural purposes, wheat being princi-
way station on the Southern Line, 208 miles SW. of pally grown, which gives employment to two large
Sydney, on the banks of the Bungalal creek, about flourmills. There are several stations in the district,
-.1 miles from lass NW. ; fares, 375., 245. 6d. It is in and gold digging, both alluvial and quartz, is carried
the county of Harden, electoral and police district on in the neighbourhood. Population of town and
ot Burrowa, and “ stands on an eminence, 1,568 feet vicinity, 900. An extensive copper mine is on the
above sea level, with wooded hills sweeping in borders of the town.
graceful undulatwns around it.” Hotels : Com- BODALLA, a postal, telegraph, Government
merciai, Golden Fleece, Great Southern, Railway, savings bank, and money-order village on the Tuross
and Swan. Public buildings: Roman Catholic church river, and on the Main Southern Road 212 miles SW.
(ot stone), a pubhe school, with average attendance of Sydney, the route to which can be either by con-
ot 25, court-house, police quarters, and railway sta- veyance to Moruya, 20 miles, thence steamer ; or by
t*on. ”6tty Sessions court held fortnightly. Popu- coach to Braidwood, thence per coach and rail.
mu oUt 18 I’ . at of the entire district is about Upper Tarago is the nearest railway station.
,050. Ihe country is occupied by farms and stations. Hotel: Bodalla Arms. Public school has an average
T ormation ; principally granite. Coaches ply to and attendance of 39 scholars. The neighbouring country
daily; fare, 7s. 6d. is auriferous, but has not been much worked. Agri-
o B-I-bl VX.E.KA, a township 352 miles NW. from cultural and pastoral pursuits are principally fol-
bydney, situated on the Gwydir River, possessing a lowed. At Comerang is the late Mr. Mort’s estate,
011 ! 6 ’ w i, ler ® Petty Sessions are held daily, from which large quantities of bacon and cheese
ana Quarter Sessions are also held. There is reach Sydney. The farm is about 20,000 acres
a telegraph, money-order, and post office, in extent, and carries upwards of 2,000 head of
• l i, k V^ Se X e , l ?A gold fi ? lds are in dairy cattle. The mechanical arrangements for the
r> „ .7’ vl ?;’ P°t*by Whitlow, 8 miles distant; manufacture of the cheese are of a superior order -
’ Upper !6 miles, from which A memorial church, in remembrance of Mr. Mort,
ofiti d i • ge quantities of gold have been found, has been erected on the estate, where service is con-
„;“ akln K. hhail Horne ! orne r et “ rns ; but the diamond ducted by the resident chaplain. Population about
holds are now the centre of attraction, several com- 400
b f. ng in ,. fud working order. The diamonds BOGGABEJ (30°40'S. lat., 150° 8.10ng.), apost,
frorr, f n V. but 4 The route to Bingera money-order, telegraph town, and railway station
y yis by steamer to Newcastle, thence in the county of Pottinger, electoral and police dis-


trict of Gunnedah, at the junction of Cox’s creek
and the Namoi river, 292 miles NW. of Sydney, to
which train, and steamer from Newcastle are the
means of communication. It lies 822 feet above
sea level. Fares from Newcastle (220 miles),
40s. 6d., 275. Population about 400. Hotels : Aus-
tralian Arms, Royal, and Court House ; also a court-
house, one public school, with average attendance
of 82 scholars, a union church, and five stores.
Pastoral and agricultural district; selectors are still
taking up the country, soil being chiefly level allu-
vial plains of great fertility.
BOLONG. See Bomadary.
BOMADARY, or BOMADEERY, for-
merly Bolong, a post town in the county of Camden,
electorate and police district of Shoalhaven, 110
miles S. of Sydney. It has a public school, with
average attendance of 41 scholars, one hotel, and
about 500 residents in township and neighbourhood.
It is a farming district of trap formation, and is
described as “a very pretty place, out of the reach
of floods, with plenty of good water.” Moss Vale
is the railway station for the locality.
BOMB ALA, a leading township in the Monaro
district on the Bombala river, 312 miles SSW. of
Sydney. It is in the county of Wellesley, police dis-
trict of Bombala, and electoral district of Monaro.
Population now upwards of 700. The country
surrounding Bombala is occupied by farms and
stations. Gold mining is carried on at the Delegate
diggings, a few miles distant. Lead, silver and copper
are found at Quedong, about 16 miles distant. The
Herald and the Times are the newspapers. Steamer to
Eden or Merimbula, fare, £2; thence coach, fare, 255.
are the means of travelling from Sydney, or by coach
from the Upper Tarago railway station,rid Cooma and
Queanbeyan ; coach fare, 70s. It has a telegraph and
money-order, as well as Government Savings Bank
office. The Anglican, Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, and
Presbyterian bodies have each a church in the town-
ship, the first and last named edifices being handsome
buildings. There is a public school, with average at-
tendance of 94, two private schools, a School of Arts,
with a handsome hall, and library of 880 vols., and
also a court-house, the Court of Petty Sessions sitting
every Wednesday ; the District Court sits three times
in the year. Much land has been taken up by selec-
tors, but the bulk of the country is used for grazing
purposes. The Commercial, N. S. Wales, and Aus-
tralian Joint Stock Banks have branches here.
Hotels—Commercial, Australian, Imperial,and Globe.
There are several local societies, Agricultural,
Dramatic Club, Masonic, Oddfellows, and Sons of
Temperance. There are 13 stores in the township
itself, and several in the outskirts. There are also
two stearn flour-mills and a tannery. The post towns
in the neighbourhood are Delegate, Craigie, Tombong,
Bibbenluke, and Cathcart. Three steam saw-mills
are in operation about twelve miles from Bombala.
The district has some very valuable timber for
building purposes. The Bombala bridge has four
girders, each 104 ft. long, hewn from trees grow-
ing in the neighbourhood.
BOOKHAM, a post town in the county of Har-
den, police district of Binalong, and electorate of
Yass Plains, located on the Bogolong creek, 206
miles S. of Sydney, on the Great Southern road.
There are two hotels (Bookham and Bogolong), a
Presbyterian Church, and a public school, with
average attendance of ten, but no large or public
buildings ; population about 200. Means of com-
munication with Sydney is by coach to Bowning
railway station, twelve miles distant. District
is principally pastoral, but recently lead, silver,
copper, and iron have been found ; and the working
of these minerals is likely to bring the place into
some celebrity. Formation : granite, sandstone,
limestone, slate, and ridges of quartz, with very rich
limestone.
BOOLIGAL, a postal town, with telegraph sta-
tion, and money order office, 544 miles W. of Sydney,
and about 50 miles N. of Hay, situated on the
Lachlan river. Cobb’s coach connects with the
train at Deniliquin and Hay; coach fare to Hay,
20s. Public school here, average attendance 29, and
two hotels. It is an important crossing place for
stock. Population, 150.
BOEAMBIL (32° S. lat., 160° E. long.), a village
about 2£ miles from Cassilis and 225 miles (301 postal)
NW. of Sydney, in the county of Bligh, electoral
district of Upper Hunter, and police district of
Cassilis. It has a store, butcher’s, and blacksmith’s
shops, and about 100 residents. Muswellbrook is
the nearest railway station. Conveyance to Sydney:
Coach to Orange, rail thence.
BOTANY BAY, a large shallow sheet of
water some 20 miles in extent, 15 miles distant S.
from Port Jackson Heads, and five miles S. of
Sydney. It has an historic interest arising from
being the place where Captain Cook anchored
the Endeavour, on Saturday, April 28th, 1770,
and afterwards took possession of New South
Wales in the narne’of the British Crown. The site
of his landing on the southern shore of the Bay
is now marked by a monument. It was named by
Captain Cook, who says, “ The great quantity of
plants which Mr. Banks and Dr. Solan der collected
in this place induced me to give it the name
of Botany Bay.” On the western side is a fine
beach, known as Lady Robinson’s Beach. In the
village of Botany is a money-order, telegraph, post,
and savings bank office, a Mechanics’ Institute with
library of 500 vols., two public schools with an
average attendance of 126, and a superior hotel, with
well laid out gardens, much frequented by picnic
and other parties. The tramway now connects it
with Sydney.
BOIJRKE (30° 5' S. lat., 145" 55'E. long.) is situ-
ated on the southern bank of the Darling river, 574
miles NW. from Sydney. It is in the county of Cowper,
and police district of Bourke: and has a post, money-
order, Government savings bank, and telegraph office,
Gongolgon, on the River Bogan, 60 miles distant
BE., has a population of 90. Enngonia is 65 miles
distant, due North, and only 30 miles from the
Queensland border. The communication is by rail to
Nyngan, thence coach ; coach fare, 110 s. 6d. The rail-
way from Nyngan is now constructing. The town
of Bourke is rising, and is now incorporated. The
Commercial, New South Wales, London Chartered,
Joint-Stock, and Mercantile Banks have branches
here. The principal hotels are the Royal and
Tattersall’s. The latter is the starting place and
booking office for the coaches to Sydney,
Barringun, 6c. Newspapers ; Central Australian
and Bourke Telegraph and Bourke Watchman. The
Mechanics’ Institute has 1,100 vols. Churches ;
Church of England and Roman Catholic; Schools,
one public and one Catholic (the former has
an average attendance of 104 scholars) ; Government
buildings ; court-house, post-office and gaol, and there
is a hospital. Bourke, being the centre of an ex-
tensive and wealthy pastoral and copper mining dis-
trict, is becoming a place of importance. When the
river is navigable steamers ply from Adelaide. Bourke
is connected, commercially, with Sydney, Queensland,
South Australia, and Victoria. A District Court
is held twice a year, a Court of Quarter Sessions
is also held, and a District Insolvent Court.
The district is mainly occupied by sheep and cattle
stations. The plains are well grassed in all ordinary
seasons, and there are considerable tracts of salt bush.
Population about 4,140 (census 1881). The Bourke
district embraces the eastern portion of the pas-
toral district of Albert, the western and southern
portions of Warrego, and the northern portion of
Wellington. The want of rain is often felt severely.
Within the last few years the district has been
discovered to be rich in metals. Copper ore, of a
remarkably rich character, and in great abundance,
proves the value of the district, and the quartz reefs
which are visible in many parts have been found to
contain gold.—West Bourke is a new township on
the west side of the Darling, 3 miles distant, having
several stores and three hotels. There has been
erected there a bridge, for which unfortunately
the wrong site was selected, and it is there-
fore of little use. In the electoral district are de-
pastured, by the returns for year ending March 31,,
1884, 11,057 horses, 98,804 cattle, 5,013,937 sheep, and
1,909 pigs. In the Bourke municipal district (pro-
claimed July 3, 1878) the value of rateable property
is £226,770.
BOWENFELS, a money-order, Government


savings bank,. and telegraph township, in the
county of Cook, electoral district of Hartley and
police district of Lithgow, 97 miles W. (100 postal) of
Sydney, with which it is in direct railway communi-
cation ; fares, 16s. 3d. and 10s. 9d. It lies 2,972 feet
above the sea-level, at the junction of the Bathurst
and Mudgee roads, and is situated on the Cox’s river.
Population about 400. There is a public school
(average attendance 40), Presbyterian and Wes-
leyan chapels, one hotel (Wood’s Family), and two
boarding-houses. The district is both agricultural
and pastoral; there are also large deposits of coal
and kerosine shale in the vicinity. Not far from here
are the works of the Lithgow Valley Iron Company,
consisting of a blast and puddling furnace, a 70-h. p.
engine, and appliances, besides a foundry and rolling
mills for turning out castings, railway, and bar iron.
A Tweed Factory is here, employing a large number
of hands.
BOWNA, a post town and railway station (latter
is 4 miles from the township), with telegraph and
money-order office, in the county of Goulburn,
police and electoral district of Albury, 378 miles SW.
of Sydney. Fares, 755. 3d., and 51s. 3d. It is on the
Mullingandra creek, near its junction with Twelve
Mile creek, and is distant two miles from the Mur-
ray river and 12 from Albury. The Upper Murray
road joins the main southern road at this point.
There are two places of worship, Presbyterian and
Roman Catholic; at the former the Episcopalians
also hold their services ; one hotel (White Horse), 2
stores, 2 blacksmith premises ; one public school
(average attendance 47), and one Roman Catholic;
also a steam flour mill and police station. No
public buildings of any size. Most of the land in
the vicinity is occupied by free-selectors, and the
farming prospects are good. Much attention is
being paid to dairying. Kerosine shale has been
found at Tabletop, 3 miles from Bowna. Population
of district about 200.
BOWNIN Gr,a post town, with money-order office,
telegraph, savings bank, and railway station, in the
county of Harden, police and electoral district of
Yass, lying 1,804 feet above sea-level, on the Great
Southern Railway, 194 miles 8. of Sydney, on a
creek of the same name, distant from Yass
about seven miles. Bowning is at the foot of Mt.
Bowning. There are several selections taken up in
the' neighbourhood, which is suitable country for
both stock and cropping. Railway fares, 345. 6d.,
225. 9d. Public school (average attendance 53), an
Episcopalian church, two stores, two hotels, and a
police station. Geological formation, limestone ; in-
dications of copper abound in the vicinity. Popu-
lation 190.
BOWRAL, county and electorate of Camden,
is a post town, with money-order office, and telegraph
station, with a branch of the Commercial Bank, 80
miles 8. of Sydney, lying 2,171 feet above sea level. It
is a station on the Southern line,fares, 135., and Bs. 6d.,
and has two hotels (Royal and Commercial), a public
school with an average attendance of 95, three
places of worship, Church of England, Wesleyan,
and Primitive Methodist, and several stores. The
fourth estate being represented by the Bowral Free
Press and Bowral Intelligence. Population about 600,
but during summer months about, 900, the town
being a favourite resort for metropolitan gentry.
BRAIDWOOD, the name of a town and dis-
trict, being in the County of Vincent, and its chief
town adjoining the Counties of Argyle and Murray,
on the West and North-West, and the County of
Camden on the North, extending to the sea on the
East, and on the South being bounded by the County
of Dampier. Other towns in the district are Araluen,
Major’s Creek, and Mongarlow. Braid wood is on the
Jillimatong creek, and has money-order, telegraph,
and savings bank facilities, is 189 miles to the SSW. of
Sydney, and situated 3,357 feet above the sea-level.
The population of the town is about 1,066 ; of dis-
trict 6,965; it contains 9 stores, 3 tanneries, 4
boot factories, 2 lemonade and cordial factories,
2 flour mills, and other places of business.
The public buildings comprise a court-house, gaol,
hospital, St. Andrew’s Church, St. Bede’s, and
the Wesleyan, Baptist, and Presbyterian chapels.
The public school has an average attendance
of 143. Bank ; New South Wales ; there is a
literary institute with 3,203 vols., 2 newspapers,
Braidwood Dispatch and Braidwood News, about a
dozen hotels, among them the Commercial, Albion,
and Court House. The population has fallen
off considerably from the census returns of
1871, owing principally to the decline of the
gold fields. The yield of gold for 1883 was 1,408
ounces, valued at £5,475 19s. 4d. The country in
some parts is well suited for tillage, and large
crops of wheat have been gathered. The district
is also rich in its native forests, and is within 29
miles of railway communication, the lumber trade
is very extensive, as the whole of the Southern
towns of New South Wales will be the most
readily supplied from it. Communication with
Sydney is by coach to Upper Tarago, thence
by the Great Southern Railway. In 1884 there were
5,179 acres under cultivation, and the produce
amounted to 28,659 bushels of wheat, 4,861 of maize,
870 of barley, 5,419 of oats, and 571 J tons of
potatoes. Stock returns for the electoral district for
the same year were 3,449 horses, 25,087 cattle,
39,361 sheep, 1,375 pigs.
BRANXTON, a postal, money-order, tele-
graph, and Government Savings Bank township and
railway station, in the county of Northumberland,
electoral district of the Hunter, and police district
of Maitland, on the Anvil creek and main Northern
road, HOmilesN. ofSydney, the communication with
which is by rail via- Newcastle, thence steamer.
Fares to Newcastle (35 miles), ss. 9d. and 3s. 9d. The
population is 90, of the district 1,200. There are
large deposits of coal of superior quality around
the town, giving employment to a number of miners.
The district is principally occupied by farmers. There
are two hotels, Branxton and Sportsman’s Arms, a
public school, with average attendance of 66, and
Roman Catholic, Episcopal, and Wesleyan churches.
A Catholic Apostolic Church is here. The Anglican
Church is a neat brick building, erected at a
cost of £1,500. The Court-house is also a new
brick building of nice design, and a lock-up is
in course of erection. The Mechanics’ Insti-
tute has a library of 300 vols. There is also a steam
flour and saw mill in the township. Petty Sessions
held at Branxton and Greta on alternate Thursdays.
In addition to being a mining and pastoral district, it
is also largely cultivated for vines, the wines known
as the Dal wood, Pernhill, Cote d’Or, &c., being in
considerable repute. The vineyard “Kirkton”is
about five miles distant, and is famed for its wines.
The villages of Stanhope and Elderslie, a few miles
away, are agricultural centres. The Hunter river
runs about three miles distant from Branxton.
BREEZA, a small township, with telegraph,
money-order office, and railway station on the Mooki
river, 242 miles N. of Sydney, and 32 miles SW. from
Tamworth. It is in the county of Pottinger, police
and electoral district of Gunnedah, and stands 951
feet above sea-level. It is now connected with New-
castle (170 miles SE.) by rail, being a station
on the North-West Extension from Werris Creek;
fares from Newcastle,3ls. 3d., 205.9 d. Population about
130. There is one hotel, and a public school, with
an average attendance of 32 scholars, and two
stores. The district is principally occupied by
runs, though numerous selectors have settled here.
BREWAERINA (30°3'S.lat., 146° 56'E. long.),
a postal, telegraph, and money-order township on
the southern bank of the river Barwon (Darling),
county of Clyde, and police district of Brewar-
rina, 527 miles NW. from Sydney, and about 70
miles E. from Bnurke. Hotels ; Sportsman’s Arms,
Royal, Brewarrina, and Telegraph. Banks : Com-
mercial and New South Wales. Communication with
Sydney is by coach to Bye Rock (fare, 90s. 6d.), thence
the rail. Steamers run, when the river is high
enough, to various parts. Population about4so. The
township is progressing, and a con siderable
number of brick and other buildings have been
erected, among them being two bonded ware-
houses, a Roman Catholic Presbytery of a handsome
and substantial style; and the Episcopal church
(Christ Church), which will seat 200. There are
4 large stores, a brick court-house, police
barracks, a School of Arts with 409 vols.


a brick hospital capable of accommodating ten in-
door patients, and a public school with average at-
tendance of 53. Local paper : Srewarrina Express.
A pontoon bridge is thrown across the river here,
and two Government punts bridge the Darling
river and the Cato creek. A high level bridge is
projected. A local Pastoral Society holds periodi-
cal shows here.
BREWONGLE. See Macquarie Plains.
BRISBANE WATER, a district on the north
side of Broken Bay, the principal town being
Gosford (which see). A steamer plies weekly to and
from Sydney; fare, 10s. The country is very
broken. Population 2,607.
BROADWATER is a postal centre, formerly
the headquarters of a large meat-preserving estab-
lishment, 342 miles N. of Sydney, situated on the river
Clarence, a mile or two above Rocky mouth. The
river here widens out to a basin of considerable ex-
tent. It was in former days one of Mr. Clarke
Irving’s stations. Communication by Clarence River
steamers. The Colonial Sugar Company have a
large sugar mill, reputed to be one of the most
complete mills in Australia. Public school here,
average attendance 63.
BROKE, a post town, in the county of North-
umberland, electoral and police district of Jerry
plains, situated on the Wollombi Brook, with
money order and telegraph office, 161 miles N. of
Sydney, having one store, public school with
average attendance of 39 scholars, two places of
worship, an inn, Drover’s Arms, and one mill. The
nearest railway station is Singleton. Population
160.
BROUGHTON CREEK, a post,savings bank,
money-order, telegraph, and muneipal centre, on a
river of the same name, 109 miles S. of Sydney. It
is in the south-east of the county of Camden, and
police district of Shoalhaven. Steamers ply to
Sydney twice a week. Moss Vale is the nearest
railway station. The population is upwards of 400,
with district nearly 2,000. Bank : English and
Scottish. One public school, average attendance
104; four churches, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Wes-
leyan, and Roman Catholic. Four stores and one
hotel. A Court of Petty Sessions is held every
alternate Friday. The Broughton Creek Mail is
published every Thursday. The country is very
mountainous, the ranges averaging 1,000 to 1,200
feet in height. The valleys are very fertile, and
large quantities of maize and other cereals, as well
as potatoes and other root crops are raised, but the
principal staples of produce are butter, pigs and
cheese. Formation: clay, trap, and carbonace-
ous, with coal in abundance. Broughton Creek and
Bomaderry form a municipal district, having 57
miles of roads, and rateable property valued
at £164,440. The whole of the town and country
as far as the sea and to the north bank of the
Shoalhaven River is a portion of Mr. David
Berry’s estate, and contains numerous farms. On
the north and west of Broughton Creek are the rich
and fertile districts of Kangaroo Valley, Berran-
garry, Woodhill, Broughton Village, Broughton Vale
(also a municipality), with valuable property valued
at £28,000, and Cambewarra, most of it being
freeholds belonging to dairy farmers.
BROWN MOUNTAIN. See Colombo.
BRUSHGROVE, a post town, with telegraph
station, savings bank, and money-order office, in the
county of Clarence, electoral district of Grafton, on
the river Clarence, about 360 miles (338 postal) N. of
Sydney, the route to which is vid Grafton by steamer;
fare, £3 10s. There are two hotels, WardeU’s and Shep-
pard’s ; two places of worship (Wesleyan and Roman
Catholic), and three or four stores, but no buildings of
particular note. Population about 120. On the other
side of the river there are a number of residents,
with one hotel, Presbyterian and Roman Catholic
churches, large sugar mill.
BUCKLEY’S CROSSING PLACE, a
postal town, 291 miles S. of Sydney, situated on the
Snowy river, on the road from Cooma to Gippsland.
The route from Sydney is vid Goulburn and Cooma,
Upper Tarago being the nearest railway station.
It has a court-house, store, public-house, and a few
private houses. Population, with vicinity, about
200. There is some good agricultural land in the
district, principally utilized for wheat-growing.
BUKKULLA is a postal centre 374 miles N.
of Sydney. Nearest railway station is Tamworth.
Coach runs from Inverell. It has acquired consider-
able celebrity on account of the vines grown here.
The BukkuDa vineyard, the property of Mr. Wynd-
ham, is situated on the Mclntyre, about 19 miles
north of Inverell. It covers an extent of 160
acres. The varieties grown are Madeira, Her-
mitage, Pineau, Reisling, and White Shiraz. The
ordinary crop is about 48 tons of grapes, producing
6,000 gallons of wine, which now enjoys a Euro-
pean as well as an Australian name. The vines are
trained on wires, espalier fashion, in six feet
squares, 1,200 occupying an acre. The soil is a red
loam, with ironstone and gravel underneath.
BULLADELAH, a post town, with money-
order, telegraph office and savings bank, in the
county and electorate of Gloucester, situated on the
Myall river, 148 miles N. of Sydney. There is a
public school with an average attendance of 48, two
churches, three stores, two hotels, saw-mills, court-
house, police station, and School of Arts. Popula-
tion 50, and about 900 in the district. Communi-
cation is by sailing vessel or coach, steamer vid.
Raymond Terrace, and mail coach. Nearest railway
station, Hexham. The district is mainly supported
by the timber trade, the formation being limestone
with coal measures, and has moderate land for
agricultural purposes.
BULLI, a police • nd postal township, with tele-
graph station, money-order office, and Government
savings bank, picturesquely situated between the
range of mountains and the coast, about 7 miles N.
of Wollongong, and 59 miles (40 direct) S. of Sydney,
the coast road from which city passes through the
village. It is in the counties of Camden and Cumber-
land, and police district of Wollongong. It is the
headquarters of the Bulli Mining Company, whose
mine is on the side of the mountain, about 400 feet
above sea level, worked by an adit or tunnel, the coal
being taken by railway locomotives to the jetty, about
1£ miles distant. This jetty is 450 feet in length,
and is built out into the open sea, where ships of
considerable draught of water are easily and quickly
loaded. A fleet of steam colliers takes the coal
to Sydney and Melbourne. The company was formed
in 1861, and the first shipment of coal took place
in 1863; about 300 miners were employed here in 1883,
the output being 131,392 tons, valued at £78,998.
There are four hotels: Railway, Royal, Black
Diamond, and Denmark; a handsome stone Wes-
leyan church, a R. C. Church and Presbyterian
Church, a school of arts, public school, average
attendance 111, and several stores. Bank: English
and Scottish. The communication is either by
rail and daily coach rid Campbelltown, or by the Wol-
longong steamer. Several farms surround the vil-
lage. The land is principally held by free selectors.
Formation : sandstone and carboniferous. Popula-
tion 1,187.
BULLOCK ISLAND, otherwise ONEBY-
GAMBA, is a suburb or portion of the City of
N ewcastle, lying about a mile W. There is an ex-
tensive foundry and engineering establishment
here, belonging to Messrs. Morrison and Bearby,
which has been considerably added to of late,
and now employs upwards of one hundred hands.
Some of the largest castings undertaken in the
colony have been successfully accomplished; two
small stores, several inns, a money-order office, and
an episcopal place of worship, St. Thomas’s, which is
specially a church for seamen. A high bridge
connects the island with Newcastle; ferry steamers
also ply. The only hydraulic cranes in the Colonies
are here. The engine house is considered to be
one of the finest buildings in New South Wales.
Population about 800. The public school here
(which is a large and commodious building, con-
structed at a cost of £2,000) has an average attendance
of 132. On the harbour side of the island is the
Ballast Dyke, where extensive wharves have been
formed ; the total wharf frontage intended to be
8,000 feet. This dyke has been formed by the ballast
discharged from vessels coming to load coal at the


port of Newcastle. Ships of the largest tonnage can
be berthed here. A branch line connects the wharves
along the dyke with the Northern Railway.
BUNDANOON, a railway station on the
Southern line, situated 2,202 feet above sea level,
in the county of Camden, electoral and police
district of Berrima, 95 miles SW. from Sydney;
fares, 165., 10s. 6d. ; it is a post town ; has money-
order and savings bank office; one store, two places
of worship, and a public school, average attendance
of 60. Formation : sandstone.
BUNDARRA, a postal township, with Govern-
ment Savings Bank, and money-order and telegraph
office on the Gwydir or Bundarra river, 343 miles
N. of Sydney, in the county of Hardinge, and police
district of Armidale. The nearest places of import-
ance are Inverell, about 30 miles N., and Armidale,
60 miles SE. The metropolis is reached by coach
to Mounbi, fare, 425. 6d.; thence railway and steamer.
Bundarra is situated in a valley of considerable
extent and of great fertility. The hotels are : Com-
mercial, Telegraph, and Killamey; and there are
four stores. Bank : Joint-Stock. Churches : Epis-
copal and Roman Catholic. Public School, average
attendance 63, and a court-house and lock-up of
brick. Population about 300 within a 2 miles radius.
Formation: basalt and trap basin, surrounded by
granite. Within a short distance of Bundarra are
the flourishing tin mines of Cope’s Creek.
BUNG-ENCORE (35° 20' S. lat., 149* 30' E.
long.), a small township with telegraph station
and money-order office, in the county of Murray,
on the Turella creek, 174 miles SW. of Sydney,
and about 17 miles from Queanbeyan. A coach
runs to Goulburn railway station (fare, 17s. 6d.).
The Cooma line will pass through here, it is
now open to Upper Tarago. Population about
~ There are Church of England, Roman
Catholic, and Presbyterian places of worship in the
town, a public school, average attendance 80,
three hotels—Royal, Lake George, and Commercial
--and a large flourmill. Quartz reefing is now in
full swing within a few miles of the township. The
district is taken up by farms and stations, the soil
being well suited both for tillage and grazing. A
court of petty sessions is held every second Friday
in each month.
BURRANGONG. See Young.
BURRAWANG. A post town, with money-
order office, savings bank and telegraph station, 96
miles S. of Sydney, in the police district of Berrima,
and electorate of Camden; mode of conveyance, coach
to Moss Vale, thence rail to Sydney ; it is situated
on the Wingecarribee River. Population of district
about 1,000. Hotels are the Burrawang Club House,
Commercial, and Pioneer. There is a branch of the
E. S. and A. Chartered Bank here, also a public
school with average attendance of 55, a School of
Arts, Oddfellows’ Hall, and Protestant Hall. Local
newspaper: The Burrawang Herald ; places of wor-
ship being Episcopalian, Wesleyan and Roman
Catholic. The produce of the district is principally
dairy farming.
BURROWA, or Boorrowa (34° 30' S. lat., 148°
45 E. long.), is a township in the county of King, on the
main road from Yass (about 38 miles from Yass) to
Young, and the right bank of the Burrowa river.
The district returns one member to Parliament.
The communication with Sydney, from which it is
about 225 miles distant SW., is by coach to Binalong,
18 miles thence by rail. The inhabitants in town and
vicinity number 4,500 persons ; in the town are 780
residents. The town is well laid out, with wide
streets running at right angles. Hotels are the Aus-
tralian, Courthouse, Royal Standard, Royal, Com-
mercial, and Queen’s Arms. The N. S. Wales and
Commercial Banks have branches here. The local
newspapers are the Burrowa News and the Burrowa
Times. Places of worship ; Episcopal, Wesleyan and
Roman Catholic. There is also a court-house, a
public school, average attendance 56, and a R. C.
convent school, average attendance 86. A num-
ber of farms are in the immediate vicinity
of the town, and the breadth of land under
cultivation is yearly increasing, the soil being
well adapted for agricultural operations. Two
steam flour mills are supported. In 1884
9,117 J acres were under cultivation for wheat,
maize, barley, oats and potatoes. Number of
holders of land (of upwards of an acre) 350,
area of holdings, 288,047 acres purchased and
22,833 acres leasehold. The district is also a
pastoral one. Stock returns to March 31, 1884, were
2,431 horses ; 4,985 cattle ; 270,675 sheep; 1,311 pigs.
Burrowa is a place of petty sessions and district
court, has a post, money-order, savings bank, and
telegraph station. The land is unsurpassed for
agricultural purposes. Formation: limestone and
slate.
BURWOOD, a suburban village and railway
station on the Great Southern line, 6£ miles W. of
Sydney, fares, Bd. and 6d. The population is upwards
of 1,000. Many of the merchants and superior trades-
men of the city have their residences at Burwood.
Hotels : Ireland’s, Freemasons’, Burwood, and Bath
Arms. Burwood was proclaimed a municipality
March 27, 1874. It has 30 miles of roads, rateable
property valued at £460,000, and a money-order,
telegraph, and savings bank office; public school,
with an average attendance of 450 ; a branch of the
A. J.S. Bank, and a school of arts with 2,120 vols.
Churches: Presbyterian, Wesleyan, Church of Eng-
land, Congregational, and Roman Catholic.
BURWOOD is 2 miles from Newcastle, and
may be considered a suburb. It has a resident popu-
lation of about 1,500, many of the male adults being
employed in the coal pit of the A. A. and Newcastle
Coal Mining Company and the brick yards. It has
five places of worship—Wesleyan, Primitive Metho-
dist, United Methodist, Roman Catholic, and Con-
gregational. Public school, with average attendance
of 73, Mechanics’ Institute, and stores. Communi-
cation with Newcastle is by omnibus.
CAMBERWELL, a post town in the county
of Durham, police district of Singleton, and elec-
torate of Patrick’s Plains, in 32° 30' S. lat., and
151° 20' E. long., located on Glenning’s creek,
139 miles N. of Sydney. The railway station at
Ravensworth is 3 miles away. There are three
places of worship and two hotels here. Population
about 100 ; of district, which is supposed to be rich
in coal, about 500.
CAMBEWARRA, a post town, with money-
order office, in the county of Camden, police and
electoral district of Shoalhaven, on the road from
Shoalhaven to Moss Vale, 106 miles S. of Sydney*
situated on the Good Dog Creek. Population 150,
of district 550. It has two hotels—the Royal and
Cambewarra; two public schools, average attend-
ance 97 ; a Union Church, and a school of arts
with 105 vols.; three stores—Matthew’s, Wend’s, and
Middleton’s—and a flourishing tannery (T. Shep-
herd’s). Formation—freestone, with various strata
of lime stone, coal, &c.
CAMDEN (county Camden), one of the oldest
places in the colony, is located in the centre of a
district advantageously suited for culture, and the
vineyards have reached perhaps as high a stan-
dard of excellence as any in Australia. It lies
on the left bank of the river Nepean (or Cow
Pasture), the main southern road passing through
the village, and has a post, telegraph and money-
order office, and Government savings bank. It
is distant from Sydney about 42 miles SW.,
communication being by tramway to Campbell-
town, 8 miles distant, thence by railway. The
population of the township was by last census
505 persons, of the district, 3,564. 788 electors are
on the Camden rolls. The pleasing character of
the country, coupled with its great agricultural
advantages, early led to its settlement, and also
to its being selected as the site of numerous gentle-
men’s seats. Much land is devoted to the growth
of the grape, the principal vineyards being those at
Camden Park (the estate of Messrs. McArthur, where
the foundation of Australia’s wool trade was laid),
and Maryland. The Church of England, Roman
Catholic, Primitive Methodist, and Wesleyan bodies
have places of worship, and there are two public
schools, average attendance 147, and Roman
Catholic ; also several good hotels—Camden, Crown,
Commercial, and Plough and Harrow; a court-
house, lock-up, school of arts (with 950 vols.), tem-
perance hall, branches of N. S. Wales and Commer*


cial Banks, and 5 stores. Newspaper, the Camden
Time*. The township comprises one long street with a
few cross streets. It was once a thriving busy place,
but floods, rust, and other drawbacks have greatly
injured it; the township is beginning to prosper
again, now that good seasons are prevailing ;
dairying and cattle-breeding having proved more
profitable, the land has been allowed to return to
grass on many farms. During the past twelve
months several farmers have turned their atten-
tion entirely to dairying. Agricultural returns for
the electoral district for year ending March 31, 1834
—8,847 acres under cultivation. Stock returns for
the electoral district—2,6s2 horses, 9,209 cattle,
9,690 sheep, 2,128 pigs. Formation : alluvial and
Wainamatta shale.
CAMPBELLTOWN is another of the early
settlements of the colony, situate 210 feet above sea-
level, in the county of Cumberland in 34° 6' S. lat.
and 150° 50' E. long., electoral district of Camden.
It is connected with Sydney, 34 miles SW., by the
Great Southern line of railway—fares, 4s. 5d., 2s. 9d.
It has a post and money-order office, Government
savings bank, and telegraph station. George’s river
runs about 2 miles distant. The township comprises
a court-house, gaol, watchhouse, and other Govern-
ment buildings, a handsome building for the Com-
mercial Bank, a town hall, large public school,
average attendance 216, several places of worship
—Church of England (St. Peter’s), Presbyterian,
Congregational, and Roman Catholic—and a few
hotels, viz.. Royal, Forbes, Railway Hotel, Jolly
Miller, Sportsman’s Arms, and St. Patrick’s
Inn. Banks: Commercial, and New South Wales.
Newspaper, the Campbelltown Herald, weekly.
The population is estimated at 690. The country
surrounding Campbelltown is principally of an
agricultural character. Wheat was formerly the
chief crop, after that maize, barley, and oats,
but owing to the havoc made by red rust in the
wheat crops, farmers have discontinued sowing that
cereal for a time. Returns for 1884 were 1,915 acres
under cultivation, produce 162 bushels of wheat,
1,440 of maize, 87 of barley, 135 of oats. Stock:
989 horses, 3,191 cattle, 2,823 sheep, 521 pigs.
Large quantities of hay are grown. Coal exists in con-
siderable quantities, but up to the present time no
steps have been taken to develop this resource.
Campbelltown is noted for the salubrity of its
climate, and the consequent longevity of its inhabi-
tants. The Upper Nepean water scheme has
beneficially affected Campbelltown. The town and
district was formed into a municipality in February,
1882, there being nine aldermen. There are 25 miles
of streets, and rateable property to the value of
£318,344.
CAMPERDOWN, a western suburb of
Sydney, and a municipality, with post, money-order
office and savings bank, in the county of Cumber-
land, electoral and police district of Newtown, 3
miles W. of the city on the Parramatta and Cook’s
river roads. Omnibuses run to and fro every hour,
fare, 3d. ; also tramway communication. There are
several important works and factories within the
boundaries, which give employment to a number
of hands. The Sydney University and the colleges
of St. Paul and St. John are also in the munici-
pality. Public school here: average attendance
481. There are three churches—Congregational,
Wesleyan, and Church of England ; also a steam
pottery, saw mills, and other works. Camper-
down was proclaimed a municipality Nov. 13, 1862.
It has 9 miles of roads, the rateable property is of
the value of £523,250. The Prince Alfred Hospital
is here. In the two pavilions there is accommodation
for 164 beds. Population 3,000.
CANDELO, a post town, with money-order
and telegraph office and savings bank, 258 miles S.
of Sydney, and 12 miles W. of Bega, is situated on
a creek of the same name on the Monaro road,
in the electoral and police district of Bega. It
has three hotels (Candelo, r ’ueen’s, and Royal), a
public school (average attendance 44), and one place of
worship (R. C.), occupying a commanding site, over-
looking the township. (An Episcopal church is at
Kameruka, two miles distant.) There are also three
smithies, saddlers’ and boot-makers’ shops, three
stores, a tannery, a school of arts, and a branch of
the Commercial Bank. The town being situated on
the main road from Monaro to the shipping port at
Merimbula, derives considerable benefit from the
traffic thus created. The population is slowly but
steadily increasing; it numbers now about 200.
Flourishing Oddfellows’ and Good Templars’ So-
cieties are in existence here. Local newspaper:
Candelo Union. Communication with Bega is four
times a week, and once by steamer, vid Merimbula.
Upper Tarago is the nearest railway station. There
is a Turf club and Coursing club established here,
and a court of petty sessions is held twice a month.
CANONBAB, a postal, telegraph, savings
bank, and money-order station, situated on Duck
creek, 330 miles (393 postal) NW. of Sydney. It
is in the county of Gregory, and police district
of Dubbo. A coach runs to Nyngan, the nearest rail-
way station, twice a week, fare, 10s. There are three
hotels, Royal, Post-Office, Commercial; court-house,
police barracks, post and telegraph office, and one
bank (Commercial). The district is almost entirely
pastoral, sheep being more extensively reared than
cattle or horses. It is at times subject to both
floods and droughts. Population 480.
CANOWINDRA, a township on the N. bank
of the Belabula River, in the police district of
Cowra, and electorate of Molong, distant from
Cowra 20 miles, from Forbes 45, from Orange 41
and from Sydney 223 miles W. Has post-office’
money-order office, and a telegraph station. A
fine wooden bridge spans the Belabula. Rich agri-
cultural, pastoral, and mining country ; a very large
extent alienated. Town advancing. Principal stores :
A. W. Collis, Thomas Finis, and Boyd. Inns : Cly-
burn’a, Victoria, Dawes, and Collis. Churches : Epis-
copal and Roman Catholic Public school (average
attendance 41) and court-house ; a steam flour mill,
and one saw mill in the vicinity. Population of
town 220 ;of district 540. Mails to Orange, and
Sheet of Bark, and to and from Sydney daily.
Petty sessions held second Saturday in each month.
Formation ; Silurian, intersected with granite dykes
(gold and copper).
CANTERBURY, a postal and municipal dis-
trict, with money-order office, and telegraph station,
in the county of Cumberland, and police district of
Newtown, situated on Cook’s River, six miles S. of
Sydney; conveyance is per omnibus from Sydney
three times a day, fare, 9d. Ash field is the nearest
railway station. Principal hotels are the Wheat
Sheaf, Rising Sun, and Woolpack; a public school
is here with average attendance 150, also an
Episcopalian, Presbyterian, and Wesleyan place of
worship. Population of district about 15,000 ; it
returns two members to the Legislative Assembly.
The district is incorporated, and has 50 miles of
streets, with rateable property valued at £454,700.
Stock returns for 1884—1,690 horses, 1,638 cattle'
728 sheep, 1,780 pigs.
CAPERTEE, is a railway station on the line
to Mudgee, being 22 miles from the bounding off
point at Wallerawang, and 127 miles W. of Sydney
fares, 225. and 14s. 6d. It lies 2,739 feet above sea
level. It has a money-order office and telegraph
station, one hotel—Camp, a public school (with
average attendance of 49), and several small stores.
Population about 100. Formation : sandstone.
CARCOAR is a postal, telegraphic, savings
bank and money-order township, prettily situated in
a valley, on the banks of the Belabula river, 150 miles
(173 postal) to the W. of Sydney, and about 33 miles
from Bathurst, in the county of Bathurst. The river
intersects the town, and is spanned by a bridge of
commodious width. The district is mainly agri-
cultural, there being 25,195 acres of land under
cultivation, principally for cereals and potatoes.
Stock returns for year ending March 31, 1884, were :
6,261 horses, 11,559 cattle, 486,290 sheep, 3,033 pigs.
There are alluvial gold workings at the Forest and
Lumpy Swamp, and rich reefs at Burnt Yards,
Brown’s Creek, and on the “Church and School
Estate.” The yield of gold for 1883 was 9,817 ozs.
valued at £30,903 19s. 7d. Powerful steam machinery
has been erected for crushing the auriferous quartz,
both in connection with the companies formed to
work the reefs, and for the use of the general public.


Copper is also being worked at several places in the
district. The population numbers about 540; in the
census district are 7,560 (18811. Carcoar is the centre
of a Municipal district, proclaimed November 11th,
1878, having 9J miles of roads and property of the
value of £50,000. Newspaper, Carcoar Chronicle.' The
more prominent buildings of the town comprise a
Roman Catholic chapel and large convent, a neat
rural looking Church of England, a Presbyterian
church, a Roman Catholic Presbytery, a fine hos-
pital, court-house, post and telegraph office, branches
of the Commercial and City banks, two steam flour
mills, and the Great Western warehouse. Principal
hotels are the Royal, Commercial, and Victoria.
The nearest railway station is Blayney, ten miles
distant. The surrounding country is ragged and
hilly, climate cold and healthy, and well adapted
for the cultivation of English fruits. Communication
is by coach to Blayney, fare, 55.; thence rail to
Sydney. Public school here (average attendance
72).
C AUG-O, a township, with telegraph station and
money-order office, in the county of Ashburnham,
electoral district of Molong, 217 miles W. of Sydney,
prettily located 2 miles from Warri creek, and oc-
cupying a very central position for both agricul-
tural and pastoral operations, wheat being the
principal product. The communication is by coach
to Orange, thence by the Great Western Railway.
It contains Episcopal and Roman Catholic places of
worship, one large public school, with average
attendance of 47 scholars, convent of St. Joseph,
three hotels, three stores, and a steam flour mill.
Population about 280, residing within a radius of
1 mile. There are several reefs in the neighbourhood,
all promising excellent results. Formation : granite
and limestone.
CARROLL, in the electorate of Gunnedah, is a
money-order and savings bank township, 275 miles
N. of Sydney, situated on the Naomi River, the com-
munication being vid Tam worth or Gunnedah. It has
two hotels, and a public school with an average
attendance of 43. Population about 100.,
CASINO, a municipal town in the district of
Richmond river, in the county of Rous, situated
on the Richmond river proper, 90 miles from the
port of Ballina (40 by road), and a little above
navigation, river steamers carrying goods to within
about a mile of the town. It is 505 miles (385
postal) N. of Sydney. Population, 1,200 ; with vici-
nity about 2,800. The streets of the town are broad,
and laid out at right angles. Casino contains an
English church and a parsonage, a Roman Catholic
church (of cut stone and brick), a Presbyterian
church, two public schools (average attendance 176)
a court-house, gaol, post-office, telegraph, and
money-order office, savings bank, school of arts with
library of 800 vols., and branches of the Commercial
and Joint Stock Banks ; the Richmond River Express
newspaper and general printing office (established
1870). There are five hotels—Commercial, Tatter-
sails, and others. Stores are kept by Messrs. F. G.
Crouch, F. B. Gulley, E. McCarthy, Morgan, and
Pyers. A mail coach runs twice a week to Law-
rence, 54 miles distant on the Clarence, from
which there is communication with Sydney by
steamship, and a daily communication by steamer
to Coraki and all parts of the river. District
court is held twice a year; also courts of quarter
sessions, courts of petty sessions weekly, and
courts of requests every month. There is a
land-agent for the district stationed at Casino;
he is also C. P. S., registrar of district and requests
courts, and of births, deaths, and marriages. The
gaol for the Richmond River district is here, with a
gaoler and warder, Quarter sessions and district
court being held bi-annuallv. Two constables are
stationed here. A high-level timber bridge is over
the river, constructed upon the McCallum truss prin-
ciple ; the spans are longer than any other timber
bridge built upon that principle in the colony, being
140 feet each. Clergymen of the Church of England,
Roman Catholic and Wesleyan Churches are resident
here. Casino is in the immediate neighbourhood
of the large squatting stations deservedly cele-
brated for the excellence of the breeds of cattle
raised on them, and in the lower district, sugar
cane is grown with marked success. The banks
of the river below the town are occupied by
farmers, chiefly free selectors, and free selectors
are rapidly increasing up the river. Different varieties
of excellent hard wood grow in the neighbourhood,
and much cedar is being cut on the creeks at the
head of the river. Farm lands near Casino have
recently been sold for over £2O an acre. In the
neighbourhood of these creeks large deposits of coal
and antimony of excellent quality are known to
exist. Good horses are bred in the district, and an-
nual races by two clubs, with attractive prizes, are
held. An Agricultural Society holds a show
annually, and has ten acres of ground. Formation :
sandstone, with trap ranges and numerous rich
alluvial flats. Casino is the centre of a municipal
district, having 37 miles of roads, and property
valued at £69,500.
CASSILIS (32° S. lat., 150° B. long.), a post,
money-order, telegraph, and Government savings
bank station, in the county of Bligh (electoral district
of the Upper Hunter and North-Eastern police
district), 223 miles N. of Sydney, on the right
bank of the Munmurra creek. There are in the
town, which numbers about 170 residents, two
hotels —Royal and Cassilis—an Episcopal church
and R. C. chapel, a branch of the Joint-Stock Bank,
a court-house, lands office, public hall, public school,
average attendance 42, police barracks, lock-up, and
four stores. Coach to Muswellbrook, 80 miles B. (fare,
305.), thence the train and steamer are the means of
reaching the metropolis, but Sydney can also be
reached vid Mudgee. The district is a pastoral one,
consisting of high and broken country, and has an
estimated population of 2,950 souls. Formation r
decomposed basalt.
CASTLERE AGH, a post town on the Ne-
pean river, in the county of Cumberland, 40
miles W. by N. of Sydney. A good road leads from
the township to the Penrith railway station, dis-
tance 6i miles S. In Castlereagh are Wesleyan
and Episcopal places of worship, and three public
schools, with average attendance of 39 scholars.
The surrounding land is mostly composed of al-
luvial deposit, and meets well the requirements of
the farmer and grazier.
CATHCART, a post town in the county of
Wellesley, police district of Bombala, and electoral
district of Monaro, 220 (322 postal) miles S. of Syd-
ney, located on Badgery’s Swamp. Coaches to
Eden, or Merimbula, about 40 miles E., thence
steamer, are the means of reaching the metropolis.
Upper Taragois the nearest railway station. It con-
tains one hotel—the St. George and Dragon—and one
school, average attendance, 42 ; but no public build-
ings. With vicinity, the estimated population is
200. Formation : basaltic trap.
CHAMBERS’ CREEK, a post town in the
county of Bathurst, 158 miles (176 postal) W. of
Sydney, located on the creek of the same name, a
tributary of. the Macquarie, in 33° 8' 8. lat. and
149° 27' B. long. Bathurst is the nearest railway
station. It has a Wesleyan place of worship, and
a provisional school-house. Hotel—Tattersall’s.
Population about 70 persons. The district is a mining
one, being a continuation of the belt of quartz
veins from Hawkins’ Hill. Formation: slate and
granite, intersected with quartz and spar.
CHARCOAL. See Unandera.
CHARLESTOWN, or SOUTH WAR-
ATAH, a mining township about eight miles
from Newcastle, and 87 miles N. of Sydney
(electoral district of Northumberland), on the
road to Belmont, on the shore of Lake Mac-
quarie. It is the locale of the Waratah Com-
pany’s coal pit, at which costly works have been
erected, and is connected with Port Waratah by a
private railway.. Charlestown has a literary insti-
tute (124 vols.), three hotels—the Commercial, Post
Office, and Charlestown, —a post-office, with savings-
bank and money-order office ; four stores, and other
buildings, and a public school with average attend-
ance of 41. Services are held regularly by Primi-
tive Methodists. Population 268.
CHATSWORTH ISLAND is one of the
several islands at the mouth of the Clarence river,
320 miles N. of Sydney, and 40 miles from Grafton.


The soil is fertile, and grows large crops of sugar.
There are eight mills here, seven on the North Arm,
and the Colonial Sugar Company’s mill. It has a
money-order and savings hank office, branch of Com-
mercial Bank, two inns, Casey’s and Mosely’s, two
stores, and there is a public school, with average
attendance of 90 scholars. Communication with
Sydney is by the Grafton steamers, and there is
also daily communication with Grafton by river
steamers. Population 1,200.
CLARENCE RIVER HEADS, or Yamba,
a post town with telegraph office in the county of the
Clarence, in S. lat. 29° 26', and E. long. 153° 22',
307 miles N. of Sydney. It is a customs’ and also
a pilot station. Number of inhabitants in the
district 340. There are two inns, and lock-up and
police quarters, and two stores. The Clarence
steamers are the means of reaching the metropolis.
District pastoral, of sandstone formation. The bar
at the Heads has been the scene of many shipping
disasters, the last and most fatal occurring in
December 1882, when the steamship New England
was wrecked with great loss of life. A new break-
water is now in course of construction.
CLARENCE TOWN, a small township with
telegraph station, Government savings bank and
money-order office, in the county of Durham, on the
western bank of the Williams river, at the head of
navigation, 114 miles NNE. of Sydney, with a
population of about 370 persons, or 1,644 in the
census district (1881). The district in which it is
situated is entirely agricultural, the alluvial flats
on the banks of the river being specially fertile, and
yielding heavy crops of maize, wheat, and other
cereals. Tobacco, too, is extensively cultivated.
The means of reaching Sydney is by steamer, or by
coach to Morpeth, 16 miles distant, or via Maitland,
thence steamer. Hotels : Commercial and the Crown.
Four stores. Places of worship, Church of Eng-
land and Presbyterian, Roman Catholic and Baptist
chapels. Public buildings; court-house, lock-up,
public school, with average attendance of 99
scholars; and school of arts, with 443 vols.
CLARENDON, the postal centre of the
Eurongilly gold field, is in the county of Clarendon,
electorate and police district of Gundagai. It is 4
miles from the Billabong creek, 7 miles from the
Murrumbidgee river, and 290 miles (342 postal) SW.
of Sydney, to which the mails are carried, via Illabo,
Gundagai and Wagga-Wagga. Cootamundra, Junee,
and Illabo are the nearest railway stations. There
is one hotel—the Clarendon—and a public school,
with average attendance of 30, and two stores, and
about 60 settlers scattered over the district, which is of
granite and slate rock formation. The diggings are
both alluvial and quartz. Agriculture is assuming
an important phase, the land being exceptionally
good. Population 250.
CLIFTON, a mining village situated about
300 ft. above sea level on the steep cliffs over-
hanging the ocean at the Coal Cliff, in the
county of Cumberland, and police district of
Wollongong, distant about 30 miles S., in a
direct line, from Sydney (postal 65 miles). Messrs.
Stuart and Co. own about 7,000 acres of coal
land at this locality. Their mine is worked by two
adits driven in on the seam of coal which is seen
“like a broad black band” along the base of
the cliffs, about 20ft. above high-water mark, and
which a little north of the mine dips into the
sea. The seam of coal is 6ft. thick and of excellent
quality, for household, smelting, and steam purposes,
same as that worked at Bulli and Wollongong. A
timber jetty 500 ft. long is erected from the mouth of
the mine out into the open sea to a depth of about
20ft. of water at end of jetty. In June, 1881, a por-
tion of the jetty was washed away. This is one of
the boldest and most remarkable undertakings
for working a mine to be found in any part of the
world. The coal is brought out of the mine, screened
on the jetty, and put into steam colliers; it being
unsafe for sailing vessels to come so near the bold
rocky coast. Owing to the roughness of the beach,
and the precipitous nature of the cliffs, the steam
boiler, sheds, offices, store-room, blacksmiths’ and
carpenters’ shops necessary for working the mine
had to be built on the jetty. Two steam colliers are
now constantly employed running with coal to
Sydney, and the output of the mine is about 300 tons
daily, which, if necessary, can be increased to 500.
About 150 men are employed at the mine and works;
these, with their families, live at Clifton. A public
school, average attendance 59, post, money order,
savings bank, telegraph-office, and school of
arts are established here, and there is a daily
mail to Sydney. The site of the village is most
picturesque; a view of the ocean for 30 miles all
round is obtained. The Coal Cliff rises abruptly
from the ocean to a perpendicular height of
1,350 ft. A road has been formed by scarping round
the steep sides of the Coal Cliff, affording Clifton
and places to the south direct communication with
Sydney. Campbelltown is the nearest railway
station. Excellent fire clay and a seam of clay band
iron ore, 40ft. thick, yielding by assay 24 per cent,
of metallic iron, are found in the coal measures
north and south of this locality. The lllawarra
Railway, which will run through the township, is in
course of construction, this section (No. 3) being let
to the contractors. Population of Clifton and
neighbourhood, 700.
COBAR (co. Robinson), a post town, telegraph,
savings bank, and money-order station, 550 (494
postal) miles W. of Sydney, 360 miles NW. of
Orange, and about 110 miles S. from Bourke, in
the police and electoral district of Bourke. It is
the site of the Cobar Copper Mines, from which a
large quantity of ore, containing a high percent-
age of metal, has been raised. Hotels : Com-
mercial, Club House, and others. Banks; Commercial
and Joint Stock. Newspaper: Cobar and Louth
Herald. Public school, average attendance 125 ; also
Episcopalian, Roman Catholic, and Wesleyan
churches. Coach runs to Nyngan railway station
(80 miles), fare, 50s. About sixty-five miles distant
is the Nymagee copper mine, which is now in
active work. The Girilambone copper mine is 60
miles E. of Cobar; here the outcrop of ore is said to
be 70 feet wide in places, and even 120 feet at
some points. The Great Oobar mine is said to be
the most important and successfully managed
copper mine in the Colony. In 1883 the value of
copper raised was £286,819. At the mine are
refining, 3 roasting, and 14 reducing furnaces and
numerous other appliances, including 3 40-h.-p.
engines, also Ford’s rock boring machinery, and
one hundred cottages for the workmen. About 700
people are employed at the mine. Within a radius
of three miles the population is estimated at 3,000,
and is now incorporated.
COBARGO, a post town, telegraph station with
savings bank, and money-order office, in the
county of Dampier, police district of Bega, and
electorate of Eden, situated at the junction of the
Wondella and Murrabrine creeks, 234 miles S. of
Sydney, on the road from Moruya to Bega. Upper
Tarago is the nearest railway station. There are
three places of worship, Episcopal, Roman Catholic,
and a Union Church, Good Templars’ hall, a
library, one inn—the Cobargo—a public school, with
average attendance of 58 scholars; branch of
the A. J. S. Bank, a police barracks, several stores,
and other' places of business. Population 137,
with vicinity, about 972. Indications are present
of mineral wealth, but hitherto no success has
attended any efforts to develop it, although con-
siderable impetus has been given by the discovery
of gold at Montreal, 13 miles distant. Much land
has been selected, cleared, and fenced in here, but
it is principally well timbered, undulating, grazing
country. Mimosa bark once formed the chief arti-
cle of export, but it is now getting scarce, and
its place is well supplied by dairy produce. The
harbour is at Bermagui, about 14 miles distant,
whence sailing vessels sail every few days for
Sydney, and the steamer to and from Eden calls for
passengers. Formation: granite.
CODRINGTON, on the Richmond river, in
the counties of Rous and Richmond, and police
district of Casino, about 4 miles above Coraki,
355 miles (postal) N. of Sydney, has a post-office
and public school, average attendance 26, a
timber mill, also two sugar mills. The route
is via Lawrence by the Clarence river steamers.


Population of district 200. This district is likely to
become a most productive one as regards sugar,
and the breadth under cultivation is yearly in-
creasing. , , ,
COLLECTOR, a postal and money-order
township in the county of Argyle, and police
district of Goulbum, 152 miles SSW. of Sydney.
The larger buildings in Collector consist of three
places of worship—Episcopal, Wesleyan, and Roman
Catholic, the last named of stone ; a public school,
with an average attendance of 37 scholars, one
hotel, a court-house and a police-station. There
are also two stores. Number of residents, about
100. Goulbum is 22 miles distant NE. Agri-
cultural district. Collector is about four miles
distant from Lake George, and nine miles from
Breadalbane railway station. A Court of Petty
Sessions and a Small Debts Court is held on the first
Friday in each month.
COLOMBO, or Brown Mountain, is situated
on Bambrooka River, 23 miles west of Bega, 312
miles SW. of Sydney. It is nearly at the foot of the
Dividing range, in the county of Auckland, and elec-
toral district of Eden. Communication is horseback
to Merimbula, thence per steamer. Upper Tarago is
the nearest railway station. There is a public school,
average attendance of 38, Episcopal and Roman
Catholic churches, and one store. Population, about
300. Maize is largely grown ; while fruit, tobacco,
hops, 'and chicory also flourish. Formation of the
country principally granite, with slate and sand-
stone. Gold, silver, tin, and copper exist in the
district.
CONCORD, a municipality ‘and a suburb of
Sydney, in county of Cumberland, electoral district
of Canterbury, lying about 8 miles W., having an
Episcopal and Roman Catholic church. The majority
of the houses are occupied by professional men and
others engaged in the city, the poorer classes being
gardeners and wood-cutters. Longbottom adjoins
Concord. A public school here, average attendance
43. The communication with Sydney is by rail,
vid Burwood, Redmyre, or Homebush stations.
CONDOBOLIN, a post town, telegraph, sav-
ings bank, and money-order station in the county
of Cunningham, police and electoral district of
Forbes, 311 miles W. of Sydney, situate on the
north bank of the Lachlan river. Forbes is distant
60 miles E. The nearest railway station is Orange,
to and from which is a coach four times a week;
coach fare, £3 3s. 6d. Hotels: Prince of Wales
Commercial, Court House, Condobolin, Exchange,
Royal and Bridge. There are 6 stores, and 2 mills,
Churches: Presbyterian, Church of England, and
Roman Catholic. The public buildings are the
court-house and police-station, and a school house
with an average attendance of 62 scholars. Bank :
Joint-Stock. Population, 450. Jockey Club here.
Good agricultural district, especially for grain crops.
Formation : slate, with indications of gold.
COOQ-EE is a suburban village, 5 miles S. from
Sydney, situated in a sandy bight known as Coogee
Bay. It is now connected by tramway. It has one
hotel —Coogee Bay—with fine grounds, and there
are many villa residences adjacent to or overlooking
the ocean, and a public school with average attend-
ance of 54. It is a favourite place for picnic parties.
COOKARDINIA, a post town in the county
of Goulbum, police district of Germanton, and
electoral district of the Hume, 357 miles (370
postal) S. of Sydney. It is on the Jerra-Jerra
Creek, has one hotel, one store, a public school,
average attendance 34, and a Presbyterian church.
There is coach connection with the Culcaim railway
station. The district, of granite formation, is suitable
for farms and stations. Population of district
about 400.
COOL AH, a post town, money-order and tele-
graph station, 60 miles 8. from Coonabarabran and
246 miles WNW. of Sydney on the Coolaburragundy
Creek, county of Napier, electoral district of the
Bogan, and police district of Mudgee. The commu-
nication with the metropolis is vid Capertee, coach
to Gunnedah railway station, fare, 275. 6d. The
surrounding land is rangy, and where suitable is
utilized for farming. Hotels, The Royal, Squatter’s
Home, and Australian Inn. Public school, average
attendance 48. Churches : Episcopalian, Presby-
terian, and Roman Catholic. Around Coolah are
some splendid squatting properties, but the land
near the towns is in a few hands which prevents
rapid settlement. Formation : coal measures. Popu-
lation, 170.
COOLONQOLOOK, a mining township, 171
miles N. of Sydney, the postal centre of a goldfield.
Hexham is the nearest railway station.
COOMA, county of Bcrestord, police dis-
trict of Cooma, and electoral district of Monaro,
is prettily situated on high land, 2,657 feet above
the sea level, on the creek of the same name, 257
miles to the SSW. of Sydney, with which city
the communication is by tri-weekly coach to
Goulbum (fare, 555.) or Gunning (fare, 505.), thence
by the Southern line of railway. The railway
from Goulbum is now making and is open to
Upper Tarago. The river Murrumbidgee flows
about ’5 miles distant. It has a post, money-
order, Government savings bank, and telegraph-
office, and is under Municipal Government. Popu-
lation 1,050 ; of the township and district together,
12,000. The buildings in the town comprise,
among others, the Hospital, school of arts, with
library of 600 vols., court-house, land office, the
gaol, post and telegraph office, Police Bar-
racks, Thornton’s assembly rooms, five inns—
the Royal, Prince of Wales, Railway, Free
Selectors, and Australian Arms —nine stores, a
book and stationery mart, branches of the Com-
mercial, Australian Joint Stock, and N. S. Wales
Banks, and the English, Presbyterian, Catholic, and
Wesleyan churches. A public school, average atten-
dance 229, and a R. C. denominational school are here.
The Oddfellows, Good Templars, Orangemen and
Sons of Temperance have branches or lodges, and
there is also a R. C. Guild; and steam
flour mills. The surrounding country is pastoral,
mineral, and agricultural. The Monaro Mercury,
published bi-weekly, and the Cooma Express,
are the local papers. The surveyor’s office for the
Monaro district is here. The criminal Sessions for
Monaro are holden at Cooma every four months.
The land office at Cooma is the centre for Nimitybelle,
Bobundarrah, Buckley’s Crossing, Adaminiby, Jin-
dabyne, Kiandra, Bunyan, Colintou, and Micalago.
Cooma is the centre of the municipal district, in
which are 31 miles of roads, and property of the
value of £201,300. Formation : trap.
COONABARABRAN, a post, telegraph,
savings bank, and money-order township on the
Castlereagh river, about twelve miles from its source,
and 267 miles (368 postal) from Sydney NW. It is in
the electoral district of Namoi and police district of
Coonamble. The traveller’s route is by mail
coach vid Mudgee, thence train; or coach, rail,
and steamer vid Gunnedah (65 miles), Quirindi
and Newcastle, or mail to Wellington (120 miles)
thence train. The Club House, Royal, Old Royal,
and Telegraph are among the hotels. Bank:
Joint-Stock. Four stores. Churches : Episco-
palian, Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic. Public
Buildings : school, with average attendance of 83.
mechanics’ institute with 750 volumes, court-house
and lock-up. There is also a steam flour mill,
and Pastoral and Agricultural Society with show-
ground of 10 acres. Newspaper : Bligh Watchman.
Some part of the country is well watered and
fitted for farming, which is almost exclusively
followed, but there are some large patches of unpro-
ductive land; the population of the township is
about 410; of the census district 1,472. Formation :
sandstone.
COONAMBLE, a post, money-order, savings
bank and telegraph township, situated at the junction
of the Mogomodine creek and the Castlereagh river,
390 miles NW of Sydney, and 110 miles N. of Dubbo.
It is in the county of Leichhardt, police district of
Coonamble, and electoral district of the Bogan. The
number of inhabitants is about 800; the district
principally a grazing one, numbering about 3,000.
The inns are the Royal, Exchange, Court House,
Commercial, and others. Banks : Joint-Stock, N. S.
Wales, and Commercial. There are two churches,
Episcopal and Roman Catholic, and two schools—one
public, with an average attendance of 84 scholars.


and a mechanics’ institute. The communication is
by coach to the Dubbo Station, 110 miles S. (fare,
£2 15s). Newspaper : Coonamble Independent. Court
meets twice a week and Small Debts court every
second Tuesday. Formation: pliocene. Accord-
ing to a lati return 1,579 acres of land are
under cultivation, principally for wheat, maize, and
potatoes. Coonamble is the centre of a municipal
district having 27 miles of roads, and property of
the rateable value of £Bl,OBO.
COOBANBONQ-, a post town, with telegraph
station, money-order office and Government Savings
Bank, in the county of Northumberland, police
district of Brisbane Water, 30 miles N. of Gos-
ford, 25 miles SW. from Newcastle and about
123 miles N. of Sydney, which can be reached by
conveyance to WaUsend or Maitland, thence the rail
and steamer. The line from Newcastle to Sydney
will pass here. Population stated at about 500 or 600.
Hotels: the Cricketers’ Arms, Hand and Heart, and
the Court House. There are three schools here,
public school has an average attendance of
16 scholars, an Episcopal church (St. John’s) and
Roman Catholic place of worship, a Literary Institute,
a court-house with constables’ quarters—a court of
petty sessions being held once a month—three gene-
ral stores, and four saw mills. It is the principal
town on Lake Macquarie, and where the greater
portion of the timber is shipped. The country around
is very mountainous, and abounds with fine timber,
fir, forest oak, blue gum, blackbutt, forest mahogany,
ironbark, and other trees.
COOTAMUNDRA, co. Harden, a post town,
with money order, savings bank and telegraph office,
and incorporated under the Municipalities Act
253 miles S. from Sydney, 36 miles NW. of Gunda-
gai, and 32 miles SB. from Temora. Cootamundra
stands 1,079 feet above sea level, it is an impor-
tant station on the Great Southern Railway Line
(fares, 455.6 d. and 30s. 3d.), and will be the junction
station of the line to Gundagai now constructing, and
is about equi-distant between Sydney and Melbourne.
It is comprised in the electoral district of Gundagai,
and there are 1,896 electors on the rolls ; it is an
independent land district, devoted to both pastoral
and agricultural pursuits, and famous for the good
quality and abundance of its wheat, averaging about
20 bushels to the acre. There has been a remark-
able improvement in agriculture during the past
few years, all cultivation being done by the latest
inventions in agricultural implements. Farmers
now cultivate up to 500 acres of wheat each.
Two, three, and four furrow ploughs, and strippers
for harvesting, are the favourite implements. In
1877 the township consisted of about a dozen houses
only, now it is formed into complete blocks,
well laid out, and can boast of some very pretty
residences, besides public buddings and churches.
There are now the following principal buildings:
Christ Church, a large and handsome edifice, which
cost nearly £2,000; Roman Catholic Church, a similar
building, neat but less pretentious; Wesleyan and
Presbyterian churches, two large steam flour mills
always kept busy, a court-house, gaol, and prison
station; good public school, with an average atten-
dance of 140 scholars; Roman Catholic, also a
private school, and a public assembly hall capable
of accommodating 300 ; handsome post and telegraph
office completed at a cost of about £3,000. The
Albert Park is a pleasure ground which excites the
admiration of every visitor ; it comprises twelve or
thirteen acres enclosed with close paling fence, with
large oval laid out in centre for cricket and other
pastimes, the whole ground being planted with
shade and ornamental trees, with promenades, rustic
seats, flower beds. &c , and it has a commodious and
very neat pavilion. A little way out of the town is
a Racecourse comprising about 160 acres, all fenced
in, with course laid out and grassed, and good
saddling paddock. The Park and Racecourse have
together cost about £2,000 in improvements. There
are also show grounds, comprising 16£ acres with
show sheds, sheep and stock pens, oval, parade and
every convenience, with large excavated reservoir,
the whole being fitted out with every requisite for
an Agricultural Exhibition. At present there are
four resident ministers, Episcopal, Wesleyan, Roman
Catholic, and Presbyterian, one lodge of Oddfellows
(M. U.), a lodge of Hibernians, Protestant Alliance
Friendly Society, Good Templars’ and one of the
Orange Institution ; Cricket Clubs, Turf Club, a well
conducted Athletic, Skating, Boxing, and Fencing
Club. There are fourteen public houses, Albion,
Royal, Commercial, Globe, Terminus, Railway and
others, and several private boarding establishments,
ten general and produce stores, five auctioneers'
firms, two solicitors, two doctors, two chemists, nu-
merous tradesmen ; three banks : New South Wales,
City, and Commercial; two local newspapers, the
Cootamundra Herald, established in January 1877,
and the Cootamundra Liberal, established in August,,
1882, both publish bi-weekly. Considerable trade is
done in wool with the Sydney and Melbourne mar-
kets ; and in wheat and other produce with Sydney
and Goulburn. Cootamundra is the natural centre
of a large pastoral and agricultural country, and is
the most direct and shortest route for travellers to
the gold fields of Temora, Barmedman and Muttama;
and to Gundagai, Adelong, and Tumut, The public
affairs of Cootamundra are watched by the Borough
Council. Cootamundra has made remarkable growth,
as a township, having swollen to a population of
1,400. There have been large additions in business
places and residences, and land has much increased
in value for principal positions. A very large
brewery, known as Resch Brothers, is conducted in
the town. There are also two cordial factories.
Cootamundra is in the centre of a rich auriferous
country, surrounded by the Temora, Barmedman,
Muttama, Wantool, Sebastopol, and Blind Creek
diggings. The revenue derived from the district
now exceeds £lOO,OOO a year.
COPELAND, county and electorate of
Gloucester, is a Government township under the
Towns’ Police Act, with post, Government savings
bank, telegraph and money order office, 167 miles
N. of Sydney, between the Barrington and Bowman
Rivers, with rich gold reefs in the district, and is
an important mining locality. It is in the centre of
a large pastoral district, with good agricultural
land. The communication with Sydney is by coach
to Raymond Terrace, fare, 225. 6d., or via Hexham,
thence the steamer. Bank : Joint-Stock. Hotels—
five: Royal and others, and five stores. Public
school, average attendance 85, and a Wesleyan
Church. The gold yield in 1883 was 2,827 ounces.
Population 800.
COPMANHUEST a village with telegraph
station 450 miles (384 postal) N. of Sydney, with a
population of about 208. It is in the county of
Clarence and electorate of Grafton. Route to Sydney
is vid Grafton, 80 miles SE. Armidale is the nearest
railway station. The sea is thirty-five miles away,
but the river Clarence, on whose banks Copman-
hurst is sited, is tidal to the township. There ia
one hotel, Cooper’s, three stores, Episcopal, Presby-
terian, and Roman Catholic churches, and a Protes-
tant hall. Mining, agricultural, and pastoral dis-
trict. Formation: sandstone.
CORARI, a township with telegraph station,
and money-order office on the Richmond river;
about 45 miles from the Heads, and 515 N. (349
miles postal) of Sydney. It is built on the south
bank of the Richmond river, at the junction of the
north arm, in the centre of good pastoral and agri-
cultural country, taken up by free selectors and
squatters. Much sugar is grown in the district.
Access to Sydney is gained by steamers direct, and
by the Clarence steamers. Prom its situation it is
likely in time to become a place of importance. It
has Presbyterian and Church of England churches,
a branch of the Commercial Bank, a public school
with average attendance of 26, two stores, several
inns, and a Government punt, which works across
both streams. The extensive shipbuilding estab-
lishment, sawmill, shed, and workshops of Mr..
T absley, the principal landowner in this neighbour-
hood, and the saw mills of Mr. Yeager, may well be
reckoned among the lions of the district. A Court
of Petty Sessions is held monthly.
COROW A, a money-order, postal, telegraph and
savings bank townshin, in the county and electoral
district of the Hume, pi ettily situated on the north-
ern bank of the river Murray, 406 miles (422 postal)


SW. of Sydney, and 40 miles W. from Albury. It
is in the midst of a good undulating grazing •country,
which is also well adapted for the vigjlerdn’s pur-
poses. The hotels are Louch’s Royal (Woking office
for the coaches), Thomson’s
Globe, Terminus, and others. There Are a School of
Arts with 483 volumes, Episcopal Wesleyan, and
K. C. churches, branches of thejH.'iS. Wales and
Australasian Banks, Building 'odciety, Custom
House, a public school, average* attendance 109, a
Roman Catholic and two private schools, crown
land office, a court-house, and a. theatre capable of
seating 400 people. The communication with the
metropolis is by the Southern line (coach runs to
and from Albury) ; it is easily accessible by rail by
way of Melbourne, being only J mile N. of Wah-
gunyah Railway 'Terminus. Coaches leave the
Royal Hotel for the Wahgunyah Railway Station
four times daily.' A, survey has been made of a pro-
posed line of,'railway from Culcairn to Corowa 40
miles, which, wiU r c9hnect the town with Sydney by
the Great Southern Route. Population, 600, inclu-
sive of district it is estimated at about 2,000. News-
paper, Corowa Free Press. Steamers ply on the
Murray to Echuca and other places during the
winter season. Corowa is described as “a fast
growing busy township, with a lovely climate, a
very pretty situation, and an increasing population."
Court of Petty Sessions is held here regularly, also
District Court and Quarter Sessions. Much wheat
is grown In the district, affording almost Constant
work to the two local steam flour mills. A pros-
perous Pastoral and Agricultural Society holds an
annual exhibition, and it has been stated by dis-
interested judges that the show of sheep at this
event is the most- important out of Sydney. There
are Racing, Rowing, Cricket, and Football Clubs, a
Lodge of Oddfellows, and a Fire brigade.
COWFLAT is a post town, with savings bank-
and money-order office, 155 miles W. of Sydney.
Copper has been found here, and worked by the
Cowflat Mining Company. Communication is via
George’s Plains or Bathurst. Public school here
with an average attendance of 6T.
COWEA, an agricultural township, with post,
money-order, Government Savings Bank, land office,
and telegraph station, situated on the north bank
of the Lachlan river, 32 miles SW. of Oarcoar, and
184 miles (203 postal) W. of Sydney. It is in the
county of Bathurst, and electorate of Carcoar, on
the loop line of railway connecting Blayney with
Murrumburrah. A coach runs daily to Blayney, the
nearest railway station on the Great Western line,
fare, 20s. ; also to Grenfell three times, Forbes
three times, Canowindra and Orange three times,
Marengo and Young twice a week. A well-built
bridge, on the principle known as McCullum’s Truss,
spans the river at this point, and gives much-needed
facilities of communication with the south-western
districts. The Fitzroy, Royal, Courthouse, Club
House, Great Western, Lockyer’s, Horse and Waggon,
and Australian are the principal inns. There are a
Roman Catholic church and convent, Episcopal
church built of rubble stone, a Presbyterian church
of brick, a public school —with an average attend-
ance of 102, a steam flour-mill, Roman Catholic
school, conducted by the Sisters of St. Joseph, with
116 scholars, branches of the Joint-Stock and Com-
mercial Banks, a commodious court-house and lock-
up, 2 steam flour-mills, and 2 large stores. In
April, 1870, the whole township was nearly swept
away by floods ; since that time the town has been
extended to rising ground, east of the former site,
and many neat and substantial buildings have been
erected : a local hospital has been firmly established.
Population of town 900; suburbs 900; town and
suburbs 1,800; of the district 5,000, and rapidly
increasing. The land in the vicinity is well adapted
for fruit, vine, and grain-growing, and nearly all
the land open to conditional purchase is now taken
up by free selectors. Formation : principally
granite. The surrounding country is highly aurife-
rous and good sluicing ground, gold being found
over a vast area, at depths varying from surface
downwards. Mining at about McDonald underwent
a thorough revival towards the end of the year, and
there is every indication of its permanency as a
goldfield ; copper also abounds in the same locality.
Newspaper ; Free Press. Cowra has a school of arts,
with library of 230 vols., a thriving Pastoral and
Agricultural Association, and' an Oddfellows' and
Good Templars’ Lodges. The principal stores are
Donnelly and Co.’s, Murray's, Taylor’s, and Rigaut’s l
Court of Petty Sessions is held daily and Court of
Requests on second and fourth Monday in each
month. As a grain-producing district Cowra ranks
in point of yield the highest in the Colony. As a
pastoral district it also takes a prominent place.
As a mineral-producing district it is anticipated that
with the advantages to be derived from an expe-
ditious and cheap means of transit to the nearest
markets, very many mines of a most productive
character will be opened up. In copper, lodes of
great richness are known to abound in various
localities within easy access of the line of railway.
CROKI, a small village, situated about 8 miles
from Harrington Inlet, on the north bank of the
Manning River, in the midst of a rich agricultural
district. It is in county Macquarie, police district
of Manning, about 205 miles north of Sydney. In
the town are two general stores, a post, telegraph
and money-order office ; a public school, average at-
tendance CO, and about 600 people. Croki is the great
emporium for oysters, and a very important shipping
place, with considerable exports and imports, almost
equal to any in the Manning district. In the locality
of which Croki is the post town, are two Episcopal
churches, one Wesleyan Church, one temperance hall
one public school—average attendance 68 four
general stores, two steam saw-mills, one shipyard,
employing a good number of hands. Steamers run
weekly. Coasting craft at intervals for the metro-
polis. The land is principally composed of rich
alluvial deposit. Daily mails are received and des-
patched every week by coach, besides a weekly mail
per steamer.
CROYDON, a railway station in the county of
Cumberland, electoral district of Canterbury, 6
miles W. of Sydney ; it has one hotel, several stores,
a Congregational and an Episcopalian church, and
a number of superior residences. Fares, 7d. and sd.
CROORWELL, electorate of Argyle, a post
town, with savings’ barik, money-order office, and
telegraphic communication, 160 miles SW. of Sydney,
and 30 miles NW. from Goulburn, the nearest rail-
way station. It is situated oh the Crookwell river,
at an elevation of 3,000 feet above sea-level. A
Court of Petty Sessions is held on the third Monday
in each month. There are two steam flour-mills,
six stores, four hotels, and four churches, a roads
office, public school—with average attendance of 88
scholars, and branch of the N. S. Wales bank. The
district is chiefly agricultural, the principal produce
being wheat, potatoes, and oaten hay. The average
yield of wheat per acre is about 30 bushels. The
population is 240. It is the chief polling place and
place of nomination for the electorate of Argyle.
Tne climate is healthy and bracing, and all English
fruits grow in abundance. Snow falls during the
winter months. The township is growing in im-
portance, and likely soon to be connected with
Goulburn by a line of railway.
CTJDAL, 221 miles west of Sydney, county Ash-
burnham, and electoral district of Molong—mode of
conveyance, coach to Orange, 29 miles, fare, 10s. It
is situated on the Boree Creek, and contains a post,
money-order, and telegraph office a branch of the
Commercial Bank, a steam flour-mill, 5 stores, 3
holels, an Episcopalian and a Roman Catholic church,
a school of arts with a library of 250 vols., a public
school, average attendance 60, and a cordial factory.
Population about 300. The district is purely agri-
cultural, principally wheat.
CDDGrEQONGr is a mining township with post
and money-order office, in the county of Wellington,
electoral and police district of Mudgee, situated on
the river of the same name, 59 miles NW. from
Hartley, 23 miles SE. from Mudgee, and 145 miles
(157 postal) NW. of Sydney. Communication is by
coach and rail yid Capertee (coach fare, 11s. 6d.). It
has a fine public school (average attendance 52), two
stores, and an Episcopal church; hotels, Royal and
Cudgegong. Population about 120. The surround-
ing district is an agricultural one, although there


are extensive alluvial gold-diggings in the neigh-
bourhood, particularly at Campbell’s Creek and the
Meroo river. Iron, copper, and coal are also found
in the district. The country is clay-slate, with
numerous quartz veins and antimony. Cudgegong
is also the name of a municipality (Mudgee), pro-
claimed July 20, 1860, having 300 miles of roads,
and rateable property valued at £327,834.
CUNDLETOWN, a postal, telegraph and
money-order township on the north bank of the
Manning river, 16 miles distant from the ocean, 4
miles below Taree, and 199 miles from Sydney,
NE., with which it has direct communication by
steamer, and a daily overland mail. Hexham is the
nearest railway station. It is in the county of
Macquarie, and police district of Manning river.
Population about 200. The district is mainly an
agricultural one, maize being extensively cultivated.
Courts of petty sessions are held monthly; places
of worship, Episcopal, Wesleyan, Presbyterian, and
Roman Catholic. It has a court-house, a public
school, with average attendance of 58, a public
library, a school of arts, 3 stores, 3 hotels, Manning
River, Royal, and Bryant’s Family. Formation :
principally limestone.
D ALMORTON, a mining centre and post town,
with money-order office, 343 miles (365 postal) N. of
Sydney, in the county of Gresham, electoral and
police district of Glen Innes. The mining is from
the quartz, one reef being worked. The communi-
cation is by coach from Grafton, or via Uralla.
Armidale is the nearest railway station. Provisional
school has average attendance 2. Population of
district 233.
DALTON, a post town with money-order office,
in the county of King, police district of Yass Plains,
163 miles SVY. of Sydney. Communication is by
conveyance to the Gunning railway station. It is
situated on the Oolong creek, about 1J miles above
its confluence with the Yarrawa Creek, and 4$ miles
from the railway. It contains a brick Wesleyan
chapel, a stone Episcopal church, one hotel—the
Wonder of the World—a public school, with average
attendance 25, a large steam flour-mill built of brick,
one general store, and several brick residences,
and about 60 inhabitants ; in the district are about
120. Chiefly an agricultural district, wheat being
the most extensively cultivated, but in the
vicinity are extensive vineyards, where much wine
is made, and there are also some large apple
orchards. The roads are being made, and the dis-
trict is reported to be making great headway.
There are some poor quartz reefs in the neighbour-
hood. Formation : granite and quartz.
DAPTO, a village on the south side of Mullet
creek, in the Illawarra district, 74 miles S. of Syd-
ney. It is in the county of Camden, and police dis-
trict of Wollongong. The means of travelling are
either overland by rail to Campbelltown, thence
coach, or by steamer to Wollongong, 8 miles distant,
thence conveyance. A substantial bridge spans the
creek. There are two hotels, the Illawarra and Dapto,
a flour mill, a public school, with average attendance
of 30, a post and money-order telegraph office, and
three churches—Presbyterian, Wesleyan, and Angli-
can. West Dapto has a Roman Catholic place of wor-
ship, with school attached, and there is also a public
school, with average attendance of 50. The popula-
tion of East and West Dapto is about 400. The
district is principally taken up by dairy-farming ;
coal abounds in the neighbouring Illawarra range.
Lake Illawarra, a magnificent sheet of shoal water,
is in the vicinity. Formation : limestone.
DARLINGTON is a municipal suburb on the
South-Western boundary of Sydney, in the county
of Cumberland and electoral district of Newtown,
it has a post, money-order and telegraph office and
Savings bank. Principal hotels are Lalla Rookh,
Royal Albert and Johnson’s family. There is also
an ironfoundry in the borough, and a public school,
average attendance 636. Population about 2,100.
Communication to Sydney is by wagonettes and
tramways every eight minutes, fare, 3d. The borough
has 5 miles of streets and rateable property of the
value of £192,000.
DEEPWATER, a small village, postal and tele-
graph station, about 397 miles(44l postal) N.of Sydney,
situated on the Mole River, about midway between
Glen Innes and Tenterfield. It is in the county of
Gough, electoral and police district of Tenterfield. It
takes its name from a lake or immense water-hole in
the vicinity. There is one store and two hotels—Deep-
water and Commercial—but there are no public
buildings of any note. The route to the metropolis
is by coach to Armidale, coach fare, 555.; train to
Newcastle, thence per steamer. Population of dis-
trict— which is of a mining, agricultural, and pas-
toral character about 150. Formation: granite.
The railway line from Glen Innes to Tenterfield will
pass through Deepwater.
DELEGATE, a post town, with money-order
office and telegraph station, 366 miles S. of Sydney, in
the police district of Bombala (Co. of Wellesley) and
electorate of Monaro. The town of Bombala is 22
miles distant. There are two hotels, Episcopalian,
Presbyterian and Roman Catholic churches, public
school, average attendance 36, and 3 stores. Goul-
burn is the nearest railway-station. Gold-digging
has been carried on to some extent. Population
of town 180, district 700. Court of petty sessions is
held monthly. Formation : granite, slate and sand-
stone.
DENILIQ,TJIN, a postal, money-order, savings
bank, telegraph, and municipal township, on the
Edward River, and the principal place of importance
in what is known as the Riverine district. It is
distant from Sydney about 481 miles SW., Hay
being the nearest railway station, to which a coach
runs daily, fare, 305., it is easily reached vid Mel-
bourne, 195 miles S., being only about 45 miles distant
from the terminus of the Victorian Railway—Echuca,
with which place it is connected by a line of railway
constructed by the Deniliquin and Moama Railway
Co., opened on the 4th July, 1876. Under powers con-
ferred by the Company’s Act, the large iron bridge
(constructed at a cost of over £BO,OOO. at the joint
expense of the N.S.W. and Victorian Government) is
used for carrying the line over the Murray. Trains
run between the two towns twice a day, and the
traffic on the line is very great, a large business
being done in the carriage of live stock to the mar-
kets of Victoria. The line averaged about £3,000
per mile for constructioh. It was expected that the
opening of the line from Narandera to Hay would
divert some of the traffic from this line, but so far
the diminution of the traffic is not appreciable.
The business of the town is principally
connected with the interests of sheep and
cattle farmers; or, as they are better known, in
the colonies—the Squatters, and with free selec-
tors. The public buildings in the municipality are
the hospital, court-house, post-office, telegraph-office.
Masonic-hall, Mechanics’ Institute, and town-hall,
the latter a most commodious building. The Mechan-
ics’ Institute has been rebuilt, and possesses a library
of 600 vols. Few municipalities have so spacious a
hall. The various religious bodies, including the
Episcopalians, Wesleyans, Presbyterians, and Roman
Catholics, have handsome and substantial places of
worship, and each of these denominations has a
resident clergyman. There are four banks, viz. :
New South Wales, Australian Joint Stock, Union
and London Chartered Bank. Since the opening
of the railway there has been a great accession
to the population, and a proportionate increase in
the number of business places and private resi-
dences. There'are now twenty-seven hotels within
the municipal area, of which the principal are the
Royal, Continental, Commercial, and Globe Hotels at
South Deniliquin ; and the Sportsman’s Arms, at
North Deniliquin. There are over forty retail estab-
lishments of different kinds ; four firms carrying on
business as stock and station agents; two archi-
tects, four leading building firms; several coach-
building establishments, and many tradesmen
of various descriptions. Circuit Courts are held
at Deniliquin twice, and Quarter Sessions and
District Courts four times a year. Several insurance
companies are represented by agencies. Deniliquin
has a public school (one of the finest out of Sydney,
costing £4,000), with average attendance of 237
scholars, and several private ones. A teacher’s resi-
dence has been erected adjoining the school house.
The Deniliquin Pastoral and Agricultural Society, in-


augurated in 1876, has very complete yards and
buildings for exhibition purposes. There is a
flourishing Jockey Club, and the race - course,
situated about two miles to the south of the
town, is fenced in, has saddling paddock, grand
stand, stewards’ and refreshment rooms, and all
other requisites for racing purposes. The population
of the town is about 3,000, and that of the town and
district is 5,736. The estimated value of rateable
property within the municipality of Deniliquin, is
£239,168 14s. od., there being 24 miles of streets and
roads. The district was originally entirely a pastoral
one, consisting of vast plains of native grass and salt
bush, intersected with clumps of timber, and in many
parts not suitable for cultivation, but farming is
now being tried with some prospect of success ;
the vine also flourishes in the neighbourhood.
In summer severe droughts are frequently experi-
enced, though numerous and expensive efforts have
been made, by the formation of dams, to provide
against this contingency. The press is represented
by the Pastoral Times, the Deniliquin Chronicle, and
the Riverine Advertiser.
DENISON TOWN, a postal township 244
miles N. of Sydney, 50 miles from Mudgee, and
40 miles from Cassilis, situated on the Talbragar
River. Hotel, the Denison. Wallewarang and
Wellington are the nearest railway stations. Pro-
visional school here, average attendance of 9.
DENMAN, a telegraph, savings bank, and
money-order station, 165 miles NW. of Sydney, on the
banks of the Hunter river, about 3 miles above the
junction with the Goulbum. It is in the county of
Brisbane, and police district of Muswellbrook, and
electoral district of the Upper Hunter, and is distant
16 miles SW. from the Muswellbrook railway station.
Hotels : Fitzroy and Royal. Churches, Episcopal—
a handsome stone building—Presbyterian, and
Roman Catholic. Other buildings are a lock-up, a
steam flour and saw-mill, a fine School of Arts, with
1,200 vols., two large stores, brick Court House and
offices, and a Public School, with average attendance
56. The district is a grazing and farming one, and con-
sists of rich alluvial flats backed up by lofty hills
of sandstone. Population 560. Coach to Muswell-
brook (fare, 55.), rail to Newcastle, and thence
steamer, are the means of reaching Sydney. Denman
lying on the main road to Sydney, travelling stock
have necessarily to pass through here.
DOUGLAS PARK (now known as Douglas),
a post town, telegraph and railway station on the
Southern line, in the county of Camden, and police
district of Camden, near the river Nepean, 45 miles S.
of Sydney, lying 396 feet above sea-level. It has a
small population scattered over an agricultural dis-
trict, Public School with average attendance 24.
Fares, 6s. 6d. and 4s. 2d.
DOVED ALE, a village 377 miles N. of Sydney.
Communication is kept up by conveyance to Grafton
or Kempsey, thence steamer or sailing vessels that
visit the Bellinger river.
DRAKE. See Lunatic Reefs.
DUBBO, a progressing township, 226 miles (278
postal) NW. of Sydney, in the county of Lincoln, elec-
toral district of Bogan, and police district of Dubbo,
in 32° 21' S. lat. and 148° 39' E. long., on the Macquarie
river, across which a fine bridge (300 ft. long, opened
in May, 1866) is here thrown. It is 865 feet
above sea level. The town is well laid out with
fine broad streets. The Commercial, Joint Stock
and N. 8. Wales Banks, the Hospital—a brick
building—the Exchange Hall and Mechanics’
Institute, in Macquarie Street, the Masonic Hall,
the new stone gaol, railway station, the post,
money-order and telegraph office, also of stone,
and the churches, Wesleyan, Episcopal, Presby-
terian, and Roman Catholic, with lofty spire,
comprise the principal edifices in the town. The
school of arts has a library of 1,400 vols. The manu-
facturing works include a steam flour and saw-mill,
a soap and candle factory and tannery, two brew-
eries and a soda-water factory. There are also ten
principal stores. In April, 1884, a disastrous fire
destroyed some of these business premises. The
principal hotels are the Royal (where passengers
can book themselves for the West), the Post
Office, the Court-house, the Overland, Tattersall’s,
and Telegraph, a public school, average attend-
ance 399 scholars, and R.C. denominational school,
under the charge of nuns, a High school, and
several private schools. The district was principally
a pastoral one, but of late considerable quantities of
land have been taken up by free selectors for farming
purposes. Wheat, oats, and maize are principally
grown, with some green and fruit crops; but,
though the soil is good, the climate is not alto-
gether favourable for farming operations. Coal
and copper are found in the neighbourhood. The
communication with the metropolis is by rail, fares,
495., and 325. 9d.; a line is now constructing that
will eventually run to Bourke. It is at present
open to Byrock, 177 miles NW. from Dubbo. There
is a large and commodious station yard here, and
the station of coarse rubble stone is a neat building
fitted with every convenience. Newspaper, the
Dubbo Dispatch. The population of township is now
about 3,200, with district it is 6,300 souls. The
municipal district (proclaimed Feb. 26, 1872) has
20 miles of streets, and rateable property to the
amount of £420,000.
DUNGOG, a small post, money-order, telegraph,
and savings’ bank township, picturesquely situated
on the west bank of the river Williams, 31 miles from
Maitland, and 130 miles N. of Sydney,which is reached
by coach from Maitland daily. Coach fare, 7s. 6d,
It is in the county and electoral district of Durham,
and police district of Dungog. The district is prin-
cipally an agricultural one, maize and wheat being
the staple products; tobacco is also largely grown.
The inhabitants comprise about 440 persons; in the
census district, 1,874. The hotels are the Royal,,
Parmer’s Home, and the Settlers’ Arms. Banks:
Commercial and N. S. Wales. Schools : one public,
average attendance 93. Churches : Episcopal, Pres-
byterian, Wesleyan, Roman Catholic, Free Church
of Scotland, and six stores. Government buildings
—court-house and post-office. The School of Arts
has a library of 708 vols. Wheat flour and maizena
of the best quality are produced in the district,
there being two large mills —one for wheat and the
other for maize. Gold has been found in payable
quantities in the quartz at Little River about 20
miles distant. The climate is very salubrious.
EAST KEMPSEY. See Kempsey.
EAST TEMORA. See Temora.
EATTABALONG-, a postal, savings bank,
telegraph and money-order township in the county
of Blaxland, police district of Hay and electoral
district of Balranald, 351 miles W. of Sydney,
80 miles NE. of Hillston, situated on the Lachlan
river, which is spanned by a good timber bridge
about 15 miles within the Riverine district.
Hulong, Hay, and Orange are the nearest railway
stations. Coach runs 4 times weekly, fare, 80s.
Principal hotels, Eauabalong, Royal, and Great
Parnell. Population about 80. Court of Petty Ses-
sions is held on the third Monday in each month.
The country is level sandy loam, lightly timbered,
with open plains and salt bush, suitable for cattle
and sheep.
EDEN (co. Auckland, 37° S. lat., 149° 56'E. long.)
is situated on the north shore of Twofold Bay, 283
miles (postal) SW. of Sydney, and 50 miles N. from
Cape Howe by land, but only 35 miles by sea. Prom
Heads to Heads it is 202 miles from Sydney, as mea-
sured by the s.s. Yarra with a patent log some
years ago. The locality has been settled since 1845,
at which time it contained “a public-house and
three or four huts, and 63 residents.” It has always
been the terminus of the main coast road to Monaro
and all the Southern District. When the Snowy
River “ rush” broke out it caused a great increase of
population for a time, since which it has been lan-
guishing away and has the appearance almost of
a deserted village, many of the buildings being
closed and several others in ruins. The Tasmanian
S.N. Company run weekly boats between here
and Sydney and Hobart, and some traffic has
again been directed through Eden. The town
is built on the slopes and valley formed by two
hills which jut out into the bay, dividing it into
two parts, whence it derives its name. There
is a good pier, a pilot establishment is maintained
here, and it is also a lighthouse station. The


houses are principally of wood, some few are
of brick and stone. There are an Anglican church,
Presbyterian church, a Roman Catholic chapel,
court-house, post, money-order, savings-bank,
and telegraph office, three or four stores, a bacon
curing establishment, three hotels—the Com-
mercial, Pier, and Great Southern, and two private
boarding houses, a steam saw mill, and a public
school, average attendance 47. The principal trade
consists in the shipment of live stock to
Hobart, pigs and bacon to Melbourne, and wool
and hides to Sydney. Eden is the natural outlet
of the Bega and Monaro country. The lllawarra
Company’s steamers trade to and from Eden,
calling en route at Tathra and Merimbula. The
population is estimated at 230 persons; in the
census district it is 1,526 (1881). The harbour is a
good one, and valuable in stormy weather as a port
of refuge, being easy of access and well sheltered
from all winds; in size and security it is second
only to Port Jackson. The larger bay is three
miles broad by six miles in length. Whaling is
still carried on here, but the whales appear to have
become scarce in this part of the ocean. The dis-
trict is mountainous, and better suited for pastoral
than agricultural purposes. 18.179 J acres of land are
under cultivation, maize, wheat, oats, and potatoes
being grown. Stock returns for 1884 for the electoral
district—6,2B2 horses, 61,811 cattle, 6,175 sheep,
17,234 pigs.
ELL ALONG- (or TEllalong), a post town in
the county of Northumberland, police and electoral
district of Wollombi, 120 miles N. of Sydney, on the
Gachaboy Creek. It has two churches, English and
Roman Catholic, one school, average attendance 44,
two stores, but no public buildings. Population in
town about 50, in the district estimated at 700.
Grazing and farming locality. Communication is
■via. West Maitland, 29 miles distant SW.
EHMAVILLE. See Vegetable Creek. I
EMU (33° 41' S. lat., 150° 41' E. long.), a small
postal and money-order township in the county cf
Cook, and police district of Penrith, on the Nepean
river, about three miles distant from Penrith, half a
mile from the nearest railway station (Emu Plains),
and 37 miles W. of Sydney ; railway fares, 4s. 9d.,
3s. The population is about 250; with vicinity
it is upwards of 500. The principal edifices are the
Episcopal church, the Wesleyan chapel, the tweed
factory, and two hotels—the Railway Inn and the
Emu Inn. It has one public school, average atten-
dance 87, and three stores. The district is partly
agricultural, and in part pastoral. The formation
is principally of ferruginous sandstone. Surface
coal is found on the ridge two miles from the town-
ship and seams of coal are supposed to underlie.
The river for several miles above the township is
“broad and deep enough to float vessels of large ton-
nage.
ENEIELD is a post town, 39 miles NW. of
Sydney (in lat. 33° 30' S. and long. 150° 50' E.) situated
on the Hawkesbuvy River, in the county of Cork,
electoral district of Hawkesbury. Mode of convey-
ance, coach to Richmond, thence rail to Sydney. :
Population of town about 450. There is one hotel, i
Stephenson’s. A public school, average attendance |
60, an Episcopal and Wesleyan church, and one j
store. Geological formation : sandstone.
EUGOWEA, a post town in the electorate and
police district of Forbes, situated on the Mandagery j
Creek, with money-order office and telegraph station,
situated 247 miles W. of Sydney. The nearest rail-
way station is at Orange, to which a coach runs daily,
fare, 225. There are two hotels, the Bridge and Eu-
gowra, a public school, average attendance 34, and
Roman Catholic convent. Population about 150.
Formation : granite.
EUROBODALLA, US miles S. of Sydney, is ;
a postal village, with public school, average attend- j
ance 27, one hotel, and blacksmith’s shop; agricul-,
tural population. Nine miles W. is Nerrigundah,
formerly one of the richest alluvial gold fields in the
colony, now almost worked out. Upper Tarrago is
the nearest railway station.
EUEONGrILLY. See Clarendon.
ETJSTON, a postal, telegraph, and money-order
township and port of entry, in the county of Taila,
police and electoral district of Wentworth, on the
Murray river, about 608 miles SW. of Sydney, and 60
miles W. from Balranald :it lies in lat. 34° 33'5., and
long. 142° 44' E. Hotels : Royal Mail, and Euston,
Public school, average attendance 31, and two stores.
Population about 150. It is an important crossing-
place over the Murray river for stock into the colony
of Victoria, and was more easily reached from Mel-
bourne than Sydney till the opening of the line to
Hay, which is the nearest railway station. It is on
the main road from Balranald to Wentworth.
Coaches piss through twice a week. A custom-
house and police-station are here, also a bonded
store. Pastoral district.
FAIRFIELD, a post town on the upper part
of the Shoalhaven river, within about 90 miles of its
source, about 30 miles S. of the town of Braid wood,
and 226 miles S. of Sydney. Upper Tarago is the
nearest railway station. It is in the county of
Murray, and police district of Braidwood. There
is here a police-station. The district, which has a
population of about 200 persons, is principally
used for the rearing of cattle, sheep not thriving.
Gold has been found in the neighbourhood, but not
in paying quantities.
FEENMOUNT, a post, telegraph, Govern-
ment Savings’ Bank, and money-order station on the
river Bellinger, in the county of Raleigh, police and
electoral district of Macleay, 337 miles (371 postal)
N. of Sydney, situated on the Bellinger River;
mode of conveyance to which is either coasting
vessel or the steamer from Macleay heads. Hexham
is the nearest railway station. Business and public
buildings are comprised in the Bellinger and Free
Selection Hotels, public school (average attendance
44), Wesleyan chapel, and Commercial Bank. The
district is a maize and sugar-growing one. A large
saw-mill is here, which is capable of turning out
60,000 feet of sawn timber weekly. Population, 150.
Formation: rich alluvial land permeated with
quartz.
EIELD OF MARS, a post town in the county
of Cumberland, and police district of Parramatta, 13
miles W. of Sydney. The district is noted for its fruit-
growing capabilities, oranges largely predominating.
There are valuable quarries, too, here, which supply
most of the metal with which the Sydney streets are
macadamized. Conveyance to Sydney is by steam-
boats, which ply frequently up and down the Parra-
matta river. In the town limits are an Episcopal and
Wesleyan place of worship, and three stores.
FISH RIVER CREEK, or Oberon, a post
town, with savings bank, money-order and telegraph
office, on the Fish River Creek, county of Westmore-
land, police district of Hartley, electoral district of
Hartley and East Macquarie, 133 miles W. of Sydney,
and 32 miles SB. of Bathurst. The means of reach-
ing the metropolis is by conveyance to Tarana, or
Bathurst, on the Great Western Railway. In the
vicinity are two hotels, two stores, a court-house,
and Episcopal and Wesleyan churches. Farming is
carried on to some extent in the distri t, and a
payable lode of copper has been unearthed. Popu-
lation of tbe district 500. Formation : granite.
FIVE DOCK, a post town (railway platform
1 mile distant, on the Suburban line), 8 miles W. of
Sydney, located on the Parramatta and Iron Cove
creek, in the county of Cumberland. It contains
three hotels, two schools public (average at-
tendance 67) and Roman Catholic; two churches.
Episcopal and Wesleyan, a Roman Catholic convent;
and a population, including the neighbourhood, of
800 people. The district, which is under municipal
government (since July 25, 1875), contains about
1,600 acres, is of sandstone formation, and is
largely occupied by villa residences that command
cl arming views; it has 49 miles of streets and
property of the total rateable value of £600,000.
Much fruit and vegetables are grown here.
FORBES, is the principal town on the Lachlan
river, with a town population of about 2,500, and a
district one of between 6,000 and 7,000, having
telegraph, money-order, and savings bank offices.
It lies west from Sydney, from which place it is dis-
tant about 250 miles. The nearest railway station
is at Orange, with which there is daily communi-
cation, coach fare, 335. 6d., and until recently Orange


and Forbes were reckoned to be 84 miles apart.
Railway surveys, however, which have just been
completed give the distant as 64 miles. Surveys
have also been made from Forbes to Murrumburrah,
vid Young and Grenfell, to connect it with the
Southern line; so that if the proposed lines are
carried out, and the western extension to Wilcannia
starts from here, Forbes at no distant date will be
one of the most important towns in New South
Wales. The line from Orange to Molong is construct-
ing, and the extension from Molong to Forbes is
authorized. The Commercial Bank has just completed
a very handsome building here, the bank of New
South Wales is about building, and the Australian
Joint Stock Bank has commodious brick premises of
its own. The Anglican, Presbyterian, and Roman
Catholic churches, are all substantial structures of
dressed stone ; a public school is here, average
attendance 250, also several hotels, Court House,
Albion, Royal, Osborne (Cobb’s coach booking
office), and others. The Court House and post and
telegraph offices are of brick, costing about
£B,OOO each. Forbes has a large and well-
supported School of Arts, and it has also a
Free Public Library. The District Hospital is a fine
building, standing on a commanding position near
the town. The Forbes municipality has just com-
pleted a scheme for supplying the town with filtered
water from the Lachlan, and water is laid on through
all the principal streets. This has been done at a
cost of £B,OOO, and the money has been raised locally
and without Government assistance. The two news-
papers are The Forbes Times, and the Forbes and
Parkes Gazette. The country is admirably adapted
for either squatting or agricultural pursuits, wheat
crops generally averaging 20 bushels to the acre. In
1884, 8.841 J acres were under cultivation, of which
4,514 were wheat, 15£ barley, 83 oats, and 25 pota-
toes. Yield 69,495 bushels of wheat, 2,615 of maize,
1,305 of oats, and 35 tons of potatoes. The stock
returns for the electoral district on March 31, 1884,
were 3,846 horses, 7,859 cattle, 981, 530 sheep, and
1,112 pigs. In the municipal district of Forbes are 100
miles of streets and roads, of which only 6 are
made. Value of property is £155,000.
EORSTER, a township at the entrance of Wallis
Lake from the coast, near Cape Hawke, about 50
miles from Bulahdelah, and 198 miles N. from Syd-
ney. It has a post office, savings bank, money-order
office and telegraph station. There are here a School
of Arts, one hotel (the Forster), two saw mills, and
a public school (average attendance 48). Hexham is
the nearest railway station.
FOREST REEFS, a postal, money-order, and
mining township, 184 miles W. of Sydney. It is 6
miles from Spring Grove railway station.
FREDERICTON, a post town with money-
order office and telegraph station in the county of
Dudley, police district of Kempsey, and electoral
district of Hastings, 301 miles N. of Sydney, situated
on the Macleay river and Christmas creek. Places
of worship, Church of England and Methodist chapel.
Hotels : Royal and Cooper’s. The public school, a
very handsome building, has an average attendance
of 79. The School of Arts, has 210 Vols. Population,
about 220. Hexham is the nearest railway station.
Agricultural and pastoral district.
FROGMORE, a small copper-mining township
with money-order office, about 16 miles irom Bur-
rowa, in the Burrowa police district, and 237 miles S.
from Sydney. The land in the vicinity is principally
occupied for grazing purposes. Route is vid Binalong
and Burrowa. Public school here (average atten-
GEORGE’S PLAINS, a post, and telegraph
station, 152 miles W. of Sydney. It is a station on
the Great Western line (fares, 265. 6d., 17s. 6d.), and
lies at an altitude of 2,260 feet above sea level.
GEKMANTON (Ten Mile Creek), a postal, tele-
graph, and Government savings bank township with
money order office, in the county of Goulburn, and
police district of the Murray, on the Ten Mile Creek,
and the Sydney Road, 38 miles NNE. of Albury, and
354 (373 postal) miles BW. of Sydney. Culcairn (17
miles distant W.) is the nearest railway station.
There are about 300 inhabitants in the township,
whose spiritual wants are met by a Presbyterian
church (in which the Episcopalians also worship) and
Roman Catholic church. There are two hotels,
Criterion and Riverina ; two schools (public school
has an average attendance of about 45 scholars),
court house, two public halls, police barracks, a flour
mill, a branch of the Commercial Bank, four stores,
about half a dozen tradesmen’s shops, and a hand-
some Presbyterian manse, Church of England par-
sonage, and Roman Catholic Presbytery. The dis-
trict is occupied by farms, stations and vineyards,
and has a population of about 600 souls.
GEROGERY, a small post town and railway-
station, with telegraph, savings bank, and money-
order office, 368 miles S. of Sydney, in the county
of Goulburn, on the main coach road to Albury (18
miles) and the Creek of the same name (799 feet
above sea-level). For the latter part of 1880 it was
the temporary terminus of the southern line, but
the extension of Albury is now completed. Fares,
625. 3d., 425. 3d. It has a German church and school,
a public school, average attendance 26, one hotel, a
store, a blacksmith’s shop, and about 300 residents.
Wheat is the principal product of the district.
GERRINGONG, a village and municipal dis-
trict on the South Coast road, 99 miles S. of Sydney,
and about 7 miles S. of Kiama, where the steamer
can be taken for the metropolis, overland route is
via Campbelltown. Hotel, Phillips’. There are
three places of worship, three stores, a public school,
average attendance 61, and telegraph, savings bank,
and money-order office. It was proclaimed April 22,
1871, has 64 miles of streets and property of the rate-
able value of £141,650.
GIRILAMBONE, a post town, with money-
order office and telegraph station, 433 miles W. of
Sydney, county of Kennedy and electorate of Forbes.
There are branches here of the Mercantile and Joint
Stock Banks, two hotels —Royal and Great Western
—a public school (with average attendance of 64),
two stores, and a Wesleyan church used by all Pro-
testant denominations. Wyngan is the nearest
railway station. Population about 300.
GLADESVILLE, or Tarban, a village with
telegraph station and post office on the banks of the
Parramatta river 7 miles W. of Sydney. The Parra-
matta steamboats call at intervals. It can be reached,
too, by the road and the bridge over the river.
Oranges and other fruits are largely grown in the
district, and much of the neighbourhood is taken up
by the residences and grounds of well-to-do citizens
and others. The Hospital for the Insane is located
here. The new wing of the hospital, situated about
a quarter of a mile from the main building, was
completed during 1881. It comprises two handsome
blocks of buildings each with accommodation for 82
patients. An Episcopal church has been built.
Public school has average attendance of 72 pupils.
GLADSTONE, a post, telegraph, money-order,
and savings bank town, in the county of Macquarie,
and police district of Macleay river, 277 miles (307
postal) NNE. of Sydney, situate on the Macleay
river, at the confluence with the Belmore, in lat.
31°' 6S. and long. 1528 51' E. Population about
120. Place of worship, Wesleyan chapel. A good
Government wharf is now erected. It has a court-
house, school of arts, and school-house with average
attendance of 88 scholars ; 4 stores and 2 accommoda-
tion houses. Agricultural district; maize is prin
cipally grown. Formation: alluvial, arising from
drift and sediment from floods.
GLANMIRE, a postal and mining township in
the county of Roxburgh, electoral district of Bast
Macquarie and police district of Bathurst, situated
on St. Anthony’s Creek, about 7 miles NE. of
Bathurst, and 117 miles (152 postal) W. of Sydney.
A coach runs daily to and from the Raglan Railway
station. The diggings were first discovered in June,
1865; from time to him a fair number of miners
have been employed. The principal reefs are the
Napoleon and Fontana not worked at present..
Population upwards of 600. Hotel, the Prince
Alfred. Public school has an average attendance of
20 scholars.
GLEBE, a suburb of Sydney, near Blackwattle
Bay, on the BW. side of the city, to which it is imme-
diately contiguous. The tramcar runs frequently
throughout the day, fare, 2d. It is an indepen


dent municipality, having been proclaimed August
1, 1859, and contains an area of three-quarters of a
square mile; 188 miles of roads ; property for rating
purposes is estimated at £1,108,030. Many of the
citizens of Sydney have their residences here. There
are here upwards of 20 hotels, 15 schools, comprising
a public (average attendance 328), a denominational,
a Ragged school, and 12 private; with a telegraph
and money-order office and government savings
bank and a branch of the Joint Stock Bank. The
population by the last census was 5,714. Formation:
ironstone and sandstone. A Hospital for sick chil-
dren has been established here, under the manage-
ment of a Board having both ladies and gentlemen
on its Committee ; on January 1, 1884, the number
of patients remaining in the Hospital was 21.
GLEN INNES is pleasantly situated at the
foot of a hill, at an elevation of 3,700 feet above the
sea-level, on the Rocky ponds, about four miles from
the Beardy river, on the railway line between
Armidale and Tenterfleld, 373 miles (417 postal)
NNW. of Sydney ; rail and steamer, being the means
of reaching the metropolis. The main Northern
line to the Queensland border is through the town.
It is in the county of Gough, electorate and police
district of Glen Innes, and takes its name from Major
Innes, one of the oldest of the New England set-
tlers. Population about 1,500 ; in the census dis-
trict (1881), 6,900. There are three churches—Epis-
copal, Roman Catholic, and Presbyterian, the latter
having turret and spire; a public school (average
attendance 196), a fine brick building—court-house,
a large stone building, now enlarged by the addition
of several stone-built rooms, post, savings bank,
money-order and telegraph office, branches of the
N. S. Wales, Joint Bank and Commercial Banks,
and a Good Templars’ Hall. Gray Street is the prin-
cipal street. It has been a municipal district since
June 17, 1872, having 76 miles of roads, and property
rated at the value of £133,000. The local newspapers
are the Glen Innes Guardian and Examiner. Hotels—
Royal, Commercial (which has a handsome music-hall
attached to it), Telegraph, TattersalTs, Mount Plea-
sant, and New England ; there are also six stores,
several of them commodious, and numerous other
business places. A large and handsome brick Masonic
hall has been erected in East street: there is also a
spacious police barracks, and a good brick hospital.
The district is principally agricultural, but sheep sta-
tions and sheep farming have numerous representa-
tives ; much mining is carried on and the country is
believed to be rich in minerals, particularly tin and
bismuth, which are now being obtained in the
vicinity in large quantities. Vegetable Creek,
now called Bmmaville, the most important tin field
in the colony, is within 28 miles distance and has
mail coach communication three times a week with
Glen Innes. Selectors are now freely taking up
ground. Wheat, oats, and cereals generally are
principally cultivated, 7,971 acres in all being under
crop; wheat occupied 2,095 acres, the produce
being 51,360 bushels in 1884. The soil is of a
rich black character. Formation: granite. The
Newton Boyd road affords a capital means of
communication between the New England district
and the seaboard. To South Grafton the distance
is 110 miles, but the distance by the proposed Rail-
way Survey is 96 miles. The stock in the district
on April 1, 1884, was : 4,277 horses, 54,080 cattle,
203,379 sheep, 1,707 pigs. Most of the mines are
worked on tribute, and some of the tributors
realized large sums during the year. A large
quantity of the ore is now locally smelted.
GLOUCESTER, a post town with money-order
office, and telegraph station, 154 miles N. of Sydney,
in the police district of Port Stevens. Principal
hotels are Garton’s and the Gloucester. There is an
Episcopal place of worship, a court-house, and several
small stores. Population about 150. Court of Petty
Sessions is held monthly ; the district is chiefly
agricultural. A coach runs to Hexham, the nearest
railway station, fare, 20s. Stock returns for 1884:
horses 2,626, cattle 28,703, sheep 980, pigs 4,412.
GONGOLGON, a township on the Bogan
River, with money order and telegraph office and
savings bank about 35 miles from Brewarrina,
464 miles (499 postal) W. of Sydney, and 60 miles
SE. from Bourke, county Warren, police and electoral
district of Bourke. Population about 100. Hotels—
The Lame Horse and the Royal. Public school has
an average attendance of 14 scholars. Nyngan is
the nearest railway station, to which a bi-weekly
coach runs, fare, 655.
GOODOOGA (co. of Narran), a township, with
telegraph station, on the banks of the Bokhara river,
80 miles N. of Brewarrina, 548 miles N. of Sydney,
and about 20 miles from the Queensland border.
Hotels ; Commercial and Telegraph, three stores,
some tradesmen’s shops, and a public school.
Narrabri is the nearest railway station.
GOOLAGONG. on the Lachlan River, 223
miles W. of Sydney, between Cowra and Forbes,
distant from the former 25 miles, and from the
latter 35 miles. Fine agricultural country. Town-
ship has made rapid strides of late. It has two
churches, Episcopal and Roman Catholic, public
school with average attendance of 53, two stores,
hotels —Galivan’s and Pearce’s. Population of town
about 100 ; within a ten mile radius 1,000. Blayney
is the nearest railway station.
GORDON. See Lane Cove.
GOSFORD, apost, savings bank, telegraph and
money-drder township on the shore of Brisbane
Water, at the head of a fine sheet of water, near
Broken Bay, about 48 miles N. of Sydney. It is in
the county of Northumberland, electoral district of
Wollombi, and police district of Brisbane Water, and is
divided into Gosford East and West. The communica-
tion direct is by steamers daily from Sydney;
and per steamer every Wednesday and Friday,
via Manly and head of Pittwater. The principal
hotels are the Pier, Royal, and Courthouse. Public
buildings, an Episcopal and Roman Catholic church,
a public school with average attendance of 84 scho-
lars, a court-house, lock-up, post and telegraph
office and police barracks, and a branch of the
Mercantile Bank. Fid Barranjoey and Manly
there is now telegraphic communication with Syd-
ney, and the Northern railway line will pass through
this town. It is chiefly a timber producing district,
of which great quantities are exported. Population
about 400. Formation : principally coal and iron.
GOULBURN is a city of great importance,
being the principal dep6t of the southern inland
trade. It is situated near the junction of the Mul-
warree Ponds and Wollondilly river, and lies distant
from Sydney 134 miles in a south-westerly direction,
at an elevation of 2,071 feet above the sea-level. It
was made a city in 1865, the diocese being known by
the same name ; the present occupant of the see is
the Right Rev. Mesac Thomas, D.D. There is also a
Roman Catholic bishop, Dr. Lanigac, The railway
from Sydney to here was many years in progress, the
mountainous character of the country having placed
engineering difficulties of no small character in the
way of its completion. The line is now open
to Albury, fares, 235. 3d., 15s. 3d. The projected
line to Cooma branches off from here. It is com-
pleted to Upper Tarago. Goulburn is well laid out
with broad thoroughfares crossing each other at
right angles. The buildings, too, are of a substantial
character, some of them comparing favourably even
with those of Sydney. The more important of the
public edifices are the various places of worship, of
which the Church of England, is one of the most
prominent; it is in the Gothic style, and was con-
secrated by Bishop Barry in the autumn of 1884.
The Roman Catholic Cathedral is also a fine edifice
Other places of worship are Presbyterian, Wesleyan,
and Primitive Methodist Chapels ; there are also
two small religious edifices at North Goulburn, St.
Nicholas (Church of England) and Sacred Heart
(Roman Catholic). The hospital, the Mechanics’ In-
stitute, with library of 6,310 volumes, Convent of the
Sisters of Mercy, St. Patrick’s College, the court-
house, and the post and telegraph office (which cost
upwards of £16,000). The gaol, a new building,
erected at a cost of £72,000, and the railway station,
which with the station-yard cost nearly £12,000, are
important edifices, and the Court House in process
of erection will be another ornament to the city.
There are three public schools (average attendance,
996) and a Roman Catholic denominational school.
Banks: N. S. Wales, Commercial, English and


Scottish and Joint Stock. The most important
hotels are the Commercial, Mandelson’s, Thomas’s,
the Royal, and the Beehive. There are two tanneries
here ; also two large boot and shoe factories, three
flour mills (City, Argyle and Excelsior), two jam
factories, and three breweries. The Agricultural
Society’s ground with the beautiful pavilion is one
of the sights of the place. There are gold-fields in
the vicinity, but of no great extent or richness, the
prosperity of Goulburn mainly depending on its
commercial position and on the agricultural resources
of the country, which are of a very productive
character. The mineral wealth of the country has
yet to be developed ; this will in time, it is expected,
contribute largely to the advancement of Goul-
bum ; copper and other metals, and marble, slate
and lime, may be instanced as the best known
at present. Lime burning has recently become a very
important industry. Population of the city 6,839.
for their ministers. South Grafton has also a
Roman Catholic and an Episcopal church. There are
also two saw mills, two tanneries, two engineering
establishments, and the city is well supplied with
stores of every description. The court-house erected
in 1879 is a modem structure of brick, large, com-
modious, and well ventilated. Two Courts of Assize
and two District Courts are held here during the
year. The School of Arts is a commodious two-
storey building of brick and stone, which has a library
of 3,000 volumes. The hospital consists of two large
two-storey brick buildings and a casual ward, having
the services of two medical officers and is under the
management of a trained nurse. There are also
a custom-house, a gaol, and a large lock-up, with
police quarters. The streets are of considerable
width, 99 and 132 feet, and laid out at right angles,
Nff. and SE. and NB. and SW. Their total length
is 48 miles, street tree planting being carried out to a
The newspapers published in the city are the Goulburn, considerable extent. Prince Street and Victoria Street
Herald, Southern Argus, and Evening Post (all issued are the main thoroughfares, and which are now
tri-weekly). Goulburn was proclaimed a municipality | lighted with gas. There are two public schools with
on June 4th, 1859. It has rateable property of the average attendance of 626 pupils on the rolls, and
value of £894,000. and 200 miles of roads. The City five private schools in Grafton, besides a Grammar
value of £894,000. and 200 miles of roads. The City
has been lighted with gas since November, 1879.
Stock returns for 1884 : horses 160, cattle 197, sheep
64, pigs 67.
GRAFTON is a city, the district having (in
1868) been made into a diocese, under the name
of Grafton and Armidale. The present bishop is the
Rt. Rev. J. F. Turner. It is a municipality (pro-
claimed July 19, 1859, with 48 miles of roads and
streets, and property valued at £312,006) and port
of entry and departure, and is in the county of
Clarence, and electoral and police district of Grafton,
and lies in about 29° 40' S. lat. and 152° 55' E. long.
It is pleasantly situated on both sides of the Clarence
river, about 45 miles from the sea, from which it is
navigable, the river here being about half a mile in
width, with good wharves and a patent slip for the
shipping. There is also a small floating dock bn the
lower Clarence. The banks of the river for some
distance inside the entrance arc low and uninviting,
but in the course of a few miles their appearance is
changed. The river there is wide, and many sand-
banks exist which at times are troublesome to the
navigator. A steam dredge is constantly at work,
and stone dykes now being carried up the river on
both sides, while breakwaters are being erected
seawards. These harbour works have been in
progress for the last 21 years, and an expenditure
of £120,000 has already been made. Grafton is
distant from Sydney by land 350 and by sea
450 miles NE., steamers belonging to the C. and
R. R. S. N. Co., and Messrs. Nipper and See,
respectively, each plying between the cities twice a
week.—lt is composed of North and South Grafton.
The North side is divided into 3 wards, East, North
and West. North Grafton is the larger and more im-
portant section of the city ; a steam ferry and punt
connect the two, and another steam ferry about a
mile lower down gives communication with the
parishes of Clarenza and Ulmarra. The population
according to returns in 1881 was—Grafton (North),
East Ward, 2,039, West Ward, 1,228 ; Grafton (South),
638 ; total, 3,905. There is a l so a large rural popula-
tion settled lound the town. (The division of the old
Clarence electoratehas taken the Richmond and Tweed
districts out of it, considerably reducing the number
of voters). Grafton may be considered a steadily rising
place, the rich agricultural lands being its main-
stay. The main buildings consist of the various
bank premises—Commercial, Joint Stock, and
New South Wales, Court-house, School of Arts, Post-
office, and Australian Mutual Provident Society’s
The Commercial Bank is a very handsome
building, which will compare with any bank build-
ing out of Sydney ; and the churches rank in about
the following order as regards architectural merit—
Church of England, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian,
(Synod of East Australia), Wesleyan, German Evan-
gelical, Presbyterian Church of New South Wales,
and Baptist. The Church of England cathedral
church is now completed ; it is a brick building of
considerable architectual pretensions, and cost up
to the present time about £5,000. All the churches,
with one exception, have parsonages and manses
School. The leading insurance companies have agen-
cies in Grafton. Each of the wards is represented by
three aldermen to each ward. The lowlands on either
side the Clarence river are among the richest in the
colony, and suitable for the growth of sugar, tobacco,
! and many other tropical productions ; but the crops
are occasionally jeopardized and sometimes injured
by floods. In July, 1876, the heaviest flood ever
known in the memory of the white man occurred ;
a large portion of the city was submerged, much
damage was done, and several lives were lost.
There are about 50 sugar mills, of which three
belonging to the Colonial Sugar Refining Com-
pany are the largest in Australia. They are all
worked by steam power, and crush for five months
of the year, commencing in July and August.
Cereals, except maize, are not extensively culti-
vated. Stock returns for 1884; horses 4,752, cattle
43,642, sheep 1,216, pigs 2,162. The Solferino gold
reefs are still worked on a small scale with satis-
factory results. Some seven payable gold-bearing
reefshave also been discovered at Nana Creek, about
42 miles from Grafton, whence there is a good road
to the field. It is expected the Clarence will yet
prove one of the richest gold districts in the colony.
’ Several other important mineral discoveries have
been reported. The silver mines at Boorook, for
some little time past have attracted considerable
attention, and are being worked profitably. In
the middle of 1880 a large quantity of silver was
being obtained, and promising stone was being
raised. There is also a copper mine about 12
miles above the navigable part. Antimony is abun-
dant. Coal exists all over the district, but no seam
has been worked. The country is well suited for
pastoral purposes, and is taken up with stations
principally devoted to the rearing of horses and
cattle. There are four steam saw-mills in Grafton
—one adjacent to the town, and three others on
various parts of the river. The Clarence and Rich-
mond River Examiner, and the Grafton Argus are
the local newspapers, both issued bi-weekly. The
Australian Meat Works are at Ramomie, nine miles
distant, the first of the kind in Australia. The
principal hotels are the Freemasons’, the Crown,
Tattersall s, Holmstein’s, Laird’s, Star, Commercial,
Court House, and Post Office. In South Grafton the
hotels are the South Grafton, Harp of Erin, Braham’s
Club, Australian, and Steam Ferry, and the bank
the Joint Stock. Grafton has telegraphic commu-
nication v ith almost every part of the district.
Casino can also be reached by steamer daily via
Lawrence, 20 miles, thence to Casino, 50 miles by
mail coach, twice a week. Four river passenger
steamers trade from Grafton to lower parts of the
river, as low as Palmer’s Island and the North Arm,
from the latter of which places coaches run to Wood-
bum on the Richmond River. Steam drojhers and
a passenger launch ply to the upper part of the river
as far as Copmanhurst, 35 miles above Grafton.
I ormation : principally sandstone. A large shipping
trade is carried on with Sydney, this being the port
of shipment for a great deal of the New England


trade, as well as the Western slopes, including the
important districts of Inverell, Vegetable Creek, and
other places. The railway now making to Glen
Innes is expected to materially assist the settlement
of the northern portion of the Colony.
GRANVIIiLE (formerly known as Parra-
matta junction) is a railway station one mile on the
Sydney side of Parramatta, and 12 miles W. of Syd-
ney, fares, Is. 2d. and 9d. It is an important railway
junction, has a money-order, savings bank, and tele-
graph office. There are several stores, three hotels
(Granville, Royal Exchange, and Vauxhall), a branch
of Commercial Bank, four places of worship, and a
public school with average attendance of 233. The
following are the principal manufactories in the
district: —Hudson Brothers and Company, Granville
brickwork, woollen mills, and an agricultural imple-
ment manufactory.
GRENFELL is an agricultural, pastoral, and
gold-field town on the Emu creek. The Weddin
Mountains rise to the SW., 7 miles from the town.
Quartz reefs abound in the neighbourhood. Some of
the mines have been worked to a great depth. Three
powerful quartz-crushing machines are employed,
and there are one foundry, three steam saw-mills, and
two flour mills. The land in the neighbourhood is
exceedingly good, and for the most part consists of
a rich loamy and chocolate-coloured soil, being pecu-
liarly well suited for vines, fruit trees, and cereal
products. Free selection is going on to a large
extent, and the town is no longer dependent for sup-
port upon the gold-producing industry, but is prin-
cipally sustained by the agricultural and pastoral
pursuits. Land is being cleared and put under cul-
tivation in large areas ; wheat and com thrive, and
the vine appears to luxuriate here equally as well as
it does in the Albury district. Grenfell is in the
county of Monteagle, parish of Brundah, and returns
one member to the Assembly, and Southern gold-
fields and Grenfell police district. It is a Govern-
ment Savings Bank and money-order, and telegraph
station. It is in 33° 55' S. lat. and 148° 13' E. long.,
and lies 233 miles (287 postal) due W. of Sydney, the
communication being by rail to Blayney or Murrum-
burrah, thence coach—fare, coach and rail, 60s. 9d.
Population of town 1,600, of district 5,535. Hotels :
Tattersall’s, Albion, Prince of Wales, Criterion,
Bristol Arms, Freemasons’ Arms, and Post Office.
Banks : Joint Stock, N.S.W. and Australasia.
Schools: one public, average attendance 226, and a
denominational (R.C.). Churches; Holy Trinity,
Episcopal; St. Patrick (R.C.); St. Andrew’s Presby-
terian ; and Wesleyan. The principal public offices
are the police and district court and land office, the
hospital (reopened), and the telegraph and post
office. Newspaper, Grenfell Record. There is a
school of arts, Oddfellows’ hall, and seven general
stores. Stock returns for the Grenfell electorate for
the year ending March 31, 1884, were 3,703 horses,
5,598 cattle, 914,538 sheep, and 1,307 pigs. Forma-
tion : granite.
GREENMOTJTH, a post town, situated on the
Davis creek, 193 miles W. of Sydney, in the county
of Georgiana, electoral and police district of Carcoar.
Geological formation principally granite and slate.
Mode of conveyance to Sydney : coach from Mount
McDonald to Blayney, thence by rail.
GRESFORD, a postal town, county of Dur-
ham, electoral and police district of the Paterson, 121
miles N. of Sydney, on the Paterson river, in 32° 30' S.
lat. and 151° 33' E. long. One hotel, the Junction ;
Church of England and Roman Catholic churches,
and one public school, with average attendance of
48 pupils. Population 350. Formation : principally
limestone. There is a good road from Gresford to
Maitland, distant about 25 miles SB., which is the
nearest railway station, coach fare, ss. Country
round both agricultural and pastoral. Vines are
largely grown. A police court has recently been es-
tablished, and sits fortnightly.
GRETA, a colliery village adjoining Anvil
creek, which has a post office, 2 miles from Branxton,
32 miles from Newcastle, and 107 miles N. of Sydney,
in the police district of Maitland and electoral dis-
trict of the Hunter. The colliery is known
as the Greta Coal and Shale Company, and belongs
to Mr. Vickery ; it is connected with the Great
Northern Railway, from which it is distant about
half a mile. The seam is 13 feet in thickness, and
is worked by a shaft 414 feet in depth. It employs
about 116 hands. There is a public school here, with
an average attendance of 139 scholars, a mechanics’
and miners’ institute, with 109 volumes, four
hotels Sportsman’s Arms, Prince’ of Wales,
Cricketers, and Railway Inn ; Anglican, Wesleyan,
Primitive Methodist, and Roman Catholic places of
worship, four large stores, and minor ones, and
medical dispensary ; and a population of 650. Fares
from Newcastle, ss. 3d., 3s. sd.
GULGONG, a mining township in the county
of Phillip, 198 miles W. (202 postal) from Bydney,and 18
from Mudgee, between the Cudgegong river and the
Wialdar or Reedy creek. Communication with
Sydney is by coach to Mudgee 20 miles, thence the
rail. It is mainly an alluvial gold-field extending
over a considerable, area being 8 miles east and west,
and 9 miles north and south, the leads lying
under basalt, but the average sinking does not ex-
ceed 84 feet. There are supposed to be 11 different
leads, the principal being Black and Happy Valley ;
from these large quantities of gold have been
taken. There are estimated to be about 200 miners
at work in the district, the total population being
about 1,500. Newspaper, the People's Advocate.
The town consists mainly of two thoroughfares,
running at right angles to each other, nearly north
and south, and east and west. In Mayne Street
is the N. S. Wales Bank; the Joint Stock Bank is
in Herbert Street. The hotels are Post Office,
Albion, Tattersall’s, Powell’s, and the Star, with
between 10 and 12 smaller ones. It has three
churches, two schools, public school has an average
attendance of 111 pupils, hospital, post, telegraph,
Government savings bank and money order
offices ; police camp, and court-house. A free
library is (here, and is under the control of
the Municipal Council. The yield of gold for the
year 1873 was 140,538 ozs. ; since that time the
yield has very materially decreased. Local com-
panies have recently been formed for the purpose of
working several abandoned reefs, and seven mines
are being worked by a Melbourne Syndicate ; power-
ful machinery is employed and successful results
anticipated. In 1883 the yield of gold amounted to
2,802 ozs., valued at £10,964 2s. 9d. Agriculture is
now to a great extent superseding mining, and in
1877 a large portion of the non-auriferous laud, which
had formerly been reserved as a gold-field, was, on
the report of Mr. Wilkinson, the Government
Geologist, thrown open to free selection and
conditional purchase. It is well adapted for farm-
ing, being alluvial flats and low hills, with a
good depth of rich red soil. Gulgong has been in-
corporated since February 5, 1876, the municipality
covering 36 square miles, there being 68 miles of
roads and streets, and property of the rateable
value of £81,480; the Council consists of a Mayor
and eight Aldermen. Gulgong forms portion of the
police and land districts of Mudgee. Water is sup-
plied from a reservoir near the town.
GTJNDAGAI, a post town with money-order.
Government savings bank and telegraph office, on
the banks of the Murrumbidgee river, 251 miles (289
postal) SW. of Sydney, containing upwards of 1,000
inhabitants, in the census district (1881) are 6,530.
It is in the county of Clarendon, electoral and police
district of Gundagai, and comprises Gundagai North
and South. For the size of the place some of the
buildings are of a superior order, the hospital is
a fine commodious structure, as is also the court-
house and Church of England vicarage. The stores,
too, and other places of business, are many of them
large and handsome, Archer’s Hotel particularly:
it is second to none out of Sydney, and contains
every convenience. Leary’s, Paine’s, and Beaver’s
Hotels are also first-class houses. The Literary
Institute has 650 volumes. The Bank of N.B. Wales
has a branch here, also Commercial Bank, both
handsome buildings. There are four schools, two
public (with average attendance of about 167) (one
at North and one at South Gundagai), a Roman
Catholic and a private school; three churches, Angli-
can, Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic; a gaol and
police barracks. Several Insurance Companies are


represented, and a steam flour-mill is constantly
at work. The iron bridge over the Murrum-
bidgee, together with the viaduct, is 5-Bths of a
mile long, and cost £38,000. A large and handsome
assembly room is erected opposite Archer’s Hotel,
with every convenience for theatrical performances.
A large town clock adorns the court-house. Gunda-
gai possesses Masonic, Oddfellows’, Good Templars’,
Orange, and Sons of Temperance Lodges. The Gun-
dagai Times (Tuesday and Friday) and Gundayai
Herald (Wednesday and Saturday) are the local
papers. The Murrumbidgee is navigable as far as
Gundagai. The river fiats are liable to floods, but the
present township is high and dry. The original town-
ship on the river flat was washed away in Juue 1852,
when 71 dwellings were wrecked and 81 lives were
lost. The country is principally taken up by sq uatters
and small farmers. The land is in places, particularly
along the banks of the river, of a very fertile charac-
ter, and admirably adapted for the growth of wheat,
maize, and tobacco. Recent stock returns (1884)
are 6,063 horses, 18,700 cattle, 583,457 sheep, 2,183
pigs. There are some productive gold-fields in the
district. The mineral resources of the district are
vast. The Australian Asbestos Company have a free-
hold here, and have exported a large quantity of that
valuable fibrous material. Slate quarries have re-
cently been opened here, and are now in full work
turning out splendid slates. Coach to Cootamundra,
fare, 12s. 6d., thence rail, are the means of travelling
to Sydney. A line of railway from Gundagai to
Cootamundra is in course of construction, and will
shortly be completed. The electorate returns one
member to the Assembly.
GTJNDAROO (also known as Lower Gun-
daroo) is a post town, with telegraph station, and
savings bank, on the Yass river, 20 miles NW.
of Queanbeyan, and 171 miles SW. of Sydney. It
is in the county of Murray, police and electoral dis-
trict of Queanbeyan. There is coach communication
with Gunning (fare, 10s.), and Queanbeyan. The num-
ber of inhabitants is about 120. There are in the
locality 3 hotels—Royal, Travellers’ Home and Com-
mercial—schools (public has average attendance 26),
a court-house, and 4 stores. Roman Catholic and
Presbyterian places of worship. Wheat, maize,
oats, barley, and potatoes are principally grown
in the district. There are also several stations.
GTJNNEDAH, a postal, Government savings
bank, money-order township and telegraph station
on the Namoi river, near its junction with the Mooki,
265 miles NW. of Sydney, with a population of
1,000. In the census district are 7,490 persons.
It is in the county of Pottinger, and police dis-
trict of Tam worth. It lies 50 miles W. of Tamworth,
874 feet above sea level. It is now connected with
Newcastle by a line of railway called the North-
Western, opened in September, 1879. It branches
from the Great Northern at Werris Creek (41 miles),
fares from Newcastle (196 miles), 365., 24s.—Hotels :
Post Office, Court House, the Freemasons’, and
others. Institutions : N. S. Wales and Commercial
Banks, public school, with average attendance of
194 scholars; Episcopal, Wesleyan, and Roman
Catholic churches, court-house, lock-up, and police
barracks ; post and telegraph office, and school of
arts. Six large stores, one flour mill, and two saw-
mills. Local papers, Namoi Independent and Gun-
nedah Advertiser. Formation : sandstone. Stock
returns for the electoral district April 1, 1884:
5,882 horses, 24,004 cattle, 1,194,501 sheep, 1,178 pigs.
Agricultural returns : 3,639 j acres under cultivation.
Produce: wheat 31,414 bushels, and maize 715
bushels.
GUNNING, a small postal, money-order, savings
bank, and telegraph township, situated on the main
southern road, and Meadow Creek (1,893 feet above sea
level), 24 miles NE. of Yass, about midway between
Goulbum and Yass, and 165 miles SW. of Sydney, in
the county of King. It is now in direct railway com-
munication with the metropolis ; there are two trains
each way daily, fares, 295. and 19s. 3d. The number
of inhabitants is about 409. Churches : Roman Catholic
(of stone), Church of England, and Wesleyan ; public
school, average attendance 101, two hotels; Prank-
field, and Telegraph, four principal stores, a steam
flour-mill, a branch of the Commercial Bank, and
a court-house. Court of Petty Sessions is held
the first Wednesday in each month, and a District
Court three times a-year. Agricultural and pastoral
district.
GrUNTAWANG, a post town in the electorate
and police district of Mudgee, 184 miles W. from
Sydney, and situated on the Cudgegong river; it has
a School of Arts, Episcopalian Church, one hotel,
and a public school, average attendance 32. Mode
of communication is by coach to Wellington or Caper-
tee Bailway Stations. Population about 200. For-
mation, basalt, slate, and sandstone.
HAMILTON, a post town, with telegraph, and
money-order office, savings bank and railway station,
on the Great Northern Eailway,7B miles N. of Sydney.
It is a suburb of Newcastle, and is described as one
of the neatest and best laid out localities around the
City. Busses and cars ply frequently. It has
English, Presbyterian and Wesleyan churches; a
Mechanics’ Institute, with a library of (760 vols.,
a public school, with average attendance of 326,
and a denominational school (R.C.) and neat muni-
cipal chambers. Among the hotels are Cherry’s,
Miners’ Exchange, and Queen’s Arms. The Castle-
maine brewery is here, also the Patent Fuel Works,
which latter utilizes the small coal from the mines,
and forms it into egg-shaped blocks at the rate of 60
tons per day. The streets are now lit with gas.
The municipal district was proclaimed December 11,
1871. Rateable value of property is £316,157, there
being 8i miles of streets. Population estimated at
2,000, a large number of whom are employed in
the collieries of the Australian Agricultural Com-
pany. Fares from Newcastle, 4d. and 2d.
HANGING ROCK. See Nundle.
HARGRAVES (formerly Louisa Creek) is
a post town with a money-order office, situated in
the county of Wellington, police and electoral dis-
trict of Mudgee, and extends from the Lewis ponds
to Louisa creek. It is 190 miles NW. of Sydney, to
which the coach to the Capertee or Bathurst Railway
Station is the means of access. Tambaroora is about
20 miles, and Mudgee 25 miles distant. It has one
hotel, two churches, a public school, with average
attendance of 44 scholars, a private school, police
quarters, court-house, and lock-up, two stores, and a
population of about 220 persons. The district is of
granite formation, and is more or less of an auriferous
character, and gives employment to several miners,
about 1,900 acres being held under lease for mining
purposes.
HARTLEY, a money-order township situated
on the river Lett, 83 miles NW. of Sydney, contiguous
to the Great Western Railway, the nearest stations
being Mount Victoria (6 miles) and Hartley Vale
(4 miles). The population numbers about 150
persons: in the census district (1881) were 8,718.
Hotel, Evans’s. It is a place of Petty Sessions, and
has Anglican and Catholic places of worship.
Public school has average attendance of 22 scholars.
Stock returns of the district to March 31, 1884, were
2,729 horses, 10,087 cattle, 37,200 sheep, 2,388 pigs.
Area under cultivation, 5,080 acres, wheat being the
principal crop. Five collieries are in the neighbour-
hood. from which the annual output of coal is
19,200 tons.
HARTLEY, LITTLE , county Cook, a small
township with money-order office, about 2 miles from
Hartley, at the base of Mount Victoria, situated in
the midst of wild and romantic scenery. Hotel:
Mount Victoria. It is about 80 miles W. of Sydney.
HARTLEY VALE, a money-order township,
situated 81 miles from Sydney, on the Western Line,
fares, 13s. 3d., Bs. 9d. It is embosomed among the Blue
Mountains, at an altitude of 3,318 feet above the
level of the sea. Rich and apparently inexhaustible
deposits of coal and of kerosine shale have been dis-
covered in the neighbourhood of the township. The
shale is found to be rich in oil, which is extracted
from it at the mines, and large quantities are ex-
ported to Melbourne and California for gas-making
purposes. This shale is said to yield 150 gallons of
crude oil to the ton, and 18,000 cubic feet of gas.
Hotels: Hartley Vale and Comet, and there are 4
stores. Hartley Vale has a population of 600 persons,
a large number of whom are employed at the works


of the N. S. W. Shale and Oil Company. Public
school has average attendance of 74 pupils.
HASLEM’S CREEK. See Rookwood.
HAY is situated in the heart of the Riverine dis-
trict, on the Murrumbidgee river, 305 feet above sea
level. It is a shipping port and port of entry, 454
miles SW. of Sydney. Post town, with money-order,
telegraph office, and savings bank. The railway is
now opened as far as Hay; fares, 725. 6d., 48s. 9d.
Cobb’s coaches leave Hay for Deniliquin daily, fare,
305., and for Booligal, Hillston, Wilcannia, &c., three
times a week. It is in the county of Warad-
gery, police district of Hay, and electorate of
Balranald, returning two members. In the muni-
cipal district are 21 miles of streets, and property
of the rateable value of £292,355. Hay is the
principal receiving depot for the wool produced
on the numerous stations about the Lachlan
and Murrumbidgee Rivers. It is an important
crossing place,by a fine iron bridge over the Murrum-
bidgee river. This bridge is 400 yards in length,
with a swing to enable steamers to pass in flood
seasons. The river is navigable from the Murray to
Wagga-Wagga (470 miles) for a short period
of the year. The highest rise in the river above
summer level ever known here has been 24 feet.
The town is described as “ one of the smartest look-
ing, best laid out, and the most comfortable in the
colony, its main street being equal to the best part
of High-street, West Maitland;” several of the streets
have been planted with shade-trees. The leading
hotels are Tattersall’s,Caledonian, Commercial, Royal
and Crown. The Hay Standard, weekly, and Riverine
Grazier, twice a week, are the local journals. The
Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Roman Catholics, and
Wesleyans have places of worship here ; there is
also a hospital, Athenaeum, and free library, with 633
vols. Banks : Australian Joint Stock, N. S. Wales,
London Chartered, and Union. The premises of
both the Joint Stock and N. S. Wales Banks are
fine spacious buildings, the former cost upwards
of £6,000, and the last named £3,500 in its
erection. Principal buildings besides those men-
tioned, are the court-house, post and telegraph
office, police barracks, public school (average at-
tendance 201), Masonic hall, three theatres, muni-
cipal chambers, and gaol. There are at Hay, Masonic,
Foresters’, Oddfellows’, and Temperance lodges, a
lands office, two breweries, soap works, and a bonded
store. The town is supplied with water from the
municipal waterworks, the water being pumped up
from the river and carried in pipes through all the
principal streets. The surrounding country is almost
entirely taken up for sheep and cattle stations, and
consists of plains sparsely timbered. Population
2,070. About 80,000 bales of wool are sent from
Hay during the season. Hay is the cathedral city
of the new Riverina diocese endowed by the Hon.
John Campbell.
HAYDONTON. See Muerurundi.
HEXHAM, a small post-town,with Government
Savings’ Bank, telegraph, and money-order office, on
the south bank of the Hunter river, and railway
station on the Great Northern line, and the main
road to Maitland, 10 miles from Newcastle, and
80 N. of Sydney ; fares from Newcastle, Is. 6d. and
lid. It is in the county of Northumberland,
electoral district of East Maitland, and police
district of Newcastle, lies in lat. 32° 51' S., and
long. 151° 44' E., on the main road between New-
castle and Maitland. Maize and lucerne are exten-
sively cultivated, and haymaking is the chief
occupation of the farmers ; considerable supplies
of fruit and fish are also sent to Sydney in
the season. The population is about 100. Churches :
Wesleyan, and Primitive Methodist ; also one public
school, average attendance 50. A steam ferry is here
for conveying passengers, stock, and vehicles across
the Hunter. Formation : carboniferous, with rich and
extensive coal beds. From Hexham the mail coaches
to Stroud and the Barrington start. It is the ter-
minus of Messrs. J. and A. Brown’s Minmi and
Duckenfield Railway, and hero are also three
private shoots, where a large quantity of the Minmi
coal is shipped, Messrs. Brown also repair here
their steam tugs and colliers, which keep in con-
stant occupation several men.
HILL END, an important mining township in
the county of Wellington, electoral district of
Mudgee, 3 miles from Tambaroora, about 40 miles
NW. from Bathurst, by coach route 58 miles (fare,
155.), by bridle track only 37 miles, and 180 miles
(206 postal) NW. of Sydney. It is a post-town, money-
order, savings bank, and telegraph station. It was
proclaimed a municipality Aug. 6, 1873. It dates its
existence from 1853, when a rich reef was discovered
near the surface, but it is within the last few years,
and notably in the year 1872, that the locality be-
came famous as being one of the richest gold fields
in the colony. Population of town and district
2,000. It has 121 miles of road, and property
rated at £35,865. The workings are principally in
quartz, though there is alluvial ground, which how-
ever can only be profitably worked during the win-
ter season. There are numerous batteries at work,
and the reefs have been proved to be extremely
rich. During 1883 the yield of gold was 5,043
ounces, valued at £19,724 3s. There are Anglican,
Presbyterian, Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, and other
churches, and a public school, with an average
attendance of 184, and several stores. The Joint-
Stock Bank has a branch here. The hotels are
Weir’s, O’Rourke’s, Royal, and others. Public
buildings, in addition to those mentioned, post
and telegraph office, court-house, hospital, and
police barracks.
HILLSTON, county of Nicholson, electoral
district of Murrumbidgee, a post town, with
telegraph station, money-order office, savings bank
and Crown Lands office, 435 miles W. of Sydney,
and 100 miles NE. of Hay, on the Lachlan river.
Branch of the London Chartered and Joint Stock
Banks are here, a court-house, Episcopal, and
Wesleyan places of worship, three stores, two hotels
—Royal Mail and Commercial—a brewery, wool-
washing establishment, steam saw mills, and a
public school, average attendance 44. A coach runs
to the Hay Railway Station, fare, 40s. The district is
a grazing one, but said to be adaptable for wheat
cultivation, and settlement is progressing rapidly.
Court of petty sessions is held daily. Population
about 400.
HINTON, a post town in the county of
Durham, 84 miles (98 postal) N. of Sydney, in the
electoral district of Morpeth, situated at the
junction of the Hunter and Paterson rivers, seven
miles from West Maitland, and is connected with
Morpeth by ferry. It has a good wharf on the Pater-
son river, two hotels, three stores. Episcopalian,
Presbyterian, Wesleyan, and Baptist places of wor-
ship, a brick school of arts with 440 vols., and a
public school (average attendance 104). Population
475. Part of the town lies high, and is reputed
healthy. The district is chiefly agricultural,
lucerne and maize being largely grown.
HOMEBIJSH, a smallpost town with telegraph,
money-order, and savings bank office on the Parra-
matta road, 8 miles S. of Sydney. It is a station
on the Parramatta Railway (fares, 9d. and 6d.), there
being frequent trains. The metropolitan racecourse
used to be here before the time of the Randwick
course. Cattle and sheep sale yards are here.
Hotel : Wentworth.
HOME RULE, a money-order, post, and
savings bank township, in the county of Phillip, and
electoral and police district of Mudgee, 185 miles
(191 postal) W. of Sydney, and 8 miles from Gul-
gong, on the banks of the Cooyall Creek. The town
had during the gold mania of 1875 a large popula-
tion, but has since declined to about 400. It
has two hotels (the Queensland and Victoria),
a police barracks and lock-up; also a volunteer
fire brigade. The district, containing about 500
persons, is noted both for its mining and grazing
capabilities, the stations of Messrs. Rouse and
Blackman taking a leading position as regards wool
producing. Gold mining is also carried on. The
formations, or strata, from the surface to the bed
rock, which is generally granite, differ much.
They are composed of layers of red, white, yellow,
and black clay, decayed and petrified wood, with
veins of gravel and cement, and in many places
basalt. Coaches run regularly to the Capertee
Railway Station (fare, 205.).


NOVELL, an agricultural district, situated 4
miles N. of Moorwatha, and about 15 miles 8. from
Gerogery Railway Station-which is the nearest point
of communication with Sydney; fare, £2 10s. The
only building of any great importance is the
public school, with an average attendance of 37.
Hovell is in the county and electoral district of
Hume, and police district of Albury. Population of
district about 250.
HOWLONG, a post town, with money-order
office and telegraph station, situated about 20 miles
W. of Albury, and 389 miles (405 postal) SW. of
Sydney. There are Episcopal, Wesleyan, and Roman
Catholic places of worship, a public school, with
average attendance of 53, a branch of the Bank of
Australasia, flour mill, three hotels—Howlong,
Court House and Mill, two general stores, two
wheelwrights and two blacksmiths’ shops. Court
of petty sessions is held here on the first Wednes-
day in each month. There is coach communica-
tion with Albury Railway Station. Population about
100, and of district43o. The district, which is watered
by the Murray, is of an undulating character, and is
utilized for farming, wine-growing, and pastoral
pursuits. The river is crossed by a punt.
HUNTER’S HIIiLi is in the county of Cum-
berland, electoral district of Central Cumberland
and police district of Ryde, and a municipality, 4
miles N. of Sydney, of which it may be considered
a suburb. It was proclaimed Jan. 5, 1861. It has
40 miles of roads, and rateable property valued
at £422,670. There is also a post and telegraph
office, and the Atlas Engineering Company have
recently established extensive works at Woolwich.
It is pleasantly situated on the Parramatta and
Lane Cove rivers, and is a favourite place of resi-
dence for the citizens, possessing numerous fine
buildings of the villa order, to which well laid out
gardens are attached. The Parramatta steamer calls
frequently during the day, fares, Is. and 9d. Popu-
lation about 1,200. The principal hotels are the
Garibaldi, Fig Tree, and Woolwich Pier. Places of
worship: Episcopal, Roman Catholic and Con-
gregational. Public school has average attendance
of 72. There is also a Roman Catholic school and
Marist Brothers’ College, and several recreation
grounds in the vicinity, with public wharves, at
which Lane Cove steamers call every hour.
ILLAWARRA is the name given to a beauti-
ful, fertile, and romantic district containing the
electorates of Illawarra and Kiama, commencing at
the Coal Cliff about 33 miles S. of Sydney, and con-
sisting of a belt of land lying between the coast
ranges and the ocean, and extending southwards for
a distance of about 60 miles to Shoalhaven. It
is of exuberant fertility and thickly populated,
being the principal district for supplying Sydney
with dairy .produce, of about £600,000 sterling yearly
value. The geological formation is that of the coal
measures, with several areas of intrusive sub-aqueous
volcanic rocks, many seams of coal of commercial
value 200 to 300 feet above water-level, from 5 to 25ft.
in thickness,all seen cropping out of the mountain
sides. The top one only is at present worked at
Mount Keira, Mount Pleasant, Mount Kembla,
Bulli, and Coal Cliff Collieries, by adit driven in
on the seam of coal, which is of veiy superior
quality for use of steam shipping and smelting
purposes. Freestone, fireclays, and rich iron ores
are abundant. The chief towns and seaports are Wol-
longong, Kiama, Clifton, Shellharbour, Port Kembla,
and Bulli (which see). The municipalities of North
Illawarra, Wollongong, Central Illawarra, Shell-
harbour, Kiama, Gerringong, Broughton Vale, and
Broughton Creek are all within this thriving and
wealthy district. The celebrated IllawarraLake is also
in this district. It is about 9 miles in length and 3
miles in breadth, surrounded by hills 400 to 500 feet
in height, connected with the sea by a narrow chan-
nel. The views of the mountain range seen from
the lake, with the surrounding scenery, are amongst
the finest and most enchanting in any part of the
world, and captivate tourists and artists. Wild fowl
and fish abound. Several fishermen are maintained
by supplying Sydney with fish from the lake; 200
baskets of fish weekly are frequently sent by steamer,
via Wollongong, to Sydney. By the census return of
1881 the population was 7,132. In the district are
depastured 2,044 horses, 15,255 cattle, 836 sheep,
5,868 pigs; the area under cultivation in 1884 was
4,366 acres, maize, oats, and potatoes being the
principal crops.
INVERELL, a flourishing township on a flat
bordering on the Macintyre river, 383 miles (354
postal) N. of Sydney, and 42 miles W. of Glen
Innes. It is in the police and electoral district
of Inverell. The principal hotels are Lambert’s,
Inverell, Buxton’s Telegraph, Brown’s Aus-
tralian, Cheadle’s Royal Oak, Hasking’s, Tat-
tersall’s, all in Byron Street. There are several
other hotels and numerous accommodation houses.
The churches are Episcopal, Roman Catholic, Wes-
leyan, and Presbyterian, all brick edifices. Other
buildings are the court-house, the public school
(average attendance 144), a public library with 920
volumes, post, money-order, savings banks, and
telegraph office, gaol, hospital, and the Joint
Stock, Commercial and N. S. Wales Banks, and
several private schools. There are three flour
mills, a tannery, about a dozen stores, and
a wool-washing establishment. Among social
institutions are a flourishing building society.
Masonic lodge, having a handsome Masonic
Hall, Oddfellows, Good Temperance, and Debat-
ing societies, and a Druids’ lodge. The popu-
lation is from 1,200 to 1,500 ; in the census district
are 7,189 persons. The country surrounding Inverell
is principally a pastoral and farming one : the soil is
of a rich red and black character, especially adapted
for the growth of cereals; 11,535 acres of land were
under crop in 1884, the harvest being 74,925 bushels
of wheat, 77,370 of maize, and 580 tons of potatoes,
34,280 gallons of wine were also manufactured. The
vine is extensively grown, and there are some large
stations. Stock returns for 1884 —horses, 4,657 ;
cattle, 19,514; sheep, 383,898; pigs, 2,594. There
are coaches to Uralla, Glen Innes, and Armidale,
the nearest railway stations, whence rail and steamer
take the traveller to Sydney. The Inverell Times and
The Argus are the local papers. The discoveries of
tin led to a great influx of population, and the soil
being admirably adapted for agricultural purposes,
a vast quantity of land has been taken up by free
selectors. The municipal district of Inverell (pro-
claimed March 4, 1872) has 35 miles of streets, and
rateable property of the value of £120,000. The
hospital is a spacious building, and is managed
by an efficient staff of officers. The P. and A.
Society holds an annual exhibition.
IRONBARKS, apost, telegraph, money-order,
and mining township in the police district of Stony
Creek, and electoral district of Wellington, on
the Kugaberga Creek, 227 miles (by rail) W. of
Sydney. The district abounds in quartz reefs, many
of them being profitably worked and capable of
further development; there are also some alluvial
workings. Population about 250, of district about
600. Hotels : Post-office, Railway, and Diggers’
Rest; and there are churches belonging to the Epis-
copal and Roman Catholic bodies, one public school,
average attendance 58, a court-house, police-station,
lock-up, and four stores. Ironbarks is reached from
Sydney by railway, fares, 40s. 9d., 275. It lies 1,780
feet above sea level. Formation: basalt and slate.
JAMBEROO, a post, telegraph, and money-
order township in the electorate of Kiama, between
Wollongong and Kiama, about 5 miles from the
latter town W., and 86 miles S. of Sydney. Com-
munication is by steamer from Kiama, or (over-
land) via Wollongong and Campbelltown. The
district is agricultural and a dairy-farming one.
Population of district about 600. There are several
stores in the village, two hotels, Tate’s and Wood’s,
and four places of worship—Episcopal, Wesleyan,
Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic. The Presby-
terian church is a neat edifice in the Norman
style of architecture. There are two schools
Public school has an average attendance of 95.
Jamberoo constitutes one of the three wards
of the municipality of the borough of Kiama, and
has its own free library. Formation: sandstone;
surface is hilly and well-watered. There are promis-
ing indications of coal deposits. Three miles N.
of Jamberoo is the “ Whispering Gallery,” which is


entitled to rank among the natural wonders of the
colony.
JERILDERIE, a flourishing town, the most
southern terminus cf the N. S. W. Railway on the
Billabong Creek, 428 miles SW. of Sydney, and 45
miles from the Murray frontier. In the county
Urana, police district of Deniliquin, and electoral
district of Murray. Rapidly rising into prominence
on account of railway communication, which opens
up the fine agricultural and pastoral county in the
vicinity. Post, money-order, and telegraph office,
Mechanics’ Institute, public school, average attend-
ance 41, Roman Catholic school, and two churches.
Weekly newspaper—the Jerilderie Herald and Urana
Advertiser; flour mill, eight hotels, five stores, police
station, branches of N. S. W. and Australasia
Banks, Agricultural and Pastoral Association, com-
pleted water conservation works at the township,
and a vast scheme being undertaken by the Govern-
ment for the benefit of the district by diverting part
of the waters of the Murrumbidgee. Population
about 500.
JERRY’S PLAINS, a post town, money-
order, and telegraph station on the right bank of
the Hunter river, 144 miles N, of Sydney, 16 miles
W. of Singleton, the nearest railway station (to
which a coach runs, fare, 7s. 6d.), and 25 miles S. of
Muswellbrook, on the road from Singleton to
Cassilis. It is in the electoral, and police district
of Patrick’s Plains. Population about 300; of dis-
trict 1,650. There are three hotels, Victoria, Post
Office, and Horse and Jockey; two large stores,
Episcopal and Roman Catholic churches, a public
school (average attendance 53). The district is an
agricultural one principally, the low lands being
especially fertile. Formation : sandstone and basalt.
Good coal is to be seen cropping out on many of
the hills. A court of petty sessions is held every
alternate Thursday.
JINDABYNE, a postal village, 292 miles S. of
Sydney, on the Snowy river. It has two public-
houses and two stores. In the neighbourhood are
about 100 persons. Good deposits of tin have been
found about the locality. Communication is via
Goulburn and Cooma.
JINDERA, a township, county of Goulburn
and electoral district of Albury, 390 miles SW of
Sydney. The name of the post-office is “ Bight’s
Forest.” It has an Episcopal and two German
Lutheran churches, a public school, average
attendance 27, a German school, two hotels.
Mill and Forest, two stores, a steam flour mill,
and a blacksmith’s shop. The district is an agri-
cultural one, and the settlers mostly Germans.
Population about 100. A coach runs to Albury
station (11 miles), fare, 3s.
JUGTONG, a postal township, with money-
order office (county of Harden, electorate and police
district of Gundagai), on the river Murrumbidgee
and the road between Gundagai and Yass, 226 miles
(292 postal) SW. of Sydney. Cootamundra and
Bowning are the nearest railway stations. There
are two hotels here, two stores, police barracks,
and lock-up; an Episcopal and Roman Catholic
church, and a public school, with average attend-
ance of 49. A Court of Petty Sessions is held once
a month. Much land is under cultivation in the
district by small farmers, and there are numerous
large sheep stations in the vicinity. Population
about 120. Formation : granite. One of the prettiest
views in the colony is obtainable from Cooney’s
Hill, on the main road, close to Jugiong.
JUNEE, postal name Old Junee, to distinguish
it from Junee Junction Railway Station, a postal
centre in the parish of Junee, county of Clarendon,
and police district of Wagga-Wagga, being the
centre for all wool and grain traffic—about 3,000
bales wool despatched from here last season. It is
situated on Houlahan’s Creek 290 miles SW. of
Sydney, and lies 833 feet above sea level. It is a
railway station on the South-Western line, fares,
515., 345. Junee has one hotel (the Junee), a
money-order office, one store, public school, with
average attendance of 38 pupils. Bank; Union.
In the district, which is of a mining and grazing
and agricultural character, there are about 530 per-
sons. Formation: granite.
JUNEE JUNCTION, a station on the Great
Southern line, 287 miles S. from Sydney, at the junc-
tion of the Narandera and Hay line, 16 miles from
Murrumbidgee river (fares, 50s. 6d., 335. 9d.) The
township contains six hotels, eight stores, a public
school with average attendance of 127, Episcopalian,
Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic churches, a branch
of the Union Bank of Australia, and Masonic,
Oddfellows, and Orange lodges. The surrounding
country is chiefly pastoral. There is a money-order
and telegraph office and savings bank, and the
largest and best railway refreshment room in the
colony. 'Height above sea level, 985 feet. Population
about 1,200.
KANGAROO VALLEY, a post town with
money-order office, in the county of Camden,
electoral district of Shoalhaven, and police district
of Broughton Creek, 98 miles S. of Sydney, on the
Kangaroo river. It has one English, a Roman
Catholic, Presbyterian, and Wesleyan churches ; also
an hotel, the Pioneer, and three schools. Public
school has an average attendance of 44 scholars..
Population, inclusive of neighbourhood, about
1,000. Mail coach daily to Moss Vale (20 miles) r
thence the railway, are the means of travelling
to Sydney. A bridge has been thrown across the
Kangaroo river at an expense of £3,000. The dis-
trict is principally of a pastoral character, with a
large extent of land under cultivation. The prin-
cipal shipping port for Kangaroo Valley is Brough-
ton Creek. Formation : principally sandstone.
KATOOMBA, a post town, with telegraph'
money-order office, and railway station on the;
Western line, 66miles W. of Sydney; fares, 10s. 6d.,
6s. 9d. It is on one of the most elevated portions
of the line, about 3,349 feet above sea level, and
being on the eastern slope of the Blue Mountains
commands one of the most extensive views in
N.S.W. There are three hotels and several stores ;
waterfalls and other mountain scenery are within-
easy distance. A coal mine is here, the property
of J. B. North, Esq., employing about 70 men!
Public school has an average attendance of 5l“
Population about 250.
KAYUGA, a postal township on the banks of
the river Hunter, about 4 miles N. of the MusweU.
brook Railway Station, and 164 miles (156 postal),
NW.by N. of Sydney. It is situated in the county
of Brisbane, in 32° 15'S.llat. and 150° 57' B. long.
Public buildings, a Primitive Methodist Chapel, and.
public school, with average attendance of 164
scholars. The inhabitants of the surrounding dis-
trict, who number upwards of 200, are chiefly free
selectors, deriving their livelihood from the pro-
duce of the land wheat, vegetables, and fruits.
The formation is a kind of sandstone, overlying,
coal measures.
KELSO, a postal, telegraph, and money-order
township and railway station (fares, 255., 16s. 6d.)on,
the eastern bank of the Macquarie river,in the county
of Roxburgh, police district of Bathurst, and-
electoral district of East Macquarie, about 1J miles
from Bathurst, with which it is connected by
a substantial bridge Population about 550. It lies
143 miles W. of Sydney, and contains an episcopal
place of worship (Trinity Church), hotels ; Sports-
man’s Arms and the Melbourne, a public school,
average attendance 76, and a Roman Catholic school..
The railway station is a neat brick building. It is
surrounded by country well suited for agricultural,
and pastoral purposes, and more or less auriferous.
It is on elevated ground, about 2,154 feet above sea
level.
KEMPSEY is situated on the Macleay river,
in a bend of the river, on low land about 280 miles.
(296 postal) NE. of Sydney, and has, including both
sides of the river—East, West, and Central Kompsey
—a population of about 1,400 persons. It is about
30 miles distant from Macleay river Heads, and is the
principal township in the Macleay district. It is a.
post, Government savings bank, telegraph, and
money-order township, and is in the county of
Dudley, electoral and police district of the Mac-
leay. The three townships join each other, and are
rapidly increasing in size and importance. Kempsey
proper, or as it lias lately been called—Central


Kempsey—is the centre of business. The hotels
and private boarding houses are numerous, and ac-
commodation very reasonable. There are five large
stores and many smaller ones. The principal public
buildings are the Hospital (accommodation for 24
patients), Courthouse, Good Templars’ and Odd-
fellows’ Hall, Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, and Pri-
mitive Methodist churches, three public schools
(average attendance 312), Presbyterian, and Deno-
minational schools. A Masonic Hall and Episco-
pal church are also in course of erection. Two
papers are published in Kempsey, the Macleay
Chronicle and Herald. Branches of the Joint-Stock
and Commercial Banks are established. Many min-
erals are known to exist in the neighbourhood. The
antimony mines at Corangala, 25 miles distant, are
being worked by a company, with a splendid and
complete plant. Much land has been taken up by
selectors, and many have done well by judicious
selection. The soil is for the most part alluvial. At
one time the cultivation of sugar-cane was attempted
and resulted in failure, but the introduction of
frost-resisting cane has induced several farmers to
revive the industry ; bee keeping on the American
principle is also attracting attention. Maize is the
principal product, the district ranking second
highest in the official returns of maize-growing dis-
tricts. There are several stations a few miles
distant from Kempsey, devoted mainly to the
breeding of horses and cattle. The communication
with Sydney is by steamer direct, coach to Hexham
Railway Station, or vid Port Macquarie, fare, saloon
£llos., return £2 10s. A river steamer plies daily
between Pelican Island and Kempsey.
KEMPSEY WEST. See Kempsey.
KIAMA, county of Camden, a seaport town, with
Government Savings Bank, money-order office, and
telegraph station, 70 miles to the S. of Sydney. It
was erected into a municipality on Aug. 11, 1859,
and has 100 miles of roads, and property valued at
£365,120. A considerable trade is done with the
metropolis, a large portion of the butter supply
coming from the dairy farms in the immediate
neighbourhood of the town. Large quantities of
milk are daily shipped to the Sydney Fresh Pood
and Ice Company. In summer the export of butter
amounts to about 600 kegs of 40 lbs. each weekly,
and in winter about half this quantity, besides
innumerable eggs and poultry. The district is
sometimes termed the “ Garden of Australia.”
The town is lighted with gas, pleasantly situated,
and is becoming a place of great importance ; it has
numerous stores, a soda-water manufactory, a
brewery, dairy, factory, and a tannery ; three banks
—Commercial, City, English and Scottish, and the
usual public buildings, among which the churches
are the most notable. These latter consist of the
Scotch Church and the Episcopal Church in Terralong
Street, the Wesleyan Chapel, and the Roman Catholic
Church in Manning Street. The post and tele-
graph office facing the ocean is a handsome building.
It has a clock-tower, with large bell. Public school
has average attendance of 243. The principal
hotels are Kiama, Steam Packet, and Royal. Man-
ning and Terralong are the principal streets. Popu-
lation is about 1,200 persons ; the whole district,
5,835, with 1,200 on the electoral roll. The Kiama
Independent and Kiama Reporter are the local jour-
nals. There is a free library, containing 1,679 vols.
There is communication with Sydney by steamer
■daily, and daily overland by coach and rail vid
Campbelltown, and by coach daily to Moss Vale and
Shoalhaven. In addition to dairy-farming, consider-
able attention is given to the growth of barley,
potatoes, and the culture of English grasses. Stock
returns for year ending March 31, 1884, were 2,481
horses, 24,961 cattle, 673 sheep, 10,403 pigs. The soil
is of a very fertile character. The mineral products
of the district consist of coal of a more than average
quality (one of the many seams being 22 feet thick),
iron, slate, and freestone. One of the lions at
Kiama is the Blow Hole. It is a cave into which the
sea enters, and, in rough weather, is violently
ejected in gusts of foam and spray through a
natural aperture. Formation: granite. Staithshave
recently been erected at the basin to facilitate the
loading of vessels with blue metal, which is shipped
from this port in great quantities, employing a large
number of men.
KIANDBA, once an Important goldfields town-
ship, has retrograded with the failing of the goldfield,
and has now only a population of about 270 persons,
of whom 80 are Chinese, but with every prospect of
again flourishing, several mining companies having
recently resumed operations. It is situated on the
Eucumbene creek, a tributary of the Snowy river,
313 miles SW. of Sydney, in the county of Wallace
and district of Monaro. It lies 4,640 feet above the
sea level. Hotels: Kiandra, and Prince of Wales.
It has telegraph and money-order facilities, 2 stores,
and a public school (average attendance 15). Com-
munication with Sydney is vid Tumut to Coota-
mundra station, or to Upper Tarago. The diggings
lie at various distances from the town, and are allu-
vial ; like all this class of workings they were soon
exhausted. There are, however, several fine-looking
reefs, but as yet none have been tried. From the
mountainous character of the country the tempera-
ture is very low, the thermometer sometimes re-
gistering s°; the mean annual temperature in the
shade is 46°.
KURRAJONG, NORTH and SOUTH,
46 miles NW. of Sydney, in lat. 33° 30' S. and long.
150° 50' E., is situated on Wheeney’s creek, which
takes its rise near here, in the county of Cook, and
police district of Windsor. There are in the locality
three churches—Episcopal, Roman Catholic, and
Wesleyan—two public schools, with average attend-
ance of 83, a store, and three boarding establish-
ments. A coach runs daily from the Richomnd
Railway Station—fare, 2s. 6d. to Wheeney Creek.
The district is of an agricultural and pastoral
character, the formation being alluvial deposit,
overlying clay and sandstone. The climate is very
salubrious, and the views are delightful, embrac-
ing a wide panorama of country. Splendid orange-
KURRAJONG HEIGHTS (Northfield)
is a postal village in the county of Cook, and police
district of Windsor, about 50 miles W. by N. of Sydney,
and 12 miles distant from the Richmond Railway
Station, to which a coach runs. It is, as its name
implies, on the summit of the Kurrajong hills, a spur
of the Blue Mountain range. The residents are about
300, and the buildings are comprised in a school,
Presbyterian church, and two or three boarding-
houses, besides several handsome gentlemen’s resi-
dences. The following description is furnished by a
well-known resident“ The district is much re-
sorted to by invalids on account of its healthy and
invigorating climate. It is a beautiful and romantic
locality, commanding magnificent far - stretching
views of the low country, scrambling walks ‘up hill
and down dale,’ delightful peeps into ‘ sylvan
shades,’ ‘bosky dells,’ and ‘ ferny glades; ’ fine
glimpses of Mounts Hay, Wilson, Tomah, and King
George, with the bold precipitous cliffs of Govett’s
Leap in the distance, and the deep mysterious
gorges of the Grose river and Big Wheeny winding
all round. Some Sydney gentlemen have country
residences here, and there are extensive orange
orchards producing abundant crops of the golden
fruit. Most of the English fruits flourish—apples,
pears, plums, cherries, raspberries, and even goose-
berries—but the orange is chiefly cultivated. Visitors
from Sydney and other parts of the colony, from all
the other colonies, from England, India, America,
and other parts of the world, are frequent. It is a
place of general resort as a sanatorium; it is nearly
2,000 feet above the level of the sea.”
KYNUMBOON. See Murwillumbah.
LiACHLAN gold-fields. See Forbes.
LAGGAN, a postal village in the county of
Georgians, and police district of Goulburn, 155 miles
SW. from Sydney, situated on the Cutty Cuttygang
creek, and the main road from Goulburn to Bathurst.
It contains a Roman Catholic church (of stone), a
public school (average attendance 23), Presbyterian
church two hotels—Sportsman’s Arms, and the
Shamrock—and a large steam flour-mill. The dis-
trict is reported to be auriferous, and rich also in
tin, copper, lead, and other minerals. Much wheat
is also grown about here. Population about 456
Communication is vid Goulburn.


LAKE CUDGELLICO. a postal town, 367
miles W. of Sydney, with a post and money-order
■office, savings bank, and telegraph station. Elec-
torate of the Murrumbidgee, and police district of
Hillston. Population of township about 200. Prin-
cipal hotels are the Albion and Rising Sun; public
school here with an average attendance of 62. Orange
and Hay are the nearest railway stations.
LAMBTON, a postal, money-order, savings
bank, telegraph station, and municipal township
(proclaimed June 24, 1871), in the county and electo-
ral district of Northumberland, and police district
of Waratah, 81 miles N. of Sydney, distant in-
land 3 miles from the Hunter river and 5 miles
N. of Newcastle. Omnibuses meet the trains
at Waratah, and run at short intervals to and
from Newcastle. There are nine places of worship.
Episcopal,Roman Catholic, Primitive Methodist, Wes-
leyan, Presbyterian, English Congregational, Welsh
Congregational, Baptist, and Particular Baptist; a
court-house and police quarters, several hotels, among
which are Prince of Wales, Miners’ Arms, Lambton
Arms, and Royal; a large Music hall, Druids’ Hall, as-
sembly room, one banking establishment (the Joint-
Stock), Public school, with average attendance of 475,
and a mechanics’ and miners’ institute, having 1,900
vols. The town consists of about 250 houses, tenanted
by a population of about 1,500 ; in the entire munici-
pality there are about 550 houses,a population of 3,500,
and rateable property valued at £153,432. Coal-mining
is the industry of the district; the colliery here
belongs to the Scottish Australian Mining Company,
who commenced work in 1863, and to whom the
existence of the town is due ; it is worked by one
shaft and two tunnels, and employs about 445
hands and twenty horses, the daily output being
about 1,200 tons. The seam of coal is about 8 ft.
6 in. in width. A private line about li miles
long connects the colliery with the Great Northern
Railway. In the neighbourhood there are numerous
orange orchards, vineyards, and flower gardens,
and 3 quarries of good building stone, and steam
saw-mills. Formation of the district, shale and sand-
stone. About 1 mile distant SE. is the colliery town-
ship of New Lambton, which is built on the estate
of Messrs. Brown and Dibbs, who own the pit and
employ about 200 hands. The seam is the same as
that worked at Lambton. A private line two miles in
length connects the colliery with the Northern
Railway. In the township are a Wesleyan and
Primitive Methodist chapel, five hotels—New Lamb-
ton, Hand of Friendship, Nil Desperandum, Sports-
man’s Arms, and Duke of Wellington, and a large
public school, with average attendance of 308. The
New Lambton Smelting Works are in the vicinity.—
Jesmond, or Dark Creek, lies about half a mile NW.
of Lambton ; it has a Wesleyan chapel, a saw mill,
and stone quarries. The yield of coal for 1883 was
252,044 tons, valued at £123,857 14s. 6d.
LANE COVE, now called Gordon, a post
town in the county of Cumberland, in lat. about
33° 40' 30" S., and long 151° 10' E„ 9 miles N. of
Sydney, situated about midway between the Lane
Cove and Middle Harbour rivers, 2 miles from each.
About here are located some of the finest orange
orchards in the colony. Grapes are also extensively
cultivated, and the whole district which is of a
pleasing and undulating character, is celebrated
for its high degree of fertility and the luxuri-
ance of its vegetation. Slate is abundant, but the
kind used for roofing is not met with.
Brick-clay and freestone abound in most parts. The
population numbers about 350, for whose spiritual
want-i are provided an Episcopal, a Wesleyan, and a
Roman Catholic place of worship. There is also
here a public (average attendance 58), a denomi-
national, a Roman Catholic school and a convent:
Hotels —the Gardeners’ Arms and Green Gate—and
two general f-tores.
LAWRENCE, a small postal, telegraph, and
money-order village on the left bank of the Clarence
river, at a point termed the Elbow, about 9 miles
above the Rocky Mouth, 18 miles from Grafton NE.,
and 464 miles (330 postal) N. of Sydney. Steamers
call regularly to ship wool, maize, stock, tin, and
other products, Lawrence being the shipping port
for much of the wool raised about Tenterfleld.
( Coaches run to Casino (Richmond River), 54 miles
distant, on Mondays and Thursdays. Population
350. Hotels, the Lawrence, Commercial, and Family.
Episcopal, Baptist, and Roman Catholic places of
worship, public school, with average attendance of
67 scholars, and a private (ladies’) seminary, and four
stores. Court of Petty Sessions is held every alter-
nate month. Bank, A. J. Stock. There are three
sugar mills and one saw mill in the village.
LEICHHARDT, a rapid and improving
suburb 8 miles W. of Sydney, county of Cumber-
land, and electoral district of Balmain, situated
on the Long Cove and Johnson’s Creek, con tarns
a post, telegraph, money-order office and savings
bank, three hotels, two public school (average attend-
ance of 583), and four places of worship. Number
of inhabitants about 1,800. The municipal district
has 43 miles of streets, with rateable property to the
value of £830,000. Mode of conveyance is rail to
Petersham, thence per bus, also omnibuses from
Wynyard square.
LIDSDALE, a post, Government savings bank,
and money-order township, 105 miles W. of Sydney,
situated in the Hartley district. Cobb’s coach con-
nects with the Wallerawang Railway Station.
LISMORE, a township, with money-order and
telegraph office and Government savings bank, situ-
ated in the centre of what will be a rich agricultural
district, on the north arm of the Richmond river,
about 420 miles_N. (357 postal) from Sydney. It is at the
head of navigation for sea-going vessels and steamers,
and the town is placed at the junction of Leicester
and Wilson’s creeks, about 22 miles by land and 72
miles by water W. from Ballina. Lismore has An ■
glican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian and Wesleyan
places of worship, brick court-house, and lock-up,
land office, public school with average attendance
of 146, two post-offices, twelve stores, thirteen
hotels—Lismore, Freemasons’ and others—Temper-
ance hall, Protestant hall, branches of the Com-
mercial Bank and Bank of New South Wales, a
school of arts with 320 vols., six boarding-houses,
five saw mills, &c. District courts of Petty Sessions
and Small Debts are held here. A pier bridge has
just been erected over Wilson’s Creek, and one is
now in course of erection over Leicester Creek,
the latter being now worked by a punt. Two
steamers trade regularly to Sydney, leaving at
intervals of five days, and there are several small
steamers engaged in the river traffic. A coach runs
twice a week to Casino, some 20 miles distant W.,
and thence to Lawrence ; while mails are despatched
to other places at stated times. The nearest towns
are Gundubimba, where there is a store and hotel;
Wyrallah, where there is a large saw-mill, a
store, two hotels, &c. ; Coraki, a rising township,
well situated at the junction of the north and south
arms of the Richmond river, where there is a large
ship-building yard, two saw mills, an hotel, two
stores, a Government punt, branch of the A. J. 8.
Bank, &c. ; Woodburn, the seat of the sugar
trade, where there are six large sugar-mills,
six hotels, three stores, two banks, &c. Ballina,
the seaport town at the entrance of the river,
with four stores, six hotels, temperance hall,
Anglican church, &c. ; while there are other rising
places on the lower portion of the river. The
population of Lismore and vicinity is about 4,000, and
the district is partly pastoral and agricultural, some,
very fine stock being raised by the squatters, while
sugar, maize, potatoes, &c., are.grown, the land being
well suited for cultivation, and there is a large area
of timbered land yet open for selection. The main
exports of Lismore are pine and cedar timber— of
the former large quantities are exported, while
maize and other colonial produce is rapidly in-
creasing. The municipal district of Lismore was
proclaimed March 4, 1879. It has 60 miles of roads
and streets, 10 only made, and property of the
rateable value of £74,869. Local papers, the Northern
Star and the Chronicle.
LITHG-OW, a township, in the electoral and
police district of Hartley, situate on either side
of the Great Western Railway, in a valley of the
Blue Mountains, “in the wide and westerly portion
of that secluded rocky glen, into which the Western
Railway abruptly descends by the well-known Great


Zigzag,” 96 miles W. from Sydney; fares, 16s. and
10s. 6d. Height above sea level 3,006 feet.
There is a telegraph office, money-order office, post-
office savings bank, branch of the Commercial Bank,
and a public school, average attendance 349.
The Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Wesleyans, Pri-
mitive Methodists, Congregationalists, and Roman
Catholics have places of worship. There are five col-
lieries on the township—which afford employment
for upwards of 300 hands—the Lithgow Valley Colliery
Company, the Eskbank Company, the Bowenfels
Coal Company, Vale of Clwydd, and the Zigzag ;
the output of coal during 1883 was equal to
181,926 tons. There are two copper-smelting com-
panies, the Eskbank and the Vale of Clwydd. The
latter can turn out 50 tons of copper per month.
The Eskbank Iron Works, with a capital of
£30,000, has a blast furnace capable of produc-
ing 120 tons'of iron per week. There is a large
foundry on the company’s ground and iron roll-
ing mills, where iron rails are now made in
quantities. There are four brick-making establish-
ments and a terra-cotta works, two lime-kilns, and
two steam saw-mills, also a tweed factory, having
24 power looms. The country abounds in coal, iron
ore, freestone, and has a plentiful supply of water
from the stream which runs through the township.
The population is estimated at 3,500 souls. There
is a police station, and court of petty sessions are
held on alternate Tuesdays. There are eight hotels,
the Royal, the Commercial, the Club House, Zigzag,
Vale of Clwydd, Imperial, Court House, Rosevear’s,
and Cosmopolitan ; and Mr. William Gray’s large
assembly room for public meetings and entertain-
ments, and a handsome School of Arts, with hall
capable of seating 500 persons. Local paper; Lith-
gow Mercury.
LITTLE BILLABONG, a post town in
Hume electorate and Albury police district, 54 miles
NE. of Albury, 250 miles SW. of Sydney, on the
creek of the same name and the Main Sydney
road, 881 feet above sea level. Coach runs thrice a
week to Germanton. Hotels—The Australian and
Little Billabong. Episcopal Church, St. Thomas, and
public school The district consists of rich agricul-
tural and grazing laud, interspersed with slate and
auriferous quartz ranges, and has a population of
about 300. Tin has been discovered in quantity at
the Pullitop Mines. Formation: quartz, granite,
slate.
LIVERPOOL, one of the very early Government
settlements of the colony, is situated on George’s
river, at the head of navigation, 22 miles S. of
Sydney. It is a post, telegraph, money-order, and
savings bank town, and also a station of the Great
Southern line, which gives it easy access from the
metropolis. Fares, 2s. 2d., Is. 3d. It is under muni-
cipal government (proclaimed June 27, 1872), having
a council of nine, 20 miles of streets, and property
of the rateable value of £130,000, and is in the county
of Cumberland, and police district of Liverpool. Par-
ramatta is about 9 miles distant. There are several
places of worship—St. Luke’s (belonging to the
Church of England, an old building erected as far
back as 1819, lately much improved by re-arrange-
ment of interior), a Roman Catholic church, a Wes-
leyan chapel, a Presbyterian church, and a Gospel
Army barracks, capable of seating 400 people. The
.Roman Catholics have a school with average attend-
ance of 70, and there is also a public school (average
attendance, 148). The benevolent asylum for male
paupers is an old building on the western bank of
the river, to which two substantial and commo-
dious wings have been added. During the year
1883 there were 969 admissions, 772 discharges, 206
deaths; leaving 724 inmates on the Ist January, 1883.
Moore College is an institution in which candidates
for holy orders in the Church of England are trained,
and is a short distance from the town. Liverpool has
several hotels, of which the principal are Creasy’s
Family Hotel, Marsden’s Railway, the Royal, Tatter-
sail’s, and Brewer’s, two large stores, Bull and Sons
and Scrivener's, and a number of small shops,
a gaol, court-house, and police barracks, also a
branch of the Bank of N. 8. Wales. Local paper,
Liverpool Herald. A new post and telegraph
office was opened in August, ISSO. Population
1,770 ;of the census district (1881) 6,520. The dis-
trict is partially taken up by dairy farms; much
milk and butter is produced. There is a large
paper-mill here (Collingwood), belonging to Messrs.
Williams and Murray, which was enlarged in 1878,
and supplied with the newest machinery, together
with water-supply ponds, at an outlay of £5,000,
which brings the total cost of the works to £BO,OOO.
The works cover an area of 51 acres,and employ 5 steam
engines of from 10 to 50 horse-power, and upwards of
100 hands. A branch line connects the mills with the
main railway. It was started in 1869, and came under
the present proprietary in 1874, It is the finest and
largest establishment of the kind in Australia. News,
printing, writing and the better class of wrappings
are manufactured. It can turn out 22 tons of fine
news, and 24 tons of wrapping paper weekly. Addi-
tional machinery has lately been introduced consider-
ably increasing the output. A smaller mill, belonging
to Mr. Wearne, is at work on the opposite bank
of the George river, which produces wrapping
papers. The river is navigable for vessels of 400
tons as far as the paper-mills. There are two large
woolwashing establishments, a fellmongery, a saw-
mill, and a tannery. These factories are having a
beneficial effect on the business of the town. For-
mation : sandstone.
LIVERPOOL PLAINS (native name Cobbon
Comleroy) is the name given to a tract of pastoral
land containing 10 millions of acres, in the NE. part
of the colony. It was discovered by Mr. Oxley in
1818, and by him named after Lord Liverpool;
it is supposed to have been at one time the bed
of an immense inland lake. Much of the land is now
under cultivation, and the district contains the fol-
lowing diggings—Hanging Bock, Nundle, Peel River,
Wood’s Reef, Ironbarks, and Barraba. It is watered
by the Namoi river, and its tributaries—Thalaba
Creek, Baradine Creek, Brigalow Creek, Turrabeile
Creek, Maule’s Creek, and other branches, and the
Peel River. The towns are—in the East, Tamworth,
Quirindi, Breeza, Gunnedah,Wallabadah and Nundle ;
Wee Waa in the centre ; and in the extreme West,,
Wallgett. The river Darling divides it from the
Warrego district. On the Liverpool Plains electoral
rolls are 5,186 names.
LOCHINVAR, county of Northumberland,
electoral district of the Hunter, a postal village and
railway station on the Great Northern line, 8 miles
from Maitland, 26 from Newcastle, and 102 miles N.
of Sydney. Fares from Newcastle, 4s. Id., 2s. Bd.
The Hunter river runs close by, and the Great North-
ern road passes through it. Population, 90. The
district is a very fertile one, immense crops of maize,
potatoes, barley, and oats being raised when floods do
not occur. There are also numerous large vineyards,
the wines from the Kaludah press having an English
as well as an Australian reputation. The township
consists of one main street. The Episcopalians, Wes-
leyans, Roman Catholics have places of worship
here. Hotel—Greely’s. There is a Roman Catholic
school, money-order office, telegraph station, and a
Government savings bank. Lochinvar lies about
210 feet above sea level.
LONG REACH, a post town 121 miles SW. of
Sydney, situated in the county of Argyle, electorate
of Marulan, and police district of the Goulbum. It
lies on the S. side of the Wollondilly river, on the old
Southern road. The route to Sydney is via Marulan
Railway Station, 9 miles distant. Population, with
vicinity, estimated at 400. The country is prin-
cipally open forest, with limestone and granite
formation. The limestone is capable of taking a
good polish.
LONG SWAMP is a postal town in the county
of Georgiana, in the police district of Carcoar, 155
miles (174 postal) W. of Sydney. The population of
town and district is between 200 and 300. The dis-
trict is agricultural and grazing. Newbridge, 25
miles distant, is the nearest railway station.
LOTJISA CREEK. See Hargreaves.
LOTJTH, a post town, money-order and
telegraph station on the left bank of the Darling
River, 65 miles below Bourke and 647 miles IS W. of
Sydney. It lies on the direct overland travelling
stock track from Queensland to Victoria and South
Australia. The district is almost entirely of a pas-


toral character. Communication is by rail to Wyn-
gan, thence coach to Bourke ; the river at times is
also available, and is largely used for the carriage of
goods and station produce. Public school here, with
average attendance of 22.
LOWER GUNDAROO. See Gundaeoo.
LUCKNOW, a post, money-order, and tele-
graph station 198 miles W. of Sydney, on the main
road from Bathurst to Orange, 6 miles from the last
mentioned town. Gold mining was carried on here,
and the yield of gold, which had fallen off, is now
recovering, principally through the operations of the
Reform Gold Mining Co. The gold is found in
pyritous lodes. The richest material is sent to Eng-
land to be sold by tender. Public school here, with
average attendance of 68 scholars.
LUNATIC REEFS, a post town in the county
of Drake, situate on the Lunatic Creek, on the main
road between Grafton and Tenterfield, 561 miles N.
of Sydney, and 7 miles from Drake proper. It has a
court-house and hotel (Pairfields), and a constable is
stationed here. There is no regular conveyance to
the metropolis, but the route is via Tenterfield, 35
miles distant, to Armidale Railway Station. Popula-
tion of town about 50 ; of district, 290. There are no
large buildings. Mining and agricultural district.
Formation ; trap and slate.
MACDONALD TOWN, a suburban muni-
cipal district situated between Newtown and
Alexandria (proclaimed May 23, 1872), in the county
of Cumberland, and police district of Sydney, from
which it is 3 miles distant, in a southerly direction,
and having now a railway station. Hotels : Imperial,
Rose of Australia, and Erskinville. The district is
principally of ironstone and clay,the latter well suited
for the making of bricks. It has a reputed popu-
lation of 2,800. Railway fares, 3d. and 2d. There are
10 miles of streets, and property of the rateable
value of £215,748. There are several private schools,
a public school (average attendance 486), an Epis-
copal church, and money order and savings bank
office.
MAC QUARTE PLAINS (now called Bbe-
wongle), a post town, telegraph, and railway station
on the western side of the Blue Mountains, at an
elevation of 2,476 feet above sea level, 135 miles W. of
Sydney, and within a short distance of Bathurst, in
which police district it is. Fares, 235. 6d., 15s. 6d. It
is in the East Macquarie electorate. It contains one
hotel, one school, with average attendance of 51, and
one place of worship. The district is alluvial, and
admirably adapted for wheat and maize cropping.
Some of the finest in Australia is grown in this locality.
MACLEAN (postal name, Rocky Mouth) is a
thriving village prettily situated on the left bank of
the Clarence River. (See Rock y Mouth.)
MAITLAND is the second town in N. S. Wales,
and comprises both East and West Maitland. The
former was the original Government township. It
lies 93 miles N. of Sydney, in the county of Northum-
berland, electoral district of the Hunter, and police
district of Maitland, in lat. 32° 45' S. and long. 151° 35,
E., and is situated on the Hunter River; its proximity
to this has been the cause of the numerous disastrous
floods which have from time to time devastated the
town and district. At the same time, it owes to this
river much of its prosperity, the alluvial flats which
fringe it being among the most productive soils in
the world, and yielding in favourable seasons such
prodigious crops as to cause the district to be called
“ The Granary of New South Wales.” In 1884 over
20,500 acres of land were under cultivation, the crops
ranking in the following order: —Lucerne, maize,
barley, oats, potatoes, pumpkins, melons, and to-
bacco. The yield of maize was much less
than usual, owing to the drought. The grape
is widely cultivated, and much wine is made.
Oranges are also extensively grown. Coal of ex-
cellent quality and unlimited supply is found in
the neighbourhood, and seven or eight pits are
almost constantly at work and fresh seams are
now being developed. A seam of kerosine shale is
also worked. The Great Northern Railway connects
the town with Newcastle, and also links it with the
neighbouring towns of Singleton, Muswellbrook,
Scone, Murrurundl, Quirindi, Tamworth, Uralla,
Armidale, Gunnedah, and Narrabri. Further ex-
tension of the line northwards to the Queens-
land border is now going on. There is also a
branch line to Morpeth, 4 miles distant. The
railway stations in West Maitland are at Church
and High Streets. “At the former place there is a large
and commodious station-house, now known as West
Maitland station, and there is a station-house also at
East Maitland. A very large trade is done with the
inland townships. The two parts of Maitland are
distinct municipalities. Bast Maitland is governed
by a Mayor and Councillors. Its boundaries are
marked by the Hunter River and Wallis's Creek as
far as the Victoria Bridge (a fine structure of wood,
which here spans the creek, alongside of which flood-
gates have been erected for preventing the submer-
sion of the lowlands, at the rear of West Maitland
during heavy freshes in the river) ; these gates
have proved a great boon to the district. It was
proclaimed March 10, 1862. There are 27
miles of roads. The value of rateable property is
£136,000. The streets are wide and well made,
and contain numerous stores and many substantial-
looking private residences. It is the see of a
Roman Catholic bishop (Dr. Murray). The public
buildings in East Maitland are, the court-house, gaol
—one of the largest and strongest in the colony—
Mechanics’ Institute, with 1,400 vols., the Bank of
Australasia (a rather ornate edifice), the Church of
England, Wesleyan and Presbyterian Churches, the
Free Church, and the Public School just completed is
one of the finest buildings in the Colony, average
attendance 227. Omnibuses ply between East
and West Maitland frequently throughout the
day. The population by the last census (1881)
gives the following figures : West Maitland,
5,300 ; East Maitland, 2,000. East Maitland property
is gradually rising in value, and a large number of
dwellings are being erected in the town.
WEST MAITLAND is much the larger and more
populous of the two divisions. It was proclaimed
November 13, 1863. It has about 40 miles of roads,
and rateable property valued at £500,586. It is
under the government of a Mayor and Aldermen.
The town itself consists mainly of one long, some-
what straggling thoroughfare, called High Street,
running parallel with the river, and containing the
principal business houses, and it is intersected by
several cross streets. Some of the business premises
are of a superior order, the stores of D. Cohen and Co.
being among the finest in the whole colony. The
banks, too, deserve mention, the Australasia and
New South Wales Banks being the most architectural.
The Commercial has no particular features ; but the
directors of the Australian Joint-Stock Bank have
recently erected a large and commodious structure
and the Commercial Banking Company are about
building grand premises having purchased one of
the best sites in the town. A Masonic hall also
forms an ornament to High Street. The in-
dustrial interests of the town are comprised in
several coach-building factories, tobacco manufac-
tories, a brewery, two mills, and three boot factories,
employing a large number of hands. The public
buildings are a court-house, a three-story build-
ing, with ground floor, formerly known as the
Northumberland Hotel; the hospital, situated on an
elevated site at Campbell’s Hill, and noted as being
one of the best and most economically managed in-
stitutions in the colony ; the School of Arts, which
possesses a valuable library of upwards of 5,730 vols.,
the Benevolent Asylum, and the Victoria Theatre.
The places of worship in West Maitland comprise
three Episcopal, one Wesleyan, one Congregational,
one Presbyterian, one Baptist, one Roman Catholic,
and a Jewish Synagogue, a handsome little edifice.
There is a convent of Dominican nuns devoted chiefly
to education, and in addition numerous schools—a
public one in East, average attendance 227, and
another in West Maitland, average attendance
536, a Roman Catholic school. Two High Schools,
also several ladies’ schools, and the Sacred Heart
College at Campbell’s Hill. The Belmore Bridge
is a useful structure. The principal hotels are
Cohen’s Family, Hodgson’s Royal, and Brown’s
Exchange; besides these there are some forty
others. The principal Insurance Companies
have agents here. The Maitland Mercury is the


oldest and largest provincial journal in New South
Wales, and has a very wide circulation. The pro-
prietors have completed large and spacious premises,
which are not only an ornament to the town, but
one of the largest printing establishments in the
Colonies. The Maitland Mail, started about
two years ago, is now issued twice a week.
The town is lighted with gas. Property has of late
years greatly advanced in value. The West Mait-
land Savings Bank is a useful institution, and
largely availed of. The Great Northern Per-
manent Building Investment Losn Society is
doing a large business. There is daily commun-
ication with Sydney by the steamer from Mor-
peth, and also by the railway to Newcastle (20
miles), and steamboat thence. Fares to Newcastle,
2s. lid., Is. lid. Stock returns for the electoral dis-
tricts of East and West Maitland (March 31, 1884):
1,521 horses, 3,687 cattle, 3,220 sheep, 1,179 pigs.
Formation of country principally sandstone, with
overlying alluvial deposit. The River bank has
been secured by stone facing at a cost of £9,000 and
has proved a great boon to the town.
MAITLAND EAST. See Maitland.
MAJOR’S CREEK, a post town, with tele-
graph station, savings bank, and money order office,
198 miles 8. of Sydney. It is on the creek from
which it takes its name, in the police and electoral
district of Braidwood, and is distant about ten miles
from the town of Braidwood. Upper Tarago is the
nearest railway station. Hotels—Hezlett’s and Com-
mercial. Public school, average attendance 85.
It is a gold-mining district; the gold is in pyritous
veins, from which it is difficult to extract it. The
chlorine process, used in Victoria, the only known
successful one, is said to be too expensive to be
used profitably. Similar stone raised at Lucknow
is sent to England to be treated.
MANILLA, a post town, savings bank, money-
order and telegraph station, 281 miles N. of
Sydney, situated at the junction of Namoi and
Manilla rivers, county Darling, electoral and police
district of Tamworth. Mode of conveyance to
Sydney is per coach to Tamworth, coach fare, 125.,
thence per rail and steamer. There is a court-
house, two hotels, a Union church, three stores,
and a public school (average attendance 40). Popu-
lation about 150, principally wheat - growers.
Geological formation : trap.
MaNDURAMA, a postal township, situated
on the creek of the same name, 177 miles W. of
Sydney. Hotels are the Commercial, Royal, and
Red Lion ; a public school is here, with average
attendance of 20, and several small stores. Blaynoy
is the nearest railway station. Population of dis-
trict about 300. Geological formation : granite and
slate.
MANLY, county of Cumberland and electoral
district of St. Leonards, a post town with savings
bank, money-order office, and telegraph station, 9
miles distant NE. from Sydney, to which steamers
run daily. Itlieson the isthmus connecting the North
Head with the mainland, and has good sandy beaches
both on the Ocean and the Harbour sides. It has
several stores, four hotels—Pier, Steyne, Clarendon,
and Ivanhoe, and other essentials of a good watering
place, and is at all times a favourite and frequent
place of resort of the citizens of Sydney, and
especially thronged at holiday times. Public school
here with average attendance of 107 scholars.
Churches Congregational, English and Roman
Catholic. It was proclaimed a municipal district
on January 6, 1877 ; it has 25 miles of road and
streets (11 made), and rateable property of the
value of £401,165. Population about 1,500. Forma-
tion : sandstone.
MARENGO, a small post town with mone3’
order office, savings bank and telegraph office, 241
miles SE. of Sydney, in 34° 20' S. lat., and 148° 30' B.
long., situated on the right bank of the Marengo
or Murringo creek, in the county of Monteagle, and
police district of Young. Hotels—Farmer’s Arms,
and Warren. A public school with average atten-
dance of 35, an Episcopal and Roman Catholic
church, fine stone police barracks, a wool washing
establishment and 4 stores are here. The means
of reaching Sydney is by coach to Young, 14J miles
W., and Burrowa, thence to Binalong Station, and
from Young to Murrumburrah. Formation: granite,
overlying in some cases limestone. The district is
reported to he in a prosperous condition, particu-
larly as regards sheep rearing and farming, and
would be more so hut for the large useless reserves
lying idle and unimproved around the town. It is
16 miles distant from Burrowa, and 15 from Young.
Population 1,000. Court of Petty Sessions held fort-
nightly.
MARRICKVILLE, an important and rapidly
advancing suburban borough, in the county of
Cumberland, electoral district of Canterbury and
police district of Newtown. It lies about 3J miles
SW. of Sydney and has a post, money-order, tele-
graph office and savings bank. Communication to
Sydney is by tramway fare, 4d. Railway and
omnibus. The principal hotels are Boland’s, Warren
View, Stanmore, Garden Palace, Thomson’s, Empress
of India, and Town Hall, There is a public
school, average attendance 460, Church of Eng-
land, Congregational and Methodist places of wor-
ship, a leather and boot factory, two tanneries, a
large number of brickyards, a few market gardens
and Graham’s renowned Nursery, at the extreme
end of the borough. There are at least 60 miles of
made roads and streets, and rateable property valued
at £700,000. The Town Hall is a substantial and
handsome building, situated on the Illawarra road.
MARTI LAN, a post, money-order, savings
bank, and telegraph township, 18 miles E. of Goul-
bum, and 114 miles SW. of Sydney. It is situated
on the creek of the same name, not far from its
junction with the Shoalhaven river, at an elevation of
2,105 feet above sea level, in the county and elec-
torate of Argyle, police district of Goulbum. It is a
station on the Great Southern line, fares, 19s. 6d. and
12s. 9d. Public buildings : one Episcopal church,
a stone-built Roman Catholic church, a Presbyterian
church, Oddfellows’ hall, police station, a school
(average attendance 28), a branch of the English
and Scottish Bank, and a Court of Petty Sessions.
Population 170. District is principally pastoral,
but is also agricultural, wheat being the leading crop.
A marble quarry and lime and Freestone quarries
are in the vicinity : these mainly supply Sydney and
the neighbouring districts. The floor of the Sydney
University is paved with marble from here. Forma-
tion ; granite and freestone.
MARYLAND (28° 35' S. lat., 152“ E. long.),
in the electoral and police district of Tenterfield,
a post town, savings’ bank, and money-order station
on the Northern frontier on the Mary creek, 468
(499 postal) miles N. of Sydney. There is one hotel,
Church of England place of worship, and two stores ,
but no public buildings of importance. Public
school has average attendance of 24 scholars. The
district is of a tin-mining and pastoral nature.
It is more easily reached via Brisbane and rail to
Stanthorpe. A coach runs from the Armidale
railway station, also a coach from Uralla railway
station to Stanthorpe, 10 miles distant. Tenterfield
is about 25 miles S. Population of town 170; of
district 504. Formation; basalt and rich agricul-
tural soil.
MATHOIJRA, a post town, money-order
and railway refreshment station in the county of
Cadell, Murray and Moama police district and elector-
ate of the Murray, 512 miles S. of Sydney, situated
35° 50' S. lat., and 145° 2'E. long., on the banks of the
Gulpha creek. There are here a blacksmith’s shop,
three hotels, the Railway, Kangaroo and Station ;
2 stores, 1 flour, 1 saw mill, and about 150 resi-
dents. In the district are also about 150 residents. The
metropolis is more easily reached via Melbourne
than overland, but a coach runs to Hay railway
station. It is a pastoral and agricultural district,
and is benefited by the Deniliquin and Moama rail-
way, which passes through here. Police-court is held
once a month before the police magistrate at Moama.
Public school here, with average attendance of 31
scholars, also Anglican and Presbyterian churches.
Principal export of the district flour and timber.
MEN ANGLE, a railway and telegraph station
ana township in the county of Camden, and police dis-
trict of the same name, situated on the Cow-pasture or
Nepean river (270 feet above sea-level), 40 miles S.


of Sydney, fares, ss. 6d., 3s. 6d. There are two places
of worship—Church of England and Roman Catholic
—and a public school with average attendance of 38.
Population about 300. The land is partly taken up
with farms, and in part used for grazing purposes.
Formation; principally sandstone. The viaduct and
bridge, which at this point carries the railway over
the river, is one of the finest pieces of engineering
work in the colonies. The bridge is on the box girder
principle, 498 feet long, and is carried on three piers
65 feet high. The viaduct is 978 feet long on the
Sydney side and 432 feet hr length on the southern
side. The river is not navigable -in fact, in the
summer season it can be easily forded —but the
scenery on the banks is very fine, and well worth
a visit.
MENINDIE (32° 30' S. lat, 142° 25' E. long.) is
a rising township, with upwards of 3,000 inhabitants.
The population of the whole district is returned at
2,000. It lies on the west bank of the Darling river,
100 miles from Wilcannia, 160 from Wentworth and
850 WNW. of Sydney, in the electorate of Went-
worth, and police district of Mitchell. It has a
public school with average attendance of 40 scholars,
a Roman Catholic place of worship, court-house,
police barracks, branch of Joint Stock Bank, post and
telegraph station, the latter being the principal
building, and a mechanics’ institute. The town is
irregularly built on sandy rises, back from the Dar-
ling and out of flood reach. The hospital, at present
closed and in ruins, at one time had an income of
£l,OOO. There are 3 hotels, Menindie, Crown and
Maidens, and 3 stores. The district is altogether
occupied by stations. The communication with
the metropolis is via the Hay railway station,
Wilcannia, Wentworth or Deniliquin ; a bi-weekly
mail is run from Hay via Oxley and Clare.
Menindie has some historic interest from the fact of
Burke and Wills having made it the starting point of
their fatal expedition in 1860. Several relics such as
camel shoes, water bags, &c. have been picked up in
the neighbourhood. Rich silver, copper, and lead
mines have been opened up between Mount Gipps
and the South Australian border.
MERIMBULA, a postal township, with
money-order, Government Savings’ Bank, and
telegraph office in the county of Auckland, and
electoral district of Eden, 200 miles (272 postal)
SSW. of Sydney, situated on Merimbula lake.
The township is mainly formed and owned by
Munn’s Maizena Company, which gives employ-
ment to the inhabitants, and the I. S. N. Com-
pany have four wharves and stores in con-
nection with their carrying trade, which is very
large. There is a small wooden church used as a
union church by the various Protestant denomi-
nations, and a public school with average attend-
ance of 31 scholars. One hotel—the Merimbula,
opposite the Company’s wharf stores. Mails from
Sydney by steamer every Tuesday, and overland via
Moruya and Bega twice a week. Population about
130. Formation : old red sandstone.
MEREIWA, a thriving township in the Upper
Hunter electorate and police district of Cassilis,
county Brisbane, situate on the Merriwa River
(Smith’s rivulet) and the main north-western route
to Port Bourke, in 32° 8' 8. lat., 150° 20' E. long., 198
miles N. from Sydney, 50 from Muswellbrook, 40
from Scone, and 60 from Gulgong (cross country
route.) Population about 1,000, town and sur-
roundings. Route ; steamer to Newcastle ; rail to
Muswellbrook, thence by Cobb & Co.’s coaches daily
except Monday, fare, 17s. 6d., making the journey
through from Sydney in about twenty hours. Forma-
tion : basalt, sand, and limestone, partly auriferous.
Gold has been found in the vicinity on the Worondi
Hill, coal and kerosene shale at Portmantle. The dis-
trict is thickly timbered in parts with box, gum,
iron-bark, stringy-bark, pine, and cedar. The soil
is admirably adapted for the growth of wheat, maize,
potatoes, vines, and grain of all kinds. A branch
line of railway will be proceeded with at once,
and cereals, wool, tallow, &c., will then have a
ready outlet to the Hunter River townships.
Pursuits: pastoral and agricultural combined.
Climate salubrious and dry. Large fertile
plains known as Gummun Plains. The district is
intersected with rivers, and watercourses, having
their rise in the Liverpool Range, the highest
portion, Moon Rock or Mount McArthur, and Oxley’s
Peak, being 25 miles to the north-west, and almost
southerly Mount Dangar, most conspicuous in the
distance ; altogether thesceneryis beautiful—wooded
slopes and rivers, interspersed with villas, vine-
yards, and corn-fields, and a network of paddocks,
dotted with the Merino sheep, for which the
Brindley Park and Collaroy estates are so
famous for the high character of their wool.
The streets are nicely laid out. The buildings
are chiefly of stone; among the principal are
the court-house in Vanacher-street, the police
barracks, the telegraph, post and money order office
—a new building centrally situated in Bettington-
street, the School of Arts in Bow-street, with a good
library of 470 volumes, and a stage with scenery for
theatrical performances ; Episcopal church, with a
parsonage on a slope of the river built of stone; Roman
Catholic church, a new Gothic building of stone with
a presbytery, and a R. C. denominational School.
The Bank of New South Wales has a branch
here. Public school with teachers’ residence, a fine
large building, with average attendance of 70
scholars. A private school for young ladies. A
substantial bridge spans the Merriwa River at West-
end, alongside is the recreation ground, well laid
out and planted with avenue trees. Hotels:
Cricketers’ Arms, Fitzroy, and Rose inn, the latter
is the booking-office for Cobb & Co.’s coaches.
Among the tradesmen are three storekeepers, one
blacksmith, a stationer, a shoemaker, a saddler, two
butchers, two bakers, a cordial manufacturer and
three auctioneers. The town is likely to extend, as
much of the adjoining land is surveyed and cut up
for building lots. It has money-order, savings bank,
and telegraphic facilities, together with a splendid
stone quarry in the town.
MICHEL AGIO, a postal village, with telegraph
station and money-order office, on the banks of the
creek of the same name, the Murrumbidgee river bear-
ing about 1 mile to the westward, and 216 miles S.
of Sydney. It is in the county of Murray, and elec-
toral and police district of Queanbeyan, and lies in
about 35° S. lat. and 149° E. long. Church:
Roman Catholic. School; a public one, with average
attendance of 37. Government buildings: court-
house, police barracks, lock-up, two hotels, Hibernian
and Pacific, and two stores. Mail coaches run regu-
larly to Upper Tarago Railway Station. The dis-
trict is suited for pastoral and farming purposes, and
has some mineral wealth. Formation: granite
and limestone. Entire population estimated at
225.
MILBTJRN CREEK, county Bathurst, elec-
torate and police district of Carooar, 298 miles W. of
Sydney, is a postal, money-order and telegraph
station, situated about the centre of the Mount
Macdonald goldfield—discovered in the year 1880.
Mode of conveyance is coach to Blajney, thence
rail to Sydney. Population is 200. There is a public
school, average attendance 40, one church, several
stores, and four hotels, the principal being the Royal
Exchange.
MILLEIELD, a post town, in the county of
Northumberland, and electorate of Wollombi, situ-
ated on the Wollombi brook, 122 miles N. of Sydney.
It has one place of worship (Church of England),
a public school, with average attendance 24, three
stores and a flour and saw mills. Agricultural dis-
trict. A coach runs to West Maitland on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, whence the train can be
taken for Newcastle and thence steamer for Sydney.
Formation: sand-stone. Wheat, tobacco, maize,
oats and tbe vine are cultivated here.
MILPARINKA is the largest township on the
Albert goldfield, near Mount Browne, lying about 924
miles from Sydney. It is on the south bank of
Evelyn Creek near a large water hole of the same
name, about 200 miles NW. of Wilcannia. It
has four hotels, Royal, Albert, Royal Standard,
Milparinka, and a branch of the Commercial Bank!
There is tri-weekly coach communication with
Hay railway station, coach fare, 190 s. Population
about 120.
. MILTON, a neat and flourishing township, 4


miles from the port of Ulladulla and the central ward
of the municipal district of Ulladulla, containing a
population of about 300, and post office, Government
savings bank, telegraph and money-order office. It is
situated in the county of St. Vincent, electoral dis-
trict of Shoalhaven, police district of Dowling in
latitude 35° 20' south and longitude 150° 30' east,
155 miles S. of Sydney, 44 miles S. of Shoal-
haven, 45 miles N. of Bateman’s Bay. Lake Bun-ill
is three miles and Lake Conjola four miles distant.
There are 3 hotels, Star, Commercial and Milton, and
8 stores. Direct communication is had with the me-
tropolis by the Illawarra Company’s steamers once
a week, and overland via Shoalhaven and Moss
Vale, thence by railway to Sydney, daily. The places
of worship comprise: Church of England, with a
branch church at the Forest 5 miles distant, Roman
Catholic Chapel at the Forest, Congregational Church
and Wesleyan Chapel. The public buildings consist
■of court-house, telegraph and post-office, school of
arts, agricultural hall, large and commodious
public school in the centre of the township, with aver-
age attendance of 113, and two Banks—Commercial
and English and Scottish. There are about 640 volumes
in the School of Arts Library, and about 900 volumes
in the Free Public Library under the control of the
Municipal Council. There are 8 public schools and
1 Roman Catholic denominational school within an
easy radius of the township. Newspapers, Ulladulla
and Milton Times, and St. Vincent Liberal. The
township is supported by the dairy farmers.
•Granite formation, clay subsoil.
MINMI, a village on a creek of the same name,
89 miles N. of Sydney, 14 miles from Newcastle, and
'6 miles from Hexham, the nearest railway station.
It is in the county of Northumberland, and electoral
district of Newcastle. The district is a coal-mining
one, and the product of the Minmi collieries (belong-
ing to Messrs. J. and A. Brown) has a good reputa-
tion for its heat-producing and steam-generating
•qualities. A private line connects the colliery with
the Great Northern Railway and the shipping shoots
at Hexham. About 400 hands are employed and the
output of coal is stated at about 1,000 tons per day.
Other companies are also being formed for coal
raising, and sinking has already begun. There are
in the village 6 hotels, the Northumberland being the
principal; a Wesleyan, Welsh Congregational, and a
Primitive Methodist chapel, a public school, average
attendance 256, a money-order office, telegraph
station and Government savings bank. Population
about 1,170. In the neighbourhood is a fine orangery.
MITTAG-ONQ-, a post town, with money-order,
telegraph and savings bank office, in the county
and electoi-ate of Camden, police district of Benima,
on the Great Southern Bailway, 77 miles S. of Sydney,
fares, 12s. 6d. and Bs. 3d. It lies at an altitude of 2,069
feet above the ocean level. Two miles distant from
here is the celebrated Gibraltar tunnel, 572 yards in
length, cut through hard shale and sandstone, and
lined throughout with brick-work and masonry in
cement. It is a coal and iron district, and the country
round is of a pastoral and farming character. Inns:
Shoathor’s, Draper’s, Hilder’s, and Comer’s. Bank :
Commercial and seven stores. There are four
churches, three public and one private school, the
former with average attendance of 126. Fifteen
■miles from here are the Australian Kerosene Oil
-and Mineral Co.’s Works (near Joadja Creek); about
1,944 acres are in occupation, in which there is a
proved seam estimated at a million and a half tons
of Kerosene Mineral, besides almost unlimited
• quantities of coal. A large stationary engine has
been erected for winding the mineral out of the
. valley, and extensive works for the manufacture of
the kerosene. It is connected by railway with the
Southern Line near Mittagong. Population 500.
MOAMA, a post-town, with money-order, and
telegraph office and railway station, formerly
known by the name of Maidens’ Punt, is situated
on the north bank of the river Murray, opposite
Echuca, in Victoria, being the border town of
New South Wales at this point. It is in the
county of Cadell, and police district of Moama.
It lies 516 (539 postal) miles SW.( of Sydney,
the communication overland with the metropolis
Being by rail to Deniliquin, thence coach to Hay,
It is in direct railway communication with Mel
bourne (158 miles 8.), from which it is easily
reached in a few hours’ journey. A railway
connects it with Deniliquin, the chief town
of Riverina, and a substantial iron bridge, that
is used for the railway and general traffic, spans
the Murray. It has been constructed at the
joint expense of the two colonies, at a cost of
over £lOO,OOO, and is, without doubt, the finest
structure of the kind in the Southern hemi-
sphere. The population is estimated at upwards
of 1,200; in the census district are 3,066 souls.
Hotels; Bridge, Border Inn, Plough and Harrow,
Railway Terminus, and Vine. Bank ; N. S. Wales.
Public school here with average attendance of 51
scholars, a court-house and lock-up. A new and
handsome Court-house, and Post-office have re-
cently been erected. There are about 100 houses,
but no building of special importance. New
public schools and police barracks have been
erected, a custom-house is also established. A dock
has been excavated and a large wharf made.
Steps were recently taken to have Moama incor-
porated, but the movement met with great oppo-
sition, and was ultimately abandoned, mainly, it is
said, through the action of farmers, who opposed it
in the belief that it meant taxation in the shape of
tolls and rates. The Episcopalians have a large
place of worship, and another commodious building
is used for promiscuous congregations. A daily
newspaper, called the Riverine Herald, is pub-
lished at Echuca, and circulates widely here,
also the Echuca Advertiser. The district is prin-
cipally devoted to grazing purposes, but of
late cultivation has been followed with suc-
cess. There are valuable red gum flats along the
banks of the Murray, which are now reserved from
being cut, for the future use of the colony. A
police court is held here, presided over by the police
magistrate. At Maloga, about 16 miles distant, is an
aboriginal station, under the care of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthews, which is reported to have been of groat
benefit in educating and civilizing the remnant of
the blacks in the district.
MOQ-O, a post town on the coast, 205 miles S. of
Sydney, and about 12 miles from Moruya. It has
three places of worship and a public school with an
average attendance of 20 scholars. Mining (quartz-
reefs) and agricultural district, principally the latter.
Population with neighbourhood about 200. Upper
Tarago is the nearest railway station.
MOIiONG (electorate of Molong) lies on a rivu-
let of the same name, on the road from Orange to
Wellington, 172 miles (214 postal) WNW. of Sydney ;
coach to Orange, 22 miles, SB., thence railway, are
the means of reaching Sydney; through fare,
395. 6d. It has a money-order and telegraph office, and
has a Government savings bank. The population is
increasing, and now numbers about 1,500 persons ;
the district numbers 6,824. Hotels : Freemasons',
Royal, Telegraph, Wynne's New Royal, Court-house,
Criterion, and Post Office ; the principal stores are
Haslam and Parker, and Piper and Co. Places of
worship : Episcopal, Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic
(all of stone). Public buildings : court-house and
police barracks, public school, a commodious brick
building, with average attendance of 127, and a
R. C. convent school ; branches of the Joint-Stock
and Commercial Banks, and a Mechanics’ Institute,
with a library of 580 volumes, and a fine brick hall
erected in 1879. Newspaper, Molong Express (Satur-
days). Two steam flour mills are here and also a
steam saw mill. The district abounds with copper
ore, and two mines, the Goodrich and the Copper
Hill, have been worked. Quartz reef with fair indi-
cation has been discovered at Buekiubah, 30 miles
from Molong. Coal has also been found, but the
capabilities of this part of the country have yet to be
developed. The railway from Orange is now making,
and will be completed in March, 1885. Farming is
now extensively carried on. The wheat returns
for 1883 amount to 350,184 bushels from 29,482
acres of land ; there are also 772 stockholders, 298,825
sheep in the district, 7,910 head of cattle, 6,388
horses, 2,829 pigs, maize, 166,000 bushels ; and in
every respect the district will compare favour-
ably with any other in the colony. Places of petty


sessions are Molong, Obley, and Toogong. Molong
is a municipal centre, proclaimed November 13,1878,
having proi erty of the rateable value of £123,208.
MOLONCKLO, a post, telegraph and money-
order station, on the river of the same name, 181 miles
8. of Sydney. It is a farming and grazing settle-
ment. The nearest coaching station is at Bungen-
dore, 10 miles distant. Upper Tarago is the nearest
railway station.
MONTEFIOB.ES, a township on the western
bank of the Macquarie, about one mile from Wel-
lington, with which it is connected by a good bridge.
It contains two stores and three hotels. It is named
after its founder and original proprietor. The com-
munication with the metropolis is by rail from Wel-
lington ; distance from Sydney 198 miles W. (249 by
rail.)
MONTREAL, a new goldfield, close to the sea
coast and on the SB. side of the Dromedary Mountain,
250 miles S. of Sydney. According to Warden Keight-
ley, “ the field contains rich deposits of free gold,
which has been subject to the action of the sea, reduc-
ing it to a water worn condition,but evidently washed
back by the sea and ranged in two terraces above
high water level.” The run of goldhas been traced to
the West through terraces, and is now being found
under Lake Wallaga. A shaft has been sunk in the
lake, and gold found at about 28 feet. At Corunna,
14 miles N., similar deposits of black sand containing
gold have been found,and also at Nelson, to the south.
Montreal is said to possess a magnificent climate, an
extraordinary deposit of gold,and is surrounded with
several lakes alternately fresh and salt, abounding
with fish and game, and having easy communication
both by sea and land. The Warden consideis the
Dromedary as “one of the grandest deposits t;f
geological formation and undeveloped richness
that exists in the Colony.” Montreal is the outcome
of the Bermagui rush, it lies three miles N. of Ber-
magui, and 13 miles E. of Cobargo. It has two
hotels, two stores, Warden’s, and police court, money
order office and public school, average attendance
6. Population about 140, mostly engaged in sluicing
the hill ground, Steamer leaving Sydney every
Wednesday and Eden every Saturday, calls to land
or embark passengers. Mail twice a week to and
from Cobargo.
MOORWATHA, a post town in the county
and electoral district of the Hume, on the banks
of a small stream called Major’s creek, 413 miles SW.
of Sydney. The only buiLiing of more than average
size is the church (Anglican), St. Mary’s. Public
school here, average attendanceJl9. Hotel: Sheetz.
Population, with the vicinity, is stated at between
500 and 600. The communication with the metropo-
lis is vid Albury (20 miles SE.) or Gerogery ; to this
last place there is a good road. District is principally
of an agricultural character and has mostly been
taken up by selectors, much wheat being grown.
A large vineyard is in the neighbourhood.
MOREE, a post town, with money-order, savings
bank, and telegraph office, 391 miles N. of Sydney,
situated on Gwydir river. It is in the police district
of Warialda, and electoral district of the Gwydir.
Hotels ; Bank, Criterion, Boyal Sportsman’s Arms,
and Caber Fal, and three stores. Public school, aver-
age attendance 65. Banks: N. S. Wales and Commer-
cial, and Wesleyan, Roman Catholic, and Presby-
terian churches. Public buildings, court house, Court
House Hotel, and gaol. The route to Sydney is
by coach to the Narrabri railway station 70 miles ;
coach fare, 40s. It is a farming and grazing district,
and supports two Racing Clubs, Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Society, and a School of Arts. Population
300. Local newspaper, Gwydir Examiner.
MOBPETH, prettily and healthily situated
at the head of the navigation of the river Hunter,
about half a mile from its junction with the
Paterson, 30 miles from Newcastle (fares, 3s. sd. and
2s. 3d ), 4 miles from East Maitland, with which it is
connected by a branch line of railway (fares, id. and
5d.), and 95 miles N. of Sydney, with which it has
daily communication by steamer. It is in the county
of Northumberland, parish of Alnwick and Morpeth,
and police district of Maitland, and has a telegraph
station, money-order office, and savings bank. The
trade of the town depends, in a large measure upon
the coal mining, and agricultural interests. There
are several pits in active operation, yielding large
quantities of the fuel, within 4 miles of the town.
A new seam of coal has just been struck wi'hin
sight of ihe township. The fertility of the river
flats has before been referred to; every kind of
produce is grown, but the staple articles are
maize and lucerne. The town consists princi-
pally of two main streets, running parallel with
the river, with short rectangular cross streets.
The town has many places of worship, and is
the residence of the Bishop of Newcastle (Dr.
Pearson). The Episcopal church is said to be one of
the most romantic and English-looking in the
colony ; the Wesleyan chapel is a fine building; the
Primitive Methodist chapel is small; both Catholic
and Presbyterian places of worship are neat and good
structures. A schoolhouse serves the Roman Catho-
lics for both educational and devotional purposes, also
a convent. The public school (average attendance 167)
is a superior building. Banks : Commercial and Joint
Stock. The buildings are principally of stone, there
being extensive quarries in the neighbourhood. The
hotels are the Royal, Hunter River, Steam Packet,
Settler’s Arms, Crown and Anchor, Commercial,
and Caledonian. The School of Arts has a fine
hall, library and reading rooms with 1,240 vols. ;
the court-house is a substantially-built structure.
Local newspaper : the Morpeth Times. The Newcastle
Steamship Company, and the Hunter River N.S.N.
Company, have each wharves for the loading and
discharging of their steamers free of wharfage duties.
These wharves communicate with the railway.
Vessels up to 800 tons can navigate the river to Mor-
peth. There is also a coal staiths belonging to the
Government. The population is estimated at 1,370
persons, the entire district being 5,340. Stock returns
for 1884—cattle 6,396, horses 3,292, sheep 437, pigs,
2,370. The town is governed by a mayor and council-
lors, having been erected into a municipality on De-
cember 1, 1865. It has 9 miles of streets, and rateable
property of the value of £108,145. The district re-
turns one member to Parliament.
MORUYA, a money-order, Government savings
bank, and telegraph town, five miles from the Heads,
on the river of the same name, in the county of Dam-
pier, electoral district of Eden, 198 miles (235 postal).
S. of Sydney, with which there is regular communi-
cation by steamer or mail coach to Upper Tarago-
station. There are several places of worship in
the town—Episcopalian, Roman Catholic, Wes-
leyan, and Presbyterian, six stores, and a branch of
the N. S. Wales Bank. The population is estimated
at 830 persons. The Moruya Examiner is the local
paper. Public school (average attendance 92), also a
R. school. The leading hotels are the Adelaide,
Commercial, Kildare, Royal, and Criterion. In the
neighbourhood are a tannery, steam flour-mill,
several cheese and bacon factories, five saw mills,
a flourishing Agricultural Society, mechanics’ insti-
tute, also Oddfellows’, Good Templars’, and Ma-
sonic Lodges. The district is an agricultural and
mining one. The Moruya silver mines are within
four miles of the town, and have been profitably
worked ; other minerals, including gold, also exist,
and will one day command the attention of the
capitalist. At Mooo some promising quartz reefs
have been uncovered. At Burba, 11 miles from the
town, a fine slate quarry is being opened out, and
from a quarry on the river were obtained the
splendid granite columns of the Sydney post office.
Large crops of maize, win at, barley, oats and
potatoes are raised (n the cultivated land, which
mainly consists of fertile alluvial flats. The Govern-
ment breakwater at the entrance to the river is
nearly 2,000 feet in length, formed out of the fine
granite for which the district is famed.
MORVEN, distant 36 miles from Albury, on
the Wagga Wagga road, and 345 miles from Sydney,
S. is situated on the Billabong Creek, which at this
point is spanned by a wooden bridge. The district
is a squatting one, the creek frontages being all
secured by the owners of the adjacent runs. The
principal buildings are a Church of England, a public
school,and a hotel and store. There is a post-office,and
mails are made up daily for WaggaWagga and Albury.
Culcairn is the nearest railway station.


MOSGTEL, a post town with telegraph,
savings bank and money - order office, county of
Waljeers, and electoral district of Balranald, 604
miles W. of Sydney, and about 70 miles W. of Hill-
ston, with three stores and two inns—the Mosgiel
and Royal. Court of petty sessions is held monthly.
Hay is the nearest railway station.
MOSS VALE, a post, telegraph, savings bank,
and money-order town, situated 2,205 feet above the
sea-level, 80 miles S. of Sydney. Communication is
direct by the Great Southern line, fares, 14s. 3d. and
9s. 3d., and on Saturdays excursion trains run at Id.
per mile. Local paper, the Scrutineer. A public
school is here, with average attendance of 111
scholars, and branches of the English, Scottish
and Commercial Banks. A court of petty sessions
is established at Moss Vale and a commodious
court-house was completed in 1880; a handsome
weatherboard church was opened by the Presby-
terians in December, 1879, and a Church of England
has been erected, at a cost of £BOO. A summer
residence for the Governor has been built two miles
from here, enclosed in spacious grounds ; also several
summer residences of Sydney gentry have been built
in the vicinity of the township. There are five stores
and four public-houses. Commercial, Tattersall's,
Family, and Royal. The land in the district consists
mainly of rich black and chocolate coloured soil,
admirably suited for farming. Population about
700. Moss Vale railway station is the outlet to Syd-
ney and Goulbum, of the rich dairying and agri-
cultural district of Burrawang, Robertson, Sutton
Forest, Berrima, and Kangaroo Valley.
MOULAMEIN (144° 5' S. lat., 35° 5' B. long.),
a postal township with money-order office and tele-
graph station in the county of Wakool, electoral
district of the Murray, on the Edward river, at the
the port of Wollongong. Is a noted landmark and
guide to mariners sailing along the coast. The steep-
ness of the mountain side on the north of Mount
Kembla, discloses a section of the geological for-
mation of “the coal measures,” live seams of coal
being seen in situ at this locality. The lower seam
is above the level of the plain and the others lying
superimposed at convenient working distances above
each other, and all cropping out to view in
several places, can be easily and cheaply worked by
adits driven into the mountain side. These five
seams are respectively 7 ft., 4 ft., 17 ft., 7 ft.,.and
14 ft. in thickness. From the report of an expe-
rienced mining engineer it has been estimated that
these seams will yield in the aggregate coal at the
enormous rate of 52,000 tons per statute acre, and
that the coal in two square miles (1,280 acres) of this
country is at present selling rates worth upwards of
£33,280,000 sterling, being- about the value of all
the gold raised from the mines of New South Wales
since their discovery in 1851 to December 31, 1879.
There is also found in this locality abundance of fire-
clay and a rich seam of iron ore, as well as a seam of
kerosene shale 4 ft. 9 in. thick. The Mount Kembla
Coal and Oil Company, with a capital of £lOO,OOO, has
opened a colliery on the property, and constructed a
railway to Kembla Bay, Five Island Point, 7 miles
distant, where coal is being shipped from a jetty
constructed for that purpose. A new Company (the
Victorian) are preparing to commence operations
here.
MOUNT McDONALD. SeeMiLBURN Creek.
MOUNT VICTORIA, a post town, with
money-order, savings bank, and telegraph office and
railway station (fares, 12s. 6d. and Bs. 3d.), 77 miles
NW. of Sydney, in the electoral and police district of
district of the Murray, on the Edward river, at the Hartley. It lies 3,422 feet above the sea-level. Build-
junction of the Billabong creek, 536 miles SW. of j ings : four hotels, Rojal, Perry’s, Imperial, and Manor
Sydney. Hotels : Sportsman’s Arms and the Moula- House, a public school, with average attendance of
mein. A Presbyterian church with resident min- 62, and a Church of England. Population about 242
ister; a court-house, police barracks and a public
school with average attendance of 19 scholars, and
one large store. District, principally a pastoral
one, is surrounded on all sides by stations. Con-
veyance to Deniliquin, about 75 miles distant SB.,
thence coach to Hay, is the route to Sydney, or
per train via, Echuca to Melbourne. Population 120.
MOUNT BROWNE, called after Dr. John I
Browne, who accompanied Sturt in his explora-
tion of 1845, is a new mining locality, situated in
the Grey range in the north-west corner of New
South Wales, in the County of Evelyn, equi-
distant from the boundaries of Queensland and
South Australia, some sixty miles from each,
and about 926 miles NB. of Sydney, in about
141° 45' B. long, and 29° 45' 8. lat. The ridge
of which Mount Browne is part, trends apparently
from SBE. to NNW., and on the eastern side of its ;
most southerly point, near a small and sharp sum-
mit, is the prospector’s claim where the find was (
made that caused the New South Wales Govern- j
mentto proclaim the Albert Goldfield, 42,000 square
miles in area. The district itself is said to be of
historic interest, as nine miles NW. of Mount j
Browne is “Depot Glen,” where Sturt’s party rested
so long ; where remains of the boat with which he
was to have sailed over Central Australia are still
preserved; where Poole, the surveyor of his party,
died; whence, whilst the others waited, he and a
few others pushed on to Fort Grey ; and within three
miles of which, on a conical peak, a cairn was labori-
ously, day by day, and with scurvy affecting its
makers, built up in memory of Poole, whilst the
peak was named after him. The whole country is I
said to be sandstone impregnated with quartz, but j
it remains to be proved whether the reefs contain I
payable gold. The mining population is about ;
500. The principal town, Milparinka, contains a
population of 120. Several small nuggets have
been found here. The prospects of the place
were encouraging, want of water being the only
serious drawback. The Warden believed the diggings
would be extensive and permanent. By the mail
route the distance from Wilcannia is 189 miles.
MOUNT KEMBLA, one of the highest peaks
of the lllawarra range of mountains, is 1,560 feet
above the sea level, distant about 5 miles SW. from
public persons. District is very mountainous, with mag-
rs, and nifleent scenery, and possessing a climate that fits
astoral it for a sanitarium ; it is of a mining and grazing
Con- character. Near here are the Weatherboard water-
it SE,, 1 falls and the celebrated Govett’s Leap. A new road
iey, or has also been opened to the celebrated Fish River
m 120. j Caves, distant 32 miles.
John I MUDGrEE is a town of some importance, on
cplora- | the Cudgegong river, about 153 miles (181 postal)
ted in NW. of Sydney, and about 80 miles N. from Bathurst.
E New It is located in the centre of a very rich auriferous
equi- ! district, and has besides the advantage of being
I and environed by country valuable alike to squatter and
each, farmer. The diggings are both alluvial and quartz,
about and the latter may be considered as practically
ridge i inexhaustible. The wool from the Mudgee district
rently has long had both a London and colonial reputa-
of its ; tion. The town, which is well built, with streets
sum- ; laid out at right angles, is presided over by a mayor
d was [ and eight aldermen, and has been a municipality
overn- 1 since February 21, 1860. There are 14J miles of
square roads, with rateable property of the" value of
be of £341,425. It has several substantial stores and shops,
Mount j and numerous hotels. Among the latter are the
rested ; Post office, Tattersall’s, Wilkin’s Imperial, the Club
ich ho House, The Sydney, and the Royal (booking-office for
e still Cobb’s coaches). The public buildings are the hos-
party, pital, the Mechanics’ Institute, with a library of
and a 2,200 vols., the court-house, the churches, and the
r three Town Hall, which cost £5,000. At the corner of
labori- Market and Church streets is the R.C. church, a
ng its towered stone structure ; the Wesleyan chapel is a
st the | fine roomy building, and a splendid Presbyterian
dry is i church has been erected at a cost of £4,000. There
z, but |is also a Primitive Methodist chapel. There are two
ontain I schools, one Roman Catholic, the other being the
about i public school, having an average attendance of 501
ains a scholars. At the end of Church Street a wooden
have bridge spans the river. Three banks : New South
place Wales, Joint Stock, and Commercial, all of which
i only are located in fine buildings. The mining capabilities
ggings of the Mudgee district are not limited to gold, as
; mail iron ore, coal, slate, and other minerals abound,
3. and only need capital and better communication
peaks with a market for their profitable development,
0 feet and the latter it will shortly have, as the line
. from is now open to Bylstone, and expected to be


completed this year. The yield of gold for
1883 was 2,016 oz., valued at £7,843 14s. 4d.
The population comprises about 3,000 persons ;
in the census district are 11,859. On the Mudgee
roll are 4,982 electors, three members being re-
turned to the Assembly. There is a large breadth
of land (24,241 \ acres) under cultivation ; produce --
172,196 bushels of wheat, 41,870 of maize, 4,711
of barley, and 8,468 of oats. The Fourth Estate is
represented by the Western Post and the Mudgee
Independent. The manufacturing interests in the
town are represented by three coach factories, three
tanneries, a soap works and candle factory, two boot
factories, and several steam flour mills. To the Post
office is attached telegraph, savings bank and money-
order office. A coach runs daily to and from the
Rylstone station, on the Great Western Railway,
Stock returns (March 31, 1884), 6,617 horses, 16,513
cattle, 247,181 sheep, 3,782 pigs.
MULGOA is in about 33° 50' S. lat. and 150° 40'
E. long., 40 miles W. of Sydney. It is on the Cow-
pasture river, in the county of Cumberland and
police district of Penrith. The country is noted
for its pasture land, and the magnificence of the
surrounding scenery ; the township itself is on the
estate of the Hon. G. H. Cox, and is rising in im-
portance. It has a public school, with average
attendance of 50, an Episcopal church, and about
160 residents in the adjoining district. Communi-
cation with Sydney is by way of Penrith. Forma-
tion ; generally sandstone.
MULLENGAND RA, a small township on the
Main South road, 20 miles NE. from Albury and 353
miles (404 postal) from Sydney SW. It has an
Episcopal place of worship (Morrice Memorial), a
public school, with average attendance of 18 scholars,
one hotel, and a store. Population about 200.
MTJNDOORAN, a post town and telegraph
station on the creek of the same name, in the county
of Gowan, electorate of Bogan, and police district
of Dubbo, 212 miles (238 postal) W. of Sydney and
54 miles S. from Coonabarabran. It contains one
hotel, the Royal, a police station, several dwellings,
and about 50 inhabitants. Travellers’ route is per
coach to Wellington (coach fare, 275. 6d.).j
MUNGINEI is a township, with telegraph sta-
tion, 400 miles (481 postal) NW. of Sydney. It is
centrally situated on the borders of N. S. Wales
and Queensland, electorate of the Gwydir. It is
built on the south-eastern or N. 8. Wales side of
the River Barwon, which forms the boundary of the
colonies, and is one of the most important crossing-
places on the frontier, being on the main roads from
Sydney and Maitland to the Moonie, Balonne, and
Narran rivers; it has been for years the officially
proclaimed crossing-place for stock. A bridge, opened
in September, 1880, now connects the two colonies.
There is a post and telegraph office on each side of
the river, a police station on N.S.W. side, and a cus-
tom house on the Queensland side ; this locality is
rising in importance, and the traffic through it
considerable; there is within a radius of 60 miles
from Mungindi over a million sheep, the wool of
which nearly all passes this way to Sydney.
lIUERUMBUERAH, county of' Harden,
electoral district of Young, a post, telegraph,
savings bank, and money-order township, 1,268 feet
above sea-level, on the Currawong Creek, a tributary
of the Jugiong, about twenty miles each way from
the towns of Young, Binalong, Jugiong and Coota-
mundra, and 230 miles SW. of Sydney. There is a
station on the G. S. line of railway here, fares,
41s. Bd. and 275. 3d. The Commercial, Criterion,
Exchange, Railway, Doncaster and Crown are among
the principal hotels, and there are twelve stores.
Banks : Joint Stock, Commercial, and Bank of
N. S. W. A steam flour mill is here (Allsopp’s).
Population 1,600. Newspaper: The Signal (pub-
lished weekly). The town is making satisfactory
progress. A new post office was erected during
1879, and a court-house and public school (average
attendance 87) in 1880. A local Progress Committee
is in existence, and works most beneficially for the
district. There is a Roman Catholic church, convent
school, an Episcopal church and handsome parson-
age, also a Wesleyan and Presbyterian Church. A
new public school building and lock-up arc in course
of erection. Courts of Petty Sessions are held on
alternate Thursdays ; Police magistrate of Young
attends. The line connecting the Great Southern
and Western systems of railway junctions near the
town. Formation : granite. The Blind Creek dig-
gings, maintaining an average population of 200
miners, are situated within two miles of the town.
MURRUEUKDI is situated on the Page
river, which runs through the town and divides it
into two parts, 192 miles NW. of Sydney, at the foot
of the Liverpool range of mountains, at an elevation
of about 1,546 feet above the sea level; at a distance
of three miles is Mount Murrula. It is in the
electoral district of Upper Hunter, and on the Great
Northern Railway, and has a telegraph, Government
savings bank, and money-order office. Railway fares
to Newcastle (120 miles), 2is. 9d. and 14s. 6d. The
population is enumerated at about 350 souls, the
census district returns give 3,782. The Royal,
NicholTs Commercial, and White Hart Inn, are
among the leading hotels. The places of worship
are a substantial building in use by the Roman
Catholics, an Episcopal church, and a Wesleyan
chapel. A convent and school have recently been
erected. The Commercial Bank has a branch here.
The public offices comprise a post and telegraph
office, a hospital, a court - house, a public school,
with average attendance of 105, and a school of
arts, with a library of 1,030 vols. The town is
connected by a strong wooden bridge (the Arnold)
with Haydonton, a township of nearly equal im-
portance, but generally considered as forming a part
of Murrurundi. Newspaper, the Murrurundi Times.
About 15 miles distant is Warrah station, the pro-
perty of the A. X. Company. A few miles from here
is the tunnel which pierces the Liverpool range. It is
528 yards long, and is lined throughout with brick-
work set with Portland cement.
MUEWILLTJMBAH, or Kynumboon, a post
town, with money-order and telegraph office, on the
Tweed River, 407 miles N. of Sydney, in the county
of Rous, and electoral district of the Richmond.
There is a public school, with average attendance of
17, Episcopalian church, two hotels, Australian and
Metropolitan, a branch of the Commercial Bank, and
a court-house. It is a place of Petty Sessions. Com-
munication is by sailing vessels from Sydney. The
Colonial Sugar Company operate extensively here,
and have erected machinery for crushing the cane.
There are about ten sugar mills in the district, and
about 1,000 acres of land under cultivation, the
average being two tons of sugar per acre. Popula-
tion of district, 1,000.
MUSWE LLBEOOE! or Musclebrook, elec-
torate of Upper Hunter, and police district of Mus-
wellbrook, is situated on Muscle creek and the
Hunter river, about 475 feet above sea-level, on the
main northern road, 60 miles N. from Maitland, and
150 miles NW. of Sydney, and is a station on the
Northern Railway; fares to Newcastle (80 miles),
14s. 3d. and 9s. 6d. The district is agricultural and
pastoral, principally the former. Population 1,074; of
the whole district 3,615. Wheat and maize are largely
grown; tobacco, and the grape also receive some
attention. The principal hotels are Eaton’s and the
Family Hotel. The places of worship belong to the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic com-
munities. Catholic, Church of England, and public
schools, average attendance 188. The Anglican
church is said to be one of the finest ecclesiastical
edifices north of Sydney. Other public buildings
are the hospital, the school of arts, with library of
1,390 vols., and branches of the Commercial and
Australasian banks. There is also a steam flour mill,
and a money-order office, telegraph station, and a
branch of the Government savings bank. Local
newspaper, the Upper Hunter Standard. The muni-
cipal district was proclaimed April 13, 1870. It
has 7J miles of streets, and rateable property of
£83,937.
MYALL RIVER. See Bulladelah.
NAMBUCCA, a mining and agricultural dis-
trict, with post, money-order office, telegraph sta-
tion, and savings bank, situated on the Nambucca
River, 341 miles N. of Sydney, in the electorate of
the Mackay ; communication being by steamer, fare
30s. Principal hotels are the Nambucca, Shamrock)


and Burraville ; there are two public schools, with
average attendance of 49, two places of worship, a
court house, police and pilot station, and a popula-
tion of 800.
NAEANDEEA, an important town, with a
telegraph, savings bank, and money-order office on
the Murrumbidgee river (county of Cooper), elec-
torate of Murrumbidgee, police district of Narandera,
348 miles SW. from Sydney, on the Great South-West-
ern Railway line, fares, 595. 3d. and 40s. A branch line
from here is being constructed to Jerilderie, distant
TOmiles. The Government buildings comprise a court-
house and land-office, police barracks, a public school
with average attendance of 145, and two private
schools. Banks ; Australian Joint-Stock, and Com-
mercial. A Court of Petty Sessions is held every day,
and small Debts Court once a month, and Court of
Requests sits every second Tuesday in the month.
Newspaper ; Narandera Argus. The principal hotels
are the Royal, Australian and Royal Mail. Places
of worship. Church of England, Roman Catholic and
Presbyterian. The river is navigable to here during
six months of the year. There are several large saw
mills about Narandera ; the pine and red gum are
exported to a great extent. The district is princi-
pally a pastoral one, but good agricultural lands have
been taken up, and satisfactory crops grown in the
vicinity of the town. Population about 500 ; dis-
trict 600. About 38 miles from here is the Abori-
ginal station of Warangeoda, a reserve of 600 acres,
where the Rev. J. B. Gribble has had considerable
success in relieving and educating the blacks of the
district.
NARELL AN, avillage of some 120 inhabitants,
38 miles S. of Sydney, between Campbelltown and
Camden. It is in the county of Cumberland. There
are here two stores, one inn (the Queen’s Arms), a :
post-office, a good school-house, average attendance i
44, and an Episcopal church. The route to Sydney
is by tram to Campbelltown railway station,
twice daily. Numerous small farms are in the
neighbourhood. Population about 150.
NAEEABEI, in the electoral district of the !
Namoi, is a post, telegraph, money-order, railway
station, and Government Savings Bank town, on
the Narrabri Creek, a branch of the Namoi River
(half a mile distant), 321 miles E. of Sydney,
and 252 miles from Newcastle, fares, 465. 6d. and 31s.
Narrabri contains a gaol, hospital, public school
(average attendance 211), and branches of the
Commercial, Australasia, and New South Wales
Banks ; a mechanics’ institute with 500 vols., a flour
mill, and throe saw mills. There are twelve hotels.
West’s Family Hotel, Commercial, Victoria, Post
Office, Greyhound, Court House, Royal, Caledonian, I
Grand Central, and Fitzroy. Population about 830,
of census district 3,132. Churches, Catholic and
Wesleyan. The district is pastoral and agricultural;
the soil fertile. The low-lying lands are somewhat
subject to inundation, but thousands of acres
of first-class wheat land at the foot of the ranges
are entirely beyond the reach of the floods, and are
being free-selected. Water is obtainable almost
everywhere for the sinking, and numerous creeks !
traverse the country. The locality has been pro-
nounced carboniferous, but nothing definite has |
been discovered. Local journals, the Narrabri Herald \
and Narrabri Argus, published Wednesday and
Saturday.
NATIONAL PARK. Port Hacking. In I
1880 the Government of New South Wales dedi-
cated by proclamation in the Government Gazette an
area of 36,300 acres of laud for a public park and
pleasure grounds for the use of the inhabitants of
the colony, under the designation of “ National
Park.” This is probably the largest public park in
the world. The management is vested in trustees,
the Legislature voting money for beautifying and
improving the grounds. About £8,200 sterling had
been so expended up to the end of 1883. The boun-
daries of this immense domain for the people’s use
has a frontage of 7£ miles to the Pacific Ocean (with
a good boat harbour at Wattamolla, and good fishing
grounds), 3J miles to Port Hacking Bay, and 1J
miles to Woronora River, 1J miles to the former
main road between Sydney and Illawarra, via Woro-
nora River, and 8 miles to the main road now in use
between those places. There are within the boun-
daries of the park from north to south about 7 milts
of the Illawarra Railway. The Port Hacking River
flows through it for 9| miles of its course into the
bay, 5 miles being navigable for boats and steam-
launches. The upper four of these five miles are
made practically a fresh-water lake by the construc-
tion of a dam below the confluence of Kangaroo
Creek. The other principal water-courses within
the park are Bola Creek, Kangaroo Creek, South-west
Arm Creek, and Cabbage-Tree Creek. South-west
Arm Creek is navigable for 2£ miles of its course,
and, at high tide, Cabbage-Tree Creek is navigable
for boats 1J miles. Since the construction of the
dam alluded to, the whole of Kangaroo Creek is fresh
water, 1J miles being navigable. The northern
boundary of the park is distant, by road and by the
Illawarra railway, 15 miles from Sydney Railway
Station, and about 17 miles from Liverpool. The
southerly boundary is 8 miles from Clifton, 17 miles
from Bulli, and about 25 miles from Wollongong. It
is intended to stock the rivers and creeks with fresh-
water fish, and conserve the game and wild fowl, in-
cluding parrots and other native birds. Port Hacking
Bay, an inlet of the Pacific Ocean, contains a large
expanse of water navigable for steamers and sailing
vessels of five or six feet draught. There is a profu-
sion of all kinds of salt-water fish within its shores,
which have fine clean sandy beaches for bathing and
other such purposes. The park generally has a
splendid aspect and abounds with very beautiful,
picturesque, fairylike scenes. From the high table-
lands at numerous places, most extensive views are
obtained of the Pacific Ocean eastward of Port
Hacking; Botany Bay, Rand wick, and Sydney on
the north ; the coast line to Wollongong and Illawarra
Mountains on the south, and of the Blue Mountains
on the west. There are many deep romantic gorges
and rich flats covered with choicest indigenous
foliage, bordered by running streams of the purest
fresh water. The high table-lands, consisting of
stony heaths, and fair to good land, is readily and
easily accessible, situated at elevations of from 350
feet to about 900 feet above high water mark. The
valleys of the principal watercourses, notably of
Port Hacking River and Bola Creek, are to a large
extent covered with rich foliage, including stately
cabbage-trees and bungalow palms, tree-ferns,
Christmas myrtle, waratahs, gigantic lilies, and
other handsome shrubs, growing in tropical luxu-
riance and brilliancy of colour, numerous well-grown
blackbutt, woollybutt, turpentine, ironbark, and
other noble forest trees, growing up to nearly 200
feet, most of them bordering adjacent beautiful
streams, having occasional long reaches of deep,
shaded, pure, cool, fresh water. A large area of
table-lands called “Loftus Heights” have been
cleared near the station on the Illawarra railway at
16| miles from Sydney, to afford sites for public re-
creation and military encampment and review
grounds. About 37 miles of carriage roads have
been formed through the park, and other roads are
in course of formation, securing varied and most
beautiful drives and pleasant walks, along which
at frequent intervals pretty and extensive views
and glimpses of the river, and the handsome palm
and fern foliage bordering thereon, come into view,
not surpassed for picturesque scenery in any part of
the world. The statesmen whose sagacity and fore-
sight dedicated this immense public park for the
uses of the people, to promote a love of nature and
recreation, pleasure, and health, and out-door exer-
cises, are worthy of the highest praise. These plea-
sure grounds being only half-an-hour’s run from
Sydney by the Illawarra railway, millions of people
will visit them in the course of time.
N ELLIGrEN, a seaport town, with telegraph
station, money-order office and Government savings
bank, in the county of St. Vincent, electoral district
of Eden, on the Clyde river, 183 miles S. of Sydney ;
a steamer plies weekly between the two places.
Upper Tarago is the nearest railway station. It is
the outlet of most of the trade between Braidwood
and the Metropolis. Bateman’s Bay is 10 miles dis-
tant E., and Moruya 30 miles S. The population
numbers about 413. Hotel: the Steam Packet.
There is a R. C. church, a Church of England, a


public schocx with average attendance of 29, a
court-house, a wheelwright, 5 saw mills, 3 stores,
and blacksmith’s shop. The district is principally
an agricultural and pastoral one, though there were
some alluvial workings in the vicinity of the town.
About 15 miles beyond Nelligen, up the Clyde, is
the young but rapidly increasing settlement of
Brooman, from * which already a large amount of
produce is carried.
NEBRIGUNDAH, a postal and money-order
village on the Gulf creek, 30 miles S. of Moruya,
and 226 miles S. of Sydney, in the county of Dampier,
electorate of Eden, and situated in a valley enclosed by
ranges. In the village are: 1 hotel, Free Selection, 1
store, 2 places of worship, Catholic and Presbyterian,
a court-house, and public school (average attendance
12). The traveller's route is by conveyance to
Moruya, thence steamer, or via the Tuross river,
or by coach, vid Braidwood and Upper Tarago.
Population about 300. Gold mining is exten-
sively carried on in the district, the workings
being both alluvial and quartz. They are some-
times known as the Gulph diggings.
NEWBRIDGE, a post town, telegraph, and
railway station on the Western line, 164 miles W. of
Sydney, lying 2,877 feet above sea-level, on Back
Creek, in the county of Galbraith, and electorate
of West Macquarie. It is 19 miles W. of Bathurst,
and 28 miles B. of Orange. It has 2 hotels, public
school, average attendance 45, 2 stores, and 2
places of worship, Church of England and Wes-
leyan. An iron mine is here, and at a radius of a
few miles are gold diggings, both alluvial and
quartz, and a valuable slate qnarry. Fares, 28s. 9d.
and 19s. Population about 100.
NEWCASTLE is the principal shipping port
on the northern coast, the amount of its tonnage
being frequently above that of Sydney, from which
it is distant about 75 miles N. It is now a city under
the Episcopal supervision of the Right Rev. J. B. Pear-
son. It is situated at the mouth of the River Hunter
on the south bank, and has many advantages
for the shipment of coal, of which it is the
emporium. The entrance to the harbour, how-
ever, is dangerous in ESE. stormy weather, owing
to the heavy sea which breaks across, and several
disastrous wrecks have from time to time occurred
The construction of the Southern Breakwater,
which is a seaward prolongation of the Nobby’s
Head peninsula (the first portion of the work was
the connection made between Nobby’s Head and
the mainland), has, however, considerably reduced
the risk. The work has already proved of ser-
vice, the bar being now sheltered, where formerly
there were heavy seas and SE. gales to con-
tend with. At the end of the breakwater a small
tower, showing a red light, has been erected, to
enable masters of vessels to define the end of the
breakwater when entering or leaving the port at
night. The lighthouse on Nobby’s Head carries
a fix«d white light, visible at 17 miles distant, and
is situated in 32” 55' 15" S. lat., and 151” 49' 15" E.
long. The depth of water at the shores is about 22
feet and of course much more in mid-harbour.
Powerful dredges are continually employed deepen-
ing and clearing the channels and the wharf front-
ages. In the Horseshoe there is now room for 24
loaded vessels to lie at moorings. A lifeboat is stationed
here, with an efficient crew, and paid coxswain, and
assistant. Nearly all the produce of the Hunter
River district finds its way to Newcastle for
shipment; but coal is the article of shipment, of
which enormous quantities are exported. The
total output of coals during 1883 was 1,824,570
tons. It is considered that the seams now being
worked contain enough coal to keep up the
present rate of production for 512 years. Previ-
ous to 1845 only one mine and one shoot were
in work ; now there are 26 seams of coal, vary-
ing in thickness from 5 to 12 feet (the Greta coal
seam is 21J feet thick), being worked in Newcastle
or the immediate neighbourhood. These give em-
ployment to about 4,000 miners, who are able to con-
duct their operations with considerable freedom from
the dangers which beset English pitmen ; explosions
from fire-damp being, until a few years ago, when a
fatal accident occurred, unknown. The deepest
pits are about 200 feet; some of them are worked by
adits or tunnels. The machinery for loading vessels
is very complete, consisting of seven steam cranes
and four shoots belonging to Government, five shoots
belonging to the A. A. Company, and two shoots be-
longing to the Waratah Company, the estimated
capabilities of all being 11,400 tons per day ; and
these have been considerably increased by the appli-
ances on Bullock Island Dyke (eight hydraulic
cranes) to an estimated loading capacity of 16,200
tons per day. The hydraulic cranes erected on the
wharf formed by the Dyke, comprise six of 15 tons
power, and two others of 25 tons. A branch line, with
viaduct over Thorsby’s creek, connects the wharves
on Bullock Island with the Northern Railway. The
appliances for shipping coal are believed to be un-
equalled, and on one occasion it is reported that 258
tons of coal were shipped in 1J hours. Eleven steam
tugs, seven of which are owned by Messrs. J. and A.
Brown, are employed in towing vessels to and from
their moorings. The accommodation for berthing
vessels has been largely increased ; there are now
about 5 miles of wharf frontage. The principal
companies are the Australian Agricultural, Co-opera-
tive, Walls-end, Lambton, Waratah, Duckentield,
New Lambton, Greta, Newcastle, South Waratah,
Hartley, Femdale, producing from 30,000 to 40,000
tons per week. The Stockton Company have
struck a good seam of coal at Stockton. Several
of the pits belonging to these Companies are
connected by private lines with the Great Northern
Railway. A fort has been erected on Flagstaff hill as
a sea defence ; it is armed with 3 9-inch guns and
rifled 80-pounders, which will command the entrance
to the harbour. Newcastle is well laid out, and has con-
siderably improved of late years, most of the princi-
pal streets now being paved and lighted with gas.
The ground upon which the town is situated rises
rather steeply from the sea, and some portions of
the town are therefore considerably elevated— a fact
to which it owes its comparatively low rate of
sickness and mortality. Newcastle possesses a
substantial court-house, a hospital, a handsome post-
office, an asylum for the insane (originally used as
barracks for the military, afterwards as an industrial
school for girls) ; grammar school, three public, with
an average attendance of 1,279, and denominational
schools—(Episcopal and Roman Catholic); school of
arts, in Hunter Street, with 3,600 vols., a magnifi-
cent railway station, equal to any in the colony,
several large churches, belonging to the Episcopa-
lians (3), Presbyterians (2), Wesleyans, Con-
gregationalists, Primitive Methodists, Baptists, and
Roman Catholics, besides an extensive and well-
conducted convent and school connected therewith,
and numerous hotels, of which the Great Northern,
which has been enlarged and renovated, Criterion, Ter-
minus, Ship Inn, and Rouse’s Hotel maybe considered
as the most prominent; a theatre, the Victoria, a mar-
ket building, which cost £5,000, telegraph and post-
office, a custom-house, completed in 1879, a spacious
yet compact edifice, with clock tower, surmounted
by a time ball, which is dropped daily at one p.m. ;
this building is of brick with stone facings, and
is 137 feet long by 53 feet deep. The shops and
places of business, are above the average of Aus-
tralian towns. The banks in Newcastle are Austra-
lasia, New South Wales, Joint-Stock, Commercial,
London Chartered, Union, and New Zealand. The
newspapers are the Newcastle Morning Herald, daily,
amalgamated with the Chronicle and Advocate, and
the Dispatch, published tri-weekly. Public baths
have recently been provided by the Corporation
near Signal Hill. At Stockton, on the northern
side of the harbour, is a patent slip, upon which
vessels of the largest tonnage frequenting the
port can be taken up for repairs. There are here 2
public schools (average attendance 1,039), and an.
Episcopal church. The Great Northern Railway has
its starting point at Newcastle, and connects it with
the northern towns as far as Armidale, and exten-
sion is now going on to Tenterfield. At Werris
Creek station the North-Western line branches off,
and was opened to Narrabri in October, 1882,
a distance of 256 miles from Newcastle. The
railway between Sydney and Newcastle is now
constructing. It will start from Waratah on the


Northern [and connect with the Southern line at
Homehush, length 95} miles, estimated cost £294,000.
Newcastle was erected into a municipality on June
7, 1859. There are 38 miles of roads, rateable value
■of property is £316,592. There are two lines of
steamers regularly plying between Newcastle and
Sydney—the Hunter River Company’s, and the
Newcastle Steamship Company’s boats. The popula-
tion of the census district in 1881 was 15,595. The
borough is divided into four Wards, City, Honey-
suckle, Macquarie, and Belmore. The electoral
area of the district has been increased under the new
Act, and now includes the suburbs of Wickham,
Hamilton, Onebygamba, the Glebe and Stockton.
Two representatives are returned to the Legislative
Assembly. Several industries are carried on in the
neighbourhood; Copper works, an extensive brewery,
shipbuilding yard, fellmongery, steam biscuit fac-
tory, carriage factories, foundries, and engineering
establishments. On Monument Hill is a reservoir,
holding 500,000 gallons, which is supplied with
water from the falls beyond Buttai. Around
Newcastle there is some land under cultivation,
which is, however, gradually being encroached
upon for building purposes. Stock returns of the
electoral district for March 31, 1884, 397 horses, 6,524
cattle, 357 sheep, 498 pigs. The mouth of the
Hunter River, formerly called Port Hunter, but now
known as Newcastle harbour, was discovered on
Sept. 16, 1797, by Lieut. Shortland, while on an
expedition to Port Stephens in search of runaway
convicts. He called the stream the Coal River, from
the fact of having found some pieces of coal on the
•banks. It was afterwards named after Governor
Hunter. For many years after its discovery it was
a convict depot. In 1821 the district was thrown
open to free settlement, from which date its pro-
gressive career commences, but it is only within the
last few years that the trade of the town has made
such gigantic strides.
NEW ENGLAND is the name given to a
pastoral district comprising a vast tract of graz-
ing country, discovered by Oxley in 1818, in
the county of Sandon. It lies in the NE. part
of the colony, and is traversed by the great
Dividing Range. The main northern road goes
through the centre of the district, and the railway
now constructing to the Queensland border bisects
it in several quarters. It forms an immense table-
land at an elevation of about 3,000 feet above the
sea-level, and has an area of 13,100 square miles.
The climate is genial, but in winter rather severe,
frost, f snow, and sleet occur, particularly on the
mountains, Ben Lomond, etc. Much of the soil
is well adapted for agriculture. It contains the
following gold diggings : Rocky River, Timbarra,
Tooloom, Pretty Gully, Oban, Puddledock, Congi,
Rock Vale, Cameron’s Creek, Gostwyck, Macleay,
Lunatic, Perseverance, and Boorook, near Tenter-
field. The “Isabella,” “Eleanora,” and other ex-
tensive gold and antimony mines at Gara Falls are
now in full operation. Silver has also been found in
many parts of New England. The Glen Morrison
reefs, near Walcha, are showing themselves to be
rich, as also are those on Cameron’s creek. The
tin mines of Skeleton and Vegetable Creeks, Tent
Hill, and others, are also in New England. Popu-
lation 15,141. Area under cultivation 16,672 acres,
principally for wheat, maize, barley, oats, and
potatoes. Dr. Robertson, reports as follows re-
garding the discovery of bismuth in this district:
“ The backbone of the country is of granite, which is
replaced on the northern or Queensland border by
felsites and transmuted rocks. At the irregular
line of junction, some claims were recently taken
up for the purpose of prospecting for tin. Of this
metal none was found, but the quartz veins dis-
closed a variable quantity of coarse gold and an un-
known mineral, which the Government chemist
pronounced to be ‘native bismuth.’ Some native
metal has been obtained in Bolivia, and in smaller
quantities from Cornwall and South Australia, but,
until the discovery of these mines, it was a mineral
curiosity.
NEW LAMB'TON,a colliery township, situate |
about one mile south by east of Lambton, in the county ;
electoral district of Northumberland. It is on |
the Brown and Dibbs estate, which covers about 1,500
acres. There are in the village two churches, Wes-
leyan and Primitive Methodist, 3 hotels, several
shops and stores, Benefit Society, and Oddfellows’
lodge. This colliery is worked by one pit, and
employs upwards of 200 men, and can raise and get
260 tons of coal per day. Close to the New Lamb-
ton mine is the East Waratah Tunnel, with over
200 men employed. The coals, which are of good
quality, are taken for shipment to Newcastle by a
private railway joining the Great Northern Railway.
In 1883 the yield of coal was 78,663 tons. The copper
works, the property of the English and Australian
Copper Company (Limited), are situate close to the
New Lambton Railway line. A public school (average
attendance 292), and teacher’s residence, cost about
£4,000.
NEWTOWN, a suburban municipality of Syd-
ney, proclaimed December 12, 1862, adjoining the
city on the SW., having 18} miles of roads, and pro-
perty of the total value of £1,038,410. It is con-
nected by railway—fares, 3d. and 2d.—and tramway;
there is also omnibus communication from Wyn-
yard Square—fare, 3d. Population (census 1881)
15,828. Principal hotels : Webster’s and Goodin’s.
Its proximity to the city renders it a popular place of
residence for merchants and others. It possesses a
very good free library, and has post, money-order,
telegraph, and savings bank offices, a newspaper,
the Suburban Independent, and branches of the Com-
mercial and Australasia Banks. Two public schools
here having 1,128 average attendance, and there are
Episcopal and Roman Catholic schools, and seven
churches. A new Court house is about being
erected, the police and small debts court being at
present held in the Town Hall.
NIMITYBELiLE, a post, telegraph, and
money-order town, in the county of Wallace, and
electoral district of Monaro, police' district of Cooma,
25 miles from Cooma SE., and 282 miles SSW. of
Sydney. Conveyance to Cooma, coach to Goulbum
(fare,sss.), thence the railway, or steamer via Eden or
Merimbula, are the means of reaching the metropolis.
The population is about 90. A court-house and lock-
up, Episcopal and Roman Catholic places of wor-
ship, two hotels, Royal and Nimitybelle, a public
school, average attendance 38, and a saw and flour-
mill are in the town. The district is a farming and
grazing one.
NORTH SHORE : this fast extending suburb,
lying on the northern shore of Port Jackson, is
divided into four municipalities. The largest of
these, St. Leonards, embraces all the area from
Mount Street (where the Borough of Victoria joins)
to Middle Harbour ; East St. Leonards extends from
Milson’s Point to Berry Street; Victoria, from Blue’s
Point to St. Leonards; and North Willoughby,
which is situated about three miles from Milson’s
Point. The suburb is in the county of Cumberland
and electoral district of St. Leonards. North
Shore possesses two Episcopal churches, two Roman
Catholic places of worship, one Wesleyan and two
Presbyterian chapels, a convent, a Jesuit college,
two public schools, average attendance 742,
Church of England and R. C. denominational
school, and several private ones. Bank; N. S.
Wales. Newspaper : St. Leonard's Recorder. It
has a postal delivery twice a day, and there is a
branch telegraph office in the town of St. Leonards,
a money-order office and savings bank, and a school
of arts, with a library of 2,170 vols. North Shore
is a favourite place of residence for the well-to-do
citizens; and numerous villas have been erected
on prominent sites, where the most commanding
views of the harbour can be obtained. There is
communication with the metropolis by steam
ferries, plying every quarter of an hour to and
from the Circular Quay, Lavender Bay, McMahon’s
Point, and Milson’s Point. A design to connect
the North Shore with Sydney by a bridge was
projected, but through change of government the
undertaking lapsed. Population of district 8,560.
Hotels : Dind’s, Albert, and several others.
NORTHFIELD. See Kurrajong Heights.
NORTH RICHMOND, a post town, Smiles
from Richmond, on the opposite side of the river,
and 41 miles W. of Sydney. It is the leading


thoroughfare to the famed Kurrajong heights, and is
of importance, owing to the splendid orangeries
surrounding it. A small coach plies between Rich-
mond and North Richmond, fare, Is. It has one j
hotel, a public school, with average attendance of
64, an Episcopal and Wesleyan place of worship, '
and a diffused population of about 100. It lies on
the Hawkesbury river and Red Bank creek, and is a
fruit country. For further particulars of the district,
see Richmond.
NOWEA, a town laid out by the Crown lands
surveyors, on the southern bank of the Shoalhaven ;
river, 10 miles W. of Green well Point, the seaport of )
Shoalhaven at the mouth of the river, and 117 miles ;
8. of Sydney by the mail route, county St. Vincent,
electoral and police district of Shoalhaven. It has
post, telegraph, money-order, and savings bank
offices; also branches of the English and Scottish
and Commercial Banks, a weekly newspaper,
the Shoalhaven Telegraph, two public schools,
average attendance 112, a public free (municipal)
library, and five stores. For the district of
Shoalhaven, Nowra is the chief place of petty
sessions, district court, &c. ; and contains
the court-house, principal police-station and
lock-up, the offices of the Shoalhaven clerk
of petty sessions, district court registrar, dis-
trict registrar, Crown lands agent, mining warden,
officer of customs, &c. The principal ecclesi-
astical edifices of Shoalhaven are among the best
architectural structures of Nowra, being those of
the four most popular denominations, ranking in
the following order: —The Presbyterian church, a
cut freestone structure, which cost £1,400; the
Roman Catholic, a rubble freestone erection, with
dressed comers, &c., built at a cost of £1,100; the
Wesleyan church, also of freestone, and built at a
cost of £9OO ; the Anglican chapel of ease, which
cost £3OO, and the parsonage of Shoalhaven, which i
cost £l,OOO. In Nowra there are lodges of Freemasons,
Sons of Temperance, Oddfellows, and Good Templars.
The main South coast road passes through it; there
is daily mail communication between it and Sydney,
vid Mossvale, by which route also, runs, bi-diur-
nally, a day passenger coach; adjacent is the
Shoalhaven iron bridge, which covers 1,050 linear
feet of water, and cost £40,000. Nowra town space
is intersected by 28 miles of streets: only five of
which, however, are built upon to any considerable
extent, and has communication by steam with
the seaport above named, four times a week.
The highest price obtained for town land as i
yet is £9 10s. per foot. The population of |
Nowra is 1,000. The town, from its situation ‘
on a gently sloping eminence, bounded on the
North by the Shoalhaven river, which swarms
with fish, and on the West by Nowra Creek,
with the superb beauties of tropical plant-
life, including an extensive variety of the most
delicate ferns which adorn its banks, commands
a splendid view of the rich pastoral and agricultural
alluvial flats of Shoalhaven, of the unsurpassed
mountain and water scenery along the coast range,
from Saddle Back north to Kiama, and south-west
to the mist-covered peaks through which the upper
Shoalhaven leaps along in its serpentine course, all
forming a panorama matchless in this country for
the varied beauties of settled and unsettled country
it contains. Nowra land district, or the parish of
Nowra, contains much unsold Crown land. The I
municipal district of Nowra, proclaimed Dec. 29, '
1871, includes town and country property, valued
at £50,000. The land —of alluvial and trapean
origin —is devoted to dairy - farming and the
growth of cereal crops, potatoes, <&c. Nowra town,
parish, and municipality form part of the electoral
and police district of Shoalhaven, which has no town
bearing its name.
NTJMBA. See Shoalhaven.
NUMEEALLA, a post town in the county of
Beresford, and police district of Cooma, 18 miles
from Cooma, 316 miles (346 postal) 8. of Syd-
ney, situated on the Numeralla river and Big Bad-
ger creek. Pastoral, mining, and farming locality,
with a population of about 200. Formation : granite
and slate. Communication is vid Cooma and Goul-
bum and Braidwood. Upper Tarago being the
nearest railway station.
NUNDLE, a township, with savings bank, tele-
graph and money-order office, in the centre of the
Peel River gold-field, within the county of Parry,
electorate and police district of Tam worth, on the
Nundle creek and Peel river, 37 miles SE. of Tam-
worth, and 234 miles NW. of Sydney. The Man-
ning and Bumard rivers take their rise about two
miles from the Hanging Bock. Coach to the Tam-
worth railway station, fare, 145., thence rail and
steamer vid Newcastle, are the means of reaching
Sydney. Hotel, Schofield’s. It has Presbyterian
and Roman Catholic churches, and a handsome
public school, average attendance 98. The in-
habitants number about 270; the entire district is
returned at 2,067. A medical man is resident in the
town. Farming is now principally carried on. It
is a very picturesque and healthy locality, being the
commencement of the New England district. There
are large tracts of very fine agricultural land, and
magnificent timber abounds.— Hanging Rock is a
village about 5 miles off. It has 2 public-houses
and 2 stores, public school, average attendance 30.
The gold mining has lately attracted much atten-
tion, owing to the heavy returns from the reefs.
Several quartz claims in the vicinity are still paying
well.
NYMAGEE, a postal township in the police
district of Hillston, and electorate of Balrauald,
having savings bank, money-order and telegraph
facilities, 441 miles W. of Sydney. There is a weekly
coach from the Nyngan railway station, fare, 50s.
Population about 1,400. There are four hotels, a
branch of the Commercial Bank, several large stores,
and a public school, with an average attendance of
109. Geological formation : limestone, slate, and iron.
The celebrated Nymagee copper mine is in full work,
and employs 500 persons ; local paper, Nymagee Star.
NYNGAN is the present (1884) terminus of the
line now in course of construction from to
Bourke. It is 99 miles from Dubbo and 377 miles
NW. of Sydney ; fares, 635. 3d. and 435. There are
I two branch banks here (the Mercantile and Joint-
Stock), andapost and money-order) office; local paper,
Nyngan Times. Hotel: Traveller’s Rest. Public
school, with average attendance of 89.
OAKS, a postal township on the Werriberri
creek, in the county, electorate, and police district
of Camden, in 34° 10' 8. lat., and 150° 35' E. long.,
50 miles SW. of Sydney. Picton railway station is
j 9 miles distant. The surrounding country is table-
-1 land, chiefly pastoral, but also adapted for farming
i pursuits. It has long been celebrated for the quality
and quantity of its timber. The principal kinds are
the oak (whence the place takes its name), ironbark,
stringy bark, blackbutt, gum, and every variety of
hard wood, well adapted for building purposes.
There are also several fine quarries of the most
beautifully grained stone, highly prized by builders.
In the town are about 100 residents, a public school,
with average attendance of 33, a church, and two
stores. In the district the inhabitants are reported
at 410.
OBEEON, a postal, telegraph, savings bank and
money-order township, 120 (136 postal) miles W.
from Sydney, about 32 miles equi-distant from
Bathurst and Hartley; in the county of Westmore-
land, police district of Bathurst, and electorate of
East Macquarie, situated on the Fish River creek.
Hotels : the Royal, and the Welcome Inn ; 2 stores.
Churches : Episcopal, Roman Catholic, and Wesleyan.
Public buildings : court-house, police-station, public
school, with average attendance of 33 scholars. Prin-
cipally a farming district, with some auriferous indi-
cations. Copper has also been found about 10 miles
from the township. Tarana is the nearest railway
station {lB miles). Population about 100, of district
500. Eighteen miles from here are the famous Fish
River Caves, some of which are very beautiful.
Photographs of them have been taken by means
of the magnesium light.
OBLEY, a post town, with money-order office
and telegraph station, in the county of Gordon,
electorate of Molong and police district of Dubbo,
208 miles (247 postal) W. of Sydney, situated on the
Little River. Population about 60. There is one


church, used promiscuously by Wesleyans, Presby-
terians, Baptists, and Churchmen, one hotel, a
court-house, police-barracks, with a lock-up, and a
public school, average attendance 23. The cele-
brated Goodrich copper mine is within 5 miles
of the township south. There is tri-weekly mail
communication by horse with Molong, thence coach
runs to the Orange railway station. The Welling-
ton station is now much nearer, about 35 miles.
In the town are two general stores and a wheel-
wright’s, blacksmith’s, and saddler’s shops. Soil
and climate are well suited for a moderate population
of agriculturists, but the district is more of a
mining than grazing character. The township is
progressing.
O’CONNELL, a post town, with money-order
office and savings bank, on the Fish River, in the
county of Bathurst, electoral district of East Mac-
quarie, 139 miles W. from Sydney, and four miles from
Brewongle railway station. There are two hotels, a
public school, average attendance 38, an Episcopalian
and Roman Catholic church, one store, and a steam
flour mill. The district is principally agricultural.
Population about 100.
OLD JTJNEE. See Junee,
ONEBYGAMBA. See Bullock Island.
ONE-TREE HILL See Mount Victoria.
OPHIR is contiguous to the Summerhill creek,
154 miles (201 postal) to the W. of Sydney. It is in the
county of Wellington, police and electoral district of
Orange, and is famous as being the first gold-field in
New South Wales, having been discovered by Mr.
Hargraves, on Feb. 14, 1851. It has now very few
marks left of its former greatness, and the popula-
tion, from thousands, has dwindled away to about 150
persons. There is one hotel, Ophir Arms, one
church, and one store. The land in the vicinity of
the town is taken up by sheep and cattle stations.
The communication with Sydney is via Orange (14
miles). The country is clay-slate, abounding with
veins of quartz, many of which are known to be
auriferous and which may yet pay for working.
ORANGE is situated on what was originally
known as Blackman’s Swamp creek, on the road
from Bathurst to Wellington, 192 miles by railway
W. of Sydney, at an elevation of 2,843 feet above the
sea-level. It is in the counties of Wellington and
Bathurst, and is famed for its bracing climate. The
town contains a population of about 2,700 persons,
while the census district of Orange has a popula-
tion of 9,461. On the electoral roll are 2,930
names Numerous trades flourish in the town,
which also contains some of the finest stores in
the colony out of Sydney, a very large business,
both wholesale and retail, being transacted with the
western interior. Orange is principally noted as a
wheat-producing district. Other crops are also
largely grown in considerable variety, comprising
chiefly maize, barley, oats and potatoes. There is a
very large area of land under cultivation. Orange is
surrounded by considerable mineral wealth. The
Ophir, Forest and Wentworth are the principal gold-
fields, though gold has been found in the town of
Orange, and is supposed to exist in numerous adja-
cent localities as yet unworked. The yield for 1883
was 2,448 ozs., valued at £8,629 Is. 7d. Copper also
abounds in the neighbourhood. There is direct com-
munication with Sydney by railway, fares, 345.,
225. 6d., and from its favourable climate and situa-
tion it is expected that Orange will become an
important depot for the slaughter of meat for the
Sydney market. The Orange Slaughtering Co.’s
works are about 2 miles distant. The town is
lighted with gas, and contains numerous hand-
some buildings, amongst the most prominent of
which may be mentioned the wholesale stores of
Messrs. Dalton Brothers, Messrs. Nelson Brothers,
the Commercial, Joint Stock and N. S. Wales Banks,
school of arts, etc., and the post-office, telegraph, and
public offices. The town, moreover, contains numer-
ous excellent shops and hotels, among the latter being
the Royal, Telegraph, Commercial, Club House, Occi-
dental, <fcc. Kenna’s Great Western hotel is close
to the railway station. There are three steam flour-
mills, two breweries, tanneries, two soap and candle
manufactories, foundry, &o. The various religious
denominations are represented by a handsome Catho-
. lie Church and a new Church of England, the Wesleyan
, Church and schools occupy a prominent position, and
the Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Baptists
i also have chapels.. The school of arts contains one of
: the finest halls in the colony, and has a library of 1,850
. volumes. The town was proclaimed a munici-
pality January 9, 1860, and is governed by a
mayor and eight aldermen. It has 14J miles of
roads, and the estimated rateable value of property
I is £308,405; a public school, with average
i attendance of 536, a Roman Catholic denomina-
, tional school and convent are at Orange, besides
i private seminaries. The Western Advocate and
Liberal are the local papers. The streets are wide
■ and well laid out, and the town and district are
i rapidly advancing. Stock returns for 1884 were
4,103 horses, 7,226 cattle, 69,952 sheep, and 2,048
pigs. 24,932 f acres are under crop, principally for
wheat, maize, barley, oats and potatoes. The pro-
duce was 231,459 bushels of wheat, 770 of maize,
830 of barley, 17,178 of oats, 2,130 tons of potatoes.
OTJRNIE is a quartz-mining district, having
rich reefs, and lying 20 miles S. of Tumberumba,
and 339 miles (451 postal) 8. of Sydney. Culcairn
is the nearest railway station. The stone from
here has yielded an average of two ounces to the ton.
Public school here, with average attendance of 21.
PADDINGTON, a suburban municipality,
proclaimed April 17, 1860, having 18 J miles of streets
and rateable property of the value of £1,332,750.
It is in the electoral district of the same name, and
police district of Sydney, and joius on to Sydney,
by the Old South Head road. Population of the
Borough 9,608. On the electoral rolls are 4,546
names. The Victoria Barracks are in the munici-
pality. There are public, private, and denomina-
tional schools, several places of worship, and tele-
graph, money order, and savings bank offices.
Public school has average attendance of 692.
Bank ; English and Scottish. Numerous omnibuses
ply to and from the city during the day, fare, 3d. ;
also tramcar, fare, 2d.
PANBTJLA, a postal, money-order, and tele-
graph township in the county of Auckland, and
electoral district of Eden, on the Panbula river,
about 275 miles S. of Sydney (200 miles by sea), 4
miles from Merimbula, 25 miles from Bega, and
about 12 miles from Twofold Bay. Hotels : the Roan
Horse, and Commercial. Churches, Episcopalian
(with resident clergyman) and Roman Catholic, both
of stone. Bank : Joint Stock. Public buildings :
court-house, public school, average attendance 62,
and teachers’ residence, also of stone. There are two
stores, an extensive tannery, and a School of Arts.
Population of town 130, and of district 1,401. The
communication with Sydney is by the Merimbula
steamer weekly, fare, 40s. Upper Tarago is the
nearest railway station. Court of petty sessions
is held every fortnight. Large areas of the sur
rounding district have been free-selected during
the past years, and the resources of the district
are being gradually developed. The exports consist
of bacon, hams, cheese, butter, maize, potatoes, etc.
A lodge of the 1.0.G.T. was instituted here in
August, 1880, and is in a thriving condition. A con-
siderable area of new land has been recently taken
up by selectors in the parish of Towacka, and a large
area is still available, but it is heavily timbered.
FARKES (co. Ashbumham), a mining and
agricultural township, with money-order office.
Government savings bank and telegraph station
on the Goobang creek, 283 miles (295 postal) W. of
Sydney. It was founded in 1871 and is the prin-
cipal town on the Billabong gold-field, which takes
a leading position among the successful gold-yielding
districts of the colony. The town is now in-
corporated. In the township are a court-house, a
hospital, a masonic hall, a public school (average
attendance of 142), and three other public schools
within three miles of the Post Office, with an
average attendance of 120 in the aggregate ; a quartz
crushing machine, flour mill, two saw mills, and
numerous stores and hotels. Among the latter
may be enumerated McLean’s Family, Commercial,
Club House, and Royal. Cobb’s coach, vi& Molong
to the Orange railway station, is the means of


reaching Sydney. Places of worship: Church
of England, Wesleyan, Roman Catholic; Banks :
Joint-Stock and Commercial. Newspaper, Parkcs
Chronicle. Population of town and surrounding
district is estimated at about 3,000. In the Parkes
division of the Forbes electoral district are about
1,000 voters. The district is of a good agricultural
character, and several valuable gold reefs are being
worked near the town.
PARRAMATTA is, next to Sydney, the
oldest town in the colony. It is situated on what is
called the Parramatta river, which in reality is an
elongation of Port Jackson, in the county of
Cumberland, electorate and police district of
Parramatta. It is distant from Sydney 14 miles
W., with which constant communication is kept up
by the river steamers and the Great Western rail-
way, fares, Is. 3d. and lOd. It was originally
known under the name of Rosehill, which was after-
wards changed to its old aboriginal name of Par-
ra-mat-ta. It was established as early as November
2nd, 1788, on which day “His Excellency the
Governor (Phillip) went to the Crescent to choose
the spot and to mark out the ground for a redoubt
and other necessary buildings. Ten convicts were
ordered to clear some land on a rising ground which
his Excellency named Rose Hill;” the natural
beauty of the country and the fertility of the soil
having attracted his attention, and caused him to
make it his residence. In July 1790 the Governor
laid down the lines for a regular town, the principal
street extending for a mile westward from the
landing place, 205 feet wide, huts capable of con-
taining ten persons each at a distance of 60 feet
apart being built on either side. Much of the early
history of the colony is bound up with Parramatta ;
the first grain was grown and harvested here, and the
earliest grants of land to convicts who had served
their time were made. The town has many features
of interest; it is well laid out, and is not altogether
unlike an English town of the same size. The public
buildings are numerous, and comprise the Govern-
ment House, which is now let on lease by the Park
authorities as a boarding-house under the name of
Park House ; the Parramatta and district hospital ;
the Asylum for the Infirm and Destitute, in which
there were 230 inmates on Jan. 1, 1884 ; the Erysi-
pelas Hospital and Macquarie Street Asylum, formerly
a military hospital, for which purpose it was built by
Governor Macquarie ; the Roman Catholic and Pro-
testant orphan schools, the inmates numbering, in
Jan., 1884, 242 and 177 respectively; the court-house,
and several places of worship—two Episcopal, St.
John’s and All Saints, the former of which was
opened as early as April 10, 1803 ; two Wesleyan,
one Primitive Methodist, one Presbyterian, one
Roman f'atholic, one Baptist, and a handsome
Gothic Congregational church. There are also four
tweed manufactories, a brewery, a drain pipe and
tile works, soap and candle factory, a Benevolent
Society, two lunatic asylums, a new hospital for
female lunatics has been provided lately, a very ex-
tensive gaol, and several schools, viz., three public,
total average attendance 849, two certified denomi-
national Church of England, one Roman Catholic
School for boys, under the supervision of the
Marist Brothers, and one for girls, under the
management of the Sisters of Charity. The King’s
School is the oldest grammar school in Australia,
having been founded in 1832. A beautiful park is
reserved for the recreation of the inhabitants. The
walks are planted with oaks, which are the largest in
Australia. The Woolpack Inn, TattersalTs, the White
Horse, the Star, Park, Emu, Royal Oak, and Royal
Exchange, are the prominent hotels. Banking facil-
ities are afforded by branches of the Commercial,
A. J. 8., and N.S.W. Banks, and a savings bank.
Other institutions are a Mechanics’ institute with
1,350 vols., and a free public library. The local news-
papers are the Cumberland Mercury, the Cumberland
Times, and Cumberland Independent. A tramway
line, constructed by private enterprise at a cost of
£20,000, connects the river with the township, it is
about 3 miles in length, and was opened for
traffic on October 1, 1883. The population
bj the census returns of 1381 was 8,433 ; number of
electors 1,211. The district is mainly devoted to
fruit-growing, and the orangeries and orchards of
Parramatta have an almost world-wide reputation.
The largest orange-trees in the world are believed to
be here, on the estate of Mr. James Pye, a gentleman
who has devoted the greater part of his life to the
introduction and cultivation of the best varieties of
this favourite fruit, the earliest having been planted
soon after the colony was founded. Upwards of
10,000 oranges have been gathered in a season from
one tree. By a late return the total quantity of
land under crop was 96 acres, of which 71J acres
were devoted to orchards and gardens, and 20J
to orangeries, the latter yielding 12,900 dozen of
fruit. The stock returns for the district on March
31, 1884, were 68 horses, 75 head of cattle, 13 sheep,
and 41 pigs. One member is returned to the
Assembly. The town has been under municipal
government (four wards) since Nov. 27, 1861. It is
lighted with gas, contains 66 miles of streets, and
the value of rateable property is £297,000.
PATERSON, a post, telegraph, Government
Savings Bank, and money-order township on the
right bank of the river of the same name, at the head
of navigation, in the county and electorate of Durham,
and police district of Paterson, 105 miles N. by E. of
Sydney, situated in lat. 32° 39' S., and long. 151° 40'
8., between the Williams and Hunter valleys. The
communication is via West and East Maitland, (12
miles) by mail coaches, fare, 2s. 6d., and via Morpeth,
10 miles distant S., by steamer. The population
of the town comprises about 300 persons, and of the
district 2,418 ; on the electoral rolls are 553 names,
Smith’s, and Wilson’s Courthouse are the hotels.
Bank, Commercial. The principal buildings are
the Episcopal church, near the river; the Presby-
terian church, on the higher ground ; Wesleyan
chapel, police barracks, lock-up, the court-house,
and the Oddfellows' hall. For educating the rising
generation there is a public school, average attend-
ance 71. The school of arts has a library of 370 vols.
The district is partly an agricultural one, broken
up into numerous small farms ; and, in addition
to cereal and root crops, large quantities of fruit
of all kinds, particularly oranges and grapes, are
grown, and also tobacco. Owing to its low site and
the lofty hills that environ it, it is at times liable to
destructive floods ; the uplands are mostly of rich
loam over sandstone, and the flats are all flood or
alluvial deposit, varying from 5 to 18 feet in depth.
The district is rich in minerals, coal, iron ore, and
limestone. The following further particulars respect-
ing Paterson have been furnished The produce of
the district is sent regularly to Newcastle and
Sydney every week by steamer ; this comprises large
quantities of cheese, butter, eggs, poultry, and many
tons of bacon—sometimes 60 and 70—and largo
quantities of oaten and lucerne hay are sent by road
to Maitland. Adjoining here are the noted and choice
herds of Tocal, Gostwyck, and other celebrated
estates. There are a number of free selectors, who
appear to be doing well, and farming operations and
the rearing of stock generally is followed to a great
extent.
PEEL, a postal village on Clear Creek, in the
county of Roxburgh, police district of Bathurst,
and electoral district of East Macquarie, in about
33° 30'S. lat., and 149° 40' E. long., 128 miles (150
postal) W. of Sydney. Within the boundaries of the
township are a public school with average attendance
of 29 scholars, a Roman Catholic school, an Episcopal
and a Roman Catholic place of worship, two
stores, one hotel, two butchers and about 100
people. Outside the town are about 300 persons,
within a radius of four miles. Cobb and Co.’s coaches
run to Bathurst. Mining, pastoral and agricultural
district. Formation : slate, with quartz reefs. Gold,
silver, lead, and other metals have been found in the
neighbourhood.
PENRITH, a municipal township (proclaimed
May 12, 1871) on the east bank of the Nepean river,
88 feet above sea level, 34 miles W. of Sydney, in the
county of Cumberland, and electoral district of the
Nepean. It is a railway and telegraph station;
fares, 4s. sd. and 2s. 9d. Local newspaper, Nepean
Times— weekly. There are 50 miles of street in the
municipal district, with rateable property of the
capital value of £260,000. The iron tubular


bridge which carries the railway over the river at
this point, is one of the finest pieces of work in
the colony. It consists of three openings of 186 ft.
clear, and one span of 127 ft., carried at an elevation
of 49 ft. above the ordinary river level. The viaduct
over Knapsack Gully, a few miles from here, is the
largest specimen of railway architecture in New
South Wales. It has five spans of 50 ft. each, and
two of 20 ft. each; its total length is 388 ft., and
height 126 ft. The Station yard at Penrith is the
next largest to Sydney, being the junction for the
Western goods traffic, and having large engineering
and fitting shops for rolling stock. The larger
buildings in the town comprise a benevolent asylum,
at present out of repair and not much used,
post, telegraph, money-order and savings bank
office, a court-house, the new town-hall and the
temperance hall, the schools—public, average attend-
ance 375, and Roman Catholic —the police office,
the railway station, and places of worship for the
Episcopalians, Roman Catholics, Presbyterians, and
Wesleyans. The principal hotels are the Commercial,
Australian Arms, Red Cow, Wheelwright’s Arms,
and Squires’ Nepean. Banks : N. S. Wales and Com-
mercial. Nearly all the Friendly Benefit Societies
are represented. Principal storekeepers : W. Fulton,
W. H. Judge, G. Nash, J. G. Bissland, M. Purtell.
Newspaper: Nepean Times. The population is up-
wards of 1,470 for the town of Penrith, 750 for town
of St. Mary’s, 618 for town of Emu. The district is
almost purely an agricultural one, about 7,573 acres
being under cultivation, but the town is composed
principally of railway employes. Maize is the most
extensively grown crop. There are two factories on
the banks of the Nepean, both idle at present,
besides one tannery in Penrith and several at St.
Mary’s, employing about 300 hands.
PETERSHAM is a municipal suburb of Syd-
ney, and railway station, on Long Cove Creek,
lying about 3 miles W. (100 feet above sea level).
It contains many villa residences of the lead-
ing trades and professional men. Besides the rail,
fares, 4d. and 3d., there is frequent omnibus commu-
nication —fare, 4d. Working Men’s Institute hero,
with library of 400 vols. It was proclaimed a muni-
cipality on December 14, 1871; it has 28 miles of
roads, and property of the total rateable value of
£782,860. To the post-office is attached money-order,
telegraph, and savings bank office. Public school
here has average attendance of 606 scholars, and
there is an Episcopal and a Roman Catholic school.
Bank : Australasia. A new Town Hall of brick was
opened on April 19, 1882. Petersham was named by
Lieut.-Governor Grose in 1793, when nine huts for
labouring convicts were built and sixty acres
cleared of timber, twenty being sown with Indian
com. A timber yard, 200 feet square, was formed
here for the purpose of constructing a “walking
mill ” to grind wheat.
PICTON, formerly known as Stokequabry (34°
10' S. lat., 150° 44' E. long.), is a postal, money-order,
savings bank, railway, and telegraph station in the
county and electoral district of Camden ; fares, Bs.
and ss. 3d. It lies in a valley 550 feet above sea-level,
on the Stonequarry creek, 53 miles SW. of Sydney,
on the main southern road. Including Upper Picton,
the original township, there is a population of about
700 persons, and 3,500 in the census district (1881).
It has a Church of England, Wesleyan, and Roman
Catholic chapels, two schools (public school has
average attendance of 126 scholars) ; court-house,
some half dozen stores, a flour mill, a branch of the
Commercial Bank, and a Hospital for Incurables.
The leading inns are the George, the Railway, and
Great Southern. The railway viaduct here is 276
feet long by a total height of 78, and has 5 openings
of 40 feet each. The district is an agricultural one,
much of the land on the banks of the creek being,
very rich. A late return shows 4,357 acres under
crop, principally for maize and oaten hay, but the
chief occupation of the inhabitants is dairy farming.
Stock returns for 1884: horses 1,594, cattle 8,698,
sheep 4,675, pigs 1,877. Kerosene shale has been
found in the neighbourhood. Formation: sandstone
and Wainamatta shale. Picton has the character of
being a healthy district. From the many little hills
surrounding it large tracts of country of a pleasing
, and varied character are presented to the view.
There are several family residences in the neighbour-
hood —Nepean Towers, Morton Park, and Clifton on
the East, Abbotsford on the West, Jarvesfleld on the
North, and Broomhill on the South. Six miles to
the West are lagoons, at all times containing a large
body of water, now called Picton Lakes.
PIIiLIG-A, a post town, with money-order office,
savings bank, and telegraph station on the lagoon
of the same name, on the road from Narrabri to
Walgett, about 65 miles from Wee Waa, and 384
miles N. from Sydney. Coach runs to the Narrabri
railway station, fare, 325. 6d. It is a place of petty
sessions. There are 2 hotels, Pellega and Newtown,
2 stores and 3 saw-mills, and it is surrounded by large
pastoral properties and numerous selections. There
is a public school, with average attendance of 29.
The Namoi River runs within 3 miles of the town-
ship. Product of the district is principally timber.
PITT TOWN, a small village about 38 miles
distant from Sydney W., in the county of Cumber-
land, near the Ha wkesbury river. Windsor is 4 miles
off. The trains can be met at Mulgrave, 4 miles dis-
tant. The village consists principally of a very long
street; it contains an Episcopal church, a Presby-
terian church (both of stone), public school, average
attendance 104, one inn, and a number of dwelling-
houses. Population 350; of district, about 600.
Agricultural district.
PEATTSBURG is a municipal township,
85 miles N. of Sydney, adjoining the township of
Wallsend, having a court-house, post and telegraph
office, and police barracks. A new school building
capable of holding 1,000 children has been erected ;
it is one of the best schools in the district, average
attendance 277. The mechanics’ institute is a
splendid building, having a large hall, reading
room, library, lecture room, class rooms and lodge
room. The reading room is supplied with nearly
all the papers and periodicals published in the
colonies ; the library contains about 1,000 volumes.
There are also Presbyterian, Baptist, Primitive
Methodist, United Free Church, and Roman Catholic
places of worship. The principal business places in
connection with the township of Wallsend and
Plattsburg are situated in this borough, including 7
large hotels. The estimated value of rateable
property is £184,000. It has 12 miles of roads and
streets within the borough. Within a short distance
is the Co-operative Colliery, at which are employed
about 450 hands. The out-put for 1882 amounted to
223,009 tons, valued at £109,269. The seam worked
is known as the Wallsend, being a continuation of
the seam worked by the A. A. Company at New-
castle. In connection with the colliery there are
a large number of ovens, where coke of an excellent
quality is produced. Plattsburg was proclaimed a
municipal borough December 27, 1876.
POONCARIE (or Pooncaira), county Perry, a
post town, with money-order office and telegraph
station, pleasantly situated on rising ground on the
river Darling, about 80 miles NE. of Wentworth, and
780 miles W. of Sydney. Hotels ; Pooncarie and
Telegraph. Two sheep stations are in the vicinity.
Cobb’s coaches pass through on the way from Went-
worth. Hay is the nearest railway station.
PORT MAC 0,17 ARIE is picturesquely situ-
ated on the sea-coast, on a promontory at the entrance
of the River Hastings, 180 miles (256 postal) N. of
Sydney, with which the communication is direct by
steamer or sailing vessels, or the route vid Manning
river steamer can be taken. A coach runs three
times weekly to the Hexham railway station, fare,
60s. Passengers are occasionally embarked or landed
by the Richmond, Clarence, and Macleay River
steamers. It is in the county of Macquarie,
and Manning electoral district, and has handsome
post and money-order, telegraph and Government
savings bank office. It is also a pilot station. The
population is about 800, that of the district 2,132.
The leading hotels are the Royal, Shamrock and
Commercial. There is an Episcopal Church with
square tower—-St. Thomas’s—a Wesleyan, Roman
Catholic, and Presbyterian chapel, a brick court-
house, a public school, average attendance 104, a
gaol, 11 stores, and a branch of the New South
Wales bank. Court of Petty Sessions is held every


day ; Small Debts Court first Tuesday in every
month ; District Court twice a year, also County
and Quarter Sessions. The surrounding district
is an agricultural one, the principal crops being
maize, barley, oats, and potatoes. The vine
is, next to maize, the principal object of culture,
soil and climate suit it well, and the quantity of
wine made is yearly increasing. There is a very
large area of land yet uncultivated, admirably suited
for the vine culture, which industry has already
assumed large propox-tions. Tobacco also is largely
grown. The cultivation of sugar, after persevering
efforts, has almost been abandoned, the seasons
being too uncertain, and the frost too destructive
to make it profitable to the grower, only one small
mill being now on the river. Mining is now claiming
considerable attention. Copper is extensively indi-
cated, and payable gold was recently discovered
towards the head of the Hastings. A steam saw-mill
is three miles up the Hastings, at which steamers
and coasting vessels take in cargo ; two other mills
are in working order in the district. Two steam
droghers bring produce down the river from over
30 miles. Local newspaper : Port Macquarie News.
POET STEPHENS is a fine harbour, about
80 miles NE. of Sydney. It is principally used as a
harbour of refuge, and is well lighted. It is in S.
lat. 32° 42' 30”, E. long. 162° 11'45". The lighthouse is
a circular white tower 60 ft. high, showing a revolv-
ing red and white light alternately every minute,
visible 16 miles. Carrington, at the head of the
harbour, is a small township.
PEOSPECT is on the main Western road in
the county of Cumberland, 'and police district of
Parramatta, 20 miles W. of Sydney. It has a post-
office, an hotel—the Prospect,—a public school,
average attendance 55, and an English and R. C.
Church. The Blacktown railway station is 3 miles
distant. District farming principally. A blue
metal quarry is being worked in the district turning
out about 100 tons per week. Municipality com-
prises 123 miles of streets, and rateable property
valued at £121,800.
PYEMONT, a thickly populated, and rapidly
extending suburb of Sydney, situated on the western
shores of the harbour on an elevated position, with a
post, money-order, and telegraph office ; communi-
cation is by ferry steamers, omnibus, or over Pyr-
mont bridge. There is a public school here (average
attendance 312), and Episcopalian, Roman Catholic,
Presbyterian, and Wesleyan places of worship, two
branch banks. Mercantile, and English and Scottish,
and a large number of hotels and business establish-
ments ; the Government Abattoirs are also situated
here. Formation : sandstone. One of the largest
quarries in the colony being worked hei-e, it supplies
stone for all the principal buildings in the city.
QTDAMBONE, a post town on the Merri-Merri
creek, in the police district of Coonamble, 350 miles
(405 postal) W. of Sydney. A coach runs to Dubbo
railway station. It has one hotel, the Quambone,
and one store.
QUEANBEYAN is a money-order and Govern-
ment savings bank and telegraph township on the
river of. the same name, 190 miles SW. of Sydney,
with which the communication is maintained by daily
coach to Tarago, fare, 10s., and thence by rail. Upper
Tarago is now the nearest railway station, a tri-
weekly mail continues to run to Gunning, also one
direct to Yass- coach from Queanbeyan bi-weekly. It
is in the county of Murray, and electoral and police
district of Queanbeyan, in 35 20' 8. lat., and
149’ 15' E. long. The population comprises about
1,050 persons, the district numbering 5,455 ; 1,712
electors are on the rolls. Newspapers : the Quean-
heyan Times and the Queanbeyan Age. One mem-
ber is returned to the Legislative Assembly. Places
of worship : Episcopal, Wesleyan, Presbyterian, and
Roman Catholic. Queanbeyan also possesses a hospital,
public school, average attendance of 91, a court-
house, a gaol, police-barracks, a convent, and two
large flour mills. Court held daily. New post
and telegraph office; two Banks, Commercial
and N, 8. W., latter premise# being rented. The
public buildings also include an Oddfellows’ Hall,
a Protestant Hall, and a Temperance Hall,
all of which are fine buildings, the Protestant
Hall being by far the most capacious. The district
is both pastoral and agricultural. The number of
acres of land under cultivation in 1884 was 9,184 r
producing wheat, 59,094 bushels; maize, 2,373
bushels ; barley, 1,703 bushels ; oats, 8,644 bushels ;
potatoes, 302 J tons. During the same period the live
stock returns were: 4,135 horses, 13,593 cattle,
366,670 sheep, 1,177 pigs. Queanbeyan is pic-
turesquely situated, and has many natural advan-
tages, including valuable deposits of copper, silver,
load, iron, and gold, which require only capital and
quicker communication with Sydney to make the
town of considerable importance. Hotels: Pooley’s,
Royal, Land’s Victoria, McNamar’s Commercial, and
Rolfc’s Rose, Shamrock and Thistle. The police dis-
trict includes several thriving villages, at three of
which, Buugendore, Gundaroo, and Micalago, courts
of petty session are held, presided over by the police
magistrate of Queanbeyan. There are six societies—
Loyal Orange, H. C. Guild, Manchester Unity of
Oddfellows, Grand United Oddfellows, Sons and
Daughters of Temperance, Church of England
Temperance, and Good Templars. Formation:
schist.
dUIEINDI, a post town and railway station on
the Great Northern Railway, is situated 1,278 feet
above sea-level, on the creek of the same name, an
eastern tributary of the Namoi, on the northern slope
of the Liverpool range, in the county of Buckland,elec-
torate of Guanedah and Tamworth, and Murrurundi
police district, 217 miles N. of Sydney. It is the
nearest station for the greater portion of the Liverpool
Plains. Business pi-emises comprise numerous hotels,
four principal stores, the Commercial Bank, and two
flour mills. There are three churches and a public
school, average attendance 100, and four other schools
within 5 miles radius, also a money-order office, tele-
graph station, court house and police barracks
Population about 280. The train and steamer from
Newcastle (144 miles S.) are the means of reaching
Sydney, fares from Newcastle, 265. 3d. and 17s.' 6d.
Farming locality, principally grain grown here, re-
turn being about 100,000 bushels annually ; many
sheep and cattle reared here.
E AGrL AN, a telegraph and railway station on the
Great Western Railway, in the county of Roxburgh
electoral district of East Macquarie, and police dis-
trict of Bathurst, 140 miles (122 by road) WNW of
Sydney. Fares, 245. 3d. and 16s. It lies 2,436 feet
above sea-level. Population about 380. It has one
hotel, a public school with average attendance of 29
scholars, and a Church of England (St. James), and
was formerly a principal coaching centre. The soil
is of a deep alluvial character, and the country is
mainly extensive plains (Macquarie), used for grazing
purposes.
RAMOENIE, a small township on the banks
of the Urara, about 35 miles above Grafton, much
less in a direct line, and 4 miles from Copmanhurst.
The township owes its existence to the meat-pre-
serving operations of which it is the seat. The com-
pany began business in 1866. Their works are
situated contiguous to the banks of the river, and
are very extensive. A large number of men are em-
ployed in the season. Public school, average attend-
ance 62.
EANDWICK, a rapidly improving suburban
municipality in the electoral district of Paddington
on the south side of the city, and distant from it
about three miles. Tramcars ply at frequent intervals
during the day, fare, 4d. There are four hotels,
money-order, telegraph, and savings bank office.
There are also many villa residences of the Sydney
merchants. A large asylum and hospital for desti-
tute children is here, sheltering on December 31
1883, 545 children—3sB boys, and 187 girls, who are
maintained at a cost of £2O os. 3£d. per head.
Rand wick is more noted for its racecourse, admitted
to be one of the finest in Australia, the principal meet-
ings attracting visitors from all parts of Australia
Randwick joins Waverley on one side, Botany on
another, Sydney on the north, and the ocean is
the eastern boundary. There are two public,
a Roman Catholic, three private schools, and
three churches Episcopalian, Roman Catholic,
and Wesleyan. There is good building stone (free-
stone), with plenty of sand, and a good water sup*


ply and gas laid on. Moore Park is partly in the
Rand wick borough. Population about 1,500. It was
proclaimed a municipality on February 22, 1859. It
has 59 miles of roads. Estimated value of rateable
property, £750,000.
RAYMOND TERRACE lies on the east
bank of the Hunter River, near its junction with the
Williams River, 18 miles from Newcastle N. It is in
the parish of Eldon, county and electorate of
Gloucester, and police district of Raymond Terrace,
and has a post, money-order,and Government Savings
Bank, and telegraph office. Steamers of the H. R.
N. and Newcastle Steamship Companies ply daily
to Sydney, 94 miles to the SB. Hexham is
the nearest railway station. The town is prettily
situated, being built on a gentle slope, the river run-
ning at the foot. It contains a few good buildings,
among which are a steam saw mill, the court-house,
and lock-up; the four places of worship occupied by
the Episcopal, Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, and Pres-
byterian bodies, a public school (average attendance
112), and Roman Catholic. The principal hotels are
the Royal, Cosmopolitan, Rock of Cashel, and the
Junction. The Joint-Stock has a branch bank here,
and there are three principal stores. The School of
Arts has a library of 500 vols., local newspaper
Gloucester Gazette. There are about 700 persons resi-
dent in the town and outskirts, and 2,040 in the
census district (1881). The district is principally
agricultural; the grape is also extensively cultivated,
some of the earliest vineyards in the colony being
within a short distance of the town ; sugar has also
been grown. 4,020 acres of land are under cultiva-
tion, maize and potatoes being the staple products.
Formation ; Old red sandstone, with splendid stone
quarries. Country swampy, but adapted for fac-
tories requiring a good supply of water.
REDFERN, a suburb of Sydney, on the SSW.
side. It was proclaimed a municipality on August
11, 1859, and has an area of half a square mile.
There are 25 miles of streets, total value of rateable
property £1,650,000. Omnibuses run frequently to
and from the city, fare, 3d., also tram. Population
(census 1881) 23,599. Redfern has money-order,
savings bank, post-office, and telegraph facilities, and
returns two members to the Assembly. The Free
Library here has 2,200 vols. Public school here has
average attendance of 855, and there is a denomi-
national school (Episcopal). Newspaper : Redfern
I'imes. Banks : Mercantile and Joint Stock.
RICHMOND is situated in the county of
Cumberland, and police district of Windsor, within
a short distance of the Hawkesbury river, four
miles from Windsor, and 38 miles NW. from
Sydney, with which it is in direct communication
by railway, fares, ss. 3d. and 3s. 3d. It has a post,
savings bank, money-order office, and telegraph
station, and has been a municipality since June 18,
1872. It has 7 miles of road, and rateable property
of the value of £133,712. The population of the
town is 1,239 persons, of the district 3,084. The
town consists of several streets, of which Windsor
is the leading one. The more important buildings
are the Episcopal church, a fine large brick build-
ing; the Roman Catholic church, a much smaller
edifice ; the Presbyterian church, a comp ict build-
ing of stone; and the Wesleyan chapel, an unpre-
tending structure of brick ; a post-office ; a School
of Arts, with library of 1,100 vols. ; branches of the
N. S. Wales and Commercial Banks; one public
school with average attendance of 254, and denomi-
national school belonging to the Roman Catholics,
and a court-house. There is a spacious park-like
reserve in the centre of the town. The principal
hotels are—Royal, Post-office, Black Horse, and
Horse and Jocky. The district is an agricultural
one, and similar in many respects to the Hunter
river country, the river flats being of the most
fertile character, but liable to disastrous floods,
that greatly depreciate their otherwise superior
advantages. It is said that a canal could be
cut at a comparatively small cost, that would
materially assist in the escape of water at flood time,
and make the district one of the most prosperous
and flourishing agricultural fields in the colony.
Maize, hay, and cereals are the principal products.
Much land is under cultivation in the neighbour-
hood, principally for cereal crops.
RIVERSTONE, a post town,telegraph and rail-
way station, 28 miles NW.of Sydney ; fares, 3s. 3d.and
2s. It is situated on the Eastern Creek, in the elec-
torate of the Hawkesbury, and police district of
Windsor. There is one hotel here, a public school,
average attendance 44, Roman Catholic church,
several small stores and saw mills, with a population
of about 320.
ROBERTSON, a post town, with telegraph
station, money-order office, and savings bank, in the
county of Camden, and police and electoral district
of Berrima, about 110 miles 8. of Sydney. It lies at
an elevation of about 2,500 feet above the sea-level,
on the road between Kiama and Moss Vale, and com-
mands fine scenery. Population, with vicinity, is
estimated at 350. A public school is here, with
average attendance of 54, and there are two
places of worship, one hotel, and two stores.
The land is principally taken up for dairy farming,
and is well spoken of. Sydney is reached vid Moss
Vale Railway station, from which it is 14 miles
distant.
ROCKLEY,a small picturesque postal township,
with telegraph,'savings bank, and money-order office,
on Pepper’s creek, near its junction with Campbell’s
river, 22 miles south of Bathurst, and 147 miles (167
postal) W. of Sydney. It is situated in the midst of
a cluster of low hills, in the county of Georgiana,
police district of Bathurst, and electorate of West
Macquarie. The traveller’s route is by coach to and
from George’s Plains Railway station daily, 16 miles,
fare, 55.; also by coach to and from Bathurst twice a
week. Population 180. The township consists of about
40 to 50 dwellings ; a substantial stone-built Wesleyan
chapel; an Episcopal and Presbyterian church, both
of brick ; the Catholic church, a more ornate struc-
ture than the others—all of these places of worship
being erected on elevated sites ; a flour mill, three
stores, a branch of the Joint Stock Bank ; two hotels
—Club House and Commercial, a public school with
average attendance of 44 scholars, a convent, and a
court-house. There are some farms and sheep stations
in the district, and also some alluvial and quartz
workings, but not of a very rich character, though
supporting a moderate population. Formation:
quartz, limestone and basalt.
ROCKY MOUTH, or Maclean (geographi-
cally described as distinct townships, but topo-
graphically the same), has a population of over
600, and is situated on the south or left
bunk of the Clarence River, at the junction of
the North and South Arms with the main river.
The growth of the first named is due to pri-
vate enterprise, whilst the latter has been laid
out as a Government township, and is a continu-
ation of Rocky Mouth. Combined, they form an
increasing township of much importance. It is
distant from the Clarence Heads about 18 miles, 30
miles from Grafton, and about 350 miles (323 postal)
N. of Sydney, and is in the county and electoral
district of The Clarence. Communication with all
the other towns and villages on the river is kept
up by passenger steamers plying twice daily to
Grafton (30 miles), Rocky Mouth being the principal
terminus, but lower townships are adequately
provided in this respect. It is the main central
depot for the agricultural products on both
sides of the main river and its numerous branches
for some distance above and below the town-
ship, with extensive accommodation in three large
stores and sheds, all having deep-water front-
ages. There are four churches and four resident clergy-
men, the Presbyterians, Roman Catholics, Wesleyans
and Episcopalians being represented ; a mechanics’
institute with a library of 270 volumes, a court-
house(with police residence attached), where District
Court is held every four months. Police and Petty
Debts and Licensing Courts are held as occasion re-
quires, presided over by resident magistrates and
the P.M. from Grafton periodically; public school
average • attendance 117; post, telegraph, savings
bank and money-order offices ; Banks of N.S. Wales
and Joint-Stock ; six aerated water-works ; foun-
dry and engineering works, belonging to the
Clarence Engineering Company, employing 30 hands ;


five hotels. Commercial, Maclean, Argyle, Criterion
and Clare Castle, and six stores. Weekly newspaper:
The Lower Clarence Advocate (Friday). Coal and
ironstone abound in the neighbourhood. Maclean
is the place of nomination for a member to
represent the electorate of The Clarence in Parlia-
ment. The population of the electorate, according
to the census of 1881, is 6,745.
ROCKY RIVER, a postal centre in the
county of Sandon and police district of Armidaie,
in lat. 30° 45' S. and long. 151° 30' E., 304 miles NNE.
of Sydney. It has one hotel, the Crown ; one public
school, average attendance 44, and a general store.
Communication with the metropolis is by coach to
the Uralla railway station, thence by train, and
steamer from Newcastle. This district, which is of
granite formation, was formerly a thriving gold-
field, but has of late years declined. It is believed
that gold in remunerative quantities will yet be
found here.
ROOKWOOD, a post town, with Government
savings bank, telegraph, and money-order office on
Haslam’s Creek, situated 10 miles SW. of Sydney,
with which there is railway communication; fires,
lid. and 7d. It is in the county and electorate of
Cumberland and police district of Parramatta. There
are here a Church of England, a Congregational chapel,
a public .school, average attendance 116, and two
hotels. Population about 300. A large area of land, 200
acres, has been set apart for the purposes of inter-
ment, and is named “The Necropolis.” This City of
the Dead is already numerously tenanted, and
many graceful memorials of affection have been
erected. Funeral trains leave twice a day. Forma-
tion : clay combined with slate. Sydney Meat Pre-
serving Company’s works are in the neighbourhood.
ROUSE HILL derives its name from the
Messrs. Rouse, who reside here. It is a post town in
the county of Cumberland, electorate of the Hawkes-
bury, and Windsor police district, 28 miles W.
of Sydney, and an old settled locality. Riverstone
is the nearest railway station. There are here
a public school, with average attendance of 34
children, an English church, a police station, a
store, one hotel, and about 50 residents. In the
district—whose formation is sandstone, slate, and
clay—are about 300 persons. The timber here is
iron-bark, box, and gum. Much oaten hay is grown,
and there are numerous orange orchards ; many of
the farms belong to the farmers themselves.
RYDAL, a money-order, telegraph, Govern-
ment savings bank, and railway station on the
Great Western Railway, 111 miles W. of Sydney,
fares, 19s. and 12s. 6d. It lies 3,117 feet above
sea-level on the Solitary creek, in the electoral
district of Hartley, and police district of Bathurst.
Churches ; Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic;
with one public school having average attendance
of 30 scholars, and an Hotel: The surrounding
country is taken up by farmers and squatters.
Population 170. The district is well adapted for
farms and the growth of fruit.
RYDE, or Kissing Point, is a village, with money-
order, telegraph, Government savings bank and post
office, on the north bank of the Parramatta river, 8
miles NW. of Sydney, and about the same distance
from Parramatta. It is in the county of Cum-
berland, and Parramatta police district, and is one
of the most picturesque suburbs about Sydney. It
was proclaimed a municipality on November 11,
1870, reproclaimed June 11, 1872. It has 50 miles
of road and streets, and rateable property valued
at £145,000. The Parramatta steamers call on
their journeys up and down; fares, Is. and Is. 6d.
each way. The leading hotels are the Steam-
boat, Bay View, and the Royal. Churches ; St.
Ann’s (Episcopal), a stone Wesleyan chapel, Baptist
chapel, and St. Charles, Roman Catholic, the latter
has a school attached. Two public schools here, average
attendance 217. At North Ryde a new Episcopal
Church has been erected. A stone Church of
England (Christ Church) has been erected in East
Ward. Public buildings: court-house and police
station. Population of the municipality 1,673 (census
1881', of the district 8,739. The country is celebrated
for its orange and other orchards. Omnibuses run
daily to and from Sydney carrying the mails. The
new line of railway to the Hunter River has been
commenced at Ryde.
RYLSTONE, a postal township, with telegraph,
Government Savings Bank, and money-order office,
in the county of Roxburgh, on the left bank of the
Cudgegong river, 32 miles SB. from Mudgee, and
139 miles W. of Sydney. The town is now connected
with Sydney via Wallerawang by rail, the
line to Mudgee running through the centre
of the district. Hotels: Rylstone Arms, Globe,
Bridge, and Shamrock, and there are six stores.
A branch of the Australian Joint Stock Bank
is here, a public school, average attendance
117, and Episcopal, Roman Catholic, and Wesleyan
places of worship. Government buildings are a
court-house, police barracks, and handsome tele-
graph and post-office. Population is about 333;
the police district, numbering 3,180 persons, now"
forms part of the electoral, sheep, and registry
district of Mudgee.
SCONE, a small post town, with money-order.
Government savings bank, and telegraph office on
the northern road, 75 miles from Maitland, 7 miles N.
from Aberdeen, and 167 miles N. of Sydney. It is a
station on the Great Northern Railway, fares from
Newcastle (96 miles), 17s. 3d. and 11s. 6d. The town
is prettily situated on the stream called the King-
don Ponds, on the slope of a small hill,? about
680 feet above the sea level, almost surrounded
by mountains, and from its elevated position
and natural advantages, as regards drainage, has
a high character for healthiness. The principal hotels
are the Golden Fleece, Belmore, Willow Tree, and
the Crown and Anchor. Other buildings of note
are the three places of worship—Church of Eng-
land, Roman Catholic, and Presbyterian ; hospital-
and benevolent asylum, the court-house, the Schoo
of Arts (with library of 1,350 vols.), and th«
public school, average attendance 110. There are
also several stores, a branch of the Bank of
N. S. Wales, and one steam flour mill. The
population comprises about 600 persons, the whole
district 4,694 (census 1881). The district is a
mining, agricultural, and pastoral one ; the yield of
gold, however, is not large. Wheat, maize, and
tobacco are the leading crops. The land in the neigh-
bourhood of the town is well adapted for tillage, and
many thousands of acres have been conditionally pur-
chased. About one mile from Scone is a wild and pic-
turesque spot known as the Plat Bock, the romantic
scenery of which is highly spoken of and well worth
visiting. About 10 miles from Scone in a northerly
direction, on a spur of the Liverpool range and 1J
miles from the Great Northern road and about 3
miles from the Wingen railway station, there is a
large coal seam on fire, called Mount Wingen, and
generally known as the burning mountain. It is a
great attraction to tourists and visitois.
SEVENHILLS, a post town, telegraph, and
railway station in the county and electorate of Cum-
berland, and Parramatta police district, 20 miles W. of
Sydney, fares, Is. 9d. and Is. Population of district
about 400. The formation is hilly, with slate strata ;
the soil is rich and admirably adapted for oranges,
the orchards being numerous and very productive.
There are forests of native timber here. In the township
is an Episcopal church, and a public school, with
average attendance of 52.
SHELLHAEBOUR, a municipal district,
three miles from the famous Lake Illawarra,
proclaimed June 4,1859,with 56 miles of streets, and
rateable property of the value of £184,042,
situated 80 miles SSW. from Sydney, county"
Camden, electoral and police district of Kiama,
contains a post, money-order and telegraph office,
two hotels, a public school (average attendance,
71), a branch of the Commercial Bank, four places of
worship, three stores, public library. Court House,
and lock-up; population of the borough about
1,300, and township 200. Mode of conveyance to
Sydney, per steamer direct, or coach to Campbell-
town, thence rail. The district is principally pastoral,
with basalt and sandstone formation.
SHOALHAVEN is a large agricultural, dairy-
ing and mining district,situated upon the river of that
name, 110 miles from Sydney by steamer to Greenwell
Point, or 126 by road and rail via Moss Vale. The


sea frontage of the district is about 50 miles. The
Shoalhaven electoral district embraces the SE. por-
tion of the county of Camden and the NE. portion of
the county of St. Vincent. This electorate returns
one member to the Legislative Assembly. The
Shoalhaven police district has separate extents of
boundaries, though within the same electorate. The
places of petty sessions are Broughton Creek, and
Nowra. A district court is held at Nowra thrice
a year. Within the district of Shoalhaven there
are at present five municipal districts, viz. : Brough-
ton Creek and Bomaderry, Nowra, Numba, Brough-
ton Vale, and Central Shoalhaven. In 1883 Central
Shoalhaven had 27 miles of roads and a total
rateable property of £73,784; and twenty-one
towns or villages, comprising Boolong, Bomaderry,
Broughton’s Creek, Broughton Vale, Burner, Cam-
bewarra, Greenwell Point, Huskisson, Nowra,
Numba, Kangaroo Valley, Meroo, Jasper’s Brush,
Coolangatta, Woodhill, Brougher’s Creek, Berrellan,
Nowra Hill, Terrara, Tomerong, Wandandian, and
Woragee, of which Terrara is the central, lie within
the police district boundaries of Shoalhaven.
In this township is situated a telegraph office,
a branch of the Commercial Bank, the Shoalhaven
News and Nowra Colonist newspaper offices, the
principal hotels, and other business places, and the
largest hall on the South Coast, the Town Hall. In
the electorate, which comprises nearly 2,000 names,
there are nineteen postal and money-order towns and
villages, and thirty-six public and private schools,
and a corresponding number of churches, chapels,
and other places of public worship, four free libraries
and three Schools of Art. The population of the census
district (1881) was 8,390. The district is very exten-
sively under farms, Mr. D. Berry alone having
between 80,000 and 90,000 acres, and between 400
and 600 tenants. The latest stock returns (March
31, 1884) were, 4,882 horses, 35,503 cattle, 2,521
sheep, 13,175 pigs. Agricultural returns : 41,698 J
acres under cultivation for maize, oats, and potatoes.
Independently of the arrival and departure of four
steamers weekly, there are a number of small coasters
trading regularly to the river, principally in the tim-
ber trade. One of the longest and most expensive
bridges in Australia has been erected, and con-
nects the north with the south portion of the district.
SILVERTON is the present centre of the
Barrier ranges silver mining district situated on the
Umberumberka Creek, about 15 miles in a direct
line from the Border of South Australia and distant
from Sydney about 800 miles S., the town comprises
about 960 acres and the allotments secured under
the New South Wales system of selection before
survey; rows of small galvanized iron houses about
10 feet square are being erected as fast as materials
arrive ; at present there are only a few stone build-
ings on the field. There are five hotels, a bank,
several general stores, and boarding houses, in addi-
tion to a Court-house and police station ; over £5OO
per week is being paid to the Government for
mineral licenses, leases, &c. The mining district is
a very extensive one, commencing at Thackaringa
on the south, and extending beyond Mount Gipps,
comprising a tract of country known at present to
be argentiferous, at least fifty miles long by half that
distance broad. At Thackaringa the first discovery
of silver is said to have been made. The lodes there
are larger as a rule, but the ore is principally galena.
The Umberumberka mines are situated about twelve
miles north of Thackaringa, and extend to within a
mile of Silverton, the principal being the Umberum-
berka Company’s property and the Orphan. The
former has been sunk to a depth of 130 feet, and has
paid the expenses from the commencement. On
the surface this lode contained galena, but in depth
it has changed to what is termed steel ore, averaging
about 100 to 130 ozs. of silver per ton. On the
Orphan claim a lode has been unearl hed which con-
tains rich chloride of silver, over 10,000 ozs. of silver
to the ton being obtained by assay. The next
discoveries of importance are situated at Lake’s
Camp, 12 miles north-east of Silverton. Here the
Apollyon is the premier mine, and has been proved
to a depth of 80 feet, the surface stone yielding 600
to. 700 ozs., improving in depth, so that in some
cases the assay gives over 12,000 ozs. The Barrier
Range Association are the lucky proprietors of this
claim, with the exception of one-sixth, which is
held by a South Australian gentleman: the same
Association also own the Hen and Chickens and
Meech’s 810w —both wonderfully rich. The Bobbie
Bums claims are also here, and from all appearances
only want developing to make the owner’s fortune.
West again a few miles is Lake’s Grave, and the
assays from the Jane Armour gave over 16,000 ozs
from the surface slugs. The discoveries extend
beyond the two last named localities to the Soakage
and Hickey’s Dam, and there are many other rich
properties. Suffice it to say that Morris’s Blow (for
which £B,OOO is said to have been refused), the
Lubra, Black Prince, Pluck Up, M'lsaac’s (reported
sold for £8,000), Orian, and many well-known claims
are scattered over this area. The latest discoveries
are at Mount Gipps, thirty miles from Silverton, and
promise to rival anything that has yet been found.
There are many other places where rich silver has
been found, from Day Dawn, near Mundi Mundi on
the east, to the Pinnacles on the west. The most
expeditious manner to reach this district from
Sydney is by railway to Hay, thence coach vid
Wilcannia ; an agitation has been started in favour
of a railway line from Hay, but the authorities are
not as yet satisfied that the importance of the place
at present warrants such an undertaking.
SINGLETON (32° 24' 8. lat., 151° 7' E. long.,
county of Northumberland, electorate of Patrick’s
plains) is a municipality on the Hunter river,
29 miles to the N. of Maitland and 123 miles NW,
of Sydney, with which it is connected by rail
from Newcastle, and steamboat. Fares to New-
castle (49 miles), Bs. 6d., ss. 6d. It is named after Mr.
Benjamin Singleton, who in 1825 was one of a
party who first explored the Valley of the Hunter.
The railway station is 135 feet above sea level.
Singleton is a place of considerable business im-
portance, and is the head post-town of the district.
It is well laid out, and has some superior buildings,
public, private and commercial; among the former
are the Benevolent Asylum and hospital, affording
now accommodation for 90 to 100 inmates; the
Mechanics’ Institut e (with 4,600 vols.)—a very superior
edifice—the court-house, the Oddfellows’ hall, the
post and telegraph offices, the public school (average
attendance 332), the various churches, and some of
the clergymen’s residences, the grammar school,
etc. A Wesleyan church, to accommodate 350
worshippers, was erected in 1881, at a cost of
£1,750. There are also Anglican, Roman Catholic,
and Presbyterian places of worship. A very large
trade is done with the surrounding district. The prin-
cipal hotels are the Royal, the Commercial, and the
Caledonia, and there are fourteen others. The banks
are the N. S. Wales, Joint-Stock, and the Com-
mercial ; several of the insurance companies have
agencies also in the town. The country in the vicinity
of Singleton is known as Patrick’s Plains (so named
by the first explorers, Howe and party, who camped
here on St. Patrick’s day). It is principally an allu-
vial flat, and therefore very fertile, but subject to
occasional inundation. The last flood occurred in
January, 1874, doing very little damage. About
6,000 acres of land are under cultivation. Maize,
wheat, and barley, tobacco and grapes are the
principal crops grown by the farmers. There are
numerous stations in the district. One member is
returned to Parliament. The population by census
of 1881 was 2,000 ; that of the district 7,022.
Singleton was proclaimed a municipality on
January 30, 1806. It has 11J miles of streets, and
property valued at £136,470. The Northern Agri-
cultural Association, one of the most flourishing of
its kind in the Colony, has its head-quarters in
Singleton, where it possesses freehold property
valued at upwards of £5,200. The position and
natural advantages of Singleton justify the belief
that it is destined to become a great manufacturing
centre, and a place of vast importance. The local
newspaper is the Singleton Argus, published every
Wednesday and Saturday. Singleton has post,
money-order, and telegraph offices, and a Government
savings bank. Two Collieries are being worked not
far from here, at Rix Creek (3 miles). The product is
a bituminous coal suitable for manufacturing and


household purposes. The mine is connected with
the Great Northern Railway by a tramway about a
mile in length. Copper has also been found in
payable quantities. Singleton was first lighted by
gas in September, 1881. The town has one small
reserve, known as Burdekin Park, which is planted
with numerous trees, and has asphalted paths. The
permanent Town Common, 14 miles distant, is an
extensive forest of about 2,000 acres. The Masons,
the Druids, the Oddfellows, Orangemen, R. C. Guild,
Sons of Temperance, and Protestant Alliance
Friendly Society, and Good Templars are severally
represented by local lodges. Singleton claims to be
one of the prettiest and most attractive towns in
N. S. Wales, and only requires the introduction of
some outside capital, to make it one of the most
prosperous, as the natural resources of the district
are practically undeveloped. A survey was recently
made in connection with a scheme for supplying
the town with water. Formation; sandstone and
basalt.
SMITHTTEDD, a post town, bounded by Pros-
pect creek, two miles from the Fairfield railway
station, 20 miles S. of Sydney, and two miles from
Prospect water works. It is in the county of Cum-
berland, and police and electoral district of Liver-
pool, In town and vicinity are 500 residents. It has
two hotels, one public school, with average atten-
dance of 108 scholars, a Methodist and a Baptist
chapel, an Episcopal church, three stores and three
tanneries. It is an agricultural and fruit-growing
district.
SOFALA, a pretty little gold-fields township,
on the Turon river, 149 miles (172 postal) NW. of
Sydney, and 30 miles from Bathurst N. It has a
money-order, savings bank office, and telegraph sta-
tion. The district in which it is situated is altogether
a mining one, the workings being both alluvial and
quartz ; the former, however, is now nearly worked
out. The reefs give employment to several crushing
machines. In the early days of mining large quan-
tities of gold were obtained from this district. The
population of the town is 644. A large number of
Chinamen dwell in and around the town. The prin-
cipal hotels are the Royal, the Globe, and the Odd
Fellows’ Arms. Places of worship: Episcopal,
Roman Catholic, and Wesleyan ; there is a hospital, a
public school with average attendance 39, four stores,
and a Roman Catholic convent. Bank :N. 8. Wales.
Coach to Bathurst, fare, 7s. 6d., thence rail, form the
means of communication with Sydney.
SOLFERINO (or Lirmville), a postal and
money-order station, on Dowaro creek, in the county
of Drake, police district of Casino, and electoral
district of Tenterfield, 60 miles from Grafton, and
520 miles NE. of Sydney. The Grafton steamer is
the means of conveyance to and from Sydney.
Population 40, about 100 in the district ; one
hotel, a provisional school, the registrar and
warden’s office, and the stores of Messrs. Bas-
setti, comprise the larger buildings of the place.
The country has good mineral resources of copper,
tin, antimony, and iron, with some pipeclay, and
has, too, grazing and cultural capabilities. Several
quartz-crushing machines were at work here, and
some very good returns have been reported ; but the
gold appears to be patchy.
SOMEETON, a post town and money-order
station, on the Peel River, 273 miles N. of Sydney,
and 24 miles NW. of Tamworth, the nearest railway
station. It is situated in the county of Parry, elec-
toral district of Liverpool Plains, and police district
of Tamworth. There are several farmers and selec-
tors in the district, which is also good grazing
country. Public school, average attendance 16.
Population about 50. There is one hotel, two stores,
and an Episcopal church.
SPRING- GROVE, a post town, with tele-
graph, money-order, and savings bank office, and
railway station on Bray’s creek, a branch, or rather
the head of Brown’s creek, a tributary to the Belu-
bula river, 179 miles NW. of Sydney, in 149° E. long,
and about 33° 30' S. lat. Fares, 31s. 9d. and 21s. It is
In the county of Bathurst and police and electoral
district of Orange, and has a public school, with
average attendance of 65 scholars, a Church of
England place of worship one hotel, a mill, but no
public buildings. Formation : limestone. Soil is
a red loam ; and the district, which has about 400
residents, is reputed to be one of the best wheat-
growing localities in the colony. It is found too col
and wet for sheep and cattle, being 3,138 feet above
sea-level.
SPRING-WOOD, a railway and telegraph sta-
tion, with post, money-order office, and savings
bank, on the G. W. Railway (fares, 75., and 4s. 5d.),
county Cook, and electorate of the Nepean, 47
miles W. of Sydney, pleasantly situated on the
eastern slope of the tableland, 1,216 feet above
sea-level. A favourite resort of visitors to the
Blue Mountains, and noted for the mildness of
its climate and beauty of the surrounding scenery.
There are two hotels, general store, and a public
school, average attendance 58.
STANNIFER, a post town, with telegraph,
and money-order office, 352 miles (374 postal) N. of
Sydney and 6 miles N. of Tingha. It sprang into
existence in 1880, and has two substantially built
hotels, two large stores, and other minor ones, also a
spacious well-built school, with average attendance
of 57. The erection of buildings is extending towards
Middle Creek, where there are two hotels, two stores
and other buildings. It is the centre of a rich tin-
mining district.
STOCKTON, a post town about one mile from
Newcastle, on the northern side of the harbour, and
76 miles N. of Sydney, county Gloucester, and elec-
torate of Newcastle. Among the industrial institu-
tions are lime kilns, steam saw-mills, and the
extensive ship-building yards of Messrs. O’Sullivan
and Co. The patent slip connected with these yards
is capable of taking up vessels of 1,500 tons register,
the workshops are provided with every appliance for
the repair and construction of ships, with powerful
shears capable of lifting 30 tons. There are also
smaller yards in the vicinity (Callan Bros., Ac ).
Hotel, the Royal. An Episcopalian church, St.
Paul’s, is here, a public school, with average attend-
ance of 113. Population about 800. Steamers run
half-hourly to and from Newcastle. The Northern
Breakwater is several hundred feet long, but incom-
plete ; it was constructed to confine the stream to a
narrow channel, and so aid in scouring the bar.
STROUD is situate near the centre of the
police district of Port Stephens, a short distance
from the Karuah river, 30 miles north from Ray-
mond Terrace, and 124 miles north of Sydney, in
the county and electoral district of Gloucester. It
was formerly the head-quarters of the Australian
Agricultural Company, to whom a grant of 464,640
acres was made in fee simple in 1826. The sale of
portions of this to actual cultivators, and the grant-
ing of leases to them and others of larger areas, has
now left but a small portion in the occupation of
the Company within many miles of Stroud. The
population of Stroud numbers 344 persons. It has a
public school, average attendance 78, School of Arts,
with a library of 1,700 volumes, a hospital and benevo-
lent institution, a money-order and telegraph office,
a Government savings bank, Episcopal, Roman
Catholic, and Wesleyan churches, other social insti-
tutions, two hotels, a branch of the Bank of
Australasia, and a court of petty sessions. The
district is an agricultural and pastoral one, well
watered, with an abundance of the finest timber,
employing one flour and 10 saw mills. In the NW.
portion of it is situate what is commonly known as the
Copeland gold field. A four-horse coach runs daily
to and from Copeland, Gloucester, Stroud, Raymond
Terrace, and Hexham, and a person leaving Sydney
by steamer at 11 p.m. will reach Stroud the following
day at 2.30 p.m. Formation : sandstone, coal, and iron.
ST. ALBANS, a secluded and picturesque
township, situated on the left bank of the Macdonald
(tributary of the Hawkesbury). It belongs to the
electoral district of Wollombi, and police district of
Windsor. It is 60 miles NW. of Sydney (postal 75) ;
steamers ply regularly to Windsor and back. There
is one hotel (Settlers’ Arms), a public school with
average attendance 39, a telegraph, post, savings bank,
and money-order office ; Episcopalian, Roman Catho-
lic, and Wesleyan churches ; police station and court
house. A bridge is now being erected across Mac-
donald River at a cost of £2,500. The district is an


agricultural one, of sandstone formation. Population
about 800.
ST. MARY’S, a postal township, with money-
order savings bank, and telegraph office, and railway
station, in the county of Cumberland, electoral and
police district of Penrith ; situated on South Creek,
28 miles W. of Sydney. There are two hotels, the
Commercial and Shane's Park, a convent, also
Church of England, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian,
and Wesleyan places of worship, two stores, and a
population of about 800.
ST. PETERS, a municipal suburb, about 4 J
miles S. of Sydney, on the Cook’s river, county
Cumberland, and electorate of Canterbury, extending
from the southern boundary of the borough of New-
town to Cook’s River. It has post, money-order, and
telegraph office, and savings bank. Conveyance to
Sydney per omnibus ; fare, 6d. There are six hotels,
five places of worship, public school (average attend-
ance 351), Roman Catholic school, private lunatic
asylum, and a branch of the Bank of Australasia. The
municipality has 11 miles of streets, and rateable
property valued at £266,857. There is also a large
Town Hall here, with spacious room for entertain-
ments, &c., a Free Library, and reading-room.
STJMMERHXLIi CREEK. See Ophir.
SUTTON EOREST, a township with tele-
graph station, about three miles south of Moss Vale,
in the county and electoral district of Camden,
police district of Beriraa, on the Great Southern
line, 89 miles SSW. of Sydney. It lies on the Med-
way creek. Population of the town and neighbour-
hood is about 500. There are two hotels, Royal and
Black Bull; three places of worship, belonging to
the Anglican, Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic
bodies, a public school (average attendance 50),
and several gentlemen’s residencies, including the
Governor’s country seat. The district is a pastoral
one, but cultivation is carried on to a fair extent.
Coal and iron abound, but have not yet been worked.
Formation : carboniferous with sandstone
SYDNEY, 33° 51' 41" south latitude, and 151°
11' 40" east longitude, the capital and seat of govern-
ment of the Colony of New South Wales, is also the
parent city of Australia. It is picturesquely situated
on the southern shore of Port Jackson —named after
Sir George Jackson, the then Secretary to the Lords
of the Admiralty—Sydney itself being named after
Viscount Sydney, who first suggested the idea of
establishing a Colony in N. S. Wales, and who was
Secretary of State for the Colonies when the terri-
tory was taken possession of for Great Britain. It
was founded on the 26th January, 1788, by Captain
A. Phillip, who came here with a fleet of store and
transport ships, for the purpose of founding a con-
vict establishment. He had six days previously
landed at Botany Bay, but finding it unsuitable for
settlement, abandoned it for the site of Sydney.
The new comers were not allowed to disembark with-
out a protest from the sable inhabitants of the soil.
The fleet was met on every point with shouts of de-
fiance from the aboriginals, and cries of “ Warra,
warra ! go away—betokened that but little hospi-
tality would be extended to the strangers on land-
ing. The locality chosen for the future city was a
delightful spot at the head of what has since been
named Sydney Cove, near a limpid stream of water,
which has long since been covered in, but which was
then, or soon after, known as the Tank Stream. The
city proper is situated at a distance of four miles
from the mouth of the harbour. The entrance to
Port Jackson from the Pacific Ocean is upwards of a
mile in breadth, and is well lighted during the night
on its southern cliffs. On the South Head, 1 \ mile
from the entrance, in 33° 51' 30" S. lat., and 151° 19'
E. long., was the Macquarie lighhouse, 76 feet high,
erected on cliffs 268 feet above the sea level, the light
being visible at 25 miles distance, showing a bright
flash every minute and a half. This lighthouse has
been superseded by a larger building, from which
the electric light now flashes its rays across the
ocean. It is one of the most powerful lights in the
world, and can be seen at a distance of about 30
miles. On the Inner South Head is the Hornby
Tower, painted in vertical stripes of red and white,
with a fixed light, that can be seen from a ship’s
deck at 15 miles. This light shows the entrance to
the harbour. Vessels drawing as much as 27 feet can
enter at low water, and in many parts in the city can
lie close inshore. This last natural advantage has
been greatly utilized, and the water is skirted with
wharves, stores, and warehouses. On the Western
side, where the shores are a little more precipitous,
there is also an unbroken line of wharfage, used
mainly by the inter-colonial and other large steamers,
and by coasters. The harbour is not an uniform ex-
panse of water, but is broken up in all directions
into capacious open-mouthed bays by the numerous
promontories jutting out into it. These bays are
harbours in themselves ; and some of them, prin-
cipally on the northern side, are the continuation of
other harbours or rivers, which are navigable for
several miles. The watery indentations that en-
circle the city allow the very heart of it to be easily
reached from the water.
There are some features of the city of Sydney
which bear a striking resemblance to an English
town. Some of the streets are narrow, tortuous,
and without any pretensions to modern architecture.
The houses have what is best described by the term
“an old-fashioned look,” although of late years-
much of this has been done away with, and the older
portions of the town pulled down to make way for
factories and warehouses of modern design and great,
capacity ; while some of the worst tenements in the-
lower localities, through the efforts of the corpora-
tion, are being rapidly swept away. Some of the-
business premises in Pitt, George, Bridge, and York
streets, and in Wynyard Square, are capacious and
elegant, and rank high in order of architectural
merit, and periodical visitors feel something ap-
proaching to wonder on seeing the old city giving-
place to a new one, of a kind which resembles the
great commercial centres of Europe. The principal
streets are laid out to the cardinal points of the com-
pass, and intersect each other at right angles. They
are designated George, Pitt. Market, King, and Hun-
ter, the leading one being the first-named, which starts;
from the water’s edge, Dawe’s point, and runs com-
pletely through the city into the country, being called
George Street West when it passes beyond the rail-
way station. The greatest length of the city is 3f
miles north and south, and breadth 2f miles east
and west, the total area being about 2,600 acres.
The modern public buildings of Sydney, as well as
the warehouses, banks, and churches, are for the
most part elegantly designed and substantially
erected edifices. The city and suburbs abound in-
sandstone, which is easily quarried, capable of being
worked into the most ornate designs at little ex-
pense, hardens on exposure to the weather, and is of
a substantial nature. The Sydney University, which
is built of this stone in the Gothic style of the 15tb
century, is an elegant building. The great hall is-
described by the late Anthony Trollope in the fol-
lowing words : “ 1 think no one will dispute the
assertion when I say that the college hall is the
finest chamber in the colonies ; if I were to say that
no college, either at Oxford or Cambridge, possesses
so fine a one, I might perhaps be contradicted. I
certainly remember none of which the propoi tions
are so good.” Its dimensions are 135 feet long,
45 feet wide, and 73 feet high. The building is on a
gentle acclivity and commands a magnificent view ;
it has a frontage of nearly 400 feet. The colleges of
St. Paul, St. John (R.C.), and St. Andrew are of the
Gothic of the 14th century, and the whole of the
University buildings are surrounded by a large park
to which the public have access. St. Andrew’s
Cathedral, the foundation of which was first laid on
July 1, 1819, has been pulled down and re-erected
thrice ; now it is a very handsome building with two-
towers ; it belongs to the Gothic of the 14th
century. It is provided with a fine organ, a bell
weighing two tons, and its internal decorations
finished off in the most beautiful style ; the front of
the building, unfortunately, does not face George
Street. The Jewish Synagogue, which was com-
pleted in 1878, belonging to the Byzantine order of
architecture, is also an elegant edifice. The new
buildings for Government offices—the Colonial Sec-
retary’s and Public Works forming one lofty mas-
sive building facing Macquarie and Bridge Streets,
and the Crown Lands Offices fronting Bridge Street


—are specimens of the skill of the architect which
are rarely surpassed for elegance and comprehen-
siveness of construction. St. Mary’s Cathedral
(R.C.), after being twice burned, is now in process
of re-erection on grander proportions than ever;
its projected dimensions are 350 feet long, width
within transepts 118 feet, width of nave and aisles
74 feet, height about 90 feet; a central tower will be
120 feet high, and two towers with spires at the
southern end will rise to an altitude of 260 feet.
The building is partly finished and roofed in, the
Internal fittings are completed, and it was tem-
porarily opened for Divine worship with great cere-
mony in September, 1882. Other places of worship
are St. Patrick’s (R.C.), St. George’s, St. John’s,
St. Philip’s, one of the oldest in Sydney, though the
present structure is not altogether the original
building, and St. James’, the old Cathedral Church,
opened on January 6th, 1822. Besides these there are
about 200 other ecclesiastical buildings throughout
the city and suburbs, some of which would not suffer
much by comparison with the edifices of older
countries. Government House, which belongs to
the Tudor style, is delightfully situated, overlooking
Farm Cove, or Man-of-War Bay, and has a splendid
view of the harbour down to South Head, the
building is surrounded by the Domain and Botanical
garden. This building was commenced in 1837, and
cost upwards of £25,000. It was occupied for the
.first time by Governor Gipps in 1845. It was over-
topped by “The Garden Palace,” where the first
International Exhibition of Australia was inau-
gurated on the 17th September, 1879. The im-
mense building was unfortunately totally des-
troyed by fire on the morning of September 22,1882,
the conflagration being the most extensive ever
occurring in Australia, and brought forth expres-
sions of regret from every individual in the com-
munity. The total loss was estimated at over half a
million sterling, including the destruction of a large
number of most important public documents, the
museum of mines, technological museum, the whole
of the census papers, &c., the building having been
temporarily used for several Government offices, and
was wholly uninsured.
The Exhibition of 1879-80 was open a little over six
months, during which time it was visited by 1,046,898
persons, the receipts amounting to £45,000. The
largest attendance on one day was on Jan. 26, 1880,
when 27,500 visitors thronged its courts. To
the Exhibition of 1851 in Hyde Park the number
of visitors was 6,170,000 ; so the percentage of visitors
to population was very much larger, being about 150
to 22*.
The banks are all imposing buildings, and may
be said to belong to the Florentine, Roman, Italian,
and Greek orders of architecture; they comprise—
the N. 8. Wales, Commercial, Australian Joint-
Stock, City, English and Scottish, Australasia,
London Chartered, Oriental, Mercantile, New Zea-
land, Queensland National, Commercial Bank of
Australia, and the Federal.
All these, as well as the Savings Bank, would
reflect credit en many of the towns in the mother
■country. The Exchange buildings on the Circular
Quay are also admired for their substance of con-
struction, and are admirably adapted to the
shipping business of the port. They have a
frontage of 104 feet by a width of 92 feet, a
height of 60 feet, and belong to the Roman-Corin-
thian order. A new and handsome building is now
in course of erection on the same site as the pre-
sent structure. Among other commercial buildings
which attract the attention of visitors are the new
offices of the Australian Mutual Provident Society,
which have been erected at a cost of £55,000, the Syd-
ney Morning Herald office (which is replete with all
the appliances of the best London offices, the paper
being printed on a Walter machine, similar to that
in use in the London Times office). This paper,
under the able management of the late Mr. John
Fairfax, has justly earned its title to be considered
“The Times of the Southern Hemisphere.” The
Sydney Mail, published and printed in the same
building, is a weekly illustrated journal of a
superior character. The Echo is an evening paper,
issued from the same office, and is framed on the
lines of the well-known London journal of the same
name. The structure where the Town and Country
Journal and the Evening Neios are issued, in Market
Street, is a fine handsome edifice, just completed,
and built with all the recent improvements requisite
to meet the growing circulation of both papers.
The office is fitted with one of the Victory print-
ing and folding machines, which is capable of
printing and folding 20,000 four-page copies per
hour, or 10,000 eight -pages, and was introduced
by the late Mr. Samuel Bennett. The buildings
of the Sydney Daily Telegraph in King Street are also
substantial and well designed. Among other news-
paper offices those of the Illustrated Sydney News
deserve mention, being as regards the variety of work
that can be performed in them about the most
complete in Australia. There are also the magni-
ficent warehouses occupied by Messrs. Newton
Brothers, the buildings of Messrs. Mason Brothers,
Messrs. Bradley, Newton, and Lamb’s Auction
Rooms, the warehouses of Messrs. Frazer and Com-
pany, Robert Gray and Sons, John Keep and Son,
Prince, Ogg and Co., Mr. E. Vickery, Harris and
Ackman, Dalton Brothers in Pitt Street; also the
large warehouses of Messrs. S. Hoffnung and Com-
pany, Young and Lark, Collins, Sons and Co., Cowan
and Co., W. and A. MacArthur, and Wright, Heaton
and Co., and an immense number of premises of other
merchants and warehousemen in and around York
Street, Wynyard Square, and the Circular Quay,
which indicate the large business that is now carried
on by importers and manufacturers in New South
Wales. The wool warehouses of Messrs. Harrison,
Jones and Devlin, and Messrs. Mort and Co., are
two of the most substantial and elegant buildings
in the city, and replete with every convenience for
carrying on the increasing business in connection
with the great staple product of the country.
Messrs. Hill, Clarke and Co., and P. N. Trebeek and
Son have also spacious wool stores at the Circular
Quay, and Messrs. Goldsbrough and Co. have im-
mense stores at Darling Harbour to meet the growing
requirements of the wool trade. Messrs. Dixon and
Sons have an enormous and substantially-built new
factory and stores in Elizabeth and Park Streets,
and carry on a tobacco business to an extent une-
qualled in the Australian colonies.
The Post Office is of the Venetian and Florentine
Italian order ; it is an imposing edifice, colonnaded
on two sides, and described as well adapted for
its purpose, though the postal business is already
beginning to be in excess of the accommodation pro-
vided. It is built of Pyrmont stone, the colonnade be-
ing formed of pillars of polished grey granite. It was
opened in September, 1874, and the work of com-
pleting this magnificent building is now being
brought to a close, the fitting up of the interior
being rapidly pushed forward; and when this is
completed, the building will extend through from
George to Pitt Street, in the most central part of the
city. The Town Hall is of great size, with a tower
200 feet high, and an architectural ornament to
the city; a hall 132 feet long by 62 feet wide and 66
feet high, with a spacious gallery to be used for
public entertainments, forms part of the design ;
this hall will be galleried. It occupies the site
that was formerly the old burial place when
the brilliant future of Sydney was undreamt of.
The last remains of the occupants of this inter-
ment ground were transferred to the Necropolis
at Rookwood. The Museum, on the eastern side
of the city, overlooking Hyde Park, is a fine struc-
ture, with a bold Grecian front, and is extensively
patronized, some 100,000 persons visiting it annually.
It is now open to the public on Sunday after-
noons. The Treasury is a very good building, of
the usual freestone ; the new building for the Colo-
nial Secretary’s Office, on the opposite side of the
street, is one of the most elegant and spacious in
Australia. In the same street a new building has
been erected for a Crown Lands Office—an elegant
addition to the other architectural structures of the
city, and only second to that of the Colonial Se-
cretary’s. Then there are the Prince Alfred Hos-
pital, the Protestant Hall, the Parliament Houses,
new Masonic Hall, Custom House, the Mint, Royal
Hotel, Petty’s Hotel, and others, which, though


not of elegant design, remind one of the days when
George 111. was King and Colonel Macquarie Gov-
ernor. The Royal and Sydney arcades are now
much frequented, they are well lighted, lined with
handsome shops, and have considerable architectural
merit. Turning to the private residences, princi-
pally in the suburbs, many of them have been erected
at enormous expense, and are surrounded with plea-
sure grounds and gardens, which, with the natural
beauty of the scenery, lend them a peculiar charm.
The public traffic of the city and suburbs is
carried on by a large number of Hansom cabs, omni-
buses, and hackney carriages. The water communi-
cation between the city and its transmarine suburbs,
Balmain, North Shore, and other localities, is main-
tained by numerous steam ferryboats which ply
at frequent intervals during the day and at night.
The steam tramway system has proved an un-
precedented success, being extended to all parts
of the suburbs ; the lines at present in full
working order are those from the terminus in
Bridge Street to railway station, Redfem ; to
Randwick, Coogee Bay, Crown Street, Surrey
Hills, Glebe Point, Forest Lodge, Waverley,
Woollahra, Newtown, Marrickville, Botany, Bowdi,
and Leichhardt.
The streets are lighted with gas, at a cost of about
£ll,OOO per annum to the corporation. Sydney
has spacious markets in George Street, usually
well stocked with fruits and vegetables of every kind,
peaches, apricots, oranges, pineapples, together with
apples, pears, plums, <fec., being in profusion during
their respective seasons. There are also the Belmore
markets, used principally for the sale of vegetables
and market-garden produce. The theatres are the
Theatre Royal, Gaiety, and the Opera House ;
and notwithstanding the distance from the great
centres of high civilization, Sydney is not only
well supported with theatrical stars of all kinds,
but with English and Italian opera singers. Besides
the theatres, the School of Arts, new Masonic Hall,
Protestant Hall, Temperance Hall, Tattersall’s Hall,
the Old Exhibition building, and Victoria Hall are
used as places of public entertainment.
Although Sydney has few reserves answering
to the shrubberied squares of most of the large towns
of Great Britain, it has excellent park lands and
gardens within its boundaries, easily accessible to the
citizens. Hyde Park is a beautiful plateau of forty
acres, nearly in the centre of the city, with a statue
to “Albert the Good,” directly opposite which in
Hyde Park Square is one to her Majesty Queen
Victoria, also one to Captain Cook. A considerable
amount of money is now being expended towards
beautifying and improving this park, which in
the early days of Sydney was used for the race-
course. The Domain, a charming expanse of park
land of 138 acres, is on the north-eastern side of
Sydney, surrounding the pretty inlet called Farm
Cove. Near the main entrance is an excellent bronze
statue of Sir Richard Bourke, by Westmacott. The
Botanical Gardens embrace thirty-eight acres, and
are considered as among the finest in the colonies ;
as in addition to the immense collection of exotics
from every clime, the locality is one of great beauty,
the grounds encircling the waters of Farm Cove,
where the men-of-war belonging to the Australian
station are anchored. Added to this is a most
beautifully laid out area on the right of the
Garden Palace. More recently-formed reserves are
Prince Alfred Park, 18 acres, Belmore Park in
the south, 10 acres, Callan Park, near Balmain,
where the new lunatic asylum has ben erected,
the National Park at Port Hacking, a tract of
600 acres on the south-east side of the city named
Moore Park, and Wentworth Park, laid out on a
site formerly known as Blackwattle Swamp. Adjoin-
ing Moore Park is the Metropolitan racecourse
(Randwick), which has an area of about 202 acres.
The course is about 1J mile in circumference, and is
now reached by tramcar, and considered one of the
best running grounds in the southern hemisphere.
In addition to the above reserves there are others
of a less extensive area in different parts of the
suburbs.
The Circular Quay at the head of Sydney Cove
has a length of 1,300 feet, available for the largest
vessels. It is now provided with piers and pavilions
for the ferry steamers. The Government have ex-
pended a large sum of money in extending the
wharfage accommodation, which adds much to
the convenience of shipping and improves the ap-
pearance of the Quay. The Australasian Steam
Navigation Company have their whaiVes, and
warehouses on Circular Quay, and a part of the
shipping business of this extensive association is now
carried on there. The fine vessels of the Orient Line,
reputed for the rapidity of their voyages to Europe,
now discharge here, and the mail steamers of the
P. and O. Company also berth at the wharf. Woolloo-
mooloo Wharf, to the east, is 1,200 feet long, and
was constructed at a cost of £26,000, a large tract
of valuable land being reclaimed ; the water is, how-
ever, too shallow and unsuited for large sea-going
shipping, but is largely used by small coasting
vessels for the discharging of coal, timber, <fec.
The eastern side of Darling Harbour, which,
skirts the western side of the city, has its frontaga
entirely occupied with wharves and quays. Here
several steam companies, Howard Smith’s, the
Clarence, the Hunter River, and others, have their
stations, and the gas company its large works. The
Grafton Wharf is one of the completest and best
appointed in Sydney; with its building it oc-
cupies an area of 3J acres. There is a wharf
frontage of 430 feet, with three piers, extensive
sheds, and ten five-story warehouses. On the
north, from Miller’s Point to Dawes’ Point (which
includes all one end of the city), and thence round
the largest headland of the port, the waterside is
also fully taken up by commercial premises, with
the exception of the site at Dawes’ Point, on which
there is a battery. The works of Messrs. Thomas
Rountree and Co., associated with their floating
dock, are important. The dock offers every facility
for vessels not exceeding 160 feet in length, and
from 500 to 600 tons burden. The Fitzroy Dry
Dock at Cockatoo Island, some few miles to the
west of the city, is a Government establishment,
originally intended for the repair and overhauling
of vessels of the Royal Navy. Vessels of the largest
capacity can be taken in without the slightest diffi-
culty, its dimensions being—length, 450 feet; width
on floor, 35 feet; width between coping, 86 feet;
width at entrance, 59 feet; depth of water over sill,
21 feet. The establishment is well provided with
the largest, most powerful, and recently improved
kinds of machinery. A much larger graving dock
is being constructed by the Government, and
for which £150,000 has been voted, situated at
Cockatoo Island, and is being excavated almost
entirely out of sandstone rock. The length will
be 630 feet, and the width 108 feet. The depth
of water over the sill will be 28 feet at neap,
and 30J feet at spring tides. The width of entrance
will be 84 feet. It is said that it will be the
largest single graving-dock constructed, and that
it will be capable of receiving the largest vessel
afloat; it will be lighted at night by the electric light.
Other great dock works are those of Messrs. Mort
and Co., at Water-view Bay. The dock is 409 feet long,
with an entrance 68 feet wide, and a depth of water
over the sill of 19 ft. 6 in. It is fitted with patent
keel blocks—length of blocks, 390 feet; is partly
cut out of the rock,and partly built up very com-
pactly with stone masonry. This dock has taken in
vessels of the largest size visiting the port, including
that magnificent vessel the Chimborazo. The work-
shops cover an area of 5 acres, with a bay frontage of
1,500 feet, employing when in full work 700 hands.
A substantial patent slip is also here available for
vessels of 1,000 tons; the length of carriage is 200
feet. The company undertake forgings up to 7 tons,
and castings up to 14 tons. The Australian Steam
Navigation Company have very extensive works,
covering 6.J acres, with most of the modem appliances
for ship-building and repairing, on the western
shore of Darling Harbour. In the workshops are
employed at times upwards of 400 persons. The slip
attached to the works can be used for vessels of 1,500
tons burthen, and can take up two steamers at the
same time. Its length is 800 feet; length of cradle,
280 feet; breadth across rails, 45 feet. There have
been constructed at these works several steam


vessels. The large fleet of the company gives con-
stant employment to the establishment, it being
kept in efficient order and thorough repair.
For some time past steps have been taken to place
the city in a state of defence, and batteries can-ying
Armstrong guns of large calibre now protect it in a
great measure from attacks from a hostile fleet.
These defences have been still (further augmented
under Major-General Scratchley’s designs, which were
adopted by the Government. The conformation of the
shores affords the best facilities for the erection of
fortifications, and seawards there is nothing to pre-
vent the city being made practically impregnable. A
military road now connects all the forts on the
northern side of the harbour. Even now it would be
a difficult matter for any ship to run the gauntlet of
the numerous guns that could be brought to bear
upon it even before entering the Heads. Among the
large guns are two lOin. 25-ton, guns firing charges of
powder of 1801 b. (nearly two barrels), giving to a
projectile of 4001b.weight a muzzle velocity of about
1,900 ft. a second, and a power capable of perforating
18in. of solid iron armour. These guns are mounted
en barbette behind earthen parapets, in such a man-
ner that they have a very large angle of lateral
training, and can thus cover a large area with their
fire. The gunners and the loading-gear are com-
pletely protected. Forts are also constructed at
Newcastle and Botany Heads.
A torpedo corps has been established, and an
electric light apparatus placed at the South Head,
which will throw a light a radius of 30 miles.
The trade of Sydney is considerable, and gives
employment to a large fleet of steamers. It is the
head-quarters of the Australian Steam Navigation
Company, the Pacific mail steamers, the E. and A.
steamers, the P. and O. steamers, the vessels of the
Orient line, and others ; besides there are always four
or five men-of-war anchored in the harbour. During
the year 1883 the number of British and Foreign
vessels which entered Port Jackson was 2,587. The
aggregate tonnage was 1,935,189.
The population of the city proper by the census
of 1881 was 99,670 ; of the suburbs 120,757, a total of
220,427. The water supply of the city is obtained
from the Botany and Lachlan swamps ; but works
are now in progress for a much more effective and
increased supply of water from the Nepean River.
The number of houses in the city and suburbs is
estimated at about 36,000. In 1883 the annual value
of rateable property was £1,691,895, at Is. 6d. in the
pound; revenue,£l74,l6B 11s. 7d. ; estimated extent
of roads and streets, 120 miles; number of rate-
payers about 19,000. The main streets are rapidly
being paved with wooden blocks and cubes ; about
80,000 square yards are already laid at a total cost of
about £90,000. The revenue of the City Council for
1883, including city, water, and sewerage funds,
amounted to £320,413 4s. 7d. The public vehicles
are under the control of the Metropolitan Transit
Commissioners.
The charitable institutions of the capital are
numerous, and are partly supported at the expense
of Government, aided by private benevolence. Some
of the leading institutions are : the Sydney Hospital
in Macquarie Street; the Prince Alfred Memorial
Hospital, opened on Sept. 25, 1882, but only partially
finished ; the Good Samaritan Institution ; Sydney
Female Refuge; the Shaftesbury Reformatory, on
the South Head road ; the St. Vincent Hospital at
Darlinghurst; the Benevolent Asylum at George
Street South, the Children’s Asylum at Randwick,
and other minor Institutions for the relief of the
destitute and suffering.
The suburbs of Sydney comprise Balmain, on the
opposite side of Darling Harbour ; the Glebe, adjoin-
ing the city, on the south-west; Newtown, Marriok-
ville.Redfern, Waterloo, all to the south ; Paddington,
Randwick, Waverley and Woollahra, on the east;
Concord, on the south-west; St. Leonard’s on the
north shore of the harbour. Each of these is an
independent municipality, and there are other
places within a radius of 10 miles, and usually
considered as suburban to the metropolis ; these are
Alexandria, Ashfleld, Botany, Burwood, Camper-
down, Canterbury, Darlington, Five Dock, Glados-
ville, Home Bush, Hunter’s Hill, Macdonald Town,
Manly, Leichhardt, North Willoughby, Petersham,
Randwick, Ryde, St. Leonard’s East, Victoria, and
Watson’s Bay. Favourite sites for pleasure resort
are Athol Gardens, Chowder Bay, Balmoral, Pearl
Bay, Clontarf, Coogee, Botany, Boudi, Double Bay,
Watson’s Bay, Manly Beach, Mossman’s Bay, Rand-
wick, Middle Harbour, South Head, Long Bay,
Association Cricket ground, Moore Park, Botanic
Gardens, Fern Bay, Agricultural Society’s Grounds,
Zological Gardens, &c.
Newspapers : Morning daily —The Sydney Morning
Herald, the Sydney Daily Telegraph, and the Daily
Shipping Gazette. Evening dailies —The Echo, The
Evening Hews. Weeklies— The Sydney Mail, Town and
Country Journal, Freeman’s Journal, The Witness, The
Australian Churchman, Presbyterian, Once a Week,
Express, Journal of Commerce, Sportsman, Social Re-
former, Tribune, Advocate, The Protestant Standard,
The Bulletin, Government Gazette (bi-weekly). Month-
lies—The A B C Railway Guide, Castner’s Rural Aus-
tralian, The Illustrated Sydney News, The Australian
Journal, The Freemason, Medical Gazette, and The
Australaskm Sketcher. Quarterlies —Sydney Maga-
zine, University Magazine.
Sydney is the seat of an Anglican Bishop and
a Roman Catholic Archbishop, both metropolitans.
The leading hotels are the Royal, Petty’s, Pfahlert’s,
Imperial, Exchange, Post Office, Oxford, Metropoli-
tan, and Freemason; but the new Licensing Act
has been the means of vastly improving Hotel
accommodation throughout the City, and demolish-
ing the inferior houses. The city is under municipal
government, being divided into eight wards, named
respectively Bourke, Brisbane, Cook, Denison, Fitz-
roy, Gipps, Macquarie, and Phillip, some of which
return two aldermen and others three, and for parlia-
mentary purposes is divided into three districts, viz..
East, West and South Sydney, each returning four
members. It has a fine School of Arts in Pitt Street,
with a library of over 30,000 volumes. A commodious
hall is attached, and a Technological College with
laboratory is now connected with the institution.
The free public library in Bent Street is largely
patronized, and now open on Sundays. To this
library is now attached a lending branch, which is
extensively availed of. There are at present upwards
of 60,000 volumes in the library.
Numerous factories are in full work. The leather
works of Messrs. Alderson and Sons cover 3J acres,
and employ over 500 hands. The factory of Messrs.
Wright, Davenport, and Co., at Marrickville, employs
350 hands in the manufacture of boots and shoes.
There are over 40 clothing factories, employing from
50 to 400 hands each. There are two large steam
joinery establishments, the larger of which has 250
men and boys in their employ. The coach factories
are also extensive, and splendid cloths are turned
out at Vicar’s Tweed Mill. There are also several
large foundries and engineering works, including
Hudson Brothers and the Atlas works, in which
large castings and every description of mechanical
appliances are turned out, even up to locomotive
engines for the government railways.
The geological formation of Sydney is sandstone
overlying part of an immense carboniferous deposit,
extending from beyond Newcastle to Jervis Bay.
Borings for coal have been made and great depth
reached, but no practical results have followed as yet.
TABULAM, distant 40 miles W. from Casino,
on the Clarence river, at the crossing place from
Lawrence to Tenterfleld, is a small postal and tele-
graph township, with an accommodation house, a
private school, with 10 children on the rolls, and a
Government punt. It is in the county of Drake,
electoral and police district of Richmond river. The
means of reaching Sydney (483 miles S.) is by horse
or conveyance to Lawrence, thence by the Grafton
steamer or vid the Armidale railway station. Popu-
lation about 50. Mining and pastoral (principally
cattle stations) district. Formation: granite and
trap.
TAMBAROOKA, a mining township with
money-order office on the Tambaroora creek, 168
miles (202 postal) NW. of Sydney, 26 miles W. from
Sofala. Bathurst is about 40 miles distant south,
with which there is coach communication. The
[ district is very hilly, and is principally taken up


for gold mining, the workings being both alluvial
and quartz. The country is clay-slate with quartz
veins, and including Hill End, has been one of the
richest gold-reeflng districts in Australia. It has
been a gold-field since 1851. But though enormous
quantities of gold have been obtained, the early
promise of the locality has not been fulfilled. The
town itself is situated on a rugged table-land,
through which the water-courses have cut deep
channels. Population 340. Hotels : Hargraves and
others. Hill End is about 3 miles distant, and with
vicinity had in its palmy days a population of about
4,500 souls. It lies at the summit of the famous Haw-
kins Hill, on undulating land stretching northwards
towards Tambaroora. Between the two townships
there is now a good macadamized road, picturesquely
lined on either side with neat, comfortable-looking
homesteads, and well-cultivated gardens. Places of
worship, Episcopal and Roman Catholic. Public
school, average attendance 57. There are several
gold mines in the immediate vicinity of Tamba-
roora, upon which powerful machinery has been
erected A line of road from Hill End to Guyong
via Chambers’ creek brings Hill End and Tamba-
roora within easy reach of Bathurst, Orange, and
the Great Western Railway.
TAMBAR SPRINGS, a post town with
money-order office, 42 miles SW. of Gunnedah, 312
miles N. of Sydney, situated on the slopes of the
Tambar Range. It derives its name from the many
springs in the vicinity. Hotels: The Tambar
Springs and the White Horse. Public school here,
average attendance 31. Mail communication twice
a week from Gunnedah. Coach fare, 20s.
TAM WORTH (251 miles N. of Sydney, and
156 miles from Maitland) is a township on the Peel
and Cockburn rivers and Goonoo Goonoo creek.
The Peel River divides it in the centre, and is
spanned by a handsome iron bridge. The town is
situated on low ground, surrounded by a range of
undulating mountains, in the midst of a fine pas-
toral, agricultural, and mining district, and is
gradually growing into importance as these interests
become developed. The principal gold-fields in the
neighbourhood are at Bowling Alley Point (28 miles',
Nundle (37), Hanging Rock (40), near Barraba (60',
and at Bingera (110 miles north'. Near the latter
place diamonds in large quantities have been ob-
tained. Copper has been found in large quantities
at Dungowan, about 30 miles distant, but not yet
worked. The town of Tamworth has been incorpo-
rated since March 17, 1876 ; it has 32 miles of streets
(most of which are planted with ornamental and
foliage trees, while the reserves and other public
grounds are being greatly improved, and rateable
property, valued at £241,834; well-built stores;
branches of the Commercial (a very handsome brick
building) and Australasian Banks, and Bank of N. S.
Wales ; also local offices for the leading insurance
companies. In the municipal chamber is established
a free public library, with a good collection of works
of reference and the newspapers of the day ; also a
Debating Society. There are three steam flour mills,
several steam saw mills, a substantial court-house,
also gaol, lock-up, and police barracks, hospital,
mechanics’ institute, with 1,200 vols., Oddfellows’
hall (now fitted as a theatre), Council chambers,
temperance ball, a fine pleasure garden and casino,
two public schools, each being splendid buildings,
with commodious teachers’ residence detached, aver-
age attendance, 452 ; a Roman Catholic school (pre-
sided over by the Dominican Nuns), who have a
Convent, 3 storeys high, containing 40 rooms, which
is the handsomest building north of Maitland. There
are two churches, belonging to the Anglican com-
munity (St. Paul’s and St. John’s), also Wesleyan
and Presbyterian chapels, and a very handsome
Cathedral belonging to the Catholic body. The
principal hotels are the Royal, Criterion, Gold
Diggers’ Arms, Post Office, and 24 others. It has a
telegraph, money order office, and also a branch of
the Government savings bank. The population
numbers 3,620 persons ; in the census district, 1881,
are 9,295 ; there are 4,500 electors on the rolls. The
railway is now extended beyond Tamworth to Glen
Innes; there are two stations, one on the Com-
pany’s side, a mile from town (Tamworth West),
the other in the town ; fares from Newcastle (183
miles), 335. 6d. and 225. 3d. Papers, the Tamworth
Neics, and the Tamworth Observer, which latter
has handsome and commodious buildings in Peel
Street, opposite the Commercial Bank. An “Agri-
cultural and Pastoral Association ” is here ; also a
Fire Brigade with fire engine ; also a branch office
of the Orange Association. The M.U.0.1.0. has a
lodge of over 150 members. The Foresters’ Court,
Royal Oak, has some 120 members. A branch of
the 1.0.G.T. is a very strong lodge, which is still
prospering, and the Catholics have a Temperance
Society of their own, which now numbers about
90 members. There is also a flourishing branch of
the H.C. Guild. A Gas Company, with a capital
of £7,000, has been successfully floated, and is
now paying a dividend of 10 per cent, per annum,
the gas being first lit on June 26, 1882. The town
is surrounded by good agricultural land adapted for
any cereals. In 1884 19,791 J acres of land were
under tillage, the products being 229,367 bushels of
wheat, 19,589 of maize, 438 tons of potatoes, 8521 cwt.
of tobacco, and a quantity of oats, barley, &c." The
stock returns were, 7,607 horses, 27,603 cattle,
694,236 sheep, 3,295 pigs. A large area of land in
the vicinity of Tamworth is held by the Peel
River Land and Mineral Company, which has
under contemplation a scheme for letting the
river frontages as hrms. Goonoo Goonoo is the
head station. This land, comprising about 300,000
acres, was originally purchased for £500,000, and
large sums of money have been spent in improving
it. A considerable and improving township exists
on the Company’s side of the river, and lots, amount-
ing to nearly 500 acres, have been alienated for
building and other purposes at moderate rates.
Tamworth has, under the new Electoral Act, two
representatives in Parliament, and is the most im-
portant town in the Northern District. Geological
formation : Upper Devonian or Lower carboniferous,
granite, basalt, &c.
TARALGA, a township in the county and
electoral district of Argyle, on the Corrobora creek,
30 miles NE. of Goulbum, the nearest railway
station, and 156 miles SW. of Sydney. It has a post,
money-order, and telegraph office, a court of petty
sessions, and a flour-mill in full work. Places of
worship : Episcopal, Roman Catholic (a stone build-
ing), Presbyterian, and Wesleyan. Bank: New
South Wales. Schools : public (average attendance,
50), and Roman Catholic. Hotels: Royal, Richland,
Australian, Argyll, and Commercial. Population
about 330. The district is an agricultural one.
TARGUTTA, a money-order, telegraph, and
postal township on the Tarcutta creek, 30 miles
east of Wagga-Wagga, and 288 miles (336 postal)
SW. of Sydney. It is in the county of Wynyard,
electoral district of Murrumbidgee, and police dis-
trict of Wagga-Wagga. A coach runs alternate days
to Wagga-Wagga {fare, 155.), and daily to Cootamun-
dra (fare, 325. 6d.), to meet the trains, also three
times a week to Germanton. Hotel: the Horse and
Jockey. School; one (public), average attendance
34. Number of inhabitants about 100. The district
is principally taken up for pastoral purposes.
TAREE (31° 54' S. lat,, 152° 33' B. long.), county
of Macquarie, is the chief postal township in the
police and electoral district of the Manning river,
and has a money-order. Government savings bank,
and telegraph office. It is situated on the north
bank of the Manning river, about 20 miles from the
junction with the sea, and 4 miles from the junction
of the Dawson with the Manning ; the “Brothers,”
three high mountains (named by Captain Cook)
near the sea-coast, bearing north-east, and Mount
Talawak, bearing south-west. The district is agri-
cultural and pastoral, principally the former ; the
soil on the banks of the river, is rich, deep, and.
fertile, admirably suited for the cultivation of maize
The town contains branches of the N. S. Wales, and
Cemmercial Banks, a public school with average
attendance of 107 scholars, a steam flour mill, a
tobacco manufactory, three hotels—the Windsor
Castle, Commercial, and the Steam Packet -six
stores, a court-house, 1 and office. Protestant hall,
Agricultural hall, and Oddfellows Orange, Masonic,
and Good Templars’ lodges. The local paper is the


Manning Times, published bi-weekly. The places of
worship, which are substantial brick buildings, com-
prise Episcopal and Roman Catholic churches and
Presbyterian and Wesleyan churches. The main road
from Maitland to Port Macquarie passes through
Taree. Mail Coach runs from Raymond Terrace to
Taree six times a week, and from Taree to Kempsey
five times a week. Communication with Sydney is
by steamer twice a week, and by sailing vessels,
distance 193 miles ; or by coach to Hexham, fare,
455., thence rail and steamer. In the immediate
neighbourhood of the town the country is flat, but
at a larger radius it becomes very mountainous.
Quarter sessions and district court is held twice a-
year. A court of petty sessions is held every alter-
nate week at Taree, Wingham, Tinonee and Cundle-
town. Good roads radiate from Taree to Tinonee (4
miles), Wingham (8 miles), Cundletown (4 miles), and
Foster (24 miles). Formation : limestone. Popula-
tion about 600.
TEMOBA, a post, telegraph, money-order and
savings bank township, situated in the parish of
Bundawarrah, county of Bland, district of Lachlan,
and between the Trigalong and Deep Creeks, the
first-named lying two miles to the west, and the
second five miles to the east, electoral and police
district of Young. Yeo Yeo, or Bland Creek, is 20
miles distant, and is the nearest permanent water.
It is distant 33 miles NW. from the Cootamundra
station on the Great Southern Railway, from which
one line of coaches runs daily (fare, 155.). The town-
ship comprises three portions, known as the upper,
the lower, and the surveyed. The latter township
is between the other two, and the three townships
were at one time joined together, business establish-
ments, tents, and huts forming a continuous line for
about two miles. Though but five years old (first
rush was on February 3, 1880), the place has taken
to itself Ihe adjuncts of a settled town. A court-
house has been erected, the Bank of New South
Wales and the Joint-Stock Bank have opened
branches ; and there are numerous stores and other
places of business. Chief Hotels : Royal Exchange,
Royal Mail, Queensland, Ward’s Club House, Golden
Fleece, TattersalTs Club House, and the Grenfell. A
fine building has been erected by the Roman Catho-
lic portion of the community, the Church of England
and Presbyterians have also erected commodious
buildings. Public school here, average attendance
130. There is also a R. C. Denominational school.
Population about 2,500. Telegraph communication
with Cootamundra and Barmedowan has been estab-
lished. Mining operations were at first much de-
layed, owing to the scarcity of water, and have been
since, but underground supplies have been found at
a depth of 175 feet. A diamond drill was placed to
work, boring for an Artesian well, but without
success. Numerous nuggets of various sizes, from
99 ozs. downwards, have been found. The sink-
ing is from 56 to 145 feet in depth, and the
wash dirt varies in thickness from 18 inches to as
many feet, the bottom being pipe-clay, and occa-
sionally slate. The yield of gold for 1883 was
17,348 ozs., valued at £69,168 6s. 2d. The country
is undulating and timbered chiefly with box, pine,
and wattle, and well suited for agricultural opera-
tions. The land having been recently thrown open
for free selection, a number of conditional purchases
have been taken up, and ere long the district round
Temora will class amongst the best wheat-producing
centres of the colony.
TEN MILE CREEK. (See Germanton.)
TENTERFIELD is a border town in New
England, on the main northern road, and on the
creek of the same name, county of Clive, electoral
and police district of Tenterfield, at the head of the
river Dumaresq, 314 (431 postal) miles to the N. of
Sydney. The town is located on a plain, and is
environed by lofty granite hills. It owes its rise and
increasing importance to the large extent of pastoral,
agricultural, mineral (tin), and auriferous ground by
which it is surrounded. The diggings are known as
Timbarra, Poverty Point, Boorook, Lunatic (anti-
mony and plumbago have also been found here),
Slatey Creek, Boro (silver also found here), and
Boonoo Boonoo, and consist of alluvial and reef.
They are variously situated from Tenterfield,
east, north-east, and north, and are within from 15 to
35 miles of the town. Maryland tin mines are from
22 to 40 miles N. of Tenterfield. Brassington creek and
the Scrub, 12 miles SE., and the Mole Table-land mines
from 30 to 40 miles SW. On the first-named and the
latter there were large populations working, and
several stores and public-houses were erected, but the
yield of tin has fallen away. At the Boorook silver
mines the prospects were very bright during the
winter of 1879, stone at a depth of 130 ft. assayed
813 ozs. of silver, and 15 ozs. of gold to the ton, the
reef from which it was obtained being 2 ft. wide
and well defined. From one claim with insufficient
power, 889 ozs. of silver were obtained for one
week’s working. Fresh discoveries of rich silver
and gold-bearing stone had also been made. Of
late matters have retrograded ; but since the report
that English capital is about to be invested, great
hopes are entertained of the future. The pub-
lic buildings comprise the Episcopal church (of
brick), the Wesleyan church (of wood), the Roman
Catholic (of stone), the new post and telegraph offices,
and the new court-house, both very handsome build-
ings ; a public school, recently enlarged, with average
attendance of 163 ; there are also three other public
schools in the neighbourhood; the Prince Albert
Memorial Hospital ; the school of arts, with a library
of 860 vols. ; the branches of the Joint Stock and
N. S. Wales Banks. The principal hotels are Brown’s
Commercial, O’Connor’s Royal, and Young’s Grand.
A collegiate school has also been established here. The
district has many advantages of soil and climate, and
is well suited for farming and pastoral purposes.
About 4,237| acres of land are under cultivation,
mostly for cereal crops. Returns for 1884 were:
34,985 bushels of wheat, 18,371 of maize, and 432
tons of potatoes ; the stock on the stations for the
same period were: 3,337 horses, 44,343 cattle,
146,443 sheep, 1,247 pigs. The population of the town
proper numbers about 1,000, for the municipality
1,800, for the electoral district 4,800. The least
expensive route to Sydney is by Lumley’s express
to Lawrence on the Clarence river, and thence by
steamer; but the quickest is vid Armidale and New-
castle, with the Sydney mail, or by way of Bris-
bane. Cobb and Co.’s coaches run to the Armidale
Railway Station, fare, 70s. ; but the extension of the
northern line from Armidale to Tenterfield is in
course of construction. Local newspapers ; Tenterfield
Star and Tenterfield Argus. The district was erected
into a municipality in 1871. Estimated value of rate-
able property £122,509 ; public reserves 21,197 acres.
Tenterfield is a telegraph station with savings bank
and money-order office, and bonded store. Stan-
thorpe, the nearest Queensland town, is about 40
miles N., and the railway of that Colony now ex-
tends to Stanthorpe, and is about being continued
to the border. The nearest point of Queensland
territory is 10 miles distant. Formation : granite.
TERARA. (See Shoalhaven.)
THURGOONA, a postal centre on the main
Sydney road, about 6 miles from Albury and 350
(392 postal) from Sydney, S., comprising an Episcopal
(St. John’s) and Roman Catholic church, a convent,
a public school, with an average attendance of 45,
and a public-house. It is a wine producing district,
Fallon’s and other well-known vineyards being in
the immediate vicinity. Communication is by rail
viA Ettamogah.
TIGHE’S HILL is a small postal township,
with money-order office, situated on an eminence
overlooking the harbour and city of Newcastle,
having two places of worship, a mechanics’ institute
with library, a public school, with an average
attendance of 154, teacher’s residence attached, and
a number of houses. The Ferndale Colliery, owned
by Messrs. Bingle, White & Co., is here working a
valuable seam of coal. It is distant from Sydney
81J miles N.
TIMBARRA, a small gold-fields township in
the county of Drake, and electoral and police district
of Tenterfield, situate at the head of McLeod’s creek,
539 miles (495 postal) N. of Sydney, about 77 miles
from Grafton, and 18 miles from Tenterfield.
Armidale is the nearest railway station. The
hotel is the Timbarra; there are, besides, three
stores, and some tradesmen’s shops. Thousands of


acres of unexplored auriferous ground lie within a
radius of 10 or 15 miles from the township. The
physical features of the country are undulating
quartz ridges and quartz, sandstone, and alluvial
flats. Tin has been found within three miles.
Population of town 200; of district about 2,000.
TING-HA, an important township in the
county of Hardinge and electoral district of In-
verell, about 344 miles north of Sydney, 40 miles
from Glen Innes, 105 miles north of Tamworth, and
midway between Bundarra and Inverell, situated
on Cope’s Creek. It was established in 1872, on
the opening of the tin fields of New England, of
which it is the centre. The public offices here are
as follows; court-house, police quarters. Warden’s
office, telegraph office, post and money-order office,
public school (with an average of 120 scholars), and
a public hall capable of seating 250 people ; there
is also a newspaper published here weekly, the
Tingha Banner. A Good Templars’ Lodge is in
existence, a branch of the Manchester Unity
Order of Oddfellows, and a Mutual Improvement
Society, each having a large number of members.
The business places arg : three hotels, Commercial,
Royal and Caledonian, four large stores, and a
number of smaller ones. Places of worship : Roman
Catholic chapel; the ministers of other denomina-
tions using the public hall. In the vicinity are two
saw mills, each of which employs from 12 to 15
men. The principal production is tin ore. In the
district are a number of tin lodes, which when
worked will materially enhance the prosperity and
importance of the place. It has been officially stated
that payable stanniferous wash extends in the
district 25 miles. The richest deposits have been
found from Stony Creek to the township of Kim-
berley, a distance of seven miles. Population about
500, of district nearly 2,400.
TINONEE, a post town, with telegraph station
and money-order office on the south bank of
the Manning River, 190 miles N. of Sydney,
and on the main postal route from Raymond
Terrace to Port Macquarie. The town is a small one,
and has but few buildings of note ; it is in the county
of Gloucester, and police district of Manning. It
has two hotels—Commercial and Freemasons’; Com-
mercial Bank, public school, average attendance 72 ;
three churches—Episcopal, Wesleyan, and Presby-
terian, two steam saw-mills, and several stores.
A coach runs to the Hexham Railway Station, fare,
425. 6d. Population about 350. Formation: trap
rock.
TOCUMWALL, a post town, with telegraph
and money-order office, on the river Murray, about
80 miles W. of Albury, and 485 miles S. of Sydney.
The Deniliquin and Albury coach passes through the
town. Public school here, average attendance, 22.
TOM AGO, a postal village on the Hunter river,
87 miles N. of Sydney, in the county of Gloucester,
electorate of Lower Hunter, and police district of
Raymond Terrace. Communication with the me-
tropolis is ridHexham. Population about 100. Public
buildings—a public school, with average attendance
of 24 scholars, and an Episcopal church. It is in
the flat part of the Hunter valley, and is therefore
liable to floods, though the land is of a pro-
ductive character. A steamer runs daily to New-
castle. Formation: sandstone.
TOOIiOOM, a post town on the Tooloom river,
a northern tributary of the river Clarence, in S. lat.
28° 38' and E. long. 152° 18'; 345 miles (412 postal)
NNE. of Sydney. It is in the county of Buller,
electorate of Clarence, police district of Casino.
Armidale is the nearest railway station, and Stan-
thorpe in Queensland. Population of town about
50, with neighbourhood about 120. Formation: trap.
TRUNKEY CREEK, a money-order and
telegraph station, with Government Savings Bank,
on the Goulbum road, 159 miles (182 postal) W. of
Sydney. It is in the county of Georgiana and
electoral district of Carcoar. Coach to New Bridge
Railway Station (18 miles) three times a week (coach
fare, 75.), thence rail, are the means of reaching
Sydney. The gold-field, of which this-is one of the
settled points, consists almost entirely of quartz
reefs; there are four quartz mills here. There are
two churches, a court-house, four stores, four hotels
and public-houses, of which the Royal and Com-
mercial are the largest. Population of district 500.
The court here is presided over by the police magis-
trate, and is held about once a fortnight. Court of
Requests is held first Thursday in each month.
Mails arrive and depart three times a week from
Sydney, vid New bridge. Public school here has
average attendance of 59. Formation: principally
basalt, with mountainous broken country. Copper,
silver, and gold also abound in the district.
TUENA, a post, telegraph, and money-order
station, on the creek of the same name, a tributary
branch of the Abercrombie, 200 miles postal (180 by
road) BW. of Sydney. Newbridge is the nearest
railway station, Goulbum is the coaching station.
It is in 34° 5' S. lat. and 149° 25' E. long., in the
county of Georgiana and police and electoral dis-
trict of Carcoar. Hotel—the Post-Office; a court-
house is here, and public school, with average
attendance of 40 children, and two stores. It is a
mining, agricultural, and pastoral district, with
quartz and iron ore abounding. A copper mine is
also in the neighbourhood. The court here is held
about once a month, and is presided over by the
police magistrate. Formation : slate, limestone, and
granite. Entire population estimated at 1,310, in-
cluding 70 Chinamen.
TUMBERUMBA, a post-town, with telegraph
station and money-order office, in the county of
Selwyn police district of Albury, and electoral district
of “ The Hume,” 304 miles(4oo postal) BW. of Sydney,
on the creek of the same name, 90 miles NE. of
Albury. It lies at an elevation of 1,760 feet above sea
level, and is noted for its salubrious climate. Popula-
tion of town, 690 ; of district, 2,500. The Union, Globe,
Tumberumba, The Terminus, and Tattersall’s are the
hotels, and there are four stores, a brewery, and a
flour mill. The public buildings are the court-house,
police station, school. Episcopal church (a brick build-
ing), and Roman Catholic Chapel. Bank : Commer-
cial. The public school has an average attendance of
92. Coach to Qulcairn 72 miles, thence by rail,
are the means of reaching Sydney, or coach to the
Cootamundra Railway Station, fare, 675. 6d. Nearest
towns are—Adelong (40 miles N.), Tumut (40 miles),
and Germanton (48 miles W.). There is a good
deal of land under tillage in the district, particu-
larly for wheat and potatoes, and in the driest of
seasons a fair harvest is gathered, wheat and oats
appearing to thrive remarkably well in the ferrugi-
nous soils; tobacco is also grown in the district.
The Tumberumba gold-fields have yielded a large
quantity of gold, and are still being worked
with fair results. Many extensive leased tracts
have been taken up in the different creek beds,
and the neighbouring basalt hills have been pierced,
by tunnels at a great cost, the promoters of this
industry obtaining large returns for their labour.
Sluicing is now carried on to some extent. At
Oumie, 20 miles S. of Tumberumba, some reefs
have been found which bear promise of being very
productive. The country is hilly and rich in good
timber. Formation: granite, with belts of basalt,
other portions slate and sandstone. Railway exten-
sion from Wagga-Wagga is expected.
TUMUT, a pretty little town located on the
south bank of the river Tumut, 80 miles SW.
from Yass, 21 miles from Gundagai, and 264 miles
(325 postal) SW. of Sydney, with which the com-
munication is by two daily coaches to Cootamundra
railway station, one via the marked tree line, fare,
255., and the other vid Adelong, fare, 325. 6d. It is in
the counties of Buccleuch and-Wynyard, and police
and electoral district of Tumut, in lat. 35° 15' S. and
long. 148° 16' 8., and has a post, money-order, Govern-
ment savings bank, and telegraph office. The
population of the town numbers about 800 persons,
and of the census district 6,600. On the electoral
rolls are 2,419 names. Churches—Church of Eng-
land, Wesleyan, Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic ;
hotels Woolpack, Commercial, Royal, Beehive,
Star, Queen’s Arms, Killamey, Gilmore and Gocup ;
public buildings— court-house and lock-up, publie
school, average attendance 146, and Roman Catholic
school. Bank of N. S. Wales and Commercial Bank ;.
Mechanics’ Institute, with library of 370 vols;
newspaper —Tumut and Adelong Times; and several


insurance agencies. Societies : Agricultural and
Pastoral Association, Freemasons, Oddfellows, Sons
of Temperance, and Good Templars. The district
environing Tumut is mainly rich agricultural land, of
which 7,567 acres were under cultivation in 1884.
Tumut has long been famed for its cereals, the
alluvial deposit being extremely rich and the growth
little affected by change of season. The returns were
as follows :—70,601 bushels of wheat, 48,285 of maize,
9,110 of oats, 502 tons of potatoes, and 10,183 cwt.
of tobacco. Stock returns were 4,433 horses, 24,621
cattle, 282,822 sheep, 1,860 pigs. Formation : granite.
The survey of a railway line from Gundagai to
Tumut is now being made.
TTJRON is the name given to numerous and
extensive diggings on the Turon river and its tribu-
taries in the county of Roxburgh. The Turon was
first occupied in June, 1857. It is distant 177 miles
W. from Sydney.
XJLLADULLA, a small seaport and Govern-
ment township, in the electoral district of Shoal-
haven and police district of Dowling, about 50 miles
S. of Shoalhaven and 159 miles S. of Sydney, with
which a steamer plies regularly once a week.
Moss Vale is the nearest railway station. The
harbour, which is about one mile across from
east to west, by half a mile from north to south,
is a good one, well protected by high land, with a
sufficient depth of water for large vessels, and is well
lighted by an iron lighthouse, 54 feet high, on the cor-
ner of the pier. This commodious pier was erected
at considerable expense ; it is 200 feet long, with a
rubble-stone approach, and affords ample facilities
for the loading and discharge of vessels of large
tonnage. There is a money-order, Government sav-
ings bank, and telegraph office ; other buildings are
-—the court-house, public school (average attendance
44), and the School of Arts ; places of worship—
Church of England, Wesleyan, and Independent.
Dairy-farming is the principal industry of the dis-
trict, and large quantities of produce find their way
to Sydney. There is plenty of good timber, and one
saw-mill turns out about 15,000 feet weekly. Popu-
lation about 129; the entire district, which is a
municipality consisting of three wards, proclaimed
April 14, 1874, each represented in council by three
members, being enumerated at upwards of 1,800.
There are 75 miles of roads in the district, and pro-
perty of £136,360 rateable value.
TJLMARRA (electorate of Clarence), a postal,
telegraph. Government savings bank, and money-
order town on the Clarence river nine miles NE. of
Grafton, by which city communication by steamer
is had with Sydney, 342 miles SW. The chief pro-
ducts of the district are maize and sugar cane, which
are largely grown. The principal buildings in the
place are—two churches, public school, with average
attendance of 129, three inns, the Commercial, Post-
office, and Exchange, five stores, branch of the
Australian Joint Stock Bank, and four sugar mills.
The population of town and neighbourhood in 1881
was estimated at 2,332. It was proclaimed a muni-
cipal district November 16, 1871. It has 189 miles
of roads, and rateable property of the value of
£179,080.
TJNANDERRA, a postal village on the main
south coast road in the police district of Wollongong,
about four miles distant from the latter town_ and
port, and 70 miles S. of Sydney. Denominational
school here. The Central Illawarra Municipal
Council have built a very handsome council chamber,
and maintain a public library for the use of the rate-
payers. Messrs. Richards and Sons employ from 20
to 25 men in their tannery ; the Illawarra Railway
passes directly through the village.
XJRALLA, a rising township in the county of
Sandon, police and electoral district of New Eng-
land, on the main northern road, situated 3,335
feet above sea level on the Rocky River, 300 miles N.
of Sydney, 15 miles S. from Armidale, and 245 miles
from Newcastle ; fares, 455. 3d. and 30s. The town-
ship of a main street, which is the Great
Northern road, besides several intersecting streets,
with an Episcopal church at one end and a Presby-
terian church at the other. Other places of worship
are the Wesleyan and Roman Catholic chapels. There
are eight stores, a money-order and telegraph office,
1 Government savings bank, a court-house, lock-up,
public school of brick, average attendance, 128.
Temperance hall, and Literary Institute, with 300
vols. Uralla also possesses a clerk of petty sessions,
a resident Church of England clergyman, two steam
hour mills, a resident medical officer, and a chemist’s
shop. The N orthern Railway is now open beyond
Uralla to Glen Innes. The extension to Tenterfleld
is being rapidly proceeded with. Newspaper,
Uralla and Walcha Times. Rich alluvial gold dig-
gings, known as the Rocky, are in the vicinity. At
these diggings a considerable number of persons are
settled. They are considered a suburb of Uralla,
contain one public-house (Snow’s) and a public school,
average attendance, 50. There are also a very large
number of farms and several large stations in the
district, within three to 12 miles of the town.
Estimated population about 400 persons. The hotels
are the Royal, Uralla, Commercial, Court-house,Great
Northern, and Locomotive, and a first-class wine-
shop. The Bank of N. 8. Wales has a branch here,
located in a brick building. The district is rich in
minerals, and is a splendid wheat-growing country.
The district is incorporated ; rateable property valued
at £53,567.
TIRANA, a telegraph, post, and money-order
and telegraph station, on the Urana creek, a tributary
of the Murrumbidgee, and on the mail route from
Wagga-Wagga to Deniliquin, 70 miles BW. from
Wagga-Wagga, 80 miles NW. of Albury, and 393-
miles (381 postal) S. of Sydney, in the county of
Urana, and electoral district of Murrumbidgee.
The communication is by railway to the Rock Rail-
way Station, 62 miles, coach fare, 30s. —also railway
to Narandera, thence coach 50 miles. Population
500. It has Episcopal and Roman Catholic churches,
branches of the N. 8. Wales and Joint Stock Banks,
a hospital, a brick court-house, a public school, with
average attendance of 55. Hotels: Royal, Royal
George, Commercial, and Urana; six stores, and
about thirteen tradesmen’s shops. The country is
both pastoral and agricultural, and, in good seasons,
crops are very productive. Free selections are on
the increase, and there is plenty of fine land
suitable for tillage, but the country is indifferently
by three watered.
VEGETABLE CREEK (now known as
Emmaville), a post town, with telegraph, money-
order and savings bank office, 403 miles N. of Sydney,
in the county of Gough, electorate and police dis-
trict of Glen Innes. Wellingrove is 14 miles distant
S. A coach runs to the Armidale Railway Station,
bringing mails five times a week. Hotels : Miners’’
Home, Cricketers’ Arms, Australian, Royal, and
TattersalTs. Places of worship: Wesleyan, Epis-
copal, and Roman Catholic churches. Other build-
ings—a public school, with average attendance of
144 scholars, and Roman Catholic school, a court-
house, lock-up, and police quarters. Bank: N. S.
Wales. Seven stores and numerous tradesmen.
Population over 3,000. A smelting works is in the
vicinity. Vegetable Creek is most happily situated j
there is splendid agricultural land within a mile,
544 acres being under cultivation; the tin field is
one of the best in N. S. Wales, and is officially
stated to extend 26 miles in one direction and 38
miles in another. In 1883 the yield of ore was 2,509
tons, valued at £125,450. It is surrounded by large
and important stations, viz., Wellington Vale,
Rangers’ Valley, Wellingrove, Strathbogie, and
Maidenhead. Tin was first discovered here early in
1872, and almost immediately after survey these
mines gave employment to a large number of men.
The best of the ground is in the hands of private
companies, some of whom have sunk to a consider-
able depth ; other workings are on the surface.
WAGGA-WAGGA (35° 10' S. lat. 147° 20' E.
long.), a pastoral township in the county of Wynyard,
on the south bank of the Murrumbidgee. It is 309
miles distant SW. from Sydney, and is connected
with the metropolis by the Great Southern Railway,
the connection with South Wagga being completed
on September 1, 1879 ; fares, 535. 6d., 365. Here
there is an extensive station ground, on which have
been erected a handsome and commodious passenger
station, a goods shed 150 ft. by 45ft., an engine shed
to accommodate 12 engines and tenders, a 50ft. turn-


table, and about three miles of sidings. Communi-
cation with Melbourne, 207 miles distant, is via
Albury and thence from Wodonga. The principal
engineering difficulty has been the bridge over the
Murrumbidgee and its approaches. These latter con-
sist of heavy embankments connecting the viaducts,
containing about 70,000 cubic yards of earthwork.
•On the north side there are 215 spans of 29£ft., and
on the south side 51 spans of the same width, vary-
ing from 9to 24 feet in height. These are to allow
for the escape of the flood waters. The main chan-
nel of the river is spanned by a bridge having two
continuous wrought iron lattice girders of 636 feet
each in total length, 12ft. lin. deep, and placed 14ft.
apart. These are divided into four spans of 150 ft.,
each span being supported on two cast-iron cylinders
9ft. in diameter. These piers are filled with con-
crete, and are strongly braced together with wrought
iron stays. The population is 4,000, the entire dis-
trict being 10,000. The town does a large trade with
the surrounding districts. Fitzmaurice Street is the
main thoroughfare. It is a fine street, about one
mile in length. There are several extensive stores,
and two or three respectable public buildings, among
which may be named the new Masonic Hall, the
Town Hall, and the hospital. The local newspapers
Aro—Wagga- Wagga Express, Wagga- Wagga Adver-
tiser, and Riverine Evening Star. The principal hotels
are the Criterion, the Australian, Commercial, the
Pastoral, and Union Club. There are four branch
banks, Joint Stock, N. S. Wales, Union, and Com-
mercial ; four places of worship, Episcopal, Presby-
terian, Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic. Public
school, with average attendance of 369, at Wagga ;
at North Wagga is another with 66. A very fine
convent of the Presentation Nuns is here, charm-
ingly situate on Mount Erin. The School of Arts
has a library of 1,400 vols., and there is in addition
a municipal free library of about 600 valuable works.
It has been a municipality since March 15, 1870. It
has 50 miles of roads, and rateable property to the
amount of £480,116 ; the town is lighted with gas,
and public waterworks are in course of construction.
The country round Wagga-Wagga is principally pas-
toral, though experience has proved it to be well
suited for agricultural purposes, and a considerable
area of land has already been free selected. By late
returns about 22,828| acres were under cultivation,
wheat,maize,barley and oats being the principal crops
Stock returns of the Murrumbidgee district for 1884,
horses, 13,386 ; cattle, 30,638 ; sheep, 3,950,274 ; pigs,
3,070. Wagga-Wagga has a post, money-order, and
telegraph office, and a Government savings bank.
The racecourse is reputed to be one of the finest in
the colony: the grand stand can accommodate 2,000
people. Prizes to the amount of £2,000 have been
run for. During the winter months steamers ply
regularly between Wagga-Wagga and Adelaide, and
also to Bchuca, calling at Hay, Narandera, Euston,
Balranald, Wentworth, and other townships, and also
at some of the principal stations to take wool and
other pastoral produce.
WAGONGA, a post town in the county of
Dampier, police district of Broulee, and electoral
district of Eden, 260(228 postal) miles 8. of Sydney,
on the celebrated Mort Estate. The entrance to the
river here—the Wagonga—is a good one, and the bay
is of capacious size. Communication is by sailing
vessel, or overland, to the Upper Tarago Railway
station, or by way of Moruya and Bateman’s Bay.
Population of district 300. There are two places of
worship, a provisional school, one hotel, and a
large sawmill. Formation; granite, slate, and quartz.
About 3 miles from the head of the river the ascent
of the N. side of the Dromedary commences; the
principal staples of the district are gold, butter,
cheese, bacon, timber, and bark.
WALBUNDRIE, a small township, on the
right bank of the Billabong Creek, 36 miles NW.
from Albury, 25 miles N. from Howloug, on the
main road to Urana, and 376 miles (418 postal) 8. of
Sydney, in the county and electorate district of
Hume. There is one hotel, one store, a post-office,
police station, and a public school, average attend-
ance, 11. Conveyance by coach, fare, 15s. to Albury
station. Population 50. District is pastoral.
Gerogery and Culcairn Railway Stations are each
about 20 miles distant.
WALCHA(county of Vernon)3l° 5' S. lat. 151“ 30'
E. long, a postal, telegraph, savings bank, and money-
order village, on the river Apsley, 40 miles S. of Armi-
dale, and 300 miles N. of Sydney. Daily coach, fare,
os. to Walcha Road Railway Station, 12 miles N., on
the Great Northern line, is the means of travelling
to the metropolis. There is also a very good moun-
tain road to the coast either to the Manning or Ray-
mond Terrace or Bendemeer. The hotels are the
Commercial, Royal, New England, Walcha, and the
Apsley. There are five stores, also a druggist’s shop,
and a resident medical man. Places of worship
Episcopal and Presbyterian (both with a resident
clergyman), and Roman Catholic. Bank: Commer-
cial. There is also a School of Arts, with 1,200 vols.
Public school with average attendance of 53 scholars.
Population is about 300. Farming is the principal
industry of the district, and there are several sta-
tions in the neighbourhood, Glen Morison, Ingleba,
Aberbaldie, Branga Park, Orundumbie, and others.
The Glen Morison gold-fields lie 10 miles S. of
Walcha. There is a land office here, with a resident
clerk of petty sessions ; and an immense area of
land has been selected during the past three or four
years.
WALGETT is situated at the junction of the
Barwon and Namoi rivers, 450 miles NNW. of Syd-
ney. It has a money-order and savings bank office
and telegraph station, and is in the electoral district
of Namoi, county of Baradine, and police district of
Walgett. It is a town of rising commercial im-
portance, as it forms the business centre of all the
outlying districts to the north and west, and on to
the Queensland border. The route to the metro-
polis is via Narrabri, to which place coaches run
four times a week carrying mails, and thence by
Great Northern Railway via, Newcastle. There are
six hotels, namely, the Telegraph, Commercial, Royal
Mail, Travellers’ Rest, Imperial, and Australian, and
five stores. Communication with the Western line
of railway is also kept up by Cobb and Co.’s line of
coaches running twice a week via Coonamble and
Dubbo, fare, 605., and via Coonamble, Mudgee, and
Wallerawang. There are also well organized mail
services between Walgett and the Narran River, by
which the Queensland borders can be reached at
Mungindi or Brenda. Newspaper: the Walgett
News (Saturday evening). Government buildings
are the telegraph and post-office, the court-
house, police barracks and lock-up, and there
is a good public school, with average attendance of
74, an hospital, school of arts, a brewery, and
several brickyards. Banks : Commercial and New
South Wales. Population is about 400, of census
district 2,950 (1881). The district is almost en-
tirely occupied by sheep and cattle stations. The
Dangar bridge over the Barwon, now completed, is
the means of bringing travelling stock through the
town, en route for their different markets. A sub-
stantial bridge has been erected over the Namoi,
about a mile above the junction, and within easy
distance of the town. Occasionally the river is uti-
lized as a means of traffic, but it is very uncertain,
from its fluctuating depth.
WALLABADAH, a post town with money-
order office, in the county of Buckland, electorate of
Gunnedah, situated on the Quirindi Creek, and
Great Northern Road, 231 miles N. of Sydney, sur-
rounded with land adapted for farming and grazing.
Quirindi is the nearest railway-station (10 miles dis-
tant). Population 200. There is one hotel, three
churches, two stores and a court-house. Produce of
wheat 30.000 bushels.
WALLERAWANG, a post town, with
money-order, and telegraph office, in the county of
Cook, and electoral district of Hartley, 105 miles due
W. of Sydney, situate on the banka of Cox’s river. In
the town boundary are about 1,000 souls. There
are churches belonging to the Wesleyan, Church of
England, Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic bodies :
five hotels, principal being Royal, Commercial, and
Railway Inn, and a public school, with average
attendance of 88 children. Bank : Commercial. It
is in direct railway communication with the metro-
polis, fares, 17s. 9d. and 11s. 9d., and is the junction


of the line to Mudgee. It lies about 2,928 feet above
the sea level. Among the minerals found are coal
in large quantities, iron ore, limestone, alum, and
gold in small quantities.
. WALLSEND is the chief colliery township
in the coal district of Northumberland county,
and lies in a valley running in a NE. direction
from the head waters of Lake Macquarie to the
banks of the Hunter about 8 miles from Newcastle.
It is situated 85 miles WNW. of Sydney, having
telegraph, money-order, and savings bank offices ;
fares from Newcastle, Is. 6d. Omnibuses run to
and from Newcastle frequently during the day.
It is the site of the Newcastle and Wallsend Coal
Company’s works, the pit being situated about a
quarter of a mile from the township. There is also
a tunnel tapping the SE. portion of the field, from
which a large output is available. The seam is a con-
tinuation of the Borehole seam. This colliery
employs about 500 men and boys, and is capable of
sending out upwards of 2,000 tons of coal per
diem. A private line connects the collieries
with the Great Northern near the Township of
Waratah. The Purified Coal and Coke Company’s
works are situated close to the tunnel. Eighteen ovens
can be utilized, and nearly 100 tons weekly turned
out There is also an iron foundry situated
in the borough, where extensive castings are fre-
quently done for the adjacent collieries. Wallsend
possesses a School of Arts,in a flourishing condition ;
it is a new building, described as a magnificent
structure, with a library of 900 vols.—a public
school, with an average attendance of 656—four
churches, Church of England, Wesleyan, Congrega-
tional, and Welsh Church (Independent), and two
banks, Joint Stock and Australasia, and a population
of 3,000. There are also several friendly societies, in
a prosperous condition. Its business places and
hotels are numerous and substantial. Among the
latter are the Traveller’s Rest, Metropolitan, Railway,
and Royal Exchange. The approaches to the rail-
way station have been planted with Moreton Bay
fig trees, which in course of time will become a
delightful and shady promenade. Wallsend was
proclaimed a municipality on Feb. 27, 1874. It has
14 miles of streets, and property of the rateable
value of £282,600.
WAMMERAWA is in the pastoral district of
Wellington, and electoral district of Bourke,
about 450 miles (postal) NW. from Sydney. The
Wammerawa is the stream which starts from the
Macquarie marshes on the opposite side to which
the Macquarie enters them, and is, in fact, a
continuation of that river. The country is of the
most splendid pastoral description, there being ex-
tensive reed beds for cattle, which are irrigated by
every rise in the river, the country being almost a
dead level. Travellers’ route is via Wellington and
Dubbo. Population about 20.
WANDANDIAN is a small quiet hamlet
situated on the creek of the same name, which is
navigable up to this point for vessels of thirty tons.
The tide flows about half a mile beyond the hamlet.
The creek empties into the shallow lake called on the
maps St. George’s Basin, connected with the sea by
the narrow gut, or natural canal, known as the
Berrewerree. The mouth of the Berrewerree is a noted
place of resort for fish, and frequented at certain
seasons by Chinese and other fishermen. Inside the
bar there is good shelter for vessels not exceeding
the tonnage mentioned, but the frequent changes in
the channel and depth of water, caused by inunda-
tions from the large extent of country drained by
the lake, make the entrance hazardous for any
strangers. It is a postal town, and is 138 miles S.
of Sydney. It is in the county of St. Vincent, and
police and electoral district of Shoalhaven. Moss
Vale is the nearest railway station. In the hamlet
are 20 persons, in the district about 100. It is
an agricultural and pastoral district of sandstone
formation. It abounds in fine timber, chiefly
spotted gum and blackbutt. Honeysuckle and wild
flowers grow profusely here, adapting it for bee-
keeping, and honey of excellent quality is very
plentiful.
WARATAH, a post town, with money-order,
and telegraph and savings bank offices, and also
a municipality, about 4 miles from Newcastle,
and 80 miles N. of Sydney. The municipality com-
prises the township of Hanbury, Georgetown, North
Waratah, and Charleston. Waratah is a station on
the Great Northern Railway (fares, 7d. and 4d.1. and
the Great Northern Railway (fares, 7d. and 4d.), and
is in the county and electoral district of Northum-
berland, and police district of Newcastle. Coal
mining is the industry of the district. The Waratah
Coal Colliery has been a prolific one, but it is now
nearly worked out. The Waratah Coal Company
now raise coal from the new colliery at South Wara-
ipulation
hotels—
Railway, Miners Arms, and others; a large public
school, with an average attendance of 32 children,
four churches—two Episcopal, one Wesleyan, and
one' Primitive Methodist—a court-house, and post and
telegraph office, and a School of Arts with a library
of 720 vols. In the vicinity are the Crystal Palace
gardens, a favourite resort for holiday seekers. Two
copper and one tin smelting works are in operation,
and there are stone quarries in the vicinity. Owing to
the large mining population, it is one of the busiest
stations on the Great Northern Railway, both as-
regards passenger and goods traffic. Besides the
coal-mining, copper-mining, and smelting indus-
tries, large quantities of fruit oranges, grapes
bananas, &c.—are grown in and exported from the
gardens of North Waratah. The municipality was
proclaimed February 23, 1871. It has 29 miles of
streets, and rateable property of the value of
£130,000.
WAEDELL is a rising township, with telegraph
station, savings bank, and money-order office, on
both sides of the Richmond river, about 10 miles
above Ballina. It is in the counties of Rous and Rich-
mond, and police district of Casino, situated in lat. 28*
50' S. and 153° 24' E. long., and is distant about 540
miles (353 postal) N. of Sydney, with which the
means of communication are steamers direct, and
Clarence river steamers. The population in’ the
district is estimated at 1,000 souls. There are
two saw-mills, one in the township, and one
on the opposite side of the river, where also is the
Roman Catholic church ; one store in the township,
and two on the other bank of the river; also two
public schools, with average attendance of 66 and 42,
and several hotels in the town, and another about a
mile distant.
WARIALDA, a township, with savings bank,
money-order office, and telegraph station on Reedy
creek, 380 miles N. of Sydney, in the county of
Burnett, electorate of Gwydir, and police district
of Warialda. Coach to Tamworth Railway Station is
the means of travelling to Sydney ; coach fare, 605..
The hotels are the Royal, the Gwydir Arms, Royal
Oak, and Tattersall’s; there are three large stores.
Bank : N. S. Wales. Churches : Episcopal and Roman
Catholic. Public buildings: court-house, police
barracks, post-office, lock-up, public school, with
average attendance of 64 scholars, and hospital. The
nearest gold-fields are at Bingera, 28 miles south
but the district is mainly a pastoral one. Population
of town, 320 ; with the district it is 3,656.
WARKWOETH, a post town and telegraph
station on Cockfighter creek, 135 miles N. of Sydney.
It is in the county of Northumberland, and electo-
rate and police district of Patrick’s Plains. There
are in the township one hotel, a public school, with
average attendance, 43, and an Episcopal church.
Agricultural and pastoral district of sandstone forma-
tion. A coach connects with the Singleton Railway
Station (12 miles W.), fare ss. Population about 40.
WAENETON, a post town in the county of
Dudley, electorate of Hastings, and police district of
Kempsey, 280 miles (302 postal) N. from Sydney. Com-
munication is by Macleay river steamer ; fare, £3.
Hexham is the nearest Railway Station. Population
50, with 150 in the district. It has one school and
a church, and is principally a farming and grazino-
locality.
WARREN, a post town, with money-order, sav-
ings bank, and telegraph office, 346 miles (353 postal)
W. of Sydney. It lies on the left bank of the Mac-
quarie river,in the electoral district of the Bogan and
police district of Dubbo. Bank : Commercial. Public
school has an average attendance of 69 scholars


three hotels and an Episcopal church. Prin-
cipally a squatting district. Coach runs to the
Nevertire Railway Station (12 miles distant). Popu-
lation 350. . .
WATERLOO, a suburban municipality on the
road from the city to Botany, 2J miles from Sydney.
It was proclaimed May 16th, 1860, extended on
the east, and reproclaimed November 19th, 1861.
The Western Ward (now the Borough of Alexandria)
was separated, and the municipality again proclaimed
August 27, 1868. The streets contain about 104 miles.
It has rateable property to the amount of £654,602.
The district is fast becoming a manufacturing centre,
already containing a large number of industrial
works, including the Pellmongering establishments
of Messrs. Alderson and Sons, and Rennie, Walsh and
Co., Goodlett and Smith’s Brickworks. Communi-
cation from city is by tram-car and omnibus. Popula-
tion about 8,000. Public school here, with average
attendance, 330.
WATSON’S BAY, a favourite resort of
Sydney people, is a small place on the shores of an
indentation of Port Jackson, a short distance from
the South Head. It has a post, money-order office.
Government savings bank and telegraph office, and
is situated in 33° 47’ 40” S, lat., and 151* 14’ 30’’ E,
long., 7 miles distant by road, and U miles by
water S. of Sydney. It forms a portion of the
electoral district of Paddington, and is in the police
district of Sydney. It is part of the municipality of
Woollahra, and known as Belle Vue Ward. Two
companies ply their steamers daily from Circular
Quay, return ticket being Is. It is a pleasant drive
from the city by the South Head road. There are
three hotels here, the Gap, Pier, and Signal, one
public school, with an average attendance of 71. and
three places of worship. The portion of cliff facing
the ocean has been strongly fortified, and supplied
with modem appliances for defence, including tor-
pedo works. A detachment of N.S.W. Artillery are
located here in barracks. The Hon. Sir John Robert-
son’s residence is situated in the Bay. Two light-
houses here, viz., Hornby and Macquarie; also a Re-
formatory for girls. The surrounding land is rooky
and hilly, and affords splendid views both citywards
and seawards. Not far from here is the place
known as the Gap, where the unfortunate Dunbar
with all on board, save one, was lost. The pilots
live here and board incoming vessels by means of a
steamer stationed off Camp Cove.
WATTLE ELAT, a postal township, with
money order office, on the Bathurst road, five miles
from Sofala, and 165 miles W. from Sydney.
Bathurst is the nearest railway station. It has
two hotels, Star and Post Office, and three stores. It
is in the county of Roxburgh. The district is a
mining one, mountainous in character, and well
timbered. Public school here, with average attend-
ance of 80. . „ , , .
WAVERLEY is suburban to Sydney, lying
E. about 4 miles. Access is by the old South Head
road, along which tram-cars pass from Sydney every
20 minutes. The fare from Sydney to terminus at
Charing Cross is 4d. Waverley is under municipal
government, and has postal, money-order, tele-
graphic, and savings bank facilities. The Council are
trustees for the cemetery for the eastern suburbs,
which is one of the most beautiful in the colonies,
being situated on one of the picturesque heights front-
ing the Pacific. The cemetery is largely used for the
residents of the eastern portions of the city. The
tramway is now extended to the Bondi Beach,
passing the Waverley Park, a reserve of 27 acres,
upon a portion of which the high-level reservoir, for
supply of the city and suburbs, is approaching com-
pletion. The tram-car will land visitors at Bondi
Beach, recently reserved by the Government. The
borough has 35 miles of road, and property of the
rateable value of £1,032,650 Bank, English and
Scottish. Schools, public (with average attendance
of 307), Roman Catholic and Church of England.
Churches : Episcopalian, Congregational, two Wes-
leyan, and a Homan Catholic.
WEE WAA, a postal, telegraph, savings bank,
and money-order township, on a lagoon of the same
name, near the Namoi river, about 25 miles W. from
Narrabri, and 337 miles NW. of Sydney. It is
situated in the county of White, electoral district of
Namoi, and police district of Wee Waa and Narrabri.
Coach to the Narrabri Railway Station, fare, 12s. 6d.,
thence rail and steamboat, is the means of reaching
Sydney. The hotels are Prince of Wales and Vic-
toria. There is one public school, with average
attendance of 47, a court-house, police-station, and
two stores. Population is about 150. The district is
principally a pastoral one, containing in all upwards
of 1,850 persons.
WELLINGROVE, a township on the Wellin-
grove creek, 13 miles W. from Glen Innes, and 385
miles (436 postal) N. of Sydney. It is in
the county of Gough, electorate and police dis-
trict of Glen Innes. The traveller’s route is vid
Armidale Railway Station. The mail is carried
on horseback twice a week. Thejfiotel is the Post Office;
there is one place of worship, a Presbyterian church.
Population is about 500 ; the district, which is princi-
pally pastoral, numbering upwards of 2,600 persons.
A good many farmers and' free selectors are now
settled upon the land, which is highly spoken of for
farming pursuits. Copper and tin are found within
a radius of 8 miles or so. Formation : granite. Wel-
lingrove Station is about 2J miles from this town-
ship.
WELLINGTON is distant from Sydney
248 miles NW., and including the township of
Montefiore, on the opposite side of the Macquarie,
has about 2,000 inhabitants. The entire district num-
bers 6,018, according to the last census. On the elec-
toral rolls are about 1,300 names. The town and
environs are incorporated, and mayor and aldermen
were chosen for the first time in 1879. In the
municipal district are 374 miles of roads and streets,
and property of the rateable value of £74,360. It is
picturesquely situated on the left bank of the Mac-
quarie river, at its junction with the Bell river, about
1,000 feet above the sea level, at the foot of a moun-
tain range. At this point the river is spanned by a
fine bridge of ironbark, which cost £B,OOO. It is in
the county, police, and electoral district of Welling-
ton, in about lat. 32° 30'S., and long. 149° E. The rail-
way to here was opened on June 1, 1880 ; fares,
41s. 6d. and 295. 6d. The railway bridge over the
Macquarie is a work of some magnitude. It con-
sists of two continuous wrought-iron lattice girders,
477 feet long, 12 feet 1 inch deep, placed 14 feet
apart, divided into spans of 150 feet, each span
resting upon two cast-iron cylinders, 9 feet in dia-
meter. The approaches are also carried by girders.
The total length of the bridge, including abut-
ments, is 648 feet 9 inches ; the height of the rails
above the bed of the river is about 70 feet. The princi-
pal hotels are Moss’s Royal and Lillyman’s Royal.
The churches comprise a handsome brick edifice used
by the Episcopalians, a Roman Catholic church,
Wesleyan, and a Presbyterian. There are also a public
school (average attendance 171) and R. O. denomi-
national school, a telegraph, money-order, savings
bank, and post office of brick, two steam flour mills,
hospital, large court-house, Church of England par-
sonage, and a gaol. Many new buildings have been
erected recently, including two handsome banks.
The Bank of N. S. Wales and Commercial Bank
have branches here, and the leading Insurance Com-
panies are represented by agents. The water supply
to the town is unsurpassed by any in Australia.
The district has the threefold advantage of being
admirably suited for agricultural and pastoral pur-
poses, and of being highly auriferous, the reefs
of the neighbourhood being many and rich. A
considerable breadth of land (14,105 acres) is under
cultivation for wheat, oats and maize, the soil
being most suitable for the former. The harvest
returns for 1884 were : wheat 136,952 bushels,
maize 5,093 bushels, barley 1,232 bushels, oats
1,915 bushels, tobacco 160 cwt. Rearing stock is
most extensively followed, the different grasses
growing luxuriantly and affording excellent pastur-
age. Stock returns to March 31, 1884, were 2,755
horses, 3,880 cattle, 219,049 sheep, 1,340 pigs.
Much land has been taken up by free selectors.
The vine is also extensively cultivated, and fruit
is largely grown. The Wellington caves in the
vicinity are famous for their beauty, and are much
frequented by visitors. During an exploration


by the curator of the Sydney Museum he found
many specimens of great interest, among them
the toe-bones of a large species of echidna, the tooth
of a diprotodon, and the pelvis of an immense kan-
garoo. Dubbo is 30 miles distant, NW., and
Orange about 60 miles distant, SE. Newspaper:
Wellington Gazette. District Court and Quarter
Sessions are held four times a year, Petty sessions
dailj, and a Court of Requests second Friday in each
month. Formation: limestone, granite, and rich
alluvial fiats.
WENTWORTH, a municipal district (pro-
claimed January 23,1879,having 14 miles of roads and
streets, and property of the rateable value of £87,630),
telegraph and money-order office, situated on the
banks of the river Darling, near its confluence
with the Murray, 500 miles W. (731 postal) of
Sydney, 407 miles NW. from Melbourne. It is in the
county, police district and electorate of Wentworth,
in S. lat. 34° 8' and E. long. 141°, 56' and has a
population of 700 inhabitants, the municipality
numbering 1,000. In the census district are 2,157
persons. Coaches leave regularly for Adelaide Mon-
day, Thursday,and Friday evenings, and for Menindie
and Wilcannia Monday morning, for Sydney and
Melbourne vid Deniliquin, on Sundays and Thurs-
days. Hay is the nearest railway station. The
hotels are the Crown, Wentworth and the Royal;
the churches are Episcopal, Roman Catholic, Wes-
leyan, and a Presbyterian, the former being the
finest church, with parsonage; banking estab-
lishments, the Joint Stock and Commercial, public
school, with average attendance of 115 ; also a cus-
tom-house, court-house, lock-up, gaol, wharf, police
barracks, and about eight principal stores. News-
paper ; Wentworth Telegraph. Court of Petty Sessions
is held daily, and a Court of Requests on the second
Wednesday in each month. The river steamer
traffic is large and yearly increasing, and the town-
ship is becoming a place of importance among
the interior towns of NS. Wales. The district,
which embraces the south-eastern portion of the
pastoral district of the Darling, is a pastoral one,
principally sheep stations. In 1884, 1,097 acres
were under cultivation. The stock returns for
the electoral district to March 31, 1884, were 8,116
horses, 21,396 cattle, 2,479,684 sheep, 987 pigs. It
has been seriously proposed that in the future
Wentworth (so named after the late Wm. Chas.
Wentworth, the framer of the Constitution of New
South Wales) shall be the capital and arsenal of
Federal Australia, and its central position gives some
reason for such a selection. It has been observed
that Wentworth occupies a peculiar and exception-
ally advantageous position. The junction of the
rivers alone renders it an unrivalled terminus for
all the intercolonial railways that may be now or at
any future time projected. The projected Victorian
line is to terminate at Yelta, on the banks of the
Murray, opposite the township of Wentworth, and
the proposed (S. Australian) line from the North-
West Bend along the course of the river would ter-
minate in the township itself. The natural topo-
graphical condition and surroundings of the locality
also greatly favour such a selection for any inter-
colonial railway, especially when the line shall be
extended to Sydney. This town is the present depot
for the supply of the interior when the river is un-
navigable, as it too often is, and with a railway to
carry the supplies it would become the central city
of Australia.
WERRIS CREEK, a station on the Great
Northern line, being the point whence the branch
line to Narribri takes its departure, 155 miles from
Newcastle,fares, 28s. 3d. and 18s. 9d.,and 230 miles N.
of Sydney. It has a telegraph station and money-
order office, and lies at an altitude of 1,245 feet.
Public school here, with average attendance, 15.
WEST BOTANY, a municipal district, about
6| miles from Sydney, adjoins municipal district of
St. Peter’s, commencing from south side of Cook’s
River Dam, and extending to Sans Souci, having the
waters of Botany Bay on the south-east. It is in the
county of Cumberland, and electoral district of
Canterbury (the latter represented by three mem-
bers in Parliament). Population about 800. Hotels —
Jacob’s Temple Family Hotel, Goodin’s Highbury
Baru, Rust’s Sandringham Hotel. There is a
public school, with average attendance, 50, the
post-office (Amcliffe), and four places of public
worship, one Church of England, two Wesleyan,
and one Primitive Methodist. Municipal affairs
are under a Mayor and five Aldermen, the
municipality being divided into two wards (West
Botany and Amcliffe wards). It has about 22
miles of streets, made and unmade ; the rateable
property is valued at £212,130; much of the land is
used for market-gardening and horticultural pur-
poses, but large quantities have been taken up for
building purposes, and the population is increasing
largely, owing to the fact that the lllawarra Railway,
now almost completed, intersects the Amcliffe
ward, where a commodious railway station has been
erected. It boasts of one of the finest beaches
in the world, “ Lady Robinson’s Beach,” formerly
called seven-mile beach ; Scarborough park, contain-
ing 100 acres, a boulevard, 198 feet wide, skirts the
park on the south-east, and an esplanade, 100 feet
above high water mark from the beach. Watering
places of public resort are—Sandringham and Sans
Souci; Sandridge park of 96 acres (private property)
is also situate on Lady Robinson’s beach. Saywell’s
tramway, in course of construction, will connect the
latter place with Rockdale station on the main road.
Omnibuses run from Wynyard Square to Amcliffe
every 20 minutes, fare, 6d.
WICKHAM, an important suburb of New-
castle, which includes the villages of Linwood,
Islington, and Tighe’s Hill, situate about 1 mile from
Newcastle city. Wickham was proclaimed a muni-
cipality on February 25, 1871, with a municipal
council of 6 aldermen, but it now consists of 9, in-
creased population entitling it to 3 additional
aldermen. It has 11 miles of road, property of the
rateable value of £282,850, and estimated population
of 1,640. The Hunter River Copper Works, a large
and important industry, is here carried on, con-
stantly keeping engaged several hundred men ; these
works have 22 furnaces complete. There are also
other industries, viz. : Ritchie’s large engineering
establishment, Sydney Soap Company’s Works, Hen-
derson’s Saw Mills, Redman’s Cordial Factory, and
Jewell’s Wool Washing and Fellmongering Works,
besides 6 hotels, Royal and others ; several stores,
branch of Joint stock Bank, &c., a Church
of England, and handsome parsonage. The Wesle-
yans and Primitive Methodists have also their
places of public worship. A large public school
and teachers’ residence has been erected, which
cost, with value of land, £4,000 ; average attendance
535. It has been enlarged by the erection of a
handsome wing, to be used as a girls’ school. A
School of Arts was established in June, 1882, in a
handsome and substantial building. The Ferndale
Colliery is in work, and supplies a good clean
marketable coal, and a valuable seam has been found
on land belonging to Mrs. Hannell. Wickham is on
the Hunter river and Thoresby creek, in the county
of Northumberland, and electorate and police dis-
trict of Newcastle. It lies about 60 miles (76J
postal) N. by B. £ E. of Sydney, in 32° 56’ S. lat.,
and 151° 47' E. long. There are here a telegraph and
money-order office. In the vicinity is the exten-
sive brewery known as the Castlemaine Brewery,
the property of Messrs. Prendergast and Wood Bros.
It is the most complete undertaking in the colony
outside Sydney, and gives employment to a large
number of men.
WILBERFORCE, a small village in the
county of Cook, and the electoral district of the
Hawkesbury, lying 38 miles W. of Sydney, in lat.
33° 30' S. and long 151° E., consisting of about 150
dwelling houses, and 360 inhabitants ; in the district
are about 850 residents. It is about 4 miles distant
from Windsor (the nearest railway station), across
the Hawkesbury. The Episcopal church is a neat
stone building at the north end of the town ; there
is another place of worship (Wesleyan), a brick
building in the centre of the town, also two school-
houses, one a public school, with average attendance
of 61, the other an Episcopal school, an hotel (the
Old Betreat), a watch-house, two stores, and a
leather factory. The district is of a rich agricul-
tural character, but low and subject to floods ; the


staple crop is maize, and the yield at times is very
large. Formation: sandstone.
"WILCANNIA, county of Young and electoral
district of Wentworth, a growing township, with
telegraph station, savings bank, and money-order
office, on the right bank of the Darling river, 583
miles (7XI postal) NW. by W. of Sydney, with a
population of about 1,400 persons. Seventeen years
ago a shepherd’s slab hut, still standing, alone
marked the site of Wilcannia. The hotels in the
town are Mount Murchison, Wilcannia, Punt,
Queen’s Head, Mechanics’ Arms, View Point, the
Commercial, the Crown and the Royal, and there
are bonded stores, eight general stores, and a public
school, with average attendance of 110. Banks;
Australian Joint Stock, N. S. Wales, Commercial,
and London Chartered. There are 2 breviers, 1
cordial manufacturer, wool-scouring establishment
and soap works, and 5 boarding houses. Episcopal
and Roman Catholic clergymen are here, and the
Church of England body have a handsome stone
church. Newspapers; Wilcannia Times and Western
Grazier It is a place of Petty Sessions, and a Court
of Quarter Sessions is held. The best route from
Sydney is by rail to Hay, thence tri-weekly coach
(coach fare, £7). The district is entirely occupied for
grazing and mining purposes. There are promising
copper, silver, and lead indications, and hopes are
entertained that, as a gold producing district, Mount
Browne (of which Wilcannia is the entrepot) will soon
attract attention. The yield of gold for 1883 was
2,947 oz., valued at £11,883 75., but the yield has since
languished. Wilcannia is on the main line of traffic
from Western Queensland, and it is believed will
become a very important centre as that colony gets
more settled upon and opened up. It is a great cross-
ing place for stock, and there is a large amount of
wool shipped annually from the town, but owing to
the severity of the drought in the surrounding
district the export last season was inconsiderable.
There are stone quarries within three miles of the
town, with an abundant supply of stone of superior
quality. There are some handsome stone built
public buildings, court-house, police-barracks, gaol,
post and telegraph offices. Athenaeum, with a small
library, and the hospital. Wharves have not yet
been built at the river bank, for the loading and
discharging of steamers, which are most urgently
required. The town was last year incorporated, and
the council have devoted themselves principally to a
waterworks scheme.
WILLIAM TOWN, a post town mthe county
of Gloucester, electorate of Lower Hunter, and police
district of Raymond Terrace, 92 miles N. of Sydney.
Population about 100. There is one church and a
school, with average attendance, 41. Farming and
grazing district. Hexham is the nearest railway
station. , . , ,
WINDEYER, a township and money-order
station on the Memo creek, 123 miles W. of Sydney,
and 25 miles S. from Mudgee, whence the coach runs
to the Capertee railway station. It is in the county
of Wellington, and electoral district of Mudgee. Two
places of worship, Episcopal and Roman Catholic ;
one inn (Mulholland’s), and five others in the dis-
trict 4 a public school, with average attendance of
42 a’police barracks, a general store, and 50 resi-
dents. The district is a mining one. Formation;
S WTNDSOR, a borough town on the Hawkes-
bury river, 34 miles N.W. from Sydney, in the
Hawkesbury electorate, with which it is connected
bv railway ; fares, 4s. sd. and 2s. 9d. It was pro-
claimed March 4, 1871. It has Si miles of roads, and
rateable property to the amount of £96,520. It is
situated in the county of Cumberland, and police
district of Windsor ; it has a post, money-order, Go-
vernment savings bank, and telegraph office. It is
one of the oldest settled places in the colony and
bui for the frequency of the floods in the district,
it would hold a much higher position than it now
does In 18(57 the river rose 63 feet above its ordi-
narv level, and the whole country was converted into
one" large lake 10 to 60 feet deep, villages and
farms being submerged. The town itself is built on
u hill, and is therefore not much affected by the
floods that occasionally sweep over the district. The
soil is of unrivalled fertility, and produces the cereals
and other farm products to perfection. The popu-
lation is estimated at 2,000 ; there are 2,021 electors
on the roll of the Hawkesbury, of which Windsor
forms part. The principal streets are George and
Macquarie ; there are several good hotels, the lead-
ing being the Pitzroy, Royal Exchange, the
Royal, and about 10 principal stores. The School
of Arts is a substantial building, with a library of
about 800 volumes. The public school is a fine
building, costing about £1,500, and having an aver-
age attendance of 326 scholars ; there are four other
schools, one a grammar school and two ladies’ schools.
The places of worship are the Church of England,
a brick building with tower and belfry, Roman
Catholic church, built in the Gothic style, Wesleyan
chapel, and Presbyterian church, both of brick, and
the Congregational church. The Pitzroy bridge
crossing the South creek has been replaced by a new
iron structure, on iron cylinders. The Windsor
bridge, built on iron cylinders and spanning the
river Hawkesbury, is a fine substantial work. The
Bank of N. S. Wales and Commercial Bank have
branches here; the latter is a fine new building.
There is also a hospital and benevolent asylum com-
bined, a court-house, and a gaol. Local papers. The
Australian and the Haioiesbury Chronicle. The
Hawkesbury Jockey Club has its headquarters here.
Formation ; sandstone and slate. Surrounding the
town are the famed Wilberforce, Pitt Town and
Cornwallis bottoms, which are unsurpassed for
fertility, producing as much as 100 bushels of maize
to the acre. The river is not navigable beyond Pitt
Town for any vessel drawing over 3 feet, but vessels
of any draught can reach Churchill's wharf on the
Sackville Reach which is 22 miles by river, and 10
by land.
WINQ-EN, a railway and telegraph station and
postal township on the Great Northern Railway, 182
miles N. of Sydney, and 106 miles from Newcastle ;
fares to Newcastle, 19s. 3d. and 12s. 9d. It is in the
county of Brisbane, electoral district of the Upper
Hunter, and police district of Scone, and is situated
on the Kingdon Ponds Creek, 1,002 feet above the
sea level. The town contains one store, but no
buildings of magnitude. Public school has an aver-
age attendance of 27. The surrounding district has
good agricultural soil, and the mountains are rich
in mineral wealth in the form of coal of good
quality, kerosine shale, and the baser metals. A
great natural curiosity exists within two miles of
Wingen, a burning mountain, 1,820 feet high, being
the only one on the continent, so far as is known.
The fire is not volcanic, but is supposed to be the
combustion of a coal seam that has in some way be-
come ignited. Population, 110; of the district,
15,500. Formation : schist and trap.
WINGHAM, a rapidly rising township with
telegraph station, post, and money-order offices and
savings bank, situate at the head of navigation of the
Manning River, in police district of that name, and
county Macquarie, on the road leading, on the one
hand, to Port Macquarie, and on the other to New
England. Sydney lies 195 miles south. Communi-
cation by steamer once or twice a week, or by coach
vid Gloucester to Hexham, thence to Newcastle,
thence per steamer. Postal communication daily. The
town is well laid out with a reserve in the centre,
and contains some good buildings, built wit h bricks
from yards in the neighbourhood of the town. The
chief buildings are a grand brick store, built arcade
fashion ; very handsome brick bank, the Commercial,
post-office, also brick, and costing £2,000 ; court-
house and lock-up, School of Arts, with library of 500
well-selected volumes and a large assembly room ;
very pretty public school (with average attendance
of 67), and teachers’ residence; there are also two
hotels—the Australian and the Wingham, four stores
—Cochrane, Herkes, Hammond, Inglis, saddler’s
shop, baker, two butchers, furniture arcade, shoe-
maker, undertaker’s shop, two brick-yards, two
blacksmiths (who also manufacture vehicles and
farming implements), two wheelwrights, two
auctioneers, a private boarding establishment. The
United Insurance Company, the City Mutual In-
surance Company, the National Mutual Life Asso-
ciation of Australasia, all have agencies here. There


are three churches— Church of England, Free Church
of Scotland, and Presbyterian: the Church of Eng-
land parsonage (lately erected) is an ornament to the
town. There are lodges of the Oddfellows, Good
Templars, and Orangemen here, who hold periodical
meetings, and a most successful cricket club. The
coroner for the district resides here, the pound
is situated here, and there is also a weigh-
bridge. The local paper is the Manning, Hastings,
Barrington, and Copeland Advocate, published weekly.
The affairs of the town and district are watched
over by an active Progress Committee; Courts
of Petty Sessions held at stated periods. This
town is of great and increasing importance, being
the only outlet for the produce from the large out-
lying districts of Upper Manning, Dingo Creek,
Marlee, Cedar Party Creek, Killawarra, &c., &c.
The products are —maize, cedar, pigs, bacon, and
other farming produce, wheat, sugar, and tobacco;
should experiments now going on with Champion
wheat prove satisfactory, this cereal will most likely
receive more attention from the farmers. Of wool
there is only a small quantity. Gold has been
found in the vicinity, but not in any great quantity ;
there are also indications of copper and tin. The
population of the town is 350, and of the district
1,700. There is an almost inexhaustible supply of fine
timber, and it will be from this district that
the future supply of railway girders will be
drawn. When the proposed extension of the North-
ern line is completed, and the line from the natural
features of the country must pass very near to Wing-
ham, this town and district will make vast strides.
WISEMAN’S FERRY, a post, telegraph,
and money-order station on the Hawkesbury river,
in the county of Cumberland, electorate of Hawkes-
bury and police district of Windsor, 64 miles NW. of
Sydney. Steamers ply to Windsor, which is the
nearest railway station. It is more a postal centre
than a town, and consists, besides a few private
buildings, of one hotel and a public school, with
average attendance of 23. It is principally a farm-
ing district. Formation : sandstone. The ferry here
connects the Great Northern road with the South,
and is the principal place of crossing for the large
herds of cattle from the north that supply the Syd-
ney market.
WOLLOMBI is a small postal, money-order,
telegraph, and savings bank township on the Cock-
fighter creek, 110 miles (132 postal) to the N. of
Sydney, and 36 miles from Maitland. Communica-
tion is had with the metropolis by the Parley Rail-
way Station, or via Maitland by coach ; coach fare, !
10s. It is in the county of Northumberland, and
electoral district of Wollombi. The population num-
bers about 200 persons, the district 1,900. The prin-
cipal hotels are the Cricketers’ Arms, the Hawkes-
bury, Laguna Inn, the Settlers’ Anns and Court
House. The churches are Episcopal, Wesleyan, and
Roman Catholic ; there is also a public school, with
average attendance of 54, a court-house, police
barracks, and lock-up, and three stores : Bank, Joint
Stock. The surrounding country is largely occupied
with small farms, 8,315 acres being under cultiva-
tion ;in 1884 the results of the harvest were : wheat
14,019 bushels, 156,731 bushels of maize, 11,077
bushels of oats, and 40 cwt. of tobacco. Stock re-
turns to March 31, 1884, 3,053 horses, 10,437 cattle,
356 sheep, 3,658 pigs. Wollombi returns one mem- j
ber to the Legislative Assembly, and there are 1,300 |
electors on the rolls. Formation : principally sand-
stone. The district is at times subject to flood.
WOOLLAHRA is a beautiful, picturesque,
and thickly populated municipal suburb of Sydney, j
about 3 miles distant SE., having frequent tram-
way communication from the city, fare, 3d. Many
of the leading Sydney professional and tradesmen
reside here. In 1883 it had 20 miles of made streets,
and rateable property of the total value of £1,881,726.
A branch of the English and Scottish Bank is here,
also an Episcopalian, two Congregational, and one
Wesleyan church. A public school, with an average
attendance of 359, a post money order office, savings
bank and telegraph office.
WOLLONGONG-, county Camden, electorate
of lllawarra, is a seaport town and harbour, distant
64 miles 8. from Sydney (34° 20' S. lat., and 150° 55’
B. long). It is the principal harbour on the south
coast, and ranks in tonnage and number of shipping
the third seaport of the colony. From January to
June, 1884, 405 steam colliers and 117 sailing vessels
left the port with 153,734 tons of coal. The export
of produce and imports of merchandize is
about 60,000 tons yearly The harbour has been
greatly improved by the construction of a break-
water, and the excavation of the Belmore Basin out
of the solid rock to 14 feet, and, under the (four)
coal staiths, to 18 feet at low water, and the enlarge-
ment and deepening the old basin. The area of
both these basins, which now form on'e, is about
3 acres, giving 1,700 feet of wharfage. To meet the
growing trade the harbour is being further enlarged
and an additional staith and three steam cranes, one
to lift 15 tons, are erected to load vessels with coal.
The Osborne, Wallsend, and Mount Pleasant collieries
are 600 feet above sea level worked by adit into the
side of the mountain, about 3 miles distant, and
are connected with the port by locomotive rail-
ways. On the end of the breakwater there is a
circular iron lighthouse, 56 feet above water level,
with fourth class (catadioptric) white light, visible
ten miles off, to lead shipping into harbour.
Passenger steamers ply daily with Sydney, and
there is overland communication by coaches
daily to Campelltown Railway Station (coach fare,
Bs.), thence to the latter city. The town, which
is also a municipality, with a population of
about 1,650, is well built, and prettily situated at the
base of Mount Keira (1,540 feet high), one of the
highest points in the lllawarra range ; it has 20 miles
of streets, and rateable property valued at £227,766.
Its environs for beautiful mountain and ocean scenery
is not surpassed by any part of the world. The
Commercial, and English, Scottish and Australian
Chartered Banks, Court House, and Public School,
are all new buildings. The Bank of New South
Wales, savings bank, and post-office have also
convenient premises for business. The Albert
Memorial Hospital is one of the principal build-
ings, next the English church (of freestone) on
Church-hill; the Scotch church with tower and spire
in Crown-street, the Congregational, handsome new
Wesleyan church (of freestone), and Roman Catholic
chapels are creditable structures. The public school
is one of the finest out of Sydney, and has an
average attendance of 254 ; there is also a Roman
Catholic school. The School of Arts (library of
1,330 volumes), Municipal Free Library, Temperance
hall and Protestant hall, are all roomy buildings.
The post and telegraph offices, court-house, and
gaol are good buildings. There are numerous and
well-appointed stores in the principal streets (Crown
and Market). The hotels are the Queen’s, Harp of
Erin, Commercial, Freemasons’, Royal Alfred,Hiber-
nian, Brighton, and Cricketers’Arms, A steam flour
mill is here. Extensive seams of fire clay and iron
ore abound. There are five seams of coal from sto 17
feet thick, all of commercial value. The steamships
of Her Majesty’s Navy, P. and O. Co., Orient and
Pacific mail lines, and all large ocean-going steamers
prefer these coals to any other in the Southern
Hemisphere. The coal trade suffers for lack of rail-
way communication with Sydney as well as the
want of larger harbours on the coast. A lino of rail
to Sydney is now in course of construction. It will
leave the main line at Macdonald Town, passing
through the National Park, Clifton, Bulli, Wollon-
gong, Dapto, on to Kiama. The police district has
the same boundaries as the electorate of lllawarra ;
the population is about 8,000 souls ; electors on roli
1,836, returning one member to the Legislative
Assembly. _ Wollongong has long been noted for its
dairy farming, and is one of the principal sources
whence the metropolis and the greater part of the
colony is supplied with butter, of which the
yearly export is about 700 tons ; 500 kegs are fre-
quently shipped weekly during the summer months.
The other exports include pigs, poultry, calves, eggs,
cheese and bacon. Local papers, lllawarra Mercury
and Woollongong Argus. The town was proclaimed
a municipality February 22, 1859. In 1883 the
collieries in the district employed about 900 miners ;
255,911 tons of coal, of the value of £179,041, were
raised. The harbour is defended by a company


of artillery and a battery of four 5-ton guns, throwing |
721 b. shot. Formation : Carboniferous, ironstone
and limestone. The town was lighted with gas in
August, 1883, by a local company.
WOLUMLA, a township on the main Monaro
and Eden road, at its junction with the Bega and
Eden road, being 30 miles from Eden, 10 from Cao-
delo, and 267 miles from Sydney, situate on the
Camberwell Creek, in the county of Auckland and
electorate of Eden. Upper Tarago is the nearest
railway station. It has a post, telegraph and
money-order office, two stores, two hotels, Kailway
Junction and Wolumla, and a tannery. Two public
schools (average attendance of 39), one church, and a
School of Arts. Population about 350. It is the
centre of a large, fertile, and pastoral district, and has
several large dairies and cheese factories, which are
the principal support of the place. Gold, copper,
and tin has been found in small quantities.
WOMBAT, (34° 25' S. lat., 148° 10' E. long.) a
postal and money-order village on the Wombat creek,
in the county of Harden, 239 miles WSW. of Sydney,
10 miles from Young, and about 55 miles from
Yass. Population 319. Hotels—the Commercial and
the Australian Arms. An Episcopal church, a Roman
Catholic churcb, and Wesleyan chapel represent the
places of worship. A public school, average attend-
ance 41, police barracks, and three stores are here.
Coach to Murrumburrah Railway Station (fare, 55.),
thence the Southern line, are the means of reaching
Sydney. Great sheep-grazing district; considerable
quantities of wheat are also grown. Formation :
granite.
WOODBTJRN, a township in the Richmond
river district above Wardell, about 308 miles (337
postal) N. by E. of Sydney, and 30 miles from the
Clarence Heads. It is in the county of Rous, Clarence
doctoral district and police district of Richmond
river ; in lat. 29° 3' 8. and long. 153° 22' B. It is on
the right bank of the river, has two post-offices, with
money-order office, telegraph station and savings
bank on both sides of the river, a public school,
average attendance, 48, a Presbyterian church, four
stores, four sugar manufactories, four hotels, and
branches of the Joint Stock and Commercial
Bulli coal mines are about a mile distant. Popula-
tion 440.
WYBONGr, a post town on the creek of the
same name, in the county of Brisbane, electorate of
the Upper Hunter, and police district of Muswell-
brook, in 32° 20' S. lat. and 150° 41' E. long. 168 miles
N.by W. of Sydney, and 17 miles W.from the Muswell-
brook Railway Station. There are about 18 residents in
the township, and 260 in the entire district. Two
churches and one school, with average attendance of
16. Formation : Volanic rocks with black alluvial
soil in the flats, and light sandy soil on the ridges.
YASS, an important town on the main southern
road, on the banks of the river Yass, 187 miles
SW. of Sydney, with which it is connected by
the Great Southern Railway ; fares, 335. 3d. and
225. Yass is in the counties of King and Murray,
and electoral district of Yass Plains, and lies
1,657 feet above sea level. The town consists of
one main street, intersected by numerous other
streets, which cross it at right angles, all of them the
sites of respectable business and private buildings.
North Yass, which forms part of the town, and con-
nected by a handsome iron lattice bridge of 285 feet
span crossing the Yass river, is well populated, and
the site of numerous private residences, as well as
a few business places. O Connelltown is also in-
cluded within the boundaries of Yass. Both the
public edifices and the places of business are sub-
stantial erections, and are tangible evidences of its
growing prosperity. The Mechanics’ Institute is a
very notable building, with a large hall, capable of
accommodating over 300 persons. The institute has
a reading-room, where English and colonial papers
and periodicals are to be seen, an extensive and well-
selected library of 3,000 vols., to which large addi-
tions are being made, class-rooms, &c. The muni-
pal chambers are also at the institute. The hotels
are the Royal, Commercial, Y'ass, Salutation, Aus-
tralians, Builders’ Arms, and the North Y'ass. The
population numbers within the municipality 1,800,
the district 7,714. The local journals are the Yass
Courier, which was established in 1857, and is issued
twice a week, and the Yass Tribune, published
twice a week. A large and handsome public school,
Banks, and doubtless in time will be a prosperous with pretty cottage residence for teachers, built at
place, in consequence of its thickly populated neigh- ! a cost of over £5,000, was opened in January, 1879 ;
bourhood—estimated population upwards of I,ooo 'it has an average attendance of 154. There is also
and the breadth of land now under cultivation, par- a Roman Catholic school. A court-house, with
and the breadth of land now under cultivation, par-
ticularly for the sugar cane. Formation : alluvial,
clay subsoil, country flat. Agricultural, sugar-grow-
ing, and pastoral district. A court of Petty Sessions
is held once a month. Several lines of coaches run
between Woodbum and the Lower Clarence.
WOODHOUSLiEE, a post town in the
necessary offices, erected at a cost of over £12,000,
is the most handsome edifice of the kind out of
Sydney. Very fine and commodious buildings for
quarters for inspector of police and for the force
were built in 1879 at a cost of £5,000. The gaol
buildings were also considerably enlarged in 1879.
county of Argyle, electorate and police district of One member is returned to the Assembly. There
Goulbum, 144 miles SW. of Sydney. It is in lat. are over 2,000 electors on the roll for 1883-84. The
34° 30' S. and long. 149° 30' B. A coach runs to and surrounding country will, no doubt, be some day'
from the Goulburn Railway Station (17 miles distant),
three times a week. In or near the township is a
public school,with 30 average attendance,anßpiscopal
remarkable for its mining wealth, as it is rich in
copper, silver, and lead ore, samples of which were
shown at the International Exhibition in Sydney,
but at present the district depends upon its agri-
church, and a scattered population of 200 persons, i but at present the district depends upon its agri-
The district is employed mainly for farming and | cultural and grazing resources. About 13,950£ acres
grazing purposes. Formation ; ironstone and slate. \of land are under cultivation, the principal crops
Woodhouselee is within! miles of the dividing range being wheat, maize, barley, oats, and potatoes,
between the Bathurst and Goulburn districts. The yield in 1884 was; wheat 128,375 bushels,
WOODSIDE is a grazing and farming locality, | maize 5,073 bushels, barley 3,452 bushels, oats
207 miles N. of Sydney, in the county of Macquarie, 8,430 bushels, potatoes 910 J tons. On March 12th,
electorate of Hastings, and police district of Manning 1873, the town was incorporated ; it has a mayor
river. Hexham is the nearest railway station. See and eight aldermen, and 23 miles of roads, and
Taree.
WOOMAB.GAMA, a portal township on the
Main South Road, 21 miles NE. of Albury, and 347
SW. of Sydney in Goulburn county. It has a
public school (average attendance of 17), one hotel
(the Woomargama), one store and a blacksmith’s
shop. Population about 50.
WOONOOKA, a postal village in the county
of Camden, electoral district of Illawarra, 60 miles S.
of Sydney, and 6 miles from Wollongong, whence the
steamer can be taken for Sydney. The coach also
eau be taken to Campbelltown. There is a School of
Arts-a denominational school (CE.), with 107
scholars, three stores, a post and money-order office,
and Government savings bank, one hotel in the
Village (the Royal), and a .Wesleyan church, also a
public- school, with average attendance, 105. The
and eight aldermen, and 23 miles of roads, and
rateable property of the value or £90,092. Circuit
courts (presided over by judges of the Supreme
Court of the colony) are held twice a year, and Courts
of Quarter Sessions and District Courts at least three
times a year. Courts of petty sessions are held daily
before a resident police magistrate, and Small Debt
Courts monthly at the Court-house. Commercial
Bank of Sydney, Australian Joint-Stock Bank, and
Bank of New South Wales have branches here,
also a Government Savings Bank ; the Mutual
Provident Society and a large number of similar
societies have agencies ho\ - e. The Church of England,
Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, and Wesleyan
Methodist denominations have each handsome
churches, in which divine service is regularly held.
There are, as stated above, a large well-conducted
public school, and one Roman Catholic, denomina-


tional, besides several private schools, a number of
handsome private and business places, and four steam
flour mills. In addition to these there is a large
and handsome building, the Convent of Mount Car-
mel, connected with which is a large num-
ber of Sisters of Mercy, who keep a well-attended
select school, as well as one in a separate building,
erected for the purpose, as a girls’ school. Stock
returns to March 31, 1884, were 4,941 horses, 11,189
cattle, 411,112 sheep, 2,207 pigs. Gold is found in
payable quantities up and down the Yass river,
r ormation : granite, limestone, and slate.
YETMAK, a post town and telegraph station
on the banks of the river M'lntvre, 433 miles (450
postal) N. of Sydney, electoral "district of Gwydir
and police district of Warialda. It is about 200
miles from Grafton, where the steamer can be met.
Tam worth is the nearest railway station. One store,
two hotels—Yetman and Bushman’s Arms. District
pastoral. Formation: alluvial.
.YOUNG, a pleasant township on the north
side of the Burrangong or Main creek, 245 miles SW.
of Sydney, with which the communication is by
coach to Murrumburrah, fare, 7s. 6d., thence by rail.
It rs in Monteagle county, Young police and electoral
uistnct, m 34° 25' S. lat. and 148° 18' E, long. Gold
was accidentally discovered in June, 1860, and the
gold-fields in the immediate neighbourhood, known
as the Burrangong Gold-fields, principally alluvial,
have from time to time attracted large numbers of
miners ; companies are now in course of formation to
work the ground on the Man Creek. It has also many
other resources in mineral wealth that have yet to be
developed, 31,222 acres of land are under cultivation
the produce for 1834 being 293,279 bushels of wheat,
3,143 of maize, 4,76.5 barley, and 11,170 of oats; pota-
toes 104 tons; besides green crops, &c. Stock returns
for 1884 were 5,076 horses, 9,269 cattle, 601,232
sheep, 2,624 pigs. The land in the district is fast
being taken up for farming purposes, for which it is
eminently suited, and surrounding Young are per-
manent homesteads, settled populations and culti-
vated soil. Newspapers, the Burrangong Argus and
the Burrangong Chronicle both bi-weekly. The
number of inhabitants in the town, according to the
last census, was 1,500, with 11.383 in the district. The
principal hotels are the Royal and Albion. There are
three mam streets—Main, Burrowa, and Lynch. The
fii st-named is the oldest, but Burrowa is the leading
thoroughfare. There are three banks—City, N.
f \\ a^eB ,’ Commercial and Union; and agencies
ot the leading insurance companies ; a court-
house, an hospital, a Wesleyan chapel, a pretty
Episcopal church, Roman Catbolio, Primitive
Methodist and Presbyterian churches ; public school
L V N h I - aver ? ge . atte »dance of 308), and a Roman
Catholic school, a School of Arts, with library of
JoO vols., and a money-order, savings bank and
telegraph otbee. A gaol is now erected ; there are
also two steam flour mills, and a Circurt Court
held twice a year. Besides Young, the post towns
of the district are Marengo, Murrumburrah, Mus-
grave 10 miles distant on the Grenfell road), Wombat,
Grogan and Morangorell. During the last few
years the town has made considerable strides, and
both it and the district are fast rising in importance.
There are many new buildings, notably the new
court-house, public school, aud the new business
premises of Watson Brothers and D. Manson, and
brick structures on all sides are fast superseding the
wooden edifices of the early time ; among these may
be mentioned the banking premises of the Com-
mercial Bank, which is a fine spacious structure,
and the School of Arts. The town is incorporated,
and the construction of the railway from Murrum-
burrah will shortly be completed, and extension to
Blayney via Cowra. The town is approached by three
different coaches, which await the arrival of the mail
train, and reach Young each morning at about
ten. The local Pastoral and Agricultural Asso-
ciation holds a show each year, at which valuable
prizes are largely competed for. A very large num-
ber of single and two-story brick cottages and stores
have within a very recent period been erected, espe-
cially in Burrowa street, and some of the stores
would do credit to a town more densely populated
and of much larger pretensions. The new post office, a
most commodious and attractive structure, is situated
in Lynch street. _ Under the new Electoral Act
Young and district returns two members to the
Assembly.






GOVERNMENT EMIGRATION
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ASSISTED
PASSAGES IN STEAMERS OF THE HIGHEST GLASS
ARE GRANTED BY THE
Afi ENT-GENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES
TO ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS,
v' SIB
SUCH AS
FARMERS, AGRICULTURAL, RAILWAY,
AND OTHER
ABOURERS,
Suitable Classes of Mechanics,
AND FEMALE DOMESTIC SERVANTS,
At the undermentioned. Kates:—
Married Couples, not exceeding 40 years of age, £6 each couple
Single Men „ „ 35 „ „ £4 each.
Single Women „ „ 35 „ „ £2
Children of 3 and under 14 „ „ £1 „
N.B.— Female Domestic Servants are in great demand, and can obtain
Good Wages in New South Wales.
Further Particulars can be had on personal or written application to the
EMIGRATION DEPARTMENT,
New South Wales Government Offices,
5, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London, S.W.
