

UfjDCCC ' j
nwKata, . * XZZ#
CATTLE, SHEEp/pT 6S t POULTRY, DOGS.
*^^**^ l^******,, ****************************^*^'*****^^*i* ,^, *^ | ' | i | ****** M '**** M ************** , * | ****^***** , i | i | ‘ | ' | ' >| ‘ | ‘* | ' |> * , ‘ 1 i»mu~~ 1
Price one shilling


SALVITIS PROPRIETARY LTD.
MANUFACTURING and AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTS
SPECIALISTS IN THE PRODUCTION OF MEDICAL AND
CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS required in the
PASTORAL, DAIRYING, STUD, and ALLIED INDUSTRIES
17 QUEEN ST., MELBOURNE
R. J. OEHR, Secretary.
TO THE STOCkOWNER
This summary of ailments occurring from time to time among
stock should, by its comprehensiveness and simple arrangement, prove
helpful in enabling the Stockowner to recognise and name the ailment
from which his or his neighbour’s Horse, Cow, Calf, Sheep, Pig, Dog, or
Poultry may be suffering ; also of still greater assistance by straightway
apprising him of the remedy needed to successfully treat the same. It is
presented in the confidence that it will serve this purpose.
IMPORTANT.
Notwithstanding this full enumeration of the ailments of Stock,
disturbances of health will occur which apparently do not come under
any of the definitions here given. In such instances we will, on receiving
full description of the symptoms of the affection, advise as to the treatment
requisite to effectually cope with it, and when desired, forward by return
post the necessary remedy. The following extract will perhaps more
plainly convey our meaning.
“ I have had other medical preparations from you that have acted splendidly.
The first was for a heifer, a perfect picture of misery, I didn’t think she could
live. Some little time after I got your mixture, sold her for beef to the
local butcher, whereas otherwise I should have lost her. Another instance
was that of a 2-year-old filly that always was poor and miserable. I would
have taken for her before I got a special mixture from you. Six months
after she was fit to go into the team ploughing every day. Now she is in foal,
and I would not take less than £ sofor her.”
ANDREW LENNOX, Moyston.


[COPYRIGHT.]
HORSE AILMENTS
AND THEIR REMEDIES.
See
Page
Abortion of Mares, infectious or casual. Give Salvitis
and irrigate genitals with washes made with y
oalvitis Soap.
- Abrasion®, Chafing or rubbing off of skin. Dust over with
Salvitis Healing- Powder ; when bleeding, paint over with Salvitis
Styptic Tincture.
Abscesses. After opening, poultice or foment. Hasten
healing with Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
. Appetite, Poor, Capricious, or Depraved. Corrected at once
with the Compound Salvitis for Horses.
Back Sinews, Strain or Sprain of. Apply Salvitis White q
Lotion bandages until inflammation subsides, then rub in eentlv '
Salvitis Green Oils. g y
Barrenness, or Sterility of Mares. Often due to the 1n
presence of micro-organisms. Treat as for Abortion. 10
rT . Bladder, Irritability with Frequent Urination, Blood in the 1A
Urine or Red Water, Gravel, etc. Require special treatment to suit the 10
case. Send particulars.
„ . Bleeding- from Wounds is sometimes troublesome to stop.
rnars Balsam, Tar, and Witch Hazel are excellent remedies, but not
so speedy or certain as Salvitis Styptic Tincture, which should find a 11
corner in every stable.
Blood, to Purify and Enrich. Nothing compares with the
Salvitis Compound for Horses.
Blown, or Gaseous Distention from gorging on grain, stc.
Baking soda will dispel gas, but to relieve pain give a Salvitis 12
Anodyne Drench ; it is instant in effect.
Bonos, Weak, Soft, or Brittle, to Strengthen. Salvitis
Compound supplies the phosphatic elements required.
BotS in the Stomach of the Horse not only cause loss of weight
and strength, but also often cause death by serious injury they do to
the coat of the stomach and by blocking its outlet. The Salvitis 13
Compound for Horses is invaluable for detaching and removing bots and
worms from the stomach and intestines of the horse. g
Brittle Hoofj Sand Crack, Quarter Crack, False Quarter,
and all conditions due to defective secretion of horn. Repeated mild 15
dressings of Salvitis Brown Blister to the coronet at intervals of
seven or ten days.
Broken Knees, Barbed-wire Wounds, Cuts, Rips, Tears.
Gores, Burns, Scalds, etc. The best application for these and all such i
injuries is Salvitis Red Oils.
Broken Wind, Asthma, Heaves, or Short Breathing
Relieved by giving in damped feed Salvitis Pectoral Powder. 16
Full Directions on Pa.cka.ges.
SEND FOR PRICE LIST 1


tile 'Bronchitis, Acute and Chronic. Internally, Salvitis
16 Pectoral Powder ; externally, Salvitis Yellow Liniment.
Bruises. Sprains, Wrenches, resulting Irom Falls, Kicks, or
Blows. Bathe with Salvitis White Lotion, afterwards rub in Salvitis
ree canker. Thrush, Spongy Frog or Stinking Foot-pad ; mainly
due to filthy yards or stable floors. Keep clean with strong lathers oi
17 Salvitis Antiseptic Soap ; pack in freshly every second day Salvitis
Black Pine Ointment. . . .
Capped Hock, Capped Elbow, or other injury causing
enlargement, if recent, Salvitis White Lotion bandages ;if neglected,
repeated mild dressings with Salvitis Brown Blister.
Castration. It is important to observe caution and
absolute cleanliness in this operation, so note—Knives, needles
18 instruments and hands can be rendered innocuous by washing with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Cold. Common, t.e.. Catarrh, following chill or exposure.
Morning and evening doses of Salvitis Pectoral Powder, warm
clothing and steaming of nostrils.
ColiC or “Gripes” (Flatulent or Spasmodic). The most
distressingly painful ailment of the horse. Speedy, certain, and
19 permanent relief obtained by using Salvitis Anodyne. _
Collar, Saddle, and other Galls. Cured by Salvitis Healing
20 Powder. White Lotion, or Meal All Ointment. , . .
Condition, out of, Down in Health, Gone in Looks, Spirits,
Energv, and Strength, with no heart to pace or pull. For such a horse,
21 the bracing, invigorating, strengthening action of the Salvitis
Compound is specially valuable.
Constipation, Obstinate. Salvitis Tasteless Purge, mild,
medium, or strong, according to class of horse.
Corns cause lameness, and often end in Quittor. Remove shoe,
c? pare the corn well out, and fill with Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Coughs of every description in horse. Speedily and effectually
cured with Salvitis Pectoral Powder.
Cracked, Chapped, or Speyed Heels. Cleanse with Salvitis
Antiseptic Soap, heal with Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Curb, Sprain and Thickening of the Straight Ligament of Hock.
Salvitis White Lotion bandages at first ; afterwards mild, weekly
applications of Salvitis Brown Blister. .
28 Debility Simple or General, from Exhaustion or Sickness.
Disappears under the restorative influence of the Salvitis Compound.
23 ~ Diabetes, or Profuse Staling. Requires special treatment
adapted to age, sex, etc. Send particulars. _ ,
24 Diarrhoea, Scour, Washy or Excessive Purging. ihe
Salvitis Astringent is an unfailing remedy.
24 Ear, Injuries to, from use of whip or bite of horse. Cleanse, then
apply Salvitis Red Oils with feather. XT ,
Eczema, an extremely troublesome Skin Complaint. Needs
persistent treatment with special internal and external reme ies.
Supplied on request.
Eyelids, Torn or Burnt. Apply Salvitis Heal All Ointment.
Full Directions on Packages.


Eyes and Eyelids, Inflammation of. Yields to bn.vulj l^6
Eye Lotion Crystals. Where numbers have to be treated the
Salvitis Dry Spray will be found most convenient and reliable.
Feet, Inflammation of. Fever in the Feet, Founder, or
ammitis. After fever and inflammation subside, restore appetite
with Salvitis Compound, bandage the limbs with Salvitis White
Lotion. When recovery has taken place use leather soles, and once a
fortnight apply a mild dressing of Salvitis Green Oils to the Coronet.
Fistula, Fistulous Withers, etc. Remove Fistula with knife
and plug with Salvitis Black Pine Ointment and cotton wool, chang- 27
mg every 24 hours.
. Foot, Packed or Punctured. Remove nail, and paint puncture
with Salvitis Red Oils or apply Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Glanders and Farcy. Treatment prohibited. Fine for not
reporting.
Glandular Swellings. Reduced with mild dressings of
Salvitis Brown Blister.
Gleet, or Nasal Gleet. Cleanse the nostrils occasionally with
sa * viti ? Antiseptic Soap, and give morning and evening allowances
of Special Remedy supplied.
Grease, or Pustular Erysipelas, i.e., Greasy Heels. Repeated
cleanings with strong lathers of Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, afterwards 28
applying Salvitis Black Pine Ointment. If chronic, special internal
treatment is required.
Gripes, or Colic. Salvitis Anodyne ensures instant and
permanent relief.
Hock Joint Lameness. Salvitis White Lotion bandages
afterwards rub in Salvitis Green Oil. 28
Hidebound. An occasional Salvitis Tasteless Purge and a
course of Salvitis Compound.
Hysteria, Restlessness in Mares when in Season. Special
calminative treatment supplied.
Indigestion, with dulness, unsteady gait, etc.; from idleness,
over-feeding, or other cause tending to impair the functional activities of 29
the stomach. Give first a Salvitis Tasteless Purge of strength suited
to class of horse, afterwards daily doses of Salvitis Compound.
Influenza, Pink Eye, Winter Fever, Rheumatic Cold, or
Distemper of Horses, a prostrating epidemic affection of the winter
season. Rest, warmth, nutritious foods, gruels, mashes, inhalations of
warm vapor of Stockholm tar. Salvitis Pectoral Powder for Cough.
To assist recovery, daily doses of the stimulating, health-renewing
Salvitis Compound.
Itch of the Skin may result from eczema, mange, or lice.
Treatment will depend on the cause. Send particulars.
Jaundice, Yellows, or Bilious Fever. Give once a week a
Salvitis Tasteless Purge, and twice daily doses of a special quinine
and acid tonic. Supplied on request.
Joints, Open or Punctured, Knee or Hock, with escape of joint
oil. Special colloid application supplied on request.
Kidney Affections. Apply Salvitis Yellow Liniment to 30
loins. Internal treatment supplied. Send particulars.
Full Directions on Packages.


See KneCS Broken, with superficial or deep wound, or swelling
Paee and inflammation only. Cleanse, and apply Salvitis Red Oils ; if open
wound exposing joint, send for Special Remedy ; if heat and swelling
only, Salvitis White Lotion bandages.
Knuckling 1 Over, from contracted tendon. Skilled surgical
attention required.
Lameness may be caused by sprains, ringbone, bruises,
pricks, corns, canker, etc. Therefore should be treated accordingly.
Suitable remedy supplied.
Laminitls. See Feet, Inflammation of.
LampaSj an accompaniment of teething. Scarify the gums,
afterwards swab frequently with alum water.
Legs, Puffed, Swollen, and Inflamed. Bandage with Salvitis
White Lotion.
Lice of all kinds. These annoying pests are the source of great
uneasiness, rubbing, and scratching, and stamping with the feet, and
biting at the leg. For their eradication swab the skin over with
Salvitis Antiseptic Solution or wash with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Liver, Derangement of. A Salvitis Tasteless Purge, followed
by Salvitis Compound.
LungS, Congestion and Inflammation of (Pneumonia), a critical
31 ailment. Requires skilled attention and incessant care. In mild cases
apply Salvitis Yellow Liniment and give Salvitis Pectoral Powder.
Maggots are apt to appear in neglected sores during warm
Weather. Eradicate these and sweeten sore with a strong lather of
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, or painting over with Salvitis Red Oils.
Mallenders and Sallenders, a scaly skin trouble, back
of knee and front of hock. First apply lathers of Salvitis Antiseptic
Soap, afterwards bandages of Salvitis White Lotion.
Mange, a troublesome parasitic disease common to ill-cared-for
horses. Swab with Salvitis Antiseptic Solution, or wash with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Megrims, a disease of the brain. Should be treated same as
Sunstroke.
Mouth, Sore, in foals and aged horses. Special Remedies
supplied.
Mud Fever, Mud Rash, or Winter Leg. Remove dirt, apply
Salvitis White Lotion, then Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Muscles and Muscular Force. Sustained by the Salvitis
Compound.
Nasal Gleet. See under “ Gleet.”
Navicular Disease, a malady affecting one or both fore feet
32 of high-class horses chiefly. Requires skilled surgical attention.
Full Directions on Packages.


- s ee
Nettle Rash, Surfeit, or Weals, a skin irritation due to digestive Page
disturbance. Give a Salvitis Tasteless Purge, and bathe skin with
Salvitis White Lotion.
Paralysis, Partial or Apparent. Often benefited by long course
of Special Tonic treatment. Supplied on request.
Pleurisy, inflammation of lining membrane of chest. Salvitis
Yellow Liniment to the ribs, warm clothing, and regular allowances of
Salvitis Pectoral Powder.
Poll Evil, Proud Flesh, Foul Ulcers, and Deep-seated Abscesses.
Should be kept clean with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, and painted daily
with Salvitis Red Oils.
Pricked or Punctured Foot. After removal of nail paint
with Salvitis Red Oils, or pack with Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Purgation, early, is often of vital importance. Salvitis
Tasteless Purge can always be relied upon when quick and thorough
action of the bowels is required.
Quittor, or Fistula of the Foot. Requires surgical attendance
In very mild cases the Salvitis Black Pine Ointment is useful.
Rheumatism, in legs, shoulders, joints. Internally the or
Salvitis Rheumatic Cure, externally Salvitis Green Oils.
; Ringbone, Sidebone, and Splints. Are each best treated with 35
mild dressing of Salvitis Brown Blister.
Ringworm, all varieties. Cured by frequently lathering with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Sand in the Intestines, or Sand Colic. Give a pint of linseed oil, 37
a Salvitis Tasteless Purge, or a Salvitis Purgative Drench.
Sand Crack, Seedy Toes, etc. Clamping and application ol 36
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Shoulder Lameness. Hot fomentations and the rubbing in
of Salvitis Green Oils. 38
Sit-fasts. Best removed with knife and healed with Salvitis
Black Pine Ointment.
Skin Diseases due to faulty nutrition. Disappear after a
course of Salvitis Compound.
Skin Sweaty or Scurfy. Cured by the Salvitis Compound and
an occasional Salvitis Tasteless Purge.
Retention Of Urine. Requires surgical relief.
Rickets, or softness of the bone in young animals. The Salvitis
Compound is eminently suitable.
Sore Backs, Recent or of Long Standing. Bathe with
Salvitis White Lotion or dust with Salvitis Healing Powder.
Sore Throat, Inflamed or Ulcerated. Mix Salvitis Pectoral
Powder with honey or treacle, and place on the tongue or lips
frequently. Also repeatedly foment with hot water or apply Salvitis
Yellow Liniment externally.
Full Directions on Packages.


OO m |
p & g e Spavins. Blood, Bone, Bog, Soft, or Thoroughpin. Are eac
39 best treated with repeated mild applications of salvitis Brown Blister.
Staggers, Stomach Sleepy or Mad. Treatment must be
4 9 preventive, feeding regulated, the system kept cool by a moderately
laxative diet, and by occasionally giving a Salvitis Tasteless Purge.
Staked or Gored. For either injury use the Salvitis Red Oils.
Stings or Bites (bees, ants, hornets, mosquitoes). Apply the
Salvitis White Lotion.
Strangles, regular and irregular, an infective disease, especially
attacking young horses. Commence by giving Salvitis Pectoral
Powder every six hours. Steam the nostrils frequently, keeping clean
with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. Hot fomentation and the rubbing in
of Salvitis Green Oils on the swelling under jaw. On improvement
give Salvitis Compound.
Stringhalt, or Sciatica of the Horse. A Special Remedy
supplied on request.
Sunstroke, or Heat Apoplexy. Constant cold water application
to head and spine. When fit give a strong Salvitis Tasteless Purge.
Swollen or Filled Legs of Heavy Horses. Bandage
nightly with Salvitis White Lotion.
Tail Itchy, with loss of hair. Apply Salvitis Black Pine
Ointment at night, washing off with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap and
warm water in morning.
, Treads, or Over-reach, Bruises or Wounds. Apply Salvitis
White Lotion.
Ulcers, Weak, Indolent, Inflamed, or Gangrenous. Can be kept
sweet by washing with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, and healed w,ith
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Urination, Kxcessive. Requires special treatment to suit case.
Send particulars.
Warts about the Eyes. Are removed without the slightest pain
or detriment by constant applications of Salvitis Wart Remedy.
Weed, Thick Leg, Shot of Grease. Bandage with Salvitis
White Lotion.
Wind Galls. Bandage nightly with Salvitis White Lotion.
Worms, Round, Thread, or flape. Expelled by the Salvitis
Special Worm Remedy.
Wounds, Clean Cut, Ragged, or Contused, new or old. Use
Salvitis Heal-all Ointment or Salvitis Red Oils.
From a large Colonial Carrying Firm.
*■ Having used Salvitis in our stables for a considerable time we have much
Measure in certifying to its usefulness as a Tonic for horses, and we think, as our team
Fs a very lengthv one, and our business extremely trying to horses, our experience
should be of value to owners of horses generally ”_Mayke, Nickless & Co. Propy.
Itd Victorian Parcels Express. Collins Street West, Melbourne.
•’ The carriers here are beginning to find out that Salvitis Compound is a
rattling good tonic for horses, and are fairly rushing me for some. —A. Clark,
Delegate. N.b.W.
■—— ~
Full Directions on Packages.
6


j CS CONCEDED that the health and vigour of our domesticated
animals largely contribute to the health and comfort of the people ■
hence the incentive to adopt such means as best minister to the continuance
in health and freedom from disease of our live stock. This is a result
that attends the 'judicioususe of the different , which
i epresent, in a usable way , the Prescriptions of experienced first authori-
ties on Live Stock Ailments, In cases of or
doubt exists as to the exact\nature of ailment, voe suggest , whenever it is
pi acti cab it , that veterinary aid should be availed of, apart from where
such is herein distinctly advised. •
A LIST OF THE AILMENTS, DISEASES, IN JURIES & SUFFERINGS
TO WHICH IT IS SUBJECT.
THEIR NATURE, CAUSES, SYMPTOMS & TREATMENT
AS DETAILED BY THE BEST PROFESSIONAL AUTHORITIES,
TOGETHER WITH SUGGESTED REMEDIES FOR THEIR RELIEF & CURL.
AILMENT and DISEASE. —The weary eye, the anxious ex-
pression, the sharp, peculiar look, the turned head, the heaving flanks,
the trembling limbs, the unnatural posture, and other “mute
indications,” tell the tale of suffering, bear testimony to a description so
faithful and true, and appeal so beseechingly to our sympathises that no
humane being should withhold compassion, or delay in affording the
utmost help and relief obtainable —within his means. Some diseases
have one or two common names; each will be found in the list, but
described under the simplest and best known name. The remedies
suggested are those of which we have most knowledge, consequently
most confidence, being of our own manufacture, and in most instances
none other than remedies approved by leading veterinary authorities,
put into a popular shape and so made more readily available to the
general public.
ABORTION, Contagious, in Mares has been proved
by scientific investigations to be caused by a bacillus, but it is not the
same as that which produces contagious abortion in cattle, the two being
of quite distinct character. The bacilli which cause this disease in
mares obtain entrance into the uterus either through the vagina, or
by means of the blood system (circulation). In the uterus they
multiply with great rapidity and set up an irritation of such intensity as


to cause the animal to abort. The cause of the disease is very readily
spread, and therefore contagious. Infected mares help to spread it by
the bacillus being found on the prematurely-expelled foetus, the toetai
membranes, and also in the secretions from the parts. Experiments
made with these same germs on pregnant cows showed that they were
not affected by them, whereas whenever a healthy pregnant mare has
been inoculated with the bacilli obtained from a prematurely born toal,
abortion soon followed. To prevent the spread of the disease, infected
mares should at once be separated from other in-foal mares, the aborted
foetus and membranes immediately destroyed by fire, and the stable,
shed or location in which the abortion occurred subject to thorough
disinfection. In-foal mares should not be allowed to run in the paddock
in which a case has occurred for at least three months. As regards the
treatment of the mare after aborting, the vagina should be syringe ,
and the vulva and the surrounding parts well washed, with an efficient
antiseptic lotion, at least once daily until all discharges from the
generative organs have ceased. A very reliable wash for this purpose
can be made with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap—say a piece the size of a nut
dissolved in a gallon of luke-warm water. As protection against
repetition of this mishap, a short course of antiseptic and tonic treat-
ment is advised. Mares in which contagious abortion has occurred
should not be covered again until two or three months after the date
when the foal was normally due. If sent to the horse any earlier
abortion is likely to occur again. Stallions which serve infected mares
are one of the chief means of distributing the disease by infecting healthy
mares during the act of service. The stallion that covers an infected
mare should have his parts disinfected with the wash recommended above.
ACIDITY of the Stomach arises from bad food and
irregular feeding. Symptoms.— The animal is observed to lose
condition; the skin is scurfy and unthrifty; he is continually poking and
picking among the litter, licking out the corners of the manger, occasion-
ally stretching out the nose and pouting the upper lip. If turned out,
he licks earth or sand, and evinces a depraved appetite ; at work he is
easily sweated; his bowels are irregular, the dung being light coloured
and glazed. Treatment.— Change the feed, and give a few bran
mashes, add one or two teaspoonfuls of Carbonate of Soda to each pan
of drinking water, and mix in each evening meal a full allowance ot the
Compound Salvitis. — Magnet's Morse Doctor
AGE. Influence on the production of disease.--
The periods of predisposition towards disease are those of youth an
old age. The foal is liable to suffer from certain affections, from which
the adult animal is exempt. With increasing age, the bones become more
brittle, the tendons, ligaments, and muscles decrease in their sustaining
powers, consequently there is an increased tendency towards an a ter-
ation in the relationship of joints, etc., rendering the latter less capable
of executing their freedom of movement. The tendency towards the
deposit of bony material is specially marked during the first three or four
years of life. Irreparable diseases of the joints are most frequent amongst
old horses, more especially such as have had severe work, with indifferent
attention. Irregularities of the teeth, weak digestion, and enfeebled
circulation, are specially marked among the latter class of animals.
Frank Barton.


ALTERATIVES • —As a general rule this class of remedies
produces their effect by acting slowly but steadily on the depuratory
organs, as the liver, kidneys, and skin, and are particularly useful in
spring and early winter, when the shedding of the coat produces a
certain amount of debility or lassitude, or when, from clipping or
exposure, the skin does not act freely, Indigestion or surfeit, causing
eruption, nettle rash or water-bumbs, are treated with alteratives, and
more frequently than not with success. Of this class of remedy the
Salvitis Compound stands foremost—so when your horse is “ out of
sorts,” does not feed well, passes his dung with difficulty, or by general
behaviour appears to be out of health, let him experience its benefit.
ANCHYLOSIS OF BONE is an extensive bony excrescence
by which the ends of two or more bones become united, as occurs in
Anchylosed and Enlarged Joint
in Ringbone.
ringbone, spavin, splint, etc. Symp-
toms are enlargements round the joint,
which is stiff and inflexible, and in some
cases the animal is lame. Treatment.
—lf there is lameness, blister or fire, as
may be thought necessary, so as to com-
plete the union of parts. The motion of
the joint cannot be restored by any treat-
ment.
APPETITE, Vitiated, in a colt
is often noticeable by the constant
nibbling at the mane and hairs of the
tail of its dam. Now, hair in any con-
dition or form is indigestible, and so may
be the source of future trouble. To cure
the colt of this habit, the hair of the
mane and tail should be smeared with
fish oil, to which Stockholm tar may be
added. This will most certainly prevent
the young creature indulging in its de-
praved taste. Worms sometimes annoy
foals exceedingly when they have attained
the age of three or four months, or even
earlier, but more particularly when they are
yearlings. An examination of the dung
will generally reveal the presence of these parasites, while the appear-
ance of the young animals, their staring, harsh, and unthrifty-looking
coat, longer than it should be; large, pendulous belly ; loss of flesh,
with frequently a dry, husky cough and constipation, alternating with
diarrhoea, betray the effects of the worms. When this is so, small
allowances of Salvitis Compound will be found efficacious.
ASTRINGENTS are agents used to diminish excessive, and
modify faulty, secretion ; they are given in diarrhoea and dysentry, and
the purging that attends septic diseases. For the over-relaxed state of
the bowels, to which young colts are subject, the Salvitis Astringent is
particularly useful.
BACK SINEWS, Strain or Sprain of, is best defined
as an overstretching of muscles, tendons, or ligaments, with very often


rupture of the fibre. Sprains are usually caused by sudden and severe
exertion. As with the horse it is “ the pace that kills,’ so it oftenest
happens to horses put to fast work. It also often occurs to cart horses,
and to others that are constantly pushed beyond their natural pace or
power. Besides manifestations of lameness, varying from the slightest
stiffness, or a limp, to halting, or inability to move, there is always
proportionate heat and swelling, and these call for prompt measures ;
neglect resulting in chronic states admitting of no relief. First of all
give the horse entire rest, keep up continuous hot fomentations for two
or three days, or as long as the place is hot and tender. Cold water
cloths, or, better still, Salvitis White Lotion bandages, frequently
changed should then be applied until natural heat is estaolished, when
a few rubbings with the Salvitis Green Oils should be given, and the
horse allowed a considerable period of rest. It may be found useful in
the beginning to give the horse a dose of physic, and if feverish to add
a little nitre to his drinking water. NOTE.—A rule that should be
adhered to by all who have to do with horses is that neither blisters,
stimulants, nor liniments, should ever be used while heat or tenderness
of the part remains, that is, not until inflammation has subsided.
BARRENNESS, with some animals, is congenital, ~ “to the
nature born” ] malformation is sometimes accountable for it, and it is
also caused by disease of the organs of generation and faulty general health.
Where no physical disability or reason is apparent, tiy change of diet
and surroundings, constant exercise, and a course of alterative
treatment of Potassium lodide, Phosphorus, and Canthaiides, in small
acceptable doses. Gradually lower the system of fat plethoric subjects,
or, if debilitated, improve condition by diet and tonics. The Salvitis
Compound has invigorating properties of more than ordinary excellence.
This is acknowledged by many breeders, stallion owners and others.
Sometimes operation is necessary, and very often change of male has
brought about the desirable end.
BELLY-ACHE.— See Colic.
BLADDER, Inflammation Of.— This is not of very frequent
occurrence, in the horse. It may be caused by the injudicious
use of fly blisters, turpentine, etc., or arise from the presence of
concretions of gravelly deposits in the bladder \ or be the result
of a blow cruelly inflicted with the toe of a heavy boot, or may exist as
sympathetic with inflammation of the kidneys. SyiTlp'tomS. The
animal is in great suffering, paws violently, cords the back, straddles the
hind legs, and postures for urination without result, and, in the case of
males, frequent unsheathing of the penis there is great thirst, a high
degree of fever, quick, small, irritable pulse, and distressed countenance,
the sufferer often looking anxiously round towards its hind quarters.
There is an indisposition to lie down, though rest is needed. Treat-
ment. —The horse should receive a dose of linseed oil sufficient to
purge, a pint, or a pint and a half, be well supplied with linseed tea, or thin
gruel, and also with mashes of linseed or bran, the linseed being boiled
or thoroughly scalded with boiling water so as to extract the
Give in the drinking water every four hours 2 drams of Bicarbonate of
Potash and 4 drams of Bromide of Potash. The bladder may be
emptied by means of a catheter by a skilled operator. Apply a poultice
of hot bran to the loins or rub in some Salvitis Yellow Mustard Liniment.
This treatment, with rest, will generally be all sufficient.


BLEEDING from the Skin. —This disease is sometime*
called Purpura. After a general uneasiness, some pain, fever, and
swelling of the legs and other parts of the body ; tumors, varying from
the size of a blackberry to that of a pigeon’s egg, often running together*
forming large patches from which blood is oozed out in great quantities,
give rise to much debility. The contagious typhus, or rinderpest, ol
cattle, bears many resemblances to this disease of the horse. Treat-
ment. —Feed the animal on the best food that can be procured, and
drop 40 drops of pure sulphuric acid in half a bucket of cold water three
or four times a day for the horse to drink. Then get one ounce each of
Sulphate Copper and Gentian Root, both in powder, mix well, then
divide into eight powders, and give one night and morning in the feed.
Apply to the bleeding surfaces and sores, once in 24 hours, a little
Creosote Liniment (or Salvitis Red Oils diluted with three times as much
salad or linseed oil). — McClure'sAmerican Horse Doctor.
BLISTERS & BLISTERING.— Judgment is necessary in
blistering horses, finely bred animals not requiring nearly so strong an
application as coarser skinned horses. Excessive dressing only leads to
ugly blemishing and aggravation of the original malady. It is not very
safe to blister the legs of a mare in foal, and it is positively dangerous
and cruel to blister all legs on the one day whether in foal
or not. If a horse’s legs must be blistered, then have only one done at
a time, and allow some days to elapse before doing another. This should
always be the case, as the irritation produced by blistering is very great,
and death has not infrequently been the result of blistering all four legs
at the same time. 1 o ensure the speedy action of a blistering ointment
or fluid, the surface—after clipping the hair closely—should be fomented
with hot water, then thoroughly dried, the blister gently rubbed in,
finally leaving a thin covering of the blister over the part, when after
10 or 12 hours a blister will be raised ; sooner, when mercurial blisters
are used. Should the blister be large, as is often the case with fly
blisters, a small slit can be made to allow of the escape of the fluid.
The part afterwards should be covered with a little fleece wool or soft
rag, and allowed to heal. The animal’s head should be tied short for
48 hours so that he cannot get the blistering matter about his lips or
eyes. Salvitis Brown Blister is very effectual in the reduction of splints,
spavins, curbs, ringbone, or other bony enlargements, and, when diluted,
equally serviceable for a thickened tendon, slight sprain, or to brace
a joint, reduce wind-galls or soft enlargements.
BLOOD, BOG & BONE SPAVIN— See Spavins.
BLOOD in the URINE, or RED WATER is occasionally
seen in horses, more frequently in cattle, and consists in a diseased state
of the kidneys, from violent strains or accidents. Calculi, or stone-like
concretions, are often found in the kidneys of horses, and cause con-
siderable irregularity in making water. Treatment. —Give plenty
of linseed tea to drink ; if the animal refuses it, drench him ; give no
saltpetre or other diuretic medicine. Lay warm water clothes or a
fresh sheep skin over the back, or in a situation above the kidneys.
If the bowels are constipated, give a small dose of Linseed Oil. To
each bucket of drinking water add 20 or 30 drops of Muriatic Acid or
Sulphuric Acid. In old horses, as in men, considerable chronic disease
of the kidneys exists. Although little can be accomplished in the way


of cure by medicines, a great deal can be done to soothe tne parts, by
soft and soothing feed and drink, such as steamed or boiled feed and
linseed tea, and green meat, with plenty of cold water at all times to
drink. The more fluids that go into the body the less irritation of the
bladder and kidneys. —Robert McClure , M.D. , F.S.
BLOWN, or FLATULENT COLlC.— Horses gorged with
wheat, oats, or other grain, and blown out with gas, can, in most in-
stances, be relieved by a full dose of Carbonate of Soda —that is, the
ordinary baking soda—say 2or 8 ounces dissolved in a wine bottle of
cold water, and given straight away as a drench, following in a hour’s
time with a Salvitis Purgative Drench. Bad cases are known by the
violent agony, rolling, kicking and plunging, and the sweat-bathed skin
of the sufferer, a condition known as Flatulent Colic, which, if not
speedily relieved, passes into insensibility and death. In such
instances, a Salvitis Anodyne Drench can be given with the utmost
advantage.
BONE DEVELOPMENT. —The development of a well pro-
portioned, bony framework is necessarily one of the first essentials to the
breeding of a high class horse, more especially when such an animal is
to be employed for hard, fast work. One of the reasons for this is that
good development of bone is usually accompanied by a corresponding
development of the ligaments, tendons, and muscles, which constitute
what may be described as the animal’s propelling power. Bones, in
themselves, have little to do with the propulsion of the animal, except
in so far as they act as a support for the body, but their proper develop-
ment is a matter of the greatest importance, as influencing the
growth of the tendons and muscles which play upon them, and through
which the motive power is really developed. Salvitis Compound con-
tains the elements essential to the building and renewal of the bony
framework in health and strength.
BONES & DISEASE. —There exists an important relation-
ship between quality of bone and liability to disease. Says Captain
HayesOther things being equal, the more porous the bones the
more liable they are to bony deposits, such as splints, spavins, and
ringbones,’’ and there is every reason to believe that his conclusions are
correct, as also his statement tjiat “ the drier the soil on which a horse
has been bred and brought up, and the ‘ harder ’ the food on which he
has been fed, the better will be the quality of his bones.” It pays in
the long run to give colts crushed oats and bran when on grass.
Periodical allowances of the Salvitis Compound, by contributing the
phosphates, tends to the strengthening of the bones of all animals.
BONE, Inflammation Of, occurs in all bones when subject
to injury, but the disease assumes special characters in connection with
the Cannon or Shanhhone. It is common to young racehorses as a result
of excessive strain and shock in undeveloped limbs, causing swelling,
great soreness, and lameness. Treatment should commence with
the giving of a mild purge, and the adding occasionally to the drinking
water of a few drops of Tincture Aconite, or of a tablespoonful of Sweet
Nitre to abate fever. To reduce inflammation apply bandages saturated
with the Salvitis White Lotion, and later, if heat and swelling continue,
mild blistering may be necessary. Let the diet be of a cooling
nature.


Ms 'v'’
" " lllllili •
■ - ■ ,. , :r : ' : - 1 ‘
■' r* 1 - J <>■;* vf 1 v,- .,* ■. • - ! tS < '■ ‘‘,t\ . '■ ■•*-’t‘
' r '
I&SB& : ' t '■' /'• ■ ■ V.-. -,/■ • ' ‘ !V‘ ■•* •. '.,. • /-.*«•
: - %
-; A »„* ,•- -,". /. ,-, Vlte£3f* - - gV^*’4k ■v' .><3?. •MfV r 4L‘ w- « jflffifo-»ffiSg {■«£
BOTS.—
The Bot Fly,
which has much
the appearance
of a drone bee,
exists in a per-
fect state, and is
most numerous
and active, in the
early summer
months. Dur-
ing the warmest
hours of the day
they may be seen
around the water
troughs, in the
stables, in sheds,
pigstyes,andcow
yards, when the
female, on close
observation, can
be seen flying
about the horses,
balancing herself
and depositing
5. The Newly Hatched Bot,
6. The Bot Full Grown.
7. The Head of a Bot Magnified.
8. The Male Fly.
9. The Chrysalis.
1. Female Fly about to deposit
an Egg.
2. The Egg Magnified.
3. The Bot.
i. The Eggs Magnified attached
to a hair.
eggs on the long hairs between the lower jaws, on the end of the hairs
of the mane, on the fetlock joint, and other points within easy reach of
the horse's tongue. The eggs, as seen on the hairs of the horse, are of
a dirty white colour, about the 20th part of an inch in length. They
are sharp at one end and blunt at the other like a rifle bullet. These
" nits," as they are popularly styled, are attached by the finer end to the
hairs by a sticky matter which is deposited with them. On the hairs
between the jaws they are matted on account of the hair being thick.
They are hatched in a few days time, depending on the warmth of the
weather, when the blunt end of the egg opens and the insect, which is
very active, begins to crawl on the skin, causing a slight itching, which
makes the horse lick the part, if it is in reach of the tongue, or if in other
parts to rub them on the feed box. In this manner the larvae reach the
mouth and get carried with the food into the stomach, where the
majority fix themselves by means of two little hooks or tentacles, with
which they are provided—one on each side of the mouth, to the white
coat of the stomach. Unless dislodged, here they remain in clusters,
firmly fixed, feeding on the inflammatory secretions caused by the
irritation of their heads and hooks, at times relaxing their hold and
fixing themselves on some more sensitive or vital part of the bowels.
They seriously interfere with digestion, causing the animal to thrive
badly, to be weak, easily sweated or fatigued, and sometimes bring about
sudden and fatal indigestion. The irritation caused by their presence
is not easily distinguishable from other forms of indigestion and colic.
When bots exist the horse frequently turns up his lip as if nauseated,
and the margins of his tongue are red and fiery. When present in large
numbers, they produce marked symptoms of loss of weight and strength,
staring of the coat, sleepiness and loss of appetite. Bots in large num-


> ; nn' - ■. * ..•■ , t ‘.'■->■*. ■
bers may, and do, cause death. It is claimed that, as a rule, bots are
harmless parasites, seldom producing much mischief, but those who
have lost valuable horses, and they count by hundreds, hold a distinctly
opposite view ; besides, the instinctive dread of the approach of the bot-
fly sufficiently indicates the horse’s consciousness of the insect s power
for evil. A high authority (Veterinary-Surgeon Clater) asserts that
they repeatedly cause convulsions, and by ulcerating the parts to w ic
they are attached frequently destroy the horse. For their expulsion,
many remedies are proposed, including Sage or ansey an.
Turpentine, and numerous other nostrums, but we have yet to meet
with anything so assuredly satisfactory as Salvitis Compound, instance
of which we cite as under; —
Mr E T Doherty, of Drouin, had horses with bots in them, for which
he used the Salvitis Compound for Horses, with splendid results, for he wntes;
—After giving the Salvitis Compound a real, practical test, on a valuable
thoroughbred sfallion. and also on a racehorse lam able « assert h confb
dence that the Salvitis Compound bears out all that is claimed for it as an
exterminator of bots and worms.”
BOWELS, Inflammation of, ENTERITIS or RED
COLIC, is a critical disease of the her-, resuhtng from ttotog. or
telescoping of some portion of
the bowels, strangulation of the
gut, through rupture, puncture
of the belly and bowels from
without, from the bowels be-
coming obstinately blocked. Ac-
cumulations of sand often induce
it, while many cases are trace-
able to acrid vegetation, or to
some such irritant, corrosive
poison, as bluestone, phos-
phorus, oil of vitriol, etc., etc.,
but mainly it is due to the
mischief wrought by intestinal
parasites. Dr. Frank Barton
states that in a record of 120
Sure Indication of Inflammation of Bowels.
cases of bowel inflammation, 88 were due to worms, the most destructive
being the blood sucking, four spined strongyle, and the little round
palisade worms. (See Worms). Symptoms.—For the first few
hours the horse is uneasy, paws, looks around at the side, shivers, is
alternately hot and cold, the eyes blood-shot, the belly hot and tender,
and soon pain—fearful and continuous pain—exists, which might be
mistaken for colic, but in colic there are times of ease from pain, but
never in this disease. As the disease progresses, internal blood vessels
give way, mortification sets in and after a few struggles the anima
expires. The first stage of inflammation of the bowels is when the
animal sits on his haunches like a pig, gradually gets up, and walks
around as if in great agony ; makes attempts to lie down, and when he
does, goes down very carefully; may make a few rolls ; - will slowly
straighten out again, attempting to rise and sit on his haunches again
like a pig. This position is a positive sign of bowel inflammation, and
to save °the patient the treatment must commence in earnest.
C. A. Meyer. Treatment.— The first thing to be done is to lesson
or destroy the pain and to endeavour to get some movement or the


Dowels, and to effect this copious injections of linseed tea or soap and
water, or back racking, must be practised, and a quart of linseed oil,
With two ounces of laudanum, should be given, and repeated in half the
doses in two hours if required. Fomentations of hot water, or bags rung
out of boiling water, must be constantly applied to the belly. Where*
from the violent movement of the animal, this is impracticable, apply
mustard and turpentine, or paint the belly over with Salvitis Yellow
Mustard Liniment. In the unceasing application of external heat and
free movement of the bowels rests the only hope of recovery.
BRITTLE HOOFS are due either to a constitutionally un-
healthy, or defective secretion of horn substance, or may be associated
with chronic skin diseases —these often going together, and accounted
for by the hoof being a dependence or continuation of the skin—or are
to be attributed to excessive evaporation during hot weather, resulting
from the destructive rasping of the crust, by which the hoof is
deprived of its natural external protection. When it exists, extra care
in shoeing is required, for often the hoof is so thin as to make the danger
of pricking and consequent lameness just possible. The best and most
logical way to remedy this state of the hoof, and to prevent sandcrack
(of which Brittle-Hoof is a frequent cause) is, first and above all, to en-
deavour to stimulate or increase the secretion of horn substance, by
applying to the coronet, once a month or so, a mild dressing of the Sal-
vitis Brown Blister; each night fomenting the hoof with warm water,
and after drying, brushing the weak parts over with a thin coat of
partially melted Black Pine Ointment. At the same time the con-
stitutional health of the horse must be well looked after.
BROKEN KNEES. —When a horse
in motion falls, he scrapes his knees along the
road, thereby causing the muscles of the knee
to be rent and torn asunder, the wound being
often large enough to put the fiat hand in edge-
wise to the depth of an inch or more. It is
quite a mistake to suppose that the knees are
cut by contact with the ground and without
tearing. If a motionless horse falls he never
cuts his knees. The knees are torn, not cut,
and no remedy is satisfactory, or even possible,
without the closing of the orifice. If the lips
of the wound be not drawn together, the heal-
ing will be by granulations—that is, grains of
flesh will build up the opening, beginning at
the bottom and sides of the wound and growing
to the surface, when skin will form over it.
This skin has no hair roots, and even white
hairs do not grow. The prevention of such
Broken Knee.
an ugly blemish could in many cases be averted—by pursuing the
following course, having thoroughly cleansed the wound : —Bring
the torn edges together with strips of strong adhesive plaster, leaving,
at the lowest point of the wound, a small aperture for drainage, or, in
plainer words, for the wound to weep. By this means the wound is
reduced in size, and healing much assisted. Shou'd the knees be
swollen and inflamed apply bandages, or bathe several times a day with


Saivitis White Lotion, diluted as directed, which is bothi cooJI g,
soothing, and healing in its influences. The growth of new hair can be
stimulated by suitable applications, after the wound is perfectly healed.
BROKEN WIND, ASTHMA, or HEAVES, the latter name
indicating the increased action of the flank. No animal is rnore
pitied than the broken-winded horse, past the prime of life, and sutier-
ing from a painful and incurable disease. Mares are more su jec
than horses ; young animals are but seldom sufferers, the aged, over-
worked! fll-stabled being the victims The disease may be
of slow growth, succeeding to chronic cough, cold, or thick-wind. L.ong
continued feeding on dry food, as meal, bran, and dusty lay an c ,
may produce broken wind, or aggravate it when it is established, bu .
is also caused suddenly, and generally so, when, after a fufl feed, the
horse has been driven fast or put to heavy draught. The vl0 )
vulsive action of the cough, in one way, and the pressure of the lull
distended stomach on the lungs, in another way, lead to rupture ot u
air cells, the result, in both instances, being impaired respiration, tne
expiration being performed by two convulsive acts instead of one ot
uniform character. The disease is remarkable as being attended bya
constant weak cough, not unlike a loud spasmodic sigh. A ra^ nO V;
appetite, great thirst, and a troublesome flatulence, are frequen y
present. There is no known remedy, as change of structure is grea,
and the parts cannot be restored to original soundness, io pu
broken-winded horse to any other than slow and easy work is re ne
torture, which every right-thinking person with any pretentions to
humanity will be ashamed to inflict. l\luch of the animal s dis e
be mitigated by judicious feeding, which should be on the principle of
little and often, of the best quality, and, most important, a^J a J s
slightly damped. A teacupful of linseed oil occasionally added to t
feed would act very beneficially. Water should also be given ini small
quantities at frequent intervals. Specially note and keep the dig
functions in good order, and should the cough become severe, and call
for treatment of a palliative nature, recollect that it is to be found m -
Saivitis Pectoral Cough Powder.
BRONCHITIS or Inflammation of the bronchial tubes is a
common sequel to neglected colds, severe galloping, etc., etc. ,
times it attacks animals over an entire district, owing to unusual
and damp, etc. The bowels are inclined to be constipated and the urme
scanty. The mucous membrane of the eyes is of a bluish-pink colour.
Treatment, —Give free allowances of the Saivitis Pectoral Co &
Powder until fever is reduced. Apply to the sides of the chest some
Saivitis Mustard Liniment, washing off with warm water 20 m
after. Promote comfort by clothing and bandages, allow plenty ot fresh
air (avoiding draughts); as soon as acute signs have passed, a course ct
tonics will assist recovery. Bronchitis may, if neglected, on *°
inflammation of the lungs. It is distinguished by more noise in breat -
ing, which, in bad cases, may be heard at some distance, but_ to dis-
tinguish milder cases the ear has to be placed close to the windpipe,
and again upon the ribs, when a rough or rattling sound as of air passing
over roughened surfaces or through frothy fluid may be very distinctly
heard. Symptomß.-There is a short, dry, and husky cough,
speedily becoming more prolonged. When a horse gives a na u


cough, he opens his mouth a little ; but when labouring under disease
he keeps his mouth closed, trying to suppress the cough. As the dis-
ease advances, the mouth becomes hot and dry, the ears and extremities
a ternately hot and cold, the pulse not hard and wiry, as in pluerisy, but
sott and compressible, and the respirations quick and hollow. There
may be discharge of pus or matter from one or both nostrils. The
bowels are inclined to be costive, and the urine scanty. Although the
horse does not expectorate in the sense that men do, he coughs up, and
nds himself of phlegm by the nose chiefly and sometimes by the mouth .
Treatment. Apply mustard or the Salvitis Yellow Mustard Lini-
ment to both sides of the chest, clothe the body and limbs, steam the
nostrils with hot bran in nose-bag as described under Catarrh, and give
night and morning the stated allowance of Salvitis Pectoral Powder, or
some other equally suitable expectorant.
Of the SOLE. —The sole is liable to bruise
rrom the shoe being improperly seated, sometimes from sand or gravel
being impacted in the web of the shoe, or by “picking up” a stone,
which, getting wedged in the foot, bruises the sole. Symptoms.—
Lameness first attracts attention to it. On removing the shoe the sole
is found hot and tender, and the foot hot. On paring the sole it is
found discoloured at the bruised part. Treatment —A few days
rest may be necessary, with the foot immersed in a poultice, or stopped
with some emollient dressing. Lanoline is, of all things, most to be
recommended. This, and the using of a leather sole or felt pad, for a
short time, will help its disappearance.
BURNS & SCALDS are injuries to the body by contact with
heat, solid and fluid. Horses, both in town and country, where fire or
steam is employed, are liable to these injuries. The best application
or such is made with equal parts of linseed oil and lime water shaken
together till the mixture is like thick cream. Apply on soft linen rags
renewing morning and night for three days, when, if not completely
healed, paint over the surface a little Salvitis Red Oils; this will
facilitate healing. NOTE.—Should lime water not be at hand, whiting
aiid water, and oil, can be substituted. Protection from the atmosphere
and irritants is indispensable.
CANKER rarely or never occurs in
horses properly attended to, or where stable
cleanliness is practised. It is directly the
result of neglect, yet in many instances caused
by the constant application of filth to the
feet. It is a kind of fungoid, spongy growth,
partially horn and flesh, spreading over the
sensitive frog and sole, which bleeds copiously
on the least provocation, ulcerating and dis-
charging a foul and offensive matter. It
occurs in one or more feet at the same time.
Treatment . —All the decomposed horn
must be cut away, the ulcerated parts washed
and sweetened with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap,
and soon after dressed with Black Pine Oint-
The Fo#t, shewing; Canker.
rnent spread on tow, wool, or cotton waste, the pad to be closely applied
and kept in position by two thin pieces of iron crossing each other


and siipped in under the shoe. The discharge should not oe allowed
to accumulate under this, therefore the foot must be examined, cleaned,
and re-dressed every day, or at least every other day, all loose and
sloughing parts being then carefully cut away.
CAPPED HOCK & CAPPED
ELBOW, or CAPULET.— This is an
injury to the point of the hock or elbow*
causing enlargement, a degree of stiffness
and sore lameness. When observed, the
whole hock joint should be examined to see
how far the injury extends. The amount of
swelling varies considerably, as does the in-
flammation present. The constant appli-
cation of a cooling lotion like the Salvitis
White Lotion, especially if resorted to in
good time, is the safest and generally most
successful treatment. Where the case has
been neglected, it may be necessary to apply
iodine —or a little Salvitis Brown Blister
made mild by the addition of four times as
much vaseline. It is usually caused by
striking the parts against some hard object.
A Capped Hock.
blows from sticks in the hands of passionate grooms, or the animal may
cause it by kicking. Lameness is rarely the result. — Armatage
CASTRATION. —This is an operation for the purpose of de-
priving the horse-colt of his entirety by the removal of his testicles. It
is a simple and safe operation. Any person having once seen it done,
can also do it, if he have the resolution to do so. It has been recently
demonstrated that castration can be performed on aged horses with as
much safety as on those in colt-hood. This is attributed to the mode or
manner of operation, namely, by an instrument called the Ecraseur, by
the use of which clamps, firing, and twitching are avoided. The method
of operation will be found fully detailed in Magnet's Standard Horse Booh.
Before commencing this operation, knives, needles, instruments, and
hands should be rendered innocuous by washing with the Salvitis Soap
—the strongest, most perfect Antiseptic Soap obtainable.
CATARRH, or COMMON COLD, occurs among horses
mostly during the time in which they are changing their coats. Chills
following exertion, or long exposure to cold and wet, are main causes.
The attack sets in with a tendency to sneeze, accompanied by a running
from the eyes, and thin watery discharges from the nostrils ; the mem-
branes of the eyes and nostrils are considerably reddened, the coat loses
its smoothness, the animal is dull, weak and feverish, is often thirsty,
and feeds indifferently or not at all ; the discharge from the nose
becomes thicker and greater in quantity as the case proceeds, and other
symptoms become more marked in character. Here is a condition
which many horse owners look upon as trifling and likely to pass off,
but it is, in reality, one capable of spreading throughout the whole of
the organs of respiration, one which predisposes to bronchitis, lung
troubles, strangles, chronic cough, etc., etc. In the early stage, warm
clothing, in warm, sweet quarters, with diet of sloppy food, such as bran
or oatmeal mashes, linseed tea, boiled barley (occasionally adding a tea-


BH ; jRsj^Bfi^nsnj
.spoonful or so of ordinary nitre, or 6. to ID drops of Tincture Aconite),
may be all that is required, but should cough or lung troubles develop
recourse should be taken to some palliative pectoral. If there be
tendency to sore throat, steam the head by means of a nose-bag partly
filled with scalded bran, adding to it a little turpentine or eucalyptus oil,
or common tar. Hang the bag on the head, being careful to adjust it
around the nose so as not to over-heat, scald, or be oppressive, re-scald-
ing the bran and renewing the eucalyptus as often as necessary.
CLIPPING HORSES* —The advantages of, first, the natural
process of moulting, or shedding the hair, is a draft on the vitality of the
animal. The appetite is diminished, and, with work or pleasure, horse
exertion is irksome during that period. Clipping, or artificial removing of
the hair, accomplishes in a very short space of time what nature requires
much more time to do. In other words, nature is anticipated in her
work, and the animal’s system is saved a call upon it. , a clipped
horse is less liable to take cold than a long-coated horse, because the
evaporation of perspiration is much more rapid. A “hot ” horse will
cool out quicker with a short coat. Every groom is aware of this fact.
Third, a clipped horse requires less fuel (food) to maintain bodily heat
than the long-coated horse ; therefore clipping, as a matter of economy,
should be generally practised. Fourth, a clipped horse looks cleaner,
acts more sprightly, and keeps in better health. Horses intended for
the sale or show ring should be clipped at least two weeks before the
event. There will be a marked improvement in weight and appearance,
with manifest advantage to the owner’s pocket-book. These points
about cover the ground. We add that clipping machines are so cheap
that all horse owners can afford to have one.
COLIC, or GRIPES,
signifies spasms of the
muscular coat of the
bowels, indicated by very
acute abdominal pain;
caused by change of
water, by water abnor-
mally cold being given to
a horse when he is in a
heated state. Sudden
change from dry to green
feed, feeding new oats or
new corn is a common
cause, worms or other
intestinal irritants may
induce it; costiveness,
and unwholesome food
First Stage of Spasmodic Colic.
often cause it; over-loading the stomach, or being put to work on a full
stomach will give rise to it. Symptoms. —One of the surest symp-
toms by which to distinguish it is by the sudden nature of the attack.
The horse may be just taken out of the shafts, apparently quite well,
led into the stall; he begins to eat, when all at once he stops, shakes him-
self, paws the litter with his fore feet or stamps violently and looking
round to his flanks manifests great distress. The pain being extreme, he
will kick at, and even strike, his bellr with his hind feet. After several


■?••• :''"/■ ,-V t\i|
■ -.r,;
■■PT , / i ;'X
wX 7i " w- * '.,|S5L - v ;/(fAM ■
I i/’J '"i > ill ’-■
Rf J ■ . ‘OR -
' :.-. yl
i ’&Lm o A^lMHifty
' :jm -. -
*/^^H
»'V / ~2 V* v *Wt-
'■■KvI'a 7 /.v /\ ' r • »V *■ ,-,^'-7 f :’-** p »
■ .• WMf r rf <■■ / , V ••■••;- ■ > ■
K1 • .( r/ ■■ I : ®^^PPIH
< ; i .-iv-
i ,-ra»» 1| »■ i g . y. f-‘
apparent efforts he gets down, rolls about, sometimes on his back some-
times quite over. Profuse perspiration breaks out over him. The spasm
soon passes off, and he
gets up, shakes himself,
and begins feeding ; dur-
ing the interval the pulse
is unaltered; the legs and
ears are natural in tem-
perature. After a time,
the attack returns, per-
haps with increased vio-
lence, when he gathers
himself, falls down and
rolls about as before.
As the disease advances,
the symptoms become
more severe, and, if not
relieved, runs into in-
flammation of the bowels,
fscond Stage of Spasmodic Colic.
which is in most cases fatal; consequently the point is to combat and over-
come it before running so far as to resist treatment. In a case of simple
spasmodic colic there is no swelling about the belly, and in this way it
is distinguished from flatulent colic. The urine is voided in small
quantities, and throughout the attack it may not be passed at all (for
there is very little urine excreted in any acute affection of the bowels, a
fact which often leads owners to suppose that the trouble is in the
bladder). For this sudden, painful and dangerous illness, no speedier,
or more certain, relief can be desired than is afforded by the Salvitis
Anodyne, which should be given in the interim of ease. The horse
should be taken into the
open, where, in rolling or
kicking about, he cannot
hurt himself; he should
be rubbed on the flanks
well up behind the ribs,
also half way along the
belly, with a liniment ot
turpentine and oil, or
with a little Eucalyptus
oil. There is no need to
walk the horse about to
prevent his lying down,
his rolling over and over
is a mode that nature has
taught him of dislodging
Third Stage of Spasmodic Colic.
OB mm mm
offending matter in the bowels. When free from pain do not be in a
hurry to offer the horse food and water, but after two or three hours he
may be given a little warm, sloppy bran, and gradually brought up to
his usual food.
COLLAR GALLS.— Bad fitting collars, especially if too large,
are a frequent cause of galls, and useful horses are incapacitated for work
by these wounds, often no larger than a sixpence. Collars should be
made to fit the neck of the horse, not the neck of the horse to fit the


collar. It is a rather remarkable fact that of the 22,000 horses of the
London Bus Company, not one could be picked with the slightest
suspicion of collar galls, for the reason that every horse has its own
collar made specially for it and fitted by a harness maker. Galls are
also produced by sudden chills in taking off collars while the horse is hot
instead of unbuckling and allowing the parts to cool. A soothing and
certain remedy, and one that admits of easy application, is the Salvitis
Stable Dusting Powder, or Salvitis White Lotion. If the horse must be
worked, the injured part will require protection, otherwise cruelty arises.
In many cases the breast band might supplant the collar. In the treat-
ment of galls, do not apply grease of any kind as it makes cleaning
difficult, serves to accumulate dirt, and hinders healing.
. CONDITION, Out Of. —From various causes the horse gets
in bad condition, notably so from derangements of the digestive organs.
Sometimes it is caused from disease or irregularity of the teeth, which
prevents proper reduction of food; this often leads to chronic indi-
gestion, first shown by irregular appetite, refusal to eat good food,
inordinate desire for filthy water, soil, or rubbish ; the mouth is slimy
and sour; soon follows general want of condition, seen in the tucked-up
belly, harsh looking coat (which is fast to the body, and defies one to
grasp a handful, as in the healthy horse); it is in addition scurfy and
intolerably dirty ; the bowels are constipated or full of wind. While at
work the horse is weak, and unwilling to encounter stiff exertion ;
scouring alternates with constipation, and what is passed indicates the
absence of digestive action. In some instances there is cough some-
times dry, but usually short, moist, or rattling—a sign of imperfect
action of the liver, and the urinary organs are more or less affected.
The Salvitis Compound in its revivifying action builds up the constitu-
tion of the animal by stimulating digestion, decomposing the impure
blood, improving the circulation, increasing the power of the gastric
juices, giving firmness to the flesh, a velvety softness to the skin,
freedom of action, brightness of the eye, and the energy of health.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.
" I have been using your Saivltis Compound JOi Horses, and recently
introduced it to the carriers here for their horses, and they are beginning to
nnd out, as I did, that it is a splendid thing for horses, and have fairly rushed
me for it. I got up one of your 8 lb. tins from your Orbost agent, and it went
in two days, and I promised to get more. I have alse tried Salvitis for pigs
and fowls with success."
A. CLARK, VICTORIAN STOCK INSPECTOR.
CONSTITUTION. —The definition of the term constitution,
when applied to any animal, is briefly, as follows: — First , that the
animal possesses not only good health, but also the power to stay in
good health; second ,the power to perform the functions of life.; and
third , the power to render good and profitable service during life. Any
animal that does not possess these has a poor constitution, hence our
watchfulness and aim should be to protect and maintain, to the best of
our ability, the health of the horse.


> CORNS. —A corn in a horse is quite different from a corn in the
human foot, for in the latter it is a hard excessive growth, whereas in
the horses it is a bruise, or rather an injury to the horn of the foot
involving the sensitive structure within the hoof and the lower surface
of the coffin bone, producing the rupture of a minute blood-vessel, a
condition best compared to the bruising of a thumb or finger nail, only
relatively much more painful. Corns are commonly found in the inner
heels of the fore feet. The shoeing-smith usually gets credit for their
•existence, but in this, as in other cases, he gets more than his share of
blame, for more often they are due to the owner’s meanness than to the
farrier’s method of shoeing. Keeping the shoe on too long (and this is
often done to save expense) is by far the most frequent cause of corns,
yet a short shoe fitted close on the side is the next fertile source of
corns. Any shoe that remains on too long “ grows in,” as stable folk
say. It doesn’t, of course, grow in, any more than a boy’s trousers grow
too short; but the foot grows and the shoe does not ; hence it is only a
question of time for the shoe that once had a bearing on the crust only
to press upon the seat of the corn, which is in the angle of the sole.
Corns are said to be hereditary, but this is not correct. It is only the
•weak sole, particularly liable to become bruised, that is hereditary.
Horses with narrow feet, contracted heels, weak fetlocks, or feet wide
apart are predisposed to suffer this way. Symptoms. —If recent, a
red spot will be found, usually on the inside heel. Soon, however, this
blood mark changes to brown, or brick red, then yellowish black, and
finally black. The latter shows that it has been done some time, and
more especially if it is festering. Treatment.— lt is a mistake to
think that a corn can be cut out. There is nothing to take away but
■stained horn —no growth ; and unless already festered the lameness will
cease on the removal of the shoe and a new one bearing on the crust. If
the corn has begun to fester, then it must be well pared out and the
matter allowed free vent below, otherwise it will choose an easier path,
and come out between hair and horn, and then a quittor may be estab-
lished almost before one is aware of it. Warm bran poultices must be
continuously applied for two or three times, adding to each a little
Black Pine Ointment. Afterwards, when the matter has all been drawn
out, the same ointment should be kept applied to the raw surface until
healed, when tenderness and lameness disappear. Keep the system cool
with green feed and mashes, and rest the horse for a while.
COUGH. —Cough is an effort of the lungs to get rid of extraneous
and irritating matter. The muscles of the respiratory organs are set in
motion, and by a sudden spasmodic action the air from the lungs and
passages leading to them is violently expelled, carrying with it mucus
and other matter that interferes with the free passage of air. Cough is
at times produced by worms in the intestines, in which case the lungs
act sympathetically with the irritation caused by these parasites. Cough
is also a symptom of various diseases of the lungs and air passages,
from the slightest irritation of the membrane of the outer passages, to
bronchitis and inflammation of the lungs (which see). It accompanies
thick and broken wind, is caused by glanders, and is also present in
diseases of the stomach and bowels. Some of' these diseases on their
disappearance leave behind them such an over-sensitiveness and irrita-
bility of the air pipes that the horse is ever after liable to a cough more
or less severe. (See Chronic Cough). As with ourselves, so with the


1 ’’ %? **' *.«,- \ r v «>• 'y**' * v ‘, ,,s .*. *■- * /< ■
s.,., I ' _ v-\ ■" ' '• **■ ’' , . ■>' j I I -\ H| ■ I Hj H '/ i v ' ’- - * *•_** * c n* H ■
M - <g !aiy■ «.. W aariMMSMwcri^-n
'-' gsN^^^biM^^!»Sat?y :^< 1»dnwa3BR?aP3 g 3l «•.&*-* ?$%:
• JHBKS. I i Mu ■ WnnIMWCTT^jtv»&qi»TgW,|*LM« ww jWIHM
horse, early attention to the first symptoms is the wisest course if w®
wish to avoid after consequences. On the repeated paroxyism of cough
attend to the warmth and comfort of the animal, and, while excluding
draughts, secure good ventilation. The application of a roll of flanneL
soaked in hot water round the throat covered with some waterproof
substance will be found of great service. Much may also be done t<&
alleviate suffering by prudent attention to feeding. >Dry hard food must
be avoided. The
chaff or other feed
should be damped,
and in cases where
the stomach is
involved the use of
green food or roots
(carrots and par-
snips) in addition
will be an advan-
tage. To allay
the irritation and
repetition of cough
the Salvitis Pec-
toral Cough Pow-
der will prove
The Act of Coughing,
very efficacious, either mixed sp honey and treacle as an electuary*
or mixed up in the damp feed.
CURB is of frequent occurrence ia young horses put to work before
their structures are capable of bearing the necessary strain entailed
in jumping and other violent efforts. It is a hard, callous swell-
ing on the hind part of the hock, some inches
below its point. A horse throws out a curb
suddenly on being quickly pulled up in a fast
gallop, or on taking an extra leap, especially
on hard unyielding ground. Tendency to
curb is hereditary, and it is therefore not
desirable to breed from horse or mare with
it, the progeny being specially liable to
throw curbs out when called on for rapid
exertion. The cause is a sprain of the sheath
of the tendons, or ring-like ligament that
binds them. At first there is much inflam-
mation, which should be caused to subside
with the Salvitis White Lotion, after which
a blister should be applied to prevent the
formation of the hard and callous substance, or
of preventing it if it has commenced to form..
DEBlLlTY.— Debility is that con-
dition of enfeebled strength and of muscular
contraction which attends many diseases,,
follows accidents, frights, or fatigue, or
that has been induced b insufficient or
improper feed, or by causes which have im-
A Well Defined Curb,
paired, or suspended the processes of nutrition. Starving and low diet
given to a sick horse, when he should be supported in the midst of


/. ■ ■ "' • : .„ j .“ ’ f ' J ■' | ,: ■ . . > ; % '__;/’
•■ f gm Kttj*gB ’,:.
2E» Sft 'HBgpSHnl V|^nBi
Mg*# '-j XHr y 1 * * 111 \9m
his sickness by good feeding, is a frequent cause. The very neglect,
or want of knowledge on this point, has killed hundreds of horses that
would have lived, which have been sacrificed at the shrine of ignorance,
error and bad judgment. Debility is evidenced by extreme weakness,
flabby swellings, staggering gait, loss of appetite, disturbed breathing,
and a lifelessness which makes the poor beast look “ the very picture of
misery.” Debility is exactly that lowness of condition which the sup-
porting, recuperative, and vitalising power of the Salvitis Compound
immediately arrests and benefits by its nutrient, tonic, and digestive
forces, and by its valuable hematinic action, whereby the blood is
enriched and the body strengthened.
DIARRH(£A, Or SCOUR, in some animals is favoured by
peculiarities of conformation, as seen in washy horses, animals with long
legs, open ribs and flat sides, with tucked-up bellies, such being liable to
purge from the simplest cause. Change of feed, especially from dry to
green, or unhealthful food, and sometimes undue nervous excitement,
is apt to produce scouring. It is usually the evidence of something
wrong, and the effort of nature to remove it. The presence of little
white worms (ascarides) is occasionally the cause. Sometimes the
drinking water may cause it. SyiTlptoniSa —These vary according
to the nature of the case. It may be unaccompanied by pain or con-
stitutional disturbance, or accompanied by pain or straining. Rapid
and increasing weakness, emaciation and loss of appetite result, and
often, unless means are speedily adopted to check it, inflammation of
the bowels is apt to set in. In all stages, and from whatever cause, the
Salvitis Astringent will be found early and permanently effectual in
arresting purging and in restoring healthy and normal action of the bowels.
A Prominent Symptom
When the Urinary Organs are Involved.
DIURESIS, sometimes
called DIABETES, is the im-
moderate secretion of clear, watery,
urine, with a correspondingly ardent
thirst, a rapidly advancing emaciation,
and great loss of strength and
spirit, without any apparent structural
disease of the kidneys, or notice-
able alteration of the composition
of the urine. It may be caused by
any agent which unduly stimulates,
such as acrid vegetation, excess of
watery food, over allowances of salt or
saltpetre ; frequently it occurs as an
accompaniment of acidity of the
stomach, but especially it is caused by
feeding on hay, straw, or oats, which,
not. having been properly dried, have
become permeated by ferment, must,
or fungi. Thus this malady’, like
sleepy staggers, is not uncommon in
wet seasons, and in rainy districts.
Symptoms. —The horse drinks deep at every opportunity, and passes
urine on every occasion when stopped, the discharge being pale, watery,
and of low density and inodorous ; in short it contains a great excess of


water and a deficiency of the solid secretions. So great is the quantity of
urine passed, however, that the small quantity of solids amounts in 24
hours to far more than the normal, a fact in keeping with rapid wasting
of the tissues and extreme emaciation. The flanks become tucked up,
the fat disappears, the bones and muscles stand out prominently, the
skin becomes tense and hidebound, and the hair erect, scurfy and
deficient in lustre. The eye becomes dull and sunken, the spirits are
depressed, the animal is weak and sluggish, sweats on the slightest
exertion, and can endure little. Treat me fit. —It is generally very
easily checked if taken in time and persistently followed up. A complete
change of diet is indispensable ; give good sweet hay; carrots are recom-
mended. A liberal supply of boiled flax seed to the drinking water will
at once serve to eliminate the poison, and to sheath and protect the
irritated kidneys. The bowels must be kept freely opened. lodine,
with lodide of Potassium, is claimed to be a never-failing remedy —very
useful in correcting thirst and checking the flow of urine. Perhaps a
still better remedy is to be found in the lodide of Iron, which has the
advantage of being a great strength supporter, easily given, and readily
combined with the tonics that are so imperatively necessary at this time*
After relief, a run at pasture is advised.
DRENCHING through the nose or down the
nostrils. —This atrociously cruel practice cannot be too severely
condemned. Consider for a minute, and answer, if you would like to
have your medicine, no matter how pleasant it might be, forced
down your own nostrils ? Dozens upon dozens of good horses have been
killed by that barbarous practice, as medicines so given usually pass to
the lungs, and give rise to such serious inflammation of the lungs as to
occasion death. No, no, drenches should never be given through the
nose; that organ was never meant for drinking or swallowing purposes*
DROPSY of the ABDOMEN is the result of confirmed dis-
ease of one or more of the internal organs. Tapping is resorted to for
drawing off the contained fluid. This, however, affords but temporary
relief, and the original disease, still existing, finally puts an end to the
creature’s sufferings.— Armatage.
EYELIDS, ulceration of, is of frequent occurrence among
horses in the summer time. Their red and roughened appearance is a
disfigurement, while the attending pain is such as to cause a constant
stream of scalding tears to trickle down the cheek, to which flies are
attracted to create a double annoyance—in fact, it is through this
medium that the virus is conveyed from horse to horse. Treatment.
—Bathe well with warm water, dry, and along the bed of the eye lash
smear morning and night a little of the diluted Yellow Oxide of Mercury
Ointment.
FALSE QUARTER is more the consequence of other diseases,
as quittor, canker, etc., having destroyed the power of the coronary
substance to secrete horn, than a disease in itself; but it is also caused
by treads, injury, a kick, or a bruise. It greatly weakens that side of
the hoof and renders the horse liable to lameness, consisting, as it does,
of a gap or groove, in the quarter usually running down from the coronet,,
covered with a layer of soft horn, insufficiently strong to protect the
sensitive structure within. It mostly occurs in hoofs that are shelly and
weak. Treatment. —Remove the pressure from affected part by


judicious reduction of the ground surface ox the wall, ana apply a oar
shoe, utilizing the frog as a weight bearer. Trim the dead horn away, and
dress and promote healing of wounds in the band with Salvitis Black
Pine Ointment, keeping the fissure filled with the same, and later —-to
stimulate the secretions of the coronary band —apply successive mild
blisters, or occasionally rub in a little Salvitis Green Oil. Give the
horse the easiest work on the softest ground.
FEET, Inflammation of, LAMIIMITIS, FOUNDER,
or FEVER in the Feet. —Few horsemen ever comprehend the
nature of this afiection. Founder, in all its forms, is inflammation of
the lamina or leaves, which dovetail into each other and bind the
sensitive and insensitive portions of the foot together. The result of the
inflammation is to loosen or
separate, in some cases
entirely, the band of con-
nection between the sensi-
tive and insensitive leaves,
resulting further in the dis-
placement of the
bone, favoured by the
weight of the body. The
point of the coffin bone
moves gradually down-
wards, forwards and out-
wards, causing the sole at
the toe to become first flat-
tened, then convex(dropped
sole), and in very severe
Effect of Founder?
cases terminating by the bone perforating the sole, rendering the animal
useless. This disease is almost entirely confined to the fore feet;
instances of all the feet being affected are of rare occurrence, and even
of the fore feet it often happens that only one is attacked. It occasion-
ally follows on the abatement of a more general inflammation, as of the
lungs or bowels, and may also be produced by engorgement of the
stomach with food of a heating nature; new wheat and barley will
readily bring it on, especially in fat animals. The same can be said of
new oats and new hay. It is sometimes brought about through long
standing, and alsc Iby faulty shoeing. The most general cause, however,
is the injudicious treatment of the horse by its rider or driver—over-
exertion, and especially over-long or over-fast travelling on hard roads.
The horse, seized with fever in the feet, may be left apparently all right
at night and next morning found suffering intensely, as evidenced by
his fidgety manner and frequent shiftings of the fore feet, which he
throws out as far as possible, drawing his hind feet under him that they
may bear the weight of his body, and relieve the affected fore feet, the
fever or inflammation in which is evidently causing the poor beast
excessive agony. If the feet are felt, the great unnatural heat of inflam-
mation will at once be observed, and the arteries above may be felt
throbbing violently. Fever in the feet begins with congestion of the
sensitive lamina —the leaf-like structures that surround the coffin-bone,
and, as we all know, that when a part begins to swell, pain decreases;
but swelling to any extent of these sensitive structures is prevented by
the non-yielding horny box (hoof), hence the reason why a horse suffers


■ 11 ■ 11 11I E, |H I I -5 I i ' ■ ‘ 111 *H '-y~y 11;v? -, •'■' H HI V s '>)■' 11 f ,. v ;vH -
A* -/ ; ,-YVY v\y . Y/Y Y Y Y YY YY Y?Y:?" yY Y j ,Y- ’■ • •■ ■
MpT ■' ‘ i "
y ■■ % y.
IBMMBgHMiWBBwIHIIaglBBHIaaBiiBWBWiM
■
such excruciating agony in this disease, particularly when made to move
or stand. Freedom from pain is most evident when the animal is lying
down, and, given good bedding, most horses so affected are ready and
willing to lie down of their own accord without being forcibly thrown*
and kept down, as some recommend. After the place is made comfort-
able, give the horse 16 to 20 drops of Tincture of Aconite in a cup of:
cold water, poured into the mouth with a bottle having a strong neck-
Repeat the dose every four hours till six doses have been given. Apply'
cold water cloths to the feet, renewing them as soon as they get heated-
In a few hours, possibly, the shoes can be taken off. At first, this;
generally cannot be done, except the animal is down. Care should be
taken in removing the shoes, so that every nail is made loose before an*
attempt is made to pull off the shoe. Have no more hammering or
pulling at the foot than is needful, for, remember, the foot is very tender,,
and any rough handling causes exquisite and unnecessary pain. Let
the cold water be kept on constantly for the first twenty-four hours, or
until active pain gives way. During treatment, give plenty of cold
water to drink, and for a day or two let the food consist of green food
and mashes, but do not keep a sick horse too long on low feed, or
debility and swelling of the legs or other portions of the body will result -
If appetite is poor or dainty, do not forget to improve it by adding to the
feed or mash, morning and evening, allowances of Compound Salvitis-
A week after recovery, a mild blister, or the rubbing in of some stimu-
lating liniment (Green Oils) on the coronet is recommended.
FISTULA.— A fistula differs only from an abscess in this parti-
cular—that the suppurated matter, instead of pointing to the outward
surface as in abscess, burrows down or through the loose textures and
forms sinuses or pipes, pointing in several directions.
FISTULOUS WITHERS. —This results from a bruise or
other injury to the withers. An ill-fitting saddle may produce the bruise,.
but it is certainly not
always caused in this
way, seeing that it occurs
in animals which never
had a saddle on their
back. Where the saddle
has bruised,inflammation
is set up, and a tumour
forms, which is very hot
and tender to the touch ;
if noticed in time it may
be dispersed by applying
a cooling lotion* l made
with the Salvitis White
Lotion, alternately aided
by stimulating liniment.
Showing a Bad Case of Fistula*
If this treatment fails, the tumour will go on to suppuration and doubt-
less extend through over the top of the bones of the withers or shoulders
to the other side, thus forming a very broad pad, as it were, on top of
the shoulder, just where the shoulder in health is the sharpest and
narrowest. Endeavour then should be made, by fomentations and
poultices, to produce an early discharge of the collected pus. <*When>


Kfs5»^XI - ■
* v
; * ■
* ■
” ,^9
the tumour is ripe it should be freely opened with a knife, and the
matter well pressed out, the discharge being encouraged by frequent hot
water fomentations, and the wound stimulated by washing well out with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. A fistula, fairly established, can only be
properly treated by the veterinary surgeon.
GREASE, or PUSTULAR ERYSIPELAS, affects the skin
of the heels, pastern and fetlock joints at their back parts. The hind
legs are most commonly affected. The primary inflammation gives rise
to considerable swelling and lameness, and
shortly an exudation of lymph takes place,
followed at a latter stage by the formation
and discharge of pus. The parts next lose
their pliancy, become hard and rigid. The
skin cracks, by which deep
formed, and from which an offensive dis-
charge constantly flows; while ulceration
goes on beneath, fungoid granulations are
luxuriant and plentiful, forming what are
popularly known as " grapes." The disease
now assumes chronic and permanent
characters, rendering the animal not only
offensive, but dangerous, as none can tell
how soon the disease may terminate in
farcy. The disease is common to coarse-
bred horses, but neglect, dirt, and improper
treatment are known among the causes when
it appears in animals of higher breed. —
Armatagc. Treatment.— At first, put
on a few linseed meal poultices, covering
A Bad Condition of Or ease.
the surface of the poultices with a layer of finely powdered charcoal.
After removing the poultices, wash the parts well with warm water and
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, leaving a good lather on for 10 or 15 minutes
before finally washing off; the parts will then be thoroughly cleansed
and the microscopic life destroyed; the surface can then be dried and
bandaged with a dressing of Salvitis Black Pine Ointment. This treat-
ment, continued for a week or so, will, in 99 cases out of a hundred,
effect a perfect cure of this filthy and loathsome disease. If grapy
growths have formed, these should be touched with caustic potash, or
stick chloride of zinc, etc., or they may be burnt off by means of the
actual cautery. Internal remedies are of vital importance ; these should
contain arsenic, or some of its combinations, with the addition of suit-
able tonics, and must be continued for some months.
HOCK-JOINT LAMENESS. —This important joint, or part
of the horse, is the seat of many diseases causing lameness. In the
majority of hind leg lameness, the hock is the true situation. This fact
is not apparent to the non-professional person, as the hock, while
diseased, does not swell so often as other portions of the body or legs
when diseased. Bog or blood spavin, and thorough-pin, a blind man
can almost see. With these exceptions, hock-joint lameness, in the
majority of cases, is charged to the hip or some other part. — McClure's
Horse Doctor.- Sprain of the hock-joint is to be treated with cold water
bandages, or cloths saturated with the Salvitis White Lotion for a


° f dayS ’ after , that » Wlth li Z h dressings of Salvitis Green Oils,
P ng every second or third day till lameness disappears.
-Gw«?/mi h t EV jl Practice of Paring: and Rasping.
ni , n f Fl**nng late chief veterinary consultant to the British Govern-
l his work ° n “ Hors e Shoeing,” says The evil of paring or
jP ng b f lo ° ked upon as the greatest and most destructive of ail
Nine £.h “of °,u h T^’ ° re T t0 ° ur “a“»g«n«nt of the horse.
Nine-tenths of the shoeing smiths who resort to this practice cannot
e f, P ai ? l J ° bjeCt> *? d those who have ™ri«en defence of it'say it “s w
allow the descent of the sole and facilitate the lateral expansion of the
hoof. t ancy our gardeners cutting and rasping the bark off our fruit
rees, to assist them in their natural functions, and improve their
appearance ; and yet the bark is of no more vital importance to the tree
an the horn of the sole, wall, and frog are to the horse’s foot.” The
sole, frog, and bars, must on no account, or under any conditions (unless
for surgical reasons) be interfered with in any way by knife or rasp. As
certainly as they are interfered with, and their substance reduced so
Ziir 11 Hi°° f b f u ln J ured * Nature has made every provision for
the defence. They will support the contact of hard, soft, rugged, or
even sharp bodies, if allowed to escape the drawing knife ; while hot
cold, wet or even dry weather has little or no influence on the interio^
or °" * he t , e v nder bor u n ’. if man not step in “to beautify
the feet by robbing them of their protection, perhaps merely to please
, e fancy of an ignorant groom or coachman, or to conform to a sense-
less custom.
INDIGESTION, Chronic. — There is in almost every stable
where several horses are kept, one horse that does not “do well.” His
coat is coarse, and stands on end; his urine at times is plentiful but at
other times scant, and like honey. When he stands in the stable for a
day or two without work or exercise his hind legs stock up, and when
lie is put to work he sweats easily and without hard labour, or sweats
profusely after he is stabled at night. He is a ravenous eater, and gets
all be war !rl t( ? eat ’ but is not satisfied , and so proceeds to eat his
bedding. If he be watched closely, it will be seen that he has the habit
of raising his upper lip, as if yawning; his manure differs from time to
time. Sometimes it is composed of small, hard, dry balls ; at other
times the balls are larger and covered with slime; again it comes in
masses, undigested and foul smelling. The horse is troubled with
indigestion, and such animals usually swallow their food without proper
mastication ; often through the teeth being out of order, but oftener to
appease the hungry craving caused by gastric irritation. Mastication of
the food is absolutely necessary in horses that are to do well, and escape
indigestion of any kind, for unmasticated, the food enters the stomach
without the saliva necessary for its subsequent digestion. When oats
are in process of mastication by the healthy horse, four times its bulk of
saliva is secreted in the mouth, and this is needed to digest it To
induce a free and healthy flow of saliva is one of the restorative dualities
of the Salvitis Compound; thus it aids, and re-establishes d?gest£n!
perfects assimilation, and improves the health.
INHALATIONS. —These are eminently useful remedies in
various affections of the respiratory organs. There are two kinds, simple
and medicated. The first consists of the application of the vapour of hot


■ sv » vf/ i ?j‘- ?
BSK .«•: %|SjM»fe\ i j<& ■ » I lil^H
iW'. ' '*j • , jQ . J?<il m -
■ N\ /^- / /> J ~ V >c Vf I 1
H \ ||E "';.
k w^BSsSISr^jmBSBs
■ ■ *9BESS99raf -ateS
esjni .
water by means of a nose-bag ; heat and moisture being efficacious in
relieving the congested mucous membranes. In simple cold, &c., a
quantity of bran or sawdust is placed at the bottom of the nose-bag upon
which the water is poured as often as required to keep up a good supply
of heated vapour; but care must be exercised in avoiding a heavy bag,,
as the animal, weakened by ailment, is not in a state to bear incon-
venience from this scource. The application should be persisted in for
hours, when it proves agreeable and beneficial to the patient. Medi-
cated inhalations are provided by simply adding some volatile
to the contents of the nose-bag, by which sedative, soothing
or stimulating effects are to be produced. Thus in catarrhs, sore throats,
coughs, influenza, &c., Eucalyptus oil, carbolic acid, creosote, and various
tinctures, etc., may be used with considerable advantage to the
sick animal. — Armatage.
KIDNEYS, inflammation Of, is generally caused by hard
work, by slipping, throwing the hind part so suddenly under the belly as
to produce undue tension of the lumbar vertebra, or from sudden chills,
eating of musty hay. Symptoms.— More or less fever of the system
generally, unwillingness to move, particularly the hind legs, dung hard
and coated, very sensitive to pressure on the spine. The horse turns to
his flank, stands with his hind legs apart, shows pain in turning, urine
high coloured and sometimes bloody. Treatment.— Give a tasteless
purge at the commencement, apply mustard poultice, or rub Salvitis
Yellow Liniment over the loins with hot cloth on top, or better, heat a
peck of salt in an oven, place it in a bag and apply. Give no diurectics
of any kind, but provide plenty of linseed tea for the horse to drink.
After recovery the horse should be kept very quiet for a month or two.
LAMENESS.— The principal causes of lameness are fractures,
sprains, ring-bones and side-bones, splints, spavins, pricks in shoeing,
corns, canker, false
quarter and quit-
tor, thrush, seedy
toe, sand - crack,
each of which is
described under its
own name. Lame-
ness caused by in-
juries to the hip
and stifle, cannot
generally be diag-
nosed with cer-
tainty by any but
an expert veterin-
ary surgeon whose
advice should be
sought. Where
this is not possible
and where the
Poot Lameness.
lameness is known to be caused from a fall or blow upon the hip or upon
the stifle joint, treatment may be adopted such as would apply to any
other direct injury, and failing an early recovery, a mild blister may be
applied, and the animal left with Doctors Rest and Time to complete
the cure.


... V/i
j/ } v
|B|^^|
LIVER.— The liver is me largest secreting gland of the body,
situated within the short ribs on the right side. Its function is the
secretion of bile—a yellowish alkaline or soapy fluid. Without the liver,
digestion and animal iieat cannot be maintained, and the waste or effete
matter cannot be removed from the blood. So, therefore, when the liver
is disturbed, there can be no health in the system.
LIVER, Congestion Of, mainly results from error of diet;
it is betokened by indigestion, colic, irregular bowels, foul mouth, coated
faeces, variable surface heat, and sometimes lameness in the right
shoulder. Treatment. —A few brisk purgations at intervals of 6or
6 days (the Salvitis Tasteless Purge acts splendidly on the liver); at
the same time should be given thrice daily in the drinking water an acid
and bitter mixture. Improve the system of feeding, and also work. .
LIVER, inflammation of, is a rare disease in the horse.
It is sometimes difficult to define. The animal is dull and heavy,
apparently deaf, or wholly indifferent to surrounding objects and noises,
and often turns his nose to the side as an evidence of internal uneasi-
ness ; constipation, with slimy and offensive faeces; the skin, membranes,
and urine eventually become yellow ; temperature and circulation are
high, the tongue sticky, and the pulse, at first frequently and irregular/
becomes slow; when the animal turns he winces and grunts ; relief is
apparently gained by the dropsy that results, the abdomen swells, wasting
of the body proceeds rapidly, and the animal dies in 6 or 8 days.— Armatagi.
Treatment is only palliative, and that can best be effected by adding
to the drinking water one ounce each of the bromide nitrate and bi-car-
bonate of potash, every morning and night, and a Salvitis Tasteless Purge
at the commencement of attack. Diseases of the liver, by frequent occur-
rence or long continuance, are apt to induce changes in the constitution
of that organ, and death may arise from softening, rupture/or
abscess, the prin-
cipal signs of
which are as fol-
lows : Heavy
and laboured
breathing, abdo-
minal pains, pale
membranes, run-
ning down pulse,
dilated pupils,
unequal surface
heat, fainting, in-
sensibility and
death.
LUNGS,
inflamma-
tion (Pneu-
monia). — In
Inflammation of the Lungs, First Stage.
this disease, the substance of the lungs is inflamed instead of the air
passages, as in bronchitis. Symptoms.— The horse will oftentimes
have a discharge from the nostrils, following a sudden exposure to cold,
after being kept in a warm stable, or rendered hot by racing, then left
unrugged. Any slight cold or sore throat may run into pneumonia.


, *^B| SB . | «|f|' «HHH
, '!; BrfflBB,
i^^BB
ssjlr *^S^^^^SSSBBmBE
tm ■
Bp .• j^^BBHJBHH
-'"U-i 's< ■ »3 -i
jKSBBg-L-SaMgiPk^t' _"r-^BHM6j^Sj^BB8^^HBBj^BiBa|i|fc^ftBi
The disease is invariably ushered in by shivering and coldness oi the
surface of the body, cold ears and legs. The pulse is full and oppressed,
running up from 60 to 80 beats per minute, differing in its character
from the pulse of pleurisy, which is hard and wiry. The breathing
becomes hard and full, panting-like. There is pain in the chest, which
at times is aggravated by cough and a quivering of the muscles of the
side and breast, that will rarely deceive. The horse will not eat, but
stands persistently with his elbows turned out, to give more freedom oi
the lungs. The nostrils are wide expanded. Ihe horse may become
ieverish, but this shortly subsides. If the ear is applied to the side oi
the chest or neck a peculiar crackling noise is heard. Perhaps the most
frequent cause is a hard or fast drive against a cold wind after being
taken from a warm, tight, and poorly ventilated stable, or some different
alteration and sudden change of heat, cold or moisture in an animal not
accustomed to work, or in one not in a proper condition to work. In-
flammation of the lungs is a very dangerous disease, requiring prompt
treatment on its first symptoms being observed. As the disease proceeds
the horse stands forward wide in front, and wears an anxious and
dejected look of pain. Any attempt he makes to lie down aggravates
his state, and adds to his pain. Treatment.— The horse must be
kept in a comfortable stable, well ventilated but not draughty. Clothe
the horse according to the weather, frequently hand rub the legs, and
draw the ears gently to create warmth. At the onset, apply mustard
plaster, or Salvitis
Yellow Liniment, to
the sides of the chest,
give 6 drops of tincture
of aconite with 2
ounces of mindererus
spirit, and an ounce of
sweet spirits of nitre,
in hay tea or thin gruel
every two hours for
24 hours, until fever
subsides. Let the
food consist solely of
gruel, well made, and
hay tea. If there is
much weakness, give
a quarter of a pint of
whisky or brandy three
pr four time* a day.
Inflammation of the Lungs, Last Stage.
A «
When the horse begins to recover, increase me ioou cauuousiy, ui d
relapse is certain, which generally proves fatal. One of the first
symptoms of recovery is the horse lying down. On no account disturb
"him, for rest is the best of restorers to exhausted nature. As recovery
goes on, gradually increase the feed, and in a little time good tonics may
be given. Great prostration, if nothing worse, follows this illness, and
despite the most careful treatment, a large proportion of patients die.
NAVICULAR DISEASE is an incurable malady affecting the
navicular bone, its cartilage, bursa, synovial membrane and tendon
gliding over its surface. It is a complaint most common in high class;


horses and free goers, and almost always confined to one or both fore
feet, explained by the greater degree of concussion here than in the hind
feet. It consists of ulceration, of various degrees, on the navicular
bone within the foot, and severe inflammation of all the surrounding
structures, resulting at times in loss of the hoof. Horses thus suffering
Longitudinal Section of Foot
and Lower Part of Limb.
1, Lower end of cannon bone; 2, the pastern
bone ; 3, coronary bone ; 4, coffin or pedal
bone ; 5, navicular bone, over which the
Dcrforans tendon, No. 6, is seen gliding,
forming the navicular sheath ; 7, plantar
cushion ; 8, wall of hoof at point of toe ;
9, extensor tendon ; 10, posterior flexor
tendon of the leg.
are spoken of as being “ groggy.’"
In order to destroy the excruciating
pain that exists, which May hew com-
pares “ to twenty toothaches com-
pressed into one agony, ' an operation,
known as unnerving, is frequently
practised. This operation in no way
does away with the disease, merely
with the pain, yet no humane man
should begrudge affording his animal
this relief, and so save the horse from
inconceivable suffering. As to its
origin, various causes are assigned ;
these are freely described in Frank
Barton’s book, The Horse Owners
Companion , from which our illustration
is taken. That writer, and all the
best authorities, agree that the most
common indirect cause of this lame-
ness are injuries and interference
with the frog —raising the frog from
the ground and contraction of the
hoof. When the foot is in its
natural condition, the frog is its
strong point of support; and if
this support is removed by paring,
or by the use of thick-headed slices,
which raise the frog from all possible
contact with the ground, the support
is weakened and there is necessarily
great strain thrown upon the tendPns. Thus, a well developed foot-pad
(frog) seems to be the best prevent I ve of this disease, seeing that the main
function of the frog is to protect the navicular arrangement. Treat -
ment. —Although incurable, much can be done to relieve pain. Findlay
Dun's advice is—Remove the shoes and allow the frog to come to the
ground ; stand the horse in cold water, or apply cold swabs, for several
hours daily, and, at night, poultice, but not made too unwieldy, so as to
prevent the horse from lying down. Give occasional doses of cooling
medicine, and an occasional laxative. If disease still persists, relegate
the horse to slow work with shoes without heels or toe-piece. Where foot
and limbs are otherwise sound, unnerving may secure several years'
service.
PLEURISY, or Inflammation of the Lining
Membrane Of the Chest.— ln point of frequency and severity,
pleurisy is the most important disease of the respiratory organs of the
horse. Though severe, no case ought to be fatal if properly treated.
Pleurisy may result from a wound of the chest, but usually occurs as a
sequel to exposure. It may affect one side only, or both. It is


2S? ii
,„ H \»7 / '■'*!: if : V**' f < ml fl- ,
• 1'V '. A y WM
m k. v* ■', ■ ‘H/m
a V ijj. 'V:
*S
V ■ {. ' yf’W ' \ ■ -v
' ,y Jm
■„ ' ■ 4|^H
>■ -* *•'•■■. -.sW _>V'> V -
■ >- . ' •; , ; W < / '.‘-A' • < * '-
generally caused by horses standing in a cutting wind when heated,
as, for instance, when after ploughing, the men sit down to their
mid-day meal and leave the horse on the hill top. Doctors, coach-
drivers, and others, who drive fast and leave their horses standing
about in a draughty street, are apt
to pay a penalty in this way. The
symptoms are much the same as in
inflammation of the lungs, but the
sharp dry cough is different, a|
first also the animal grunts and
groans when made to turn, and
flinches when the ribs are pressed ;
he often looks round at his sides,
and this gives rise to mistakes
among the inexperienced because
it is a symptom of gripes. One
feature is great disinclination to
move the fore limbs. There is no
heaving of the flanks as in inflam-
mation of the lungs, but the flanks
Pleurisy.
have a tucked up appearance. The cough soon acquires a characteristic
catching sound. After the dry stage, an excessive quantity of fluid is
discharged from the pleura, and “ water on the chest ” or hydrothorax
results. According to an American veterinary authority, Dr. Robt.
McClure, a peculiar line will be observed in pleurisy running from the
haunch round the belly to the breast bone. Treatment should be
practically the same as for inflammation of the lungs, put in cool, well-
ventilated stable, give the same fever mixture ; blanket the body, neck
and legs warmly ; if serious, put mustard or Salvitis Yellow Liniment on
the ribs, apply the same stimulating liniment to the legs, and hot water
cloths, hot as can be borne, constantly to the chest. When acute symp-
toms have passed, give every six hours the stated allowance of Salvitis
Pectoral Powder, which will have the double effect of allaying cough and
dispersing such water as may have accumulated within the tissues.
Allow plenty of cold water —8 or 4 times a day—to which add a ffood
nobbier of gin.
QUITTOR, or Fistula of the
Foot, is a pipe wound, having its opening
between hair and hoof—in 90 per cent, of
instances seen at the quarter of the horse’s
foot. It may arise through the horse treading
on some sharp pointed body; from a neglected
prick, a festered corn, or tread from the op-
posite foot. The matter being unable to find,
or make, an exit through the unyielding horny
hoof, makes its way toward the softer struc-
tures above the latter, showing itself above
the coronet as a tender and painful swelling,
ultimately ending in the formation of one or
more suppurating pipes or channels. At first
the horse is extremely lame, and there is con-
Quittor.
siderable constitutional disturbance. In a few mild cases, the exit
the matter is followed by speedy recovery, but, in the majority of cases,


* I'/.-
at l&jY l 1 ’
the opening shows no tendency to heal but continues to discharge a
blood-stained matter, while pain and lameness remain. The modern
treatment is to explore the quittor with probes, and after opening up the
channels to direct into them, with a specially constructed syringe, a
strong solution of either chloride of zinc, bi-chloride of mercury, or
nitrate of silver, and this with the object of effecting the destruction of
the quittor by setting up a healthy discharge. In mild cases, this can
be achieved by frequently washing with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, am.
constantly plugging the orifice of the quittor with the Salvitis Black
Pine Ointment. In all cases, the shoe should first be removed, and if
the quittor is caused by corn or prick, the spot should be well pared out
and matter drawn out by poultices.
RHEUMATISM. —The sudden lameness and halting action of
horses caused by rheumatism are often mistaken for strain or other
injury, but the shifting nature of rheumatism soon reveals the truth, as
the horse with the mistaken shoulder lameness one day, may show the
disease in the hip the next; it flies about from one leg to the other. In
acute rheumatism there is always more or less fever, and the severe pa m
the animal suffers is shown by his short, jerky breathing, and the evident
unwillingness to use the affected limb. The disease is due to the state
of the blood, having its origin in impaired digestion and assimilation ;
the blood becoming charged with elements inimical to its constitution.
The joints are the usual seat of the malady, the offending element
locating itself in the substance of the cartilage, bones, and tendon,
which enter into the formation of the parts. The heart, with its
coverings, and the lining membrane of the chest, are also liable to partici-
pate seriously and fatally.—
Treatment. —Keep in a very warm
place and clothe body thoroughly. Band-
age limbs. If joints are swollen and hot,
apply cloths dipped in icy water at frequent
intervals. If this affords no relief in 48
hours, rub the parts with a liniment com-
posed of equa proportions-of capsicum,
belladonna, and soap liniments. Repeat
several times daily, using friction and
massage. Add a few tablespoonfuls of
linseed oil to the food. In addition to this
give the following draught every six hours:
of potash, 40 grains; bi-carbonate
of potash, 8 drams ; tincture of colchicum,
2 drams ; water added, 8 oz.—mix. Half
this quantity will be sufficient for a foal.—
F. Barton. In simple cases of rheumatism,
outward applications are mostly relied upon
for relief, and one of the most valuable
liniments for this affliction, either in man
or beast, is the Salvitis Green Oils.
RINGBONE is a serious affection, constituting unsoundness in
the horse. It consists of a deposit of bony matter upon either the upper
or lower pastern bones, typical cases showing complete ring-like for-
mation either at the pastern or coffin joints. It should be remembered


• *• *■ i'‘&r*£ A : ,>• ’>_ v 1&~’{ yJ&i *'
tnat the growth of a ring-Done is from the outside. Bones do not grow
from within outwards, but from the periosteum, or covering membrane,
and when, by concussion, this membrane becomes inflamed its function
of secreting bone is excited and bony matter produced in excess, so much
so as to cause anchylosis—which see. All breeds of horses are liable to
ring-bone. It is most common in the fore legs of heavy, coarse bred,
horses, with short and straight-up pastern joints. When occurring in
fine bred horses, it is the hind leg which is affected. Sometimes it does
not cause much lameness, while again the lameness may be very severe,
and perhaps incurable. At first there may be a somewhat tender and
yielding enlargement, and then is the time to use, for a week or so, a
sedative cooling application of the character of the Salvitis White
Lotion, in order to modify the extent of the inflammation, and thus avoid
the production of a large deposit of bone, which, besides being an eye-
may also prove detrimental, by ending in stiffness or even fixing of
the joints (anchylosis). CSIUSQS. —External injuries, such as sprain
of ligaments, concussion, blows, treads, etc., etc. Treatment. —
After the inflammation is subdued, or when the enlargement has become
a hard bony formation, much may be done by way of cure by repeated
mild dressings (say at intervals of from 7 to 10 days) of Salvitis Brown
Blister. Ihis causes absorption of some of the deposited bony material,
and also, by thickening the skin, gives increased support to the part.
SAND-CRACKS
are open cracks or fissures
of greater or lesser extent,
and may commence at either
the upper or the lower mar-
gin of,the hoof, and are due
to defective secretion of the
horn-forming substance, or
result from some sudden or
severe strain, as in landing
after a high jump, or when
making a false step. Ac-
cording to their position
they are distinguished as
toe, quarter, heel, or bar
cracks; toe and quarter
cracks being those most
commonly met with. Toe
Sand' Cracks.
cracks are generally in the hind feet of heavy draught or field horses,
the injury arising from the stress with which the toes are dug into the
ground in starting loads. Quarter cracks appear oftener in the feet of
light horses, trotters, hunters, and racehorses more particularly. Some
horses are very liable to these cracks, and when a cure has apparently
been effected, the cracks are apt to return. Bad shoeing is often the
cause of sand-cracks, especially where the weight-bearing properties of
the sole have been ignored. Insignificant at first, they gradually extend,
growing wider and deeper until the horny substance is penetrated, when
lameness becomes apparent ; inflammation is set up, both in the lamina
and within the skin above the fissure, the part is very painful, and the
lips of the wound, at its upper part, gape as the tissues swell. When
the animal is made to move the crack is seen to open every time the
rt n rr nr: ~ '
36


foot is put to the ground and to close again when «.nc weight is removed
from it. During this closure the borders of the crack pinch some of the
swollen and sensitive structures, causing excruciating pain and some-
times bleeding. Sand and drt accumulate within the crack, and dis-
charge of matter may ensue ; sometimes a great deal of fever is set up.
It is very painful to witness a horse, especially a heavy cart-horse,
attempting to walk with sand-crack at the toe. He keeps the foot
elevated from the ground as long as possible, puts it down, heel first,
very carefully, and when the toe is forced to the ground he immediately
lifts the foot with a sudden catch, the pain often being so great as to
cause him to groan. Treatment. —Allow the animal perfect rest, an
occasional mild purge, and a green or sloppy diet. To reduce inflam-
mation, remove the shoe and all other sources of irritation, and pare the
edges of the crack if they press upon the tissues, so allow the matter
to escape. Remove all traces of dirt and grit by washing the foot well.
Apply bran poultices daily. After removing the same fill up the crack
with Black Pine Ointment, at the same time anoint the frog of the foot.
But as sand-cracks never unite, the chief endeavour must he directed to
induce sound growth of horn from above to below. A mild or diluted
application of Salvitis Brown Blister around the coronet once weekly for
a month or so will be found one of the best means of inducing a healthy
secretion for the formation of new and probably better material, extend-
ing from the top of the hoof to the ground surface. Anything like a bad
sand-crack should, however, be clamped, plated or riveted, so as to keep
the divided edges in true position until the crack grows out. One fertile
cause of sand-crack is the insane practice of paring the sole and rasp-
ing the outer wall, by which the hoof is weakened in its integrity and
unfitted to bear jar or concussion ;it becomes hard, brittle and cracked ;
no longer the elastic, strong, weight-bearing and protecting substance
originally designed by nature for the comfort of the beast, and the
pleasure of man.
SAND IN THE INTESTINES, or SAND COLIC.— This
progressive complaint often culminates suddenly, in a few days wreck-
ing an otherwise healthy and robust animal to such an extent that the
poor brute will fall from weakness, and after a painful struggle will,
unless relieved, stretch itself out to die. It is brought about differently,
and as a rule gradually. Thus on sandy soils, after heavy rains, the
herbage becomes bespattered with sand, and this is consumed by the
horse ; frequently the horse imbibes it from the water holes of dry
creeks*, from the beds of swift running streams, but oftenest while
grazing when vegetation is scant and with but slight hold of the soil.
Capt. Hayes says: “When horses are bedded down with sea sand, or
with*river sand, that contains saline matters, they are apt to eat large
quantities of it, and consequently suffer from a severe form of inflam-
mation of the intestines. Many instances are on record of troop horse?
having become thus affected after having been picketed on sand. It is
a common complaint among the horses of the Russian steppes. Horses
will imbibe salt sea sand with avidity, and have been known to eat, with,
naturally, fatal results, quantities of 80 lbs. and upwards.” Generally,
the sand is taken into the stomach and is passed on to accumulate in the
more dependent intestines, where, with other indigestible matter, especi-
ally if the sand is of a cementy nature, it forms into a concrete mass
most difficult of expulsion. This mass, by its obstruction and constant


x\ ••• ' v .
\ - '■ , : ’' ,. < f *'-■" ,
friction of the sensitive surface of the intestinal membrane, causes such
intense suffering, evidenced by severe colicky pains and the frequent
spasmodic passage of sand and dung, that death frequently results.
The most rational and satisfactory treatment consists in keeping the
animal on mashes and boiled food, through which about four ounces of
linseed oil should be mixed with each feed, assuaging pain by some good
anodyne—the Salvitis Anodyne, for instance. Gentle massage, or rub-
bing of the belly, will considerably help matters, as will the rolling of
the horse from side to side. Gentle persuasion and assistance to rise is
also suggested. To whip, shout, and lift at the animal's tail, when in
this condition, is base cruelty and a waste of time. Twenty hours after,
or as soon as the soft food and oil have had time to soften the obstruction,
a Salvitis Purgative Drench, given in a quart of gruel, will remove all
remaining sand.
SHOULDER LAMENESS. This is not very common, but
is liable to happen from the limb slipping sideways while running in the
paddock, or slipping accidently on wooden pavement, or wet planking.
To guard against error in diagnosing affections of the shoulder, it must
be borne in
mind that all
muscular tissue
is apt to waste
if it is deprived
of its usual
amount of exer-
cise, as we fre-
quently see in
the shoulder
shrinking on
one or both
sides, while the
real seat of the
disease is in the
feet; therefore
it is very neces-
sary to be able
to distinguish
Shoulder Lameness,
shoulder lameness from many other affections with which it is apt to be
confounded. Many people attribute every lameness they do not under-
stand to an affection of the shoulder. When the horse has strained the
shoulder, the limb is brought forward with a peculiar dragfsrinsf motion,
as shown in illustration, whereas, if the trouble is in the foot, the limb
will be raised and brought forward without much difficulty, but put
down tenderly to lighten the concussion. While standing, the joints
will be somewhat relaxed, the heel raised, with the toe resting upon the
ground. In shoulder lameness, the head will be carried low, the limb
brought forward with a good deal of difficulty and pain, and without
ability to bring it in front of the other. There is seldom much swelling,
nor much heat, unless strain or sprain be recent and violent. TrG«&t>
ment.— Give a dose of physic, foment the shoulder and inside the arm
close to the chest with hot water, which is to be continued for at least
one hour, and repeat often, as long as there is inflammation ; give fever
medicine two or three times a day. Let the food be of a light opening


nature, and insure to the horse quiet and comfort until the lameness
disappears, or until the acute stages are passed, when the rubbing in of
a good stimulating liniment, or the repeated application of mild blisters,
may prevent the lameness becoming chronic. The Salvitis Green Oils,
and the Salvitis Brown Blister, are both applicable to such cases.
3KIN, —The skin should be considered not so much as a safe
covering of the muscular tissue of the animal, but more by far as an
organ supplied with an enormous quantity of blood; indeed, every drop
which passes through the veins is distributed through the exceedingly
fine capillary vessels, hence this outer covering of the animal quickly
indicates any disturbed state of the system. One of the most frequent
troubles that affect the skin is an undue supply of blood, by which the
invisibly small vessels are overcharged, producing first redness or con-
gestion )then inflammation and tenderness, the effect of which is a
variety of eruptions—the effort of nature to get rid of the waste matter
gathered in the capillary vessels. The symptoms are intolerable itch-
ing, dropping of the hair by reason of the stoppage of the needed nutri-
ment furnished in the hair follicles, or a conspicuous redness, due to the
engorgement of the minute vessels with blood. 'I he animal is con-
stantly licking or biting itself, or rubbing itself on posts or fences, often
producing sores which are apt to spread, or the skin becomes covers
with watery vesicles, which break by rubbing, and run together, forming
serious and unsightly sores. To keep the skin in a healthy pleasing
state, and to preserve the purity and fluidity of the blood, the. Salvitis
Compound is super excellent, its tonic and alterative action having, at
the same time, a very beneficial action on the other important organs
of the body.
SPAVIN is a term applied to a variety of
diseases affecting the hock joint, distinguished
by soft and hard enlargements. Bogy and
Blood Spavins, and Thorough-
pins, are of the soft variety, and may be
termed the wind-galls of the hock. They are
caused both by strain and over work, but
principally by lunging back upon the hind legs.
When the swelling is inside and in front of the
hock, it is called a Bog Spavin, which is
merely a distention of the bursal cavity filled
with the natural fluid of the joint. The swell-
ing is soft, and yields to the pressure of the
finger. Blood Spavin is the same as bog
spavin but more extensive, and generally in-
volving the hock joint on its three sides front,
inside and outside, so giving the limb a thick,
rounded appearance. Thoroughpin is of
the same character —an enlargement on the
back, inside of the upper part of the joint,
where its natural condition is a hollow. 1 his
Bog ° r Blood Spavin.
swelling extends across under the tendon, forming a tumor between tno
calcis and thigh bone. It is simply a rupture of the s y no ™> -i
allowing the synovia to escape. By pressing one side, the swelling is
to the other side; and sometimes there is connection


# "I ' j’'A^>X|v,'W^Sw*^^V i a^•■ ..^
W
■ Hr
. ■ . ■
/Bv.’J,'- r^i;; - '*'•'*;;.f/
; - m% 1
%mk/ '■ i> ri^' T jBN
J 'lljl
Ip yi l#P ? r r*
; •- -
, v ,. . v .
with the swelling in front. Either of these enlargements rarely cause
lameness, though sometimes they may cause inflammation of the parts
involved. states, in his Standard Book on the Horse, that in the
first acute stage of these swellings, the rubbing in of soft soap and salt
bones involved ;
in others nearly
all of them may
be affected, or
anchylosis, that
is, fusion of the
bones of the
joint may have
Th rougiipin.
resulted, rendering the limb permanently
stiff and deformed. See illustration.
The causes of bone spavin are numer-
ous ; altered bearing, predisposition from
conformation of the limb, but pro-
at night, and washing off in the morning,
repeated two or three times, works wonder-
fully well, but in old confirmed cases blister-
ing is necessary.
BONE SPAVIN, or SPAVIN
PROPER, consists of an irregular bony
excrescence on and about the bones of
the hock joint, preventing their smooth
and proper action over one another, and
causing lameness. This bony growth
attains a great size, and though, in some
cases, we find but one or two of the
Uaioo of all the Bones of the Hock
with Excessive
Bony Enlargement.
very often a colt is bred from a
spavined sire or dam, or both, when the
colt is sure to inherit the same defect.
Symptoms. —The first symptom
usually shown in bone spavin is a stiff
moving of the toe, which causes a peculiar,
quick, catching-up of the leg, especially in
trotting. This varies according to* the
ceeding mainly
from hard
work, sprains,
or any cause
which excites
inflammation of
this part. Pro-
bably the most
common cause
lies in the
breeding of
horses, as
A Very Lmrg»Bone sp«vin. amount of inflammation and its location,
from being scarcely noticeable at first, and passing off entirely after
going a little way, to severe lameness or stiffness of the hock. This hock


i.V/4 I
: V; '.
\ iigin
3|
is observed to be less freely used than the other The u •
the hard road, and he will ii mp considerably [f 1J 1 WOrSe on
a-ftv. Asyns ws w - •»
," m b 7 ‘hey frequently stand for a
during the fi —lf there is heat
eatinnc 1 ' srst5 r$t few days ’ use cooling appli-
TeziZ’tZ “ Stron B stream of water
two or thr Pa y for ° or 16 repeating
an/ tV' m “ \ day - If P ast the first
onlv r., d M* ,° ase has become chronic, the
and report H eatm “‘ is counter-irritation
mation wh/ 6 ? “P ? ufficient local inflam-
slrin to ou dissolving or blistering the
skin, to arouse nature sufficiently to' produce
For h th°e Sl t °- t- U ” i0 ? ° f the bo " es involved.
SalvitU n * rletl ®| °f s Pavin enumerated, the
and wII nr r ° Wn B ,St6 L is s P edall y intended,
and mol. P rove more efficacious than bandage,
find more merciful than firing,
wA PU ? IT ’ ° r SPLEIMT.-Splint is a
Of th i" y t , umor occurri ng chiefly on the inside
ot the shank or cannorf bones of the fore leg
spnni and Small Wind uaii. A Splint After Cure
Showing Bad Condition
of Bone Spavin,
usually well up near the
knee. It is situated partly
on the splint bone (from
which it takes its name),
and partly on the cannon.
Young horses are most sub-
ject to splints; seasoned
horses are well known to
suffer but seldom. . . .
Symptoms. —At the
start there may be no en-
largement, nor anything to
indicate the seat of trouble.
The horse appears all right
on a walk or on soft ground,
i mov ing rapidly on a
hard road, and especially
down hill, considerable
ameness will be shown.
Running the fingers along
the edge of the bone from
the knee down, and nresc.
»ng with the ends of the finders inflamm,/ a ° wn ’ and press ‘
covered both by heat and tenderness “time* bv H
Tr.atment.-If the inflammation is up near theTointit'^Sl'


be more serious, and cause “tegf««' stoply^Hh
require but little treatmen . better still, swathe the part
cooling applications, hose frequen y A£ter the acute
round 8 with cloths wet with IQ Qr 12 days apply
stage has passed, clip the ha , Splints occur on the inside,
mild dressings of Salvitis BrownßU bp whe „ there is
because the centre of ‘I sdeit is usually caused by an injury,
splint or enlargement on _the ou , the best London veten-
Theoretically, they constitute ’ ition on the limb, the age of
SorsT'd ttter circumstances, when passing such animals with a
of practical soundness. , r Q
certificate oi P familiar to every horseman, and of a
STAGGERS.-A * in diffe rent horses,
serious character. It P r ® s ® ext g nt t0 which the brain and nervous
depending altogether U P° h ar i ety be mad, grass, stomach, or
centres are affected the va y really means an
steepy staggers. 1, ®t onf ! overloading the stomach ; digestion is
attack of acute indigestion, fro the evolution of carbonic acid gas
arrested, fermentation is* set up> d Qn the space allotted for
distends the stomach and bowel l , P the blood, thereby affect-
the lungs to play in, centres, and producing
ing the healthy action of the biain and nervo —injections of warm
death in from 12 to 20 hours Treatmenx. sQ the
water and soap, and a ban fermentation by dissolving two ounces
gas can get free P assa g e - . not available, as much baking soda,
of the sulphite of soda, or if t d the dose t0 be repeated every
in a pint of water, and give nseed oil*, given between the doses, wil
hour until relieved. A pint l 4 Grass or Sleepy Staggers.
hasten the action of the bowels. 2» *® d ghould be treated in the
—A chronic J ar^rf f s t °a ff ffers?-This is inflammation of the brain,
same way. 3, Wad Staffs SvirmtOlHS. —Dulness, followed
and is sometimes called P^ enl^ he sl ® postage, or the congestive period
by excitement and ma n . The horse unconsciously throws
passing off, then the ma n some times endeavours to climb up the
and dashes himself about, a tQ keep him from pulling
wall. At times, ropes will ha . destro ying harness, carriage,
back and becoming unmanageable, thereby destroy | of a mad
sometimes other horses, and even the smble ttseth J becomes
horse is great, and a painful s.ght to T . g worth
hausted, falls, and dies. Treatment. or will, give relief to a
saving, and rarely can be saved , for nothing ca ufe does not
mad horse but bleeding, and th g j able mass , unable to
rally, and the horse d.esa dull. fluid and , ymph , h ence
from other hordes so that he may not injure them.
7 . _ uc cyqtEM Give your horses now and again
TONE UP THE e Sadvi t is Compound—in their food that
a good tonic preparation t he S y S t e m, purify the blood,
will increase the appetite, imp d im y prove the tone of health
S you. If. however, o„ the
42


_____ - - W
| / % /v :. 5 ! ’>'■' il
f 7 -" -mV '* ' 4 I
II^^SHI's' v i i aI/// j|
| L- * t : /*■ if m
" y gBi \ M^^^HHHSHK^SseBBiy iTf il
. - • AkV,Mi
*;•'■■'■- \ - A. \ ; «i .
**>" *■>.+ '' ,'; i ,• . ] < -. , i •
s W s t 'r (h dash -" UP
found in the , ——————
jound in the stomach and
bowels; they are also
sometimes met with in
h T St e r very P art of the
cK° y * l" vesti gation
shows there are over
thirty kinds of worms
that infest the horse— of
these, there are but a few
that are very common;
hrst, the terra lumbrici,
* ] . ar S e worm from 4 to
14 121ch ? s long that lives
symptom7oMVorni*r
in the intestines. It looks lik, n *
white and tapered at both ends e lt C L m found e^rt^ WOrm, is y ellow ish
bowels where it often exists in great "i the lar^e and -mall
"IT ,ean f and ragged-looking, by absoS th ' ? P - ng the animal
the support of the horse. Needle t ® nutrim ent intended for
LTof7 h V£ e s r n r of 0 1 h er r
end of the bowels, often in thousands and the y. 0c . c "Py the lower
buttnr^ n ° ya^ Ce k y itohing they produce ! rritat i° n . causing
buttocks and tail till hair and skin flr A ff f the horse will rub his
f b -r C ' !? "! a ? y instan ces, a severe him to
foliate and plaited tape worms are the ™ ' pe wor ms, the per-
ranges from one to ,"-ed
thr *e fcet in length.
When the horse is
badly infested
with this variety
of worm, such ex-
treme emaciation
is brought about
that death often
results. Instances
are known of
several gallons; of
these worms: Being
taken out off thts
bowels after dearth.
Of the round
worms, one off the
most pernicious'is
that known as “the
palhsade. worm.”
The Wormy Horse.
® mood-vessels and bowels as well Tf . whose abode; is in
presence especially dangerous Their l tS wanden "ff habits makes; its
lnc h ?„d a quarter. Thif parasite ‘t ngth is abouf «
yearlings. Another variety of worm tnn , causes heavy losses among
y WOrm> to ° ofte ° met with, is the four.
43


66
SALVITIS MEDICINE CHESTS
wn for country patrons.
NO. 1
FOR HORSES
A selection adapted to the
emergent wants ot
the station.
Pull particulars of
contents on page 47.
;-4. :
m
I
fA
»
t
NO. 2
FOR CATTLE
Expressly suited to the
wants of dairy
farmers.
Full particulars of
contents on page 67.
SPECIAL NOTICE.-For not^
willing to give SPECIAL ADVICE FREE, ame w ill have our prompt atten-
you on request, which fill up and post o , already been largely availed of,
don. Our offer to help stockowners irithis way Q f lN preparations . There is
with advantage to them. We■ 8”* ra "‘ et ’‘) stem , J animals so quickly as the different
S ?o" d‘o h u‘ "he? preparations are equally reliable.
spin'ed strongyle (strongylus 1 are usually
worm.
When fresh, it is of a history i s spent
found adhering to the pellets ° f dg ‘ bl t0 perforate to serious con-
in the wall of the gut, which they a b bowels, are not uncom-
sequence. Colic, and even l oy| Tl ptoririS.r--As a rule, the presence o
monly due to such worms. general unthriftiness of the animal, his
worms may be suspected y . , state Q f the bowels, and where
staring coat, chronic mdigestron J bo(Jy wi| , be vitiate d, and
he is seriously infested, , q'be appetite is capricious,
often a sour smell will pervade the system. T rubbisbi biti g
often depraved, the horse eat g Uk of the stable, and the
viciously at the walls, w ° od^ rk ’-f£eatmerit for the expulsion of
general health is interfere W1 • . , f WO rm present; thus both the
these parasites depends upon the vary dil got r id of with a
large and the small worms first.™ b " sSvitis Compound supplies. When
good ferruginous tonic such»l“ vibs don P e _ pu t this Compound
you notice such symp oms, vour own satisfaction, and to the
to the test. The resuit 'wdl be to ow The animal that harbours
unspeakable pleasure of t e s systematic course of treatment
either the round or tape worm will need a system fem extract , or
with such anthelmintics as sat . g g ial Worm Remedy
turpentine. To meet.such <^« s - ; ; embracin g exceptional vernal-
sunttrssts as. ~—- *• - 1
domestic animals. ~~


INFLUENZA, Xt^^er B of OU Hors e or r :s "££
"3S. malady, capable of spreading
:^f tri r sss- J£
symptoms are developed the penod and
within twenty-four hours) a . , , The extent to which
muscular weakness that suddenly become eviden .
the various organs may be involved-the lungs,liver, .
frequently becoming implicated exp ain co [ our 0 f the membrane
Pink-Eye denoting the peculiar bright pink colour • of
lining the eyelids that is always P r ® s ?"' in bodily temperature.
immediate loss of appetite, wit ™ a '. tl nos trils, swollen, tearful
Other Symptoms are-glary discharge fromi the: nos . rus,
eyes, general weariness, soreness degree of
or colicky purging rapid oss of fleshy and
prostration. Uroncnitis , . fr . nll . nt form the most
and lung inflammation, t l houg hi Hc^ don# ' Treatment-
critical, hence the most to e rea unde rstood that purging or any
First, and importantly, let diminish the strength must
method of treatment that ten . g great f rom the first.
be avoided, as the debi 1 a ing condition demands
The suffering horse ; should have>the and quie
in a well aired stable free from g • should be fed in small
clothed and the legs bandage wi easily digested nutritious food —
quantities, at frequent mtervals. s ppy, have been beaten
say, milk, wheaten or oatmeal gruel m which a*
up —varying occasionally, with a A later to drink, to the latter
horse with plenty of linseed tea and o of When the
adding every 3or 4 hours a qua Da i n f u l apply externally flannels
throat is sore and
wrung out of .hot wate , the ' upper a ir passages, steam the nostrils
the congestion and irntat , Qil has been dropped, and when
with .water in which a little yp as invariably
happens the
cough becomes
troublesome,
have immediate
recourse to
Salvitis Pectoral
Powder, the
value of which
for allaying the
intensely dis-
tressing cough
of influenza is
beyond compare.
We strongly im-
press this upon
i • „„f remain long after all the other
the public mind, as the coug i 1 improvement sets in, the recovery
symptoms have passed away. Wh £ loyment of a high-class
of strength can be greatly assiste y exact l y 0 f the nature best
S5 ST 238« sa -“


•“ SALV,T 'S ” proprietaries.
p OR HORSES.
Compound salvithi H
replenishes bone/mliscle nt and on?bined ' a t# " ,C ’
tablesp a 'bf 8 j for “ete S W 3 nderfu J s taying h powe h r!and®
health and Com Pound SalvitU «,ni u * quarts of oats with a lar^,
establishes perfecf dlges"fon 4- quarts without 3
in better heart,
skin, liver; kidnevrfnTK and nrL why ? il
Salvitis is d l b °*T e,S ’ and generally tones “/? Pr ° Per aCtion of the
stallion, the hIoL g ° d J° r the r «ce, the bum Compound
strengthens hl£. a / e » or th e colt If S’ or the working horse the
he r S a„d in r “tb. Tf J,bs P T«fe i n vl|.r,£f
i s * ,viti » Tasteless Puri-;- th'"* ‘ , °° ° rdlnar >’ al| o»ances,'
sol'd S in a s mWs -«'. - .48. A and strong—
Salvit'a Anod g,v,D B ph7,lc bi ' ls
Slunila™ 5 -
Salvitis White I otio and per-
(o r At p L h g ra ,t Quarter, Sand
„ Salvitis Ingredients f ! r " d ?r e ‘ and Suppie" H °° f ’ *“*■• and general,,
arapldly*He““Vo , !*m®* der )-. Mix«l*»”hLard' <or can he used
«r Broken 'f. b,e for C«i S” ow V " it for™
difficulty experienced in this hnf d r Ga s * Is put up in thi’« W ° Unds ’ Sores . Chafed
W,lb satls laction. SnitaW. "orwardtaj ,he
-Salvitis Antiseptic s human use - g 8 y substanc e»
aU^fo??e|jg l vj b ’ (^ b ; F ' n of and the Early Cure
0-1 Sore, and &SS£sg* and £-«« ofays'
and soap. For the c „ re of p “* * ,h * *
Ants * F, /T- and “ango^n’does 1 and'?’ P u° Ud F,e sh, Heels ' -Saddle
Ants, and Lice on Animals 8 ’ d for the destruction of d Nox,V, S ° V* for
Salvitis Red Oil. t? r Noxious Insects, Bugs
a'u‘k'ndS i “ riaS ’ G ° res ' W« r Kn«"|* 3 ?'" d »- fresh or old R ips Te _
' S-lvitia Qreen a - ‘
S,i - - Sprains, Slrains
r Salvitis Yellow M,,., ~ . ° ckmen ' stablemen
E„r sore Throat, Bronchitis, Wanted
—
46
SEND FOR PRICE LIST,


Salvitis Purgative. A cure for Sand in the Intestines of Horses. Sold in t.ns
l™"™ variety »«V^
in A*t . Fnr the speedy and effectual relief and cure of
:o .f h >, rn ,t |fo^ t^., le P a-nriSee p FO s‘rn'e. SP and y o. h er live stock.
5..»1tU Lotion cryetals P-id*
Stockman, Shepherd, etc, ready (amily •
Ut, S..VW.°°Dry sp«y- *» eimp.c and contagious ophthalmia. A .übstitnte for
te "“ aivitu styptic Tincture lnstantly stops hieing and relieves pain, and
hastens cur. of cuts, etc. For animal particular.,
Salvitis Cure lor Rheumatism m
Salvitis Worm
SALVITIS HORSE MEDICINE CHEST.
Adapted to the emergent wants of the Station.
1 81b Tin Compound Salvitis for Horses.
2 Bottles Salvitis Anodyne Drench for Gripes,
rp. Brown Blister.
Purgative Drench.
i Attica ” Green Oils for Sprains.
1 Bott .. Antiseptic Solution for Skin Diseases.
i Oils for Wounds
1 Bottle ” White Lotion for Inflamed TendoTiS '
2 Cakes ’’ Antiseptic Soap.
i Rottlp Wart Remedy.
1 Bottle p ectora l Cough Powder.
jTih -- s typ tic Tincture for Stopping Bleeding.
9 Tin ’ ’ Strong Tasteless Purge.
; 11 Medium Tasteless Purge
2 v ” Black Pine Ointment for Sore beet, etc.
ITm ” ingredients for Heal-All Ointment.
1 Rattle ” Eye Lotion Crystals.
1 Box Worm Powders.
Certificate from Carbine ® J 1 ". oundj x have great
TW. Norris, Es T-— ‘ Having to U trainers Ur and all interested in hoiges, as a useful
pleasure in i t .” Walter T. H.ck.ubot ,
preparation, carrying
Flemington. like the same animal since getting SalvltU
North Adelaide.-" Our hone ■» * to ieveral frieude.»-T. A. Hewett.
Compound. We have recommended
A drattghl h „rse of mine about w.nt verymuch
Compoundl eats iook. S pieudid."- D . Oee.o, Corner.
"■entire horse •
him quite a new horse, vve
Grenfell, N-S.W. [he best thln g 1 over used for v,ouud..»-
, BnnWillock, Wycheprocf.
J- T R emergent illneaaes.
Special Med ‘|t?J® s S pr f i»mptly answered.
47


CATTLE AILMENTS
AND THEIR REMEDIES.
See ■ w w «
(contagious). °OneoTtfomosf seriotfJaffl'"f “ f ipping of the Cal I
herd. Treat by giving i„ thcTfUd «° i . a , ffllctlons lhat befall the dairy
62 the same time irrigating or iiusiiiiiu if* Vl ,S An f' se Ptic Compound ai
water in which salv ?ti«AntS'^ l,e c wo,llb and genital passages with
of .he bull should also be* The B geni,als
Aftei-hi»+u Tii ln t> with the same soap.
Delayed Cleansing’ °‘ herwi ® e . s P oken of as
warm water made slightly 8 snddy wUh with ™' k
after calw™ ,a k° r qmTker^rfs^uvfca 8 /b"") ! °i‘ en see ”* n “»!
enriching Salvitis for Cattle. an founcl than the blood
application of War^Sed Removed by daily
a 2artstThouM a Vfhn S medi T t r ? tm a ent ° f the «*cted
rest of the herd at once dosed with the s!v' y des troyed, and the
as protective against contagion V ' US Anti «ptic Compound
Whdon, or functional
required, and the Salvitis for Ca«le provS ‘° nic is th «
SSSZ&£S? -ws. Greatly
Of Stockholm tar. aer ’ aided oy inhalations of vapour
prudmu, 1 SalviUs for CaWe”* ° f Nutrition - Arrested by the
Red OW 7 ’ °c herwise h®| U w*h : n Salvitu e We°aHnir U pd er ' Stitch when
B««s: s srr re stops b, “ di ”SedTat!,r tis
X s r/ c w^er eund and
disease of young?tock mamly^NodfiHn^ I *’./ 11 ' An infectious, fatal
Salvit” ? Pr ° tect °‘ h « animals o? the h er d Un tt r M J ,k “ d Act!
Compound. ’ f y should be dosed with
with gas
xLd * n C ‘ ° f 2oz - bakiB S so g da g in a pinT of “ * into the Paunch
Anodyne Drench added to it p t of water and a Salvitis
F “" Dlr e ct7ona o^rp a ck« K eZ


of the Windpipe. For inis and
mdred ailments the Salvitis Pectoral Powder is invaluable.
Cold, Common, or Catarrh, induced by sudden changes, travelling
on dusty roads. Give warm bran mashes or oatmeal gruel two or three
times a day with an allowance of Salvitis Pectoral Powder.
■.i-i,£ 0 7 Btlp ? tion> ° r Stoppage of the Bowels. Will generally
yield to doses of castor oil, Epsom or Glauber salts. When these fail
to move give Salvitis Purgative.
vow-pox, a contagious disease. Chief features, feverish state
and eruptions on the teats and skin of the udder. First reduce fever by
giving a Salvitis Purgative Drench. To hasten the drying-up and
healing, use Salvitis Healing Powder, dry or mixed with milk.
| *1
Bone Disorder, Bone Chewing Habit, etc. The
malady passing under these very expressive terms is more prevalent
fi r^on^r t^e - Catt e Australia than any other ailment. In some parts
this affection passes under the name of Cachexia. This condition is
due to the absence of phosphates in the soil and herbage, hence it is
indispensable that the animal should be provided with these in some
other concentrated form. To meet this evident necessity, there are
com me in t e Salvitis for Cattle all the phosphatic elements
essential to the restoration and maintenance of the bony fabric in
soundness and strength.
PiftbstOS. Excessive urination often appears in the cow.
Special treatment required. Send particulars.
Diarrhoea and Dysentery often affect grown cattle. Give
successive doses of Salvitis Astringent, until purging ceases.
Digestion. When this function is impaired we may be sure
that those of absorption, circulation, and secretion are involved.
Salvitis for Cattle wonderfully assists digestion by causing a plentiful
flow of saliva, provides against stoppage or torpidity of the bowels, and
promotes the full abstraction and absorption of nutritive matter.
Disinfection of Cow Sheds, etc. Nothing superior to chloride
oi lime. lo kill the virus of infectious diseases, wash byres with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap or Solution.
D^OPP* l ' the Cud, Dribbling, Slobbering, etc. Indicates
that the animal is out of sorts, and in need of a tonic like Cattle Salvitis.
Dropsy, general. Skilled surgical attention required.
Drying Off of Peisistent Milkers. Special Drenches supplied
on request. r
Wounds, Scabs, or Rashes in or about. Specially healed
and protected from flies by Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Eye Affections, Simple or Contagious. Salvitis Lotion or
Salvitis Dry Spray, according to Affection and number to be treated.
Eyelids, torn by nail or barbed wire. When requisite, stitch:
afterwards apply Salvitis Red Oils or Salvitis Heal-All Ointment/
Full Directions on Packages.


Fardel-bound, Clue-Bound, Dung-bound, tne orunts,
Stoppage, etc., are all popular descriptions referring to the Impaction ol
the third stomach or omasum. This condition, often attended by death,
could in most cases be prevented by the use of Salvitis for Cattle, its
digestive and tonic action helping the solution and absorption of food
and the propulsion of its waste.
Feet, Injuries to the, from nails, thorns, glass, sharp stones, etc.
Cleanse and paint with Salvitis Red Oils, or pack with Salvitis Black
Pine Ointment. . .
Fetlock Joint swollen from injury or strain. Bandage with
Salvitis White Lotion.
Feverishness, with Colds, Coughs, etc. Reduce with a Salvitis
Purgative Drench.
Foot and Mouth Disease, or Epizootic Aphtha, is a
contagious eruptive fever. Requires prompt skilled attention and
special treatment.
PQOt Rot, or Disease of the Sole of the Foot of Cattle and
working Bullocks. Pare away decayed horn, sprinkle sole over with
bluestone, then pack with Salvitis Black Pine Ointment. Renew
this treatment every third or fourth day.
Foul in the Foot, Low or Loo, or Abscess in cleft of Foot. Cleanse
with water and Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, then pack with Salvitis
Black Pine Ointment. , , _ ,
Gangrenous or Mortifying Wounds. First remove dead flesh
with knife Tor frequent application of nitrate of silver. Stimulate healing
with Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Garget, Caked Bag, or Inflamed Udder (acute or chronic).
Continuous hot fomentations, hot bran poultices, or hot cloths, and the
rubbing in every fourth hour of Salvitis Absorbent Jelly into the
affected quarter.
Gastritis and Gastro-enteritis, that is, Inflammation of the
Fourth Stomach and Bowels. As these diseases require different
treatment, skilled advice should be sought.
Glos Anthrax, Malignant Sore Throat, known also as Blain.
Treatment of no avail, and properly prohibited.
Glossitis, Inflammation of the Tongue, the result of some
injury or irritant growth. Feed soft, sloppy foods, give a Salvitis
Purgative Drench, and on the tongue place, three or four times a day,
some paste made with treacle and Salvitis Pectoral Powder.
Hsematuria, Blood in the Urine, from blows or other injuries
over the region of the kidneys. Not to be confounded with Red Water.
Apply hot bran or fresh sheepskins to loins, give linseed tea to drink,
and feed on slush mashes or gruels. If persistent, give Special
Treatment, supplied on request.
Hair Balls, caused by the animal licking itself, or companion,
and swallowing the hair. Confine the animal for a day or two to sloppy
food, then give a full dose of linseed or castor oil, or the half of a
salvitis Purgative Drench.
Horn Catarrh, from injury or blow. Remove or
splintered pieces, bathe with warm water, and pack with SalvitU
Black Pine Ointment.
Full Directions on Packages*


%!!!)€«€*
Hoven, Tympanitis, or Drum Belly, .distention of the paunch Page
or mmen with gas from fermentation of wet grass, ciovcr, etc. Often
I»h£h C ?« iff r * ? f baldng / oda ( with a Salritls Anodyne Drench
added to it) given in a pint of water; but in critical cases recourse is
f*v“ n CC K SS t0 l h !u tr ?°? r ’° r sharp p° inted knife, the instrument
being pushed through the left flank into the rumen, an operation called'
fmthe^t n roublc. fter d ° S ® ° f Cattle sa,vit » s will prevent
Husk, or Hoose (Parisitic Bronchitis), due to the presence of
worms in the windpipe and bronchial tubes. Treatment by inhalation
of tar, sulphur, or chlorine gas fumes. For quicker results carbolic
acid and turpentine can also be vaporised for the same purpose. Give
Salvitis Special Worm Remedy.
. . . • m , t or Retention of Food in the third Stomach,
Manyphes, or Manifolds ; also variously known as Dry Bible, Stomach
Staggers, etc. A disorder of cattle particularly prevalent in the dry -±
season. In the majority of instances this affection could be prevented
y attention to diet, a plentiful water supply, and by assisting the
digestive process at a time when most needed with a tonic, solvent, and
nutrient of the strengthening power of Cattle Salvitis.
Indigestion and Sour Stomach are of common occurrence
among cattle. Its existence may be guessed by the lazy, indifferent,
and imperfect chewing of the cow. Occasionally change the feed from
ry to green. When this is not practicable add to whatever is given a
daily allowance of some good stomachic like Cattle Salvitis.
Jaundice, the Yellows, and Inflammation of the Liver. Keep
the bowels free with bi-weekly doses of Salvitis Purgative, give
simple digestible food, and twice daily in the drinking water a Special
Acid and Tonic Mixture. Supplied on request.
Lice of two common species appear in cattle. Tobacco wash,
sour buttermilk, linseed oil, and kerosene will each kill. Should th
fail wash with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. 3
Lumpy Jaw, or Actinomycosis. The Salvitis lodide Remedy
is worthy of implicit confidence for its safe and successful treatment.
Lungs, Congestion and Inflammation of (Pneumonia), Pleurisy,
etc. At once apply mustard poultices, or Salvitis Vellow Liniment,’
to both sides of the chest, clothe or rug, supply plenty of linseed tea,
keep the bowels relaxed by occasional doses of linseed oil, treacle, or
Epsom salts, and give, mixed in treacle sweetened water, a dose of
Salvitis Pectoral Powder every four hours. When recovering give a
good tonic like Cattle Salvitis. *
Malignant Cdtarrhi with dulness, feverishness, profuse
discharge from eyes and nostrils, sore throat and cough; at times
epidemic among young stock. In the early stages give a Salvitis
Purgative Drench. Keep eyes and nostrils clean by constant warm
water fomentations, giving Salvitis Pectoral Powder every four hours
mixed in treacled water. If purging supervenes, rely on the Salvitis
Astringent.
Mammitis (contagious), otherwise known as Black or
Infectious Garget, a notifiable disease, and a scourge to the dairy
farmer. Separate the affected from the non-affected animals. Reject
Full Directions on Packages.


the milk secreted as unfit for human or animal consumption, and while
waiting instructions from the authorities dose with Salvitis Antiseptic
Compound. Wash the teats and udder with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Also inject into the teat warm water made slightly suddy with the same
soap after each secretion. To the quarter or quarters apply constant
hot water fomentations, and rub in Salvitis Absorbent Jelly*
Manse in the Hollow of the Neck and the Root of the Tail. Use
tobacco or carbolic wash, or thick lathers of Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Milk Fever, or Parturient Apoplexy, is now successfully treated
by the injection of sterilized air. The occurrence of this malady can
generally be prevented by giving, ten or fourteen days before calving
time, a Salvitis Calving Drench.
Ophthalmia, simple or contagious,lnflammation, Granulation,
Ulceration, and all mattery and filmy conditions of the eye. For such,
the quickest, most efficacious, and the easiest of application is the
Salvitis Dry Spray, by which numbers of live stock can be treated
without trouble or delay. . , , , . .. ~ .
Pleuro-pneumonia (contagious) is now included in the list
of notifiable diseases under the Milk and Dairy Act. Preventive
inoculation is the only safeguard against this infectious disease.
Purgation. In the sudden or serious ailment of stock early
purgation is a consideration. The Salvitis Purgative is of full
strength and of prompt action, therefore suited for such emergency.
Red and Black Water, SO named from the red or brown
tinge imparted to the urine. Lately calved and young cattle chiefly
affected. Remove from pasture and hand-feed. Provide ample supply
of linseed tea, feed gruels, and give in treacled water a Salvitis Red
Water Drench, repeating the dose in forty-eight hours.
Rheumatism, with shifting pains, swelling, and inflammation.
Treat with the Salvitis Rheumatic Cure, externally applying the
Salvitis Green Oils. Feed gruel and mashes.
RjQitgfgj faulty development and softening of the bone, mostly
seen in young cattle. Feed generously, adding to each feed the stated
allowance of Cattle Salvitis. . ,
Rinderpest, a specific malignant,contagious fever,called in bomb
Africa “ Cattle Plague,” or “Typhus Fever.” Treatment ineffectual and
prohibited. Slaughter of all infected animals, and those that come in
contact with them, requisite for the extermination of the disease.
Rjngworm, White Flaw, Bald Scab, Dry Scab, is a
parasitic Disease. Isolate the affected animals, cleanse and disinfect
their stalls. With a blunt edged knife remove the scabs and scales
from the face of the ringworm, then apply a thick strong lather of
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, tying up the animal to prevent its licking
or rubbing it off. Do this daily until cured. _
Roaring in Cattle, caused by tumour preventing free passage ot
air into windpipe. Young stock are frequently troubled. A senes of
applications of Salvitis Brown Blister externally to the neck hasten
dispersal of tumour. . , ,
Sanding in Cattle, another phase of Impaction. Treat in t a
same way as for “ Impaction.” ___
Full Directions on Packages.


. ®?r* T ® at *i cracked, chafed, blistered or scabby. Dress threeiSL
times daily with Salviti* Healing Powder, dusted on or made into a 65
paste with milk, so that it may be readily cleansed off before milking.
Speying. In the performance of this operation the greatest
attention to cleanliness should be observed. Knives, needles, clamps,
scissors, and hands can be rendered innocuous by washing with
salvitis Antiseptic Soap. 8
Staggers, often the secondary result of some
disease ot the stomach involving the brain. Give full dose of Salvitis
Purgative; repeat in forty-eight hours if necessary. Reduce the diet,
give only mash foods, and house the animal until better.
.... Sunstroke. At once apply cold water to head and spine.
When sufficiently recovered give a Salvitis Purgative Drench.
Fever, with or without Red Water. Repeated dipping,
and the administration of Salvitis Antiseptic Compound.
Tuberculosis, local or general, is a notifiable disease.
slaughter ot the animal the best course.
Ulcers and Ulcerous Sores. Keep clean with Salvitis
Antiseptic Soap and hot water. Hasten healing with Salvitis Black
Pine Ointment.
Urine, Stoppage or Incontinence of. Demands surgical
attention.
*
Udder I Inflamed and Hardened. Frequent hot fomentations and
rubbings in of Salvitis Absorbent Jelly. 65
Vc&riolcl Vaccina, the technical name of Cow Pox, is now
made a notifiable disease. Being highly infectious, the hands after
milking should be washed with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. For
dressing the teats (for it is on these and adjacent parts of the udder that
the pocks generally appear) there is nothing better than Salvitis
Healing' Powder made into a paste with milk, or ointment with
lard.
% t .
Warts, or Angle Berries (the name for long necked warts). Can
be removed by a ligature of horsehair or waxed thread, the application
of caustic, or painlessly with Salvitis Wart Remedy.
Worms, Tape, Husk, or Lung, and every other variety.
Exterminated with Salvitis Special Worm Remedy.
f
Antiseptic Compound.
“ The Antiseptic Compound you sent me for Black Leg in Calves was a
complete success. Did not lose one. Last year without it I had the misfortune to lose
sixteen tully reared calves. Wishing your Remedies every success.”— M. T. Russell
Darhmurla. J •
Cripply Cows.
“We found it gave such excellent results that we ask you to send us, as soon as
possible, another pound’s worth.H. D. Bellis, Winton.
Salvitis Calf Cream.
One of the first and most respected authorities on stock rearing in Australia
writes: “It seems to make up the calves well, and they handle well after getting it.~
—Robert Clarke, Belinda Vale, Lancefield Junction.
" - *
Special Medicines supplied for emergent illnesses.
Letters promptly answered.


Diseases of Cattle
/
COMMON TO AUSTRALIA.
IMPACTION otherwise Retention of Food In the
Omasum, Third Stomach, Manyplles, or
Manifolds, also known variously as Dry Bible, Acute
Indigestion, Stomach Staggers, Vertigo, Stoppage,
TH© Grunts, &C* 9 &C. 9 and in the British Isles as Maw or
f?2trdell Bound is a disorder most prevalent in the autumn, and
during protracted summer droughts when herbage is scarce, dried-up, and
lacking in nutriment, and water supply insufficient, irregular or objection-
able, when cattle, to escape the fatigue of wandering in overpowering heat,
gather food hastily, consuming at a gulp withered grass, its pare ed
roots, and adhering grit, or, when impelled by hunger, they devour t e
leafage and stems of herbs, plants and growths which, although not
poisonous in the ordinary sense, nevertheless act injuriously throug
their irritant, insoluble or astringent properties seriously
with digestion. In America, where this affection is termed Wood
Pyil the third stomach or bible, on post-mortem examination, is
often found filled with leaves, dried brambles, sticks and twigs from
bushes, in a mass so dry and hard that it readily burns when nre is
applied to it. Apart, however, from the influence of the season,
Impaction of the Omasum is liable to follow the sudden transference
from succulent diet to dry feeding, and also to result from
continued, unvaried feeding on straw, bran and chaff. The
occurrence of the disease among a number of cows in the same herd
and at about the same time has suggested to some an infectious
origin, but beyond the coincidence of occurrence, there is, so far, no
evidence to support such a supposition. It is a complaint upon which,
until recently, authorities held different opinions, some believing
it to be a distinct and independent disease, affecting tlm third
division of the stomach primarily, provoking and terminating
in atrophy of its muscles and of the leafy structure of that organ,
resulting in its total loss of function; constipation, brain and
other troubles following as a sequel. But it is difficult to imagine
this occurring without the other divisions of the stomach being at the
' same time involved. Such, indeed, is now the belief of later and more
exact observers, these contending that Impaction of the Omasum or, as
it is popularly termed, Dry Bible, is ...but the effect of present and pre-
viously existing deranged condition of the gastric and intestinal mucous
membrane, more especially that of the Abomasum (true digestive
stomach) and of the Intestines; post-mortem (examination, as a rule,
revealing extensive congestion or inflammation of these organs, with
indications of atrophied or paralized parts. In instances this paralysis
has been found to extend throughout the whole digestive track and to


■Mi» »mMMK& SI ■ & 1 -’ « 1 **%? j W mB&aSv/ir A ML' -? h
the muscles concerned in swallowing. During life this is shown by the
inability of the animal to masticate, to swallow food, or to retract the
protruded tongue, this last characteristic feature being a significant
symptom of advanced critical stage of Impaction. Obstinate constipa-
tion, marked by the ani-
mal's painful, oft-repeated,
unsuccessful efforts to pass
dung, also indicates loss of
intestinal expelling power.
The brain disturbance,
which in some animals is
so pronouncedly present,
we attribute to the im-
peded or perverted blood
circulation. Before enter-
ing on the more immediate
causes of attack, it will be
as well to remind the
reader that accumulation
or retention of food in the
Omasum is present in a
lesser degree in those ail-
ments of cattle in which
appetite, rumination, and
the movements of the
paunch are long sup-
pressed, the contents of
the stomach becoming
then gradually dry from
absence of saliva and
diminished secretion of
CRITICAL STAGE OF IMPACTION.
the other digestive fluids. This condition is met with in all severe
febrile diseases. In slaughter yards the partly-digested food found in
the Omasum of debilitated animals is generally in a dry condition.
Cause. —For the better comprehension of the cause and nature
of this malady we append a description of the organs of digestion in
cattle by Dr. G. H. Dadd, U.S .A. Its perusal will remind the reader of
the modes by which food reaches the different compartments of the
stomach, how it is dealt with in each, and how in health each process
of digestion operates harmoniously for the sustenance of the cow
and the continuance of her usefulness. From this interdependence
of action it may very reasonably be inferred that impairment of
function in either of these divisions means the derangement and dis-
organisation of the whole. At the onset we see that for the completion
of the first and successive processes of digestion, healthy muscular action
or strength—for all muscular action is but the exercise of strength—is.
as indispensable as is the presence and action of the salivary, gastric and
other digestive secretions. All manner of movements are produced by
the muscles, including the movement of the jaws in mastication, in the
gullet when swallowing, in the stomach during the tituration of food
and the expression of its juices, in its further propulsion, and the eventual
expulsion of its waste. Again we see that the alimentary canal—which
begins at the mouth and continues through the gullet, stomach and in-


testines, and which in all parts of its length is lined by a skin or mucous
membrane in the inside—is on the outside over-laid with muscles.
These muscles, and also the mucous membrane, are crowded with blood
vessels, which for the due performance of their functions depend upon a
constant supply of pure blood, and just as these cannot do without it so
also the brain, the spinal cord and the nerves have equal or perhaps
greater need of a like supply. Now it is evident that neither pure,
nourishing blood or muscular force can be supplied by the ill-nourished
animal, and it is here that we hit on the primary and principal cause of
Impaction, namely, debility due to innutrition. This debility, so dis-
tinctly marked by diminished secretion of the digestive 1 juices and
enfeebled muscular power, is of progressive tendency, increasing as the
summer advances, reaching its worst exactly at the time when herbage
and fodder from its less digestibility requires more than ordinary amount
of gastric and salivary fluid to insalivate and render it pulpy, and more
than usual muscular force to facilitate the extraction of its nutriment
and fit it to enter the fourth stomach. It is then also that the Abomasum,
from its want of a due share of vital action, becomes unable to perform
its part in the physiological process of digestion, hence the accumulation
found in the Manyplies. These accumulations being subject to
fermentation, or decomposition, the Omasum becomes over-distended,
thereby obstructing the circulation of blood through its surface, de-
priving it not only of nutriment from the nerves of nutrition, but para-
lizing its secretive function. The conflicting and very unfavorable con-
ditions that attend the disease engaged our attention some years back
and was one of the potent reasons for introducing the specific Hematic
Tonic, known as Salvitis, the use of which among cattle in the
early summer months may be considered, as has been abundantly proved,
an absolute preventive of this disease. Our persistent advocacy of its
use is based on the fact that it is a high-class tonic which at once in-
vests the blood with a new and resistive force, stimulates its circulation,
renews the strength of nerve and muscle, and by imparting vigour and
vitality effectually stays the advance of this disease. It is also a
stomachic of the first order, greatly assisting digestion by inducing a
free flow of saliva and the other digestive juices.
—The symptoms and duration of attack vary con-
siderably, being governed by the mildness or severity of the disease. In
mild cases the signs are loss of appetite and loss of cud, bowels consti-
pated, a drum-like condition of the abdomen, staring coat, heavy expres-
sion, breath laboured and foul-smelling, disinclination to movement, the
cow lying down most of the time on the left side, and moaning frequently,
or grunting after each expiration of breath. If standing, the back, is
arched, and the hind legs unsteady. Much tenderness is shown on the
right side under the short ribs, if the animal be there punched or pressed
with the fist. Sometimes diarrhoea of a very offensive nature exists;
this when examined, has the appearance of a thin liquid running through
hardened matter, which adheres to the side of the bowels. In severer
or acute cases attack is usually preceded by the frequent passing of
hard, glazy, baked-looking dung, after which the action of the bowels
ceases. The animal then becomes dull and almost immovable, the head
hangs low, the ears droop, the horns are hot, mucus is discharged from
the nostrils, saliva dribbles from the mouth, the tongue hangs out of the
mouth j evidences of acute pain are to be seen, the suffering animal
moaning piteously, grinding its teeth, looking round at it* flank, kicking


/'■ I.! . ' *■/ ■•SZt.-
4r ■ y /v ■ !>
■ SSHBy' . SB ’ v’' -- V >■ .: **■ *
I I' .-.: v?JJ
E&f- ... •' - J ’ ; r. ..:••-*• ' '. -'^^%k
Bt1» ' * ’ — Vy .*' • • 'Tly
■ re. $•■> *•»• .-_ v -‘- • - . rv^B
* V ■' , • w ,.• . .; . k • •• • - ._' . BuV V. \-
.. . . . . r« ■ S . . g, , • ** » *•-*.• • *>■ -,
' ■ -Vvyxvr/;•:>•-Ji/ *.•♦.
zk ’%&&$■?& 3*C v**• • .i-v,v. \ • ■. "*-'•‘■#3
■ / ♦‘ .■* *-il ■■
m m mJEtJllksSHEm *JB >L . v. ■*'■- x * v < a*: - Jtf I
jgli .JSk Wit nlw JfiB iB bHk\J- rawA«>' \:«c «■ •. -»'“•• \ J I
ftiiijy&SiBr 1 1 ■' L ’ •■ ■ * ■ j '. I
\m jl 8 IwyA-::. <>.^v-; v-;.- ml
Iji 1 11ra»% « • i' ••*••< St S
IM W « V ■'' jBKvl \ 'V«ifc' * v' -:• ■< v '• • ■ <X" . ,5\M
If ,<¥Ss& %Sgk Mk ib/_ A>^>r- C - • ~~o. •. -'-> - v <Vw', ■ -
f gmMM :^ v . -
Marm. j Mr* *3M Jm ~ v - . nwuMi
■ft w -va itfy i in '4mS A nKT*: 1 > '• 0'vf®S«KSWHit
DIAGRAM SHOWING THE DIFFERENT COMPARTMENTS OF THE
STOMACH OF THE OX.
SECTIONAL VIEW OF THE SAME.
A— Gullet. B— Rumen, or Paunch. C— Reticulum or Honeycomb Bag.
D—Omasum, or Manyplies. E— Abomasum, or True Digestive Stomach.
(It is this stomach that is employed to curdle milk.)
X —Valve connecting Intestines.


at its belly and lashing at its sides with its tail; the eyes become staring,
the white red, when frequently a highly excited condition follows, and the
animal rushes wildly about, running over obstacles as if it were blind,
paws at the earth, or bellowing and staggering, charges trees, fences or
buildings, or circles round and round until it falls insensible, delirious, or
paralized. The eyes lose their sensibility to light and touch. In acute
cases the attack is often sudden, death following within 20 or 80 hours ; in
less acute cases, with energetic treatment, recovery may be looked for in
the majority of cases. The signs of amendment are—cessation of the
grunt, the passage of some hard cakes of dung, and subsequent abate*
ment of the fever, and, if it has ceased, return of the milk flow.
Treatment. —This is one of the diseases in which the cause
should be treated as well as the effect, and this is why we have so long
urged the use of tonics to brace and strengthen the system and stomach,
to increase nutrition by helping the solution of the coarse dry herbage
to which cattle in the summer time are mainly restricted. In the treat-
ment of the effects, the first and chief object to overcome is the impacted
condition of the stomach, as upon this depends the success of the
treatment. To accomplish this, it is sometimes necessary to use
the strongest purgatives known, as well as frequent injections
through the rectum. Judgment and experience in the selection and
combination of a purgative remedy is wanted. Epsom Salts, Glauber
Salts, Aloes, Linseed and Castor Oils, arc among those chiefly used, but
often the exigencies of the case require stronger and more immediate
action than these induce, and recognising this, and the serious conse-
quences that attend danger of delay, we have specially prepared for this
purpose a Salvitis Purgative for Cattle, which can always be depended
on when quick and thorough action of the bowels is of vital importance.
Every encouragement must be used to get the animal to drink, treacled
water preferably, for large quantities of fluid are obviously most essential
in softening the hardened contents of stomach and bowels, which cause
the evil. An injection, with a large syringe or a spray pump and hose,
forcing a couple of gallons of warm watery soap suds into the bowels
should be used. During the time while the purgative is acting,
the strength and nervous force of the animal should be kept up by
stimulants freely administered. The diet, if the cow will eat, should
consist of mashes or watery foods, or it may be necessary to drench
frequently with oatmeal gruel, to either of which full allowances of
Salvitis for Cattle can advantageously be added, and continued in the
ordinary feed until recovery is fully established. After free action of the
bowels is secured, it is best to use green food, or to give occasional but
lesser doses of the purgative in order to insure perfect breaking up of
the Impaction, When signs of brain disturbance have set in, treatment
is frequently hopeless.
Description of the Organs of Digestion
in Cattle.
" THE GULLET is the medium through which food is conveyed
to the stomach. It is a tube furnished with spiral muscles which run in
different directions. By this arrangement, the food ascends or decends
at the will of the animal. The inner coat of the gullet is a continuation
of the same membrane that lines the mouth, nostrils, etc. The food,
having undergone a slight mastication by the action of the teeth, is
formed into a pellet, and, being both moistened and lubricated with


- i"
. fwbt, , __ i
VOK3Py^^WCTCin^^^hM^^^ , T^*' : '~ JrfittMBteEv *’ *- \ ~ -.,’ ■*■*''..■
saliva, passes down the gullet by the action of the muscles, and falls
immediately into the paunch, or rumen ; here the food undergoes a
process of maceration, or tituration. After remaining in this portion of
the stomach a short time, and being submitted to the united action of
heat and moisture, the food passes into another division of the stomach
called the reticulum, honeycomb, or second stomach, the inner surface
of which abounds in cells; at the bottom, and indeed in all parts of them,
there are glands, which secrete from the blood the gastric fluids. This
stomach possesses a property similar to that of the bladder, namely —-
that of contracting upon its contents. In the act of contracting, it squeezes
out a portion of the partly masticated food and fluids; the more solid
portion comes within the spiral muscles, is embraced by them, and
ascending the gullet passes into the mouth for re-mastication. After
the second chewing and contribution of saliva, this food passes with its
softer and more fluid parts into the third stomach, or manyplies, which
consists of a series of leaves, by which it is reduced to still finer division
before being passed into the fourth stomach in which true digestion takes
place. The second stomach again receives a portion from the paunch,
and so the process continues.
Rumination and digestion, however, are menchanico-vital actions,
and can only be performed when the animal is in a healthy state —a fact
not sufficiently remembered.
THE OMASUM, MANYPLIES OR BIBLE.
(Laid open).
The Manyplies, or Bible, as sometimes called, contains a number of
leaves, some attached to the upper and lower portion, and some which
apparently float loose. Their surface taken together is very great, and
is covered with projecting papillae, similar to that found on the tongue.
The attachment of the membrane is very delicate, and can be readily
rubbed off with the finger and thumb. This being so, it needs but little
irritation from retained and dry ingestia to produce very serious local
and constitutional disturbance. The action of this stomach is one of
alternate contraction and expansion; while, like the other compartments
of the stomach, it secretes its due share of gastric fluids for the purpose
not only of softening its contents, but also for the defence of its own
59


surface against friction. The mechanical action of the stomach is
communicated to it partly by the motion of the diaphragm, and its own
muscular arrangement. It will thus be perceived that by this joint
action the food is submitted to a sort of grinding and abstractional process.
The papillae, or prominences, on the lamina or leaves, present a rough and
sufficiently hard exterior to grind down the food, unless—and this is the
important point it shall have escaped the reticulum in too fibrous a form.
Kangaroo, sword and other grasses, corn stalks, oat stems, and
twigs are apt to make sad havoc in this and other parts of the stomach,
owing to their unyielding nature; for the stomach, like other parts of
the animal organisation,suffers from over-exertion, taxation, and effort,
and a cortesponding debility ensues, which, if allowed to increase, sooner
or later develops a partial or general paralysis of the alimentary canal.
The fourth division of the stomach is called . It some-
what resembles the duodenum of the horse in its functions, it being the
true digestive stomach. It is studded with numerous nerves, blood-
vessels, and small glands. It is a laboratory carefully equipped by the
Divine Artist and capable of carrying on the chemico-vital process as
long as the animal lives, provided its healthy functions aye . The
glands alluded to secrete from the blood a powerful agent in the
which is the agent in reducing the food to chyme and chyle.
This, however, is accomplished by the united agency of the bile and the
pancreatic juice, both these fluids being conveyed into the Abomasum
by means of small tubes and canals. Secretions also take place from the
inner membrane of the intestines, and, as the result of the united action
of all these fluids, the substance called chyle is formed. This is the most
nutritious portion of the food and has a milky appearance. The chyle is
received into a set of very minute tubes called lacteals, which are ex-
ceedingly numerous, and arise by open mouths from the inner surface of
the Abomasum and the Intestines. They receive the chyle; from
thence it passes into a receptacle, and finally into the thoracic duct.
Ihe thoracic duct opens into a vein leading directly to the heart • so
that whatever portion of the chyle is not actually needed by the organism
is thoroughly mixed with the general mass of blood. That portion of
chyme which is not needed, or cannot be converted into chyle, descends
into the intestines, and is finally carried out of the body by the rectum.
From all this it will be seen that the solution of food is due to the
chemical action of the gastric secretions and that the solvent power and
volume of these depend, as does also the necessary muscular action
upon the measure of health and vigour possessed by the animal
The yearly increasing mortality from this disease and the fact that
it is associated with the bone-chewing habit of cows, is our reason for
dealing so exhaustively with the subject.
Impaction, Early Relief, and Cow soon Back to Her Milk.
The Salvitis Purgative has been tried by me on one of my cows suffering from
her P mi k° n an W d hi RiT’ &S not uu n got earl y relief - hut came back to
her milk, and in a little time was in much better condition than she had been since
A vin§: ' , An ,^,°? e wbo has had the same experience will agree with me that stock
Glenmaggie ° P by them f ° r CaS6S ° f Agencyl WlLLlAM Marsh? LL
l,«u? al |! ltlS ' by i*! constit “tent phosphates, furnishes the material necessary to form
healthy bones and to keep the growth of bone equal to the growth of muscle and thah
is how “it makes all the difference" to the cripply cow. It is a wonderful’agent fw
arrestmg unnatural wa Sti „ g 0 f flesh and strenßlh , and for counteracting “hose
influences which tend to weaken. Trial alone will convince you of Its


Salvitis Purgative Very Reliable.
For cattle with Impaction or stoppage, Salvitis Purgative will be found very
reliable. On the cattle I drenched with it for Impaction, it acted speedily and with
thorough effectiveness. They were immensely benefited by its use. I state this with
pleasure and heartily recommend it to anyone with stock.—Faithfully yours,
H. H. Earl, Creighton.
Just The Thing for Cattle after a Long Drought.
After a test, I must say that the Salvitis Purgative is an excellent one, and just
the thing for cattle after a long drought such as we have just gone through. Store-
keepers should keep this with their other preparations on hand, as they are certain,
when known to meet with ready sale, particularly in the dry -time of the year.—Yours
truly, E. P. Bedwell, Glenara, Rushworth
Impaction—Every Case Satisfactorily Treated with the Salvitis
Purgative.
“ Salvitis Purgative has been put to repeated trial in my dairy herd, and in every
case the result has been satisfactory.” —Wm. Threlfall, Creamery Manager, Long-
wood.
Salvitis Tonic given in small quantities in the feed at milking-time, according to
directions, absolutely prevents the possibility of Impaction of the stomach and stop-
page of the bowels, and that “ makes all the difference,” for then no cure is needed
and no loss likely to occur.
indigestion and innutrition.
When once the process of digestion becomes disordered it is apt to continue so for
a long time; hence the value to the cattle-owner of a stomachic like Salvitis, which not
only assists digestion but strengthens and tones up the system by its vitalising and
wonderfully nutritive power. Cattle take it readily, and with relish, and early show
proofs of its good effects in restored appetites, improved digestion, increased nutrition,
and in the recovery of health and profit.
In evidence whereof we quote the experience of those well-known champion Ayr-
shire breeders, Messrs. Wm. McNab and Bro., Oakbank, Tullamarine, who aver that
FOR GIVING TONE AND STRENGTH TO THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS
Salvitis is unsurpassed.
" I use Salvitis with ray cattle in their food as a tonic, and can speak well of it.*
— W. J. Brisbane, Gowrie Park, Weerite.
“ I am a believer in the tonic properties of Salvitis, and strongly recommend it to
the farmers and others I come in contact with in this and the northern district.”—A
P, McColough, Bendigo.
” Five years’ most favourable experience of Salvitis causes me to place such a
high value on it that I always have it on hand.” — H. W. W. Richards, Boort.
“After giving Salvitis a thorough trial (two years) on my cows, I am pleased to
acknowledge the great benefits resulting from its use, condition vastly improving, and
the quality and yield of milk being much superior than previous to its use.”— Duncan
McDonald, Mount Wallace.
IMPACTION and CRIPPLES are each due to the same cause, viz., digestive
failure, the latter taking the form of mal-nutrition of the bones, hence both respond to
fhe same treatment. Thus Salvitis possesses the two-fold recommendation of being a
remedy for each.
” Have used a great deal of Salvitis, and find it extremely valuable in warding off
bone and other disorders, and for keeping cattle in health and profit.” —E. Speed,
Rosebrook.
“Salvitis for Cripples in Cattle we have found extremely good.” —E. Hoatson
Pyramid Hill. ”My crippled cows were completely cured with Salvitis, and the Com-
pound cured ray horse of hidebound and skin affection.” —J. D. Griffin, Mooroolbark.
“ For years I have been using Salvitis for Cattle with such satisfactory success that I
never fail to recommend its use.”—W. H. Williams, Budgerum West. ” Three years’
use, with uniformly good results, enable me to speak highly of Salvitis for Cattle.”—J.
Flynn, South Wangaratta. ‘‘We found it gave such excellent results that we ask you
to send us, as soon as possible, another pound's worth ” —H. D. Bellis, Winton.
‘‘That I got for my bull improved him a good bit; please send another lot.”—J.
J. Lewis, Seville.
SALVITIS PROPRIETARY LIMITED,
61 17 Queen St., Melbourne.


ABORTION IN CATTLE, WARPING, SLINKING, or
SLIPPING THE CALF, Etc—Premature expulsion of the foetus may
occur at any time after conception, but is most common at some of the regular
intervals when heat would otherwise be due. Happening during the first two
months of pregnancy, it frequently passes unnoticed, and if of a non-contagious
nature will cause little trouble. The majority of abortions, however, occur
at the close of the third, or during the fifth or seventh month, and may bt
either casual or contagious. When occurring during the latter half of preg-
nancy, the signs are mainly the same as those of calving. The cow appears
dull and uneasy; there is marked decrease and change in the milk, if it be
a milking cow’ that is affected, and considerable swelling or enlargement
of the udder in the heifer. The vulva (i.e., the external outlet of the female
genital organ) becomes distended and flabby, _ pimples the size of millet seeds
appear on its surface, and frequently mucus is discharged, usually of a dirty
reddish colour, with a distinctive foul odour. The water bag and foetus are
expelled in two to five days after these symptoms, and the after-birth a little
later —or possibly it may be necessary to remove the latter by the hand.
Casual, non-contagious abortion —that is, such as results from falls, strains,
fright or disease affecting other parts of the body—may often-times be averted
by prompt attention to first indication. The giving of a good uterine calmina-
tive is at this juncture of the greatest service. Half or three-quarters of an
ounce of Sodium Bromide, with half a fluid ounce of Fluid Extract oi Vibur-
num dissolved in the drinking water, is a specially valuable combination to
correct disposition to miscarry; indeed, may be regarded as next to preven-
tive of such mishap. Such a dose should be given morning, noon and night
until the threatening signs subside.
CONTAGIOUS ABORTlON.—Whenever abortion occurs without
some well-known exciting cause, such as accident or severe disease, it is in-
variably of contagious nature, at least it should be treated as such._ The con-
tagious form of abortion is caused primarily by germs which gain entrance
into the animal’s system, and develop rapidly in the region of the placenta
(or foetal membrane), thereby setting up uterine catarrh, poisoning and
destroying the placenta, thus depriving the foetal calf of its nourishment, so
that it dies in the womb. The germs usually enter the blood of the calf also,
so that the entire mass of foetus and after-birth, when expelled, is infested
with infectious material. Healthy cattle may contract the germs or virus
by smelling or touching the diseased foetus, or membranes that have been
aborted (for it is well known that cows will congregate around such an object,
sniff the ground, lick the body, etc.), also by the nosing or touching of the
vulva, tail, or any of the hinder part of an abortive cow that may be coated
with infectious mucus, or from the stall, post, litter, bedding, or grasses which
have been contaminated by discharges from diseased cows, but it is self-
evident that copulation affords the most favourable opportunity of all for
infection, and the only way in which direct introduction of the virus into
the uterus can be effected, also it stands to reason that if the herd bull be
allowed to serve a cow that has recently aborted, the penis will become
infected with the germs, and that these germs, unless destroyed, or rendered
inert, by some potent antiseptic treatment, will, in all probability, be after-
wards transferred to every other cow the bull serves.
-
Treatment and Disinfection.—Where contagious abortion occurs,
the only method of controlling and stamping it out is by thorough disin-
fection, persistently continued for some weeks, treating the cow-
shed, byre, the cow herself, and especially her generative organs. As
soon as the trouble is recognised, the diseased cow should be isolated from
the remainder of the herd, and what is still more important, in fact, impera-
tive, if the disease is to be limited to the first victim, is the immediate removal
and rigidly keeping away the other pregnant cows as far distant as possible from
the abortive cow and neighbourhood of abortion. All products of abor-
tion foetus, membranes (which should be specially searched for), all bedding.


si
m bBbS -■ CTEMBBgSauK^^g
.-■ ■£ m -
'Mfc .'/»j^^JSafe^
;j£ <y“’^-’
«*|glk ' "' h<* ,®C *' * -'> .»
Bjl- ■:. : -;Sv : -
»
T v, 1 ~ - . 'VC: ' **r > j- * .> V r 1 -Ts^^.-.<'C%riC^ v '- a L‘ :; t\^' 1 A'' - -'^ l *vS^^C '" z% r '- x . y -
pT.. '
•_ %fiC >-'V ■’., - . -"^-'■;-^ w ’ ■ *•’- V - ' „• ■- -\' , c , ,-'- .- .J. ._ -o . *-.\ “■ -** ' - •; i>V-.’ ( -* '•■ ■• ' ; • r- -;- ;: ■ Cv *•;- - .' “ ■ '. - ,. .-- -.: C"V'
"i / \ > lli ;, *.’ - -; - -. .." ■- r - •'-
- y:0- ' : \ ■ ’ ' ’ , - • . . ' .
V ■ -•«.- '. .,? *“ ■ *• -* r -■•» " "-. V'’’’ "' i * " I > *“ -■ - ■■ ’*- ' ■" „’ ■ / V jBS .- ,./v .-■_ ■;, / • ; ' _■■ -./■_« * •; ' -._. *- • « - ' ■ a
. v-'.-: .v . . /J "-V; : v-i- v.• v-' ‘ ■ r ' ■
SP^ r
I* ~ * ■" ,'
? ■■*•*&** -* 3S% -««sies
» \ *%£> j^piwnu
r.oai Diagrams of Prof. Qilruth,
Now Director of Veterinary School, Melbourne University.


■grass, fodder, or anything likely to be contaminated by the discharge or pre-
sence of the cow, should be totally destroyed by fire. The after-birth, when
removed by hand, should be burned, and the hands of the operator thoroughly
disinfected. The vagina and womb must be washed out thoroughly with
a weak antiseptic solution, such as Mercuric Chloride, i in 10,000, Carbolic
Acid, Creolin or Lysol, 1 ounce to the gallon water. A very
effective and in every respect safe and reliable solution can, at
economical cost, be made with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, one half of a shilling
tablet being sufficient when dissolved in two gallons of warm water to make
a solution of antiseptic quality which, for this particular purpose, cannot be
excelled. The solution thus made can be injected into the vagina and womb
by means of a large spray syringe, such as a cheap spray pump, modified for
this purpose, or by an ordinary India Rubber Syringe with female nozzle
attached, or it may be carried into the womb by means of a piece of clean
half-inch diameter rubber hose, 5 or 6 feet long, inserting at one end an ordi-
nary tin funnel, into which the solution can be poured. Smear the loose end of
such hose with grease, and with the hand carefully introduce into the vagina,
taking care not to injure the lining membrane. Raise the end containing the
funnel to an elevated position (see illustration), say, 2or 2 Yi feet higher than
the cow’s back. Should the fluid not run freely from the tube, the
end in the womb need only be gently moved to and fro to secure a free
flow. The vaginal irrigation should be given once every four or five days
until all discharges stop. The exterior hinder part of the cow, the vulva,
anus, tail, adjacent portion of hips, udder and legs should daily, for a week
after aborting, be thoroughly washed down with warm water made suddy
with the same soap. This again should be afterwards douched off with
warm water alone. After treatment, the animal should be allowed to stand
quietly in the bail for a couple of hours. The strength of the animal should
be maintained by liberal feeding, adding to the feed or giving in oatmeal
gruel, or treacled water, twice daily, the specified allowance of the Salvitis
Antiseptic Compound, to complete the dislodgment and annihilation of any
germs of the disease remaining in the system, fresh generations of which
would undoubtedly repeat their attack on future conceptions. As
the other pregnant cows of the herd should be dosed. Cows that get a
weekly or bi-weekly allowance of Salvitis Antiseptic Compound, say, be-
tween the fifth and the ninth month of pregnancy, may be regarded as greatly
if not wholly protected against infection. The cow that has aborted should
not be bred again until all discharges cease, and the parts become entirely
normal, and in any event no sooner than two months after abortion. Before
permitting service again, the vagina should be flushed out with the same
antiseptic solution, and afterwards thoroughly rinsed with clean, warm water,
about two hours before service occurs. As precautionary measure, no cow
should be served by a bull that is not subjected to disinfection both before
and after service. The bull should be placed in a crush-pen, and the penis
and sheath thoroughly washed with the same antiseptic solution, or a rubber
tube large enough to fit over the sheath can be used with a funnel in the
same way described for cow. The belly and legs should also be swabbed.
As an extra precaution, it is desirable to very carefully wash the passages
and parts below the tail of each cow with a solution made as described. The
whole of the buildings should receive a fresh lime-washing, and the floors,
drains, etc., a complete disinfection with chloride of lime or some other
equally efficient germicide.
CONTAGIOUS STERILITY.—This perversion and failure of natu-
ral function is now known to be occasioned by the same organism, in fact,
to be but a different phase of the same exasperating and costly complaint,
and although, as Dr. Gilruth puts it, "the appearance of contagious abor-
tion in a dairy herd may seem at first blush to be a more serious matter
than what is termed the contagious form of sterility, reflection very quickly
assures us differently. Abortion, when observed, frequently occurs when
pregnancy is so far advanced that a certain milk yield is assured, and the


mere loss of the calf is considered of comparatively small importance. The
sterility, however, which so often follows, evidenced by the cow persistently
returning to the bull, and failing to conceive, is a far more serious matter,
meaning, as it does, that the cow may, for a prolonged time, be off “ the
profit-earning list,” or, as frequently happens, in spite of being repeatedly
served, remain permanently barren. Usually, under such circumstances, the
bull is adjudged to be impotent, and possibly a neighbour’s bull is borrowed
and tried, with no better success, but probably to the disadvantage and loss
of the obliging neighbour, through the bull on his return introducing the
trouble to his own cattle. The fact that sterility spreads among a herd of
cows is, in itself, sufficient <proof that the cause is a living organism, and
investigation has identified it as that which is productive of abortion, con-
sequently it is safe to predict that service by a bull that has been used with
cows afflicted with this form of sterility, and has not previously undergone
rigid disinfection, is certain to prove useless or abortive.
Treatment must be essentially the same as that laid down for con-
tagious abortion, viz., frequent washings and irrigations with accredited anti-
septics, an extended absence from the bull, for a period of at least six
months; in very pronounced, old-standing cases, removal to other pastures
or district, a short course of good tonic treatment, and guarded attention
to disinfection on return to breeding.
CONTAGIOUS or CATARRHAL INFLAMMATION of the UDDER,
a disease popularly referred to as Pea or Plug in the Teat, from the fact
that the teat duct becomes obstructed by a small, hard lump or nodule of about
that size. This disease, although not threatening the life of the cow, is of
considerable importance to the dairy farmer, its tendency being first to impair,
and, if not arrested, ultimately to destroy the milking capacity and market value
of the cow, the milk yield from an affected cow becoming so contaminated by
inflammatory matter as to render it unfit for human or animal consumption.
The onset of the disease is indicated solely by a decrease of the supply of milk
from the affected quarter. This milk, though normal in appearance, quickly
sours and coagulates. The first local symptom is the development of a hard
nodule at the base of the teat, accompanied io some cases with slight
puffiness, tenderness, and heat, but seldom acute inflammation. Shortly after
these early symptoms the milk becomes sticky, thick and yellowish, much of
the nature of pus, which, in point of fact, it is. Gradually it gets a dirty brown
tint, is more curdy, and, if allowed to stand, a dirty brpwnish-yellow deposit
settles, surmounted by a thin, pale, milky fluid. Soon it diminishes, until little
can be removed, the teat-duct grows sensibly thicker, and if no attention be
given becomes impervious, and the whole quarter rendered useless. This con-
dition is at first confined to one quarter; after a few weeks another is invaded,
and finally the whole organ becomes affected; abscesses form, which, if not
relieved by lancing, burst and discharge their contents, during which time the
whole of the udder may slough away. As to curative treatment, this must be
carefully and vigorously applied in the early stages if success is to be hoped for.
and should consist in subjecting the affected quarter to the injection, twice daily, of a
warm 4 per cent, solution of Boric Acid, frequent cleansing of the teats and udder
with warm water and Antiseptic Soap, also rubbing in nightly some such absorbent as
the Salvitis lodide Jelly.
SORE TEATS . —Amongst the troubles that will assail the milking herd from
time to time are sore teats. These are sometimes looked upon very lightly, but a very
great loss is often occasioned by an outbreak of this in the dairy. The teats become
very painful, and the cows contract a habit of retaining their milk, which often ends in
their going dry much earlier than nature requires. The soreness, or breaking out of
small blisters and cracks upon the teats, is, when neglected, very troublesome to get
rid of. It is far from unlikely that the trouble is caused by the rough squeezing,
pinching, and pulling of the milker. The quickest, safest, and cleanest means of curing
sore teats is by using the Salvitis Healing Powder, dry, or made into a paste with
milk, or into an ointment with butter.
“ I have used this Powder when every other remedy I was told to try had failed, and I
found that it cured the teats once and for all, as the cows have not had them bad since ,f
A. E. Gartsidk, Harcourt.


“BALVITIS” PROPRIETARIES.
FOR CATTLE.
saivltU for Cattle doubles the sustaining power of food, exercises a verj
salutary influence not only on the functions concerned in the milk yield, but on th|
whole female animal organisation. Is of inestimable value for the cure an<
prevention o# cripples, bone weakness, wasting diseases, loss of appetite (
poor, unclean, or unnatural appetite, and for other troubles well known u
Dairy Cattie Owners; at least, those unacquainted with the tonic, stomachic,
and nutrient virtues of Salvitis for Cattle. It is now largely used by Dairy
Farmers in all parts. For the protection or recovery of health, or to sustain cattU
in profit, this preparation challenges all others, affording everywhere complete
satisfaction. By giving it a trial you can lose nothing, but will gain valuable
experience. Mix it with the feed of any six milkers, and then compare the quantitj
and quality of their milk with that of other six cows not getting Salvitis. You will
want no more convincing proof. In tins— 2 Jibs., 81bs.
20! bs., and in jolb. cases, containing 400 ordinary allowances,
Salvitis Drench for Red Water, tin of two drenches,
Salvltil Antiseptic Compound. A Preventive and Cure of Contagious
Abortion in Cattle, Contagious Epidemic. Affections, Inflammatory, Pustular, an<f
Eruptive Fevers, Putrid Sore Throat, Red and Black Water, Foot and Mouth Diseases
Sold in cases containing 2,000 allowances, in tins containing 1,000 allowances
in 81b. tins,
Salvitis Calving and Milk Fever Drench. Given xo or 14 days before ot
immediately after calving, it secures the Cow against attack of Milk Fever, and
facilitates the proper cleansing.
Salvitis Healing Powder is the safest, cleanest, and quickest cure for Sore#
and Cracks on the Teats of the Cow. Contains nothing that is poisonous or the least
prejudicial to the health, a fact that ought to recommend it to the use and confidence
of all engaged in dairy farming. For the rapid and perfect cure of Chaps, Wounds,
and Sores on the human skin it will prove of the greatest value,
Salvitis lodide Remedy. For Lumpy Jaw.
Salvitis Absorbent Jelly. For the cure of Inflammation of the Udder in
Cows and Ewes.
♦ »
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. Makes an incomparable wash for flushing genitals
and womb of cattle that have aborted. Dissolve the size of a hazel nut in two or three
pints of warm water. For the cure of Old Sores, Foul Ulcers, Proud Flesh, Wounds.
Also is effective for the destruction of Noxiout Insects, Bugs, Ants, and Lice on
Animals.
Salvitis Red Oils. For Healing Wounds, fresh or old, Rips, Tears, Cuts, Barb
I n J urles , Gores, Broken Knees, Festering Sores, Burns, and Skin Abrasions of
all kinds.
Salvitis Green Oils. A stimulating, all-useful Embrocation for Sprains, Strains,
Wrenches, Stiffness, Slips, Falls, Rheumatism. Invaluable for stockmen, stablemen,
and shepherds.
Salvitis Yellow Mustard Liniment. For Sore Throat, Bronchitis, Inflamed
Lung, and other serious affections.
. Salvitis Purgative. For Impaction in Cattle. Can be depended upon when
quick and thorough action of the bowels is of the utmost importance, as in cases of
Stoppage of the Bowels. Fits of Convulsions, Inflammatory Fever. Sold in tint
of 1 drench, 7 drenches,
Full Directions on Packages.
66
Seen Pages 85, 86, 87, 88,
SEND FOR PRICE LIST.


salvltls Special Worm Remedy. For Lung Worm, Stomach Worm, Tape
f/orm, and every other variety of Worm that infests Live Stock of every kind.
Salvitis Cure for Warts. A painless remedy for relieving Warts on the teats
p\d udders of cows, and other parts of the skin. Suitable for human use also.
Salvitis Pectoral Powder. For the speedy and effectual relief and cure of
lough in Horses, Cattle and Sheep, Swine, and other live stock.
Salvitis Eye Lotion Crystals provide the Dairy Farmer, Poultry Keeper,
Stockman, Shepherd, etc., with a ready means of making a splendidly efficacious Eye
Lotion, not only for his live stock, but for himself and family.
Salvitis Dry Spray. For simple and contagious ophthalmia. A substitute for
lotion.
Salvitis Styptic Tincture. Instantly stops bleeding and relieves pain, and
fastens cure of cuts, wounds, etc. For animal or human use.
Salvitis Cure for Rheumatism in all classes of stock, pigs particularly,
SALVITIS MEDICINE CHEST.
Adapted to the wants of Dairy Farmers.
1 81b. Tin Salvitis for Cattle.
1 Tin ' ~ Calving Drench.
1 ~ ~ Healing Powder for Sore Teats.
1 Bottle ~ Absorbent Jelly for Inflamed Udder.
1 Tin ~ Astringent for Scour.
1 ~ ~ Antiseptic Compound.
1 ~ ~ Purgative Drenches.
I Cake ~ Antiseptic Soap.
I Bottle ~ Red Oils for Wounds.
I Tin ■ ~ Red Water Drench.
1 Bottle ~ Worm Remedy.
1 Tin ~ Dry Spray for Sore Eyes. '
1 ~ ~ Pectoral Cough Powder.
1 Bottle ~ Green Oi's for Snrains, etc.
TESTIMONY.
AttPEßgfßl—“ I bought a tin of Salvitis Astringent for a calf T bad at tba
Melbourne show bad with Scour, and found it early had the desired effect. I have
lince used it for a heifer which scoured rather badly through drinking salt water at
Lake Alexandrina, and cured her with two doses. I have given it further severe trials,
and admit that I never came across anything to act so quickly or so effectively, and
have had thirty years’ experience with stud stock.”—L. H. Jenkins, Herdsman for the
Sate J. H. Angas, Point Sturt, S.A.
“ We have made an extended trial of Salvitis, and find it an excellent tonic for
dairy cattle. For giving tone and strength to the digestive organs it is unsurpassed.
Two ounces mixed with a little bran given once a week may be looked upon as a sure
preventive of Impaction, that dread of the farmer during the dry months of the
year. We also found it a splendid drench when mixed with new milk to give cows
that show sickness after calving. We feel sure that if Salvitis wfis more generally
used, we should hear less of those so-called new diseases peculiar to the dry season of
the year.”— Wm. McNab & Bro., Oakbank, Tullamarine,
Mrs. A. Greig, Trentham —" I must thank your Company for the ‘ Salvitis Annual’
that was sent to me. Mrs. Alcorn came to me to see if I coilld tell her what to give
her cow that had not cleaned after calving. It was eleven days then, and she thought
the cow could not live much longer, as she was very low ; but I sent for a tin of your
Calving Drench for her, and she was pleased at the result. The cow seemed so
much better after a few doses.”
Special Medicines supplied for emergent illnesses.
Letters promptly answered.


See
Page
CALF AILMENTS
AND THEIR REMEDIES.
Appetite, Depraved. Commonest in calves that are insufficiently
nourished, namely, those fed on milk that is poor in fats and mineral
substances. Appetite corrected and a thriving state restored bv use 'of
Salvitis Nutritive Cream.
or Quarter-ill, a deadly, infectious
disease, chiefly appearing in calves from five to twelve months old,
characterized by gaseous swellings about the body, particularly on
the loin or hind quarter. On pressure these swellings emit a peculiar
crackling sound. Treatment of affected animals useless. To protect
the unaffected calves dose them with Salvitis Antiseptic Compound.
Constipation, Obstinate, relieved by loz. or 2oz. doses
ording to age) of Salyitis Purgative, given dissolved in treacle.
Parasitic. Commonest with calves between the age
of six months and two years, and due to the presence in the fourth
stomach of minute straight worms, which are taken into the system with
the muddy water of creeks, dams, waterholes, etc. Symptoms comprise
70 a foul smelling diarrhoea, capricious appetite, tucked up appearance
harsh dry coat, rapid wasting, and death from exhaustion. Give’
according to age, repeated doses of Salvitis Astringent until purging
becomes natural. Should wasting continue, send for Special Remedy,
Hair Balls. The disposition of calves to lick each other and to
swallow the hair is often excited by stomach irritation, which a course
of Cattle Salvitis or of the Salvitis Nutritive Cream will allay and
correct. J
HllBk| or Hoose, or Verminous Bronchitis, is caused by small
w hich s ®t up great irritation in the bronchial passages, cause a
suffocating cough, and an inflamed state of the lungs that often leads to
death. Subject the calf to the inhalation of fumes of burning tar and
sulphur, and the following morning give a dose of Salvitis Special
Worm Remedy. F
Indigestion, Gaseous or Fermentative. With this the calf is
constantly afflicted, especially during its first six months, the causes
being bad feeding, over-feeding, irregular feeding, feeding food too
watery, too concentrated, sour, or unwholesome. Its existenc is
marked by constitutional disturbance, lowered temperature, cold legs
dry muzzle, distention and belching of gas from the stomach, debility
and depression, quickly followed with a pasty diarrhoea, which later on
becomes watery, and finally frothy, sour smelling, or very stinking
intermixed with curds or clots of blood. When in young calves restrict
diet to sweet skim milk, adding the appropriate quantity of Salvitis
Nutritive Cream ; in older calves, feed thin wheaten gruel, to which
add morning and evening an allowance of Salvitis Astringent.
. . Li 9®’ t The u pt h nfty calf is apt to be crowded, in its matted, dirty
hair,, with these objectionable parasites. Apply a lotion made with
Salvitis Antiseptic Solution, or wash with Salvitis Antiseptic soap.
" ♦ •
Full Directions on Packages. “


Navel Infection Disease, the origin of White Scour and Lung
Disease of Calves. Prevented by the application of Salvitis Red Oils
to the umbilical wound early after birth.
Poddied, or Pot-bellied, is an unnatural distention induced by
the feeding of substances which the abomasum (true stomach) and
intestines are not yet capable of digesting, such as wheat, rye, barley,
or maize meals, and the too early feeding of coarse fibrous hay, chaff, etc.
To remedy this state, feed green stuff, bran, and a few carrots, adding
to the ration once daily an allowance of Cattle Salvitis, and for a short
time reduce the quantity of water supplied. It is young half-starved
calves that are apt to assume this form, an argument for the early and
continuous use of Salvitis Nutritive Cream in the milk fed, for it
promotes digestion and assimilation, and disposes to firmness of flesh.
Ringworm. Young stock are much disfigured at times by
white patches of ringworm. A few applications of a lather made with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap is an effectual cure.
Scouring, Simple or Contagious. Scouring, which at first may
be nothing more than an attempt of nature to relieve the stomach and
bowels of some irritating substance, may, unchecked, become more acute,
until it develops into a contagious disease. Through sheer inattention
to this ailment thousands of calves are permitted to die, which in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred could be saved at a comparatively
slight cost by the Salvitis Astringent. This is no idle statement.
Thrush in sucking calves shows itself in whitish sores on the
tongue or gums. Wash with alum water, or make a paste with a little
Salvitis Pectoral Powder and treacle, and place in the mouth and on
the lips once or twice daily.
Worms. Beside the throat worm, calves suffer greatly at times
with stomach and tape worms. For such the Salvitis Special Worm
Remedy is recommended.
“ SALVITiS ” PROPRIETARIES.
FOR OALVES.
Salvitis Calf Cream, a nutritive substitute for the fat removed from skim
or separator milk, supersedes all meals or foods in that it needs no preparation,
Is uniform in character, keeps sweet to the end, is palatable, digestible, and highly
nutritious, is readily assimilated, maintains bodily heat and energy, without which
no young life can thrive, strengthens the bony fabric, avoids constipation, prevents
diarrhoea, favours continuous growth, and in every way contributes to the best and
most economical gains. One gallon restore* Butter Fat value to 150 gallons of
separator milk. 1 gallon tin 2 gallon tin _ ....
Salvltis Astringent. An infallible cure for scour, skit, or diarrhoea, dysentery,
or bloody purging, in calves, cows, lambs, sheep, colts, etc. Thousands upon
thousands of pounds are annually lost to the people of this country through sheer
inattention to this ailment, which in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred could be
treated successfully, and at comparatively slight cost, by the Salvitis Astringent.
Corroborative evidence of this fact is found in the number of unsolicited, indispetabje
testimonies received from leading cattle breeders, so don’t allow your calves to die
from scour
Full Directions on Packages.


-' ' ''
DIARRHOEA—Scouring in Calves (simple and contagious).—
•' Scouring is a common result of indigestion, and at first may be nothing moie than an
attempt of nature to relieve the stomach and bowels of offensive and irritating contents.
As the indigestion persists, however, the fermentation going on in the undigested masses
becomes steadily more complex and active, and what was at first the mere result of
irritation or suspended digestion comes to be a genuine contagious disease, in which
the organized ferments (bacteria) propagate affection from animal to animal, and from
herd to herd. This constitutional predisposition to indigestion and diarrhoea is some-
times fostered by too close breeding, without taking due account of the maintenance of
a robust constitution, and hence animals that are very much inbred need to be observed
and cared for unless their inherent vigor has been thoroughly attested. The surround-
ings of the calf are powerful influences. Calves kept in small yards suffer to a greater
extent than those running in the open air. When once established, the malady is liable
to perpetuate itself by contagion and to prove a veritable plague in a herd, or a district
The symptoms of diarrhoea may appear so promptly after birth as to lead to the idea
that the cause already existed in the body of the calf, as it usually shows itself before
the end of the second week. It may be preceded by constipation, as in retained
meconium or by foetid eructations and colicky pains, as in indigestion. The tail is
stained by the liquid dejections, which are at first simply soft and mixed with mucus,
with a sour odour, accompanied by a peculiar and characteristic fetor (suggesting rotten
cheese), which continually grows worse. The amount of water and mucus steadily
increases, and in acute cases, death may result from the continued drain on the system
and the poisoning by decomposition in the stomach and bowels. When the case is
prolonged, the passages, at first five or six per day, increase to 15 or 20, and pass with
more and more straining, so that they are projected from the animal in liquid stream.
The colour of the discharge, at first yellow, becomes a lighter greyish yellow or of a
dirty white (hence the name white scour) and the stench becomes intolerable. At first
the calf retains its appetite, but as the severity of the disease increases, the animal
shows less and less disposition to drink, and has lost all vivacity, lying dull and listless,
and when raised walking weakly and unsteadily. Flesh is lost rapidly, the hair stands
erect, the skin gets dry and scurfy, the nose hot and dry, or the condition alternates
with a moist and cool one. By this time, the mouth and skin, as well as the breath and
dung, exhale the peculiar, penetrating, sour, offensive odour, and the poor calf has
become an object of disgust to all that approach it. Fever, with rapid pulse, and
increased breathing and temperature, usually comes on as the bowels become inflamed,
the abdomen gets sore to the touch and tucked, and motions grow excessive, offensive,
and blood mixed until the animal dies from sheer exhaustion." No more valuable or
economic remedy for this all-too-prevelant disease in calves can be wished for than is
(>rovided in the Salvitis Astringent, a remedy availed of, and testified to, by some of the
argest dairy farmers in Australia.


SHEEP AILMENTS
m
AND THEIR REMEDIES.
NOTE ! The specific diseases of sheep are comparatively few, but
sheep are peculiarly subject to contagious diseases, and these, owing to
the herding instincts of the animal, are often difficult to check.
Obviously, the extent of the flock precludes the possibility of treating
each sheep separately, hence some general treatment has usually to be
adopted. When occasion necessitates the treatment of one particular
sheep, stud or other valuable animal, the same treatment should be
followed as is suggested for the like disease in Cattle, with the difference
that the dose must be reduced to one-fourth.
Anthrax, termed also Cumberland Disease, Splenic Apoplexy,
and Black Rot, is the most virulent and fatal of all animal diseases.
Treatment of infected animals absolutely useless. For the prevention
of its spread dose the unaffected sheep with Salvitls Antiseptic
Compound, and move them to higher, drier country.
Black Leg, or Anthrax of the Extremities, known also as Black
Quarter, Quarter Evil, Black Spauld, and Hasty, a rapidly fatal disease
that 'occurs occasionally among sheep. Supposed to be inter-
communicable with cattle and sheep. Remove the non-affected to dry
upland, and dose daily for two or three days with Salvitis Antiseptic
Compound.
Blood, Excessive Richness of, or Plethora, tends to apoplexy,
liver disease, and inflammatory states. Reduce diet, or remove to
poorer pasture, or hasten the process of reduction by occasional doses
of Salvitis Purgative.
BlOOd, Poverty of, from failure of nutrition consequent on disease
or deprivation of food. For this the Salvitis Sheep Tonic is specially
intended. It enriches the blood, strengthens and sustains the system.
Blood-poisoning Diseases are mainly of germ origin, with
symptoms having a similarity to those of Anthrax, but of less virulence.
They appear, under the influence of season, on certain soils where
growth is rank. Attacks are sudden, and not infrequently attended
with great mortality. Drench unaffected sheep with Salvitis
Antiseptic Compound, and keep them on the move, and put them on
different pasture.
Bone, Brittleness, Softness, Swelling, and Bending of, with
depraved appetite, wasting, etc. Conditions seen in sheep on cripply
and coastal lands. Salvitis Sheep Tonic, by its phosphatic and
mineral elements, quickly alters this undesirable state.
Full Directions on Packages.


Blown, Dew-blown, Bloated, Blasted, Fog Sickness, or Distention
from fermentation of the contents of the paunch. The fourth of a
Salvitis Anodyne Drench, given in half a cup of warm water, affords
almost instant relief.
Braxy, or Blood Disorder due to sudden changes in the quality
of the food. Treat with Salvitis Antiseptic Compound, giving
purgatives and stimulants as required.
Cankered or Sore Mouths in lambs, thought to be due to
a minute organism which is found in the milk of ewes. Bathe with mild
alum water, or mix loz. of Salvitis Pectoral Powder in 21b. of
treacled water, and swab out mouth and lips.
Coast Disease, Heart Water, Rot Gut, or Dropsy of the Heart
Bag. Believed to be due to the absence of sustaining elements in soil
and vegetation. Change of pasture and the provision of licks or
compounds that will tend to restore and maintain the blood in its
integrity and strength. Salvitis Sheep Tonic effects this.
Conjunctivitis, or Simple Ophthalmia, caused by injury,
intrusion of foreign bodies, effects of cold winds, dust, smoke, etc.
Search for and remove the offending substance, and bathe eye with
lotion made with Salvitis Eye Lotion Crystals, or use the Salvitis
Dry Spray Cure where numbers are affected.
Coughs, Bronchial, Catarrhal, etc. Are safely and satisfactorily
treated with Salvitis Pectoral Powder.
Debility of Ewes following excessive lactation. Daily or bi-daily
allowances of Salvitis Tonic, or give in milk Salvitis Nutritive
Cream.
Diarrhoea, Simple, Parasitic, Putrid, or Blood-mixed, in sheep,
lambs, and other stock. Is early and permanently stopped by Salvitis
Astringent.
Dropsy of Sheep and Lambs, with discharge from nostrils,
inability to rise, stand, or walk. Supply pure water, and place beside
the sheep dry feed, such as chaff, bran, ground oats, in which is mixed
some Salvitis Sheep Tonic.
Eczema, Erythema, or Eruptions, scaly or discharging,
purulent irritant fluid. Wash with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, or
apply Salvitis White Lotion.
Eyes, Sore. See “ Conjunctivitis.”
Foot Rot, Si mple and Contagious. Use Salvitis Foot Rot
Cure.
Fluke, Liver Rot, Poke, or Bane, a disease due to the presence
in the liver of the fluke worm. In advanced cases treatment is of no
avail. Plenty of salt, a dry run with nourishing herbage, and an
occasional allowance of Salvitis Sheep Tonic will do much, by
supporting strength and increasing resistive power, to prevent
development in sheep lately affected.
Fly-struck. See “ Maggots.”
Full Directions on Packages.


Qad Fly, Grub in the Head, or Sheep Bot Fly. The female
deposits its ova on the margin of the nostril of the sheep, from where
they crawl into the nostrils and cavities of the head. Hold the sheep’s
nose over a vessel containing a mixture of burning tar and sulphur, so
that the fumes shall be inhaled. Attacks of the fly may be prevented
by lightly smearing the sheep’s nostrils with Salvitis Black Pine
Ointment.
Garget, Inflammation of the Udder. Continuous hot
fomentations and the rubbing in of Salvitis Absorbent Jelly.
Gid, Sturdy, Turnsick, Turnside, Blind Staggers, or Moonstruck,
a disease caused by the larval form of the tapeworm of the dog affecting
the brain. When the disease exists treatment is of little good. The
preventive is the periodical dosing of the dogs for tapeworm. Dog
Salvitis and Salvitis Worm Pills expel tape and all kinds of worms.
Horns and Hoofs, Injuries to. After attention to fractures
and removal of splinters, etc., pack up with Salvitis Black Pine
Ointment.
Impaction of the Manifolds, or Manyplies, Vertigo, Stomach
or Grass Staggers, Fardel Bound, is undue retention of partly digested
food between the leaves of the omasum, or third stomach, attended by
obstinate constipation, colic, staggering movement, convulsions, and
frequently by death. Treatment must be prompt. A drench made with
Salvitis Purgative should be given before swallowing becomes difficult
or impossible. On improvement Salvitis Sheep Tonic should be given
with a feed of bran daily.
Joint-ill, Joint Evil, Joint Disease, or Limping, a filth disease
associated with Navel 111. Protection against the inroad of the germs
of this disease is of first importance. This can be accomplished by
dressing the navel early after birth with Salvitis Red Oils diluted,
repeating the dressing daily for three or four times.
Louping-ill (trembling), an infective disease conveyed by ticks,
attended by convulsions, peculiar jumping and high leaping, trembling,
and paralysis. Early and continuous dosing with Salvitis Antiseptic
Compound, with an occasional purgative, may save the sheep.
MaffffOts. or Struck by Flies. To destroy the maggots and
sweeten the sore, paint over with Salvitis Red Oils. Sheep dipped
twice in the year are seldom attacked by flies.
Ophthalmia, and most affections of the eyes and eyelids,
whether of simple or contagious nature. Most effectually, and with
little trouble, treated with the Salvitis Dry Spray, especially where
numbers are affected.
Phosphorus Poisoning, Symptoms of. Attacks of colic,
vomiting, groaning, jaundice of membrane, swelling of the tongue with
difficulty of swallowing, paralytic appearance, weakness of heart, hasty
breathing, trembling, blood-stained purging, and probably great thirst.
Antidotes are small doses of turpentine (for a sheep a teaspoonful) and
small doses (five grains) of copper sulphate (bluestone) in linseed tea or
Full Directions on Packages.


starch water, repeating every second hour. Avoid giving milk, oil, and
eggs, as they dissolve the phosphorus, rendering it more active.
Rheumatism, or Joint Felon, with pain, lameness, swelling
of the knees and hocks, stiffness of the neck, loss of flesh, etc. Valuable
animals, accustomed to be housed, can be successfully treated with the
salvitis Rheumatic Cure.
Scab, or Itch, a parasitical disease, now rarely met with, once
a source of incalculable losses. Can be cured and controlled by
dipping, using any of the arsenical or non-poisonous sheep dips. Of the
last class, the oldest established and most permanent in effect is
McDougall’s.
SCOUTS, Skit, the Flux, or Diarrhoea. Can be stopped early
and permanently by a few repeated doses of Salvitis Astringent.
Sore Nipples or Teats, by which lambs often die of hunger
from their dams refusing them to suck. The application of Salvitis
healing Powder, or an ointment made with it, is all that is needed to
cure.
Thrush in Mouth of Lambs. Best treated by mixing one part
of Salvitis Healing Powder in four parts of treacle, and smearing same
on dam’s teats.
Worms. Those most common to the sheep are the lung worm,
stomach worm, and tape worm. For lung worm first subject the sheep
to fumigations of tar and sulphur in air-tight shed, afterwards sprinkle
over their feed Salvitis Sheep Tonic for some days. Stomach and
tape worms are unfailingly expelled by the Salvitis Special Worm
Remedy. After expulsion of the worms, sheep should be treated to a
course of Salvitis Tonic for Sheep.
Wounds, Sores, etc., are the doors through which diseases often
enter, hence the healing process should, when possible, be assisted. The
Salvitis Red Oils, acting as a protective and curative, will hasten this
desired end.
“I had excellent results last year from your Worm Remedy for Sheep.”—
E. Batty, St. Hillier, Devenish.
Salvitis Sheep Tonic* —For remedying impoverishment of blood in sheep
and for restoring it to nourishing and vitalising force. An invaluable strengtheher and
sustainer of the system. Will prove of wonderful service to ewes reduced by excessive
lactation, to rams exhausted by over-service, and to sheep weakened by any severe
drain on the system, exposure or wasting. To accommodate those who wish to treat
a few special members of their flock, we put this up in small tins.
Ophthalmia in Sheep. — Salvitis Dry Spray simplifies the treatment of
Ophthalmia in Sheep, especially where numbers are affected.
Special Medicines supplied for emergent illnesses*
Letters promptly answered.


“SALVITIS” PROPRIETARIES.
FOR SHEEP.
Salvitis Antiseptic Compound. For the Blood Diseases of Live Stock, such
as the Malignant Diseases of Sheep, Contagious Epidemic Affections, Infectious
Abortion, Inflammatory, Pustular, and Eruptive Fevers, Foot and Mouth Diseases,
Putrid Sore Throat, Red and Black Water. Sold in cases containing 2,000
allowances, in tins containing 1,000 allowances, in 81b. tins,
Salvitis Cure for Foot Rot in Sheep. One tin sufficient for one gallon of
wash.
salvitis Sheep Tonic. A specific for arresting and remedying Impoverishment
of Blood in Sheep, whether resulting from failure of nutrition, or debility due to
destruction wrought by internal parasites. Useful for the emaciation and feebleness
occasioned by drought. Invaluable as a strengthener and sustainer of the system.
Operates as a splendid invigorant for stud sheep.
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. For the cure of Old Sores, Foul Ulcers Proud
Flesh, Wounds. Also is effective for the destruction of Noxious Insects, Ticks, Ants,
and Lice on Animals.
Salvitis Red Oils. For Healing Wounds, fresh or old, Rips. Tears, Cuts, Barb
Wire Injuries, Gores, Broken Knees, Festering Sores, Burns, and Skin Abrasions of
all kinds.
Salvitis Qreen Oils. A stimulating, ait-useful Embrocation for Sprains, Strains,
Wrenches, Stiffness, Slips, Falls, Rheumatism. Invaluable for stockmen, stablemen,
and shepherds.
Salvitis Yellow Mustard Liniment. For Sore Throat, Bronchitis, Inflamed
Lung, and other serious affections.
Salvitis Special Worm Remedy. For Lung Worm, Stomach Worm, Tape
Worm, and every other variety of Worm that infests Live Stock of every kind.
Salvitis Pectoral Powder For the speedy and effectual relief and cure of
Cough in Horses, Cattle and Sheep, Swine, and other live stock.
Salvitis Eye Lotion Crystals provide the Dairy Farmer, Poultry Keeper,
Stockman, Shepherd, etc., with a ready means of making a splendidly efficacious Eye
Lotion, not only for his live stock, but for himself and family.
Salvitis Dry Spray. For simple and contagious ophthalmia. A substitute for
lotion Easiest, speediest, and cheapest method of treating the eyes where numbers
\re affected.
Salvitis Styptic Tincture. Instantly stops bleeding and relieves pain, and
hastens cure of cuts, wounds, etc. For animal or human use.
Salvitis Cure for Rheumatism In all classes of stock,
♦ *
We have been informed that the Ram 44 Salvitis.” which was purchased for 230
guineas at the 1902 Sheep Sales in Melbourne, was given the peculiar name “ Salvitis”
in consequence of the great benefit which he derived from the use of Salvitis, which
was administered at a critical time. The owner (Mr. W. C. Grubb) was so pleased
with the result that he at once named the ram 44 Salvitis.”
• *
Full Directions on Packages.
77
See Pages 85, 86, 87, 88
SEND FOR PRICE LIST.


PIQ AILMENTS
AND THEIR REMEDIES.
Abortion, or Slipping (contagious). Always to be suspected
when a number of sows in a herd abort about the same time. Treat on
the same lines as for Cattle, namely, administer salvitis Antiseptic
Compound in the slop food, and flush sexual parts with water made
slightly suddy with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Appetite, Failing, generally the symptom of approaching or
existing ailment. Vary the diet, and add to the morning meal an
allowance of Carbonized Salvitis.
Appetite, Morbid, i.e., strange craving for unnatural substances,
collected rubbish, rotten wood, stable refuse, etc. Often indicates the
presence of intestinal worms; in young pigs the preliminary sign of
Rickets or Cripples. Craving corrected and healthy appetite restored
by Carbonized Salvitis. Worms—round, long, and tape —expelled by
Salvitis Special Worm Remedy.
Barrenness in sows. In many instances due to the same
cause as Contagious Abortion. Should be treated similarly.
Cold in the Head, Nasal Catarrh, with sneezing, discharge
from nostrils, etc. Feed warm slop food, in which put morning and evening
a dose or Salvitis Pectoral Powder. Steam nostrils with hot bran.
Constipation, Obstinate. Speedily relieved by Salvitis
Purgative.
Cough, Bronchial, from the irritation of dust or of parasites in
the air passages. For the former, give Salvitis Pectoral Powder;
for the latter, Salvitis Special Worm Remedy.
Cripples, Rickets, Soft Bones, Dwarfed Growth, Weak Limbs,
evidenced by bowed legs, twisted feet, enlarged or tender joints, with
persistent w r eakness, conditions of frequent occurrence in young pigs.
Feed milk and sound meal, adding to each feed an allowance of Salvitis
Nutritive Cream. It supplies the phosphatic elements that are
wanting.
Cramp, or Painful Stiffness of the Limbs. Rub in Salvitis
Green Oils diluted with four parts sweet oil, and give a few' doses of
Salvitis Rheumatic Remedy.
Debility and Wasting of Young Pigs. Early and effectually
cured by Salvitis Nutritive Cream.
Diarrhoea, or Scour, in young and old pigs, following feeding
on sour milk, offal, etc. No surer or speedier cure than Salvitis
Astringent.
Digestion, Imperfect, a great cause of unthriftiness. Early
improved by Carbonized Salvitis#
Eczema, Rust, Pitchy Mange, or Scale Eruption. An intolerably
itching, irritating, and offensive eruption on the skin of pigs. Occasionally
wash with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. When scabby spots become
foul and angry looking, use Salvitis Red Oils or Salvitis White
Lotion. Special Internal Treatment required.
Full Directions on Packages.


Erysipelas, from the bright red splotchy eruption commonly
called “ Wild Fire.” This infectious and terribly fatal disease is now
classed with swine fever. Penalty attends neglect to report its outbreak.
As preventive against infection the non-affected pigs should be dosed
with Salvitis Antiseptic Compound.
Eyes, Inflamed, ulcerated, discharging mucus, etc. Set right
with lotion made with Salvitis Eye Lotion Crystals.
Feet, Sore, from travelling, standing in filth, etc. Cleanse with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, then apply Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Fits, Apoplectic, Epileptic, or Convulsive. On of
consciousness give proportionate dose of Salvitis Purgative*
afterwards Carbonized Salvitis.
Gripes, or Colic. When spasms have passed off give a Salvitis
Tasteless Purge in the slop food.
Husk, Hoose, or Throat-worm Croup. Subject pigs to fumigation*
of tar and sulphur, afterwards give Salvitis Special Worm Remedy or
Salvitis Pectoral Powder.
Indigestion, Chronic, evidenced by unthrifty condition,
scouring, etc. Give Carbonized Salvitis until improvement is visible.
Kidneys, Congestion and Inflammation of. Send for Special
Calminative Medicine.
Lice on Pigs. Disturbs rest, retards growth and the fattening
process. Wash with warm water and Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Liver Oisea.se, Yellows, Jaundice, etc. Administer once a week
a Salvitis Tasteless Purge, and once daily mix Carbonized Salvitis
in the slop food.
|yjaggots. If a pig has a sore i n i ts ear > fli es are a Pt f° blow in
it. Salvitis Red Oils, while destroying the pest, will sweeten and heal.
Measles, Bastard. An affection attacking recently weaned pigs,
attended with diarrhoea and sore throat. Stay scouring with Salvitis
Astringent ; swab mouth and throat with alum water.
Milk Fever. The sow, though not so subject as the cow, is by
no means exempt. To prevent an attack, seven or ten days before
farrowing time give half of a Salvitis Cleansing Drench.
Mouth, Snout, Head, and Ears, Sore and Scabby, with dulness
and loss of power in bind legs. A germ disease of very young pigs.
Wash the sow’s udder and tne piglings’ heads with alum water, and add
once daily a dose of Salvitis Antiseptic Compound to the sow s meal.
Disinfect farrowing pen and burn litter.
Navel Infection Disease, contracted by the newly-born pig through
the navel wound, and known to be the cause of "White Scour and Lung
Disease of sucklings. Lightly smearing the navel wound soon after
birth with Salvitis Red Oils will prevent the possibility of the contagion
being absorbed into the piglings’ systems.
Nettle Rash, Nettle Fever, Brick Rash, or Urticaria. An
intensely irritating eruption of the skin, accompanied with feverishness,
vomiting, etc. Disappears after a dose of Salvitis Purgative. Allay
irritation and inflammation of skin by frequent applications of Salvitis
White Lotion.
Full Directions on Packages.


Paralysis, Partial, with loss of motion. Apply Salvitis Green
Oils diluted with four parts of oil. Send for Special' Nerve Tonic.
Pleurisy, with painful suppressed cough and sharp jerky
breathing. Treatment same as for Pneumonia, with the addition of hot
bran or hot water cloths applied constantly to the sides of the chest.
Pneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs, with shivering,
disinclination for food, difficult breathing, and painful cough. Feed
light sloppy food, to each meal adding an a lowance of Salvitis
Pectoral Powder. Apply Salvitis Yellow Mustard Liniment or
Salvitis Green Oils to the sides of the chest.
Quinsy, Strangles, or Gloss Anthrax. A most malignant disease,
as a rule terminating in gangrene of the throat and tongue. Kill the
victim and burn the carcass. Remove and dose rest of the herd with
Salvitis Antiseptic Compound.
Rheumatism, Joint-ill, or Joint Felon, frequently makes
cripples of young and thriving pigs ; in older pigs the disease closely
resembles rheumatic gout in the human subject. Early applying a
liniment, one part Salvitis Green Oils and four parts sweet oil, will
prove wonderfully beneficial, and with a course of Salvitis Rheumatic
Remedy effect a perfect cure.
Swine Fever. This term now includes Swine Plague, Hog
Cholera, and Swine Erysipelas. Penalty attends neglect to report their
existence. As protective against infection, pigs in the neighbourhood
of those attacked should be at once dosed with the Salvitis Antiseptic
Compound. As safeguard against infectious diseases, and for the
general preservation of health, we urge upon swine owners the constant
use of the Carbonized Salvitis.
Scour, or excessive purging, from any cause, in young or old
pigs. Stopped at once by Salvitis Astringent.
Snuffles, Sniffles, Bull Nose, or Acute Catarrh, with putrid
discharge and bleeding from nostrils, cough, sneezing, hard breathing.
Swab the nostrils with warm water made slightly suddy with Salvitis
Antiseptic Soap, and in the feed add a dose of Salvitis Antiseptic
Compound.
Tail, Inflammatory Eruption round the root of, often causing loss
of tail. Scrape off eruption with thumb nail or blunt-edged knife until
it bleeds, then with a feather paint with Salvitis Red Oils, and the tail
will be saved.
Teats, Sore, Cracked, or Chapped. Speedily cured by applying
Salvitis Healing Powder, dry or mixed with lard or vaseline.
Udder, Inflammation of. A trouble that happens with heavy
milking sows. Foment with hot water and rub in two or three times
a day Salvitis Absorbent Jelly. Keep system cool with Salvitis
Purgative.
Worms. Besides throat and lung, or husk, worms, the pig often
harbours in its stomach and intestines the tape worm, and also a large
round thorn-headed worm, yellowish white in colour, of very destructive
habits. For preventing the development of intestinal parasites, also for
the expulsion of the develooed worms, a daily allowance of Carbonized
Salvitis will prove most effectual.
« ~ "" ———■———■■ ■■ ■■ ■■■■■ ■——— ■ ■
Full Directions on Packages.


“ SALVITIS ” PROPRIETARIES.
FOR PiGS.
Carbonised Salvitis for Pigs An Ant-acid, Antiseptic, and Alterative
Compound. I.t Promotes Digestion, its Ant-acid Action Neutralising the Effects of
Sour Milk or other sour substances; its antiseptic action counteracting the evi
effects of offal and other coarse and improper food; its alterative action keeping
the system cool, the bowels regular, whereby Constipation is prevented the tendency
to Apoplexy. Epilepsy, Convulsions, Fits. Paralysis. Rheumatism, etc., lessened, the
skin kept free from disfiguring diseases, and the mouth, snout and ears clear of scabs
and sores; its powerful depurative qualities operating to purify the blood and fortify
the system against invasion of Swine Fever, Swine Erysipelas, or other infectious
diseases. It is an Expellant of Worms. It is equally suited to Roasters, small Porkers,
small Bacon or Medium Pigs, and very beneficial to Suckling Sows, as it causes a
free flow of pure milk, thus assisting young pigs to thrive. A wonderful economiser
of food. Sold in boxes,
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. For the cure of Old Sores, Foul Ulcers. Proud
Flesh, Wounds. Also is effective for the destruction of Noxious Insects, Ants, an
Dice on Animals.
Salvitis Red Oils. For Healing Wounds, fresh or old, Rips, dears, Cuts, Barb
Wire injuries. Gores, Broken Knees, Festering Sores, Burns, and Skin Abrasions of
•all kinds. ...
Salvitis Green Oils. A stimulating, all-useful Embrocation for Sprains Strains,
Wrenches, Stiffness, Slips, Falls, Rheumatism. Invaluable for stockmen, stablemen,
and shepherds.
Salvitis Yellow Mustard Liniment. For Sore Throat, Bronchitis, Inflame
Lung, and other serious affections.
Salvitis Special Worm Remedy. For Lung Worm, Stomach Worm, Tape
Worm and every other variety of Worm that infests Live Stock of every kind.
Salvitis Pectoral Powder. For the speedy and effectual relief and cure of
Cough in Swine and other Live Stock.
Salvitis Eye Lotion Crystals provide the Dairy Farmer Poultry Keeper,
Stockman, Shepherd, etc., with a ready means of making a splendidly efficacious Eye
Lotion, not only for his live stock, but for himself and family.
Salvitis Dry Spray. For simple and contagious ophthalmia. A substitute for
lotion. - ,
Salvitis Styptic Tincture. Instantly stops bleeding and relieves pain, and
hastens cure of cuts, wounds, etc. For animal or human use.
Salvitis Cure for Rheumatism in all classes of stock, pigs particularly.
“ We are constant users of the Carbonized Salvitis, and find it to be indisputably
a health preserver. It considerably helps digestion, keeps the system in order, and
cerSnlv favours the early putting on of condition. We do not hesitate to recommend
its use by breeders, particularly at farrowing time.”— Worner Bros., Renrow Park,
Teni ?With it i never saw pigs thrive so well or so rapidly. When four months old
they weighed 100 lbs. each D. Shannon. Manager Butter FactoryWangarata
tney weig Carbonized Salvitis to pig breeders and fat eners in this
district and they are practically unanimous that it clears the Worms out of the pigs
~ H G J 4TGE & RoBB?NS bOS GIadstone, Tatura-"As a result of giving Carbonized
Salvitis, my Berkshire sow and her litter won first prize at the Grand National
Show, 1898.”
Full Directions on Packages.
81
SEND FOR PRICE LIST. Ei


POULTRY AILMENTS
AND THEIR REMEDIES.
Note ! Poultry diseases are mostly of a contagious nature, rapidly
developed, and often attended by considerable loss, hence first
symptoms should demand prompt treatment.
Baldness, White Comb, and Scurfiness. Remedied by light
washings with Salvitis Antiseptic soap.
Blood Poisoning, with extensive abscesses about head and
neck. Open abscesses, anu apply, slightly, Salvitis Red Oils or a very
light lather of Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. To the eyes use lotion made
with Salvitis Eye Lotion Crystals.
Bumble Foot, and Tumour, or Wound on Foot. Apply
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Cankor, or Ulcerous Condition of the Head. With feather
paint lightly over with Salvitis Red Oils.
Chicken Cholera, or Fowl Typhoid. The deadliest of
poultry diseases. Early treatment considerably decreases mortality.
Dose affected birds with Salvitis Fowl Cholera Cure, and place
Salvitis Poultry Antiseptic in the drinking water of the rest of the
birds in yard.
Chicken-pox, Warts, Mosquito Bites, Sore Head. Names
given to small yellowish eruptions that appear on comb and wattle and
about beak and eyes. Wash eyes with lotion made with Salvitis
Eye Lotion Crystals, and swab comb, wattle, and face with same.
Colds, or Catanh, with discharge from nostrils, inflamed eyes,
sneezing, etc. Wash eyes with lotion made with Salvitis Eye Lotion
Crystals ; inject little of same into nostrils. Give internally, in feed
or drinking water, Salvitis Poultry Antiseptic.
Debility. Moulting, heavy egg production, and long journeys
frequently induce this condition. Continued allowances of Poultry
Salvitis soon restore health and vigour.
Diarrhoea, Excessive and Offensive. Checked by a dose or two
of Salvitis Fowl Cholera Cure.
Dysentery Epidemic in Fowls and Turkeys. If noticed in its
earlier stages can generally be successfully treated with Salvitis Fowl
Cholera Cure.
Egg Laying. Young birds often have difficulty in laying their
first eggs. Poultry Salvitis, by its relaxing influence, prevents this.
Fits are mainly caused by the irritation of Worms. Poultry
Salvit is effects the expulsion of Worms.
Gapes, or Thread Worm of the Throat. To prevent Gapes is.
better than having to adopt means for relief after chickens are affected.
This is accomplished wherever chickens get occasional doses of Poultry
Salvitis in their food.
Indigestion. Change the food, and put the birds on a course
of Poultry Salvitis.
Illustrated Book on Poultry Diseases & Cures, Price 7d. posted


L©gs ,s Unsightly Excrescences on, of parasitic production. The
only application that will restore such legs to a state of health is
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment. ff
j_ggr Weakness. Feed sound grain with a sprinkling ot freshly
ground bone, adding to morning meal an allowance of Poultry Salvitis.
Lice. Dip bird in bath of warm water made slightly suddy with
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Liver Diseases of. Common to over-fat iiens. A varied
vegetable diet, with small repeated doses of Salvitis Fowl Cholera
Cure, very effective.
Moulting 1 . To assist the bird through this strain on its vigour
and vitality, nothing will be found more beneficial than Poultry Salvitis.
Pip, or Hard and Scaly Tongue. Swab tongue and mouth with
borax water, feed soft food for a day or two, adding morning and
evening a small quantity of Poultry Salvitis.
Rheumatism, with painful swelling and stiffness of joints,
or contraction of toes. The bird must be kept in a warm place, fed
warm and stimulating food, and be given Special Remedy, which will be
supplied on request. ...
Roup. Croup, or Diphtheria. A highly infectious and dangerous
disease. #On outbreak every preventive means should be exercised to
stay its further development. The drinking water, believed to be the
chief means of transmission, should at once be impregnated wit
Salvitis Poultry Antiseptic, and a Salvitis Roup Pill at onc ©
administered to each bird of the roost. The swellings about the head and
eyes should be opened, their contents removed, and the wound lg t y
smeared with Salvitis Red Oils. The ravages of this disease are next to
unknown among poultry accustomed to allowances of the strengthening
and protective properties of Poultry Salvitis.
§C2liy Leg, 3 contagious parasitic disease. Ihe rubbing in of
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment will in a few days effect a complete cure.
Worms. Both the round and flat varieties infest poultry oftener
than is supposed. They are the cause of emaciation and great debility.
Salvitis for Poultry is not only a certain expellant, but, if occassionally
given in the food, absolutely prevents the development or existence
of worms in the intestines of fowls.
« SALVITiS ” PROPRIETARIES.
FOR POULTRY.
Salvitis for Poultry has acquired an immense sale and a high reputation
amongst those engaged in the poultry industry, and is declared by them to be
unrivalled as a poultry tonic and egg producer. It ensures healthy, well-
conditioned birds, with abundance of eggs throughout the year. It helps birds
through the moult, imparts brilliance to the plumage, prevents roup, croup and
diphtheria, liver disease, gapes, cholera, etc. In tins—ilb. 81b.,
201b., and solb. cases.
Salvitis Antiseptic Compound. For poultry epidemics
Salvitis Pills for the Cure of Roup in Poultry, tor use amongst priz*
or valuable poultry.
Salvitis Tonic Pills for Pigeons.
Salvitis Red Oils.
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment
Illustrated Book on Poultry Diseases & Cures, price 7d. posted
83
SEND FOR PRICE LIST


DOG AILMENTS
AND THEIR REMEDIES.
To the reader we say, let the treatment of your sick dog be
governed by that wisdom, generous care, and attention its devoted
obedience and fidelity deserve. Remember that a timely remedy will
frequently prevent serious ailment, save much suffering, and in many
cases the life of the dog.
X
Accidents that result n Cuts, Rips, Tears, Barbed Wire and
other Wounds require much the same treatment. Bleeding, when
profuse or persistent, should be staunched by the application of the
Salvitis Styptic Tincture. First cleanse the part with tepid water,
bring the edges together with plaster, or, if necessary, stitch, dust over
a little Salvitis Heal All Powder, and bind with lint or soft rag. If
slow to heal or angry looking, apply Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Blood, Poverty of, evidenced by paleness of membranes, lack of
energy, depression, lassitude, dull eye, staggering gait, and laboured
wheezy breathing, with progressive weakness, under which the dog
gradually sinks and dies. Causes are poor food, exhaustive demands on
stud dogs; with bitches excessive secretion of milk and the too long
suckling of puppies. Not unfrequently it is due to the presence of
worms. If the latter be suspected, give Salvitis Worm Pills or Dog
Salvitis. If from exhaustion or following sickness, Salvitis Dog
Tonic Mixture should be given.
*
Blotch, or Surfeit. Inflamed patches which discharge a thin
mattery fluid that forms into a scab, matting the hair together. The
scab and hair falling off leave bare moist patches, which itch intolerably,
causing continual scratching and rubbing. Blotch is often aggravated
through want of cleanliness, dirt mixing with the exuded matter causing
increased irritation of the skin. Wash the patches daily with Salvitis
Antiseptic Soap, and give a course of Special Tonic Mixture, supplied
on request.
Bums and Scalds are often the result of accidents, now and
again the evidence of cruelty and maliciousness. The best remedy for
either is Salvitis Heal All Ointment. Apply frequently and as soon
as possible.
Canker Of the Ear mainly affects long hatred and water dogs.
It attacks both the flap and internal structure, the attendant pain
causing the dog to constantly paw the ear or violently shake the head.
The ear is hot and emits an offensive discharge. In the case of internal
canker after frequent hot fomentations and drying, smear over the
ulcerated parts, with the finger, a little Salvitis Black Pine Ointment
or Salvitis Red Oils. For external Canker do the same.
Full Directions on Packages.


Claws, inflammation at the roots, often occurs among running
dogs. There is redness between the toes and thin discharge therefrom.
Foment night and morning with hot water, then swathe the foot with
bandages wet with Salvitis White Lotion.
Cough varies in character, according to cause—in common cold
it is slight and hurried; in bronchitis, hard, dry and in
inflammation of the lungs, short and suppressed ; when the throat is
sore, the cough is hoarse; in asthma, it is wheezy and often followed
by vomiting; in distemper, the cough has a peculiar husky, hollow
sound. From whatsoever cause, cough should not be neglected. The
Salvitis Cough Pills for Dogs should be given, or a Special Cough
Mixture, supplied on request.
Distemper, known also as Dog-ill, Snifters, etc. A highly
contagious specific disease mainly attacking young dogs, but also
frequently jeopardising the life of adult dogs. Contagion is the only
cause. Of the various forms that are oftenest met with is the catarrhal,
the symptoms being great feverishness, disinclination for food, irregular
bowels, harsh staring coat, vomiting, discharge from eyes and nostrils,
with a rapid loss of flesh. To allay the initial fever and cough, give a
dose of Dog Salvitis ; also rub the chest with camphorated oil. The
eyes and nose should be frequently cleansed with a little boric acid
wash, and to abate the tormenting itchiness of the skin sponge or swab
with Salvitis White Lotion. A bi-weekly allowance of Dog Salvitis
will do much to regulate the bowels, stay loss of flesh and strength, and
ward off fits of convulsions or attacks of paralysis ; in fact, with good
nursing and judicious feeding, it is about all that is required to bring the
dog safely through the perils of distemper. Recovery, if slow, should be
assisted by a course of Salvitis Tonic Mixture for Dogs.
Eczema of the dog is often described as Red Mange or Surfeit.
It appears on the skin in small patches covered with bladder-like
eruptions. These, when scratched, discharge their contents, run
together, and form nasty scabs. The skin assumes a very inflamed and
wrinkled look, the hair falls out, and its place is taken by a scurfy
looking scale, which causes much irritation to the dog. Washing the
parts with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, and afterwards dressing with
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment, will afford immense relief; but to
effect a perfect cure, recourse must be had to Special Internal Treatment
by the Salvitis Eczema Pills.
Fits, Epileptic, are of common occurrence with dogs. They
occasionally result from excitement, but are often due to the irritation
of worms, the tapeworm particularly. Occasional doses of Dog Salvitis
will reduce the tendency to repeated attacks by expelling from the
system parasites which induce fits.
FlG£lS, Lice, and all other external parasites are prejudicial to
the comfort, well-being, and thriftiness of the animal, their
extermination is desirable. For ready and decisive extermination of
such pests nothing approaches the Salvitis Antiseptic Soap.
Full Directions on Packages.


Mang6. The distinction between this and eczema is that mange
!s caused by a parasite that is readily transferable by contact from on®
animal to another, while eczema, blotch, and surfeit are not. Cover
the dog with a lather made with Salvitis Antiseptic Soap, allow it to
remain on for ten or fifteen minutes before washing off, dry well, and
then apply Salvitis Black Pine Ointment.
Worms. Three kinds of worms affect the dog, viz., Round,
Thread, and Tape Worms. They locate themselves in various parts of
the body, and soon debilitate even the strongest dog. There are many
symptoms, the commonest being vomiting, evil-smelling breath, staring
coat, and generally emaciated appearance. Whenever you notice such
symptoms put Salvitis for Dogs to the test ; the result will be your
own delight and the unspeakable pleasure of the suffering beast. When
from size or viciousness there is difficulty in administering Salvitis
for Dogs, resort can be had to the Salvitis Worm Pills, which, besides
being very effective, are readily swallowed by the dog if enclosed in a
small piece of meat.
11 SALVITIS ” PROPRIETARIES.
FOR DOGS.
Salvitis for Dogs. Supersedes every other known remedy for the expulsion of
Worms. Is also a cure for Distemper and other ill conditions.
▲
Salvitis Pills for Expelling Worms in Dogs. For use when above is difficult
to administer, as with vicious or unmanageable dogs.
Salvitis Cough Pills for Dogs.
Salvitis Tonic Pills.
Salvitis Cure for Eczema or Red Mange in Dogs.
Salvitis Antiseptic Soap. For the cure of Old Sores, Foul Ulcers, Proud
Flesh, Wounds. Also is effective for the destruction of Noxious Insects, Bugs, Ants,
and Lice on Animals.
Salvitis Eye Lotion Crystals provide the Dairy Farmer, Poultry Keeper,
Stockman, Shepherd, etc., with a ready means of making a splendidly efficacious Eye
Lotion, not only for his live stock, but for himself and family.
Salvitis Styptic Tincture. Instantly stops bleeding and relieves pain, and
hastens cure of cuts, wounds, etc. For animal or human use.
Salvitis Cure for Rheumatism in all classes of stock.
Salvitis Black Pine Ointment. For Canker, etc.
Salvitis Red Oils. For Healing Wounds, fresh or old, Rips, Tears, Cuts, Barb
Wire Injuries, Gores, Broken Knees, Festering Sores, Burns, and Skin Abrasions of
all kinds.
Salvitis White Lotion, A Cooling, Soothing, and Healing Lotion for Bruises,
Contusions, Inflamed Tendons and Joints, Itching of the Skin, and the Reduction of
Swelling from Injury. Suitable for human or animal
Salvitis Ingredients for making Heal All Ointment (or can be used as a
Dusting Powder).
Salvitis Tonic Mixture. A special tonic for dogs suffering recovery from
distemper or other serious debilitating ailment.
Full Directions on Packages.


v. : :vy , W^K , >ffl l >»y ,^, .'? T ’ rr** v »»*vrt'v
■ ><w/:- - - ; v 1 • • ■:•■•■ v.wrw -.v.*.- t? ..^.v,
:•: •:•>;• .v :• ■••*■•\:™.y ■&
n r-|. . ,■--» - 11 nr|i ~ ,
'T7 r T’rV '4' 1 ' • ; ■ j ;1
“ SALViTIS ” icO$ 4| >-’*1’ 1 ■ I HB£>-.~ *««m«*«^|
| '■■•'**5 •: SBrt-u.ow «usr*ri
edy for Lumpy J* *1 -
( •"'ll * M £ I * mKSK$&*^ k?t
I v ~— > ■ • s-li Rs«s» :&0*mmm
or i»« uk^.^Wb S’! 8 '■ - "HiL. itimm '
„ I
M.u,. ,„ u .,, lh , SA is ♦«•» 'zSBBHBffiStiE li BBv
?“**"■“•““•»>■-.1 «.if. p ■».!«^Jjr > . tnwftllrffi IX'7 f] ■nbt^BaMenj
———>4 MStoasMs
N* AilmonU BK* i, l »£Sg|i
' ■’ *


I Urn* • T*f CW
Mil (|uil ..^jT.Ajiljl
1/ - ifeSS
kmmv ** I
. > ' 11 '***«*i«t* *r«t«r
- K1>>^.-t *>•■■* ■d*** 1
I AS^F SALV,T,S *** | #
- W»w I : I
r ]
..-isgs poultry »o i r .; .S
■ •-• r SALVITIS’
: PERM
I ***** *««** ***••**>. I I y'.-i *' ' h . 1
. :| >fftt>t |5l ©««,«*». £ *****»*% «♦»•>*»** AW**« r i «* ''&§ f „ . 1
•* w '***** } -■ * I * l *y— ** *"' N,<:i ''w«< .«=«, . ■ r s , - -1
I **%-#m«*»,,*. .-;< ,**. ****** «***, a m*t*%: ■ I -h€ -** w TJ T , rr* ■?«> *.<.-«,■
- *»>*■»*<* -■■' i
fesC:r ?,,i k-v ... 4 ■
r I rsr - * I :*,>.?•■ r . • M
if. “~~k=rr~"~ ' j
fca=^ggg£^. , ?p^


' x- . ••
|- Drench ,J tor Absorb^
r ■-";.! UtrrsH s.J^?j“...*a
; 11 . k w is V
VVSI V
| l IWPOVER'SHWt.NT OF atOC-.i .N
-| -—":^r^^-''-' :T --: '
»'
t ■
V,


i8SS8l ii ti sie | Vl^l
Mmm. 18 & /■’%** ***** ****.***■ * »*&« ?«»»■*«$ oa* «»* -m*t» "'■'■■ v^-"' '■ 4;,,V$y,' . , i
A ' f ■■■ yyt&Qfvmxt# wm& ■& m • -... j;§|£
■IB I$ “SALvms”! I &«&■ rIOR - DOGS* m
Mini ■ NUTRITIVE **i.», «*, »..»•*if
B^T: s >-- : GRBAMffi^ ; ' &? iM*4 ?^v *?* *f m M
H : A SU>i$TfTUT£ FOS TH£ j ' '
and prevention .g.j|
AfcJ SUT8ITIVE CRIAM Be mm-S-
&wKKh~* '• mMi B SKIM« SEPARATOR»will, to ««»a&ftiurc» n>
yBMpjgl' AV B liii » » : v : ..v-'i OT *<»»<»<>»< «t«fnu»» ,«r IHartwHw* flH K S" ' *** ***• .£>. It
H;l> ”il65 e W : m Wt Si?*I
h S » 89 na»«m Hi .cssssgsssjiJts; ■ Wvv^^"" , “ rt ' •“ ""•“»■•■??ffl
|.-‘ ,, salvitis , ’->m Its wok b chucm ii».ii«srB£saas : «
ityptic TinW B ?, I a^Momow
w r' . .i «>11 Ml S . |! B«waiiinui«w8M«,i» ■ WKmt&gBL £ '~s &&'*£%
5 __i. .vM| H < ** )««*■► 3mR3ti&i£:;.::: : ¥;: »«<**? *<»» -ovtgK *»«U* «* ftMtffct*. MS m, 411
or MyBiAp9 9 ITISSLY V ■ *‘ > ‘ >a " <om - : y t.M ■:■■/■-''. ■ Bh 1 m
Sfe«w» ««*» ~sa I -8KURHUK i*«cs3reaiaaaas ■ wp«^5!“! |S rMP,l^S#'M
I 11 w«$ M B9P r«
fe«*tt»V*«*St im[i«»g ■ 1 f«w«t enmoNH ■«»». ii«»aKra£iSiasfeaS fi I'liaB***-
k.' --*aSS*M ■ ~ “ srs.visss~~ ssssswsr——*-* ■
■fcaWii B . *«J!£5!!!!L>»« ■
“ 1 *“ J UjT,r y J —[ ■ |
)pjj ' y ii '• !


USEFUL TABLES
FOR
BREEDERS
5.
Time of
Mares
Cows
Ewes
Sows
1
Bitches
I
Fowls
Service.
340 days.
283 days.
150 days.
112 days.
63 days.
21 days.
Jan.
I
Dec.
6
Oct.
IO
May
30
Apri
1 22
Mar.
4
Jan.
2*
» *
8
»»
J 3
»)
17
June
6
» 9
29
)»
11
• t
29
»*
l 5
1 »
20
1 1
24
t»
!3
May
6
* 1
18
Feb.
’5
»*
22
t »
27
»»
3i
f t
20
t >
13
» 9
25
9 9
12
»*
29
Jan.
3
Nov.
7
11
27
T»
20
April
1
1 1
x 9
Feb.
5
1 »
IO
»1
14
July
4
f»
27
1»
8
»1
26
»i
12
»»
17
1»
21
t »
I I
June
3
> 1
15
Mar.
5
t >
19
> 1
24
> 1
28
» 1
18
) •
IO
> >
22
9 9
12
> »
26
» »
3 1
Dec.
5
» ♦
25
>»
J 7
1 1
29
f 9
19
Mar.
5
Feb.
7
>»
12
Aug.
I
n
24
May
6
1 >
26
» •
12
1 •
! 4
* 1
19
1 »
8
July
I
*»
13
April
2
i •
19
11
21
»>
26
1 1
n
8
9 9
20
1 %
9
1 1
26
1»
28
Jan.
2
O
22
11
13
9 9
27
9 9
16
April
2
Mar.
7
»»
9
1 t
29
D
22
June
3
»»
23
»
9
»*
H
t »
16
Sept.
5
' 9
29
» *
IO
«i
3°
11
l6
1»
21
11
23
»i
12
Aug.
5
1 »
17
May
7
»*
23
t»
28
•»
30
>»
19
9 9
12
> 1
24
»»
14
ti
30
April
4
Feb.
6
• »
26
9 9
19
July
I
>»
21
May
7
»»
I I
t 1
13
Oct.
3
9 9
26
» t
8
1»
28
1 >
11
18
t f
20
» f
TO
Sept.
2
1 t
1 5
June
4
» •
2 T
9 »
25
1 *
■ 27
i 1
17
?»
9
t »
22
} 9
11
I I
nr
28
May
2
Mar.
6
• 1
24
i »
16
»1
29
»»
18
June
4
>»
9
* >
13
» «
3 1
* 1
23
Aug.
5
•»
25
* »
11
»»
l6
•
* >
20
Nov.
7
».
3°
9 9
12
July
2
» )
18
»1
23
* 1
27
f f
H
Oct.
7
9 9
l 9
)f
9
1 »
25
i 1
3°
April
3
» 1
21
1»
J 4
9 9
26
9 9
16
July
2
June
6
t
IO
1 1
28
)»
21
Sept
2
t»
23
I i
9
n
13
1»
!7
Dec.
5
i •
28
1 >
9
»1
3°
t •
16
»1
20
»>
24
» 1
12
Nov.
4
• »
l6
Aug.
6
) •
23
1 1
27
May
I
» •
19
* »
I I
> 1
23
» 1
x 3
1 1
30
July
4
1»
8
>»
26
) »
18
» *
3°
) »
20
Aug.
6
* •
II
»*
>5
Jan.
2
t 1
25
Oct.
7
« J
27
* i
13
» »
18
»>
22
»»
9
Dec.
2
•»
m
Sept.
3
t >
20
• »
25
•»
29
v
l6
1 1
9
> 1
21
t 1
10
» 9
27
Aug.
I
June
5
n
23
»)
l6
»*
28
y »
17
bept.
3
1 1
8
n
12
n
3°
• »
23
Nov.
4
1 »
24
* *
10
«
1 »
*5
» 1
>9
Feb.
6
» 1
3°
))
11
Oct.
1
i *
r 7
9 9
22
»»
26
1 1
13
Jan.
6
11
IS
» f
8
t »
24
9 f
29
July
3
1 »
20
» •
c 3
• 1
25
1 t
15
Oct.
I
Sept.
5
1 »
IO
» i
27
f 1
20
Dec.
2
! 1
22
• i
8
*»
12
» »
17
Mar.
6
»»
27
»»
9
n
29
>»
15
1 1
1 9
24
1 *
13
Feb.
3
*»
l6
Nov.
5
»»
22
»)
26
» »
31
• »
20
)»
IO
»•
23
* 1
12
t 9
29
Oct,
3
Aug.
7
11
27
1 »
*7
t *
3°
»>
19
Nov.
5
1 »
IO
1 »
April
3
9 9
24
Jan.
6
»»
26
)*
12
1 1
*7
• 1
21
« 1
IO
Mar.
3
» 1
13
Dec.
3
> »
19
» 1
24
f «
28
» f
!7
0
IO
» t
20
» 1
10
9 f
26
} *
31
Sept,
4
* »
24
t »
J 7
9 9
27
> 1
!7
Dec,
3
Nov.
7
f »
II
\ May
I
1 1
24
Feb.
3
» 1
24
»»
10
>»
14
1 »
18
» 1
8
« 1
31
» 1
IO
»1
31
> ♦
J 7
1 1
21
>»
25
15
April
7
1 »
17
Jan.
7
>)
24
»*
28
Oct.
2
»»
22
* >
14
9 9
24
14
?»
Cr
31
Dec.
5 1
» 1
9 J
»»
29
M
21
Mar.
3
» »
21
.sa
Victorian Wholesale Agents for Salvitis Proprietaries:
VOUNOHUSBAND, ROW & CO. PTV. LTD.
n KINO STREET, MELBOURNE


alvitis Proprietary Vi
%
as
4! V
iwioil
a
> r Fc /
o
Mb)
mi
a\
Z/ m J
0
S'
r~>
w
IN THE PRODUCTION OF
Medical & Chemical Compounds
■ REQUIRED IN THE 'EX**-
Pastoral. Dairying .Stud.
AND ALLIED INDUSTRIES.
••*<9
0 09
cr
IJ
u
u
u
TL
■S
/
A
A
y
/
WHOLESALE AGENTS
Victoria : Younghushand, Row & Co. Propy. Ltd.,
Melbourne.
New South Wales: Hales Ltd., Sydney.
Queensland: Hjwes Bros. & Co., Brisbane.
South Australia : G. Wood, Son & Co., Adelaide.
E. & W. Hackett, Adelaide.
Western Australia : Gardner Bros., Perth.
. Tasmania : Edgington & Henty, Launceston.
Pearce & Pearce, Hobart.
India: Australian Fodder Company, Calcutta.
Thompson, Thomas & Co., Bombay and Ceylon.
Straits Settlements: Thompson, Thomas & Co.,
Singapore.
New Zealand: Rand, Walker & Co., Wellington.
Java: C. Soesman, Samarang.
i
%
n\v\v
N
N
N
%
‘i/
K
7
s
s
r
/
o
\
Ask your Storekeeper for the
“SALVJTIS” PREPARATIONS
and see that you get them.
lt=E
r
o v
o
y
i
t’L
S
