

Lloyd + Memorial + Church, + Wallaroo.
1914
1864
JUBILEE!
To celebrate the occasion, Services will be held
in the Church as under:-
SUNDAY, JUNE 14, 1914:
11 a.m. ... ... REV. S. FORSYTH
(Methodist)
2.30 p.m. ... REV. J. A. McLELLAN
(Presbyterian)
6.30 p.m. ... REV. DAVID MORGAN
(Pastor)
For Meetings throughout the Week, see Page 3.
SUNDAY, JUNE 21:
REV. ALFRED GIFFORD (Chairman of the Congrega-
tional Union of South Australia) will conduct Services
at 11 a.m. and 6.30 p.m.
EVERYBODY WELCOME.


THE LATE REV. JOHN LLOYD.
Pastor 1887 1904.


THE CELEBRATIONS WILL BE CONTINUED
DURING THE WEEK, as follows : —
m
MONDAY, JUNE 15 :
PUBLIC MEETING, at 7.45 p.m. Speakers: Ministers of the
Town.
0
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 17 :
PUBLIC TEA, at 5 p.m., at the WATERSIDE WORKERS’
HALL. Admission : One Shilling.
At 8 p.m., IN THE CHURCH: SERVICE OF SONG, “ THE
CABIN BOY’S BIBLE.” Admission : Sixpence.
0
THURSDAY, JUNE 18 :
WELSH SERVICE, at 7.45 p.m. PREACHER: REV. DAVID
MORGAN.
0
FRIDAY, JUNE 19 :
MEN’S MEETING, at 8 p.m. REV. ALFRED GIFFORD,
Chairman of the Congregational Union, will Address the
Men.
0
A HEARTY INVITATION IS EXTENDED TO THE
PUBLIC TO ATTEND THESE SERVICES.


WELSH FOLK CONNECTED WITH THE CHURCH SINCE 1864.
STANDING (left to right) —Thomas Davies, Mary Prosser, Isaac Owen, Daniel Davies, Annie Kenchington,
Robert Price.
SITTING (left to right) — Sarah Bryden, Margaret Richards, Margaret Phillips, Margaret Davies, Betsy
Davies, Ann Rees.


A Brief History of the Wallaroo Welsh Church.
The Loyd Memorial (Welsh) Congregational Church.
1864 1914.
A BEGINNING appears to have been made in the early
part of the year 1864 to hold worship in the building in
Charles Terrace. Mr Edward Preece conducted the
services, and associated with him were a number of
Welsh people who had just arrived from Wales, some of whom are
still connected with the Church. The services were subsequently
held in a wooden building in Elizabeth-street, not far from the site
of the present Church. All the services at the time were conducted
in the Welsh language. A Congregational Church had also been
established in the town, and the minister in charge was the Rev D.
M. Davies, of Brecon College, Wales. Mr Davies frequently
preached at the Welsh Church for a period of about two years, and
was invited to become the Pastor of the Welsh Church, which he,
however, declined. Soon afterwards Mr Davies accepted a call to
the pastorate of the Welsh Congregational Church at Ballarat, in
Victoria.
About this time, Mr John Lloyd, who was employed at the
Smelting Works, was accustomed to preach in Welsh to his com-
patriots on the Lord’s Day, and very highly valued were those ser-
vices from their originality and fervor, and from the manifest
blessing of God upon them. Circumstances connected with the
Works made it likely that these services would be lost, which led
to an effort being made by the workmen, and supported by friends
outside, to secure Mr Lloyd’s teaching and oversight in the future.
After a year, the people gave Mr Lloyd a solemn call to the
pastorate, which he could not for a time see the way clear to
accept. Eventually, after prayer and consultation with Rev W.
Wilson, then of Kadina, he thought the hand of God was discerni-
ble in it, and assented to the call. Mr Lloyd was ordained on
January 19th, 1869; the Revs W. Wilson (Congregational), A.
Michie (Presbyterian), Thomas Garnett (Primitive Methodist), and
Thos. Raslon (Wesleyan) taking part in the service.
Sir W. W. Hughes, who was then in Wallaroo, and connected
with the Wallaroo Smelting Works, proved a true friend to the
Church. He was so impressed with the work done by Mr Lloyd
and those associated with him that of his own accord he contribut-
ed £5O per annum towards Mr Lloyd’s stipend, which amount was
regularly paid until the death of Sir Walter.


The Church has been affiliated with the Congregational Union
of South Australia since the year 1866, and it has received from that
body considerable assistance in various ways. In the year 1898,
the Church was honored by the election of its Pastor (Rev John
Lloyd) to the Chair of the Union, a position he filled with credit to
himself and satisfaction to all concerned.
The present building was erected about the year 1869, and
provided accommodation for 200 persons. For a while it remained
in an unfinished state, but Mr Lloyd, with a loyal following, set to
work, and by means of concerts, etc, in which the Welsh Choir
made themselves famous for their excellent singing, an amount of
money was raised sufficient to complete the Church and
purchase a Manse. For many years Mr Lloyd continued to con-
duct a morning service in Welsh, and the Church was well attend-
ed ; but about 1894 it was deemed advisable to substitute an
English service in the morning, as the greater part of the congre-
gation were not conversant with the Welsh language. A week-
night service was, however, conducted by Mr Lloyd in his native
tongue up to the time of his death.
The building was taxed to its utmost capacity, and on the
occasion of any special service the Institute Hall was engaged, and
on several occasions anniversary services were held in one of the
other Churches of the town, kindly lent for the occasion.
Mr Lloyd was famous throughout the State, and his services
were in great demand. He received several invitations to
pastorates in this State and Victoria, but his people would not hear
of his leaving. He had the oversight of the Church at Mount
Lofty in the early days of its history, and was invited to become
the Minister there, but his attachment to Wallaroo was too strong.
He was a great worker in the Temperance Cause, and exercised
a potent influence on the lives of the growing boys and girls of the
town.
In October, 1904, Mr Lloyd attended Bordertown to conduct
the anniversary services there, this being the only Congregational
Church in the State he had not previously visited. During the
morning service he was seized with an illness which proved fatal,
and he died at Bordertown on October 29th, 1904. His body was
brought to Wallaroo, and the funeral was attended by the largest
concourse of people ever seen at a similar gathering in the town,
and the grief was widespread. Five hundred school children
marched in the procession, thus paying their tribute to him who
was known as “ The Children’s Friend.” Soon afterwards it was
decided to perpetuate his memory, and a marble tablet was erected
in the Church.
For many years, as has already been observed, the Church
suffered from lack of accommodation ; but, owing to the dread of
incurring a debt, the work of enlarging and improving was con-
tinually delayed. In 1908 it was, however, decided to proceed with
this very necessary work. The alterations were completed on
February sth, 1908, when, in the presence of a great and
A Brief History of the Wallaroo Welsh Church.


memorable gathering, Mrs E. Lloyd (widow of the late
beloved minister) re-opened the Church and re-named
it “ The Lloyd Memorial Church ” in memory of its first
pastor. Mrs Lloyd, who now resides in Adelaide, still maintains a
close and practical interest in the Church and its people.
The pastorate remained vacant from October, 1904, to October,
1905. The difficulty ot finding a successor to Mr Lloyd who could
preach in the English and Welsh languages was soon apparent.
During this period the loyal band of people were greatly assisted
in carrying on the work by the practical sympathy they received
from friends of other denominations, and were kept buoyant by a
gracious sense of the Divine guidance.
The Rev Rees Jones was appointed to the pastorate in Octo-
ber, 1905, and remained until April, 1907. In May, 1907, the Rev
G. A. Cooper, of Houghton, S.A., accepted a call to the pastorate,
and remained in charge for syears, when in September, 1913, he
left to take charge of the Churches at Milang and Macclesfield.
It was during Mr Cooper’s pastorate that the improvements to
the Church were effected, and the sum of about £SOO was expended
in enlarging the Church to accommodate 300 persons, providing
class-room, re-arranging the seating, and otherwise improving the
interior. The whole of the amount was raised within four years,
and the Church cleared of debt. That the improvements to the
Church have been fully justified is amply borne out by subsequent
events, and the question of further improvements to the exterior,
and providing additional accommodation for the Sunday school, is
now under consideration, and a start will probably be made after
the Jubilee Celebrations.
In April, 1913, the Rev David Morgan, of Claremont, W.A.,
accepted a call to the pastorate, and, although Mr Morgan has
only been in charge for 12 months, he has done exceptionally fine
work. The people have enthusiastically responded to a “ Forward
Movement”; the Church is self-supporting, and some splendid
organisation work has been effected.
Too much praise cannot be bestowed on the noble work of the
pioneers, whose memories to-day are cherished by succeeding
generations, and perhaps no better tribute can be shown than the
fact that they are faithfully carrying on the work so firmly esta-
blished by their forefathers.
The Church has exerted an influence for good in the lives of
men and women who to-day are scattered over the whole of the
Commonwealth, as well as those who are leading citizens in our
own town. For all this we humbly and reverently recognise the
hand of Divine Providence, and hope and pray that the future will
be even brighter than the past, and that succeeding generations
will give a greater stimulus to the work, so that it may be
abundantly blessed by God and continue to exert an influence for
good in the town.
A Brief History of the Wallaroo Welsh Church.


We have to-day amongst us the following who were present at
the foundation of the Church
Bryden, Mrs Sarah Prosser, Mrs Mary
Bates, Mr John Prosser, Mr Thomas
Bates, Mrs Lizzie Price, Mr Robert
Davies, Mr Thomas, senr., Price, Miss Lizzie
Davies, Mr Thomas, junr„ Price, Mr William
Davies, Mrs Sarah Price, Mrs Jane
Davies, Mr David Phillips, Mrs Margaret
Davies, Mrs Margaret Phillips, Mr John Daniel
Davies, Mr Daniel Phillips, Mr William
Evans, Mr Thomas Phillips, Mrs Sarah
Evans, Mrs Mary Richards, Mrs Margaret
Hughes, Mrs Mary Jane Richardson, Mrs Susanha
John, Mrs Catherine Rees, Mr Evan
Jones, Mr William Rees, Mrs Ann
Kenchington, Mrs Annie Strongman, Mrs Mary Ann
Owen, Mr Isaac
The present officers are: —Pastor, Rev David Morgan ;
Deacons, Messrs John D. Phillips, Thos. Davies, junr., Thos. Evans,
Wm. Jones, Thomas John, August Hagedorn, Eynon Deer, John
James Jones, William Parker Jonps.
In connection with the Jubilee Celebrations, the Church has
undergone complete renovations, and special attention has been
given to beautifying the interior. Much of this work was carried
out with the voluntary help of willing hands, and the people are
liberally responding to a Special Jubilee Offering to meet the cost
incurred by this work.
Compiled by Officers of the Church.
Wallaroo, June, 1914.
Hicks & Hughes, Printers, Moonta.
A Brief History of the Wallaroo Welsh Church.


PRESENT PASTOR AND DEACONS.
STANDING (left to right) — John J. Jones (Treasurer), W. P. Jones, A. Hagedorn, David Morgan (Pastor),
Thomas John (Secretary), Eynon Deer.
SITTING (left to right)—Thomas Davies, jun., John Daniel Phillips, William Jones, Thomas Evans.


INTERIOR OF THE CHURCH.
As it appears after Renovations for Jubilee Celebrations.


