

BY
JOHN YALE,
SECRETARY OF THE VICTORIAN ALLIANCE.
Reprinted from the “Victorian Review.”
PRICE—ONE PENNY,
Or 6s. per 100.
Watt Co., Printers, I4g Little Collins Street West, Melbourne.
A^
~o. x. %
Melbourne:
THE TEMPERANCE BOOK DEPOT, TEMPERANCE HALL,
RUSSELL STREET.
1883.


LOCAL OPTION.
The .able paper by Mr. Aldrich on “ The Practical Working of the
Licensing System,” in the March number of the Victorian Review,
may perhaps have its fitting sequel in an exposition of the principle
known by the now popular term, local option. Mr. Aldrich deals
with the licensing system as it affects four classes of persons, namely,
licensing magistrates, owners of public-house property, brewers and
distiller?, and publicans : for my present purpose, I shall deal_ with
it as it affects tire people at large. At the outset, let it be distinctly
understood that the Local Option party, of whose platform I, as sec-
retary of the Victorian Alliance, may be allowed _to speak with
anthority, would welcome any amendment of a restrictive character
to the Licensing Act ; such, for instance, as the raising of the
license-fee ; and that moreover we are now, by the use of the plat-
form and the press, seeking to arouse public opinion in favour of the
enforcement of the act as it stands. But believing that the most
stringent Licensing Act rigidly enforced would only result m a
diminution of the evils, we must be excused if our chief efforts are
in promotion of a reform which may result in the total abolition or
the curse. The physicion may say of the fever-stricken patient
“ Bathe the heated brow, moisten the parched lips, give cooling
drinks ” but his chief care is to give medicine to remove the cause of
the malady ; and now that the body politic is stricken with the fell
disease intemperance, the wise statesman, while placing all due im-
portance upon auxiliary measures, will seek most of all to attack
the disease at its root. .
Any statement of our case approaching, completeness must begin-
with the proposition that the liquor traffic is the source of vast evils,
not only to the unhappy victims of drink, but to society at large.
This is now so generally admitted that to many a proof may seem
unnecessa'-y. But to be convinced of an evil is one thing, to act
upon that conviction another. In the language of Coleridge—
“ Truths of all others the most awful and interesting are too often
considered as so true that they lose all the power of truth and ho
bed-ridden in the dormitory of the soul, side by side with the most
despised and exploded errors.” It is so with the facts of intem-
perance their very number has made them impotent. A Creswicfc
disaster every week would become a commonplace: intemperance is
already a commonplace far more terrible. We want the facts which


have been allowed to slumber in the public mind to become living
realities, awakening people and Parliament to earnest and effectual
action.
According to a return presented to the last Legislative Assembly
there are in Victoria 4312 hotels, 317 licensed groceries, and 79
colonial wine stores. Assuming the population to have reached
895,000, this gives a licensed house to about every 190 persons, in-
cluding a large proportion of children and many abstainers. So
many drink-shops have been licensed that there must be flagrant
adulteration and a large amount of drunkenness in order to make
the business pay. Excessive competition in the liquor trade acts
injuriously upon those in the trade, the consumer, and society at
large. Each drink-seller caters for a comparative few ; hence the
few must be tempted to drink excessively, and the liquor supplied
is “ fearfully and wonderfully made,” so as to yield a large profit.
Even those who figure as the champions of the traffic do not defend
all of it: those who retain any conscience cannot. It is now uni-
versally admitted that, through the mistakes of the past, there are
far too many drink shops, and that some plan of reducing their
number should be adopted.
The publican assures us, with more or less sincerity, that he views
intemperance with righteous indignation, and sheds tears over the
drunkard’s money as he drops it into his till. Yet the facts remain
that men and women, charged with drunkenness and consequent
disorder, are hauled before our City Bench by the score, and that
arrests for drunkenness in Victoria were 10,056 in 1880, and 11,065
in 1881. Assuming that each arrest represents a separate indi-
vidual, in 1880 one in every 85 of the population was arrested, in
1881 one in every 79. And these figures are but an indication of
the evil—the index to a huge volume of vide. A common sight of
Melbourne is an intoxicated man or woman leaning against a wall,
staggering through the street, or lying helpless upon the path,
while the policeman walks by on the other side lost in meditation.
One of the saddest phases of the case is the number of young
persons, of both sexes, who are charged with intoxication and insult-
ing behaviour. Mere boys and girls in age, veterans in vice, are
constantly appearing in the dock. The practical philanthropist must
ponder over the question of our police magistrate —“ What can we
do with these young people ? ” And many of the most deplorable
cases—those from the higher walks of life—never appear upon the
charge-sheet of the police court, but go to make up the unwritten
statistics of human misery. The good ship, strongly built from
stem to stern, well-rigged, and found in all conducive to safety,


goes out with the tide and favouring, breeze, bidding fair to reach
her desired haven ; but the rocks and quicksands prove fatal to her,
and she becomes a shattered wreck. So do we see many a young
man starting in life with every promise of success, education, talent,
home training, who, instead of reaching the haven of prosperity, in
a few short years becomes a helpless wreck upon the rocks and
quicksands of the liquor-traffic. We know that there are “ many
men of many minds,” and all do not look at drunkenness through
teetotal spectacles ; but to all right-minded persons intemperance is
an unmitigated curse, and its prevalence calls for the most active
efforts on the part of those who have the welfare of our young
country at heart.
Following upon drunkenness there is poverty. In Victoria, where
every man can get a fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work, and where
there is employment for all who are able and willing to work, poverty
should be almost unknown. We can understand honest poverty in
the old country, where the farm-labourer is often called on to
maintain wife and family upon a beggarly pittance of twelve shil-
lings a week, and where the poor seamstress makes slop shirts for
thirteen pence a dozen, and finds her own cotton. But here, de-
serving poverty is at least very rare. Yet the fact remains that
Melbourne has its slums, swarming with barefooted and ragged
children ; that, in Victoria, there are paupers, beggars, and vagrants,
and many who tremble upon the verge of the abyss of want. Why ?
We venture to assert in a large majority of instances through in-
temperance and its attendant vices. We see the man of toil labour-
ing to earn that which should carry comfort and happiness to his
home. But the temptation of the open bar leads him to spend
much of his earnings in drink. By quick degrees the habit of
drinking increases ; and, in the same ratio, the comforts of home
become less. The family Bible finds its way to the pawn-shop, and
other household treasures go the same road. The children’s cloth-
ing becomes ragged, their daily bread more scanty, their features
grow pinched and wan. The wife, by her own hard labour strives
to keep the wolf from the door ; but, at last, even her earnings are
seized by the drink-maddened man. Then a home is destroyed, a
family broken up, and those who should be adding power and lustre
to a rising country become elements of national decay. If, by a
sudden change in the habits of the people, the stream of wealth
which is now pouring into the bottomless abyss of the liquor traffic
were diverted into legitimate channels, poverty would become almost
if not altogether unknown, and the colony would enter upon an era
of prosperity unparalleled in the annals of the world.


A large proportion of crime is also the product of the drink
traffic. Drunkenness itself is a public nuisance and a crime, although
arrests for this alone are rarely made. Alcohol excites the evil
passions, deadens impulses to good, renders natural affection dor-
mant, and blinds its victims to consequences ; and thus leads to the
various crimes of violence. Ofttimes when the blow is struck, the
shot fired, the knife plunged, drink is the real criminal, though the
drinker must be held responsible. Intoxicants sometimes produce
that form of courage, or recklessness, without which many of the
exploits of criminals would not be performed. Intemperance tempts
to crime by placing its victims at the mercy of the wrong-doer.
Many a one robbed of money or virtue would bear testimony to the
truth of this statement. Drink oftimes saps the foundation of the
moral character, until the whole superstructure falls with a crash,
and the drinker becomes altogether bad. Poverty and idleness are
sources of crime ; these are the outcome of intemperance. And
lastly, many children are trained to crime, or at least are so
neglected that they naturally fall into criminal ways, through the
intemperance of parents. Of a total of 25,346 persons arrested in
1881, we have seen that 11,065 were charged with drunkenness.
Common observation will bear us out when we say that a greater
part of the remainder of this standing army of criminals were made
such by intemperance. There is a terrible harmony in the ex-
perience of English-speaking peoples in this matter. For upwards
of 200 years British judges have been declaring that from three-
fourths to nine-tenths of the crime they have been called upon to
punish was the issue and product of the drink-shop. The same tale
is repeated by American authorities, except in those parts where pro-
hibition is enforced. Colonial judges have taken up the cry, until
at last it has become a horrible truism.
I might enlarge upon the physical and mental disease and pre-
mature deaths resulting from the consumption of the poison called
alcohol, sometimes taken in combination with other poisons, such as
fusel oil and vitriol. The 65 deaths from alcoholism during 1881,
as recorded in the Year Book, are but a slight indication of the evil.
Thus the enemy enters the mouth “to steal away the brains,” and
often enters the mouth of the parent to steal away the brains of the
child. The declaration of Dr. Bowie, that 70 per cent, of the cases
he had to treat at the Yarra Bend Asylum were due to alcohol
proves this to be no poetic figure, but an expression of stern fact.
The transmission of the various diseases and tendencies caused by
alcohol from generation to generation is now proved beyond the
shadow of a doubt. Thus, by the operation of the laws of hereditary


descent, the circle of misery is ever widening, and the vitiation of
human stock always on the increase. But, instead of unfolding
more of this tale of terrors, I will close the present indictment of
the liquor traffic by declaring it to be the foe of all that is good in
the State, and the ally of all that is bad. Every worker in the
"State is interested in the preservation of the Sunday as a day of
rest ; the liquor-trader, with his back-door and his mean tricks,
evades the Sunday law, seeking to trade when thirsty souls have
the most money and the most leisure. The State is interested in
the spread of education ; the drink-shop is the natural foe of the
school. The State is interested in the purity of election, especially
where the bold experiment of manhood suffrage is being tried : the
drink-shop is oftimes the seat of political corruption. And that
vice which is more terrible in moral guilt, and in its consequences to
the sinner and his offspring, than drunkenness itself, goes hand in
hand with intemperance. Practical philanthropists have started out
to reform the Sodom and Gomorrah of Victoria—the slums of Mel-
bourne—and some have turned back dismayed. Why ? Because
the victims of dishonesty and lust are also the victime of intem-
perance, and it is this intemperance which makes the case hopeless.
Drink seems to have the power of keeping its victims fast in the
lowest depths of vice. Thus, wherever we find any good work in
the community, we see its operations lessened and impaired by the
liquor traffic ; and wherever we find any evil work, we see its de-
velopment aided and abetted by the liquor traffic. Drink is Heaven’s
bane and the Devil’s steam-power.
This, then, is our basis of argument—the liquor traffic is the source
of vast evils to the victims of intemperance and their dependants,
and of material injury to the persons and property of the people at
large. This has become so evident that all thinking men, including
the members of the Licensed Victuallers’ Association, are agreed
that something must be done. Of course, when we come to what
that something should be, there is a variety of opinion. Without
criticising the plans of others, I will proceed at once to a statement
of the remedy the Victorian Alliance proposes. Every drink-shop
is supposed to be licensed, not for the benefit of the publican, but
for that of the public. The drinking-bar is supposed to be a want
of the district in which it is situated. Trades in general are left to
be controlled by the law of supply and demand. Any man is at
liberty to open a shop for the sale of bread, meat, books, clothing,
or any other harmless commodity. But it is admitted that free
trade in drink would be an unmitigated curse. The law steps in to
see that none hut good men and women are allowed to dispense the


dangerous article ; and that the supply is not m excess of the legiti-
mate wants of the respective districts. lam writing of the law as
it is in the statute hook, not as it is administered by an ineffective
Bench. The avowed object of the Licensing Act is to supply a
public want without creating a public nuisance. Now we say that
the people are the best judges of their own wants. This to a
certain extent is admitted by the present law. Every three years
the ratepayers have the opportunity of saying through the ballot-
box whether they want an increase in the number of drinking
bars. The idea of asking for any increase seems so absurd to the
public mind that many voters have not thought it necessary to
use the franchise ; but so far as the vote is recorded, the people say
most emphatically that they do not want any addition to the
number at present existing. This is local option already granted ;
our complaint is that the embodiment of the principle is terribly
one-sided. It is universally admitted that, through the mistakes of
the past, the liquor traffic exists to an extent far in excess of all
reasonable requirements ; but the present form of local option, while
giving the people power to prevent an increase of the evil, does not
give them power to reduce it. Therefore we wish to extend the
principle already granted. At present two questions are submitted
to the voter—(l.) Shall the number of public-houses be increased?
(2 ) Shall the number of public-houses not be increased ? We wish
to add a third—Shall the number of public-houses be decreased?
The Local Option resolution which was adopted by the last Legis-
lative Assembly declares “ That inasmuch as the avowed object of
licensing the sale of intoxicating liquors is to supply a supposed
public want without detriment to the public welfaie, this House is
of opinion that a legal power of restraining the issue or renewal of
licenses should be placed in the hands of the persons most deeply
interested and affected—namely, the inhabitants themselves, who
are entitled to protection from the injurious consequences of the
present system by some efficient measure of local option.” It is only
fair to recall the fact that this resolution, as adopted by the
Assembly, had an additional clause, favouring compensation, insisted
upon by Sir Bryan O’Loghlen before he would allow the question
to be put. For the present let me state that the Alliance is
opposed to’ this amendment. By passing the resolution Parliament
has declared that the people ought to have the power of controlling
the liquor traffic ; it is for the new, or some future, Parliament to
give them what is admittedly their right.
When the principle of local option is fully embodied in law, how
is it likely to act ? Of course, it will be found in some districts


that the temperance sentiment is very strong, and in these we shall,
perhaps, see the liquor traffic very quickly reformed “ altogether.”
The general working will very probably be something like the follow-
ing :—The people of a district will resolve that there shall be a
certain specified reduction in the number of licensed houses, say to
the extent of 50 per cent. Then, when licensing day comes round,
the authorities—whether magistrates or a board specially elected for
that purpose—will have to refuse one-half of the applications. A
license is a privilege granted for the term of one year. In the case
we are anticipating, the Bench would have to say to one-half of the
applicants, “ Gentlemen (or otherwise), your licenses expire with the
year, and, in obedience to the voice of the people, we must refuse to
renew them.” They would naturally say this to those who had con-
ducted their houses badly, and sold something worse than pure
alcoholic poison. This would remove those places which are admit-
tedly social pests, and prove a wholesome lesson to liquor traders
left. Frequently the publican is fined twenty shillings for evil
practices, and told to sin no more ; and he says that he will not.
But it’s the old story—
‘l The Devil was sick—the Devil a monk would be ;
The Devil got well—the devil a monk was he. ’
Perhaps for every shilling paid as a fine the publican makes a
pound profit by the breach of the law. A discount of five per cent,
is only reasonable. But with the sword of local option hanging over
his head, he will be far more careful. And, moreover, being saved
from excessive competition, he will be able to supply what is called
a pure article, and in other respects will be more careful to obey the
law, which he now treats with contempt. Thus we shall see more
specimens of that interesting personage, the “ respectable ” hotel-
keeper. In these ways drunkenness will bo reduced, and there will
be far less of poverty, crime, disease, insanity, and immorality, and,
consequently, more of prosperity and general happiness. This would
prove a vast boon to the community, and would doubtless lead people
to think of the greater blessings that would result from total pro-
hibition. And then a number of persevering people will be at work
in their own way, in season and out of season. I allude to the
people called teetotallers. It is thought that strong drink increases
strength ; abstainers will show that it is a source of weakness. It
is thought that alcohol promotes animal warmth ; abstainers will
show that it lowers the temperature of the body, though deceiving by
an outward glow. It is thought that alcohol is useful as a stimu-
lant ; abstainers will show that stimulation means irritation—as by
the cut of a whip or the sting of a mosquito —and that power drawn


from the future by the alcoholic whip must be paid back with heavy
interest. It is thought that only the ignorant and degraded fall
victims to drink’s seductive power ; abstainers will show that
in the drink there is danger to all. It is thought that alcohol
is a good creature of God ; abstainers will show that it is a
miserable sinner—that it does those things which it ought not
to do, leaves undone those things which it ought to do, and
there is no health in it. It is thought that the drinking bar is a
public want ; abstainers will show that it is a public nuisance. And
if these doctrines are true they will ultimately prevail. A little more
than fifty years ago the seven men of Preston signed the pledge,
and inaugurated the Total Abstinence movement. Now the various
teetotal societies in the United Kingdom have two millions and a-
half of registered members, to say nothing of the number of
abstainers, perhaps equally as great, who are not connected with any
organisation. In these colonies abstainers are already a very re-
spectable minority. We may reasonably suppose that the adherents
of total abstinence will continue to multiply in the same ratio as
they have done during the past half-century. It has taken a certain
time for 50,030 abstainers to become 100,000 ; this number should
become 200,000 in a similar period, and so on till abstinence is
universal. And as temperance truth is propagated, the drinking
customs of society will be weakened, and the general public senti-
ment raised. The results of the temperance propaganda are not
only seen in the large number who have crossed the border-line of
abstinence, but in the great bulk of the public who have been drawn
nearer to it. The first result, then, of local option will be a reduc-
tion in the number of drink-shops, followed by a reduction in the
evils which flow irom them. Afterwards, with the advance of
knowledge and moral feeling, the public sentiment will be steadily
improving ; and this sentiment will, from time to time, find ex-
pression at the ballot-box. The law will work in harmony with an
ever-enlightening public opinion. Slowly but surely the darkness
of error will be dispelled by the sunlight of truth. And, perhaps,
finally the dream of the prohibitionist will be realised, and the
liquor traffic disappear altogether. Hotels will remain, for the
accommodation of travellers, and the supply of necessaries, which
do not include intoxicants. Some hotels will be converted into
coffee-taverns, and the rest into places of business—made necessary
to supply an increased demand for articles of utility, resulting from
the improved habits ot the people. But the traffic which destroys
the health and morals of those engaged in it, and inflicts countless
ills upon society at large, will be as a horrid dream of the night,


looked back upon when the world is brightened by the rays of the
morning sun.
Certain objections are brought forward to our principle, but in
this we share the experience of all who have entered the arena of
political strife beneath the banner of Reform. Every reform has to
pass through three stages —the “Pooh, pooh,” the “No, no,” and
the “ Hear, hear.” First, people say the idea is absurd; only
madmen and fools would advocate it. Then they say it is the plan
of radicals and revolutionists, who are trying to turn the world
upside down, and all steady-going people with it. And at last they
say everybody knew it was right. Local option has passed its
“ pooh-pooh ” age, and has now entered the combative period.
Certain objections have been raised, with a few of which I shall now
proceed to deal. Some tell, us that we seek to interfere with the
liberty of the many in order to save a few from their own folly.
And in a land like Victoria, where freedom is the heritage of all,
this objection deserves serious consideration. Let me point out
that the very term by which our plan is known shows that we are
not seeking to infringe on liberty, but to extend it. Option means
choice—freedom of action. You say to your servant, do a certain
thing in a particular way, and the servant is controlled by your
will; but you say, do it as you please—you have your own option,
and you leave him freedom. And we want the people to do as they
please—to have their own option—instead of being controlled by a
practically irresponsible bench. But it may be urged that this does
not meet the case ; that the objection really is that, if a majority
were ever to decide to have no drink-shops at all, there would be an
unwarrantable interference with the just rights of the minority.
Now what is liberty? Roughly stated, to do as you please; but
such liberty is properly termed license, and is not allowed to those
living in society. A man alone on an island has perfect liberty—
I’m monarch of all I survey,
My rights there are none to dispute.
But, while he has absolute freedom, he loses all the benefits of co-
operation, and sighs to be a -slave, in the company of his fellows.
Imagine a state without law—in other words, with complete
freedom;
The good old rule suffioeth them; the simple plan
That they should take who have the power,
That they should keep who can.
The strong become tyrants, the weak become slaves. True liberty
is only to be realised in free compliance with just law. Living in
society, we are bound to give up our individual right of action when


that conflicts with the common good ; but we are largely the gainers
by the transaction. The settler goes away to the bush, far from
civilisation and the haunts of men, and there he enjoys an amount
of rude’freedom. By-and-bye the district becomes settled ; roads are
made, police provided, regulations enforced, and taxation imposed.
The first settler loses some of his original freedom, and has new duties
falling upon him; but who will say that he is not largely the gainer?
Some old fogey asks, “ Why should I be compelled to send my
children to school?” But society knows that, for its own well-
being, as well as for the welfare of the respective children, education
should be general; and old Ignoramus is compelled to send his
children to school, whether he likes it or not. A ship arrives at
the Heads with a loathsome disease on board, and is at once put
into quarantine. A merchant says, “I have goods on that ship which
I want at once ; there is a market for them just now.” Society is
very sorry for the merchant, but, for its own protection, keeps the
ship in quarantine just the same. Buying and selling are subject
to law. If a particular commodity is dangerous, but necessary,
society regulates its sale ; if it is dangerous and unnecessary, society
has the right to suppress its sale. The law says, “ Thou shalt not
sell bad meat”—at least not too bad. “Thou shalt not trade on
the Sabbath day.” “Thou shalt not sell strong drink without a
license.” “ Thou shalt not sell in the place of the poison called
alcohol the poison called anything else.” And so on, in numerous
succession. How, apply this reasoning' to the case we supposed,,
namely, a community in which a majority decide to have no drink-
shops whatever. There would be no infringement ot the drunkard s
liberty. The drunkard is a greater slave than any poor whip-galled
wretch that ever trod a South American plantation. And;.we
venture to think that if a vote were taken of the drunkards only, a
large majority would be in favour of total prohibition. From bitter
experience they know the evils of intemperance, and daily cry in
anguish, “ Who shall deliver me from the body of this death ?”
Their will-power is dormant, and the craving for drink so strong
within them that, while the temptation to vice surrounds them, they
feel impelled to give way ; but give them the opportunity of being
saved from temptation, and they would seize it with rapture. Oft-
times when speakers are appealing to the victims of intemperance
at open-air meetings, the cry involuntarily bursts from the lips,
“ Why don’t you close the public-houses ?” A measure of pro-
hibition would be a proclamation of liberty to those who are bound.
And there would be no infringement of the drink-seller’s liberty.
The right to sell strong drink is not a moral right, but a legal right.


One man sells a bottle of wine, and thereby becomes a criminal to
be punished by the law ; another sells a thousand bottles, and is a
virtuous citizen. In what lies the distinction ? The first has not
a license, the second has. A license is granted for one year : it
may be renewed from time to time ; but if at the expiration of any
one year the renewal is refused, and the applicant placed on the
same footing as the great bulk of his fellow citizens, there is no
interference with liberty. The right to sell strong drink is given by
the law for the supposed welfare of the public ; for the actual welfare
of the public it may be withheld. For every one who has the right
to sell intoxicants there are many who have not; prohibition would
place all on an equality. And finally there would be no infringe-
ment of the moderate drinker’s liberty. I have supposed that the
majority of the community, wishing to be entirely delivered from the
curse of intemperance and the thousand and one ills it brings with
it, resolve that every drinking bar shall be closed—in fact that the
entire sale of intoxicants, whether by publican or grocer, shall cease;
but a minority of moderate drinkers demand that the sale shall be
kept on for their convenience. If this demand is conceded, the
intemperate will continue their course, and as they perish fresh
victims, from the ranks of the young and the moderate drinkers,
will take their places. Drink-created crime—poverty, vagrancy,
disease, insanity, immorality, death, bringing curses upon society at
large—will endure. Now we say that a minority has not the right
to inflict evils upon the majority, merely in order that it may tickle
its palate with alcoholic liquors. Admit that right, and you admit
the right of the few to ride rough-shod over the many. Total
prohibition through local option would infringe the rights of none,
but would be a development of true liberty, which is found in free
compliance with just law. However, the question for to-day is not
between the present number of hotels and none at all, but the present
number and a decrease ; and the measure which would leave this
question to be decided by the people, rather than by a bench or
board, is in perfect harmony with the democratic institutions of
Victoria.
Another objection is that men cannot be made sober by act of
Parliament. This assertion has been made so frequently, and by
such dignified and respectable people, that it almost passes for a
truism. We simply declare it to be a fallacy. Experience shows
most conclusively that, as you decrease the facilities for the sale of
drink, you decrease drunkenness and its attendant evils. We know
that in some parts of the State of Maine the prohibitory law has not
always been sufficiently backed by public opinion to secure its


stringent enforcement. Local option, by leaving each district to
settle the matter for itself, would not involve such a failure. The
truth concerning Maine, as shown by State documents and confirmed
by the evidence of the various officials, is that there is not one-tenth of
the drinking that existed under the Licensing Act. Here is a con-
clusive fact: The Canadian Government sent two commissioners to
Maine and other states to examine and report upon the working of
the prohibitory laws. One of these was thoroughly opposed to pro-
hibition at the outset, but was converted to it by what he saw in
Maine. The report of the commissioners was so favourable that, in
1878, a Permissive Bill was adopted by the Dominion Parliament,
This measure was inoperative for a time, pending the settlement of
a question as to its legality. Now the British House of Lords has
declared it to be perfectly legal, and already vast areas of the Do-
minion are freed from the liquor traffic by its operation. Of the
numerous instances of successful prohibition, I may mention St.
Johnsbury, Vermont, so vividly described by Hepworth Dixon as
the “ Workman’s Paradise Vineland, New Jersey, “ Where
collectors cease from troubling, and tlie dwellers are at rest; Low
Moor, the bright spot of Lancashire ; Saltaire, in Yorkshire, ac-
knowledged to be the best monument to its illustrious founder, Sir
Titus Salt ; Bessbrook, the only town in poor distracted Ireland,
which is free from the presence of the policeman ;. Shaftesbury-
park, near London, over which the late Lord Beaconsfield went into
raptures of eloquence ; Throckley, in Northumberland, the village
where coal-miners never get drunk ; and the more than 1400
parishes in the province of Canterbury, in each of which the liquor
traffic is forbidden by the land-owner, to the great benefit of the
inhabitants. Time after time this report is sent by the authorities;
“No public-house ; No beershop ; No pauperism ; no crime.”
Sobriety by law is an absolute and gladdening fact ; and surely
what is being done elsewhere can also be accomplished by the fertile
brain and strong will of the people of Victoria,
Before concluding, I must briefly refer to the all-important
question of compensation, and upon this matter I am compelled to
cross swords with Mr. Aldrich. This gentleman asserts, in reference
to the proposal to deprive publicans of their licenses without com-
pensation, that “ the injustice of such a course needs no exposition.
Its folly is not less obvious since no legislature whose members
speak English will ever dispossess the licensed victuallers without
paying them for what they lose.” To find a sentence more in oppo-
sition to fact than this last would be extremely difficult. First, let
us examine the justice of the claim presented. The owner of


publichouse property says, “ I am getting a rent from two to four
times as great for my property as I should were it used for any
other purpose. Surely you will not deprive me of this advantage
without ample remuneration ?” But, sir, you have not paid a cent,
for this. Year by year the State has been making you a handsome
present, and now you have the audacity to demand compensation if
the present is not continued. Why, sir, if this matter were settled
on purely “ commercial principles” you would be compelled to dis-
gorge a share of your ill-gotten gains for the benefit of a long-
suffering community ! Let us suppose a case. A man erects a
building as a publichouse. It will realise £2OO a year ;as any
other sort of house, £IOO. The application of the tenant for a
license is refused-, and the owner gets £IOO a year, the legitimate
rental. The application is granted, and the owner gets £2OO a
year. This goes on for five years ; then the license is lost and the
rent goes down to £IOO. Shall we compensate the owner because
the State has made him a present of £SOO ? We are moved with
indignation at the audacity of the claim, and break into laughter at
its folly. We approach the publican with respect. He says “ I
have invested my money in the liquor trade by permission of the
State, and if compelled to withdraw, demand a lair trade value for
my business.” In what does the State permission consist ? A
license, for which the sum of £25 is paid. For how long is this
license granted ? The term of one year expressly stated. Then if
the license be withdrawn during the twelve months, say at the end
of September, there is clearly a legal right to the sum of £6 55.,
not a farthing more. But inasmuch as it is not proposed to with-
draw licenses, but only to refuse to grant new ones when the old
expire, there is not a legal right to compensation. This doctrine
has been consistently maintained by English-speaking Parliaments,
judges, and magistrates from the very beginning of the licensing
system. Going back a little—to 1552—we find that English
justices were empowered to abolish ale-houses when they thought
fit ; but the historian makes no mention of compensation. Two
years later it was decreed that only forty taverns should be allowed
in London, and in other boroughs, with a few exceptions, only two ;
to those closed there was no compensation. In 1758, owing to the
scarcity of grain, distilling was prohibited in England. History
records that in consequence the people were more sober, there was
less crime and more trade ; but for distillers and liquor-sellers there
was no compensation. Coming on to 1800, we find that the British
Government closed at one stroke 200 drinking dens in the seaport
of Plymouth, for the sake of the health and the morals of the navy.
The land-sharks, who had been fattening upon poor Jack, were not


paid for ceasing to do wrong. In 1835 and 1841 amendments to
the Beer Bill were passed, which resulted in the closing of a large
number of small beershops. The aristocracy of the gin trade would
have sneered at the idea of Government compensating their poorer
brethren. Throughout the numerous communities in America,
where the drink trade has been prohibited, we search in vain
for an instance of compensation. In Ontario an act was passed
in 1876, which deprived some 2000 drink-sellers of their
licenses at a stroke ; but even those affected made no demand
for compensation. Under the Canadian Temperance Act of 1878,
the principle of no compensation is being jealously maintained. In
Melbourne, last January, four licenses were finally refused ; and
even the solicitors for the applicants had not the impudence to ask
for remuneration. It may be objected that these refusals were made
on the ground of certain specified evils ; but the evils are merely a
matter of degree. The City Bench may wait for an hotel to become
a “ dead-house ” before they refuse the licence : people in general
have a finer moral feeling. And, finally, let me quote a case which
has just been settled in England. In September last the magis-
trates of Over Darwen, in Lancashire, refused 34 applications for
renewal of licenses, not on grounds personal to the applicants, but
because the licenses were not wants of the district. An appeal was
made by 25 of the applicants to Quarter Sessions, when the decision
of the magistrates was upheld, it being ruled that licenses are
granted from year to year on the sufferance of magistrates, and
that, in the eye of the law, there is po vested interest beyond the
current year. Next, one of the applicants, to test the question, ap-
pealed to the Court of Queen’s Bench. Here the judges, without
hesitation, confirmed the ruling of Quarter Sessions. (Mr. Justice
Stephen stated that a renewed license is merely a new license granted
to a man who has had a license before.) It was then determined to
carry the case on to the Court of Appeal, and, if necessary, to the
House of Lords ; but Lord Chief Justice Coleridge discountenanced
the appeal in such strong language that the appellant wisely sub-
mitted to the inevitable, and accepted defeat. The British press
has taken this case as proving that the idea so prevalent that the
holder of a license has a vested right in it is a thorough delusion.
Pricked by the sword of fact, the bubble has burst. For the
Government to take money from the pockets of the people and put
it into the pockets of those who are now growing rich upon the ruin
and vices of their fellows would be gross public robbery. Therefore
I conclude in the words of Mr. Aldrich—“ Beduce the licensed
houses as much as possible. They, it is too true, sadly need im-
provement off the facejjf the earth. But rob nobody in the process.”


THE
VICTORIAN ALLIANCE
“ For the indisputable principle that the community has the right to determine for
itself whether it is expedient that intoxicating liquor shall or shall not be sold.—
George Higisbotham.
President —The Hon. J. MLJNUO.
OBJECTS:
1. The extension of popular control over the Liquor Traffic, to secure for
the people the right to decide not only whether they want more public-
houses, but whether they will have LESS.
2. The enforcement of the present Licensing Act, in particular to close
Public House back doors on Sunday, and to make the law a fact instead of
a farce.
3. The education of public opinion until the people come to the conclusion
that the Liquor Traffic is not a public want but a public nuisance, and
treat it as such.
A Subscription of not less than one shilling a year constitutes member-
ship of the Alliance. Members who pay not less than ss. a year receive
the Alliance Record free by post each month. Subscribers of one guinea
per annum and upwards are entitled to be enrolled as members of the
General Council of the Alliance. Subscriptions may be forwarded to the
local honorary agents, to any member of the Executive Committee, or to
the Secretary, Ms. John Vale, at the Temperance Hall, Russell-street,
Melbourne, from whom all further information may be obtained.
Read the “ALLIANCE RECORD,” Price, Id.; Edited by
J. W. Meaden.
TEMPERANCE BOOK DEPOT.
The Committee of the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society have much
pleasure in intimating that they are importing a constant supply of all
kinds of TEMPERANCE LITERATURE and BAND OF HOPE
REQUISITES, which they will sell at English publishing prices.
The Scottish Temperance League’s publications, in strong bindings,
suitable for libraries.
Over 100 different varieties of Reciters, Dialogues &c., from Id. to 255.
each. Large variety of Hymn Books, Illuminated Pledge Cards, Services
of Song, and Temperance Music Books.
Liberal Discounts to Temperance Societies, Bands of Hope, and Sunday
Schools. -Orders by letter must in all cases be accompanied by Cheque,
P. 0.0., or Stamps.
Watt & Co., Printers, 149 Little Collins Street West, Melbourne.
