

w.Jix* i * Jr f jf7r
SjL 7 JnPSWf * /Vfe
“ i27vS®3Byii
/ i : 1 1 0 A
*a «4
.©is;
j q n p
I S33 A
Li f&Pi
fir\
1 i
*r °
* *
1 ✓
6^o
t* I
I
I
r *
s
—^
r.
/ «■
WN6ON/
u °
4 0
ON.
/ • # •
7/ • • •
•# ♦ •
i/
vy


party, with a big iced cake, and all
her friends to tea, but when her
mother was tucking her into bed, she
was still thinking about the choco-
lates.
When all the house was quiet and sleeping, she crept out
of her bed and across the passage to the dining room.
She said to herself, "After all, they are mine. What right have they got to
put them in the cupboard?" Then she became so angry that she could not
go to sleep, and at last, when all the house was quiet and sleeping, she crept
out of bed and across the passage into the dining-room, In a second she had
the box of chocolates out of the cupboard, and was tip-toeing back to bed.
When Joan was warmly under the blankets again, she pulled off the lid of


0166^3
the box and said to herself "I'll have jusf two." But they were s© lovely—*
each one had a different cream filling—that her hand kept going faster and
faster in and out of the box until presently there was very little left except
wrappings.
Then Joan began to feel very strange. Her head became heavy and
dropped and dropped, the empty box slithered away from her and fell to the
ground. The strangest things began to happen. Joan was falling—falling, and
then suddenly there was a bump, and she opened her eyes, and found that
she was in a green paddock filled with flowers and trees.
But the first thing that struck Joan's eyes was that the grass was made of
angelica mother probably puts some on fancy cakes you have for parties—
and the flowers were glistening red preserved cherries, nougat, coconut ice,
and every sweet you can think of. Can you imagine anything nicer? Joan
couldn't. She was so delighted that she began crawling along the ground
and stuffing handfuls of grass and flowers into her mouth. Then she stood up
and saw in the distance a cluster of walls and towers that proclaimed a town, and
she decided to walk that way and explore.
Her eyes nearly popped out of her head for the soldiers, too, were all made of lolly.


"Come with us," said the leader, "we'll take you to
our King."
As Joan came near the walls
f
of the town a whole line of soldiers
came marching out, and as Joan
stared at them curiously her eyes
nearly popped out of her head—for
the soldiers, too, were all made of
lolly. Her fingers began to twitch
excitedly, and then, before she knew
what she was doing, her arm popped
out and clutched a soldier's arm, and
she began to tug and tug. Imme-
diately she was surrounded by the
little men who were all talking at
once, and somewhere from a high
tower a bell began to ring, "Ding-
dong, ding-dong."
Joan was terribly frightened.
Her hands began to shake and her
legs felt like water.
"Come with us," said the leader
of the lolly soldiers, "we'll take you
to our king."
This made Joan all the more frightened. The soldier, whose arm she had
tugged at, was now unable to move it, and he looked very cast down. She must
ha ve damaged it badly! The king was almost sure to put her into prison.
By the time she had come to this frightening conclusion they were inside
the walls of the town, and marching towards a lovely palace made of pure white
icing, with barley sugar windows studded with blanched almonds. Inside in a huge
hall sat the king, a kindly-looking old man with a white beard of fairy floss. Joan
saw that his throne was made of multi-coloured rock which looked like
a rainbow.
The king smiled at Joan, and the leader of the soldiers told him what
had happened.
"Put her in the dungeons," commanded the King, "and every half-hour give
her a tablespoonful of ice-cream, and then one of strawberry jam."
Joan licked her lips. The silly old man! Strawberry jam and ice-cream
were her favourites. When the first tablespoon was pushed towards her she
held out her hands eagerly to take it, but as the hours passed she began to


Inside in a huge hall sat the King, a kindly-looking old man with a white beard of fairy floss.
hate it and to long for some nice slices of plain bread and butter, or some
bread and milk. ' *
At last Joan knew she couldn't swallow another mouthful. She felt she
never wanted to see ice-cream or strawberry jam as long as she lived. She
pushed the spoon away, and cried out, "No! No!"
"It's the King's orders you must," one of the soldiers was beginning
when a loud bell began to clang, 'Ding-dong! Ding-dong!' and the men rushed
out of the room.
In a few seconds they were back again, and catching hold of Joan s arms
they said, "Come with us. The King wants you to be brought to the top of the
castle. We are going to be attacked."
"Attacked!" Joan's eyes nearly popped out of her head with fright. On
top of the castle she expected to see guns being loaded, but nothing was
happening except that dozens of kegs of lemonade were being rolled along the
roof, and Joan saw huge crates of luscious chocolates being opened. Then the
little girl stared across the plains that surrounded the castle, and she saw


hordes of soldiers marching forward
with guns slung over their shoulders.
Joan was really frightened now.
Why hadn't these silly lolly people
got some guns?
Then the king gave the order,
"Over with the shot, boys," and
before Joan's astonished eyes the
kegs of lemonade were emptied Into
shoots which reached down to the
moat, and the chocolates were
tossed over the side —hundreds and
hundreds of them. In a minute the
moat was filled to the brim with icy
cold lemonade all fizzy and inviting,
and as soon as the approaching
army saw it they lay down their fire-
arms and began to rush towards the
moat, and hundreds of them were
drowned and many more of them
ate the chocolates so fast and
greedily that they had to lie down
and sleep or creep wearily home-
wards.
In half an hour it was all over.
She opened her eyes in astonishment to find her mother
beside, her bed with a huge spoonful of yes,
castor oil !
Then the King called all his soldiers and out of a big box of the largest
and most beautiful chocolates Joan had ever seen he gave one each to his men.
Joan was just going to say, "Now I see what happens to greedy people—how
wise you are," when she was shaken violently by the arm and she heard a voice
saying:—
"Wake up, you greedy girl, and open your mouth wide." And she opened
her eyes in astonishment to find her mother beside her bed with a huge spoonful
of yes, castor oil I
And Joan swallowed it without a single protest, and she said to her mother
in a solemn voice, "I shall never be greedy again as long as I live." Then she
told her mother ell about her curious dream because, as you have guessed
long before this, that was what it was.


. r rrlfV 9 <
QfflEiO (
ELLEN'S favourite hiding place when she had any time to spare was the big
apple tree at the end of the garden. It was from here that she could
watch, without being seen, the child next door.
It wasn't that she liked the little girl in the next house, or even admired
her oh, no, Ellen would have indignantly denied this, and protested that it
was just the garcten that attracted her.


The big apple tree was such a
comfortable place to sit, with its big
wide trunk and gnarled twisted
branches, and Ellen could see, with-
%
out any effort at all, the back
garden next door. Mr. Williams,
her father, was always talking about
the next door garden, too, but Ellen
wasn't particularly interested in it,
although she could not help admiring
the tiled paths, the sundial and lily
pends, the fountain that played so
coolly on hot summer days. She
liked the vine-covered arbors, too.
and the glimpses she could catch of
the oreen croquet lawn on the far
side of the house. Mr. Williams was
always talking about the greenness
of the lawns, the largeness of the
flower blooms, the absolute lack of
weeds. "Oh well, dear," his wife
always soothed him, 1 Rutters have a
gardener working there all day,
Ellen's favourite hiding place was the big apple tree.
From here she could watch the child next door.
remember." (The Williams had an odd-job man once a week and Mr. Williams
spent his Saturday afternoons planting and weeding.)
And now, of course, as you have already guessed, the Rutters were very
rich people. They were an old couple, and, until lately, had lived alone in the
big house with their servants, and a fat cat, who sat most of the day sunning
himself on the top of the green house. A month ago, however, the little girl that
had aroused Ellen's interest had come to live with them, and now she spent all
her spare time in the apple tree catching tantalizing glimpses of her new
neighbour.
Helen Rutter (Ellen had managed to find out her name) was about the same
age as herself, and to Ellen she was eve rything, and had everything, that she had
always wanted. Helen had real curly hair, and not the kind that has to go into
curl papers, and she had lovely clothes in all Ellen's favourite materials and
colours that her mother was always saying were unserviceable or too expensive.


I i v|X \ % 1 fpy PB jl\ n*r- M>a
Sometimes she would see HeJen walking round the garden taking her doll for a sedate promenade.
She had a real gold watch that really went, and a huge doll's perambulator,
and a baby doll that was as big as a real baby. She had a marvellous camera,
too, that she wore slung over her right shoulder. It took quite a long time for
Ellen to find out all these things and at times it was difficult to hide away in the
big apple tree because her small brothers were always calling, "Ell ! Ell ! Where
are you?" or her mother came to call her to meals.


Sometimes she would see Helen
walking round the garden and taking
her doll for a sedate promenade,
and she would stare into the apple
tree when she heard the other girl's
name being called almost as though
she suspected there was somebody
there.
Ellen was cross with her little
brothers, and when her mother
scolded her she said, "Well, I'm sick
of being me, anyhow. I'd much
rather be Helen and live next door."
Mrs. Williams replied gently,
If you ask me, Ellen, Helen Rutter is
a very lonely little girl. Both her
parents are dead, and it can't be
much tun for her there with those old
people, however kind they may be.
She doesn't even go to school, but
has a governess." - t
"I'd be willing to change
Mrs. Williams said, "Helen Rutter is a very lonely
little girl."
places," retorted Ellen crossly. "Fancy having ail those gorgeous clothes and
living in that scrummy place!" And she had flung herself out of the house
nearly in tears. Then she flew down the garden and scrambled into the tree.
The first thing Ellen saw was Helen walking down the path with a
book in her hand. She stooped to pat the cat, but he turned his back and when
she picked him up he jumped out of her arms, and flew across the garden, his tail
angrily held erect. For a moment the girl stood and watched him, then she
flung herself into a long basket chair on the lawn and began to read her book.
Presently a voice called, "Helen, time for your practising," and the little girl
went primly into the house, stepping carefully on the paths and not walking
across the lawns or touching the flower beds.
Ellen, in a much better humour, grinned to Kerself. She'd like to see her
brothers walking along the paths like that! Why, there weren't any real paths
in their old garden. They all ran across the lawn and had jumps across the flower


5
beds. Scottie, their dog, buried his bones in all sorts of places, and their cat
was always going to sleep on their father's pet patch of plants.
The next evening Ellen heard voices coming from over the wall and, hurrying
to the tree, heard the gardener talking to Helen. He was saying, crossly, "No,
Miss, your grandmother particularly said you were not to touch the flowers
without permission."
"Oh," the girl's face fell, "I only wanted a few for my dolls' house, but it
doesn't matter." She walked across the lawn, and came so close to the wall
and the apple tree that Helen stifled an exclamation of surprise. Then sud-
denly Helen flung herself down under some shrubs and burst into tears.
For a moment Ellen stared at the recumbent figure in dismay, then she
couldn't bear it any longer, and she called softly, "Helenl Helen!"
There was a startled sob, then
the apple tree through a tangle of
curls.
"Hullo!" said Ellen.
surprised
"Hullo!" came
reply.
Then Ellen, leaning as far out of
the tree as she dared, said, "Come
up here, Helen. I'll help you get on
to the wall, and we'll have a real
talk," and she grinned a cheerful
welcome.
"I'd love to." Helen scrambled
up with surprising speed, and
soon the old tree held them both.
And they talked and talked, and,
as Ellen told her mother later,
she had never felt so sorry for
anyone in her life before. "She's
simply got no one to play with,"
she explained, "and her grand-
parents are kind, but they are
silence, and a pair of wet eyes surveyed
She heard the gardener talking to
K * |


so old that they don't understand.
And she's not allowed to have a
dog, or pick the flowers, or have any
real fun." Then she added, fer-
vently, "And she's so nice, mum,
really she is not a bit stuck-up."
"She is just like I said, in fact,"
agreed Mrs. Williams, concealing a
smile at her daughter's enthusiasm,
"we'll have to see what can be done
about it."
And the very next day she went
to see Mrs. Rutter, whom she knew
slightly, and the result of it was that
Mr. Williams made a little gate leading into the
next garden.
There was a startled sob, then silence, and a pair of
wet eyes surveyed the apple tree.
Helen was allowed to go to school
with Ellen, and that Mr. Williams
made a little gate leading into the
next garden, so that now, whenever
Helen Is lonely, she can visit Ellen
without any bother at all. And no
longer does Ellen envy the child next
door.
COPYRIGHT
Published by
FRANK JOHNSON
350 SEORSE STREET. SYDNEY
Pinnacle Press, 431 B Kent Street, Sydney
