

Reprint from
Queensland Geographical Journal.
(New Series.)
VOL. XLVIII.
Long Range
Weather Forecasting
INIGO JONES,
F.R.A.S., F.R. Met. Soc.,
M.A.M., Met. Soc.


Long Range Weather Forecasting.
(Papers read to the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia (Queens-
land) by Inigo Jones, Director of Crohamhurst Observatory and Bureau
of Seasonal Forecasting under the Land Administration Board, and Re-
search Director of the Long Range Weather Forecasting Trust of Sydney).
This Society has been addressed on this subject on previous occasions
by the late H. C. Russell, of Sydney, by my late friend E. C. Barton, by
my late revered chief, Clement Lindley Wragge, and by Dr. J. P. Thomson.
Mr. INIGO JONES, F.R.A.S., F.R. Met. Soc., M. A.M, Met., Soc., Director Crohamhurst Observatory.
The great importance of long range weather forecasting is quite
generally admitted, and is the most important aim of modern meteorology,
although so far very little progress has been made in its solution owing to
the very difficult nature of the problem.
Its importance arises from the fact that it would be of the highest
service to agricultural and pastoral pursuits on whose prosperity the
health and happiness of mankind depend.
In the prosecution of the research at Crohamhurst, grateful men-
tion must be made of the help given by the Queensland Government, the
Council of Agriculture and the Press in all three eastern States by means
of which a free service has been possible to primary producers who large-
ly avail themselves of the forecasts and general advice given from the
Observatory. In the State of New South Wales the Graziers’ Association
and the great pastoral companies, notably Dalgety’s, have stood by the
work and have now formed the Long Range Weather Forecasting Trust
in Sydney, thus finally ensuring the carrying on of the work until a final
demonstration is obtained, and this result, I feel sure, will be positive.
Overseas, the Carnegie and Smithsonian Institutions have been very
helpful, and with the International Astronomical Union and the Royal Ob-
servatory at Greenwich, have provided indispensable masses of data. The


Commonwealth Weather Bureau has for many years supplied all the
weather maps and any other data requested, with unfailing courtesy. The
Divisional offices, too, have been very helpful, and that of Brisbane es-
pecially so, through the kindness of Mr. Richards and Mr. Hartshorn,
while Mr. Mares, of the Sydney office, has always shown me very great
courtesy and assistance.
In ancient times it was regarded as sacriligious to attempt to divine
the future weather, but nevertheless, astrologers and diviners constantly
attempted it, and this is the case to the present day, but it was not till
the period of the Renaissance that any scientific' processes began to be
directed towards it.
Bacon, in his “Novum Organum,” mentions a cycle called the Prime,
which he heard of in the Low Countries, whereby a repetition of climatic
characters occurred about every thirty-five years, and advised its study.
This advice was, unfortunately, disregarded. When Galileo discovered
the sunspots he thought that they might be used for the purpose of dis-
covering the causes of the weather, but again no encouragement was
given to his suggestions, and I firmly believe that had those two sugges-
tions then been followed up, the problem would be solved, whereas we
are now just on the threshold of the enquiry. Herschel, the elder, sought
to connect rainfall, famines, and the price of wheat with the changes in
the sunspots, and later Norman Lockyer endeavoured to discover a cycle
in the rainfalls in India connected with the fluctuations of the sunspots.
The moon has also been tried as a possible factor, and work on this
phase was done by my late correspondent, Janvrin Browne, of Washing-
ton, whose work is now being continued by Dr. Helm Clayton, of Canton,
Massachusettes, formerly head of the Argentina Weather Bureau.
He also seeks to incorporate the work of Sir Gilbert Walker, once
head of the Indian Weather Service, which deals with co-relations be-
tween various factors, and is now being fully tested in India by attempt-
ing through it to predict the monsoonal rains. Mr. E. T. Quayle, of Mel-
bourne, has done a great deal of similar work for Australia, and this has
been published by the Weather Bureau in Melbourne.
The only serious attempts to issue seasonal forecasts in Australia
have been first by Charles Egeson, of Sydney Weather Office, in 1891, but
his work was not favoured by the then Government, although its result
was very close to truth, and he died shortly afterwards. The other was
by my late chief, Clement Wragge, who was instructed by the P.M.G.,
Theodore Unmack, to issue a forecast for the coming year. This was
done by Unmack because he had seen a reference to the cycle discovered
by Bruckner in some European journals.
Bruckner had been instructed to examine the changes in the levels
of the Caspian Sea, and from this was lead to examine all available weather
records of Europe, wherein he found an undoubted cyclical repetition at
about thirty-five years, and in this can be recognised the Prime, whose
study was advocated by Bacon about three hundred years before. Wragge
combined this cycle with the sunspot period, and from these issued a fore-
cast up to 1932, which proved correct in its general trend, but leaving a
problem of studying and accounting for the anomalies, and in so doing
to discover their meaning and thus to add new factors of importance.
My own studies began with Mr. Wragge in 1887, in consequence of
which I have now available a daily record covering almost fifty-six years.
By 1923 the cyclical repeat began to be quite apparent, and the first fore-
cast was issued, as there was then a dry period in progress. Its termina-
tion was estimated and published under the auspices of the Council of
Agriculture and the Press. This came very close to reality and attracted
a great deal of attention in agricultural and pastoral circles, and from
then on my whole time has been devoted to the research.


Mr. Travis Rimmer, of the University of Queensland, devoted softie
time to the application of the Gilbert Walker system to Queensland, but
as he died very soon afterwards, no results have been published.
Other investigators are the Scripps Institute of La Jolla, in Cali-
fornia, which bases its work on the movements of great masses of oceanic
waters at different temperatures. Dr. C. G. Abbot believes that changes
in the solar constant of radiation form the clue to climatic changes but
recently great controversies have raged round this idea, and with the
refinements of the instruments, the range of values has been greatly re-
duced. Dr. Baur, of Bad Homburg, was giving four-day forecasts based
on a system similar to that of Sir Gilbert Walker.
At present the workers in the field are very numerous, and there are
a large number who correspond with Crohamhurst Observatory. Among
these may be mentioned Lord Dunboyne, who bases his estimates on prev-
iously observed similar sequences, Sir Gilbert Walker, Professor Henri
Memery, of Talence Observatory, Dr. Baur, of Bad Homburg, Fritz Bela
Groissmayr, of Passau (correlations), The Abbe Gabriel, of Caen, in Nor-
mandy (lunar control), Dr. Douglass, of Tuscon (Tree Rings), Profes-
sor Ellsworth Huntington, of Yale, the author of the book “Earth and
Sun,” Mr. Halbert Gillette, of Chicago, Dr. Savur, of Colaba Observatory,
Dr. Brooks, of Blue Hill Observatory, and M. Gentil Tippenhauer, of
Haiti, who has independently announced a theory almost precisely identical
with my own.
Up to 1923 the paucity of practical results and the importance of a
foreknowledge, as revealed to me by my work as a pioneer at Croham-
hurst, induced me to turn my full attention to it, although with so many
people with so much better and larger outfits, it might easily be deemed
an act of supererrogation for me to have dared to enter the field at all.
The way in which this came to pass was that after a year of observations
while still at school, Mr. Wragge wished me to enter his office, which
was done in 1888. In 1891, following a change in the affairs of my
father’s family, he decided to relinquish his profession and take up agri-
culture. In searching for a farm he was, by a very curious accident, told
about the land which he soon bought and called “Crohamhurst,” where I
joined him in 1892, and have lived there ever since, and brought there
the instruments which I had used in Brisbane, consisting of a telescope
and a meteorological outfit, and also armed with the knowledge of the
plan which Mr. Wragge had for the solution of the problem of seasonal
forecasting. At the end of four months the record fainfall of Australia
was obtained, but at that time the arduous nature of pioneering prevented
any investigation of such an important event, and also the then difficult
nature of the district operated against such being undertaken, but it is at
this point where one of the important geographical features of the work
comes in through the extraordinary character of the Stanley River at
Crohamhurst. The final clues were only obtained when the observatory
was built in 1935, and these showed the remarkable bearing of Croham-
hurst on Australian Meteorology. The experiences of the great drought
of 1902 and later those of 1915 and 1919 showed very forcibly the great
value that foreknowledge of the season would be so that when, in 1923
I had in my own observations, a demonstration of the Bruckner cycle,
there was every urge to go deeply into the question. It was soon apparent
that the mass of material could not be handled in a private house, and
the building of an observatory and computing station for the purpose was
envisaged. From 1927 to 1935 I lived in Brisbane, organising the build-
ing and sustenance of the new observatory.
Meanwhile, the observations at Crohamhurst were not neglected, so
that the record is unbroken, and the Elements for fifty years have lately
been published by the Brisbane Trust. Finally, the Queensland Govern-
ment proclaimed the site of the Observatory a Reserve for scientific pur-
poses, and Messrs. M. S. Herring and P. C. Macnish were appointed


Trustees. The Queensland Government has granted a subsidy to enable
the research to proceed. This was done at first under the auspices of the
Council of Agriculture, but after the observatory was built the work was
attached to the Department of Irrigation.
In 1930 a paper was read to the Australian Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science in Brisbane. In 1931 a former president of this
Society, His Grace Archbishop Duhig, did me the honour to preside over
the annual meeting of the Queensland Astronomical Society, when the
matter was brought up to that time, and in 1932 I again addressed the
Science Congress in Sydney. The title of these papers were “Seasonal
Forecasting” and “Meteorology as a Branch of Astronomy.”
I did not attend the New Zealand meeting, but took a paper to Can-
berra in January, 1939, bringing the matter up to date, but a good deal
of rancour being displayed on that occasion, I later went to Sydney where,
through the courtesy of Mr. Giblin, the General Manager of Dalgety’s, I
was able to meet the representatives of the graziers and farmers, and
put the needs of the case to them, when they agreed to form a Trust for
the purpose of fully testing mine and any other theories that might be put
forward. It is realised by them that some years must elapse ere the final
proof or otherwise can be obtained.
One of my overseas correspondents, Mr. Halbert P. Gillette, of Chi-
cago, in a paper read before the Pennsylvania Water Works Association
in October, 1940, said, “The ultimate goal of meteorology is accurate long
range forecasting. To be of the greatest economic value, such forecasting
must relate to rainfall decades ahead, for in many cases water supply
systems are designed to meet the needs not only of the present, but of the
next generation.
“To many people it may seem visionary even to discuss ways of at-
taining such a goal, because after a century of research, fore-
casts by Government weather bureaux throughout the world are usually
limited to a few days in advance. But to reason that a scientific goal is
not to be attained in the near future because it has defied attainment in
the past is neither logical nor does it show acquaintance with the history
of scientific progress. Again and again difficulties that seemed insurmount-
able have been suddenly overcome by some new attack. Often the suc-
cessful attack has had less of novelty than of energy in its prosecution.
Pessimism was never the parent of any discovery. No one has ever sug-
gested any method of very long range forecasting except by the aid of
cycles.
“There are so-called correlation methods of forecasting a few months
in advance; and such partial successes as have been attained seem to
me to be due either to cycles of whose existence the forecaster was not
aware or to opposed seasonal conditions six months apart.
“An example of this kind of forecasting is the English folklore that
a moist summer is often followed by a severe winter.
“There is an abundance of literature on weather cycles, little of which
goes further back than Schwabe’s announcement in 1842 that he had dis-
covered a cycle of about ten years between maxima ....
“Much of the literature on cycles is a rehash. The number of cycle
researchers has been surprisingly few, and of these few, only a very few
have extensively investigated cycles longer than about 35 years. Yet it
is the longer cycles that have been responsible for climatic changes such
as have produced the ‘dust bowl’ conditions and serious droughts in many
regions during the last decade or two.
“Man-kept records of weather seldom go back more than about a cen-
tury, and since most cycle researchers have only that sort of data, they


have seldom attempted to find cycles longer than about a third to half a
century. Nor were they very successful in finding the exact length of even
the short cycles that they discovered.
“What was worse, these cycles seemed to lack stability, and proved
valueless for forecasting purposes because there was no way of telling
when ‘the two year cycle,’ for example, would either cease to display it-
self or would invert its phase, that is, ‘cause a dry spell when a wet spell
was due or the converse.’ ” I quote Mr. Gillette at this length because quite
independently he has arrived at the same conclusion as has been reached
at Crohamhurst, where there have been added to the 35-year cycle of
Bruckner, cycles of 59, 71, 84, 107, and 165 years, with a possible cycle
of 330 years which has been located by many independent workers also,
but which obviously cannot be dealt with for a long time yet.
We may then turn to another independent worker who was brought
to my notice by Professor Ellsworth Huntington, of Yale (another friend
whom I have not yet met). This is the late M. Gentil Tippenhauer, of
Haiti, who, in a paper published in 1934, stated, “My theory culminates
in the newly discovered law which says, ‘whenever, under the supposition
that the cosmic radiation is constant and permeates the interplanetary
space, the planets return simultaneously together to the same helio and
geocentric longitudes under the same three positions of the moon;
the same weather conditions reappear at the same locality.’ This is (ex-
cepting that I have further simplified the problem by omitting the moon)
precisely my extension of Mr. Wragge’s own work. I might also add that
until his death he continued to correspond with Crohamhurst, as his son
and successor did up to the time of the war.”
In his paper he goes on to say, “And now I feel justified in announc-
ing to the world that the exact astronomical precalculation of the coming
trend of the weather for months and years in advance, day by day, and
for any station on our globe, is in principle a solved problem to-day.”
Two further remarkable independent confirmations of the work at
Crohamhurst have been received. One from Dr. Karl Jansky, of the Bell
Telephone Laboratories, confirming the supposed magnetic effect of Jupiter
through wireless research, and again from Captain Staples, author of that
remarkable book, “Cosmic Machinery,” and in reply to comments upon it
sent from Crohamhurst, he wrote after discussing my Canberra paper at
very great length, “I now come to the point for which I wish particularly
to thank you. I suppose every worker on sunspot periodicities has been
attracted by the Jovian Period. Hitherto I have been inclined to discount
this on gravitational or electro magnetic grounds, as the influence of
Jupiter’s field appeared to be too small to produce the very considerable
differences between sunspot max. and min. The point of connecting this
influence with heliocentric longitude had escaped me .... I now see
that the passage of Jupiter across the heliocentric longitude may influence
the solar field very considerably and that the passage of the other planets
would have proportional effects. This poses a new ‘riddle of the universe,’
that one can now actively attack and I shall always be interested in any-
thing you may add to the subject.”
In his covering letter he also writes: “ . . I find we have travelled
on parallel paths for a considerable time. I have read your paper, not
only with interest, but with direct advantage for, as you will see in the
attached remarks, you have given me the key to a problem that previously
eluded me.”
THE NATURE OF THE RESEARCH.
In order to obtain a correct idea of the research which is being at-
tempted at Crohamhurst Observatory, it is necessary to get a view of the
conception of the universe as held there, and to do this it is necessary for
a time to suspend previous ideas on the subject.


The universe is regarded as an electro-magnetic entity (See note t
at the end of Lecture) through which eternally circulates the minute pro-
jectile known to us as light which is, however, only a small proportion of
the whole mass. This mass is imperishable in energy and amount, but is
capable of going through a series of conversions from one form of energy
to another, but in this process nothing is lost.
The nature of these projectiles is very little understood, but it is
fairly clear that in their interstellar progress they possess what may be
termed a neutral property, and that in this passage light is not light, nor
heat heat, and so on, but have these properties restored to them when
they re-enter a suitable environment.
In this incomprehensible milieu our solar system with the earth and
its host of planets, is situated and travels through it at an enormous speed,
which is quite ineffective to our normal consciousness. This sublime fact
has been built up through ages of unhappy suffering by the martyrs of
science, and on it the whole research rests. Having through practical ex-
perience had the importance of long range forecasting deeply impressed
on me, the work I did under Mr. Wragge began to mature, and an ex-
amination was made of all the attempts at long range forecasting to see
what they offered and what factor they had perhaps neglected, as owing
to their lack of success it was clear that such a factor must exist. It was
then seen that this important fact of the fundamental nature of the uni-
verse had been entirely overlooked. A set of trial positions was at once
worked out, and in this Dr. Baldwin, of Melbourne University, came to
my assistance, and it was at once seen that the results were fully positive
and a message was despatched to Brisbane to say that the problem of long
range weather forecasting was solved in general if assistance could be
given to work it out in detail. Working on similar methods, my corres-
pondent, M. Gentil Tippenhauer, made the same announcement very soon
afterwards, but quite independently and without any knowledge of my
work. My life long friend, Mr. J. D. Story, then put me in touch with the
late Professor Priestley, who was much impressed by the brochure which
was placed in his hands. He, however, reported that it would take three
hundred years to obtain the proofs. Whereupon I advised my friends that
work must begin at once, as in such circumstances there was no further
time to lose, and this was accordingly done. A committee was formed
at the instance of the lates James Allan, and ultimately the Observatory
was built and His Excellency Sir Leslie Wilson, did me the honour to de-
clare it open on 13th August, 1935.
The hypothesis on which the work is based states that when the
planets again occupy the same heliocentric position that the same weather
conditions will be experienced subject, of course, to any modifications pro-
duced by volcanic or even human agency in the shape of erosion, erection
of water supply dams, removal of forests, etc. There thus arises a series
of cycles which are decided in the following manner: The sun, which is a
vast body existing in a state of incandescence (a condition which is out-
side any experience on earth) remains in that state eternally, with just a
slight fluctuation constituiting a tide of about eleven or twelve years’ dura-
tion and which is indicated in a very easily perceptible way by the sun-
spots.
The identity of this period with that of the planet Jupiter has long
attracted attention, and various reasons for it were advanced, none of
which were at all convincing, and attached to this was the important de-
fect in the cyclical theories that there was no method of establishing a
datum point. Birkeland’s important experiment with the electrified globes
subsequently magnetised, produced an effect so exactly similar to the
sunspots that reasoning was applied to it and it was postulated that if
light was corpuscular, then as the sun moved through space attended by
the cohort of the planets, each of which was a powerful magnetic field,
that as each one passed across the heliocentric longitude of the sun’s ad-
vance through space, its magnetic field acting directly on the corpuscular


matter would so deflect it that the sun would for a time receive a very
small supply, and consequently its energy, which was always being re-
duced by excessive radiation, amounting to trillions of tons per day, would
show a marked effect. The positions worked out by Dr. Baldwin were
then applied and it was found that the assumption was correct at the
time and thus the required datum point was established. This was then
applied to the weather records, and a general coincidence was found there
also. It was also seen that associated with each passage of Jupiter there
occurred a major drought in eastern Australia, a position which was put
to the test by predicting a major drought associated with the passage in
the end of 1936 and this again was confirmed. There was, however, found
to be great differences in the intensities of these major droughts, and
these again were found to be due to the presence of another major planet
besides Jupiter. Saturn was responsible for the great irregularities in
1865-70, and these were repeated when the same combination took place
in 1924-29, while in the great drought of 1902 the deciding factor, after
Jupiter and Saturn, was the passage of Uranus’s magnetic field as well.
The data for the passage of the four major planets in 1811, 1818 and
1820, showed the great effect to be expected, and in 1815 Europe had no
summer. This, however, does not occur again till 1984-1988, and owing
to the length of our Australian data, cannot begin to be tested till 1953
165 years after the “Landing.” As the period of Uranus almost evenly div-
ides the period of Neptune, it is regarded as possibly a very important
cycle, and has just now begun to have enough data from 84 years ago to
test it also, and it is giving some very marked positive results.
As there are certain anomalies in working out the cycle discovered
by Bruckner, it was seen that these further cycles, due to the other major
planets, would probably account for them, and it was also realised that
possibly the sunspot action might be another important and hitherto neg-
lected factor. Here the lack of observations made it necessary to begin
almost ab initio. Regular observations were only begun in 1873, and not
till the co-operating observatories were made use of in 1884 was there a
continuous set of observations, so that in Mr. Wragge’s day there was not
sufficient sunspot observations to cover a single short cycle, and even now
only enough for two, the Bruckner, and that of Saturn. A close study
was made of the possible immediate connections between earth and sun
and in this Ellsworth Huntington’s book of that name was most useful. The
connection between the character of terrestrial cyclones and sunspots was
clear both in their structure and relative positions. The clear connections
between sunspots and magnetic storms and the general magnetic hori-
zontal force, the aurora, the relative growths of trees, frequency of
thunderstorms, and even with such things as the rate of suicides and
marriages, are all quite definitely recorded, and here Professor de Lury,
of the Dominion Observatory, Ottawa, and Dr. Stetson, of the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, have made important contributions con-
firming the position in general terms. By his experiments, Zeeman has
shown that the sunspots are the main seats of the sun’s magnetic force,
and this is confirmed by the resultant magnetic storms on the earth, re-
cords of which arrive regularly from Mount Wilson Observatory, in Cali-
fornia.
Dobson, by his discovery of ozone in the upper air and the effects
the sunspots have upon it, has made it clear that the sunspots are the
media of transmission of the special effects from the sun to the earth
and has thereby simplified the problem immensely, as the sunspots are
easily observed, whereas the other solar effects require very elaborate
and costly apparatus.
Up to about 1920, very little work had been done on the connection
between earth and sun, and this was largely due to the failure of the
previous attempts to get any satisfactory results, and it was even gen-
erally stated that there was no connection between the sunspots and the


weather as had been erroneously claimed. However, there still remain-
ed in the background of thought the idea that there must be some con-
nection, and in 1923 Professor Ellsworth Huntington, of Yale, published
his book “Earth and Sun,” which came into my hands a year later, and of
which a very close study was made, and this led to the advance in the
work begun by Mr. Wragge, which I hope will lead to the final solution of
the problem of long range forecasting, but it remained to add something
to the matter compiled by Huntington. This was to find a datum point
for the cycles, and the sunspot period. In order to effect this, all the
systems proposed were examined and compared, in order to see that as
they were none of them quite satisfactory, if possibly any factor may
have been omitted. When this was done it was noticed that the proper
motion of the sun, discovered by Herschel, and which amounts to some-
where about 2,000,000 miles a day, had not been made use of. In fact,
though first announced in 1783, very few books on astronomy mention it.
It is obvious, however, if any thought is given to the matter that such a
great motion must have some significance and the following processes
were adopted:—
Huntington drew attention to the very obvious similarity in the
duration of the sunspot period and that of the orbit of Jupiter, and there
had been many attempts to discern what the cause might be, but so far
none of the explanations were satisfactory. Huntington, on p. 261 shows
that if the interval between the visual sunspot maximum recorded by the
Chinese astronomers in 1372 and the then most recent high maximum in
1917 were regarded as 46 periods, this would give a mean result of 11.861
years, the period of Jupiter being 11.862.
The most generally accepted, but still unconvincing, hypothesis was
that the variation in the sunspot numbers was due to the tidal pull of
Jupiter but the difference in this at Jupiter’s aphelia and perihelia were
quite incompatible with the relative states of the sunspots at the maxima
and minima. Again turning to “Earth and Sun,” we find on p. 184 the fol-
lowing experiment performed by K. Birkeland, already famous as the
deviser of the most practical method of obtaining nitrogen from the air.
This experiement was described in an article on the Origin of Worlds
published in the Scientific American Supplement, Vol. 76, 1913. A small
steel globe was placed in a large vessel, from which the air had been ex-
hausted and subjected to electrical discharges up to 400 milli-amperes in
intensity. The larger the globe the more noteworthy the results. The
main result was a series of small bright spots on the surface of the globe.
These were due to disruptive electric discharges from the globe itself,
which succeeded one another rapidly and sometimes actually carried off
bits of steel. When the globe was not magnetised the spots were dis-
tributed irregularly, but when it was magnetised, even feebly, the spots
arranged themselves in two zones parallel to the magnetic equator of the
globe. The more strongly the globe was magnetised the more closely the
spots approached the equator. Moreover, many of the spots showed nu-
merous arms projecting in all directions, and curved so that they appeared
to indicate vortices. They revolved in opposite directions on the two
sides of the magnetic equator. In this respect and in their zonal distri-
bution parallel to the magnetic equator, and also in their tendency to
locate themselves in high latitudes with a weak degree of magnetisation
and move toward lower latitudes as the strength of the magnetic field in-
creased, there seemed to Birkeland to be an analogy between the little
spots on the steel globe and the sunspots. In all these respects Birke-
land’s spots seem also to present some analogy to terrestrial cyclonic
storms. This raises the question whether on a magnetised globe as huge
as the earth an electrical charge derived from the sun could cause dis-
charges from the outer air which would set up vortices and help to give
rise to storms.
The analogy to the sunspots is very striking as in all particulars this
is how the sunspots act, and from this was deduced an hypothesis of the?


cause of the sunspots, namely, that they are cyclonic eruptions on the
sun caused by a charge exerted by some source in outer space, and as the
possibility of an electro-magnetic discharge from the planets seems quite
inadequate, it must obviously proceed from some source in outer space.
Here the great controversy as to the nature of light became an important
link in the argument. Newton had arrived by intuition at the opinion that
light was corpuscular, or in other words, a projectile, and Clark Maxwell
had demonstrated its electro-magnetic nature, and also it was known that
the earth was a great magnet, and, therefore, the other planets must
possess the same character.
These various factors are combined, and produce the following hypo-
thesis. The sun and the other stars are all radiating bodies sending out
vast streams of energy in the form of light, so that space is full of this
radiant energy, and the sun, in his passage through space, rushes through
and is recharged by this electro magnetic matter. In this case there
would be an almost constant production of sunspots, but this is not so,
as a distinct tide in these, lasting from the minimum period of al-
most total absence to the next minimum of between eleven and twelve
years, with a rapidly increasing period of about five years, followed by a
slow decline, and the similar period of Jupiter’s orbit has been noted.
Electric discharges are strongly deflected by a magnetic field, and the
planets are seen to be such, and of these, Jupiter has the obvious maxi-
mum field strength as well as being the largest of the major planets and
the nearer to the sun, and it is assumed that when he passes across the
heliocentric longitude of the sun’s path through space, that is when he is
in 18 hours Right Ascension as regards the sun, the spots should be at a
minimum and an examination of the observations show that this is usually
the case, and going back to the great Chinese visual maximum in 1372,
it was found to be in agreement. At times, however, the sunspot mini-
mum drifts away from this position, but later returns to the normal posi-
tion as regards Jupiter.
From this we get several important results; first that the fluctuations
of the sunspots are due to this action of the magnetic field of Jupiter
and this was then applied to the weather observations and it was found
that at every passage of Jupiter there was a major drought in Australia.
Had Jupiter been the sole cause, then all droughts should resemble one
another, but this is not the case, as they vary greatly in intensity anl
duration, and these were further examined, when it was found that the
more severe droughts had another major planet also in the same position
as regards the sun.
In the 1902 drought (the maximum drought so far recorded) the
three major planets, Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus, were concerned, while
in 1865-1870, and again in 1924-29, Jupiter and Saturn were concerned
in similar relative positions. The drought comes either before and at
the passage of Jupiter, or at and after, so that it should be possible to
predict Australian droughts years in advance, and in 1933 this was done
as regards the Jupiter passage and sunspot minimum of 1936 and the
estimate was fully borne out by the drought which ensued, and the warn-
ing enabled those who regarded it to modify the effects on their farms
and stock. It was further postulated that these planetary passages might
in some way interrupt the weather sequences and that after each passage
a similar weather sequence would set in so that details of the weather
might be given in advance, and this is the method pursued. A synchro-
nous chart is prepared showing the weather recorded at the station con-
cerned for all the years similarly related to the various major planets,
and from the combination of these years the new season is developed.
Till recently there were only two fields with available records, namely,
those of Jupiter and Saturn, but now the records are available to deal
with the field of Uranus, whose orbital period is 84 years. This has al-
ways been thought to be a very important one, as it very nearly halves
the period of the outer planet, Neptune, whose period is 165 years, but


which cannot be employed in Australia til! 1953, or 165 years after the
“Landing.”
This also solves what was one of the main difficulties, namely, that no
year ever came that was quite like a preceding one, and this so greatly
discouraged the investigators that the possibility of cyclical repetition
was almost entirely abandoned. It is quite obvious that if a season is the
result of a new combination of four separate components, then it is a ne-
cessary result that no season ever can resemble any that went before. An-
other important result was the assumption of a form of interstellar radia-
tion, and this was some years later announced as cosmic radiation. It
also points to a possible solar mechanism whereby the whole planetary sys-
tem takes on the character of a vast machine, whose function is to regu-
late the supply of energy to the sun and thereby to maintain the standard
of life upon the earth and not to permit a regular stage of vital energy,
which would soon lead to a deterioration of all living things. It is by the
times of stress acting on the less vital members of the animals and plants
that the survival of the fittest secures the maintenance of a high standard,
and later to the development of a higher grade of life. The life of the
sun seems thus to be interminable and light is thrown on this by a study
of the rocks of Labrador. These rocks are estimated to be somewhere
about a billion years old, and consist of metamorphosed fossils of sponges
and algae, which can only exist at a very limited range of temperature,
and this shows that the temperature of the earth is now much as it was
a billion years ago. The inference is that if there is any change of con-
ditions coming, they are so infinitely removed in that phase which we call
time, as to be negligible.
The sun may, therefore, to all intents and purposes, be considered a
changeless and eternal object. As fast as it gives out its tremendous
stores of energy, it is recharged by means of similar emanations of cor-
puscular matter from all the other stars, so that it seems justifiable to
say poetically, “Light is the blood of the cosmos.”
CHARACTERS OF THE SUN.
The sun is a vast body 864,000 miles in diameter, rotating on its
axis in about 26 days. It consists of incandescent matter with a surface
temperature of about 14,000 deg. Fahr., and there is no condition on earth
except, perhaps, an electric furnace, by which we may form the least con-
ception of its state. At this temperature the elements exist in a state of
disassociation, as no chemical combinations can take place at such a dis-
ruptive temperature. The rotation of the sun carries the spots along, but
they seem to have no proper motion of their own beyond a slight amount
of sway, probably due to their own state of disturbance. Their structure
closely resembles that of a tropical cyclone, and they are confined to the
same relative region of the sun, namely, that corresponding to our tropical
zone, and also both spots and cyclones are not found on the equator (ab-
solutely on the earth) and only on very rare occasions on the sun.
The whole universe in every degree of state of existence consists of
an electro-magnetic condition, and the rotation of the sun gives it a cer-
tain magnetic field, but its great heat renders this transitory, but the
main magnetic strength is concentrated in the sunspots with their tre-
mendous rotation at the rate of somewhere about 10,000 miles per hour.
These are of prodigious size, as quite an ordinary spot may be as large as
the earth, and many are as much as ten times its diameter. They are the
sites of violent outpourings of electro-magnetic streams which pass out
into space and a portion of these enter the earth’s upper atmosphere, and
in striking its out layers automatically create the ozone band which pre-
vents the ultra-violet light from reaching the earth with destructive ef-
fects on all life. Phantastic schemes for reaching the moon, etc., seem
to overlook the serious fact that no apparatus could withstand the dis-
integrating force of this powerful ray.


The magnetic field of the sunspots was revealed by Zeeman by means
of one of his remarkable experiments. In dealing with the spectrum lines
of the elements, he was investigating that of iron, which had a vast num-
ber of lines, and he then caused the rays from the white hot metal to pass
between the poles of a magnet, when it was seen that the lines were
doubled, trebled, and quadrupled, and even more. When the spectroscope
is turned on the sun and pointed to a part of its surface that is without
spots, a more or less normal set of lines is seen, but when the spectroscope
is turned on a spot, this doubling, trebling, etc., of the lines is at once
seen, thus showing that the specially strong magnetic fields on the sun
are in the sunspots themselves.
Although the sunspots were discovered by Galileo in 1608, there is
very little systematic record of them for more than two hundred years,
as it was considered sacrilegious to aver that the earth’s great luminary
could have what had some analogy to an eruption of the skin. To such an
extent was this almost incredible idea carried that the late Professor
Wolfer, of Zurich, who got out for me the daily sunspot figures, told me
in his letter that the figures were quite unreliable prior of 1816.
Further light on this is seen in the discovery of the sunspot period
itself, which was not initiated till 1823, when Schwabe, of Dessau, an
apothecary with an interest in astronomy, began a daily series of obser-
vations, and by 1843 announced that the sunspots appeared to increase
and die away again in periods of about ten years. Carrington was the
first to make systematic drawings of the sun, and his first observation was
dated November Ist, 1853, and this spot is that from which the Green-
wich catalogue dates, but it was not till 1874 that Christie, the Astronomer
Royal, began to publish a regular annual volume of sunspot observations
alone. The climate of Greenwich, however, was such that only about 150
observations, and often less, were secured each year, and during the win-
ter months were few indeed, so that in 1884 co-operating observatories
were made use of in other parts of the world, and since then there has
been a record of the sunspots for every day in the year. This, however,
means that there is only a complete record of the spots since 1884, only
a partial record to 1874, and a very broken record to 1816, before which
the figures are more or less conjectural.
The existence of a layer of ozone at a height of about 40 kilometres
was discovered by Dobson in 1922, and its presence has been generally
attributed to the action of the ultra violet light from the sun by the oxy-
gen present there, while radiation of certain wave lengths decomposes
ozone. Therefore, the amount of ozone is less in the equatorial regions
where the sunlight is constant than at the poles, where it is much less in
duration.
Moreover, the amount of ozone shows a seasonal fluctuation and
the minimum is found in the northern hemisphere in August and Septem-
ber, namely, the autumn, and in the southern hemisphere, in April and
May, which is the autumn in that hemisphere.
The earth’s axis of rotation is inclined to the ecliptic at an angle of
23 i degrees, which is the cause of the seasons, and that of the sun at an
angle of 7i degrees, which, with the period of the sun’s rotation, was
found when the sunspots were discovered by observing their daily changes
of positibn. It is, therefore, seen that as the earth revolves round the sun,
the respective hemispheres are presented to each other at intervals of six
months, and it so happens that the southern hemispheres are presented to
each other in early March and the northern hemispheres early in Septem-
ber, and with the lag that characterises most natural effects, the ozone
minimum follows this date in both hemispheres, and from this it is pos-
sible to see that the ozone layer being formed by the general emanation
of the sunlight is again decomposed to a certain extent by the direct em-
anations from the sunspots and- therefore, is less in the tropics where


the sunspots, being confined to the equatorial regions of the sun, are more
constantly directly overhead. When the tilt of both bodies is such that
the southern hemispheres of both are in greater juxtaposition, then the
minima occurs and this shows that the sunspots give out a special emana-
tion of a different character to that of the general radiation of the whole
sun, and we have already seen that they are the sites of the strongest
magnetic fields on the sun.
This, moreover, solves a question that has long puzzled geographers,
namely, the essential difference between spring and autumn. As these are
determined mainly by the sun’s altitude, which is the same in spring and
autumn, there should be no difference, but their characters are most
clearly different, spring being the season of storms of an electrical nature,
while the autumn is the season of cyclonic disturbances. There is also a
connection between the ozone and the states of barometric pressure,
ozone being low in high pressure systems and high on the western side of
cyclones, and this again may be one of the causes of the difference in sea-
sonal character of autumn and spring, and Dobson remarks that it is re-
markable that the ozone situated at so great a height should be so closely
connected with variations of pressure much lower down.”
It seems probable that a form of induction is the cause here, and
when the upper atmosphere is disturbed by strong bombardment from the
special emanations of the sunspots, action is induced in the surface atmos-
phere, and that this is enforced by the magnetic effects of the circulation
of the high and low pressure systems.
The thunderstorms of spring, being sudden violent reactions occur-
ring when the ozone layer is greatest, the more prolonged and intense
cyclonic tropical storms begin at the end of the maximum ozone period
and die away as the minimum approaches.
Moreover, the zones of tropical cyclones and sunspots are one of tho
clear connections between earth and sun, and further demonstrate that
the sunspots are the special media of communication between sun and
earth.
One of the first phenomena to be seen to be connected was terrestrial
magnetism, and the sunspots, and also the aurorae, and it is thought that
the ozone being greatest in the polar regions shows that it is in some way
connected with the aurorae and therefore both are effects of the sun.
Kullmer has shown that the storm tracks in the United States are related
in their positions to the sunspot period.
EFFECT OP SUNSPOTS ON THE WEATHER.
One of the divisions of the research at Crohamhurst is that into the
effects of the sunspots which, under the hypothesis, are the final deter-
minants in the cyclical effect, and therefore also one of the main causes
of the variations which frequently veil the cyclical sequences and make
them seem contradictory or even absent. It has been often asserted that
the sunspots definitely do not affect the weather, and Dr. Norris Russell,
of Princeton, is quite obdurate on this point. One of the reasons of this
opinion is that the wrong method has been adopted, namely, that of taking
the sunspots as a whole, while the explanation is that it is the individual
spots that are responsible for the effects which then can be plainly and
easily seen. First, the sun being an electro magnetic object, the north
and south fields are important, and first the spots must be divided into
northern and southern spots, and from observation it is found that the
southern spots affect the weather of the southern hemisphere, and that the
northern spots do not unless there happens to be a southern disturbance
present which is invisible to the ordinary telescopic vision but requires
the high power spectroscopic attachments to divulge.
Next, the portion of the southern sunspot track must be considered
so that the whole of the southern sunspots together will not give any good


results. The southern spots as a whole seem to build up a gradual cumu-
lative effect as happened after the great southern sunspot activity in 1889.
For immediate effects we must look to individual spots, and here again
their magnetic character must be considered, as well as their general char-
acter. The sunspots are vortices in the sun’s surface, rotating with im-
mense velocity, and thus setting up a magnetic field which magnetises the
electrical discharges as they are driven forth from the sun into space.
The gamma rays, being neutral and undeflected, strike the earth
and cause magnetic storms and aurorae when the spots are seen near the
middle of the disk. By deflection, the other rays are driven outwards
and do not enter the earth’s atmosphere, when the spots are in that posi-
tion. When the spots are between the edges and the middle points, the
weather effects are confined to temperature effects, and at those points
occur cold spells, such as the snow storm recently reported in Tunisia.
When the spots are about to appear on the disk, the deflection by the
magnetic field causes the electron emanations to enter the earth’s upper
atmosphere, and then, by induction, the lower air is affected, and storms,
etc., are generated. This effect, however, is not forecastable, as there are
no means of knowing when a new spot group will come into sight.
The only spots that can be foretold in this position are those which
cross the sun several times, and are classed as recurrent spots. Some
groups have made two or more passages, and one group even crossed again
and again for over a year, but this, too, is uncertain, as a group may die
out on the invisible side of the sun at any time.
The groups whose effects are observable, and also whose effects are
predictable are those which are seen to pass across, and it is known that
when they reach the final part of their passage and disappear, that this
charging of the upper air and subsequent induction, will shortly occur,
though so far there is no regular interval at which this will occur, or
knowledge of the duration of the effects. The same, however, is found
with the magnetic storms as regards interval from the central passage,
and the storm effect and its duration. The only thing that is known in each
case is that the effect is nearly always observed, but again in both cases
there are times when it does not happen, though their proportion is not
great. There are three more effects to be noticed: First, the sudden col-
lapse and consequent disappearance of a spot or group when the effect is
usually a violent and destructive storm. Secondly, the sudden appearance
of a group, especially when in the final part of the course followed by the
spots. This, however, is apparent, and not real, as the spot groups do not
move themselves, but are carried forward by the rotation of the sun. This
gives rise to a more intense order of disturbance than in the case of a spot
that traverses the whole course. The third effect is when a group goes
through violent changes, especially by the addition of further component
spots, when the intensity of the effects is greatly increased and, in the case
of violent changes and additional members, an effect on the weather by the
production of storminess may occur with a central spot. A notable ex-
ample was the great Sydney rains of March, 1942, which also were a re-
currence of a 71-year group shifted latitudinally from Newcastle in 1871.
The extraordinary nature of Crohamhurst itself has been a wonder-
ful and almost uncanny factor in the research. Lead to it by circumstances
that almost savour of the supernatural, it soon revealed its importance by
establishing the record rainfalls of Australia for a day, a rainy period, or
a month.
These great rainfalls show that the locality has something of a special
nature about it and really, in a geographic sense, Crohamhurst is one of
the most remarkable valleys in the world.
Crohamhurst is situated at almost the extreme north-eastern corner
of the Moreton uplands, on high ridges which run down to Crohamhurst
Creek, itself a tributary of the Stanley River, which is in turn the princi-
pal tributary of the Brisbane River.


It is one of those cases in which the tributary is of more importance
than the main stream. The blacks were fully cognizant of this, as tney
had a saying which meant, “No Stanley, no flood.” When the great flood
of 1893 was being investigated, the Moreton blacks had become so de-
graded and scattered that their important local knowledge was overlooked,
and the obvious argument of the far greater area of the Upper Brisbane
area was given undue importance, with very misleading results.
The Stanley River rises in Mount Livingstone, due west of Croham-
hurst, and flows first in a northerly direction towards the Blackall Range.
It then turns in a southerly direction and flows back towards Mount Liv-
ingtone, and is then joined by a tributary of some importance, rising from
the extreme north eastern corner of the watershed and known as Ewen
Creek. It then flows eastwards till it reaches Peachester, where it is joined
by another large tributary known as London Creek. To this point the
river is like most rivers in their upper courses, deeply engorged, but from
this point there begins a feature that makes this river unique. At Pea-
chester it is almost on the level of the coast range, which from Peachester
to Woodford is so depressed that had any severe earth change have taken
place, the river might easily have flown from thence direct to the sea and
entered Moreton Bay or the Bribie Passage by one of the many channels
that the railway crosses between Beerwah and Caboolture. The western
bank for these twelve miles is high and rugged, but the eastern bank is
practically level with the summit of the coast range. In this way the river
reaches Woodford, where it again becomes deeply engorged and reaches
Kilcoy, and then turns south, flowing through the Somerset dam site, then
in a southward course, after which it flows westerly till it joins the Bris-
bane itself at Caboonbah. It can thus be seen what a very unusual stream
the Stanley is, and this remarkable character has a bearing on the import-
ance of Crohamhurst as a research station.
The general trend of the massifs here is, as is well known, a north-
south one, but owing to the distribution of land masses, the part of the
Stanley flowing down to Peachester forms a valley with mountain masses
lying east and west, and thus is found a valley whose mouth points direct
to the Pacific, and east of which the land steps down to the marshy coast
flats along the shores of Moreton Bay. Across the Bay are the highest
sandhills in the world, namely, Moreton Island, which, with Stradbroke,
form a normal north-south ridge, while just south of the point where the
eastward course of the upper Stanley turns again south, stand the great
masses of the Glass House Mountains, with the great Beerwah on the coast
range itself rising to a height of 1,803 feet. Reference has been made
to the three tributaries of the Upper Stanley, and these, strange to say,
all rise out of one great hill, a spur of the Bald Knob, which can be seen
from the railway standing over Landsborough, and there are reasons to
believe that in this mountain there may be a vein of radium or other radio-
active mineral, since extraordinary telephonic effects were encountered
that can reasonably be attributed to such a cause. It would seem as if
the coast range between Mellum Mountain and Mount Mee must have sunk
during the eruptions of the Glass House Mountains. This, and the con-
tours above described, have a distinct effect on the coastal cyclones that
reach this province. They are first drawn towards the coast strongly by
the radio active character of the Bald Knob, and then caught by the More-
ton-Stradbroke highland and enter Moreton Bay, where they are confront-
ed by the masses of the Glass House Mountains, which force them to enter
the Vale of Crohamhurst, where, following the law laid down by Claxton,
of Hong Kong, in his paper on the Typhoons of the China Sea, they ex-
haust themselves of their burden of rain and thus is accounted for the
fact that the record rainfall of Australia fell at Crohamhurst in 1893.
On one occasion did the cyclone, after entering the Bay, pass to the
east of the Glass House Mountains. That was in January, 1887, when
the cyclone passed south to the head waters of the Logan, with such dis-
astrous results to life and property. Unfortunately, in 1887, the only


rainfall station near the Logan was Mundoolun, which recorded a monthly
total of 28 inches, while Brisbane had 23, and Woodford only 14. In all
other recorded great cyclones, Crohamhurst has shown a tremendously
higher rainfall, and this is further exemplified when the rainfall gradient
of the normal average falls is considered. At Esk, near the junction of
the two rivers, the annual average is 38.75, and at Kilcoy above the dam
it is 39.15. Twelve miles east at Woodford it has risen to 52 inches, and
at Peachester, on about the same level, it has risen to 68 inches, while at
Crohamhurst, 3 miles further west, it has reached 74 inches.
These facts illustrate the great importance of Crohamhurst as a
meteorological station, while its long detailed record gives it further value
in cyclical research.
In passing, it is of interest to note the light that the Glass House
Mountains throw on the antiquity of man. They are the cores of extinot
volcanoes whose cones have been eroded by centuries of heavy rainfall,
and have been estimated to have been extinct for about five million years.
The aboriginies, whose traditions were handed down from father to son,
and which have been found to be quite reliable when tests are possible,
used to say that these mountains threw fireballs or firesticks at one an-
other, and they must, therefore, have witnessed actual eruptions, so that
there must have been intelligent human life in Australia at that remote
period.
As rainfall is the most important matter to the primary industries,
the research is mainly centred round that element. Temperature and dura-
tion of sunlight are not important here as in other lands, and the strange
manner in which human beings have adapted themselves to endure the
strong sun is a matter for attention by the medical profession as, half a
century ago there were quite frequent cases of sun-stroke, whereas to-
day people expose themselves freely to the sun, and even largely go hat-
less with no apparent ill effects. Rainfall is a definite effect of condensa-
tion under certain electro-magnetic conditions, which are now being close-
ly studied, but are not yet very well understood, and in this respect
Queensland has very clearly marked geographical divisions. The main
range running north and south more or less parallel to the coast causes a
heavy rainfall by rarefaction of the air rising in the winds off the ocean
which are lifted across the range and in so doing lose their moisture as
rain through the rarefaction due to the lift.
This is rendered clear by the lesser rain on the Burdekin Delta with
its absence of high land compared with the Barron and Herbert just to
the north with their high mountains and the tremendous high steady rain-
fall at such places as Babinda, Hervey’s Creek, etc. Cape York Peninsula,
with its lower eminences, shows a lower rainfall. These areas are sub-
ject to intense tropical cyclones which raise the rainfall immensely where
the cyclones come ashore as shown by the work of Claxton on the Typhoons
of the China Sea. The Western country derives its rain from the same
causes, although there are no mountains, but the same condensation takes
place when it does rain, but the mountains now are mountains of cooler
air round which the monsoonal cyclonic systems revolve, though the pro-
cess is very much obscured by the fact that the air mountains, unlike the
coastal mountains, have a movement of their own. This movement is af-
fected by the position they occupy and its relation to the western slopes of
the main range, and they are further modified in their courses by the
watersheds and courses of the western river systems, so that the cyclical
sequences are divided into as many sections as there are river systems.
Moreover, each province has a cyclical sequence quite its own, though
there is a general interrelation between them, but with a clear retention
of individual character. The coast itself has a further distinct portion
round Crohamhurst of a very special character, but which yet seems to
have a distinct connection with the changes that occur all over Australia
so that the graphs of the control stations used in the observatory from


material kindly supplied by the Commonwealth Weather Bureau show
changes to comply with those at Crohamhurst which again are based on
the cyclical controls to be explained later.
THE ANTARCTIC INFLUENCE ON CLIMATE.
A great deal has been written on this subject, and many people hold
the view that here lies the solution of the problem of seasonal weather
forecasting, and my friend, Sir Hubert Wilkins, advocates the mainten-
ance of observatories on the Antarctic continent. I shall now try to show
what is the true relationship of the Antarctic to the problem, and also to
show that, though important, its bearing has been overestimated.
The great ice mass at the pole, as observed by the limits of the pack
ice, undergoes a fluctuation related at a distance of four or five years to
the sunspot period. After the minimum it continues to accumulate for
some years and shows the same lag as most other natural phenomena
through the decline of a factor or its acceleration being overtaken by
the opposite force and just as the coldest day is not at the date of the
shortest day, so the greatest amount of ice is not at the time of lowest
temperature associated with the sunspot minimum, and the setting in of
the melting of the surplus ice occurs some four or five years after the
sunspot energy increases after the minimum. When this happens, then
vast masses of water at very low temperature are released and enter the
southern ocean currents in the Antarctic and join in the general flow to
the east. When this water reaches the eastern side of the South Pacific
it is prevented from continuing its eastward flow by the long continental
mass of South America, towards which the northern point of Graham Land
projects. Thus a large proportion of the resultant cold water is driven
north and swells the volume of the Humboldt current, which is turned at
the Equator into the eastward equatorial current, whose temperature is
thus lowered considerably. This current in its turn gives rise to the New
South Wales current through the equatorial current being intercepted by
the long line of New Guinea and Australia. It is along the edges of this
current that the hurricanes of the Coral Sea are generated, and the cool-
ing of this current by this means causes it to have two cold periods in each
sunspot epoch. One at the minimum of sunspots by the direct effect of
the lowered activity of the sun, and a second some years later through the
delayed melting of the polar ice as above described, which thus gives rise
-to a secondary drought phase in each sunspot period.
The Antarctic factor is made use of in Argentina for long range fore-
casting by using the observations made at Laurie Island, and although this
station gives important long range data whereby the seasons in Argentina
can be estimated in general terms, as much as three years in advance in
certain districts, yet for short range daily forecasts the position of Laurie
Island is too far east to be of value, as the systems have passed over Ar-
gentina before they reach the island station. It was hoped that the Byrd
Expedition might find a suitable site for a station which would be west
from the longitude of Argentina, but this was not achieved.
Sir Hubert Wilkins advocates the establishment of stations on the
Antarctic continent for use in Australian forecasting, but this seems to
present very great practical difficulties, and a very useful, and at the same
Time practicable, scheme, would be the re-opening of the station of Mac-
quarie Island, and also one on Kerguelen Island, where the observers would
be capable of certain relief from time to time and the observations could
be sent by wireless at once. The important observation would be the tem-
perature of the sea water, from which it would be possible to ascertain
the state of the continental ice. Periodic observations of the limit of the
■pack ice should also be made in connection with the two stations.
The Australian and New Zealand Science Congress have repeatedly
advised the Commonwealth Government to re-open the station on Mac-
quarie Island, and I have myself suggested requesting the French Govern


ment to either open or allow to be opened a station on Kerguelen, where
there are a number of buildings and a feasible harbour. I then asked the
French Academy of Sciences to move in the matter, and this was done and
just before the war an exploratory air flight was to have been made from
Madagascar.
The motion of the solar system towards the north is responsible for
the preponderance of water in the southern hemisphere, and also for the
peculiar distribution of land masses at the poles, the north pole being flat
and generally landless, while the south pole has great land masses with,
a rugged surface and great elevation. Similar effects are noticeable on
the moon, and there are distinct differences in the northern and southern
hemispheres of the planets Jupiter and Saturn, while Mars shows similar
features to the earth.
All these show the great importance of the sun’s motion.
The rainfalls of Australia are derived first from two main sources,
a northern or equatorial, and a southern or antarctic. The northern source
is again divided into several geographical parts. The motion of the earth
in rotation produces the great equatorial current flowing westward from
South America along the region of the equator and forming what
Maury so poetically described as a river in the sea with distinct banks of
water at a distinct temperature and it is along the borders or banks of this-
current that the fearful tropical hurricanes are generated which cause
such destruction and heavy rain when they make an impact on our shores.
Here again there is a division owing to the differences in the mountain
massifs on the coast, and again in relation to the divisions of the Barrier
Reef itself.
A further division is made by the relative strength of the antarctic
current flowing northwards along our eastern coast, but so far not enough
study has been devoted to this. I have secured the co-operation of the
Queensland Branch of the Commonwealth Lighthouse Department, but as
yet the other States have not consented to have the sea temperature ob-
servations supplied whereby the relative strength of this current could bo
gauged. The cyclones strike the coast in three main provinces. On Cape
York Peninsula itself, next on the Herbert-Barren coast, and thirdly in
the Mackay area, and there has been some evidence of their cyclical repe-
tition, but the data is far too scanty and of too little extent in time to be
used with certainty or any approach to it. Next there are the cyclones
which evade the Barrier Reef altogether and strike the land in the south-
east, most of them coming into the Vale of Crohamhurst, but some come
in to the north near Bundaberg or Maryborough, while others get south to
the Vale of Tweed and along the northern rivers of New South Wales.
The next division of rainfall systems which are relatively heavy but
not to be compared to the coastal cyclones, are the depressions which form
to the west of the main range. These have several tracks. First, those
distinctly related to the Gulf of Carpentaria and which form active centres
at various points there, and to the south. This point of origin gets fur-
ther south as the winter comes on. Next there are those which are as-
sociated with the projection of Northern Australia.
The Queensland coastal cyclones are formed by the detached cur-
rent known as the New South Wales current, which is driven south by the
interception of the lands which project south and east from New Guinea,
but a certain amount of water flows through and this gives rise to the mon-
soonal eddies which originate in the waters to tl\e north of Australia and
thence come down over the western pastoral lands. The point of origin
of these monsoonal impulses varies with the state of the season. Through
the summer they may originate over the Northern Territory itself, but as
the season advances the point of origin comes further and further south,
so that in the winter it is unusual for them to arise north of the tropic,,
and therein are strongly controlled by the artesian basins. There is a


suspicion that the force and course of the western rains have been adverse-
ly affected by the constant draining of these artesian beds since the dis-
covery of this source of water and the radio-active content of the water
may possibly have had an effect on the course and intensity of these storms,
and it is an undoubted fact that in the last few decades the western rain-
falls, as well as the flow of the artesian wells, has steadily declined. It is,
however, not yet possible to state that this is a real decline or just part
of the long 165 year cycle, as such rain deficiencies have been noticed in
older lands also. The only recent evidence was afforded this summer
when the abnormal rains on the Paroo were confined to that area and had
not the general character as was the case in the wet season of 1890 or
1870 before the wells were put down. The last rains of a northern origin
are those of Western Australia where a very violent type of tropical hur-
ricane arises on the north-western coast of that State, and these are strong-
ly affected by the massif of Mount Gregory, which elevation decides their
final course as to whether they come south to the east of it and traverse
the interior, passing the goldfields, and then joining the antarctic circula-
tion or passing to the west, die out in their passage down the west coast.
All the above rains are summer rains, and find their terminal period when
the southern sunspots reach their most southern altitude in March, al-
though occasionally under special solar stress a storm may arise somewhat
out of season.
The rain storms of the southern part of the continent arise from two
sources. There are the effects of the extended courses of the tropical
storms and the direct effect of V depressions arising from the antarctic
circulation. These pass along the Great Australian Bight and give rains
from Western Australia travelling eastwards along the whole southern
litoral. When of great intensity under strong solar stress, they may form
distinct cyclonic centres over definite areas, and such are essential to
heavy rains over areas like the Riverina.
Another cyclonic form are those that frequently arise on the south-
ern coast of New South Wales, and are generated by the discontinuity at
the boundary of the New South Wales and antarctic currents at that point.
The point of the continental impact of these systems varies very much.
Some begin their contact with the south-western areas of Western Aus-
tralia, while others come up in the Bight itself and others again begin to
operate off the coast of Tasmania, thus creating three geographical div-
isions of this type of rain.
A great deal of research has been devoted to search for connections
between one province or area and another with a view of finding sequences
between them whereby forecasts can be made for these regions, but it
seems rather uncertain whether this can be done with any certainty owing
to the fact that really each province has its own sequence derived from a
cyclical cause associated with the general principles that I have here en-
deavoured to outline, and that the sequence of each is distinctly its own,
and may vary considerably from that of a province almost or actually ad-
joining, so that really each division has its own cyclical sequence.
Confirmation of the importance of the position of the planets with
reference to the sun’s path through space was obtained from the Bell
Telephone Laboratories in New York, where Dr. Carl Jansky was conduct-
ing experiments in wireless in regard to a special form of static most pro-
nounced in June, when the 18th hour of Right Ascension is at the meridian
at midnight, and consequently when the earth is in the longitude of the
solar apex or path through space. This disturbance was then closely
studied and was found to progress steadily round through the year till
it returned to the same position again in June, thus showing that the
point at the 18th hour was its source, and thus it is seen that the passing
of Jupiter, with his immense magnetic field through this position, is justi-
fiably assumed as a datum point for the cyclical periods, and similarly in
a lesser degree for the other major planets Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
These four planets form a group of large bodies revolving round the sun.


and it is probable that they are a gigantic mechanism which regulates the
sun activity and so the cyclical periods into which all activities are sub-
divided together define a' complete cycle of 165 years, and it can be
shown that the great epochs in human history are governed and divided
in the same manner. I made this the subject of my address to the His-
torical Society in 1932.
The periods of the planets are non-comensurables, and so never re-
peat exactly the same combination.
The most important is the cycle ruled by the magnetic field of Jupiter,
which is 11.862 years long. Two revolutions take 23.724 years, and Dr.
Abbot finds a cycle of this length in many American weather figures; the
third revolution is completed in 35.586 years, and in this we see Idle prob-
able cause of the famous cycle found by Bruckner and its variability is
possibly decided by its combinations with that of the orbit of Saturn, whose
period is 29.548 years.
The sunspot periods were then tested by making use of what dates
were available, beginning with the great Chinese sunspot maximum of
1372, and as the minima are usually about five years previous to the max-
ima, this would give a minimum at 1367, which was the date of the pas-
sage of Jupiter through 18 hours R.A. For some reason yet to be dis-
covered, the minima agree for some epochs with the hypothetical posi-
tions, and then drift away, but later return to the required position. From
1688 to 1735, there was a close agreement, then it drifted away till it got
as much as five years difference in 1818, but then returned to theoretical
normal, and from 1877 to 1913 showed a very close compliance. It has
now drifted away again and at last minimum the difference was 3 years.
The sunspots have opposite magnetic polarities in each solar hemis-
phere, and these are reversed with each epoch. Thus, if on the northern
hemisphere the leader of a group is a north seeking polarity, then all the
other leaders on the northern side will be similar, but the leaders on the
southern side will be south seeking, and this endures for duration of that
sunspot period. When the minimum point is reached, then the spots of
the new epoch are recognised by the polarity of the leaders being reversed.
In this is seen the reason why the Bruckner cycle shows irregularities,
since the spots in the second cycle will begin with opposite polarities, thus
creating different solar conditions in support of the weather changes. For
this reason, as soon as the data were long enough to include a span of 71
years, this cycle was tested since the sunspot polarities are then the same
as the year concerned. This has given very important and mainly posi-
tive results. The double cycle of Saturn of 58.916 years is close to five
revolutions of Jupiter of 59.310 years, and also seems at times to give
practical results. What has always appeared as probably a very import-
ant cycle is that ruled by the magnetic field of Uranus of 84.015 years,
and for this the weather records are just becoming available. It almost
divides the period of Neptune of 164.788 years, which is the complete or
grand cycle, but will not be available till 1953, when the few records of
the times of the landing by Captain Phillip will come within its span. So
far the 84 year period is showing very encouraging results. The double
period of Neptune would be 329.576 years, and the Abbe Gabriel, of
Caen, M. Andre Auric, of Paris, and the late Janvrin Browne, of Wash-
ington, have expressed the belief that a cycle of about that length will
be found.
The passages of Jupiter and Saturn across the heliocentric longitude
of the Solar Apex are alternately close and wide, and this, with the fact
that their periods are incommensurables, results in a steady separation
of their times of transit until finally they coincide once more. The period
of this process is 854 years, and this may be the basis of a very long
cycle. The times of coincidence of the transits in our Era were A.D. 15,
A.D. 869, and A.D. 1723. At the passage in 1723 the assumed and actual
sunspot minima were in agreement.


A repeated wide combined passage of Jupiter and Saturn has been
studied. Those of 1865-70, and 1924-29 with positive results, but there
will not be a chance to study another close passage until 1959 to 1960.
The last was in 1900-1901, but here Uranus’s passage in 1904 confused
the issue and the one before that was in 1841, for which the data is poor.
The studies of cycles by comparison with past seasons failed partly
from the uncertainty and scanty nature of the data, and next because it
was assumed that there was one cycle only, and finally because there was
no established datum point. Now the datum point is hypothetically fixed,
the tests become more possible, and now that it is recognised that there is
more than one cycle and all interactionary, the difficulty of there not being
any exact repeat found is overcome, but it becomes evident that the only
way to test the hypothesis is by a forward constructional programme, but
still using what data there are to check back upon, and also for the pur-
pose of making test estimates. In 1941 the position of the Uranian cycle
became evident as the records matured, and it could be seen that the
1853-57 drought was being repeated, though obscured by the other com-
bining cycles, and the records of Sydney and a few other stations for
1858 were obtained, and on that basis a sequence of three events was set
out, namely, a general rain in May, a fairly dry spring, and a pronounced
wet period either at the end of September or early in October, and this
treble sequence was reproduced in full, thus showing to that point that
the hypothesis was upheld. Unfortunately, the 84 year old data becomes
obscure again for a time, but in June a general rain, following dry autumn
should again demonstrate the correctness of the assumption based on this
line of deduction. In 1860 and 1861 there were unsually heavy rains in
August in Brisbane, and apparently along the coast down to Sydney, and
if these are parts of the 84 year old cycle they should again fall in 1944
and 1945, but if they do not then occur, it must then be concluded that
they may form part of the complete cycle of 165 years.
Another example may be given, that is, the great rains of March,
1870. In 1940 there were given as a test of the 71 years cycle, in which
case they should have recurred in 1941, but the rains of March, 1941,
though general and in places heavy, did not come up to the high intensity
of those of 1870, and the test for that cycle was, therefore, negative, and
must now be deferred till it is tested as a component of the 84 year cycle,
when it would recur in 1954.
The next point that arises is the possibility in time of testing each
weather group back to its component cycles, which can only be very par-
tially done as yet. Thus, in the case of the great rains of 1870. Had
they been 71 year events they would have been seen in the records of
1799, which do not exist, but in time this will be quite possible, but it
will not be for some years yet, when the back data are full and reliable.
Had Bacon’s advice been taken, observations would have been made with
this in view, and the problem, if it is to be solved along these lines, would
have been nearer to its end. Finally, the proposition will be as follows.
Take any rainfall group as an example; it is first to be referred to the
former seasons at each previous cyclical period, namely, 35, 59, 71, 84
and 165 years. Each of these is again similarly referred till, when the
records are available for long enough periods, the exact composition of
every rain group should be determinable.
The final determinant is, however, the southern sunspots present at
the time of the cyclical maturity of a group.
Observation shows that the southern sunspots are more important
to us in the southern hemisphere than those on the northern side. They
appear to have three possible points of action. At their entry onto the
visible disk, at the meridian passage if greatly disturbed at the time, and
most strongly at the final passage over the limb, and for some days after-
wards unless a fresh sunspot group follows or more especially if it bursts
through in the final quadrant. Such eruptive spots are always more ef-
fective than groups making a steady transit (see note *) through the sun’s


rotation, and it is possible for action to be delayed through a long suc-
cession of spot groups until the time of the final clearance. By an old
convention the limb where the spots are seen last is called the west limb,
but as the sun turns from west to east it is quite evident that this is really
the east limb and as the earth’s weather systems move mainly from west
to east, this should be amended in solar observations at least.
A great deal of sunspot investigation has been done regarding the
whole spotted surface, as a unity, and this has lead to serious errors, as
it is to the individual spots that we must look for definite reactions. The
special importance of the sunspots is seen in the marked change in the
season that takes place early in June and early in December, at which
times the passage of the earth in its orbit and the tilt of the sr.n’s axis
cause the spots in each hemisphere to come into line with the correspond-
ing hemispheres of the earth, and summer and winter begin to assume
their special character from those dates.
The research is now concentrated on the 84 year cycle, whose great
probable importance I have already referred to, and the method is that
of the synchronous charts previously mentioned. These show the groups
of rain and temperature changes in the past cyclical years, and from
these the estimate of the coming season is prepared, and each event is
checked as it arrives, and further checked as to its exact date with the
daily sunspot observations. When the result is positive, the process for
that event is complete, but there is always the other method of examining
the cyclical components of each event, especially in case of a negative
result. For example, the next important test event is that of the June
rains, which were heavy and general in 1859, and should, therefore, re-
peat as an 84 year event. To check these they should be examined for
their presence about 36 years before, that is, in 1822, or 23 or 24. In
1823 the reports of Sir Thomas Brisbane showed winter rains heaviest
in July. The Saturnian cycle would show a check in the records of 1800,
but there is only an account of floods in January; the 71 year period goes
to the year of the landing, when it is recorded that there were heavy win-
ter rains. As times goes on, this method of checking can be more and
more fully resorted to. So far, this cycle has given some important re-
sults, and last year it was possible to establish three points in sequence
which seems to put the matter outside the possibility of mere coincidence
and within the scope of a law.
These are the main lines on which this research is being attempted,
and I feel confident that success will be its final achievement, and that it
will be possible to find the solution of the long vexed question of seasonal
forecasting.
Note *.—Since the lecture was delivered a very striking example
has occurred of the effect of an eruptive southern sunspot (meaning one
which breaks through in view of the earth). Such came in the middle of
May, when the rains of the Saturnian cycle were ready for reproduction,
and the general rains of June, 1859, were very close. The effect was a
very general rain with some extremely heavy falls, many in excess of 10
inches, while thirty thousand million gallons of water flowed into Sydney’s
water supply dams.
Note t- —Meteorology provides two singular proofs of the electro-
magnetic constitution of the universe in the cirrus clouds. At sunset the
horizontal beams strike the earth’s limb and the cirrus streams adjust
themselves to the beams; secondly, the shape of the cirrus and mares’
tails, have always been a puzzle, and the analogy is the electric flame,
that is., a flame subjected to the tension of an electro-magnetic field.
These phenomena are fully dealt with in “Cosmic Machinery,” by Captain
Staples.


POSTSCRIPTUM.
Since the delivery of the paper, the following important sequence
has been established. The heavy winter rains of 1859 were under test
observation as possible component of the 1943 season, as an 84 year
cyclical repetition, but this did not happen, and further research showed
that they were partly the winter rains of 1788 in the Bruckner series,
which was possibly by the link given by Governor Brisbane’s short 18
months of rainfall observations at Parramatta, 1822-24, thus 1788 heavy
winter rains delayed the sailing of the convict transports—interval of 35
years—heavy winter rains at Parramatta given in rainfall record of Gov-
ernor Brisbane—interval of 36 years—heavy rains in winter 1859—in-
terval of 35 years—heavy winter rains in 1894—interval of 36 years—
heavy winter rains in 1930. This not only establishes a complete se-
quence, but also shows the 71 year repeats on the double Bruckner cycle.
Owing to the year 1872 showing similar rain which did not repeat
this year, it can be surmised that the rain of 1788 had another component
of the same character on the 84 year series, which gave the rain of 1872.
The Bruckner series, following 1930, should then recur in 1965, and
2001, while the 1872 winter rains should recur in the winter of 1956.
This, of course, involves the hypothesis that each rain group has a per-
manent individuality.
Fig. 1.
Relation between Sunspots and Magnetic Horizontal Intensity at Various
Stations.
(International Astronomical Union).
SEASONAL FORECASTING.
POSTSCRIPTUM 11.
The great rain of July, 1872, which, under the hypothesis should be
repeated as a part of the seventy-one year or double Bruckner cycle, in
1943, has now been recorded on that cycle in its full period of seventy-
one years and two months in September with a registration at Croham-
hurst of three and a half inches.
23


There are always two possibilities for a repeat on the double Bruck-
ner series; either that it will come seasonally, that is at or very close to
the same day and month, or that it will come at the full cyclical period of
six revolutions of the controlling planetary magnetic field, in this case
11.862 years X 6 or 71.172 years, which is roughly seventy-one years and
two months. Exactly the period is 71 years and 62.78 days. In this case
Fig. 2.
Atmospheric Ozone. This plate is from the Report of the International
Union, and shows the amount of Ozone at various stations whose latitude
is given. It can be seen that the minimum occurs in the autumn in both
hemispheres.


Fig. 3.
The Cyclical Elements in 1942 showing the dry late winter and early
spring with the four cyclical components.
Fig. 4.
The Cyclical Elements of 1942, showing the onset of the rains in October,
with the four cyclical components in the years given.


the rain fell at 7l years and 69 days, and its occurrence was due to &
sudden sunspot outbreak 28th to 30th August, with its subsequent charg-
ing of the upper air as explained in the paper.
POSTSCRIPTUM 111.
The final disputed point in this theory was confirmed almost as soon
as the paper was read by the discovery of planetary bodies belonging to
several other stars, Mu Draconis, Xi Bootis, 61 Cygni, 70 Ophiuchi, by
Dr. Strand of Sproul Observatory in Pennsylvania, and Dr. Sen of Allaha-
bad University points out in a letter to The Observatory for December,
Figs. 5 and 6.
Test positions of cyclical repetitions.
On left the floods of 1863 and 64 are seen to be Bruckner components,
but not Saturnian, and the possibility of their having a Uranian charactei
is indicated below.
On right the so far negative results of the tests for the 1870 flood are
shown. Therefore, the next test for this heavy rainfall must be in 1954.
on the Uranian cycle.


1943, that under Banerji’s Cepheid Theory planetary bodies may be quite
numerous. This, of course, removes the sun from its allegedly almost
unique position, and thus the theory of the planetary mechanism advanced
in this paper now rests on surer ground.
This material reached Australia as the “Journal” was going to press
and this revolutionary discovery thus appears first probably in an Aus-
tralian journal.
Fig. 7.
The Cyclical Components of the Pearl Flood and that of 1931 on left.
On right the cyclical components of the flood of 1893.
Below the tests for the Century Cycle of Professor Henri Memery, of
Talence Observatory, Bordeaux, France.


R. O. GILLIES & CO. PTY. LTD.
