

r/osst>
AUSTRALIA’S TALISMAN, I
STATE RESERVATION, CULTIVATION, I
AND IRRIGATION. I
A Solution of the Rapidly Intensifying f
Industrial Problem. •||
BY C. HORSPOOL. I
PBICE—SIXPENCE. |
grtrintetj; ©
MACDOUGALL & PRENTICE, Printers, “ Chronicle ” Office,
128 King Street, Newtown. 9
1891. W




OOKING
FORWARD.
AUSTRALIA’S TALISMAN.
STATE RESERVATION, CULTIVATION,
AND IRRIGATION.
*. Solution of the Rapidly Intensifying
Industrial Problem.
BY C. HORSPOOL.
PRICE—SIXPENCE.
gnjbmnj;
MACDOUGALL & PRENTICE, Printers, “Chronicle” Office,
128 King Street, Xewtown.




nsss's/rioss
19 V -99,
DEDICATION.
To those who having faith in the future of
Australia, would strive for her highest social
development, and whose idea of labour for the
common weal is not limited to an interested
15 per cent philantrophy, but is based on the
principle that the highest help is to help others
to help themselves, and under such conditions
that the toiler shall personally retain the fruit
of his toil.
Feb. 23, 1891.




Looking Forward
That the Old World is labouring under unequal social con-
ditions of the most appalling kind is a truism, but any person
whose time is not entirely occupied on behalf of his own indivi-
dual welfare must have noticed that those conditions are being
rapidly established in Australia, and further, that it is only a
question of time and development for such unequal social
conditions, to make themselves felt in the New World with the
same intensity as they are being already felt in the old.
That the festering poverty which is eating into the heart of
civilization in the Northern Hemisphere is already manifesting
itself beneath the Southern Cross, the following facts but too
clearly indicate and prove. Whilst with much demonstration
we were celebrating our centennial year, on the outskirts of our
city was a huge national workhouse under canvass for the
accommodation of citizens who were unemployed. During the
late strike when several thousand men all over the colony left
their usual occupations pending a settlement of the dispute, how
was it that in so many instances other men were found willing
and anxious, often at considerable personal risk, to step into the
places thus made vacant ? Whence came they ? The recent
Intercolonial Conference of Charity Organizations held at Mel-
bourne to consider the “ scientific distribution of charity ” to the
thoughtful mind is a sign most ominous, and the very latest
development in proof of social decadence in New South Wales
is an attempt to establish in our midst by a clergyman a scheme
which is the counterpart of General Booth’s for “ Darkest
England.” As we have only been colonized one hundred years
the old world cry of over-population can hardly be applied to us,
yet we have so soon reached this deplorable state of things.
What is the cause ? The answer is simple, it is the only
answer, “It all lies in the land.” Land is the source of all
wealth, all men must directly or indirectly have access to it, in
order to produce that which will sustain life, and the cause lies
in the fact that the few have gained possession of that which is
an absolute necessity for all, and have thereby been enabled to
prohibit the many from having access to it unless they consented
to such terms as the possessors choose to impose, and as such


terms are always regulated by the iron law of necessity they
were enabled to demand the largest proportion of all that was
produced, as the price of their permission to be allowed to pro-
duce. Thus on the one hand true development has been vir-
tually strangled, and the avenues of employment restricted in
consequence, whilst on the other hand by far the lion’s share of .
all that has been produced has been surrendered to those who did
not produce it, and the real producer rendered proportionately
poorer in consequence.
As there is only one main cause for poverty and general
depression so there is only one main remedy for its removal.
Make it possible for all who so desire to obtain access to the
land under the most favourable conditions. Establish a yeoman
class upon the soil, who, because they personally reap the fruit
of their own exertion, will be prosperous, and consequently con-
tented, and will constitute the best possible foundation of
national prosperity. To do this would decentralize the people
and prevent the present congestion in our large centres of
population. New South Wales has an area of 900,000,000 square
acres, and yet one-third of its population is located in Sydney.
All the land adjacent to settlement is already in possession of
those aforesaid, to resume it is not practicable, indeed impossible,
but as there are millions of acres of land yet unalienated from
the State, it is a matter of comparative simplicity for the State to
settle the people upon them in such a way that flagrant violation
of natural law will be an absolute impossibility, and to the dis-
cussion of a scheme by means of which it can be accomplished
this pamphlet is devoted.
Owing to the exigencies of our climate with its alternations
of drought and flood, agricultural pursuits are very precarious ;
but there is one potent word, which, like a fabled talisman, is
capable of defying the often disastrous results and of reducing
them to harmony with national desire. Irrigation.—By it
means the barren wilderness can be made to blossom like the
rose. It is the only effectual method by means of which our
climate can be satisfactorily and permanently counteracted, and
its many waste and barren acres made fruitful and capable of
settlement. India, although parched and sterile, has been
transformed by this simple method of impounding waste water
and distributing it over the soil. In California it has been
most successfully applied, and in Victoria at the Mildura settle-
ment most astounding results have been produced. Thus
irrigation is altogether past the experimental stage, and is now
a practical and an accomplished fact.
The late Bishop of Melbourne, Dr. Mooiehouse (now Bishop
of Manchester, in addressing a public meeting recently at Salford,
England, referred to the question as follows : —“ The Murray,
which ran through Victoria was 2500 miles long, ten times as
long as the Thames, and was bound to play an important part in


the future development of the resources of the colony. It was
there, in the immediate vicinity of the plains, which were capable
•of irrigation, and already the people of Victoria had become
sensible of the absolute need of irrigation. He remembered the
time when he had to use the cattle whip to them. He could not
make them to see that they were loosing the means of maintain-
ing an immense population, and of aoemualating untold wealth,
by letting these great rivers roll their waters uselessly to the sea.
In times of drought farmers had asked him to pray God for rain.
He answered that the only prayer he could offer would be like this :
0, God, forgive us for our idleness and folly and unthankfulness,
and give us grace in the future to use better and more wisely Thy
gracious gifts in nature and Providence” {cheers). Now, he was
thankful to say, schemes of irrigation were being begun, and the
plains were so Hat that they could easily be perfected when fully
■developed. They would sustain forty times more people than
lived there now. The colony, he believed, has a glorious future
before it, and would be, in fact, a better England without pau-
perism and without destitution.”
Chaffey Brothers, speaking of the Murray and its land, in re-
lation to their irrigation scheme, say—“ Nature, here, wears a
joyous and not a depressing countenance, with the soft blue sun-
lit sky and her sparkling waters—she smiles upon everything and
everything smiles back upon her. A river is life, a vast stimula-
ting vivifying influence, always most agreeable, but in a parched
.and thirsty land doubly beneticient in its effects. The birds love
it and harbour near it; the trees adorn it with their caressing
branches ; the very ground yields readily to afford it ample scope,
mid the dry land on its banks is yearning to be wedded to it that
it may produce with prolific abundance the glorious fruits and
flowers which such a happy union will bring forth.”
In the recently uttered words of our late Bishop, Dr. Barry,
we have further reliable opinion on the value of irrigation :
•“Australia is almost self-sufficient, and is able to provide the
comforts and most of the luxuries of life that humanity desires,
but she is beset with one great draw back and danger—the ever
recurring drought causing infinite ruin and suffering, and it is
■certain that she will have to face the question of irrigation,”
The Press aJso speaks favourably and most encouragingly
on this subject. The Sydney Morning Herald recently stated that
■“ With the introduction of a water supply for the land should be
a system of thorough scientific culture such has has produced
such remarkable results in California, and is already giving pro-
anise of equally productive results on the Mildura settlement.
Irrigation and thorough culture should go together. ’
The foregoing extracts are abundant evidence in favour of
irrigation, and but for the fact that we are so prone in Australia
to model all our ideas of settlement and development on Anglo-
Saxon lines we should have resorted to it long ago, and most


extensively, as not only have we annually a vast volume of flood
water escaping down our rivers without any national attempt to-
impound and utilise it, but in the interior there are subterranean
reservoirs which only require to be tapped by the skill of the-
engineer for the barren wilderness to be made to rejoice, and fit
it to teem with a prosperous population.
The Sydney Mail says :— ■“ The application of water to the
soil will become the salvation of colonial agriculture, and a
direct inducement for securing settlement on the land. The
rural population of New South Wales languishes in direct con-
trast to the amazing increase of the metropolis ; but the farmer
produces that wealth, the handling and spending of which finds-
employmentfor such a large proportion of the inhabitants of
Sydney. Congested cities with a depleted country are a
menace to the prosperity of any State in that the avenues for
employment are curtailed, the markets for some manufacture are-
limited, and young men and women crowd into office and shop-
life, and work for wages that shrink in consequencejto a star-
vation limit. Hitherto the climatic risks of farm ng have
checked the prosperity of New South Wales,, but with the utili-
sation of its streams flowing to waste, and the irrigation of its-
desert lands, the city will empty itself upon the country, and
thousands of happy homes spring up wherever the vital fluid can
be appropriated. It will indeed be k happy time when young
men can look forward to securing for themselves a life of useful
work, combined with out-door pleasure, and found a smiling
home, surrounded with rural delights amidst all the advantages
of social enjoyment that an irrigation colony affords.”
In order for an irrigation colony to be of the highest benefit
both to the individual and the State, and so fulfil the glowing
aspirations of the above writer it must be a National Under-
taking, because if undertaken by private enterprise the syndicate
which provides the required capital would possess a mortgage
over the energy and industry of future generations, and the
interest on such mortgage would be exacted as rent, which would
be continually rising, the only limit being the success of the
settlement. Water is a great national asset, and as our land
ought not, so our rivers must not be allowed to pass into the
hands of private persons. An irrigation scheme on the banks of
the Nepean called the “Mulgoa’’has just been placed before the
public, and it affords a most striking and puugent “object
lesson ” on the above facts.
Mulgoa comprises about 20,000 acres of good land which,
the promoters purchased at £l2 per acre, and as Parliament has
conceeded the rights to irrigate this land with water from the
Nepean River the promoters set forth in their prospectus that the
land will be increased in value from £25 to £SO per acre thereby,,
which means that apart from the improvements, irrigation will
increase the value of the Mulgoa Estate £750,000, and as the-


persons who originally obtained the right to use the water require-
the modest remuneration of £150,000 for same the increased
value amounts to £900,000, and there is not a fraction of im-
provement to represent it (as the cost of machinery for distri-
buting the water will be met by a special tax.)
The sum of £900,000 simply represents future labour, the-
results of which will be obtained from the land. It will be paid
in the form of rent or interest, to those who have actually done
nothing towards producing it, except to obtain the right from
Government (or buy the right when obtained), to compel a
section of the people to pay them for the privilege to use their
own water in conjunction with their personal labour and land.
Thus the plain English of the scheme is this : Those who under
such conditions work the soil and produce, the value will in
addition to living themselves, have to provide a huge sum for
others who practically did nothing ; consequently, the real benefit
of irrigation, viz., increased facility in production is not reaped
by the people but by the land and water lords, who may chance
to control the scheme. For irrigation to be of real value to the
people it must be so promoted and controlled that the people who
work the land shall personally reap the entire benefit accruing
from the result of irrigation in conjunction with their labour ; and
the only way for such a result to be achieved te for irrigation to-
be made a national undertaking. The Government must open
up the land to the people and make it possible for the poorest
citizen to obtain access to it in order that he may utilise his-
natural fund of energy in conjunction with irrigation thereon i
and then minus a small sum to recoup the national outlay, per-
sonally retain the full fruit of his industry and energy.
Although the idea may appear a novel one, for no government
in the world has yet taken upon itself the proposed responsibility r
yet the author of this pamphlet considers it quite feasible and
practicable, and professes to propound a scheme by means of which,
it can be instituted in New South Wales.
Australia should not wait to be led. She does to a great ex-
tent already, and ought still to lead in the van of progress, and
if anything can be done to increase her prosperity and stability,,
every colonist should feel it his duty to help forward any move-
ment which is for the common good.
Far too much of our best land has already been parted with,,
and is being held by capitalists and syndicates for their own per-
sonal benefit and to the detriment of the people’s interest. The
other week, one million one hundred thousand aeres of land were
offered for sale, being the private estate of one man, and he
probably did not employ more than fifty or one hundred men ora
the whole estate, which, if properly cultivated would have main-
tained half the people at present in Sydney. With this alienated,
land this scheme has nothing to do. We have millions of acres
of good land lying in waste which would, if properly utilized,.


'bring millions of money to the Government and the people, and
not one acre more of such land should ever be alienated from the
state. It was the alienation of the land that is causing the trouble
in England and Ireland, and with this result, the land, as a matter
of course, has much increased in value, making the rich become
richer and the poor poorer, so much so that oppression, poverty,
and starvation has become the common lot of multitudes.
If we would avoid this result we must avoid their error ; we
must reserve the land for the people. Then we must arrange some
■ organized plan for its cultivation, and the best method of doing
this, in New South Wales, would be to establish National Irriga-
tion works ; provide comfortable homes for the people and place
them on the land. These are the main propositions of the scheme,
and if carried out would find employment for ten times the people
at present in the colony ; bring about a better state of morals and
health ; do away with such poverty as is attributable to lack of
employment, help and enrich the Government to an enormous
extent, and would secure great natural riches to all the people of
the colony and their children for ever.
If the Government could see their way to accept such a
scheme they might make a commencement by selecting fifty
thousand acres of suitable land as near the railway line as pos-
sible, and then extend a light line of railway immediately to it; of
course the idea seems somewhat preposterous, but on consider-
ation it is not so, as we have in New South Wales already spent
£40,000,000 in railways to enrich private landowners and others,
and it would not be preposterous at all to spend a few thousands
more to enrich land which belongs to the State. Then the most
suitable part could be surveyed and laid out as a township, and
divided into business and villa allotments, which could be leased
for twenty or more years. Then instead of waiting for the
orthodox deputation, at once proceed to build a Town Hall, Post
Offices, and Public Schools. If it were decided that there were
to be public-houses on the settlement then a substantial jail and
courthouse would have to be erected also ; but if it were deemed
wise to prohibit alcohol being sold then the jail and courthouse
could be dispensed with. Land would have to be reserved for a
public park. The surrounding land would then be arranged into
farms, orchards, vineyards, vegetablo gardens, &c., as might be
deemed best, say, in ten or twenty acre blocks ; if for farms, up
;to two hundred or two hundred and fifty acres. Then make
roads, fences, and clear the land, and build houses on each allot-
ment of such size and quality as the amount of acres may re-
quire. Then a complete irrigation plant should be installed. The
land planted with fruit trees, and provision made for all seed
which might be required during the first year. The Government
should then select suitable people as tenants, for the ten-acre
allotments and give them one pound per week with house and
orchard rent free for one, two, or three years, as the case may be,


House
... £100
Clearing land ...
50
Making roads
50
Paid to tenant for labour
... 156
Interest
60
Share of irrigation
15
Total
... £421
"to enable them to live and bring up their families until the trees
■come into profit, which may be expected at the third year when
every portion of his ten acres ought to under proper cul-
tivation.
The cost to the Government at this point woud be as
follows :
(The above figures are only approximate.)
TUe question may be asked from whence shall the Govern-
ment obtain the money required for the large expenditure ? ( Is it
not possible to form a National Bank for New South W ales ? Is
it not time we formed such a bank, and would not such an
undertaking constitute a favourable opportunity to do so J . If
not it could be borrowed from England at a low rate of interest
for such a purpose.
After the third year the tenant shall pay 5,7, or 10 per cent,
■on the outlay ; the fifth year when his trees are in bearing
he shall pay a proper rent as may be arranged by the Govern-
ment, to pay off capital and interest in fifteen years from the
commencement. In no case where a tenant fulfilled his
engagement, and kept his character, shall he be dismissed. He
-should also be allowed the preference to continue after the 15
years have expired. Should, however, any be found not doing
their duty they shall be liable to be dismissed. It would also be
advisable to make it compulsory for every man to insure his life
for not less than one hundred pounds.
There would be neither risk nor loss to the Government on
these lines, but great ultimate profit, as may be gathered from
the following facts :—lrrigated land in America, rose in three
years to double its cost, and town lands in connection with
irrigation settlements to nearly four times their cost, and accord-
ing to the statement of Chaffey Brothers it will not be possible
to buy land for orange growing in ten years’ time for less than
two hundred pounds per acre. In Mildura, \ ictoria, some of the
irrigated land is to-day worth from eighty to one hundred pounds
per acre. At Chaffey’s Werribee settlement, twenty-five miles
from Melbourne, land has changed hands for one hundred and
eighty pounds per acre. This high price was paid not for re-
sidential but for market gardening purposes, and ten-acre blocks
in Mildura and Renmark are fetching one hundred and fifty and


two hundred pounds. The above statements show clearly what
is made of irrigated land by private enterprise, and also plainly
demonstrates that if the Government kept and irrigated the land
and saw it properly cultivated not only would such action benefit
the people without actual loss, but that an enormous national
profit would result from such a course.
Some doubt may be expressed as to where a market may be
found if so much fruit were produced. We have a market already
only waiting to be supplied at our very door, as Australia is-
spending annually for dried imported fruits the sum of £750,000,
and England imports dried fruits to the amount of eight millions
sterling per annum, thus constituting a market for all our pro-
duce, not only dried fruits but fruit in its original state. Last
year the Tasmanian truit-growers sent apples to England which
realised as high as 20s. to 245. per case, and encouraged by their
success they have this year chartered two vessels to load fruit for
the London market, which is not only open for fruit but for meat,
butter, eggs, &c., &c.
In California there is one million and a half acres under fruit
cultivation, and owing to the systematic exportation, fruit is-
realising higher prices now than in years past.
About twenty miles from Sydney is a ten-acre orchard with-
out the benefit of irrigation, which was bought by the present
occupier some years ago, who cleared and planted it with oranges,,
lemons, grapes, tigs, apples, plums, peaches, and various other
kinds of fruit, from winch he will probably realise an income of
from two to three hundred pounds per annum, and for the sale of
eggs an additional hundred pounds. If this can be done by a
private individual who in the first instance had to buy the land,,
then clear and fence it, and then build his house and meet all the
various incidental expenses, what would ten acres of land do-
according to this scheme, to benefit the occupier, with house-
already built, land cleared and fenced, trees planted, seed supplied
for the first year, irrigation provided, and a certain salary of 20s.
weekly He may the first and second year get a crop of grain r
potatoes, or other vegetables, which, with the aid of the 205.,.
would enable him to live in comfort. The third year the fruit
trees will begin to bear, further adding to his profit and comfort.
The fourth year a fair crop may be expected. The fifth year the
yield will be abundant. If oranges, he will have eighty trees to-
the acre, each tree bearing from one thousand to one thousand
five hundred oranges, and if sold at eight for a penny will bring
him in £4OO per annum from his ten acres If grapes of the
best kind they will yield from three to four hundred pounds per
annum. If olives, after three years’ growth, they will bring him
in a sufficient income for the maintenance of his family, and will
soon lead to fortune. Apricots pay well : also, apples, pears,,
plums, peaches, cherries, and the other varieties of fruit, almost
without exception. And if fowls are kept a further income o£


•one hundred a year may be realised, altogether offering such
inducements for cultivating and settling upon the land that it
would soon absorb all our surplus labour, and open up a field so
enchanting that by aid of a system of emigration tens of thou-
sands of our brethern in the old land who spend their lives
toiling like serfs for a bare pittance and a pauper’s grave, would
gladly come over and help us to appropriate the lavish bounty
which Nature is yearning to bestow upon us. Mr. Kuskin says:—
“ There is no nobler task for human enterprise in the present than that
which is to be found in the great pioneer work of colonization,
the leading forth of the surplus thousands of the teeming multi-
tudes of the old world to people the great vast solitudes of the
new, and the removal, as far as possible, of obstacles which lie in
their path in the establishment of happy homes.”
If this scheme of State irrigation were carried into effect on
a large scale a revival in all kinds of business would follow, such
as ship-builders, shippers, merchants, and trades of every kind.
It would secure plenty of work and good wages for every man
who was willing to work, and the number who decline when an
opportunity is given is considerably smaller than their calumnia-
tors would declare. Its waves of prosperity would roll on every
shore of the world, blessing all nations and injuring none, as
would be realised more clearly in fifteen years to come when
looking back from this standpoint, we should find millions of
acres of land under cultivation ; the barren wilderness turned into
a beautiful garden, the rivers, the land, and the sun all
harmonously united to pour their wealth and gladness into the
treasury of the people.
The gaunt withering hand of poverty which is being stretched
over us to-day would be gone, and with it oppression crime
would be reduced to a minimum, the “ common people ” housed
in happy homes, living abreast of their civilization, and shaded by
their own vine and fig tree.
The Government which accomplishes this will not only esta-
blish a memorial which will perpetuate its memory for all time
but it would receive back all monies expended together wiUi the
houses and cultivated land, which will be worth double of tlffee
times their cost, and will also be in possession of the yearly rent
roll for same*-a magnificant national asset “to hold and to keep*
for the good of the people for ever,”


Muo
N cQ) l/
1508
01887975
i 2


MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION
AUSTRALASIA
THE FIRST
Office in these
colonies
which granted
Life Assurance
Absolutely Free
from
Restrictions
VyR>:VISA MALA
Invests all its
Funds in
these Colonies.
All Profits
belong to the
Policyholiers.
Established 1869, and Incorporated by Act of Parliament,
o
Board of Directors:
SAMUEL DICKINSON, Esq.,
Chairman.
The Hon. F. T. HUMPHERY, M.L.C.,
Deputy Chairman.
The Hon. W. J. TRICKETT, iI.L.C.
RUSSELL BARTON, Esq.
The Hon. JOHN DAVIES, C.M.G., M.L.C.
The Hon. JAMES N. BRUNKER, M.L.A.
General Manager:
J. C. REMINGTON.
A THOROUGHLY AUSTRALASIAN INSTITUTION.
LOW RATES OF PREMIUM.
CLAIMS PROMPTLY SETTLED.
UNDOUBTED SECURITY.
POLICIES INDEFEASIBLE from date of issue, and contain
NO CONDITIONS as to residence, calling, habits of life, or
cause of death.
Principal Office :
GEORGE & WYNYARD STREETS, SYDNEY,
WITH BRANCHES AT
Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Auckland and
Christchurch.
(See Outside of Cover.)


MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION
OF AUSTRALASIA.
Principal Office: GEORGE & WINY ARE STREETS, SYDNEY.
, c ttE INSIDE THIS COV. r).
