

Looking Backward
Reminiscences of 42 Years
BY SAMUEL MITCHELL, J.P.
NORTHAMPTON. W.A.
Geraldton Newspapers Limited Print
MARCH 18, 1911
Reprinted February, 1970


Cooking Backward
(Reminiscences of 42 years
BY SAMUEL MITCHELL, J.P.
NORTHAMPTON. W.A,


LOOKING BACKWARD
In the year 1867 I was offered the
management of the then celebrated
Geraldine Lead mine, situated on the
Murchison River, in this State, and
about 50 miles inland from the mouth.
I went to London in May of that year
to complete arrangements, and was
there on the sth “the English Derby
Day.” I daresay some of the older
members of the horseracing fraternity
will remember that it snowed on that
particular day—a rare incident for
that period of the year in the Old
Country. The matter with which I
was immediately concerned was fixed
up by my engaging for three years,
and I left my dear home in Corn-
wall with eight miners (one of these
having his wife) some time in August,
and joined the good old ship
Zephyr at Gravesend bound for Swan
River (the common name for Western
Australia in those days). Simul-
taneously with our leaving port there
sailed a large ship called the Glen-
mark, bound for New Zealand, and in
passing down the Channel we came
to close quarters. Some of those
aboard the Glenmark held out a rope
and offered to tow us, although there
did not appear to be any need of it.
At the Lizard we parted company and
we never expected to see the leviath-
ian again. But after we had been out
for about five weeks, we fell in with
her and kept in her company for four
weeks. Often we exchanged signals
but at last the big ship, finding she
could not shake us off apparently
turned sulky and would not answer
us.
I mention this incident as showing
how often it is that the bigger under-
rates the smaller. The Glenmark was
three times the tonnage of the Zephyr
but it could not beat her in sailing.
After a splendid, but uneventful, pas-
sage we reached Gage Roads on Nov-
ember 13, and waited for the pilot,
“Captain Jackson.” The late Mr.
Marmion (who was then a youth, and
afterwards became Minister for Land)
was the first to come aboard. I may
here remark that the arrival of an
overseas ship was a big event in those
days, because most of the supplies
were brought out by three or four
sailers. Overseas steamers were
scarcely known at that time. They
were never seen anywhere on our
coast. Moreover, there was then no
railway or telegraph within this im-
mense territory.
I landed next day with my little
band. It was the day of the election
of a member for the Legislative Coun-
cil—there was no Assembly then —and
I witnessed a few fairly lively scenes.
The late Mr. Walter Bateman was the
successful candidate. Who the other
was I do not remember. The next day
I journeyed to Perth in one of De
Letche’s coaches. At that time most


of the traffic between Perth and Fre-
mantle was done by a couple of
coaches running twice a day and a
similar number of what were then
called “Puffin’ Billies" on the river.
These latter were of very crude
construction especially to the eye of
one fresh from the old country. My
arrival in Perth (there was not much
in common with Perth then and now,
except by name) happened to coincide
with the formal opening of the bridge
over the Swan River leading to Guild-
ford. This event afforded a splendid
opportunity for a newcomer to some
extent to see what colonial life was,
because all sorts and conditions of the
population within reasonable distance
were there. The volunteer corps was
also in attendance with their guns
on their shoulders and their bayonets
by their side. Altogether I was very
favorably impressed with the free
and easy style of colonial life, and
straightaway made up my mind to
adopt Australia as my future home.
If I live to see the 13th of November
next I shall have been here 42 years,
with a break of a short visit to the
Old Country in 1871. During our
short stay in Fremantle I visited as
many notable people and places as I
could. Naturally the depot (“the
Imperial Prison”) was one of the first
institutions I examined, owing to so
much we had heard on our way out
about it, “Moondyne Joe,” and other
celebrities. Now with this place few
reasonable people could discover any
fault, because, after all, it was a
prison, and but few found themselves
there unless they deserved it. I also
visited the chain gang (of which I
had heard so much) and saw it work-
ing near the Fremantle Bridge. What
I witnessed I have never been able to
eliminate from my memory. There
were about 14 or 15 men in the gang,
hobbled like horses, only worse, be-
cause there was a biggish weight
attached to the hobbles. Under such
conditions they had to dig, shovel,
and wheel away the earth. The sight
was revolting in the extreme. I dare-
say these men deserved severe punish-
ment, but to see human creatures
treated like wild beasts was enough
to make one’s blood turn cold. Any-
way, what I saw has had an indelible
effect on my mind, and influenced all
my subsequent dealings with that
unfortunate class. I must admit,
however, that any consideration 1
may have given them, has met with
but few requittals. But that's by the
way.
After a few days’ delay we sailed
in an old dugout called the “Favorite"
for Port Gregory via Champion Bay.
The name “Geraldton” was not then
quite as prominent as it is today. We
duly reached the latter port where we
landed, and the first three persons I
remember meeting were the K.M. (Mr.
Durlacher), Dan Scott, and G. Baston,
all of whom have long since joined
the great majority, although neither
of them was much older than myself.
In regard to our landing, I have
often thought how ridiculous my little
party must have appeared in the eyes
of the inhabitants of the town,
because each man carried a gun as
though he expected to meet an enemy
of some sort. But if any such delu-
sion did exist among us, it soon
vanished. I often heard my Cousin
Jack afterwards say “They be a
bravish lot of good fellers in
Champ’n Bay.” I was almost forget-
ting to say that on the day we landed
there was a big cricket match on. I
well remember two of the players,
Aubrey Brown and Harry Smith, with
both of whom I became intimately
acquainted afterwards. The latter
was the hero of the day, and was
carried off on the shoulders of his
co-partners in the game. I daresay
there are some still in Geraldton who
well remember the event. After a
stay in Geraldton of a day and a half,
we again set sail in the same old tub,
“The Favorite,” (an inapplicable
name as far as we were concerned)
for Port Gregory, the destination of
our long sea voyage. We reached
Port Gregory on a Saturday and
remained overnight. Not long after
we had retired to our rough shake-
downs a laughable incident occurred,
whereby the whole of the guards were
ordered to turn out. The disturbing
element was the yelling of one of our
party—a man called Carkeek. Of
course, being newcomers and having


been stuffed with so many thrilling
yarns on our voyage out as to the
doings of some of the notable
characters in the colony, such as
Moondyne Joe and Prank Hall, we
naturally supposed our mate was
being attacked by one of this frater-
nity. On investigation, however, we
found the culprit was a land crab
plenty of these on Port Gregory
beach in search of, I suppose, new
blood. The creature had found the
way up the leg of Carkeek’s trousers.
Needless to say the enemy was
quickly dispatched, and we resumed
our shake-downs and slept the sleep
of the righteous for the rest of the
night. Next morning, Sunday, we
started for our final destination, the
Geraldine Mine, on teams driven by
Job Burton and Joe Allen, both of
Geraldton, I believe, who had each
brought down a load of ore from the
mine.
CHAPTER II
We had not proceeded far on the
road to Geraldine when we met other-
teams laden with ore coming from the
mine and, being anxious to learn all I
could, I asked one of the teamsters on
what day he left the mine. The ques-
tion seemed to puzzle him, and after-
scratching his head by way of refresh-
ing his memory, he said :
“Well, Sir, If you’ll tell me what
day it is now, I’ll tell ’ee what day I
left the mine.’’
X told him it was Sunday.
“Then,” said he, “I left on Thurs-
day.”
Well, this answer was what is often
called a ‘facer,” especially to those
who were just out from the land of
pasties, prayers, and psalm singing,
and where the doctrine of keeping the
Sabbath holy was largely preached
and largely observed. At the time I
left there were thousands of families
that would not have a letter opened
or newspaper read on a Sunday. They
went as far as to refuse to cook their
Sunday’s food on that day, but pre-
pared it on Saturday and had it cold
on the Sunday. I daresay it is differ-
ent now, as at any rate I should say
it would be. I may here remark that
the average Cousin Jack is the
greatest conservative under the sun,
although he claims to be a liberal.
Well we covered about eight miles
the first day and reached a place
known as the Big Plat, where we
bivouaced for the first time. A large
number of natives came round the
camp, out of mere curiosity I suppose,
to see the newcomers and try to
"spring” a sixpence. Nothing parti-
cular transpired here except an exhi-
bition of spear and boomerang
throwing, which was most interesting
to us. We were particularly taken
with the boomerang. I may here
remark that I was much struck with
the musical tones of the native female
voices, especially in laughter, but I
cannot say as much for their beauty.
So much for my introduction to a
people or race that I was destined to
have a great deal to do with almost
ever since, and of whom I shall have
more to say hereafter.
The old boat, Favorite, although
she brought us safely to port, never
got away again, because, in trying to
clear out through one of the passages
she was thrown by a big wave on to
the reef and became a total wreck.
Inasmuch as there were no lives lost,
there was no very great public loss.
The old tub was literally alive with
cockroaches and every sort of
domestic insect, and the smell below
deck was frightful. Few people now-
adays have any idea of the discomfort
and hardships travellers 40 or 50
years ago had to endure.
We started soon after breakfast.


Most of us had to walk as there was
not room in the drays for half of us
owing to their being laden with stores
and luggage. Although it was tire-
some travelling, because of the
roughness of the road and the intense
heat intense to those who had only
just come from a cold climate we
jogged along as best we could and
reached what was known as the half-
way halting place, “Trevenson,”
occupied at that time by the late Mr.
Nancarrow. We had our frugal mid-
day meal in the open air. Some of
the men went out in search of game,
but did not add to our somewhat
scanty larder. In the evening we
found ourselves at a camping place
known as The Desert, a name that
certainly did not belie it. Here
another attempt was made to secure
a little fresh meat of some sort, but
without success. It was surprising
how little game we saw on our road
journey. During the evening two
gentlemen from the mine I need
not give their names called at the
camp, and in general conversation
with one of them I remarked on the
prevalence of blasphemy among the
men. I had not then, you see, quite
forgotten my mother’s training. The
individual I was addressing looked at
me with a sneering smile, and said,
“Well, if it is likely to interfere with
your health, you will not live long.”
Now this was anything but encour-
aging, but at that time it would have
taken a strong puff of wind to blow
me down, so that I did not take much
notice of what he said. Notwith-
standing his prediction I have
managed to pull through to this day,
although he and his (that evening’s)
companion, have long since crossed
the Great Divide. I am now able to
say that it will take more than a
bullock driver’s oath to put me off my
tucker, or sleep, or even to cause me
to swear, although I have heard a fair
amount of “bullocky” language during
the last 42 years or so.
We reached our destination, the
Geraldine mine, after a tedious
journey on November 26th of the
same year we left our home in Corn-
wall, and I honestly admit that the
place did not appear to be half as bad
as it had been painted to us. Of
course we did not expect to find a
Paradise nor did we so that
we were not disappointed with the
place, rough though it was.
I formally took charge the next day
and went down the mine accom-
panied by one of the miners. Although
the mine did not appear to have been
wisely opened, or worked (there were
innumerable drawbacks in those days
that are not known now) still I was
pleased with what I saw. I may here
mention that the trend of the lode
was in the bed of the Murchison
of ore. I may here remark that little
or no pretension was made to syste-
matic mining, because we had merely
come down to fill in time until we
could resume the work at the
Geraldine mine for which we were all
River for about threequarters of a
mile. Here shafts had been put down
and in fact all operations had been
done from those shafts. Whoever
was responsible, it was an unwise
step to open out a mine in the bed
of a river that might run any day
and of course flood the mine. Had a
vertical shaft at the outset been sunk
away from the river, and the lode
exploited from It, below the river’s
bed, much trouble and expense would
have been saved. But then, it was
no use crying over spilt milk as the
saying goes. So I turned to and did
the best I could, and got on remark-
ably well till the following March,
when the flood came down, filling the
mine and causing all sorts of damage
to the property and anxiety to myself.
This unfortunate occurrence stopped
all mining operations for about six
months. Meanwhile I took the en-
gaged miners to a property in the
Northampton district known as
“Woombarra,” which belonged to our
company, and did a little rough and
ready mining, and raised a fair
quantity of ore. It was from here
that the first carbonates of lead were
sent from the State. This class of ore,
until then, had been discarded as use-
less from a commercial point of view.
However, having a knowledge of the
various classes of lead ore, I saw at
once that a great waste had occurred
in connection with this ore. I had


a parcel dressed, excluding all other
kinds of lead ore, and on careful
assay I found it contained 73 per cent
of pig lead. Ever since then the
carbonates have been sought after
and utilised as keenly as that of the
sulphides “galena,” so that I claim
to have been the first to demonstrate,
in a practical way, the commercial
value of carbonates of lead in this
State. As far as I am aware I have
never had any credit for this dicov-
ery, but this is by the way.
I remained at Woombarra with my
little band of miners until we had
raised and sent away a fair quantity
engaged. The Woombarra is today a
good lead mining property and will,
in after years, in common with many
other like properties in the district,
prove to be acceptable State assets,
notwithstanding their present general
neglect.
As soon as the Murchison River
had subsided we returned thither to
tackle the difficult task of unwatering
the mine, which had been filled by the
overflow of a huge river which carried
down with it all sorts of rubbish,
besides doing considerable damage.
We eventually got to work again and
for the remainder of my term of
engagement I, with the assistance of
the miners (because in mining, as
well as in soldiering, a general can
do little or nothing without his men)
did remarkably well. And this in
face of having to pay £3 per ton
cartage to Port Gregory.
CHAPTER III
J concluded my last paper by
stating that I did very well during
my three years’ management of the
Geraldine mine. This notwithstand-
ing the £3 per ton cartage to Port
Gregory, and another 8/- per ton
lighterage to Geraldton, besides other
odds and ends and these were
numerous. I purpose in the present
paper, to not only look backward, but
also to touch on the future of lead
mining in this district. Regarding
the cartage, lighterage, and other
expenses I have just mentioned, it is
only fair to say that at that time
there was an appreciable set off
against these charges and expenses
that does not now obtain, because we
could then get the most of the ore to
London in the wool ships trading
between here and there at the nomi-
nal freight of 1/- per ton. Moreover,
T have known instances of shipowners
paying so much per ton for the
privilege of getting the ore as dead
weight ballast for their ships. But I
never participated in any such per-
quisites, as I considered it good
enough to get the stuff home at a
nominal figure. Shipowners were not
then, any more than now, very consid-
erate as to the care of cargo entrusted
to them, and frequently much loss
was, and is, sustained by shippers
through the reckless handling of
cargo. I am sure that there are, at
this moment, scores upon scores of
tons of lead ore lying at the bottom
of the sea, or rather sand, alongside
the old Geraldton jetty, and still a
larger quantity off where the wool
ships used to anchor, all deposited
there through sheer want of care.
Few except those who have had the
experience of it have the slightest
idea of the loss that is sustained in
handling lead ore in bags, even under
careful conditions.
But to return to the Geraldine mine
and district. In face of all the draw-
backs I have named, and in face also
of so many reported failures, it is
gratifying to be able to say a fair
measure of profit accrued to the


owners as the result of my three
years engagement.
I was not long in the district
(Geraldine) before I was impressed
with the great possibilities of its
mineral resources, and if it was, and
is only given cheap transit facilities
for the ore, etc., great things are
bound to eventuate. The extension
of the Northampton line to the Lower
Murchison is spoken of, and I have no
doubt it will be an established fact
sooner or later (the sooner the better
for the whole State). When this is
done it will prove that I was no false
prophet in saying and I have no
axe to grind that as surely as day
follows night the varied mineral
resources of the Geraldine district will
some day be very helpful to the State,
especially to the Victoria district, as
there will be hundreds of miners
employed there. That is if the powers
that be do not do, as they have done
in the Northampton district, virtual-
ly alienate most of these resources
from the Crown. The conditions un-
der which land is granted within the
mineral zone give, I believe, the lessee
the right to everything (except pre-
cious metals) to a depth of 40ft. from
surface. If the idea was to close
down mining for all time nothing
could be much more effective than
this enactment. The right to go down
to the other side of the globe would
not have a more detrimental effect
on mining, because anyone, on min-
ing bent, would not think of entering
upon such property, even if he knew
there was good payable ore there.
Under present conditions, he would
have no right until a depth of 40ft
was reached, and how is he to reach
that point? He certainly could not
do so without the lessee’s permission.
Now I do not wish it to be thought
from the above remarks, that I am
opposed to the alienation of land, its
surface anyway. Indeed, I say let
every inch of it, except what is re-
quired for reserves for the conveni-
ence of the public, be occupied and
utilised according to its adaptability.
My contention is, and always has
been, that the mineral, and the rights
to enter upon any lany for the pur-
pose of prospecting and mining,
should be reserved, and I do not sec
why this cannot be done as well here
as in the case of precious metals. The
question may reasonably be asked,
why protect the mineral when there
is no mining being done? Admitted
this is so at present, but it was not
always so, nor do I think it will long
continue to be so. A dozen or 15 years
ago, for instance, farming in this dis-
trict was not much like it is today.
Few then thought that the Govern-
ment, in order to supply the demand
for agricultural land, would have to
buy back huge estates at fabulous
prices (when using the word fabulous
I mean as compared with what was
paid for them). History often repeats
itself in many ways, and who shall
say the same thing may not happen
in regard to the minerals as has oc-
curred in respect to the estates I
have referred to. As showing the
high percentage of lead ore in the
Northampton and Geraldine districts
(in both of which I was for many
years actively engaged in mining pur-
suits, and perhaps exporting as much,
if not more, ore for the same period
than all other exporters put together)
I was always very particular in dis-
carding all extraneous matter from
the ore, and frequently it (the ore)
yielded a percentage of over 80 per
cent of pig lead, rarely below 75 per
cent. I well remember, in one in-
stance, we (that is the firm of Crow-
ther and Mitchell) shipped over 200
tons by a wool ship the “Robert
Morrison”. I daresay there are
many who will remember her. That
shipment realised in London £l4/1/-
per ton gross. This can be verified
by Mr. E. Pope, who was then chief
clerk to the firm to which the ore
was consigned, but who is now in Ger-
aldton. It was he that cabled the re-
sult to us. During the last four or
five years several spasmodic attempts
have been made to resuscitate mining
in the Northampton, Narra Tarra,
and the Geraldine districts, with no
very great measure of success. This
is not easily accounted for because
large sums of money have been spent,
and no one for a moment thinks the
old workers had taken out all the ore.
There is one thing I do know, and
that is that most of the ore that was


laised was sent away with little or
no dressing or classification. It was
despatched simply as it fell from the
point of the pick. This was a mis-
take, especially when transit expen-
ses W'ere high, because it costs just as
much to send extraneous matter as it
does the pure ore. Besides, when such
low grade stuff gets into the mar-
ket, it militates to some extent
against the district from which it
came.
CHAPTER IV
In my last contribution I said inter
alia that perhaps I had exported as
much lead ore during the period to
which I was referring, as all other ex-
porters put together. I wish to mo-
dify this statement, because I had not
then in my mind's eye the Melbourne
and Champion Bay Lead Mining Go’s,
property, the Narra Tarra mine, so
that their exports are not to be con-
sidered in my rough estimate. Now,
referring to the contemplated exten-
sion of the Northampton line to the
lower Murchison, and writing as one
well acquainted with the whole dis-
trict, I do not hesitate to say that
whenever this line is extended, it will
for a distance of 20 or 25 miles, tap
some splendid country for wheat
growing, or in fact for almost any-
thing in the way of agriculture. But
the Geraldine district proper is not
essentially agricultural owing to the
predominance of salt water over that
of fresh. I remember experiencing a
period of close upon 17 months with-
out any rain to speak of, which was
very trying to the little mining com-
munity. I shall now leave W.A. for a
trip to the Old Country, because I
had naturally become a little home-
sick. Can it be wondered at? I had
a dear wife and young children at
Home. To make a long matter short
the company offered me a free pas-
sage home and back, with half-pay,
conditionally that I would come back
and put in another three years in
their service. To this I agreed and
sailed in the first week of January,
1871, in the same old boat that
brought me out three years previous-
ly. Nothing particularly transpired
during the voyage, except our sight-
ing the barque Bridgetown, a regular
trader to Swan River at that time.
This vessel had left Fremantle some
10 days before we did. Just as we
were rounding up at James Town an-
chorage, St. Helena, we espied a sail
in the distance, and the sailor’s criti-
cal eye pronounced her to be the
Bridgetown. Up went the signal
“What Ship”, and quickly came the
answer “Bridgetown”. She continued
her voyage, whilst we remained at
anchor for 24 hours, which gave an
agreeable opportunity to those who
chose to see a little of this historical
island. Several of us naturally did
not miss the chance, and went ashore
and remained there as long as we
could. We had a good look around
and some of us visited Napoleon’s
grave at Longwood, an interesting
spot to anyone who was acquainted
with the doings of Europe in the ear-
ly part of 1820. No one of our party
was game to climb Jacob’s ladder, so
called because of its height, which is
said to be half a mile. Anyway, a man
at the top only looked the size of a
baby from the bottom. This ladder,
which really consisted of a flight of
steps, is on the right hand side of
James Town as one enter from the
harbor, and on the top of this hill are
the residences of the governor and
other officials. James Town at that
time could scarcely be rated above a
village (and not among the largest of
these). It is situated between two
steep hills in fact in a ravine. The in-
habitants were mostly colored and
seemed to be poor and needy. Their
chief support appeared to be derived


from passing ships calling for supplies
and the sale of inferior fruit and Java
sparrows. A few investments were
made by our party in these latter,
taut few, if any, of the birds reached
England. Most of us thoroughly en-
joyed ourselves during our short
stay.
I noticed that the inhabitants deal-
ings were quite Oriental, because they
asked double as much as what they
afterwards took for their wares. After
taking in water and other supplies
we again set sail for our destination,
and shortly after passing Ascension
Island, we again fell in with the
Bridgetown. This time we fraternised,
and Capt. Barber and some of his
crew came aboard so that we had an
enjoyable social for a couple or three
hours. Those who have not experienc-
ed a long sea voyage can scarcely
realise what a pleasant effect such a
change—short though it be —has upon
those aboard ship. It was when in
the vicinity of Ascension that I first
saw a booby with wings. (Of course
I had seen many with two legs). A
large number of these booby birds
used to alight on the mast and yard-
arms of the ship and could be easily
shot, which shows how applicable
their name was. Nothing particular
occurred during the voyage except the
appearance of a brilliant Aurora Aus-
tralis, some few degrees this side of
the Equator. It was a magnificent
sight, and for brilliancy and distinct-
ness far excelled the one that recent-
ly appeared here.
Well, I reached my home in Corn-
wall on the 15th April, and strange as
it may appear, I wrote per mail stea-
mer from St. Helena that I would be
there on that day. Of course it was
but a haphazard prediction, yet it
proved to be correct. I remained in the
Old Country for about 13 weeks, and
was glad to leave it again for W.A.’s
sunshine. I brought back with me
another batch of miners under en-
gagement for three years. The ship
called at Falmouth, where we joined
her and duly sailed for our destina-
tion, the Geraldine mine. Nothing ex-
cept what is incidental to such voy-
ages happened, and we duly reached
our journey’s end during the last
week of October, 1871.
CHAPTER V
Before proceeding with my reminis-
cences I have to ask you to allow me
to thank the “Kalgoorlie Sun” (and
yourself for the re-production) for the
great compliment it has paid me by
stating in a short paragraph inter
alia, that I was the father of 24 child-
ren. Now, who would not be proud
of such a record, and especially when
there is such an outcry about the fall-
ing off in the birth rate? Why even
the parsons —or most of them at any
rate —are crying out against it. Now
I am not going to quarrel with my
literary friend as to the number of
my progeny, even had he gone higher.
There is no use being nice to one or
two But by way of extenuation I
may add that I have been married
twice, and am now sorry that I did
not—after a decent lapse of time from
the date of my last terrible domestic
catastrophe venture for the third
time. Because no one knows, except
he who has experienced it, the miser-
able existence of a man without his
natural companion, a wife, especially
when he has been blessed for so many
years with such companionship. The
number of my youngsters, as specified
by my friends, may seem abnormally
large. Yet so far I have been able to
pay their school fees, provide a
widower’s mite for church collection,
postage stamps (no inconsiderable
item when there are so many corres-
pondents of one sort and another) and
in fact all reasonable requirements—


not an easy task, ’tis true, at times, I
must admit. To be serious, the posi-
tion of a parent with eight mother-
less children is not to be viewed light-
ly, especially when there is no de-
ceased’s wife’s sister’s soothing and
guiding hand available. I must ask
to be excused for being a little senti-
mental. Everyone is so at times.
To continue my reminiscences, I
told you in my last chapter that I
had again reached the Geraldine with
my little contingent of miners and
had assumed the control of affairs, I
may here remark that my brother
Jim—a white of the whitest of men —
had charge during my absence. He
has long since joined the great maj-
ority, although eight years younger
than myself. Unfortunately the Mur-
chison River again came down, flood-
ing the mine and causing much loss
to the owners, and damage to the
mine. Worse still, one poor fellow
lost his life. Owing to the suddenness
and magnitude of the flood, he was
not able to escape. His name was
David Wallace, a right good fellow
too. It was he who sank the present
barrel well, which is, and has been,
a great convenience to all travellers in
this district.
Now I may just as well say at once
that my second term of office was not
attended with the same success as was
the first. The cause was not through
the lack of ore, but for the want of
efficient labor to take it out. At that
time labor was very scarce and infe-
rior, that is to say for mining pur-
poses. I used to engage all sorts and
conditions of men in Perth, in fact
what I could get. I would give them
an advance and their travelling ex-
penses, and after a few days they
would abscond. I prosecuted them
until I was tired and became almost
ashamed to enter a police court, be-
cause I was not then, any more than
now, fond of police courts, and was
never there if I could avoid it. To
add fuel to the fire another misfortune
overtook us. That was the sinking of
the s.s. Xantho at Port Gregory with
58 tons of uninsured ore aboard. This
represented a total loss because the
few tons we managed to get out of
her did not cover the expense incur-
red. Many of the Geraldton people
will, I am sure, remember this inci-
dent.
Now this was very disheartening'
and I almost began to think I must
have been born under an unlucky pla-
net. However, I went back and did
my best for the rest of my term, and
although there was no great profit
shown, yet there was no loss which,
under all the adverse circumstances
was fortunate. The time will soon
come when I shall have completed my
second term of engagement, but be-
fore saying “au revoir” (I have no
intention of saying goodbye to the
Geraldine mine district) there are
many little incidents I would like to
record.
The Geraldine mine in the seventies
and the early eighties, was known as
the “end of civilisation,” between
that spot and Roebourne. There you
encountered the last white man when
going north and first when coming
south, and as it was on what was
then called “the highway to the
north-west”, naturally most travel-
lers this way used to call and recupe-
rate for a day or two. Few, if any,
were turned empty away. One even-
ing, not very long after we arrived
my brother and I were sitting in a
room, no doubt thinking of the “girls
we left behind”, when there was a
knock at the front door. I opened it,
and to my dismay saw an object with-
out hat or shoes and otherwise in
rags and tatters. Noticing my appa-
rent embarrassment, the visitor said,
“Do not be alarmed my friend, I dare
say you will have heard of that wild
man, Hooley.” I told him we had
heard of Mr Hooley passing some
months before with sheep for the Nor’
West. Said he, “Well, I’m Hooley.”
Needless to say that after that assur-
ance Mr Hooley was welcomed to our
modest home, where both the inner
and outer man were cared for and the
rest of the evening was spent very in-
terestingly. Mr. Hooley told a hun-
dred and one anecdotes of his travels.
In a general conversation with him I
suggested that a trip of this descrip-
tion, viz., from Roebourne to Perth,
single-handed, was running a great
risk especially in view of the unrest
among the natives in the regions he
had to travel through.


Said Mr. Hooley with composure.
“I was never afraid of them at day
time. It was a night surprise that I
thought most about. But to guard
against this I used to make a camp
about sundown, light a big fire and as
soon as I had partaken of my frugal
meal, I unhobbled my horses, took off
their bells and went forward five or
six miles, and camped, without a fire
or anything that was likely to attract
attention.”
We should have liked him to have
stayed a few days with us, but he
could not as he had to be in Perth at
a certain date. In after days I fre-
quently met Mr. Hooley, scarcely ever
without recounting the circumstances
of our first meeting. Subsequently I
sat in the Legislative Assembly with
him. His health had then failed him
and he looked it, and from my seat I
used to look at him and asked myself
was it possible that he was the same
person who made such an uncere-
monious visit to me in the early part
of 1878, He was then as lively as a
cricket, and almost as playful as a
kitten. Mr. Hooley’s memorable ride
of nine of 11 days (I am not sure
which) from Roebourne to Perth, will
be remembered by many. It was he
who first opened a track from Geral-
dine to the Nor’-West.
CHAPTER VI
In my last contribution I gave a de-
scription of an unexpected visit from
the late Mr. Hooley. It was he who
opened up a travelling route through
the bush from what may be termed
the south to the north-west of the
State. During my sojourn at the
Geraldine, I had many visitors of one
sort and another. Among them was
the present Sir Edward Horne Witte-
noom. He was then but a youth, and
had only just left school. I was not
long in forming an opinion of my
youthful visitor, viz., that he was as
cool as a cucumber, and as deep as
the Bay of Biscay, always pleasant, if
at times a little sarcastic. I said at
that time that he would some day
take a prominent part in the control
of the colony, and events have shown
I was not far wrong. A few years
ago Mr. Wittenoom had applied to
him the appellation of "10-foot Ned.”
A more inappropriate name could
scarcely be imagined, because it is a
long time since Edward Wittenoom
has dabbled with anything at the
shallow depth of 10ft. I believe I
heard his maiden speech, and inter-
alia, he said he thought it was better
for one to be born with brass than
gold. Who shall say he was not
right. Probably he himself demon-
strates the correctness of what he
said. There were scores of other
things which, I daresay, he remem-
bers—which I need not refer to. Mr.
Roberts, the reputed millionaire of
Yatheroo, was once my guest. It was
when he was removing the late Mr.
W’alter Padbury’s stock from the
Nor’West to Mr. Roberts’ present
home. Mr. Roberts has repeatedly
invited me to his place, but somehow
or another I have never been able to
avail myself of the pleasure, which I
regret. The late Hon. T. Burges was
a frequent visitor, and I as frequently
returned the compliment. Mr. and
Mrs. Burges (both gone and much
lamented) had the happy knack of
making their guests feel at home.
On one occasion Mr. Burges brought
with him a Mr. Wm. Moore Green.
In those days I used to put in most
of my spare time in assaying. In
explaining to them how it was done,
I told them to select six small
samples of sand from the bed of the
river and file a little silver into one
of them. I would then show how it
was done, handing the silver back to


them. My reason for recording this
circumstance is because of the fact
that Mr. Green wrote a letter to the
"Inquirer,” the leading paper of the
colony at that time, stating that
silver had been found at the Geraldine
mine, and that he had seen it
extracted. The paper eventually
found its way to London, and as a
matter of course met the eyes of the
owners of the mine, which brought
forth an unpleasant letter from them
asking why I had not apprised them
of the fact. I had to write a long
letter of explanation, and wished Mr.
Green had visited and practised his
jokes upon some other place other
than the Geraldine. I do not know
what has become of him, but I have
more than one reason to remember
him. Then came the unfortunate
Clarkson Bros., of Dongara, who were
taking stock northwards. They
stayed with us for a week or ten
days, before proceeding on their ill-
fated journey. I rode a considerable
distance with them when they start-
ed, and probably was the last to shake
hands with them. There are thou-
sands in the State who have never
heard of this sad occurrence, and
thousands of the older settlers that
will remember the fate of the Clark-
son Bros, with regret. At the time
it was generally supposed that they
were murdered by the natives. But
to my mind this point has not been
satisfactorily cleared up. Their
mutilated bodies were found about
130 miles from where I parted with
them, and as far as I know, no one
has ever been indicted with the
offence, so that there has been no
clearing up of the mystery. Anyway
by their unfortunate deaths the State
lost two very worthy sons.
In my first chapter I referred to
Frank Hall and Moondyne Joe, and
our anxiety as the result of yarns
tihat had been spun to us on our
voyage out. But judge my surprise
when I arrived at the Geraldine and
found this identical Frank Hall run-
ning the butchering business of the
place. I found the said Frank Hall
honest and upright. As for Moon-
dyne Joe, he afterwards entered my
service. As a man he was above the
ordinary. So much for these two
celebrities, about whom we had
heard so much.
Before leaving the subject of indi-
vidual acquaintances of the early
days, I particularly wish to refer to
Mr. Chas. Von Bibra, who was then
the owner of the Murchison House
station. (It was from here I tasted
my first banana, kindly sent by a Mr.
Chas. Gill a nephew of Mr. Bibra,
who lost his life by drowning in the
Nor’West). The station subsequently
fell into the hands of the late Mr.
Ogilvie, and still more recently it
went to Messrs. Drage Bros., the pre-
sent owners.
CHAPTER VII
Several reasons have prevented me
continuing these notes for a season,
the chief of which was that my right
hand was temporarily put out of use,
as the result of an accident sustained
many years ago. I left off at an
account of the Murchison Station. The
original owner of this property was
Mr. Chas. Von Bibra, who is now, I
hope, in Glory (as "Le Grondeur”
would say). About the year 1869 Mr.
Bon Bibra let the station to Mr.
Charles Gill, a relative, and went, I
believe, to Tasmania. Like many
another wanderer, he became home-
sick, and in a comparatively short
time, returned to the Cinderella State,
a wiser, but not richer man. Some-
where about this time I chanced to
meet him in Geraldton. He told me
he was in a bit of a fix as his goods
and chattels were at Port Gregory,
and he could get no conveyance to
take them to Murchison House. I


offered to let a couple of the teams,
which were carting ore for me under
contract, take his effects to their
destination, as it would mean only a
matter of a day and a half. He wish-
ed to pay for this service, but as I
refused to accept money, he offered
me what he described as a wonderful
dog, stipulating only that if I ever
desired to sell the animal I should
give him the first chance to purchase.
I took the dog, which went by the
name of Jumble. Jumble afterwards
became well-known all over the dis-
trict. I daresay many of the older
hands will remember him. He was
one of the largest dogs I ever saw.
Mr. Loftie, who then lived in Perth,
had one of the same breed, and they
were invariably seen in company.
Now Mr. Von Bibra and his dog may
not be of interest to the general
public, but I mention this incident
simply as part of my experiences.
Shortly after Jumble’s advent my
brother Jim paid me a visit. Know-
ing his way about the place Jim
took his horse into the stable. But
he could not get out. Jumble took
up his position at the door, and re-
fused to let him pass. Some time
elapsed before I could be advised of
the situation, and could release the
prisoner. On another occasion I left
my coat near the top of the shaft,
with Jumble alongside it, and went
down and turned to with pick and
gad. Requiring my coat a little
later, I sent one of the men up for it.
The messenger soon returned stating
that Jumble claimed possession of the
article. I tried to persuade the man
to go up again, but he said he would
sooner lose his job than risk an
argument with Jumble. One day I
was driving through the bush,
Jumble following. He turned off at
one spot into the scrub, and that was
the last I saw of my old four-footed
friend. I felt his loss severely.
In a recent issue of the “Express,”
I noticed a reference to the death of
Mr. John Green, at Eaglehawk, and
'Le Grondeur” gives the name of the
boat which was owned and worked by
Mr. Green as “Les Trois Amis.” I
remember the craft well. I once
chartered her to take a load of ore
from Port Gregory, and Captain
Setten, of the good old ship Zephyr,
and I took passage in her, to see if
it was safe, in Captain Setten’s
opinion to take his vessel inside the
reef. He decided in the affirmative.
We were safely deposited at the
“port of land crabs,” and took in a
cargo of lead ore. But the weather
became boisterous, and the glass fell,
Johnny Green at first refused to
venture out, and it took us some
time to induce him to do so. We
made the attempt, and got blown
over to the Abrolhos. We then shaped
a course for, as we thought, Cham-
pion Bay, but when daylight broke
we found ourselves off Dongara.
Making for Champion Bay we got
into difficulties among the reefs, and
to add to our troubles the vessel
began to leak badly. Green was very
cool through it all, and got to work
vigorously at the pump. Eventually
we got to our destination, taut the
experience had been a trying one. I
have often wondered what had be-
come of Johnny Green. On my first
journey to Perth in one of Leach’s
coaches, Johnny’s father was a
fellow-passenger.
CHAPTER VIII
I finished my last chapter by leav-
ing Mr. Bibra and the dog “Jumble”
which he so kindly gave me, and
which at that time money would not
purchase. Now (as your readers will
see) I have given a fair amount of
attention to Mr. Bibra. This on
account of the fact that before leaving
London to take up my duties at the
Geraldine mine, I was warned not to
have any dealings with him and an-
other gentleman (whose name I need
not give). This advice was exactly
what a true British subject would
resent and disregard, because he gen-
erally likes to think and prove for


himself, so that I admit to being a
disobedient servant, because I was
not long in making the acquaintance
of the two individuals that I was
warned against and have never had
cause to regret it. Indeed if every
one had acted as honorably and
friendly to me, I should have been
saved a great deal of unpleasantness.
I will now for ever leave Mr, Bibra
to quietly rest in his eternal home,
and the Murchison Station to look
after itself, and for the last time will
refer to the Geraldine mine and dis-
trict (except when dealing with the
natives). About four months after
my arrival the Murchison River came
down a banker, completely flooding
the mine, doing much damage, and
causing much loss to the company.
I may here remark (probably I have
said so before) that all the workings
were in the bed of the river. During
this flood I had a very unpleasant
experience. The store was situated
on the opposite side of the river from
which the goods arrived, so that I had
to construct a rude raft, with a
hawser on each end. I made several
successful trips on the raft, but on
the last occasion, the payout end (so
to speak) held on too tightly, and
brought the raft right across the par-
ticularly strong current, causing it to
capsize and precipitate me into the
stream with my apparel and boots
on. I had a big struggle to save my
life. I tried to climb a tree in mid-
stream but failed, and had then to
trust to my strength to reach the
bank by swimming. Fortunately I
could swim a little, but was no
expert. I struggled on without losing
heart or presence of mind, sinking
several times to the bottom. I was
fairly exhausted when a team owner,
called Jimmy Gray swam out and gave
me a couple of strong pushes towards
the bank, so that when I again went
down my head was above water and
my feet touched the bottom. I have
always considered that Gray helped
to save my life. Some time after this
I had another unpleasant experience.
In my employ I had a ticket-of-leave
holder called Nicholson, said to be an
ex-Norfolk Island prisoner, who ’twas
said had not been out of gaol f or
thirty Christmasses. He seems to
have had a quarrel with his mates
and wanted me to let him go, which
I refused to do, and shortly after as
I was sitting on a bag of ore along-
side the man sewing the bags (the
late old Sam Smith) who will be
remembered both here and at Gerald-
ton, Nicholson stole up behind me
and hit me on the side of the head
with a large lump of galena, stunning
me for the time. When I came to,
some one brought me a revolver.
Nicholson then cleared, vowing ven-
geance on any one who tried to arrest
him. He was, however, soon cap-
tured by a much smaller man than
himself, viz., P.c. Capel, who was
then stationed at Northampton, and
afterwards at Geraldton. I believe
he subsequently became drummer of
the Geraldton Rifle Volunteer Band.
I daresay many here and at Gerald-
ton will remember him. Nicholson
was tried and sentenced to three
years’ hard labor, a very light sen-
tence, in my opinion, considering the
enormity of the crime which undoubt-
edly amounted to an attempt to
murder.
The Geraldine in those days was
not a bed of roses for anyone in
charge. He had a rough lot to deal
with, but the worst evil was sly-grog
selling. I have lain awake scores of
nights with my clothes on, especially
when drinking was going on, ready
for emergencies, but in eight cases
out of ten it was needless, and I am
pleased to say there were not many,
if any, of the Nicholson grade
amongst the men. Before leaving
this district it is only fair, as one who
claims to know more about the min-
eral resources of it, than any man
living, to state that I have no hesi-
tation in saying it teems with lodes
of lead ore and some copper as well.
With the exception of the Geraldine
the pioneer of the district no
mine (except maybe the copper mine)
reached a depth of over 100 feet and
at no time has the ore been delivered
at the shipping port “Geraldton,” for
less than 55/- per ton. Most of that
I sent away cost fully 70/- which
took the gilt off the ginger-bread and
crippled the industry. Should the


much-talked of extension of the
Northampton line for 40 miles be
effected, it will make a vast differ-
ence, and besides, if it goes that far
it will, as sure as day follows night,
be extended to the Murchison River.
The Geraldine will then become a
great mining centre, and will be
assisted by the establishment of small
mixed farms and one will go to help
the other. I now leave this district,
where I had many pleasant exper-
iences and many bitter ones and go
to Northampton.
CHAPTER IX
In my last I said I was leaving the
Geraldine district and going to North-
ampton. This was in the latter part
of 1875. Before my departure my
late employers presented me with a
valuable silver breakfast service suit-
ably inscribed, and notwithstanding
my many misfortunes, from one cause
and another, mostly, however,
brought on by domestic affictions (of
which I shall have something to say
in the last chapter of this narration)
I still hold this magnificent tribute
intact. Needless to say I prize it
beyond description. My greatest
trouble in connection with it is what
to do with it before I go hence. It
would not be right to give it to any
one individual of my families, and to
divide it would spoil it. Naturally I
desire it shall be kept in my family.
When I came down I first resided at
Wheal Ellen (so-called after my dear
edest daughter of my first family).
Many here and in Geraldton will re-
member her. She has long since
joined the great majority. My wife,
her sister (Miss Stephens), and our
son Samuel Herbert (who is now
owner of Mount View Station) soon
joined me from the old country, leav-
ing the two girls home at school.
We subsequently came to reside in
town, occupying the old building
recently renovated and now used by
the W.A. Bank. My son, William
Edgar, was bom in these buildings.
The Wheal Ellen was for many years
looked upon as the mine of the dis-
trict from the fact of employing a
large number of men and producing
and sending to market such large
quantities of ore, whose value reach-
ed from £60,000 to £70,000, when it
closed down owing to the terrible drop
in the price of lead, and not from the
scarcity of ore. It was said to be the
deepest in the district. It was, how-
ever, only 290 ft. For many years
there were two factions, the Wheal
Ellen versus the rest of the town and
immediate neighborhood, or vice
versa, whichever you please. Each
had its own cricket club, and often
tried conclusions with varying results.
But when Northampton had to meet
an outside club, then the two local
teams wedded and made common
cause against their opponents. Ger-
aldton and Northampton often met,
both here and at Geraldton. Mr.
Finnerty, the present Warden at
Coolgardie, was at that time our big
gun. At the time I write of North-
ampton was a very small place no
semblance of a town. It is true
there were two churches, one pub, a
small shop or two, a makeshift of a
post office, and no telegraph in
fact there was none in the colony,
except maybe, that from Perth to
Fremantle. I well remember when
this line was first mooted what a hue
and cry there was against its con-
struction by the old grandmothers
who, if they had any sort of new
idea, they never allowed it to emerge
above the top of their boots. Truly
they were the most conservative
people imaginable.
I had not been down here long be-
fore the question of a brass-band was
discussed, and, as most of us were
bettter walkers than talkers, it was
soon decided to have one, and your
contributor “Le Grondeur,” who re-
sided here, prepared the list of
instruments for us, which was soon


sent to Melbourne. The instruments
reached here in due time, and were
given out to the most likely to make
good use of. With one or two excep-
tions, all were raw material at this
sort of thing. But, thanks to “Le
Grondeur” he gave them an idea of
the rudiments of music, and he also
taught them to play the first march
"The Tin Pot Band,” with which they
made their first public appearance.
Well, through energy and intelli-
gence, it soon became a useful and
entertaining institution. The mem-
bers were mostly Cousin Jacks, who
have a general aptitude for music.
Among them there were several glee
or part singers who always proved
to be very helpful in all entertain-
ments. The band’s usefulness was
manifested during the “Irish Famine”
(I have forgotten the year) when a
trip to the Greenough via Geraldton,
was made on behalf of a fund for the
relief of the Irish. A performance
was given to a bumper house at
the latter town. We then passed on
to the Greenough where we stayed
for two days, and gave a number of
entertainments, but, alas, when we
got back to Geraldton to give our
promised second performance I am
afraid we cut a very sorry figure on
the platform. All the singers were
that hoarse that they could scarcely
speak, to say nothing of singing,
whilst others had blown all their
wind away, and, besides, there were
at that time, three pubs on the Green-
ough, with good-natured publicans
and wives. The second performance
at Gerald ton (which I shall never
forget) was not very classical, but
was amusing to those who were not
too fastidious. There are scores in
Geraldton and the Greenough who
will remember our visit. The grati-
fying result of the trip was that I
was enabled to remit to Mr. S. L.
Burges, senr., of Perth, who was head
of the collecting fund in the colony,
the handsome sum of £132, and few
things I have assisted to do during
my 42 years sojourn, shall I remem-
ber with greater pleasure. I will
again refer to the glee singers (who
formed a part of the band). It was
during a visit from Sir Luke and
Lady Leake, who were my guests,
that I asked these singers to render
some of their songs in the open air,
but within the easy hearing of my
distinguished visitors, and, when
they finished, Sir Luke handed them
a cheque for five guineas. Referring
to the £132 gathered during our
journey, it would take a fairly good
company to gather in that amount in
the same space of time nowadays,
CHAPTER X
In the concluding part of my last
contribution I dwelt at length upon
the formation of a brass band at
Northampton. I did so because the
band was our first public move-
ment, and because it was subsequently
very useful in rendering assistance
to deserving causes. In those happy
days (as I may call them) many
young fellows and sometimes the
older ones, used to come up from
Geraldton for a little relaxation. It
was not long before the younger
section of the visitors got to know the
bandsmen and their places of resi-
dence. Then they would sometimes
commandeer the instruents, and
occasionally the members as well.
On one occasion a larger crowd than
usual came up, all bent on fun. By
the evening many of them had secur-
ed instruments, including the big
drum. After partaking of a little
sugar beer and similar beverages,
they essayed to promenade the main
street, each blowing his own tune,
irrespective of harmony, time, or
cadence. The effect made the night


hideous, and rather scared some of
our older folks. The drummer, it is
said, fell over (and into) the big
drum, when going down the hill
(steeper then than now) in front of
the spot where Mr. Magee’s store now
stands. The promenaders eventually
pulled up in front of my door, and
blew like Ballaam is said to have
done before Jericho wasn’t it
Jericho? I had long since gone to
bed, believing then in the old saw
that commences “early to bed,” etc.,
which piece of ancient wisdom has
perhaps been responsible for keeping
me in good health for so many years.
At all events the impromptu band,
though it blew a hurricane, did not
bring down the walls. It blew the
old man out of bed, however, and
that was probably all that was want-
ed. I merely mention this incident
to show that in those days wo were
a free, easy, and lively lot. But
although we indulged in a certain
amount of what might be called
frollicking, there was no impropriety
of any sort. We were simply jolly
because we were actually living.
The next thing to occupy our
thoughts was the erection of a public
hall. After very little discussion the
matter was decided on, and in an
incredibly short time the foundation
stone was laid by my then eldest
daughter, who afterwards became
Mrs. Bird. All Northampton and
neighborhood donned their Sunday
clothes in honor of the occasion, and
we had a right good time, although
morning dances were not then the
vogue as now. We made a small be-
ginning with a room 40ft. x 20ft.,
with seating and other conveniences.
This hall has been growing ever since,
and will I suppose, like a certain
advertising tree, go on growing to
the end. It is now a fair-sized edifice,
which includes dressing and reading
rooms, library, and caretaker's
quarters. I was for many years pre-
sident of it, and our old friend, Mr.
Tomlinson and myself were elected
life members many years ago, in con-
sideration of our activity in promot-
ing its growth.
Our next conception was a volunteer
corps. I was permitted by the then
Government to form a half-company
of 40 men. I was not long in getting
the necessary number of recruits,
and by dint of hard drilling we soon
made a fairly efficient corps. But we
could not boast of any crack shots.
On one occasion the then Command-
ant, Major Angelo, paid us a visit
of inspection. He ordered a number
of dummies to be set up. On these
we had to advance and fire. When
the dummies were presumed to have
been annihilated, we proceeded to
count the hits. One man had pre-
viously claimed a certain number
of hits. When the total was
made up it did not amount to what
this one man had claimed as his
contribution. But we improved after
that. I subsequently took 10 men
down to the military tournament at
Guildford and we secured second
place in the order of merit. In my
next notes I will deal with later
events.
CHAPTER XI
In the year 1882 I was created a
Justice of the Peace, so the reader
will see that I rank as one of the
seniors on the Commission. For
many years I was rather busily engag-
ed in police court work, and in many
other ways incidental to the position
of a J.P. This was especially the
case owing to there being no real
Resident Magistrate at Northampton.
Certainly we were within the juris-
diction of the Geraldton R.M. but he
seldom came up at the time. There-
fore I, being the only residential
honorary justice, had the lion’s share
of the work. Northampton was a
pretty lively place at the time, so
that it fell to my lot to do more
honorary labor than many a stipend-
iary magistrate. In proof of my
statement I may say that the
authorities thought it necessary in


those days to have three constables
stationed at Northampton, although
in my humble opinion, two would have
been ample. For many years there
has been only one officer here, and
everything seems to go just as
smoothly now, as then. Now, during
a period of nearly 30 years’ service,
it is only natural to suppose that I
had many unpleasant cases to deal
with. In some instances I would
sooner have cut off my right hand than
decide them. When litigants come
into court both sides expect or
pretend to expect to win. As only
one can be victor, there is bound to
be a growl, so the person who
accepts the honorable, but thankless
position of a J.P. must be prepared
for adverse criticism (rightly or
wrongly) however his decision goes.
Such criticism he must be able to
shake off as a duck’s back does
water. All he should strive after is
to do his duty fearlessly and with-
out bias. I am pleased to say that
though my experience has been long
and varied, not one of my decisions
has been publicly challenged. The
first gentleman with whom I ever
sat on the Bench was Mr, E. H. (now
Sir Edward Wittenoom). The police
court and station was then in the old
building close to the present railway
station. There were, at that time,
absurd formalities associated with the
course of justice. A large bell was
placed near the court, and was rung
loudly every night at 10 o’clock a
reminder of the curfew bell of olden
times. I am now virtually out of
harness as far as police court work is
concerned, and rarely go there if I
can help it, leaving this service to
younger men. I however do a fair
share of signature attesting simply
because, I suppose, I am centrally
situated.
I daresay there are not many who
have reached my age who cannot
recall something of which they are
proud. Certain incidents have occur-
red in my Australian career of which
I am more or less proud, because they
involved the saving of life. At the
Geraldine mine there was a man
named Shivers in my employ. He
resided at a place then called the
4-Mile Pool mine, but now known
as the Three Sisters. He worked at
Mary’s Spring' mine, some 2t miles
away. He left his home on Sunday
evening' for the scene of his labours,
with the object of starting work the
following morning. He got lost in
the bush, and the poor fellow was not
missed for three days. On the morn-
ing of the fourth day word of his
disappearance was brought to me. I
lost no time in gathering together
some natives, four in number I think,
and with as much water as I could
carry on horseback, and a little
stimulant, we started out. We were
not long in picking up the missing
man’s tracks. Following the traces
we found the three spots where he
had camped on successive nights.
We came upon him at 3 p.m. Needless
to say he was in a bad state. We
quickly got him on the horse, one
holding him on and another leading
the animal, and were able, shortly
afterwards to hand him over to the
tender care of his wife. In referring
to this incident I have always likened
those natives to a small pack of
hunting hounds. When on anything
like fair country they used to keep
my horse at a moderate canter.
Whenever they lost the track they
immediately opened out, and as soon
as one of them picked up the trail
again, and went full tear. I do not
think the native trackers of these
days are equal to the old ones
probably from lack of practice.
Another incident occurred nearer
home and at a more recent date, dur-
ing the time I was exploiting the
Uga mine. I had just arrived there
after luncheon when a messenger
galloped in with the information that
a man named Morton was buried at
the West Wheal Virgin mine, belong-
ing to the late Mr. Rosser. My aid
was asked, and I was not long reach-
ing the scene of the accident. A few
apparently bewildered people (Mr.
Rosser was laid up with sore eyes)
were standing about the pit’s mouth,
and from them I learnt that a rescue
party had gone below. After making
a few hasty enquiries I descended
the mine without a light, there
being none available judging the


distance by counting the rungs of
the ladder. I presently encountered
a policeman with a light, and he
quickly took me to the spot where
the man was buried. Two policemen
and a man named Ashman were
making futile efforts to liberate the
poor fellow. I took charge of affairs.
The work was most trying and dis-
heartening, for no sooner had we
cleared poor Morton’s head, than
another inrush of earth occurred. At
last I decided to put in what miners
term a penthouse. It was a rude con-
struction, but it served the purpose.
When, owing to the almost super-
human efforts of my helpers, we had
cleared Morton’s body and part of
his legs, we decided to run no risk
of further falls of earth, and pulled
him out by main force. He was
quickly got to the surface, and taken
to Mr. Rosser’s house I believe.
Morton lived for many years after
than, mostly with Mr. Lauder, on
the Chapman. By way of acknow-
ledgment Morton later showed me
what appeared to be a rich lead lode.
We merely sampled it and covered it
again, but as far as I know nothing
has been done with it. When I reach-
ed home on the evening after the
rescue, I was one of the proudest
men in the colony, and, if I remember
rightly, your contributor “Le Gron-
deur,” was present. I brought under
the notice of the authorities the fine
work done by the policemen and
Ashman, and they were rewarded
with a present of £5 apiece.
CHAPTER XII
The latter part of my last chapter
related to the rescue of a miner who
was buried in a mine through the
falling of a large body of earth upon
him. Now, anyone may reasonably
ask if the man was completely buried
how did he survive. Well, it was
this way. He was against the hang-
ing wall of the lode, and was therefore
more or less sheltered as the bulk of
the weight fell on the footwall. Also
the debris that fell on him was of a
rubbly nature and enabled him to
breathe.
Once upon a time I did a little
horse-racing, somewhere between ’79
and 'Bl as far as I can remember.
It came about in this way. I had a
gelding placed in my hands to use
and sell if an opportunity offered.
His name was Banjo, and it became a
household word in the whole district.
He was sired by a horse imported by
the late Hon. T. Burges, of the Bowes,
called Agriculturist. I had an
opportunity of riding Banjo to Ger-
aldton, and although he carried
something like 13’( stone, Including
the swag. I thought when we reached
Glenfleld, he was remarkably fresh,
although I had not come down very
slowly. After leaving Glenfleld I
set him going full speed to the Chap-
man Bridge, but he did not seem to
tire. I did not know what the pace
was, but I felt convinced he was a
stayer of the first grade. So I pur-
chased him for £l4. After running
and winning lots of scratch races at
Northampton, I decided to let him
have a try at the Geraldton annual
meeting. His first essay was reward-
ed with the Geraldton Cup, and I
believe the two-mile race, but as to
the latter 1 am not sure. At all
events he won two of the best events
of this meeting and one of the best
on the following year. If lam wrong
I would like to be corrected. I was
almost forgetting to mention one
little event during Banjo's career. It
happened that our old and worthy
friend, Micah Downes, had a piebald,
and must have dreamt that it was a
racer. As Banjo at that time was the
only horse in the district to Micah’s
mind worth considering, he sent me
a challenge, which I accepted. The
race came off on the Geraldton race-
course, and there was a large attend-
ance to witness the event. Mr. W.
Osborne (who was in business at


Geraldton at that time) rode Banjo,
and Micah rode his own neddy. Banjo
was again victorious, and Mr. Osborne
told me afterwards that, had he put
the horse at full speed, he could have
reached the winning post and return-
ed and met Mr. Downes at the dis-
tance post. Banjo was one of the
best pieces of horseflesh in the Vic-
toria District at that time, but of
course he had not then the company
to meet that he would have to face
now. This little horse won me hund-
reds of pounds, but I do not think my
pocket benefitted one farthing. The
money came easily and went freely,
and I was content with the gratifica-
tion of winning. Banjo was what
might be called a one-man horse be-
cause little could be got out of him
except by his usual trainer, Patsy
Shea. On one occasion Patsy grew
tired of the duty of training, and
handed his charge over to a man
called Rumble. One morning there
was a battle of routes. Rumble
wanted to go one way and the horse
another, the latter, however, had his
way. There are many incidents to be
related in connection with the horse
racing and other sports of those days.
I may however, say that the races
generally gave opportunity for a dis-
play of the brutal art of fisticuffs, but
to recount them would require more
space than is available.
In the year of 1888 I was engaged
to inspect and report upon the Whim
Well Creek copper mine. This was
its designation at that time. I sug-
gested the elimination of the word
“Well’’ so that it is now known as
The Whim Creek Copper Mine. I
proceeded to Cossack in the s.s.
Flinders, and we had a pleasant
voyage. There was an old gentle-
man named Wittenall aboard, who
used to entertain us by giving an
account of the earlier days of settle-
ment and the hardships and difficulty
the pioneers (of which he was one)
had to contend with. He told us he
had not, before his present trip, had
a coat on for 23 years, and when he
got aboard the lighter to go ashore,
he took off his coat and threw it
down saying “No more coats for me."
I lost no more time than I could
help before proceeding to the scene
of my labor, which was between 40
and 50 miles from Roebourne. On
reaching the spot I confess to have
been almost mesmerised by what met
my gaze. The surface was literally
strewn with rich copper ore. All that
was required was a man and a wheel-
barrow to gather it together. Very
little real mining had been done up
to this. I remained longer than I
intended, and would even have pro-
longed my visit, being so much struck
with everything I saw.
When my report appeared many
said I had (as the saying goes) lost
my head or the heat had melted my
brain. But there was nothing over-
drawn about the report. The mine
has stood the test for 22 years, and
only about a month or so ago the
present manager was reported to
have said that the Whim Creek cop-
per mine was the best in the State.
I may here remark that up to my
visit the ore was carted to Cossack
at an enormous expense. At that
time telegraph poles were being
landed at Bala Bala (now the ship-
ping port to and from Whim Creek).
It occurred to me if the poles could
be landed there, there could be no
reason why the ore could not be ship-
ped from there. I suggested this
being done, and the suggestion was
carried out. I shall have something
more to say later in connection with
this property and my trip there.
CHAPTER XIII
On my return from Whim Creek I
was asked by the owners to select a
competent copper miner to take
charge of, and work, the property.
My choice fell on Mr. J. Reynolds,
now of Northampton, who, I knew
had been engaged in copper and lead
mining all his life, in the Cousin
Jack’s country, Moonta (S.A.) and in
W.A, He was duly engaged and pro-
ceeded to the mine, taking with him
a small number of men. Under his


management much success was
achieved. A large quantity of the ore
exported yielded as much as 50 per-
cent of fine copper, an extraordinary
result from such a large quantity. At
the time of my visit I characterised
this property as a second Rico Tinto,
and had a small modern smelter been
erected at the start the possibilities
might have been enormous. Perhaps
it is not too late now for Mr. Shee-
man to move in this direction, I
repeat I was much struck with the
general aspect of the Whim Creek
district, and firmly believe it is teem-
ing with minerals of one sort and
another. Among my fellow passen-
gers northwards were many gold
prospectors bound for Pilbarra. They
included an elderly man with a wheel-
barrow which I daresay he had
brought all the way from Victoria. I
saw this old chap and his wheel-
barrow on the road several times
passing Whim Creek. The sight
damped any idea I may have had for
gold prospecting.
My visit to Roebourne came close
upon the brutal murder of the Union
Bank officials. While there I put up
at the Jubilee Hotel, kept by a Mr.
Wilson. One evening it was whisper-
ed that the suspected murderer was
amongst us. I do not know what ex-
cited this suspicion, but I know we
each slept with one eye open after
that. It seems deplorable that the
mystery surrounding this diabolical
crime has never been cleared up. I
say “deplorable” because it is a
terrible thing that a possibly innocent
person should be suspected of a crime
and be given no opportunity of vindi-
cating himself. Many looked askance
at one individual over this affair, and
perhaps he little knew what was in
the minds of the people among whom
he moved.
Whilst on the subject of copper
mining propositions, I may mention
that I reported, on behalf of the late
Mr. A. Forrest, in conjunction, I
believe, with the National Bank, cn
the Twin Peaks copper shows which
are situated, I think, about 70 miles
north of Yalgoo. Nothing particular
resulted from my inspection and re-
port. A copy of the latter document
was held by Mr. England, of the
National Bank of Australasia, a few
years ago, and doubtless he still has
it. Although I was convinced that
there was an abundance of copper ore
in and near Twin Peaks, I came to
the conclusion that, owing to the
then existing transit conditions, the
ore could not be won and delivered
at market for what it would fetch.
X thought at the time that many legs
likely spots had been prospected for
gold, and I think so still. Twin Peaks
will some day (I may not live to see
it) become a scene of mining activity.
As these reminiscences must soon
be brought to a close, I must now-
push on, of necessity leaving many
incidents unrelated. In the year 1890
I was engaged by a London Co. to
proceed to the Murchison goldfields.
I took a train to Mullewa, which was
then the terminus of the line. Many
old friends came to the Geraldton
station to see me off. Among these
was the late and I may add,
lamented—Mr. Maitland Brown, R.M.
At that time typhoid was prevalent
on the goldfields, and those who came
to say au revoir advised me to take
a large quantity of the best water
procurable slightly diluted with Craw-
ford’s whisky, I took this advice,
with the best results. In due course
I reached the champion town for fleas,
sore eyes, and those little insects that
keep one awake in bed. I refer to
Mullewa. After a day and a half
there, I started by coach for Cue.
The journey was something to be re-
membered. It was a case of ‘gee up,"
“get out,” and “push behind” all the
way, and little wonder considering the
nature of the track. Mr. Jimmy
Thompson, of journalistic renown,
and Mr. Fulton, of South Australia,
were fellow passengers. The latter
died shortly afterwards, and his re-
mains were taken back to his native
State. Few who journey to those
fields nowadays, have any conception
of the discomforts that travellers
endured in 1896, My first attention
was given to Lake Austin, a rough
and God-forsaken place which was
fairly rich in gold. As there was
almost a drought there I decided to
20
LOOKING BACKWARD


push on, and took advantage of a
butcher’s cart to reach Day Dawn,
and pulled up at Gallop’s Hotel, the
Golconda. The first person I rocog-
nised, on entering the place was Mr.
Frank Wittenoom, an old ncquain-
tance, and once a neighbor.
CHAPTER XIV
In concluding my last contribution
I mentioned that I had reached Day
Dawn. I made my home there for
some time, going into Cue almost
daily. The first proposition that I
fancied was the Bonnie Dundee, after-
wards named the Golden Dundee,
Although I had implicit confidence in
it, the show did not come up to ex-
pectations. I then held, and do now
hold, that it was a fair average pro-
position for the district. I was per-
haps more or less influenced by the
facts that it was near Cue, close to a
public battery (the only one in the
district) and contained a long- length
of gold bearing quartz. I would point
out that at that time the Cue and
contiguous districts were supposed to
be of a 2oz. grade, but with the ex-
ception of a very few mines the
average was far below this. I pur-
chased the public battery which was
erected by a syndicate promoted by a
Mr. Livingstone, a journalist, who
ran a paper at Mt. Magnet at one
time. This purchase was a highly
profitable one to the company for
whom I bought it. My main object
in buying was to serve the con-
venience of properties I had purchas-
ed, and might purchase. I next
secured the Ashbourne (then the
Once Again). I looked upon this as
a really good little property, but it
formed the rock we split upon. I
had suggested the sinking of a main
vertical shaft. The company was
quite agreeable to this, but wanted
me to consult another party as to
where it should be sunk. I objected
to do so, because I was of the opinion
that the judgment of the person
suggested was not equal to my own.
That was as far as opening out and
developing the show went. He might
have been a better man than I was
from a gold-extraction point of view,
but as for opening out and develop-
ing a mining proposition, I at that
time would give place to no man.
Accordingly I sent in my resigna-
tion. I was asked to reconsider it,
which I refused to do, pointing out
that if I was not competent to decide
where to have a shaft put down, I
had no right to be there. So that
was how I left that company. I
still represented the one that first
engaged me to go to the fields. To
represent two separate companies is
an unsatisfactory position, because
one is bound to be jealous of the
other.
During my stay on the fields I
took over, on behalf of the company,
the Rose of England, but it was not
through me that it was purchased.
In fact, I was adverse to it. I have
forgotten the upshot of this venture,
or whether the purchase was ever
completed. My next step was the pur-
chase of the Homeward Bound, situ-
ated about half-way between Cue and
Day Dawn. This was a particularly
promising show. The reef was fairly
rich down to about 18ft. or 20ft. at
which point it became barren, that is,
as far as was then seen. Although no
profit was made, yet the loss was
trifling. Anyway I have no complaint
to make. I made the purchase with
my eyes open. The next property I
secured was the Victoria, quite close
to the battery I had previously
bought. This was a satisfactory deal
and I claim to have been the first to
pay a dividend from the actual output


of any mine in the Cue district. If I
am wrong I shall be glad to be cor-
rected. I may here remark that on
a Saturday afternoon I paid the de-
posit on this property, and on the
following Monday morning I was
offered SI,OOO for my bargain. Need-
less to say I could not accept, even
had the offer been ten times as much.
I also bought the Cooya at Day Dawn,
and near the Great Fingall. This was
also a satisfactory deal, but I did
not remain in charge long, as I was
offered an acting-wardenship at Cue,
which I accepted. Of course I had to
relinquish my active connection with
the mines of the district. Previous
to this I was offered a mines inspector-
ship which I declined. Mr. Frank
Reid then took on the post. Now I
virtually gave up the acting Warden-
ship to go into Parliament. This was
the worst thing I did in my life, be-
cause, although I did not expect to
remain in Cue after the return of
Warden Dowley, yet I was promised
a permanent appointment when I
agreed to accept the Cue office. Dur-
ing my tenure of this post many
amusing incidents came under my
notice, one of which I think is worth
recording. A man had a proposition
alongside the road from Day Dawn
to Dead Finish. The labor conditions
required two men. The owner went
on sinking and driving until his funds
gave out, and the poor fellow had to
discharge his man. He then adopted
a plan to try and hold his mine. I
have said his show was alongside a
public road. He used to climb down
fill the bucket, come up to the sur-
face and await the approach of any-
one. As soon as he, or they, got
within hearing distance he would call
out “below there,” and straightaway
begin to wind the bucket which he
generally managed to empty just as
the travellers were passing. The
tacts were related to me by a man
who wanted me to take action. Of
course I told him I could not do any-
thing, unless he applied for forfeiture
and even in that case I should hesi-
tate before I would, under the circum-
stances recommend such forfeiture.
I have said my going into Parlia-
ment was one of the worst things,
if not the very worst, I did in my
life. Why I did so I cannot under-
stand because at that time there was
not any payment of members. May-
be I dreamt or thought, I was a Glad-
stone, or some other famous politi-
cian. Anyway I put in four years
without any pay, and when the fol-
lowing election came along, I was
opposed by the present Attorney-
General. Mr. Nanson, who was
adjudged to have beaten me by one
vote, which I have never admitted. I
still characterise the election as a
most unfair one. Nearly every one of
the presiding officers were partisans
of my opponent. At one place no less
than 13 or 15 voting papers were
numbered on the back by the presid-
ing officer. Those papers should have
been thrown out by the returning
officer, which would have made me
an easy winner. A person once in
Parliament, and turned out, will,
unless he has means, find a millstone
around his neck. Such has been my
experience.
CHAPTER XV
Before leaving the subject of gold-
fields and mining, I would like to
mention that, in 1899, I took an option
on behalf of Mr. A. E. Morgans and
myself, over a mining proposition in
the Yalgoo district. We paid Mr.
H. A. Spalding, who, I understand, re-
presented the lessees of the show,
sloo for the said option. The mine
(copper) was then known as the
Wheal Catherine. I thought I had
made an excellent deal, and as soon
as I reached Perth, I told Mr. Mor-
gans that we could not go wrong, as
there was sufficient ore in sight to
repay us, no matter what happened.


It must be remembered that I had
thoroughly examined the property
before parting with the SIOO. Revisit-
ing the Wheal Catherine a fortnight
later. I was thunderstruck to find
that the copper had disappeared, with
the exception of a little lying on the
surface. The recent alleged dis-
appearance of a rich gold leader at
the Chaffinch reminded me forcibly of
my Wheal Catherine experience.
Needless to say I hastened back to
Perth and advised Mr. Morgans of
the state of affairs, and suggested
that we let the first loss suffice. Any-
way I was not prepared to go further.
These disappearances are often
characterised as mysterious, but I do
not exactly fall in with that idea.
Experience has taught me that in
seven cases out of ten, where a
phenomenally rich surface show is
encountered, it proves treacherous,
seldom going down more than two or
three feet. This, I think, applies par-
ticularly to gold and copper, but is
not so pronounced in the case of
lead, at least so far as the lead bodies
of this district are concerned.
It may not be out of place here to
review the policy pursued'in relation
to the minerals of this district. As
the law now stands anyone holding a
lease is permitted to mine to a depth
of 40ft. below the natural surface, and
no deeper. To my mind this is one of
the most absurd limitations a legis-
lature ever sanctioned. A miner
should be allowed to go as deep as he
likes, or else he should not be allowed
to mine at all. No good can accrue
from his pottering about above the 40
feet level. When a prospector comes
along desiring to sample a piece of
country the owner can hold him at
bay on the plea that he (the owner)
intends to mine to a depth of 40ft.
In most cases doomsday would be
reached before the 40ft. level. Min-
erals are thus virtually locked up. It
is a small chicken at present, but it
will assuredly come back to roost.
Some day the Government will have
to pay heavily to get back mineral
rights, in the same way as it has had
to lay out large sums to regain pas-
toral and agricultural rights in this
district for the benefit of the com-
munity. Our minerals, I feel sure,
form a large and desirable asset.
Many will remember that I have
always advocated the leasing of
every inch of the surface if necessary
reserving to the Crown the right to
the minerals, or the right to allow
persons to work the minerals, pay-
ment to be made to the lessee for any
real damage caused by the entry of
the prospector or miner. Of course
the lessee could sink as deep as he
desires for water. In the Old
Country, not two out of ten persons
who hold the surface, have any right
to the minerals beneath it. I cannot
see why this system cannot be intro-
duced here, with this difference, that
instead of some high personage hold-
ing a right to the minerals, it should
be retained in perpetuity the Crown,
which should receive fair dues out of
any profit arising out of the working
of the minerals and nothing more.
Let me, for a moment, refer to what
is being done at the Baddera lead
mine, situated about 3f miles north of
the Northampton railway station.
The reference will show how neces-
sary is the conservation of minerals
for bona-fide mining. This mine had
been closed down for many years
until the present owners, the Fre-
mantle Trading Co., started opera-
tions. It is no stretch of imagination
to say the Co. is doing wonders. A
large quantity of high class galena
has been sent to market, whilst
hundreds of tons remain on the sur-
face, awaiting treatment by the con-
centration machinery, most of which
is on the mine, and in course of
erection. Someone referring in these
columns a short time ago to the mine,
said that while operations were at
present being conducted on a com-
paratively small scale, yet it employ-
ed more men and teams than any ten
farms in the district put together.
I endorse this statement, and add
that the mine circulates more ready
cash than ten farms would set in
motion. I wish the Baddera mine a
lasting and prosperous career. The
present owners deserve success.
I wish to add a final word concerning
the aborigines. In 1867 (the year of
my arrival in the colony) these sable


gentry were not too highly domesti-
cated. The natives who hung about
the Geraldine mine (the scene of my
first abode) were no exception to the
rule. There were several notorious
outlaws amongst them, “wanted”
chiefly for the crime of cattle-spear-
ing which, at that time, was rife
throughout the colony. While holding
no official appointment I always
constituted myself a native protector
and during my long stay amongst
them, I have had very little trouble
with them. To deal successfully with
the blacks you must always keep your
word. Whether I promised them a
hiding or sixpence they always got it.
They very quickly became acquainted
with the position, and frequently one
or other of them, who had earned my
displeasure, would come and hold up
his leg, asking me to drive a spear
through it. This was done by way of
atonement. They were constantly
quarrelling and fighting among them-
selves. When living in a settled dis-
trict the native is docile and obliging.
In his wild haunts he is sometimes
aggressive, and always defiant. I
have often felt disgusted when read-
ing reports of the alleged ill-treat-
ment of natives by settlers. There
may have been an isolated case or
two of this kind, but they are the
exception and not the rule. A little
light chastisement often does a native
good. It certainly does not represent
ill-treatment. It benefits him much
more than sending him to Rottnest.
Of course I do not advocate wholesale
flogging which, to me, is repugnant.
Once, many years ago, I and another
magistrate, tried a native for assault.
The charge was proved, and my col-
league was in favor of ordering a
flogging. I was opposed to the flog-
ging, but knowing that, if a flogging
was ordered, one of us would, accord-
in to the regulations, have to witness
it. I reminded my friend of the posi-
tion. He undertook to act as witness,
and the flogging was ordered. From
what he told me afterwards I gather-
ed that he never desired to see an-
other such brutal exhibition.
CHAPTER XVI
In my last I referred to the flogging
of a native. In connection with it an
incident happened that is worth re-
cording. We had amongst us a native
youngster named Jigger, whose repu-
tation was none too good. Those
who knew him best suggested that, if
he liked, he should be allowed to wit-
ness the flogging. He accepted the
opportunity with delight, thinking, I
suppose, to extract some fun from it.
He saw the flogging all right, but
when it was over he was as white as
any white man, and, after a moment
or two, he fainted. I venture to be-
lieve that experience had a beneficial
effect on him.
Governor Weld, during his term of
office, visited the Geraldine mine. At
that time the natives were very
troublesome, A short while pre-
viously they had speared (not fatally)
two white men named "Buddy” Sulli-
van and Mat Barlow. His Excellency
having heard a good deal of the evil
deeds of the natives, expressed a
desire to see as many of the sable
inhabitants of the country as possible,
I managed to get about a half score
to come in to the settlement. The
worst characters could not, of course,
be induced to show themselces. After
admonishing the blacks to give up
fighting and stealing, and after order-
ing a supply of flour, tea, sugar, and
tobacco for them (the custom on
such occasions), Governor Weld pro-
ceeded to select the most suitable
man amongst them to be King of the
Tribes of the district. This exalted


position fell to a native locally known
as Left-handed Billy. The choice was
a good one as it happened. The
newly-made monarch was dully in-
vested with a flag his emblem of
authority which he planted at the
entrance to his Breakwind Palace
which he occupied for several months,
in a dignified manner, compatible with
his high position. He did nothing ex-
cept give orders to his subjects, who
had to attend to all his requirements.
Matters went on smoothly for some
time, and I fancied I could see a
marked improvement in the demea-
nour of the natives, but as time wore
on some of the rank and file grew
tied of subjection. Indeed a few
became openly rebellious, so the King
quickly made up his mind to abdicate.
He did so and went back to his
former unostentatious mode of living.
But up till his death, which occurred
only a year or two ago, he retained
the title of King Billy.
Many other events concerning the
natives might be recorded, but as I
must bring this narrative and self-
imposed task to a close, I will pass
on. Up to this point my story has
dealt in a great measure with more
of my ups than my downs. There
is another side to the narrative, for I
have had my share of domestic and
other misfortunes. I brought out with
me a brother-in-law named John
Osborne, who died ten months after
our arrival here, leaving a widow
(my sister) and three or four children
in the Old Country. Then came the
rather sudden death of my brother
John, whom I had induced to come to
West Australia, and who did not live
long after his arrival. His death was
always a mystery, for he was the
picture of health, and stood 6ft. 2in.
in height, being built in proportion.
His death was a terrible blow to me,
especially as my parents, who were
getting old, were particularly attach-
ed to him. Then came the loss of my
first wife in 1883. She and I had been
practically children together, and her
death touched me deeply. Friends
said she had spoiled me for another
wife, but whether this was so or not,
I made another venture after waiting
six years. My next trouble was the
loss of my business partner, Mr.
Crowther, which occurred 15 or 16
years ago. His will was worded in
such a way that everything had to be
sold, leaving me with only my house-
hold furniture. Thus I had practically
to begin life afresh. Then came the
death of my poor brother Jim, one
of the best fellows who ever lived. This
grief was followed by the loss of my
eldest daughter, the wife of Mr. Bird,
of Perth. Then a sister and a grown-up
nephew were drowned, on their way
out to join us, by the sinking of the
ship Kapunda, on the South African
coast through colliding with another
vessel. Five years ago my youngest
and only brother Dave, was found
dead in a street at Johannesburg,
South Africa. It is supposed that he
was sand-bagged, robbed, and
murdered, but it has not to my mind,
been thoroughly cleared up. Any-
way, I lost my only brother, and was
the only one left of a family of nine,
of which I am the eldest. Close upon
four years ago my culminating mis-
fortune overtook me in the loss of
my second wife, who was only 35
years of age. I was thus left with
seven young children (six girls and
a boy). Only those who have exper-
ienced it, know what it means for a
man to be left with a family of
young, motherless children. I had
an equally severe blow previously,
but I was then younger and stronger,
and better able to withstand trial. I
have seen laid in our Gwalla burial
ground the remains of two wives, two
brothers, one brother-in-law, a father
and mother-in-law, five children, and
three grandchildren. It seems to me,
looking back on it, a very sorrowful
record. I am now fast approaching
the condition known as “Has Been.”
For myself, however, I have no
anxiety, but about my dear children.
I feel troubled. May the Lord protect
them as I have tried to do. I am
afraid I close on rather a sad note,
but perhaps my readers will pardon
an old fellow who, “looking backward
42 years,” and counting up the friends
who have passed on ahead of him,
feels a little lonesome, and more than
a bit weary.


[?]
