

Looking
backward




and forward
/ A
f /*
* ft
i'A
/ ■ ’ff V
■ . : ■;-■ ■, • ■ ,■ / ,




a preliminary thought
3,000 YEARS before the dawn of Christianity, an unknown
someone in ancient Syria started a ball rolling. It rolled down the
centuries and around the world. Its impetus has never ceased. And,
although it was a glass ball, it behaved like a snowball gaining
size with momentum.
Glass born of hard sand, potash, lime and fire, aided by technical
science—has become the substance of which modern life is made. And,
lest you label this as an exaggeration, think for a moment of the
myriad functions of glass in the world to-day. Men live in it, see
by it, unlock the ether with it. Women cook in it, preen before it,
even dress in it. Without it there would be neither artificial light,
X-ray nor scientific instruments. From hypodermic needles to the
most powerful lenses from cameras to lighthouses —it is glass
all the way. You bottle in it, pack in it, you contact it in a hundred
forms every day of your life. It has more uses than any metal in the
world. Its force is creative; its future endless.


Looking backward and forward
1915
Factory of the Sydney Glass
Bottle Works on the site of the
present plant at Dowling Street,
Waterloo.
ONCf upon a time someone wrote a warning proverb concerning the throwing of stones
by people living in glass houses. How old is that saying? It may surprise the modernist to
know that it was possibly current amongst the ancient Assyrians well over 7,000 years ago,
for there is certainly evidence that glass houses were lived in at that time!
How was glass discovered? There is a common legend that Venetian sailors, making a fire on a hearth
of hard soda blocks on a sandy beach, stumbled on the formula. This, however, is discounted by
authorities. They think it far more likely that the origin came through the burning down of a corn store,
the composition of the ash being approximately that of commercial glass—i.e., silica, sodium and
calcium. Whatever the truth may be, the antiquity of glass has been established beyond all doubt.
The early product was, naturally, crude in texture because of the primitive furnaces employed: designs,
too, were restricted although external decorative treatments reached a high peak of artistry.
G I, ASS-BLOW IMiI N 50 15. C. Greater versatility in shapes became evident about half a century before
the birth of Christ, for it was then that the glass blower’s pipe was evolved —a simple tool which
remained in use for all blown glass right up to the nineteenth century, and which is still in use for
many types of modern glass working. It was about the time of the Renaissance, however, that the art
received its greatest stimulus—particularly in the city of Venice. Venetian glassmakers spread all over
Europe. They were accorded high social position; in fact, participation in the production of glass was
restricted to “gentlemen and the sons of gentle-men.”
Even those early days were not without what we now know as “the Nazi touch.” The secrets of glass
making were very jealously guarded and glass makers going abroad were obliged to return immediately
they were ordered to do so. Default meant the imprisonment of their nearest relations and, ultimately,
the “liquidation” of the defaulter by a secret envoy!
The first type of glass melting furnace was constructed in the form of a bee hive and was built of fire-
proof clay. Inside this furnace stood a number of clay crucibles or pots into which the glass-making raw
materials were filled. This method of producing glass was so uncertain that glass makers had to be
called out into the forest whenever the glass was ready for working—no matter at what hour of the
day or night. In a radio broadcast it was recently pointed out by Mr. W. J. Smith that this practice
persisted in glass factories in England and even in Australia up to fifty years ago! As a matter of fact
pot furnaces —modernised versions of the type referred to —are still used in the production of the best
classes of glassware.
GLASS-MAKING GOMES 1 O Al SI RALIA. The story of the glass industry in Australia goes back to
the year 1866. About that time —some 70 years ago —Messrs. Felton and Grimwade, who were whole-
sale chemists, erected a small furnace in Graham Street, Port Melbourne. They engaged some English
glass blowers and set out to supply their own requirements of glass bottles. Later on works were
established in other Australian cities and in New Zealand. About the same time a small glass bottle
factory was opened by Mr. Joseph Ross on the site of the Darling Harbour Goods Yard in Sydney. This


THROUGH GLASS
business was later removed to Camperdown and carried on by the sons of the founder. Eventually,
however, it became steadily apparent that if Australia were to compete with the older countries, full
advantage must he taken of modern methods of mass production.
Australian Glass Manufacturers Company Ltd. was first established in 1916. It was actually a consoli-
dation of certain smaller undertakings principally devoted to bottle-making the main plant of which
was established early in the last war. A factory in New Zealand was built in 1923. In the following year
a considered policy of expansion was put into action. How active that policy has been may lie gauged
by the fact that in 1925 the Company employed 2,260 people, whilst to-day well over 6,000 people are
on the pay roll. The Company which 16 years ago manufactured bottles only, has expanded to cover no
less than seventeen industries with plants extending over approximately 115 acres. Over 250 acres of
sand land are also owned. The Company pays approximately £1,500,000 annually in wages and salaries
and it has to be remembered, also, that its huge purchases of coal, soda ash, and other raw materials
create a vast amount of indirect employment.
So rapid were the strides made by the Company that by 1939 an important new development became
necessary. Up till that time, many of the activities undertaken, whilst being essential parts of the
Company’s equipment and organisation, had so expanded that they became large enough to he treated
as independent businesses, serving outside customers as well as the Company’s own departments.
Thus, although the Company was primarily a glass-making concern, it had gradually become vitally and
directly interested in many other allied industries. Still further growth in production had necessitated
the sectionalising of the industry.
Proprietary Companies were, therefore, formed and operate as separate entities. It was at this point
that the name of the parent Company was changed, and Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd.
came into being. The subsidiary Companies now operated by A.C.I. are; —
Australian Glass Manufacturers Co. Pty. Ltd., Australian Window Glass Pty. Ltd.,
Crown Crystal Glass Pty, Ltd., A.C.L Case Makers Pty. Ltd., A.C.I. Engineering
Pty. Ltd., A.C.L Fibre Packages Pty. Ltd., A.C.I. Investments Pty. Ltd., A.C.L Metal
Stamping and Spinning Pty. Ltd., A.C.I. Plastics Pty. Ltd., A.C.L Refractories
Pty. Ltd., Bernard Smith Pty. Ltd., Dott and Company Ply. Ltd.,
Nerv Zealand Glass Manufacturers Co. Pty. Ltd., Plumb {A list . I Pty. Ltd.. Jfff '
Queensland Glass Manufacturers Co. Ply. Ltd.. South Australian Silicates
Co. Ply. Ltd.. II esl tuslralian Felspar Company.
The change in regime proved successful from the outset. Take a swift glance
at the varied yet complementary activities of this great national enterprise
Pry, first of all. into the fact that A.C.M. to-day produces every size and shape
of glass container required by the market—ever 10,1)00 different shapes,
sizes, colours and letteiings! In all States of lhc 4 Commonwealth as
well as in New Zealand, a surplus of plant and equipment is always
maintained so that am demand may he met at the shortest
notice. And nobody knows better than A.C.M. how great
that demand can he and how short the notice!
Heavy stocks of bottles and jars are invariably
on hand in a bewildering variety of designs
and finishes. 131^ WSa , i
1941
One of the recently completed
buildings of Australian Glass
Manufacturers Company Pty.
Ltd. at Dowling Street, Waterloo.
mg backward and forward






GLASS is breaking into the building world with almost the
same speed and certainly that characterised the debut
of reinforced concrete. Glass has finally moved into the
building field, and it will stay. Have you ever visited the
plant of Australian Window Glass Pty. Ltd. and seen the
highly ingenious machines which turn out glass bricks with
consummate ease? Have you seen figured rolled and wired
safety glass sliding silently from molten material to finished
product in one smooth motion? You have actually to witness
the scale of production to realise how hungry is the Glass Age
for more and more of this bewildering essential. You have
to see sheet glass rising 40 feci from the roaring maw of the
furnace, to be sliced like cheese by men who juggle glass with
the facility of conjurers. In this plant you will see glass heated
till it softens, then bent over moulds of almost any desired
shape. The glass sinks, lakes the form of the mould,
and is then annealed. Here you will see glass by the
acre, glass by the ton, glass for a nation’s buildings. SB
If you want to visualise the colossal market this plant ■■"!
must supply, think of the miles of windows you pass JmtSi
in a day’s walk; of the houses and flat buildings; the Jfr&
factories, the churches, and public halls; the theatres,
cinemas and restaurants. Think of the conservatories,
hospitals and schools. Imagine, if you can, what would
happen if sheet glass and window glass suddenly disap-
peared into the void, and became unprocurable. It does
not lake much reflection to see why the Australian Window
Glass undertaking is far more than a commercial enterprise.
And if you think that refractories aren’t intensely interesting
as well as important, step into the plant of A.C.I. Refractories
Ply. Ltd. You’ll see miracles being wrought in (day — clay
shaped ami patiently moulded, then burnt to tin* enduring
hardness of granite in fire-wrapped kilns. Blocks and bricks
for the fiercest furnaces in Australia . . . pots to withstand
the heat and pressure of molten glass . . . literally the very
foundation stones of a thousand industries.
AUSTRALIAN WINDOW GLASS PTY. LTD.
This major A.CI. subsidiary produces plain clear sheet glass and
figured rolled glass. From the same source come the famous
Insulux Glass Bricks in a range of patterns and sizes, anti-actinic
Coldlite glass, glass lenses and Flushlile lighting fittings. Bent
glass is also a product of this company.
Glass goes building






From Crystal Vas e
to Threepenny Jam Dish
LET US switch hack for a moment to a house in the Strand,
London, in 1557. There some genius discovered lead flint
glass. Glass experts in Venice at that time were using lime glass
and it was the English discovery which started to put the Venetian
operators out of business, and, one supposes, had ultimately a
great deal to do with the establishment of (Town Crystal Glass
Ply. Ltd. It is easy to understand why lead content gives glass
such appealing brilliancy when it is remembered that artificial
gems are made from glass of high lead content. How is glass cut?
In many cases articles produced for cutting are made by the
freehand process —without a mould and by the use of hand
tools. After annealing it goes to the cutting shop. At this stage,
of course, it is merely a shape entirely without pattern. Every
part of the design is cut on the surface by skilled artisans using
specially constructed wheels. At first the design is roughed and
passed through successive stages until finally smooth. It is then
ready for the acid polishing which brings the newly cut design
to its full brilliancy. Cut glass, however, is but one of the
hundred products produced by this important A.(51. subsidiary.
By far its greatest output is in the field occupied by the jam dish,
the salad bowl, the plate, cup and saucer, tin 1 milk jug . . . glass
pressed into a thousand shapes and designs for the service of
domesticity and home-decoration. The vogue for combining
chromium with glass—in everythin" fr“m “tnoker-’ -namh and
display accessories to lighting ware > .il ■■ ■l< i• • I i-.i I rmn
this source, 100, comes the fa mo m- ■ P\r< •. do- im-nw.n.
which is tableware as well.
CROWN CRYSTAL GLASS
PTY. LTD.
This is one of the most important sub-
sidiaries of the organisation. From this
plant come a thousand-and-one articles in
glass, most of which are familiar to all
because of their daily domestic use. These
include table and kitchen glassware, col-
oured water sets, Agee Pyrex ovenware,
display stands , commercial and domestic
lighting ware, table lamps, and floor
standards , as well as chromium, metal and
glass smokers' stands, tables, furniture,
etc. On the right can be seen the Crown
Crystal studio where the final Aesthetic
touch is given to the more decorative
type of glass ornaments and utensils.


The Engineering Chic ken and the Glass Egg
TT IS lime now to consider ihe engineering activities of A.C.I. At this stage we are reiniixit't!
of. tin* ancient problem ol the chicken and the egg the problem of which came first. Did
engineering conn' before glass.' 1 Or glass before engineering t Before there can be ihe right
glass there must he the right engineering, but only engineering experts can tell you how far
high-preeision engineering eouhl go without the aid of glass I 1 here was a time, of course,
when A.C.I. (then A.0.M. ) had to walk down the road to buy its engineering. To-day the
t With plants in Sydney and Melbourne, this subsidiary produces machinery, moulds, dies, shell-making lathes,
C.I. ENGINEERING PTY. LTD. as we n as man y components required for modern aircraft. Typical products of the Company, photographed
above, include a giant Aerex ventilating fan, a special shell-making lathe, a de-airing machine, three moulds


walk isn’t necessary. A furiously acti\ c subsi diary produces work not only for its brother
departments in A.C.I. hut for general engineering requirement.' as wadi. From out of its enviably
modern plants in Sydney and Melbourne conn 1 moulds, dies and lathes. From the same industrial
iiii l > spin aireralt landing wheels, (lap-operating de\ ices, observers seals, axles and a host of
the vital necessities to eflieienl aeroplane const ruction. A.( i.l. s modern engineering equipment
enables its plants to carry out an almost unbelievable variety and volume of work.
for the manufacture of glassware, and finally a stack of ammunition boxes . . . the latter being a product of the Joinery Section, Photographs in the lower
half of the page show some of the work of the various shops that comprise A.C.I. Engineering and indicate the intensive activities, wide scope and outstanding
resources of this organisation. The photographs also give hint of the large army of employees engaged in the activities of A.C.I. Engineering.
. . and the G lass




AUSTRALIAN GLASS MANUFACTURERS COMPANY PTY. LTD.
The advantages of glass containers need little emphasis. It is now universally accepted
that they possess maximum “eye appeal ” and create confidence— because glass can hide
no secrets. They are most adaptable and lend themselves to creative design . . . are
hygienically perfect and easy to clean. Finally, glass containers have no chemical reactions
—a vitally important factor in the packing of foodstuffs. Over 10,000 different types of
glass containers are produced by Australian Glass Manufacturers.
It is this subsidiary which has pioneered the manufacture of glass tubing in this country.
This tubing is used in vital defence work, in Neon lighting, for laboratory purposes, high
tension fuses, etc. From the same plant come the all-important ampoules which play such
a vital part in medical services, not only for defence purposes but in civilian life. These
ampoules, which are made in sizes from ½ c. c. to 500 c.c., are now manufactured for the
first time in Australia . . . another tribute to the progressiveness of A.C.I. research and
experiments and to the Way it is playing its part in making this country self-sufficient.




There are some forms of glassware which
defy even the ingenuity of the most intricate
machines. There are others which can be
produced only by a combination of auto-
matic production with the more personal
skill of the craftsman. It is here that Dott
and Co. Pty. Ltd. step into the glass-making
picture. This is the A.C.I. subsidiary which
“specialises in specialisation.” From its
plant comes an interesting miscellany of
products which are little known to the
householder, besides a host of familiar
utilities such as aquariums, biscuit bowls,
vases and illuminating ware. The glass
utensils of the laboratory and the hundred
and one special jars and containers required
for technical purposes come from this
factory. Here, too, are made (for the first
time in Australia) the glass bulbs which are
the basis of the modern electric lamp. A
list of the products of Dott & Co. reads like
a catalogue of the unheard-of. It ranges
from fly traps to witch bowls; from propa-
gating glasses and petrol mileage testers to
battery jars and chimneys. Soap dispensers
come side by side with fish bowls, and oyster
glasses with hydrometer measures. Even
wreath covers join the variegated proces-
sion! But the operations of this subsidiary
are not limited to glass. Metal spinning and
art metal working come within its ambit.
Briefly, this Company describes itself as
“manufacturers of Flint Blown Glassware
and Metalware mostly used for lighting
purposes”—a most unromantic outline of
an output packed with interest and fascina-
tion. This organisation provides another
convincing example of the versatility which
is the keynote of all truly successful modern
enterprise: of specialisation over the
broadest possible field.
DOTT & COMPANY PTY. LTD.
From rain gauges to fish howls and liquid soap dispensers to
light fittings, range the products of Dott and Co. Pty. Ltd. . . .
important Melbourne subsidiary of A.C.I. Their plant is the
source of flint blown glassware and metalware. In addition to
its operation in the field of artificial illumination, this company
also supplies the glassware needs of laboratories, technical
departments, and specialised industry. Generally speaking, it
can be accepted that this company produces the type of glass-
ware in which mechanical precision must be combined with
the more personalised skill of the expert craftsman.




Steel
FIRST COUSIN TO GLASs
w K have already laid emphasis on the extent to which glass lias penetrated the building
field. Reference to this point is not complete, however, without mention of steel. Through
its important subsidiary Bernard-Smith (Ply.) Ltd. A.C.I. fabricates structural steel for
its own requirements and for the IN.S.W. market generally. As might be expected in times
such as these, a large proportion of this Company 's production is for defence requirements.
You will notice, in this story, that we cannot gel very far away from glass. It was because of
glass- the demand for glass- and the tact that factories bad to he built to produce glass —that
the fabrication of structural steel first came into the A.C.I. picture. It is not surprising there-
fore. that the Hcriiard-Saiilh subsidiary has hcen going at full I lore since it was established.
BERNARD-SMITH (PTY.) LTD.
So close is the relationship between steel and glass in
modern constructional engineering, that the creation
of a subsidiary for the fabrication of steel demanded
by modern buildings, bridges, cranes, etc., was not
only logical, but inevitable.
Bernard-Smith (Pty.) Ltd. specialises in all types of
heavy erections. The illustration on the left, for
instance, shows a typical "I” section girder in process
of fabrication. In the background is portion of the
huge steel framework of the King George V Memorial
Hospital fabricated by Bernard-Smith.
Whilst the hulk of the output of Bernard-Smith ( Pty.)
Ltd. consists of structural steel, the hopper illustrated
on this page, together with its steel framework, shows
the adaptability of the Company’s resources for work
of a more specialised character. Among the various
types of work carried out over the last few years are
Bridges, Cranes, Built-up Mild-Steel Machine Frames,
Furnace Casings and Chimneys, Chasses, Floats, Pipe
Lines and Cas Producers,
Immediately below can be seen a number of the petrol
containers made by Bernard-Smith for the Royal
Australian Air Force.


Glass gets its
Overcoat
A.C.I. FIBRE PACKAGES PTY. LTD.
This subsidiary is responsible not only for the many
forms of cartons and containers required for the pack •
ing of A.C.I. glass products generally, but for those
required in many other branches of industry. This
plant is admirably adapted to the production and print •
ing of any of the varied types of containers which
modern merchandising conditions demand. The acti-
vities of A.C.I. Fibre Packages do not end with cartons,
A battery of modern letterpress printing machines
produces labels and advertising matter for A.C.I. and
the business world generally.


slructural steel to boxes and cartons is a long jump, but we will take it because so
many people wonder why A.C.I. got into the package business. The simplest explanation,
of course, is that completed glass products have to be fitted with a “going away” dress. They
can’t travel in an undressed slate . . . and they can t be sent to market in any old container
which might be on hand. It is the business of A.C.I. Fibre Packages Ply. Limited (and New'
Zealand Glass Manufacturers Co. Pty. Ltd. just across the Tasman) to see that good glass has a
good overcoat for travelling and that it is snugly protected against the bumps and jolts of a
careless world. It is a very important job; and far more complex than it sounds. To-day, the
packaging of products is almost as important as the quality of the articles themselves. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the facilities developed by A.C.I. for the production of cartons and
containers should attract the attention of outside organisations. The result has been an increas-
ing demand on those facilities for the design, manufacture and printing of “overcoats” for a
surprising range of goods. The plant now caters for almost every field of commerce.
A.C.I CASE MAKERSPTY. LT D.
The more solid type of "overcoat" requ ired for the pac kings of glass
and sikilar pr oducts is provide dby this subsidiary. The Co mpany, for
instance,"gets" its own timber and ope rates its own sawmils .Thus,
even the forest of the Commonwealth contribute to the Nation's ever.
increasing cry for glass and still more glass.


What do You know about Plastics?
LASS is the oldest plastic known. However, when modern plastics first emerged from “out
VJ of the nowhere into here” (that was about the time you first heard of Bakelite, remember?)
they seemed destined unlike glass—to spend their usefulness entirely in a world of rather
childish gadgets—fancy buttons, penholders, ash trays and “arte shoppe” novelties. Certain
European nations, however, in the service of their particular economy, began to ignore the more
elemental uses and turned plastics to use in pipe lines, agricultural machinery and aircraft
parts. Plastics began to run invisibly through the inner construction of tanks, battleships,
bombers and the whole gamut of weapons of war. That opened a new era. It brought plastics
right into the industrial front line. One supposes, as far as A.C.I. is concerned, that thoughts


A.C.I. PLASTICS PTY. LTD.
A.C.I. Plastics Pty. Ltd. produce everything from bottle
caps to radio cabinets . . . from lipstick cases to re-
frigerator accessories . . . from cups and saucers to
table lamps and aircraft parts. To illustrate every
application of plastic production to contemporary life
would require a book far larger than this. Sufficient is
shown, however, to indicate that the immediate past
has been astoundingly productive and that the future
is without limit.
of bottle caps first turned their glass-tuned minds to the plastie field. Whether that he so or not.
their plastie subsidiary now produces everything from hollle caps to radio eahiuets . . . from
lipstick eases to refrigerator accessories—from cups and saucers to table lamps and aircraft parts.
Already there are plasties that are as transparent as crystal and which tinkle like glass . . . and
plasties that stretch like rubber and come in fascinating rainbow hues. There are plasties that
can he sprayed like lacquer; plastics that for many purposes outwear steel. Plasties lighter than
aluminium, and thin as tissue. In the plastie field the horizon is the limit . . . and your horizon
depends upon how far you can see. It seems that A.C.I. has a habit of seeing a very long way.


An intensive search is going on all over the world for uniform hig-vohiine industrial uses for
plastics. In this direction they must eventually get to grips with metals and woods . . . not
merely on a basis of colour and appearance, but on some combination of price and superior
performance.
SUPPLYING THE “HAT'’
Glass needs a “hat” as well as an “overcoat.” With the increasing vogue for glass containers
came the need for improved closures. Originally the ordinary cork was deemed sufficient —hut
not for long. It quickly became apparent that the metal top (and to some extent the plastic
lop), would supersede its more mundane predecessors. Realisation of this fact caused the
inception of A.C.I. Metal Stamping and Spinning Ply. Limited. A plant was established which
could not only produce the essential caps, but print them with the diversified insignia of a host
of businesses. It was not long before the potentialities of this plant were extended to more
ambitious requirements. So closely is metal linked up with lighting ware (primarily a product
of Crown Crystal Glass Pty. Ltd.) and so great a part does metal play in the many products of
A.C.1., that this subsidiary quickly found itself called upon to manufacture a vast range of parts
outside the field it was originally intended to supply.
How this Company finds time to produce cork products for refrigerators, cork strips and wads
and a host of other cork accessories is known only to its efficient management —but the fact
remains. The organisation produces cork products not only for its own requirements, but for
those of a very extensive clientele . . . particularly in the fields of refrigeration and industrial
insulation.
Previously in this book you have read about plasties —but since plasties have not yet made a
dent in the market for glass, A.C.I. mines and treats its own silica supplies at Longwood in


W.A. FELSPAR COMPANY
Because the highest grade glass cannot be
manufactured without felspar, A.C.I. operates
its own felspar mines in Western Australia.
It is not long since Australia depended upon
overseas sources for this invaluable product.
To-day, however, it is recognised that felspar
emanating from these deposits is equal in
quality to that produced in any part of the
world.
A.C.I. METAL STAMPING AND
SPINNING PTY. LTD.
W hen glass bottles and containers were first
conceived, the mundane eork was considered
adequate for purposes of closure. With in-
creasing modernisation of design, however,
and with the steadily growing appreciation
that artistry plays an important part in mer-
chandising, arose the demand for metal caps,
stoppers, bottle tops, etc. Not only was it
necessary to be able to produce such require-
ments in metal, but facilities had to be pro-
vided for imprinting them with designs,
trade-marks and other insignia of one hun-
dred and one products and industries. A.C.I.
Metal Stamping and Spinning Pty. Ltd. was
originally brought into being to meet this
need. Gradually its facilities were required
for more ambitious purposes, with the result
that, to-day, the plant of this subsidiary is
engaged in the production of metalware for
lighting fixtures and all the variously designed
components of decorative illumination.
South Australia. Silica (as your grandson will inform you) is
the basic ingredient of glass. And he’ll tell you also that you
can’t make the best glass without felspar: which is why A.C.I.
works its own felspar mines in Western Australia. Before the
Company look over the Coolgardie deposits, all its felspar
came from abroad. It doesn’t any longer: and the Australian
product is frankly admitted to be equal to any in the world.
Tools may seem a very uninspiring topic after reading of the
more spectacular operations of A.C.I. Nevertheless the activi-
ties of Plumb (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. are of marked importance in
this connection. Housed in a modern factory, this enterprise
has already become active in markets previously monopolised
by non-Australian manufacturers. And the matter goes even
further than that. It is from here, too, that valuable muni-
tions accessories are emanating—serving a grimmer need of
this Commonwealth of ours.


Manufacturi ng Pl ants
OF SUBSIDIARIES
AUSTRALIAN CONSOLIDATED INDUSIRIES LMITED
War-time regulations prohibit aerial photographs of industrial plants. This has rendered necessary the inclusion of certain
photographs which are not strictly up-to-date and. do not include the many new buildings erected during the last few years.
Above : AUSTRALIAN CLASS MANUFACTURES CO. PTY. LTD., MELBOURNE Inset: OFFICES AND SHOWROOMS.
Below. AUSTRALIAN CLASS M ANUFACTURES CO.PTY. DOWLING STREET, WATERLOO, SYDNEY


CROWN CRYSTAL GLASS PTY LTD; SYDNEY.
AUSTRALIAN WINDOW CLASS PTY. LTD., SYDNEY.
A. C. I. ENCINEERING PTY.LTD., SYDNEY.
BERNARD SMIT H (P T Y.) LIM ITED, SYD N EY
AUSTRALIAN GLASS MANUFACTURERS CO, PTY, LTD., ADETAIDE
QUEENSLAND GLASS MANUFACTURERS CO. PTY. LTD., BRISBANE.
AUSTRLIAN GLASS MANUFACTURERS CO. FTY. LTD.. FER'I!I
NEW ZEALAND GLASS MANUFACTURERS CO. PTY. LTD.. AUCKLAND.
riHKK PACKAGES PTY. LTD.. SYDNEY. PLUMB (AUST) PTY. LTD., SY DNEY. FRONFACE OF FOUNDRY & GARAGE., SYDNEY


Messrs. Alfred Felton and Frederick
Sheppard Grimwade, pioneers of
the glass industry in Australia.
Board of Directors
AUSTRALIAN CONSOLIDATED INDUSTRIES LTD.
r pHE control of a vast national enterprise under
modern conditions permits no sinecures. Never
before in the history of the Commonwealth has industry
carried so vast a responsibility—not only to those engaged
in it, but to the country and the Nations it supplies.
Consciousness of that responsibility is at the very root of
the policy laid down by those who control the operations
of Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd. Conditions
arising from the war have called not only for careful
judgment hut upon capacity for hold action in an ever-
widening sphere. For the results which are being achieved,
the Directors of this Company claim only a partial share
MR. E. NORTON GRIMWADE ( Chairman )
of credit —preferring to make it known that from the army of A.C.I. technicians, engineers,
chemists, executives and workmen has come the major contribution.
Pledged to a policy that is national in character, those who carry the responsibility 7 of
leadership of this organisation arc facing the future in the confidence that they have the
unstinted support of the widespread and growing personnel which shares the determination
to place the needs of the Nation before all other considerations.
MR. T. C. ALSTON.


MAJ.-GEN. H. W. GRIMWADE, C.B.C.M.G.
MR. W. J. SMITH Managing Director).
MR. F. J. SMITH.
SIR ALEXANDER STEWART.
MR. A. E. SMITH
(General Manager).


WE NEED GUNS, SHIPS, AND PLANES
‘‘l
a ft not this the appointed time fo i*
all to -make the -utmost exertions in
their power? It the battle is to be
won, we must provide our mem with
the ever increasi n g q n antities of
weapons and antm nnition they need,
more aeroplan.es* more tanks, more
shells , more gun s.”
CHURCHIL L




ALTHOUGH we live in a mechanical age, it is remarkable how long it took
\ the modern community to realise fully that war is largely a mechanical process.
L A- The first thought was invariably of manpower and the methods based on 1914-
1918. Problems of equipment, of the manufacture of munitions in Australia
and of the development of the Commonwealth as an arsenal were regarded as a later
consideration. It has taken this country and the world in general quite a long time to
realise that Australia is no longer an “outpost” of the Empire. With national acceptance
of that fact, however, has come a new' industrial outlook.
The technical and productive resources of Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd. have
always been maintained with emergency requirements in view . . . whether in the
interests of normal industry in peace time —or of strength from the military aspect.
The Company has always realised that flexibility of any industry —its prompt adaptability
to changing conditions —is of major importance —no matter what national or inter-
national circumstances might prevail.
It is because of this realisation that A.C.I. has been aide in so comparatively short a lime
to move into the fropt line of industry’s drive for victory ... to organise its vast resources
for the production of munitions and munition-making machinery. Prior to the outbreak
of hostilities A.C.I. was one of the first industrial organisations selected to erect annexes
for the production of munitions of war. Urgent war work is being carried out by A.C.I.
in both New South Wales and Victoria.
A large munition factory has been built, and this plant is operated without profit to the
Company. For some considerable time aircraft components, aero engine parts, shells, cart-
ridge parts and other essential war supplies have been produced and every facility not
already applied to defence and Government needs is immediately available, and all plant
and equipment is at the disposal of the Government as and when required.
Fully realising the extreme urgency of their task, A.C.I. employees are working at lop
speed in shell production and, in the engineering shop, landing wheels, brake assemblies,
cylinders and other vital aircraft components are being produced with utmost rapidity.
Right throughout the organisation there is a spirit of responsible enthusiasm —an appre-
ciation of the need for teamwork of the highest character and efficiency. A.C.I. employees
are responding splendidly to the calls made upon them by national emergency.
To the production of munitions and the requirements of war generally this great
organisation is bringing the same efficiency and productive ability which has charac-
terised the whole of its industrial history. Nothing is allowed to interfere with maximum
effort and output. Standards of quality and performance are rigidly observed, and
technical accuracy is the unalterable rule.
It can he said that the war effort of Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd. typifies the
spirit of Australia ... an inflexible determination that victory is the dominating objective
and that nothing must he allowed to interfere with its speedy and positive attainment.


Regulation quite properly prohibit any full description of the pro-
cesse illustratesd on this and subsequent pages which deal with a f ew
phases of A.C.I Munition production. Above,we see a typical A.C.I
carftsman engaged in finishing and turning the base and forming the
crimping grove for ithree-inhigh explosive sells.
Below is shown the finishing and turning of the outside from of H.E.
shell-typical example of which are seen on the left of the page.
The lathe and manchinery employed are of teh very latest type...
many improvements for which have been developed in the workshops
and plant of this organisation.


Production of aircraft com-
ponents and parts is one of the most
important of A.C.I. activities under
wartime conditions. On the right
can he seen an important and deli-
cate operation in the drilling of a
crank case for a Gypsy Major Air-
craft Engine.
The main illustration in the lower
half of the page shows thread mill-
ing being carried out in the fore-
ground. with handing operations in
the background. This particular
photograph gives some indication
of the part played by A.C.I. in the
production of 3-inch lI.E. shells.
Inset is a photograph showing an
assembly of propeller trolleys built
by this organisation for the
R.A.A.F.


Whilst the illustrations on these two pages provide a
glimpse into the more direct forms of Defence work
carried out by A.C.I., it has to be remembered that
many of the Company's less spectacular activities have
equal significance in the military sphere, even though
their application to urgent national needs may be
slightly less apparent. The manufacture of glass am-
poules by Australian Glass Manufacturers Company
Pty. Ltd. is a typical case. It could not be claimed
that these ampoules will win the war: nevertheless,
from the medical aspect, their functions are as vital as
those of aircraft components to the R.A.A.F. In the
same way, many other products of A.C.I. are being
manufactured in increasing volume at the direct
request of Defence authorities. Photographs repro-
duced on this page show: — (Top) Flap-operating
cylinder mechanism for Wirraway aircraft is one of
the operations of A.C.I, The illustration shows how
inspection of this mechanism is carried out. (Above)
In this photograph is shown the inspection of the
brake assembly for landing wheels of Wirraway air-
craft. (Right) Here is shown an assembly of propeller
inspection tables, built by A.C.I. for use of the R.A.A.F.


FUTURE ?
| 1 has already hcen slated that we are living in the (Hass Age. just as surelv as our prinueval I'orehears
I lived in the Slone Age. 'I he inlinite versatilitv of glass . . . the ease with which it can be adapted to
a mull iplieity ul purposes . . . places it in the very forefront of constructional materials. Because it can
he bent, rolled, blown; rendered as hard as steel or as soft as silk, turned into fibre, or moulded into
exquisite beauty glass will steadily supersede many a eosllv metal. \et the ultimate is still a long way
oil . . . and here is an industry which never remains satisfied. In all parts of the world, physicists,
chemists and engineers are continually working at new formula'. (Hass research is untiring and endless.
In the Ad,.l . laboratories, highly qualified chemists and technicians carry out a programme of perennial
experiment. i\o possibilities are overlooked and no expense spared in the exploration of new applica-
tions tor glass: in fact many new developments pioneered hv A.(..1. technicians have been adopted in
overseas glass manutaeturing practice. Adi.l.. through a widespread network of internalional allillations,
keeps constantly in touch with every new development . . . assuring that Australia and New Zealand keep
pace with the world. A. (I. I. does not end with am part ieular aeeoni pi ishmenl. It goes on and on into Ihe
fields ot chemistry and manufaellire. 11 is realised t hat glass still has a thousand unexplored uses. Thai
is why its zeal tor exploration never diminishes. And that is why the Company which once made humble
bottles has become a great national institution. We live in an age when girls have dived from glass
springboards: crowds have stared at thumbprints hanging in mid-air until they learned that thev were
looking at "invisible" glass. (Hass has a future as a text ile: and is already in use as a fibre for insulal ion
and air filtering. It would he hazardous for any prophet to attempt an accurate forecast of the future.
Ibis brief summary of all that is symbolised hv the initials Adi.l. is but a pointer of those vast
possihllil ies which will revolutionize industry and enhance the prosperity of Australia.
... and what of the




A New Sydney Headquarters
IN WILLIAM STREET
TOWERING gracefully at the foot of William Street, Sydney, is the new State Headquarters
of A.C.I . —a new addition to the dignity of Sydney’s architecture. This building, together
with A.C.I. premises in Spencer Street, Melbourne, will house the administrative corps of A.C.I.
This is the house that glass built! By day it glimmers and glows contentedly in sunlight; at
night it becomes a pillar of colour—its soaring glass brick walls still living when other walls are
dead.
Before yon go inside this nine-floored building, ask a question or two about the frameless main
door. It is made of glass: of glass strong and unsplinterable; armour plate glass which will bend
hut not break. (And the floor over which you will enter is glass also!) But look np at the face
of the building. See those beautiful mosaic tiles? Glass again used for the first time on a
complete exterior. Throw your head back and look at the pavement awning. There are glass
domes inset to light the footpath.
Now go inside. Ahead of you as you enter the ground floor showroom is a decidedly unusual
elliptical stairway to the glass-halconied mezzanine. But before you go up visit the basement—
a permanent display theatre for the many and varied products of A.C.I. subsidiaries.
Now —up in either of the high speed automatically operated elevators to the mezzanine floor —a
charming setting for Crown Crystal lighting fittings, architectural glass, and chromium furniture.
When you stroll around the centre balcony you are walking on glass. Glass bricks, too, form
the internal partitions. Secret of the quietness of each of these floors lies in the use of rubber
flooring and acoustic tile and fibrous plaster ceilings. They damp out all annoying sound.
Up further now to the second floor to see the display of pressed glassware and to inspect the
well-designed offices of Crown Crystal Glass. The third floor provides convincing evidence
that A.C.I. intends to provide its visiting buyers with exceptional comfort. There is a charmingly
furnished lounge complete with writing tables, and even a sound-proof glass bricked dictation
room —with stenographers available for those who prefer to “talk” their correspondence.
On the third floor also are the Directors’ offices and the Board Room —interesting examples of
dignified efficiency in the modern manner. During your tour of this and all other floors you will
have been impressed by the excellence of ventilation —due to a special system whereby exhausted
air is replaced continuously.
At the time of writing the tenancies and purposes of the other floors in this “House that Glass
Built” have yet to be finalised. It is easy to visualise, however, that this structure will become
the hub of a new administrative centre in Sydney. Already there are signs that this area is being
recognised as a logical administrative and distributing centre. Anticipating this, A.C.I. has
already made all necessary plans and provisions for expansion and extension of the building
at a later date. Another step forward in the march of A.C.1.!
and now


GLASS HEADQUARTERS FOR N.S.W. THE NEW A.C.I. BUILDING, 52-58 WILLIAM ST., SYDNEY


• ••••••••
This brochure, commemorating the opening of the new A.C.I. headquarters
in Sydney, was printed by A.C.I. Fibre Packages Pty. Ltd. It is illustrated
with blocks produeed by the Engraving Division of Crown Crystal Glass
Pty. Ltd. Photographs, with few exceptions, are also the work of the
Engraving Division.
We gratefully acknowledge the co-operation of the Department of Informa-
tion and the N.S.W. Government Printer in supplying certain of the
photographs used in this publication.
•••••••••


aci
