

Looking
Sunward.




Looking Sunward
Tbe Australian Presbyterian Mission
in Sontb India to«day
ISSUED BY
The A. P. M. Field Council


' What can we do, o’er whom the nnbeholden
Hangs in a night with which we cannot cope ?
What but look sunward, and with faces golden
Speak to each other softly of a hope ? ”
“ The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing
in His wings


CONTENTS
PAGE
Foreword 4
Chapter I
I 'WILL INSTRUCT THEE AND TEACH THEE 5
Chapter II
THEY THAT ARE SICK 13
Chapter 111
THE GLAD TIDINGS 20
Chapter IV
of such is the kingdom 25
Chapter V
morning rays 30




FOREWORD
The outcastes of India, for countless generations un-
known to most of the world and ignored or treated as
lower than animals by their fellow-countrymen, are now
not infrequently the subject of headlines and articles in
the -world's great newspapers ; their condition is a concern
of statesmen the world over- But still in their millions
they are living and dying in filth and ignorance and sin.
Among them labour the representatives of many Christian
Missions- Among them lies the chief work of the A.P.M.
We work surrounded by darkness: the darkness of
dreadful customs sanctioned from time immemorial; the
darkness of utter ignorance and of the slave mentality of
people treated as such through the centuries. We are in
the midst of declared “Criminal Tribes” whose recognised
age-old custom is to live by theft and crime. There is
the darkness and uncertainty of political upheaval; and
now the darkness and strain of financial stringency, when
from our supporters at home comes the reluctant word :
“No advancing at present. Retrench !”
But we are looking sunward. We face the first
gleams of the day that we know is dawning when among
the ‘'outcastes’’ of India shall arise a strong, self-
governed, self-supporting Christian Church; when the
Light of the World shall shine in India in glorious noon
and there will be no more outcastes nor any caste, but all
will be one in Christ Jesus.




CHAPTER I
I will Instruct Thee and Teach Thee
Samidoss (which being interpreted means the servant
or slave of God) has for some time been snuggling up
against his big sister. Even though the small round hut
is only twelve feet wide, the bamboo door shut and his
father, mother and two small brothers as well as his big
sister all sleeping on the earth floor with him, Samidoss is
cold- His little shirt is holey, other clothes he has none ;
but his big sister who works in the fields has a sari round
her and is a little warm. By and by his sister and
mother go out and leave the door open, so to avoid the
cold air he snuggles up in the corner and is just dozing off
again, when a head appears in the doorway. “Hey”.
Samidoss! Didn’t you hear the bell ? School-time!!
“Alright, teacher, I am coming” says Samidoss and settles
down again to have another forty winks before going to
that big cold school.
Ten minutes later Samidoss has to leave that little
hut, for the constraining hand of the teacher is upon him.
Samidoss is eight years old and in the second class-
He was three years in the first class, because he had to
be away so often minding the sheep on the hills- Also
the former teacher had not been so persistent as this one
in dragging him to school. Samidoss is also a playful lad
when fully awake, and much preferred to play jokes on the
other boys than to count seeds and scratch letters in the
sand-
‘Second class, stand ! Take up your books, turn to
page twenty. Samidoss, read.” Samidoss reads as well
as he can under the circumstances. Third standard, in
which are seven boys and one girl, are doing arithmetic on
their slates just six feet away. The upper half of first
class are saying their tables with one boy as leader
intoning “two sixes are twelve” for the class to repeat
after him. The four fourth class boys are reading aloud
in their corner last week’s lesson in their reading books.
The infants (dr lower half of first class) are learning to
write in the sand on the floor. The teacher’s wife has
1


made the first letter in the Tamil alphabet for each of
them and they are running their little fingers round these
letters, repeating the sound in high-pitched tones. Raja-
ratnam (King’s Jewel) who is in the fourth class is crying
because the teacher has punished him.
Meanwhile Samidoss is reading, and doing fairly ■well
while the teacher’s eye is on him and the teacher’s voice
is helping him with the hard new words, but stumbling
badly when the teacher turns aside to stop a fight between
two third class boys who have been pinching one another,
or to speak to Yesumoni (Jewel of Jesus) who is more
intent on tying up her hair and arranging a flower in it
than on saying her tables.
So the morning’s work goes on. The teacher and his
wife have a hard task to look after twenty-five boys and
five girls in one room, in five classes doing five different
lessons.
The next lesson is arithmetic and Samidoss doesn’t
like it. He didn't learn his numbers very well in first
class so he counts on his fingers and makes many mistakes.
He much prefers to copy from Muthuswamy (Pearl of the
Lord) who is very obliging for he hopes to have a loan of
Samidoss’s beautiful sling when later they are out on the
hills.
“ Samidoss, Samidoss! ” calls his mother’s voice from
the school doorway. “Why do you want Samidoss ?’’ asks
the teacher. “He must come and mind the baby because
I have to go to the shop on the roadside to get some ragi
grain for his father’s meal". Samidoss goes readily.
Anything to get away from sums.
“Yesumoni, Yesumoni, come and mind the baby”,
calls her mother, who is on her way to plant ragi in the
field of the headman of the caste village. “Can’t you let
Yesumoni stay this morning?” asks the teacher “You
took her away yesterday, and twice last week. She will
never learn this lesson before the Inspector comes next
week- Besides, the Missionary may come this morning
and I want all the children to be here”. “That is all very
well, but we must eat and the Missionary can’t feed us nor
will he mind the baby”, retorts Yesumoni’s Mother.


FIRST CLASS IN A VILLAGE SCHOOL
VILLAGE SCHOOL IN SHOLINGHUR DISTRICT


VILLAGE SCHOOL AND TEACHER’S HOUSE
BOARDING HOME BOYS
STUDYING IN PALLIPAT CENTRAL SCHOOL


By nine o'clock one boy after another has gone to his
work and only the small ones remain for the close of
school. In the evening when the children reassemble for
school tired after a long day in the open under a blazing
sun, the more interesting lessons are taught: stories,
Bible texts, etc-, and some general knowledge of the world.
Compared with the standards in Australia, ours are
low and the results are poor, but they are improving. The
great trouble is poverty. Each family lives from hand to
mouth on the meagre income that it can earn by farm-
work* Boys from seven to ten years of age have to help
a little by grazing the animals of their caste masters or by
any other work that they can do. Girls have to mind
babies, get firewood, help in cooking, and do light work.
Thus the schoolwork has to be crowded into the spare
time morning and evening. Also, the parents are not as a
rule very helpful because they cannot see any practical
monetary value in education and as yet have not realised
its spiritual importance.
Still, there is a growing recognition of the value of
education and it is our schools that have created this*
The school-church is the one bright spot in the village.
On our village teacher, to a very large extent, rests the
success or failure of our Christian Church* Improvement
mentally and spiritually without literacy is very slow and
very uncertain. In our villages there is a growing number
of young men and women who can read and write.
Their bright faces reveal a broader outlook on life and a
freedom from the fear and superstition which cramps the
souls of their fellows-
Our policy in village education is to go forward,
wherever there is a foundation of faith and a real desire
after higher and better things.
There are eleven village schools in the Pallipat dis-
trict, with an enrolment of 268 boys and 106 girls. There
is also a Higher Elementary School in which 180 boys,
Christian, Hindu and Mohammedan, caste and outcaste,
study side by side* One of our Christian Boarding Home
boys was top of the school last year with excellent marks
in seven subjects. It is very pleasing to note that Board-
ing Home boys coming from our village schools to this
central school are among the best scholars in each class.


Once a month in Sholinghur circle the missionary
visits and inspects each village school A drive along
fourteen miles of road in the early morning and a walk
along the bund for a mile and a half between the paddy
fields (when a false step means being plunged into thick
mud) and here we ate at Tekkaloor Village School In
all our villages school is held from 6 A-M., to 8-30 or
9 A-M. Then the boys go out to the fields to look after
the cattle or to help in the ploughing and planting. At
the end of the day they gather in school once more and
study from 6-30 till 9 P.M- The village teacher’s life is a
very lonely and very responsible one. His is the care of
all the Christians in the village ; he conducts Sunday
School and Church services ; he is at the beck and call
of all the people of the village. He is probably the only
man in the village with any education and therefore he
and his wife have very little real companionship with the
other people.
Once a month he comes to Sholinghur for a Bible class
and to receive his salary. Sometimes he will have a visit
from the Pastor or an Evangelist or some other member
of the congregation.
In Sholinghur circle there are ten village schools, with
from thirty to fifty children attending each school- The
percentage of girls attending is very small but is steadily
growing as India is waking up to the need of giving the
girls a better chance in life. Some of our schools have
gone thrtiugh troubled waters this year- In one village
because there was trouble between the Hindu and Chris-
tian families, for weeks instead of fifty children attend-
ing the school daily, only the few Christian children
attended. In June a number of transfers were made
among the teachers and in some cases the upheaval was
so great that it took a little while to recover. But as we
look back over the year’s work we are encouraged by the
interest and enthusiasm we see in many of the schools.
The gardens have been a special feature of the school
work this year and very interesting reports of the size of
the vegetables and flowers grown were given by the tea-
chers at one of the monthly tea-meetings held at the bun-
galow on pay-days.


Sholinghur town schools, Middle, Branch and Girls’
Caste, have all done steady work throughout the year.
The Christian teachers of the Middle School have added
Scripture teaching to their work. Formerly an Evangelist
took the Scripture classes.
In the Branch School, within the high walls of a
compound, with an enclosed well for water supply and a
padlocked gate to keep it safe from wandering cows and
goats, the boys are able to have a small but varied
garden. Here they grow different kinds of vegetables and
indigenous plants.
One of the latter provided an interesting handwork
project. After the green leaves had been used as a
vegetable, the tough stems were gathered and allowed
to dry- Later these were steeped in water for several
days and the fibre removed, washed and dried. Then in
the handwork class the boys rolled and twisted the fibre
into ropes of varying thickness- There are many uses
for such ropes in an Indian home, but perhaps the com-
monest is for stringing their wooden framed beds.
In every Indian village oils are extracted from different
seeds. The oil press is a simple affair not unlike a mortar
and pestle. In their garden the boys have grown castor oil
plants. The ripened seeds have been gathered and when a
press has been contrived the oil will be extracted-
Another project carried out in a corner of the play-
ground was the laying down of a miniature plan of
the village. The boys were encouraged to make models
of their own homes and the teachers contributed models
of public buildings.
About 150 boys study in the Branch School yearly, the
majority of them from homes where agricultural pursuits
are the means of livelihood so it is fitting that they should
be encouraged in gardening and such projects as these.
Altogether there are at present 787 boys and girls
studying in our Sholinghur district schools. Hindus and
Christians alike learn the Lord’s prayer and many texts,
and listen to many Bible stories; and we pray that the
seed thus sown may bring forth much fruit.
2


Pymble Girls’ School (Sholinghur)
P stands for Pymble. It also stands for three Tamil
words written in English. They are “Pen Pillaihul
Padasalai” and if “Pymble’’ is placed first, why,
there’s the equivalent of “Pymble Girls’ School”
Y stands for Yesterdays. Our Girls’ School has been
working for many years, and now very often when we
visit the Indian homes we find that the mothers of to-
day were our students of yesterday. Because of the
years spent in school they are better and more
intelligent mothers- The happy memories that these
women hold of the school make us glad.
M stands for Manners. If one passes through the
streets of the town one soon knows which girls are
attending school. In contrast to the untidy children
who follow, and shout “Salaam, salaam” many times,
the school-girl will pause, raise her folded hands and
with a smile give her greeting and pass on. She can
be merry and mischievous enough, but she is learning
to be quiet in demeanour and thoughtful for others.
B stands for “Bhim the Baby Elephant” who stands on
top of our collection box. He has been busy all the
year picking up and guarding the small offerings
which the children bring for the Mission to Lepers.
This year they have collected Rs. 12-B
L stands for Little Ones. They are so happy since
we’ve moved into the new building, where they have
room for a proper kindergarten circle. They have a
teacher who understands their needs too.
E stands for Expansion. While there are little girls
growing up rough in manner, and without any love of
beauty or true knowledge of the only One Who can
bring beauty and harmony into their lives, we cannot
rest content. Our work must expand until all are
gathered in.


G stands for Gifts. Gifts of pictures sent from
Australia last Christmas were much appreciated. The
gift of a baby doll for the play corner has given much
pleasure to the little girls.
I stands for the yearly Inspection. Once a year the
work of the school is examined by a Government
Inspectress. This year the inspection took place on
August 2* We felt that it had been a thorough one
and that we might justly be proud of the things
which had been praised ; and wisely led to correct
revealed weaknesses*
R stands for Recreation. Perhaps one of the most
popular forms of this is the annual concert held at
Christmas time* This year the children dramatized
‘‘ The Fourth Wise Man ” and also the Christmas
story. There were songs and dances too, the whole
making an enjoyable afternoon for parents and
friends.
L stands for Lessons. In connection with all lessons
we have added more practical work* Domestic
Economy, Hygiene and First Aid have specially
been developed, and there have been lessons in cook-
ing and bandaging.
S’ stands for Sunday School and Scripture* Three
classes have been held for the Hindu girls every
Sunday afternoon. Expression work in these classes
has been an added feature this year. In day school
each class has a scripture period daily. Once a
week the highest classes have had a combined
session at which a children’s edition of “ The Pil-
grim’s Progress” was read.


S stands for the Staff. There have been seven teachers
on the staff throughout the year. All are trained
teachers- We are pleased to report another year of
harmonious work.
C stands for Children. There were 131 children on the
roll. Of this number twenty-five were Brahmins and
twenty-three were Christians.
H stands for Headmistress. Our capable Headmistress
has secondary grade teacher’s training and because
of her knowledge of English is able to use a wide
range of materials for her classes. She is of a
bright and cheerful temperament and is able to keep
her staff working harmoniously-
-0 stands for Our School Buildings. For many years
the classes were overcrowded, in the long narrow
building that served us for a school. Early in the
year we were able to rent a more suitable building-
It was an old Brahmin home, very much out of repair
and very dirty. We repaired the place and made it
clean and sweet and the owner allowed us to use it
rent free until the debt was paid.
In this building each class has a room to itself and
much better discipline has been maintained-
-0 stands for Our Goal. This is, that every little girl
in Sholinghur may have an opportunity to learn to
read, write and use her reasoning powers ; to learn to
love the beautiful things of life; and to learn to know
and love the Lord Jesus.
L stands for the Light and Liberty which are coming
to our Indian Women through our schools. It stands
for Love too —Love which makes possible the whole.
Tennis and Badminton in Sholinghur
Our tennis club came into being in February this
year and enthusiasm for tennis has since been growing
steadily. We have played two matches against the
Pallipat Club and to our surprise and delight won them
both. Two other matches were played among the Club
members. The court has given the men teachers some-
thing to do in their leisure hours-
Girls here do not play tennis so badminton was started
this year for them and many happy hours have been spent
on their court.


IN THE PYMBLE GIRLS’ SCHOOL
SHOLINGHUR BUNGALOW AND TENNIS COURT


SENIOR, NURSES AT SHOLIXGHUR HOSPITAL
PATIENTS WAITING FOR TREATMENT


CHAPTER II
They that are Sick
The Barrier
What could be more impenetrable or more formid-
able than this Tamil language ? It arrests at every
turn !-.-The horror of those first attempts, and the humour
of them too, if they would only cease to be so humiliat-
ing! Calling for the “ donkey ” when in reality it is the
“baby” one wants to bath ; ordering “eggs” off the ward
floor when one means to say ‘ bundle” of torn saris! Who
would not forgive Nurse retreating hastily for a little
laugh ? But the nurses are always very sympathetic and
helpful—they will supply the missing word or suggest a
different rendering of a phrase-
Tamil nursing lectures have to be prepared and,
worse still, delivered- Agitated crowds of patients’ rela-
tives have to be re-assured and kept out of the wards.
Tamil seems to be fluent until one’s flow comes to a sud-
den end by one old woman twisting her fingers expressive-
ly and saying “No, Amma, I dont understand English ”!
The Diet Room accounts have to be checked and written
up and the prices of rice, mustard and chillies to be ar-
gued about. Dhobies and sweepers have to be scolded for
neglect of duties, and donkeys, buffaloes, bulls and dogs to
be kept out of the Hospital Compound
So much to be done and so much eagerness to do it
efficiently ; but Tamil stands between us and those whom
we seek to serve most- Then what a recompense and joy
when understanding dawns at last on some poor soul
and we go on our way rejoicing, knowing that God is in
our midst and that fluency in Tamil will come if we “keep
at it-”
Patients
Latchmi was feeling very miserable- She had not
slept all night because of the pain in her chest. Last
night the village priest had come and waved the sacred
margosa leaves around her head and chanted prayers.
The native doctor had given her a pill which she had
crushed and eaten with some honey. But the pain had
3


only got worse. She could not breathe, and how thirsty
she was ! But no one would give her anything to drink
for fear she would get a chill.
The women of the village crowded in through the
open doorway, shutting out what little light and air there
was. Many and varied were the cures suggested. Then in
came another woman with her child on her hip. Narsamma
looked at poor Latchmi and then she said to her : “ Why
dont you go to the Mission Hospital at Sholinghur ?
They will look after you well there and give you medi-
cine to stop the pain- Look how sick my baby was- He
was so thin and would not eat. Someone told me about
the hospital, and I took him there- They gave him
medicine and now he is well and strong. ’
“But it is five miles to Sholinghur and I don’t know
anyone there. lam so frightened.’’
The pain gets worse and at last Latchmi can stand it
no longer- She agrees to go, so while Granny gathers
together the necessary cooking-pots and rice, the men
bring an Indian bed. This is a wooden frame on four
legs ; across it string is laced to form a mattress. The
men now turn the cot upside down and attach strong
ropes to the four legs. Two poles are passed through
these ropes. An old sari is placed on the bed and on this
Latchmi lies. Four men lift the improvised stretcher
and accompanied by 20 to 30 relatives begin the long
walk to Sholinghur.
At length the hospital is reached- Latchmi is given
medicine for her pain, and clean and comfortable in
hospital clothes she lies fighting her battle for health.
At last the great day comes when she is to go
home. The astrologer has been consulted about a lucky
time for her to start. Doctor and Sister are called into
the ward and garlanded and presented with betel nut and
fruit- Latchmi returns home rejoicing in her return to
health and eager to influence others to come to hospital—
So the work grows-
Sanjeevi has a sore leg. One day while ploughing
he struck it on a stone. He crushed some leaves and
tied them over the wound with a piece of cloth and con


tinued his work ploughing the swampy ground for the rice
crop. He has no time to go to hospital. The rains
have just fallen and he must get the ground ready for the
women to set out the young rice plants, otherwise he and
his family will starve*
His leg gets worse and at last he decides to go to
hospital. He arrives early and while waiting looks
round at the other out-patients* He sees a baby with its
feet and hands covered with itch; several people have
legs or arms bandaged; in the corner he sees a man
looking very miserable with fever* He notices that some
of the patients have white tickets, others green and red.
The man next to him explains that on two days a week
they see Doctor ; the other days they go straight to the
dressing room* It is Monday, the day for those with
white tickets, and of course all new patients, to be seen.
He has no time to hear more for just then the front
door opens* the two doctors come out and Doctor-Iyer
starts a lyric in which Nurse and the one or two Chris-
tians join. This is followed by a short address after
which the service closes with a prayer.
The patients then in turn go in for their medicine
and treatment. At last Sanjeevi’s turn comes* Doctor
asks him his name, age. caste, etc*, all of which are
entered in the register* His age causes some difficulty.
Sanjeevi has no idea of it* His guesses range between
fifteen and fifty* Doctor writes down thirty His leg
is seen and treatment ordered and across he goes to the
opposite room to get it dressed.
For a week or two Sanjeevi will come every day to
get his leg dressed and every morning he will hear some-
thing about Jesus and His Life and Message*
Indian Home Treatment
For a burn apply ink, flour, salt or charcoal.
For injuries dress with crushed leaves, sawdust,
lime, cowdung or any other substance available.
For a cdd with-hold vegetables such as Ladies’
fingers, pumpkins, spinach and young coconuts ; or butter-
milk. lime-juice, coconut juice. These cool the body !


The following substances are heating and may be given
freely : potatoes, ripe coconuts, mangos and bananas.
For fever -withhold water and cooling substances, as
they will cause a chill! Get medicine from the native
doctor> or buy ginger in the bazaar ; after pounding it soak
it in water and then drink the water.
For pain apply sandal-paste or heat a piece of iron in
the lire and apply to the painful part until the skin is
burnt.
Infant Welfare
Give the baby sugar and water to drink for the first
three days. If any difficulty is found in getting it to
drink, dip a piece of dirty cloth in the sugary water and
allow the baby to suck it. From the third day baby
should be allowed its milk.
If it is sleeping do not wake it to feed it. but give it a
drink whenever it cries- Every morning give it a tea-
spoonful of castor oil. Place margosa leaves under its
bed to ward off evil spirits.
“ Narlaku ”
Does it ever come ? No word echoes and re-echoes
through the hospital wards more frequently than “narla-
ku” —“to-morrow”. Narlaku the cobwebs will be swept
from the walls—narlaku the leaking basin will go to the
village for repairs—narlaku the thermometer the crow
broke will be reported to Sister-Ammal. The baby will
have a clean shirt narlaku- Narlaku the dhobie boy will
bring the long-overdue clean linen. Narlaku the monsoon
will break !
And in the meantime —? The spiders flourishing and
silvery webs festooning the ceilings and walls ; no water
ready for Doctor-Ammal’s hands because of the leak in
the basin; no temperatures taken by the Night-Nurse be-
cause she found a smashed thermometer, —and how could
she wake Sister-Ammal from sleep to report that ? And
why change the baby’s shirt every day in hospital ? Why,
when he goes home he will wear the same little red shirt
for two months —Sister-Ammal is far too fussy ! The
linen is literally forcing open the dhobie-box lid—and


Govinda the dhobie has gone to a distant village to visit a
sick sister-in-law of his wife’s brother ! And amidst it all
Doctors, Sister, Nurses and servants scan the skies in
vain for the monsoon rain to rid them of the almost un-
bearable heat*
Sister has never seen such methods* Things must
change and at once ! New rules must be formed. “Nar-
laku must never be whispered within the precincts of the
hospital. ‘‘lppo”, ‘‘Now ”, must take its place, and soon
the hospital will be in order.
Days, weeks, months, years have sped by and Sister-
Ammal has learnt that the East cannot be hustled* “Nar-
laku” has chased her far into the silent watches of sleep-
less nights and she is heard to groan “ When will the
Sholinghur hospital be clean and the staff working har-
moniously and in order ?” And then across her mind
comes a long-forgotten verse :
“ Not thine nor mine to question or reply
When He commands us, asking ‘How ?’ or ‘Why?’
He knows the cause, His ways are wise and just;
Who serves the King must serve with perfect trust.”
The Nurses
It is on duty that one really learns to understand and
love the nurses* They still have a long way to go in re-
gard to a sense of service to their own people, and in de-
veloping a full sense of responsibility. Yet they are win-
ning their way slowly but surely and it is when one comes
in touch with the homes from which they have come that
one realises what progress upwards has been made.
Seniors and juniors have as uniforms white jackets
and saris, no caps. They move with grace and dignity,
and are gentle and lovable in their ways.
A Peep Beyond
Tinga-ling, tinga-ling! With this welcome sound
and the day’s work completed, Kamalam, Hannah, Re-
becca, Pappal, Grace, Ruth and Yesammal leave the
wards for their own quarters.
The Nurses’ Home is a long building with red tiled
roof projecting into a narrow verandah in front. There are


five rooms leading out on to the verandah and at the back
five small kitchens; beyond, two stone enclosures for
bathing. The senior girls have separate rooms, two
juniors room together. The first room is the Rest Room,
which came into being this year and provides a place for
recreation and prayer. Each nurse has been given a
pretty blue prayer-mat.
The nurses all take an interest in keeping their rooms
clean and tidy, and love having Bible pictures on their
walls. They sleep on grass mats, and have few
possessions beyond tin trunks for their jackets and saris,
and brass pots for their food. They each have a large
black umbrella, which was given for the rainy season, but
which in Indian eyes adds greatly to their dignity in all
weathers!
As with most nurses, a great deal of their time off
duty is spent in sleep. Hannah is fond of birds and one
day she was found to have in a basket in her room a tiny
sunbird which she had trained to stand on her finger.
Kamalam, who is a widow and older than the other girls,
is prone to keep fowls in her sanctum. These gradually
are used for food and more bought in their place.
Pappal and Grace, our two new probationers who
have come to us from our own Girls’ Boarding Home,
are like rays of sunshine —with a few little storm clouds
now and then. If a volunteer is needed for a disagreeable
job it is always Pappal who plunges in and does it with
cheerfulness. She loves pretty things too, and is fond of
the garden and sees the ferns do not die for want of water.
Surprises
It was the last day of 1931 and away out at the
village of Venganur a wealthy family of Reddis was in
great distress. One of the women in the household was
very ill and days had passed and still she had grown worse
instead of better. What was to be done ? Would the
Mission Doctor-Ammal at Sholinghur come out so far
on such a dark night ? The night was far too dark and
fearsome to bring the sick one in a bullock bandy to the
hospital. Runners were sent to bring Doctor-Ammal,
who diagnosed an acute case of pneumonia- The woman


came to hospital and eventually recovered* The family
to show their gratitude, gave an extra Rs* 15, above their
account, for something special for the hospital ward;
and so our Dressing Trolley became a reality, and greatly
facilitates the work of the doctors*
Hearts were touched in the Homeland by the urgent
need for new beds in the wards, and the result was a
donation of £SO. This came, we believe, as a direct
answer to prayer.
Another surprise gift came in and we were enabled to
purchase a food safe.
Mostly through the untiring work of the women and
girls in the Home Church our linen cupboard has been
kept replenished year by year; these generous gifts,
besides being appreciated for their usefulness, also link
Indians and Australians in a closer bond of love and
fellowship and co-operation. We are all working together
to hasten the coming of Christ’s Kingdom on Earth.
To What End ?
Standing ever like a sentinel opposite the Mission
hospital is the big Hindu Hill Temple, towering on a peak
a thousand feet above us. At night a light shines from
the temple door like a big eye watching us. To reach
the temple one has to climb one thousand and fourteen
steps and it is up these steps weary sin-laden souls climb
seeking peace of heart and health of body. For it is said
that whoever climbs to the top will be cured of any
sickness Watch them going up and see them coming
down ; one cannot probe the hearts of them, but no light
of peace and joy shines in their faces. They are still
seeking, often they know not what*
Can we withdraw our hands, our goal unattained and
the work incomplete ? God forbid, till the Cross of Christ
stands high on Temple Hill —and only the hands of men
with changed hearts can place It there.
*****
During 1932 Sholinghur Hospital treated 1037 in-
patients and gave 19,451 treatments to out-pdtients. At a
weekly dispensary conducted by the Doctor at Pallipat
for part of the year 1126 treatments were given.


CHAPTER III
The Glad Tidings
Open Air Campaigning
The field of work is large, the villages are often hard
to reach, and the work can only be done at night time- So
month by month a small band of workers from Pallipat —
the missionary, the two evangelists, two teachers and
sometimes the Pastor, pack up and go into camp. Camps
are usually timed to coincide with school holidays so that
teachers from the large Central School may accompany
us-
The bullock cart sets off first with camp-stretchers,
tents and food. Some time later the “T” model Ford sets
out. Soon we have to leave the main road and follow
some narrow cart track. The Indian bullock-cart track
is narrower than a car’s track so it is usually a bumpy
and perilous journey; perilous to springs and tyres, if not
to life! As evening falls we come to a shady mango grove
near a well. Here we camp, often at the foot of one of
our picturesque granite hills.
By this time it is seven o’clock and we must get ready
to go to the near-by villages. After asking our Heavenly
Father’s blessing we go out in two or three parties, each
having a brilliant kerosene gas lamp with it’s 300 candle
power flame, as well as one or two musical instruments.
Hand-harmonium, violin, accordion, cymbals, drum, and
last but not least, the gramophone are all pressed into
this service-
As the bright light pierces the darkness of the vil-
lage the wondering people come out to see who we are.
By eight o’clock most of them are just finishing their even-
ing meal and they gather round the bright lamp, like
moths round a flame- The only other lights in the village
are very small taper-like oil lamps, with a hurricane lan-
tern here and there- The gramophone is the newest att-
raction and soon a large crowd comprising almost every
man, woman and child in the village is seated in a semi-
circle on the ground in front of us- When all
have arrived one of the camp party stands up to


VIEW FROM HOSPITAL
BUNGALOW SHOWING
SHOLINGHUR HILL TEMPLE
LEPERS AWAITING INJECTIONS
AT PALLIPAT DISPENSARY


A PREACHING BAND'S CAMP
EVANGELIST PREACHING NEAR A VILLAGE


preach. Probably last year about the same time we have
preached to these same people. The preacher refers
to that teaching and goes on to amplify it. We preach
Christ as the Saviour they need; the Light of the World
who will dispel the darkness of their minds as our
powerful gas light dispels the darkness of their village
street. They listen with rapt attention and seldom
interrupt. One after the other two or three speakers
unfold the Gospel story for the space of one and a half
or two hours. Soon the children are all asleep on the
ground or on their parents ’ knees- At last before we go
we ask for questions from them. Very often they do not
ask any, but say : ‘‘ Yes, what you say is true, but how
can we change ? We live and worship as our fathers
did.’’ Sometimes a man defends his fathers’ gods with
much argument and on one occasion in combating the
views of such a speaker we covered for the second time
all the ground which we had gone over in the first hour
and a half, while the people with much interest heard
twice over what we had to say.
The work has been very encouraging- Teachers
have gladly given up their hard-earned holidays to do
this work and with their help we have been able during
the year to preach in over 80 villages to at least ten
thousand different people. Only once in a year do most
of our villages hear the Gospel story. But here and there
all the time we find seeking ones and during the rest of
the year one of our evangelists goes to these privately,
seeking to lead them to the light-
Thus the work goes on from year to year- Little by
little the ramparts of ignorance and superstition and
sin are crumbling. Our workers find a great difference
in preaching now from preaching ten years ago. There is
much more interest and far less direct opposition; yet the
sad part of it is that our workers have been so few and
that many of the villages have only heard the message
two or three times, and none of them have heard it
regularly.
In Sholinghur
Sholinghur district is divided into five Evangelistic
Circles each under the care of an Evangelist. Day by


day these men go out to the villages, visiting the Chris-
tians, talking with the Hindus and telling the stories of
Christ-
Two special camps have been held during the year ;
one when the six Evangelists, three Biblewomen and Miss
Goldie camped for three days and visited many villages ;
another at the time of the Tiruttani festival, when the
Evangelists stood by the roadside and talked with the
many people on pilgrimage to Tiruttani and sold many
Gospel portions to them.
Every Sunday afternoon the C. E- preaching band has
gone out, sometimes to one village, sometimes to another.
Every year in the month of November people throng to
Sholinghur for the Hill festival and the Endeavourers
found much work to do among them.
Zenana Work
Here is an interesting family. It has been in touch
with the Sholinghur Zenana work for many years. In the
same house live four generations. The oldest member, a
slight grey-haired old lady, is still active and able to earn
her daily bread ; the youngest was married a year ago-
The three older women are widows and the youngest of
the three has four children living with her. She used to
attend our Girls’ School and when recalling the
happenings of those days she tells how Miss McLean
would come seeking them and take them to school herself
if they were many days absent-
They are members of a mixed Vaishnuva caste whose
natural place in the scheme of things is to gather flowers
for the adorning of the temple deities, or tutelary gods in
the houses. But only the oldest widow is engaged in this
work, and only she ties her sari in a way that shows that
the caste has been intermixed with the Brahmins. With
the first sign of light in the morning she takes her basket
woven from palm leaves, and visits places where she
knows flowers will be available.
When she has gathered all that she can find she begins
her regular round of the shops and homes where her
coming is expected. In return for a handful of flowers a
small coin is given her and thus she lives. The flowers
are placed before the household shrines.


All these women are keen listeners and one is able to
read and explain to the others any story placed in her
hands.
Next to this house lives a deserted wife. She is re-
lated to the other family but lives alone. Amirthavalli
has always desired to be a Christian- Long ago Miss
McLean gave her a Telugu Bible and started her in the
habit of daily reading and prayer- This she has conti-
nued faithfully and openly confesses her faith and her
desire to join the Christian community. Why does she
not do so, you may ask ? The main reason is that apart
from the house she has no means of her own and no
possible way of earning money as a Christian. For her
food and clothing she is dependent on relatives.
In another family we find the Mission’s influence
quietly at work. Two children, a boy and a girl, were
born in the home of a dancing woman- They grew up in
touch with the Mission’s workers. The boy passed through
our schools, was trained and is one of our teachers-
The Mission could not save the girl and she passed
into the life that caste and custom demanded of her.
There were children born to her and amongst them two
daughters These little girls were sent to our Girls’
School- The elder according to the Indian custom was
kept at home after she was about fourteen, but the Bible-
women kept in touch with her
It was when the younger girl was withdrawn that we
learnt that indirectly the Mission had been able to
do for the children what it could not do for the mother.
It is alway a keen sorrow to see the children of this
caste pass out of childhood, but in this case sorrow was
turned to gladness- By the influence of the teacher bro-
ther the family are breaking away from life-long custom,
and the girls will be given in honourable marriage.
In a family which has been connected with the
Mission for many years there are five widows and two
married women who hear the Gospel with faith and reve-
rence- The old grandmother, though bedridden for years,
was very bright and intelligent and would often enter into
debate with the Bible-woman. The parable of the rich
man and Lazarus troubled her. She could not believe


that God would allow eternal punishment- When she
was dying she asked for the Biblewoman and they spoke
of the days that had been and of the coming parting. Her
last words with the Biblewoman were : “ Well, I’m going
to Jesus. When you come we’ll both know the truth.”
Annammal has been married fourteen years —
married as a child of twelve—and all that time ill-health
has been her constant companion.
The little baby that might have given her great
gladness stayed but long enough to waken a passion of
love which, thwarted, has left her restless and unsatisfied-
Perhaps it is because of ill-health that her life
seems always at extremes. For months she will be a
reverent and eager listener to the Biblewoman who has
been her friend for years and then for weeks she will be
possessed of an evil spirit and will beg the Biblewoman
to leave her.
Recently she was taken to Vellore hospital where the
doctors said she should undergo an operation but that as
she was not strong enough to stand it they would try to
build up her strength first. Wearying of the hospital,
she gave way to the persuasions of relatives, who took
her to Chittoor to a man who cures by branding- The
circular iron brands were heated and applied to her
body, and she writes that now she is well except for the
wounds-
One feels so sorry for these pathetic hysterical
women ; there are many of them in India, and will be
until existing social evils are removed.
Three Biblewomen work in the Sholinghur Zenanas.
This year the number of their pupils has increased to
93- —28 are married women, nine are widows and 56 are
unmarried girls- Only about half the pupils can read well
enough to understand the Gospels or Bible stories-
Until they can do this a school reader is used ; after-
wards Bible stories written in simple language are in-
troduced and later if possible a Gospel- Several of the
widows read widely and welcome the monthly Tamil
magazines and any other books we can provide them with-
Ramakrishnapet has 33 pupils and is at present
visited by one of the Sholinghur Bible-women-


CHAPTER IV
Of Such is The Kingdom
There is much happiness and pride among one group
of little girls in the Sholinghur Girls’ Boarding Home ;
the results of this year’s group competition are out and
once again the Sindala family have won ! Now in their
room hangs a third picture-
Our Boarding Home children are divided into four
family groups. Each group has a Mother and Auntie to
look after it; each small child has a Big Sister to help
her. Each family has its own room and every week
points have been allotted to the cleanest- In an Indian
household work is made easy. Let us take you through
the Boarding Home. We go through the front door into
a big room. By the wall on one side are boxes made out
of small packing cases; in these the children keep their
clothes and books- A larger box holds their cotton
blankets- In another corner stand grass mats. And that
is all the furniture! Each of the four rooms is the
same- At night the children spread their mats on the
floor, roll themselves in their blankets, and their beds
are made and they in them !
We pass through the four rooms and then we come
to the Store-room. Each family has one corner and in
each corner is a stack of small earthenware pots piled
one on top of the other. One holds rice, another ragi,
another salt, and so on.
Next we come to the kitchen ; just a bare room with
eight little cooking places in a row on the floor.
In the yard are four garden plots Points have been
given throughout the year for cleanliness of the room,
clothing, boxes, etc-, for the best kept garden and for the
team games played every Monday afternoon- Compe-
tion has been keen throughout and cobwebs are no longer
to be seen in our Boarding Home.
This year for the first time the children had their
own clothes for their holiday time ; always previously
they have taken their school clothes home. But
in July the edict went forth that only the children who


had their own clothing could go home for the September
holidays. During these two months many an hour was
spent with the parents, trying to make them see their
responsibility to their children. But the result was well
worth while and the parents’ pride in their children when
dressed in clothes bought with their money was good to see.
This year too the children have given their own
money to the Church collection- Those who did not have
any have done special work at the Bungalow and earned it.
Industrial work is being carried on steadily. All the
skirts and blouses w r orn by the children are made by them-
selves- Each girl possesses three skirts and three blouses
—that is all that an Indian child requires. Among other
things done this year the children made traycloths, chota
sets, doyleys, etc., as a farewell gift for Miss Goldie, and
they have also made a dress each for the children of old
Boarding Home girls now married- During the year two
of the Industrial Class joined the Hospital staff as proba-
tioner nurses. Now there are thirty-two children in the
Home-
■**#**
Day is just dawning; the sun which will so soon be a
blazing glory is not yet arisen- During the last hour or
so an occasional bullock cart has broken the night still-
ness, its axle creaking and groaning, its sleepy driver
urging on his tired bullocks with hoarse shouts as they
come to a rise in the road ; now and then a night bird
screeches or a distant jackal howls; no other sound is
heard until suddenly a bell rings out on the still air. It
is the signal for the day to begin at the Pallipat Boys’
Boarding Home.
For a little while hurricane lamps gleam through the
windows of the two dormitories while the boys read their
daily Scripture portions and say their morning prayers.
Soon there is the sound of thirty young voices singing an
Indian Christian lyric It is light by this time and now
there is stir and bustle all round the Home as the boys,
dressed only in khaki trousers and with their red towels
round their shoulders, come out to their work. For the
first half hour all are busy in their own gardens ; then one
or two go to the kitchen to get ready the morning meal of


GIRLS OF SHOLINGHUR BOARDING HOME
JUNIOR CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOURERS, SHOLINGHUR


PALLIPAT BOARDING HOME BOYS WEEDING RAG
SOME OF INDIA'S UNREACHED MILLIONS
AT HINDU FESTIVAL


ragi gruel, partially prepared the night before; others
sweep in and around the Home ; others grind the grain
for the evening meal; a couple gather grass and roots for
the bulls; most of them go to work in the paddy and ragi
fields where so much of their food is grown.
School is over for the day. The Hindu buys have
gone off to their various villages. The Boarding Home
boys, who have just had to cross the road from school to
their own buildings, have put their school clothes away
and their books in the cupboard until the evening study
period and, again in working garb (the treasured red towels
this time worn on their heads, turbanwise) are all very
busy. Two or three are making a new goat-proof gale
for the mud wall round the vegetable gardens. The
vegetables must be guarded very zealously ; they are to be
sold to the Home and to the teachers living near and the
profits entered to the credit of whichever group of boys
produced them, so that they can buy new books and
necessary “extras". One boy is chopping wood ; two are
in the kitchen cooking; some are threshing the newly
harvested grain Here is a very busy group of senior
boys- They are the industrial class making grass mats,
the sale of which is to enable those of their number who
will not later on be teachers to set up looms and continue
the industry in their own villages when they have passed
through the Home; and to buy the necessary outfit for
those who are going on to further training- At a glance
we can see the whole process- The long grass they have
themselves gathered and dried is being dyed by two of the
workers. Two others are extracting fibre from the wild
aloe leaves to make into thread for the loom. Sitting on
a stone beside them is a boy already at work thread-
making ; with one end of the thread tied firmly round a
bhre brown toe he is very busy, tongue protruding in the
manner of intent boyhood the world over. Two other boys
are slowly and painstakingly weaving a pretty mat —for a
bungalow floor or a well-to-do Indian’s bed-
Half past eight on Sunday morning. A small white-
clad boy is standing beside a length of railway iron
hanging from a tree and lustily striking it with a short


iron rod. First bell is ringing for church in Pallipat! As
soon as it stops there comes the sound of singing in the
Home from the boys assembled for their little pre-church
service- Then in single file they come marching out,
singing as they come. The smallest of all, little Nalla-
muthu (“Good Pearl”) leads the way and tall Enoch
brings up the rear. All are in their Sunday bestclean
white shirts and long white veshtis. All the heads of
black hair are oiled and sleek and shining; faces are
shining too- “ Outcaste” boys, rescued from poverty,
ignorance and destitution; bright and lovable, giving hope
and promise for the future.
♦ * * * »
Christian Endeavour ! What a lot these two words
stand for nowadays in Sholinghur. Visit the Middle
School on a Wednesday afternoon aad there you will find
four groups busily working: Senior and Intermediate boys,
Intermediate and Junior girls- Or perhaps this day the
boys are over in the Church grounds digging a pit in which
to plant a tree, or weeding round the new hedge planted
by them a month ago- Another day the girls may not be
there —they have gone out to a village to play with the
children, to teach them to be clean and to tell them the
stories of Jesus.
Leave the Middle School and walk along to the Bun-
galow and there you will find the group of small boys
and girls- They are perhaps cleaning and sorting stamps
ready to send to Australia for sale or they are rolling
bandages to be given to the village teachers to help them
in their work of doctoring the minor ailments in the vil-
lage- Perhaps they are making handwork to be used in
the village schools.
Then visit the Boarding Home and see the senior
girls listening to a consecration address by the Pastor, or
conducting their own meeting. Another day they too will
be out in a village, teaching and preaching-
The senior boys have undertaken the magic lantern
work and have already visited many of the villages. Con-
stant requests are coming in asking them for visits.


Because of the firm belief of a few members in the
good that might be accomplished through the C- E- and
their desire to see the boys and girls really working for
the coming of the Kingdom, the new C- E. came into being
this year. There are now seventy-nine members divided
into six groups, each group having two leaders. The
groups meet every Wednesday and once in three months
a combined meeting is held. In November a combined
meeting was held, when each group took part in praise
and prayer. The new organisation has amply justified all
hopes and we go forward encouraged into the new year.
*****
“ Salaam, Sir,” comes a greeting to the lady mis-
sionary from a small atom of a boy Next week all the
soft curls now hanging round his shoulders are to be shav-
ed off and presented as a gift to the gods. His flashing
dark eyes and laughing face have not yet seen things as
they really are ; the world to him is still a jolly, carefree
place full of fun. He is the only child of a father and
mother who are keen to learn of Christ and His Way and
are always waiting ready when Bibleammal calls.
Let us pray that they may know the Way, the Truth
and the Life before any dark shadows of heathenism blur
that young child’s laughing face-


CHAPTER V
Morning Bays
The Pallipat Church set out this year on the road to
self-support by establishing a system of grain collections
in each of its thirteen village congregations- The idea is
that when each family prepares its food it may put aside a
little of the grain as a gift of thanks to God- When the
family has nothing to eat—and this happens at times—of
course it can give nothing.
Our outcaste village Christians have never supported
their Chursh regularly. Apart from an odd farthing or
two given as an offering in Church, and a gift at the time
of the Harvest Festival, most families have not felt that
it was incumbent on them to support the Church while
the Mission was there to do it. So there is before the
leaders of the Church the arduous task of teaching the
people, poor as they are, the sacred duty of giving. This
year by dint of much encouragement on the part of the
Pastor, Session and village teachers, the system may be
said to have been established with encouraging results-
Almost half of the total amjunt of money required
by our infant Church this year, including the Pastor’s
salary, was given by the Mission’s Indian workers and the
village Christians themselves.
* * • » *
Among those who have given most gladly is Chinna
Abraham (“Little Abraham”, to distinguish fro n an
older man in the village who is “Big Abraham ”) He is a
mere bag of bones; he has some chronic internal com-
plaint and is seldom free from pain. His wife, Selvam
(“Wealth ”!) is not a strong woman and cannot do hard
work, and they have several small children. How they
manage to dive at all is a mystery. At times they have
had to beg a few pice or some food to keep body and soul
together. Yet Chinna Abraham and Selvam regularly,
week by week, give a grain collection to the Church-
Some days each week they must eat—and whenever they
do, they take some of the grain and put it aside for the
Lord.


The Spirit of Christ is manifest in other ways among
our Christians. Nargunam (Good Character) lives at
Kollatur, an outcaste village about four miles from
Pallipat. Together with his wife and young daughter he
was baptized about three years ago- He regularly walks
the four miles to the central Church on Sunday morn-
ings and is seldom absent from the evening service in his
own village. There are only three Christian families in
Kollatur and Nargunam is the mainstay of the work
there.
About a year or more after his baptism there was
great rejoicing in his family over the birth of a son. He
is not a young man and it meant a great deal to him to
have a son: yet about six months ago came the word
that the boy had died- Patiently they had tended the
child ; not realizing that he was so ill they had not
taken him to our Sholinghur Hospital where expert care
might have saved him. The Pastor went to conduct the
funeral service and next day he said ; Nargunam bore
his sorrow well, with Christian fortitude and hope- He
said to me when I asked him how this affected his loyal-
ty to Christ: ‘lt makes no difference. The Lord gave
and the Lord hath taken away. It is his will. He has
blessed me and will bless me.’ ” What more can any of
us say with centuries of Christian experience behind us ?
* * * * *
Not only within but without the fold do we find signs
for happiness and encouragement Cramped up in a
tiny narrow passage, with legs crossed to prevent them
striking the opposite wall sat the Missionary and the
Biblewcman- The pupil, a young woman with three
sturdy wee children, sat on the other side of the hall step
with face intent and eyes shining as Bibleammal talked
with her- Here was one of the many millions of India’s
poor- Often keeping life in their thin bodies is difficult ;
but far worse are the powers of darkness that grip their
souls- But Kuppamma is eager to hear of Heavenly
things week by week and into her heart has come the
longing to know Christ as her teacher knows Him.


“ But why dont the people of this village want to
listen to our story of Jesus ?” • •••The question was asked
as we made our way to a stronghold of orthodox Hinduism.
The answer had significance- Amma, the people want
to hear us, but the Rajah of this village has forbidden
them to listen and they fear his power-”
Numbers of children came out of the low thatched
houses to follow us, and women peered from the doorways
as we passed- Seated on a pile of stones, Jeevaratnam-
ammal began to give her message of hope. To-day there
was no opposition ; the women listened quietly. An old
man with the sign of the god on his forehead gradually
edged his way closer, and as soon as opportunity offered
said to the speaker “Amma, I can see by your face you
have wisdom”. At noon we came away. The sky
above was as brass and strongly the sun beat down upon
us. But there was a song of joy in our hearts for the
wisdom which only comes from a Christ-filled heart had
shone forth on a group bound by dark ignorance, supersti-
tion and fear.
*****
A little cluster of mud and thatch houses out on the
hill near the Sholinghur-Arkonam road is an indication of
a development which may come- The Government a few
years ago gave to the Mission a large grant of land to be
alloted to outcaste Christians. There is no rent to pay,
only a tax on the actual crop cultivated- The only con-
ditions attached are that the one receiving it must build
a house, live there and cultivate the land. Here ten
Christian families have settled and we hope in the near
future to have a flourishing Christian village where our
poorer families may find a haven of refuge.
*****
In Eachambadi village at present daily cottage prayer
meetings are held. Why ? The Christians there say :
“it is because we have not been better Christians that the
rest of our village has remained heathen so long. We
must lead better lives and so win them too for the Master”.
May this spirit grow and spread till all India is at the
feet of Christ.
Printed by The Hogarth Press, Mount Road, Madras 3-’33.


Convener-Supeiintendent of Foreign Missions :
Rev. A. Fleming,
Box 100, C. C.
G- P. 0.,
Sydney ; N. S.W.
Field Addresses :
Miss A-H. Goldie, Miss N. Lang, Dr J.P. Watt,
Miss C R. McCredie,
Sholinghur,
North Arcot,
South India.
Mr- & Mrs. C- S. Bovall,
Pallipat,
Via Nagari,
Chittoor District,
South India.


DISPENSARY DAY
AT PALLIPAT
The Dispensary, Pallipal.
Issued by the Foreign Missions’ Committee of the Pres-
byterian Church of Australia in the State of N.S.W.


SATURDAY MORNING
DISPENSARY DAY AT PALLIPAT
By Dr. JANET WATT.
the Hospital on Friday the Compounder and nurse have been
busy getting medicines and instruments ready. These are
packed into a large tin box. The bowls are tied in a separate
bundle. At 8.15 a.m. the car comes over from the other bun-
galow and Daniel proceeds to pack the things into it. The box
sits on the floor in the back of the car. On one side is a tin of
petrol and on the other a primus stove. We take a nurse with
us. Sometimes there is a patient to be taken home. An old man
we were taking once was so scared that he would be left behind
that he gave nurse orders to have his bath ready for him at 4 ".m.
We pack ourselves into the car and off we start. Round to
the Post Office first of all for the Home mail and then on to
Pallipat. It is a trip of 17 miles and the road is pretty bad in
spots. We are never sure how the road will be. There are
generally several anxious moments while we wonder whether
Henry will pull us through the ruts and sandy patches.
Besides the Church Mr. Boyall has a tent erected. Here we
hold our dispensary. There are generally one or two patients
waiting when we arrive. As we start they crowd round and all
expect to be seen at once. The majority of them have come from
villages several miles away. They are on their way to the big


weekly market in Pallipat. They have heard of the dispensary
and come for medicine. We charge every patient a quarter anna
(equivalent to our farthing). While they are waiting the Evan-
gelist speaks to them and sells portions of the Gospel.
Who come you may ask? We get patients with all kinds of
ailments. Boarding Horae boys with colds or injuries. Children
with itch. Many lepers and many with tuberculosis. We try to
persuade the lepers to go to Chingleput Leper Settlement, but it is
not always possible for them to go. The husband cannot go and
leave his wife and children to starve. To these we give injections
each week.
Each week we see at least one very sick patient who is in
need of Hospital treatment. These we try to get to come with us
to Sholinghur. That is a very big undertaking for many of them.
They have never been so far away in their lives before, and a
journey in a car is a new experience. Despite this, we generally
have someone to take back with us. One Saturday there were
twelve to come. We sent four off on the bus, took two women in
the car with us, and arranged with Mrs. Boyall for the rest to
come down in the Boarding Home bandy on the Monday. By this
time it was too late for one of the women, and her baby was born
in the Village,
At length the last patient is seen—the medicines are sorted
—some are left at Pallipat. The empty bottles are taken home
to be filled. Home we start, rejoicing that again we have been
privileged to bring healing to some of India’s suffering people.


An Indian Village.
Medical Mission Work is carried on by the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales in the Sholmghur and Pallipat
districts of South India.
Dr. Janet Watt and Sister Lang are in charge.
The Goodlet Hospital has 26 beds and several private wards.
During the year 1931, 18,394 " Out-patients ” were treated
and "In-patients” numbered 861. 76 operations were carried
through. Maternity cases totalled 60.
£l5OO per annum is required for the maintenance of this
work.
AN URGENT NEED is a Motor Dispensary Van for work
in the Villages.
Send your gift to the Rev. A. FLEMING, Convener of the
Foreign Missions’ Committee, Box too CC., G.P.0., Sydney.
