





Baron forrcst of Bunburu
and of
Jforret in Jfifr
A tribute to a great explorer and statesman from the scholars of
Western Australian schools.


CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION, Sir James Mitchell, Lieut.-Governor of Western
Australia 4
FOREWORD, Mr. M. G. Little, M.A., Director of Education 5
A GREAT AUSTRALIAN, Mr. I. T. Birtwistle, Chairman of
Council, W.A. Historical Society 6
SOME QUALITIES OF LORD FORREST, Sir James Mitchell ... 8
THE BIRTHPLACE, R. S. Purdie, Perth Modern School 9
THE SUPPOSED BIRTHPLACE OF JOHN FORREST, Iris
Ann Strugnell, Picton State School 9
PICTON CHURCH—JOHN FORREST’S CHRISTENING PLACE
Naomi Mae White, Picton State School 11
FORREST, Ruth Stubberfield, Perth Girls’ High School 11
POEM—“ JOHN FORREST,” Valerie Olds, Perth Modern School .. 12
MT. LEONORA, John Bell, Correspondence Classes 13
FORREST’S CAIRN ON MT. LEONORA, Phyllis Leaney, Gwalia
State School 14
TWO OF FORREST’S CAMPING PLACES, Barbara McCooke,
Correspondence Classes 15
RAVENSTHORPE SCHOOL HONOURS FORREST, June
McCulloch, Ravensthorpe State School 16
FORREST IN ESPERANCE, Senior Children, Esperance State
School 16
PERTH TO ADELAIDE VIA THE COAST, Dorothy Otley,
Bayswater State School 17
OVERLAND TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA FROM GERALDTON
Mary Ogilvie, Correspondence Classes 19
JOHN FORREST’S THIRD EXPEDITION, Susan Halley, Gerald-
ton State School ... 21
FORREST’S PARTY IN THE MURCHISON, Vera Wallam,
Carrolup Native Settlement School 22
■“JOHN AND TOMMY,” Reynold Hart, Carrolup Native Settlement
School 24
FORREST’S PARTY AT WELD SPRINGS, Dulcie Penny,
Carrolup Native Settlement School 24
STORY OF TOMMY WINDICH, Grace Reed, Bayswater State
School 26
THE FORREST BROTHERS IN THE KIMBERLEYS, David C.
Cruikshank, Perth Modern School 28
AN ABORIGINAL ORATOR, Tommy Pierre 28
EXTRACTS FROM JOHN FORREST’S “ EXPLORATIONS OF
AUSTRALIA” 29
EARLY YEARS OF JOHN FORREST, B. Houston, Perth Modern
School 31
FORREST AS PREMIER, Steffoni Keating, Bayswater State School 32
POEM—“ FORREST THE STATESMAN,” Valma Williams, Bays-
water State School 35
BILYA ROCK, Glenys Carslake, Gutha State School 35


SIR JOHN FORREST IN COOLGARDIE, Colin Trotman, Cunder-
din State School 36
THE GOLDFIELDS WATER SCHEME, Bruce Claughton, Forrest
High School ... 41
JOHN hORREST’S PRAYER, Maureen Davis, Clackline State
School ,43
POEM—“JOHN FORREST,” Jennifer Jenkins, East Canna State
School 44
FORREST—MAN OP VISION, Wilma Mead, Perth Modern School 44
POEM—“ SALUTE TO FORREST,” Brian Lemon, Perth Boys’
High School ... 46
THE TRANS-AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY, Betty LoKve, Corre-
spondence Classes 46
FORREST HIGH SCHOOL, Des. Gibson, Forrest High School .. 47
UORD FORREST—A PEER OF THE REALM, Barbara Till,
Perth Modern School 48
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
MAP SHOWING FORREST’S ROUTES, Laurie O’Donnel, Perth Boys’ High
School 7
LORD FORREST Art Insert
JOHN FORREST—“ The Young Explorer,” 1870 Art Insert
SUPPOSED BIRTHPLACE OF JOHN FORREST, Iris Ann Strugnell, Picton
State School .. „. 10
MALCOLM HAMERSLEY, TOMMY WINDICH and JOHN FORREST 13
MT. LEONORA 14*
FORREST’S 1874 EXPEDITION AT GERALDTON 19
COTTAGE AT GERALDTON, 1874 21
FORREST’S 1874 EXPLORING PARTY , 23
ATTACK BY NATIVES, drawn by a native boy attending Carrolup Native
Settlement School 25
GRAVE AND HEADSTONE OF TOAIMY WINDICH 26
FREMANTLE HARBOUR, 1897 33
FOUNDATION STONE OF BUNBURY HOSPITAL 34
OPENING OF RAILWAY TO KALGOORLIE, 1896 37
WATER REACHES THE GOLDFIELDS —Sir John and Lady Forrest acclaimed
in Coolgardie, 1902 39
SIR JOHN FORREST and C. Y. O’CONNOR Art Insert
A GREAT SON OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA, drawn by Paddy Malloch, Loreto
Convent, Nedlands Art Insert
PIPE TRAIN 421
MUNDARING WEIR 43
LORD FORREST MEMORIAL, drawn by Nigel Ward, Kent Street High School ....
FORREST HIGH SCHOOL. 1947 !. 47
PICTON CHURCH CEMETERY 48


fJntxodaation
By the Kt. Hon. Sir James Mitchell, g.c.m.g., Lieut.-Governor
of Western Australia.
THE FORREST CENTENARY
I am asked to write an introduction to this booklet, which
is made up of articles written by children of many schools,
all dealing with the life of Lord Forrest.
Lord Forrest was the last explorer of a great unknown land,
of which there is now no great territory left to explore. The
explorer does interest young people. He faces the unknown, a
dangerous if exciting life, replete with incidents that appeal' to
the imagination of the young. For them an encounter with a
tribe of wild blacks would be of greater interest than the most
important discovery.
Forrest was an ideal explorer. He was a good bushman
and surveyor, and he possessed qualities that earned him the
goodwill and friendship of all who came in contact with him.
He never forgot people he met, and they remember him.
Lord Forrest was explorer, civil servant, member of the
Council in Crown Colony days, first and only Premier of this
State under responsible Government. He was the Western Aus-
tralian representative in the first Federal Ministry.
This booklet does not pretend to be a biography. It does,
however, place on record many intimate and interesting happen-
ings of a long, active and very full life, and will appeal especially
to young people still at school. It will also prove a valuable
addition to the fuller account that will be written and spoken of
the life of Lord Forrest during his centenary celebrations.
The children still at school did not know Lord Forrest, but
he still lives in the minds of their parents. Much has been
written about him and tradition has handed down far more of
the history of his life. It is in this field that I hope the youthful
writers will work. It may well be that they will place on record
much that will help the biographer of the future.
In conclusion, may I quote for you a verse of a poem I
learned when I was a boy? It was Longfellow who wrote it: —
“Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.”
Lord Forrest was a great man who has left “ footprints on
the sands of time.”
James Mitchell.


l \J'o%£CVo%d
To the School Children of Western Australia.
It is 118 years since our State was founded, and during that
time many great West Australians have rendered service to their
native State. This year is the centennial year of the birth of John
Forrest, possibly the greatest of them all.
Like you, he sat as a pupil in one of our schools. Like you,
he played as a West Australian boy in our fields. He began his
service to the State at an early age and, while vet a young man,
was chosen to be the leader of men in great: enterprises.
A surveyor by profession, he opened up our back country and
was the leader of several exploration parties in the interior of
Australia. Where highways now run, he cut the first trail. Where
settlements now flourish he made his camp fire—the first white
man to penetrate the loneliness of the outback country.
In his later years he took his share in government, and in
1890 he became the first Premier, when His Majesty the King
conferred the right of responsible government on this State.
In the greater sphere of Australian politics, he was Western
Australia’s representative in the planning of Federation and in
the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia. He spent
his last years as a member of its parliament, and his service, both
to State and Commonwealth, culminated in his election to the
Peerage. John Forrest, the boy at school, thus became Lord
Forrest (the first Australian to be so honoured by our King).
He was pre-eminently a great surveyor and explorer, and to
his great achievements in this field he added further lustre to his
name in his latter days as a great statesman. His was the courage
and the vision, coupled with the engineering genius of C. Y.
O’Connor, that gave to us such great engineering works as the
Goldfields Water Scheme and the Fremantle Harbour.
This year we pay tribute to this great West Australian, and
may his example inspire the young West Australians who read this
little booklet to render service to their State.
M. G. Little.


cc^fusEatian
We commemorate John Forrest’s birth because he was a great
Australian. He believed in his country and himself, and he dared.
We are proud of his daring, because we know that Australia would
not have been made the country it is without the aid of men and
women who had courage and audacity, just as it will not be main-
tained without those qualities.
Forrest was a man who looked forward. His gaze went far
afield from Perth, and he believed a great land lay beyond the
horizon awaiting development. So he and his intrepid companions
added rich chapters to the stories of exploration. He envisaged
a Golden Mile if water could serve it, and he ordered the laying
of the long pipe-line that today not only aids those who raise
golden metal', but also those along its route who raise golden
grain. He saw many ships taking West Australian products over-
seas and he and C. Y. O’Connor created a modern harbour at
Fremantle.
These and many other fine visions he had. He was purpose-
ful and forthright enough to see that they were realised for the
benefit of Western Australia. But that is too restricted a state-
ment : they were realised for the good of Australia, because what-
ever impetus is given to Western Australia benefits the continent.
We salute an inspiring memory and this book in which the
rising generation acknowledges the work of a great son of the
West.
Ivor T. Birtwistle,
Chairman of Council , W.A. Historical Society.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Invaluable help in the compilation of this booklet has been
given by Miss M. Lukis, 8.A., Archivist, Public Library of W.A.
The services of Mr. C. M. Harris, F.R.G.S., in addressing chil-
dren in various schools, is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks
are also due to the following for the use of photographs and
blocks for reproduction: “ Western Mail,” W.A. Historical
Society, Miss E. L. Burgess, Messrs. J. Rintoul, J. G. Moore,.
A. Walker, and Mary Ogilvie and Susan Halley.
J. P. Stokes,
Editor.


MAP SHOWING FORREST’S ROUTES.
Drawn by Laurie O’Donnell, Perth Boys’ High School.


pf z
p# y
Stwi &JZ- '^Y
rf I
ccALftZC
unX*y
Jcuwu-^


Lord Forrest


John Forrest — “The Young Explorer” — 1870.


THE BIRTHPLACE
R. S. PURDIE (Science IV.B).
Perth Modern School.
One of the most important centres in the South-West is
Bunbury. This town is the birthplace of three of our State Pre-
miers and they have earned for it the name “ The Birthplace.”
The first of these was Sir John (later Lord) Forrest, who for
life service to Australia and the Empire had the unprecedented
honour of being created a Peer of the Realm. It was whilst on a
voyage to England to receive this honour direct from His Majesty
that he died, the first Australian-born Peer.
For many years it was understood that Lord Forrest had
been born at Picton, four miles from Bunbury. It has since been
shown, however, that his parents did not transfer to Picton until
after 1847, the year of his birth.
At Mill Point, on the Eelup estate of Mr. John Scott, the
first settler at Bunbury, there was until a few years ago the re-
mains of an old mill. It was here that Forrest, senior, erected a
flour mill in the ’forties, and he remained there until the mill was
destroyed by fire. He then moved to Picton.
It is a subject of much controversy whether Lord Forrest was
born at Mill Point or at Hough’s Landing, some half-mile nearer
Bunbury. It was there that Forrest, senior, had a mill before he
transferred to Mill Point, because the trees and sheltered position
checked the southerly and easterly winds needed to drive the mill.
One of the grand-daughters of Mr. and Mrs. John Scott,
who owned the property on which both mills stood, in a letter
to The West Australian in 1939, states that as a child she and
her sisters knew a remnant of the Forrest house near the mill
at Mill Point as the birthplace of John Forrest. This is, perhaps,
the most authentic source as it was Mrs. John Scott who brought
Lord Forrest into the world.
This information shows that it was not at Hough’s Landing
but at Mill Point where Lord Forrest was born. Nor was he born
in the mill itself, as many people suppose, but at the house nearby.
The Supposed Birthplace of John Forrest
IRIS ANN STRUGNELL (Class VI.). Picton State School.
Lord Forrest is believed to have been born at Mill Point, a
point which juts out where the Preston River flows into Lesch-
enault Estuary, about three miles north-west of our school. Here
his father, Wm, Forrest, built a flour mill, which was worked
by wind.
Before, he had built it nearer Bunbury, near where the Parade
Hotel stands, but he did not receive the right winds for the


mill, so he moved it to Mill Point. Here Wm. Forrest built a
home where John Forrest is reputed to have been born.
The sketch of the house where John Forrest was reputed to-
have been born was made by myself, from a picture that appeared
in a supplement to the Sunday Times, dated 1929. There is nothing
remaining of this home now, except an old post or two, to show
where it was situated.
SUPPOSED BIRTHPLACE OF JOHN FORREST,
“ There is nothing remaining of this home now, except an old post or two.”
When young John Forrest was about four years of age his
parents moved to a home called “ Picton,” situated about a
quarter of a mile from our present Picton School. This home,
which is still standing, is now occupied by Ernest Forrest, a
nephew of Lord Forrest.
Just down behind Mr. Ernest Forrest’s home are the remains
of an old school. This was the first school that John Forrest
was supposed to have attended. Perhaps John went to this school
till he was about twelve years of age. Then he went to the Bun-
bury school, where Mr. Hislop taught. Later John attended
Bishop’s School in Perth.
A tale has been handed down in the Forrest family, that
when Wm. Forrest was moving to “Picton,” per bullock wagon,
young John Forrest, although only four, persisted in walking with
the bullock driver. This shows that even at that early age young
John Forrest possessed a mind of his own.


THE CHRISTENING PLACE
Picton Church, near Bunbury.
NAOMI MAE WHITE (Class VI.).
Picton State School.
Rev. John R. Wollaston was the first minister of the Church
of England in this district. At Australind, as well as in the Bun-
bury district. Wollaston conducted services. He moved from Aus-
tralind and resided in a house about 1J miles south of our school.
Alongside his home, he and his sons built the old Picton Church.
The original church was made of mud and sticks, but the
present church is of weather-boards, with shingles for the roof. It
is a small church with weeping willows round about. The church
is about 104 years old, and it was here that Lord Forrest was
christened.
The historic Picton Church is one of our most interesting
relics. A small portion of the original wall has been preserved,
showing how laborious must have been the work of the builders.
The bell, which was obtained from a boat that had been wrecked
in the early days, still calls to service the worshippers. We retain
a deep affection for the church with such hallowed memories.
( \Jo r LXE±t
RUTH STUBBERFIELD (Grade VIII.).
Perth Girls’ High School.
The celebrating of the centenary of the opening of our school
reminds us of another centenary which we shall soon celebrate—
that of John Forrest, the greatest man the colony has ever pro-
duced. He was a man who “loved the jarrah forests, the eternal
stretches of plains and deserts, the low ranges, the high clififs, the
sand dunes, the granite hills, the outcropping quartz reefs, the
mulga wastes, the undulating sweeps of goodly pastures, the farms,
the orchards, the vineyards.”
John Forrest was born at Bunbury on August 22nd, 1847.
His father, William Forrest, a Scotsman, had emigrated to Aus-
tralia in 1842. He cleared his land in the almost untouched dis-
trict near Bunbury, surrounded by natives who were not always
friendly, and by a few white men who' were within a day’s journey.
With crude implements William Forrest built his house and culti-
vated his small property. It was in this humble dwelling that the
first peer of Australia was born. He grew up to be a lover of
the open air, and his early associations with natives gave him an
insight into their lives, and equipped him with a bush lore in-
valuable to him in his years of exploration.


Accounts of Forrest’s main explorations have been told
elsewhere in this booklet. They brought fame to John Forrest,
now popularly known as ‘“The Young Explorer.” The successful
accomplishment of all Forrest’s journeys was due not only to the
courage and endurance of the men, but to the skill and foresight
of the leader. In his 1874 journey, Forrest crossed country that
“was enough to daunt a man and to kill a horse,” and he trium-
phantly completed what was the last great task in Australian
exploration.
As a statesman Forrest possessed a burning loyalty to Western
Australia, and an absolute confidence in her destiny. His faith
was steadfast, and he could always inspire confidence and courage
in his fellow men. His motto was “Ever onward.” Small wonder
that he always had able colleagues. He could command a large
following, for people are always willing to trust a man “who knows
that he knows.”
g.°k
VALERIE OLDS (3Z). Age 14 years.
Perth Modern School.
One hundred years ago, this year,
Was born a statesman great —
Joho Forrest, who from humble sphere,
Rose to a high estate.
He did explore the Continent,
Right to the central plain,
And is well known for daring deeds,
Done for the country’s gain.
He helped O’Connor with his scheme —
A pipe-line to the ’fields,
And good, clear water from the Weir,
The taps there now do yield.
In Parliament he passed a Bill,
To settle on the land,
Men who would farm, and grow the crops.
To meet the State’s demand.
In nineteen eighteen, much beloved,
At sea, near Sierra Leone,
He died, much honoured by our State:
John Forrest had gone home.


MT. LEONORA
JOHN BELL (Class IV.), age 10 years. Correspondence Classes.
As a pupil of the Correspondence Classes, who lives at Clover
Downs Station, three miles from Mt Leonora (so named by John
Forrest in 1869), I find it a pleasure to add my small tribute in
honour of one of Australia’s greatest sons.
John Forrest was probably the first white man to climb Mt.
Leonora, which lifts its cairn-crowned head modestly some 2,000
feet above sea level. I climbed its rugged side a few days ago
and added a stone to the cairn built by Forrest 78 years ago.
The object of Forrest’s first trip was to find whether some
bones said to be lying a long distance out were human, and whe-
ther they might belong to Leichhardt’s ill-fated expedition. The
bones were not human, and gave no tidings of that unfortunate
explorer.
But Forrest and his party kept on spying out the land, to see
if it could be used for future settlement They went beyond where
Laverton now stands, and on their return journey passed through
where Leonora and its twin mining town, Gwalia, now sit on
the earth’s stony surface.
Forrest trod with weary
feet over places from which
millions of pounds worth of
gold have since been taken,
and he reported that the
country was probably gold-
bearing. But he was looking
neither for gold nor for
glory. He, like a true pat-
riot, was seeking only to
serve his State.
When I see Mt. Leonora
glowing in the evening sun-
light, I remove my hat in
honour of Lord Forrest,
who left Western Australia
so much better than he
found it.
MALCOLM HAMERSLEY,
TOMMY WINDICH AND JOHN
FORREST.
Photograph taken on their return
after an unsuccessful attempt to
trace Leichhardt’s party.


FORREST’S CAIRN
On M+. Leonora
PHYLLIS LEANEY (Class IX.). Gwalia State School.
Two miles from Leonora, where Gwalia is now situated,
there is a large hill. John Forrest named the hill Mount Leonora,
and placed a large cairn on its summit. The cairn is still to be
seen on Mount Leonora.
MT. LEONORA SEEN FROM A DISTANCE OF HALF A MILE
Forrest’s cairn is visible at the highest point.
As John Forrest stood on Mount Leonora and surveyed the
surrounding country, all he was able to see for miles around
were shrubs and trees. He must have walked over the spot where
the Sons of Gwalia Goldmine now stands, little knowing what
wealth lay under his feet. He also probably walked over Lower
Hill, another gold-bearing reef.
As he gazed over the never-ending plain, I wonder if Forrest
thought a town would ever spring up there, and w r hat people
would do for a living? If he had known what wealth lay under
his feet, he wouldn’t have had a shadow of doubt as to the answers
to these questions.
Although this expedition did not achieve its purpose of find-
ing Leichhardt’s remains, it was not the fault of John Forrest.
On his return he was able to make public the extremely valu-
able information about country that had not been previously
penetrated by white men. Even though he found no gold in
Leonora he must have had some suspicion, for on his return


he reported that the country was worth the examination of
geologists.
Although John Forrest didn’t stay long in Leonora, the in-
habitants are proud of the visit paid to- the district by the famous
explorer, and of the cairn he left on Mount Leonora.
To-day this cairn is a smoke-grimed circular pile of rocks,
7 feet high and 21 feet in circumference. The cairn is used
as a wind-break for picnickers, who climb the mount in great
numbers. Perhaps it also reminds the miners of Gwalia, who
daily rattle down to a depth of over a mile into the bowels of
a spur of Mt. Leonora, of the intrepid West Australian who
early passed that way.
FORREST’S CAMPING PLACES
Mourning Hill and County Peak.
BARBARA McCOOKE (Class V.), aged 10 years.
Correspondence Classes.
Two miles to the west of our home is a huge tree-clad rock,
Nourning Hill. It slopes down to rich, green flats, and at its base
there is a spring of fresh water. Many times since I was a little
girl I have played there, gathering pink everlastings and fern,
and gazing over the lakes to County Peak, several miles away.
County Peak raises its crest high above the surrounding
country, and, from its summit, a wonderful view can be seen. There
are farm houses and cleared fields, some sown with oats and wheat,
some studded with grazing sheep and cattle. At the foot of its
rolling slopes are the lakes; and further away are the hills of
York and West Brookton.
Both Nourning Hill and County Peak are proud that they
were once the camping places of a great man.
Seventy-seven years ago John Forrest, his brother Alexander
and a small party set out from Perth to find a stock route to
Adelaide. During the first stage of the journey from Perth to
Esperance John Forrest camped at County Peak, some twenty
miles from Beverley. He mapped the surrounding district of
Bally Bally and then crossed the lakes and camped at Nourning
Hill. Here the horses rested and fattened up before the party
continued on their long journey. While waiting, Forrest continued
his survey work. Until quite recently a survey peg set up by him
could be seen about nine miles south of Aldersyde. Unfortunately,
this peg was burnt when the paddock was cleared.
When John Forrest stood on Nourning Hill or County Peak
he saw virgin country, tall timber and rolling scrub. I wonder
if he saw visions of the prosperous farms we see today?


RAVENSTHORPFS TRIBUTE
JUNE McCULLOCH (Std. V.). Ravensthorpe State School.
On Arbor Day, 1946, the children of Ravensthorpe School
planted a tree in remembrance of the fact that John Forrest on
his West-East journey in 1870 passed through the Phillips River
district.
Already Flinders, Eyre and Roe had built up a fairly full
map of the district, so Forrest’s trip was merely a matter of
“passing through” from Kojonup to the coast, where his supply
ship would be awaiting him.
It was still a black man’s country, and these were the first
whites to cross this territory. Already the Dunn brothers had
selected land on the Phillips River at Cocanarup, but had not
settled. Likewise, the Moirs were already interested in land be-
hind Fanny’s Cove, but they did not settle there until two years
later.
The routes over which the natives led John Forrest were
afterwards revealed to the settlers, and thus Forrest’s tracks
became the settlers’ roads.
Probably their first watering place in the district was Cocan-
arup, thence down the Phillips River to Caroarup. Possibly a
camp was made near the Steere River, because a marked mungi
tree is still shown by settlers as “ Forrest’s Tree,” indicating
the place where he crossed the river.
Cordingup, three miles from Ravensthorpe, was the next
watering place and thence to Carlingup.
All these spots are at easy stages for a riding party. It was
not until they had passed beyond the Oldfield and Young River
districts that they entered the arid country.
Forrest in Esperance
Joint contribution by the Senior Children,
Esperance State School.
On Sunday, 24th April, 1870, John Forrest and his party,
consisting of his brother Alexander Forrest (a surveyor), H. M.
McLarty (a police constable), W. Osborne (a farrier and shoe-
ing smith), the ever-faithful Tommy Windich, and a second
native named Billy Noongale, reached Esperance Bay. Some
privations had been endured from want of water and exposure
to storms. Horses and men welcomed a rest on the pioneer
station of Messrs. Dempster.
Five days later their provision ship, the “Adur,” put into
Esperance, and the explorers were enabled to obtain supplies


calculated to last them to the next meeting-place. They occupied
themselves for some days in preparing for the journey over
the desert, and on the morning of 9th May a start was made.
Some beautifully grassed lands were traversed near Esperance
Bay. Then came scrubby, sandy country, studded with bare
granite hills, with Mounts Howe and Merivale in the distance,
and so on to Israelite Bay, where the “Adur ” was found at
anchor.
In 1876, Tommy Windich died in Esperance. His grave
to-day is well cared for and carefully kept. He sleeps in a grove
of small, green trees amongst the sand dunes close to Dempster’s
Head.
Sir John Forrest returned from a visit to the Eastern States
on board the S.S. Innamincka. On board with the Premier and
his party were their horses and equipment for proceeding over-
land to Coolgardie.
It was the sth May, 1898, and a big day for Esperance,
The Premier was greeted on the jetty by the town band playing
and the leading citizens of the town. That evening a banquet
was held in the Grace Darling Hotel. At the reception to the
Premier, many requests were made - principally a demand
for a railway to the Goldfields. ,Sir John definitely refused the
railway, but offered instead to provide £30,000 to build a road
through to the ’fields. This, however, was rejected by the local
authorities, with the result that the ’fields trade was lost to
Esperance.
Even to-day there are old residents who still believe Sir John
was wrong and who have not forgiven him for that refusal. But
Mr. W. C. Dempster, writing from Argyle last year, said: “ I
can now see that Sir John Forrest, that wise and far-seeing-
statesman, one of Australia’s greatest sons, consulted the best
interests of Western Australia as a whole when he refused to
build the railway from Esperance to the Goldfields. To have-
done so would have been to hand over the Goldfields trade to
the Eastern States. Without the Fremantle Harbour which he
created, the railway and water scheme, and the Eastern wheat-
belt developed to Southern Cross, the rich mines would have been
depleted in a few years and the low-grade mines now worked
would have been unprofitable, and long since abandoned.”
Perth to Adelaide via the Coast
DOROTHY OTLEY (Class VA.). . . Bayswater State School.
In 1869 Forrest set out on an expedition hoping to find traces
of Leichhardt’s earlier expedition. His journey was unsuccessful.
A year later (1870) Governor Weld was anxious to obtain in-
formation about the southern coast between Albany and Adelaide.


No other expedition had been carried out in this area, since John
Eyre had, in 1840, crossed from Adelaide to Albany.
Forrest’s party left Perth on 30th March. 1870. with fifteen
horses. The company included John Forrest (leader), Alexander
Forrest (second in command), H. McLarty (a police constable),
W. Osborne (a farrier and shoeing smith) and two natives,
Tommy Windich being one. Forrest was at that time only 23 years
of age, and he and his companions were not discouraged by the
privations suffered by Eyre. It had been arranged before the
party left that the schooner “Adur” was to convey provisions
to different points along the coast, where the explorers would get
them. After proceeding south from Perth, the explorers kept as
close as possible to the south coast, striking inland occasionally.
The party made good progress to Esperance Bay. Their main dif-
ficulty was lack of water, and pasture for the horses was also
scarce. At Esperance Bay the men enjoyed the hospitality shown
them by the pioneer settlers of Esperance. The horses were also
rested.
After a brief pause, once more they resumed their journey.
Ten days later they reached Israelite Bay, after having travelled
over scrubby, sandy country. Here the schooner “Adur” was
waiting for them. Men and horses rested and recovered their
strength. Eucla was the next meeting-place with the schooner.
They again set off, keeping as close as possible to the huge
cliffs which rise hundreds of feet at this particular part of the
southern coast of Western Australia. In one portion of the coast,
cliffs three hundred to four hundred feet high fell abruptly to
the sea. The explorers peered cautiously over the edge, but soon
drew back, terror stricken by the dreadful view.
Men and horses were both distressed while passing through
barren, waterless country stretching for about 150 miles, but
Forrest’s wise leadership brought them to where water and excel-
lent food were obtainable.
Here Tommy Windich’s keen eyes discovered some relics of
Eyre’s expedition—the bones of a horse and two small pieces
of leather.
A welcome sight met their eyes when the sand hills of Eucla
were sighted and, much to the joy of every member of the party,
they beheld the schooner riding at anchor in the harbour.
The party had lost condition rapidly while on the most diffi-
cult portion of their journey. Barren, waterless country had to
be traversed. Very soon the horses were thoroughly exhausted
They were soon little better than skeletons, with sunken eyes
and dilated nostrils. The men, too, were suffering from the pri-
vations they had endured. At last, however, Fowler’s Bay was
reached on 12th July. The party then proceeded from Gawler
Ranges to Port Augusta and then southwards to Adelaide, where
they were very warmly welcomed.


The explorers were bronzed and healthy in spite of their
journey of nearly 2,000 miles. An overland telegraph line was
made possible by John Forrest’s journey, and his report on the land
was very valuable. After this the party returned to Perth by sea,
where a hearty welcome awaited them.
OVERLAND TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Start from Geraldton.
MARY OGILVIE (Gass V.), age 11 years.
Correspondence Classes.
April Ist, 1874, seems a long time ago to us, but there are
people still living in Geraldton who remember the day quite well.
It was on that day that John Forrest, then a young man of
27, set out on his last and most important expedition.
NOON ON APRIL Ist, 1874.
John Forrest’s party about to set out from Geraldton.
I have been talking to one of those who remember. Tier name
is Mrs. Howes, and she was a little girl of 12 at the time. She
watched the preparations from the verandah of her old home, and
she has told me many interesting facts. Perhaps you would like
to hear them.
John Forrest had made up his mind to find out what kind
of land lay between West Australia and the South Australian
Telegraph Line. No white man had been over that country before,
and no one knew what dangers faced them. They were warned
to keep on friendly terms with any natives they might meet.
The party arrived in Geraldton from Perth on March 28th,
1874. Geraldton was then known as Champion Bay. The next few'
days were spent in shoeing horses and packing equipment. Some
of the provisions were sent on ahead by carts and drays as far as


Mr. Burges’s station on the Murchison River. On the evening of
March 31st the explorers were entertained to dinner at the Gerald-
ton Hotel by Mr. Crowther, M.L.C. It must have been a happy
event. We can imagine all the good wishes which would be given
to the little band of explorers. Some people were rather anxious
about the journey, for John Forrest had made a big change from
any of the other explorers. He had decided to take horses with
him instead of camels. Horses cannot live without water in the
same way that camels can. It was not known whether there would
always be a supply of fresh water along the route they intended
to take.
On the morning of April Ist there was great excitement in
the yard of the Geraldton Hotel. The horses were being pre-
pared for their long journey. Some were to carry men, and others
provisions. The party took sufficient supplies to last them for eight
months.
Directly opposite the Geraldton Hotel stood a row of
cottages. Two of these cottages were used as the “Town Hall,”
and the Resident Magistrate did his work there. Behind them
rose a high hill called Flagstaff Hill. On the top of the hill was
a flagstaff, and a small building shaped like a pepper pot. This
was used to guide ships into the jetty. In the day time a flag
would fly, and at night a beacon would burn. Any excuse was
made to fly the flag, and so we may be sure that the flag was flying
on that morning.
It was at noon that the party gathered in the street between
the Geraldton Hotel and the Town Hall in preparation for the
start. They included John Forrest (the leader), Alexander For-
rest (his brother), J. Sweeney (a farrier who went to care for
the horses), J. Kennedy (a police constable). Also there were
two aborigines: Tommy Windich (who became a life-long friend
of John Forrest) and Tommy Pierre. There were others who had
decided to go a little way along the road with them. A trooper
was sent to bring back the mail.
So they set out and travelled by way of King’s Table Hill.
Here they rested on the common land where any grazier was
allowed to let his stock feed. In those days there was no wireless
to give news, and we can be sure that the people of Champion
Bay would watch anxiously for the return of the trooper with
the mail, and latest news of the party. He left them when they
reached Wallala Spring, about the end of April, and was the last
white man to see them before they reached the Telegraph Line.
We know now how successful the trip was, and it is good
to know that Forrest led his men triumphantly across Australia.
I passed the Geraldton Hotel yesterday. It looked very
ordinary, but I closed my eyes, and once more the streets were
thronged with people. I saw John Forrest, I saw his men, I saw
the little girl that Mrs. Howes was then, 1 heard the cheers as
Forrest rode down the street.


Geraldton is proud to have known John Forrest the explorer,
the statesman, and West Australia’s greatest son.
This cottage served as Geraldton’s “ Town Hall,” and the Resident Magistrate did
his work there. From here Geraldton folk waved “ God-speed ”
to John Forrest and his party.
[Note by Headmaster, Correspondence Classes: On account
of a severe physical disability this little girl has never been able
to attend school, and has been educated entirely by correspondence.
She has always taken a keen interest in her lessons, is very inter-
ested in history, and reads widely. She has gone to much trouble
in collecting material for this essay. In her wheelchair she has
visited several old residents to obtain information and photographs
JOHN FORREST’S THIRD
EXPEDITION
SUSAN HALLEY (Class VIA.). Geraldton State School.
On the 18th March, 1874, a party consisting of John Forrest
(leader), Alexander Forrest (second in command), James
Sweeney (a farrier), James Kennedy (a police constable), Tommy
Pierre and Tommy Windich (two aboriginals), well armed and
provisioned for eight months, with about twenty-one horses set
out from Perth.
Forrest was running a very great risk taking horses, because
former exploration parties coming from east to west failed to get
through, even with horses and camels.
The expedition took ten days to cross the Victoria Plains.


They arrived at Champion Bay on the 28th March, and spent
three days making- final arrangements.
At noon on the Ist April, which was the Wednesday before
Easter that year, they started off from the office of the Town
Trust in Gregory Street. There was quite a crowd to see them
off. They turned right by the curfew bell, past Shenton’s and
Crowther’s Stores, the Methodist Church, the Victoria Hotel,
Gray’s Store, the Anglican Church, Trigg’s Hotel, and the Work-
ing Men’s Institute; then, after passing the Roman Catholic
Church of St. Francis Xavier, they continued along the road to the
mines. They were able to water their horses at the wells used by
the teams bringing lead from the mines to Geraldton port.
The party crossed the Chapman River by the bridge that was
made by convicts in 1868. Soon they passed the White Peak
Station, the property of Mr. J. N. Drummond, passed the police
station at the foot of King’s Table Hill, and so on to the Bowes
River, where the party camped that night. The party stayed at
the Bowes River on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday. The
place where they camped was called Knockbrack, which was just
like an Irish cabin owned by Thomas Burges. On April the 4th
Forrest started out again accompanied by Messrs. E. and F. Wit-
tenoon and Mr. Lacy as far as Allen Nolba. (Allen Nolba used
to be a native burial place.) Forrest camped at Wandanoe on the
sth April, where they had difficulty in collecting the horses. They
passed many wells and eventually reached Yuin, which was Mr.
Burges’ head station, where they said goodbye to civilisation. When
they struck the Murchison River there was plenty of grass and
good feed. They continued east until they came to spinifex plains.
At Weld Springs natives made an attack, although they were
beaten off and were very scared of the fire of guns. On the 22nd
August it was John’s birthday, and also the day that the explorers
reached the border line between the two colonies. They reached
the telegraph line on a Sunday, the 27th September. They went on
to Adelaide where they received a warm welcome.
Forrest’s Party in the Murchison
VERA WALLAM (Std. V.). Carrolup Native Settlement School.
We have a tracker on our settlement at Carrolup who knows
a man who followed John Forrest’s party while passing through
the Lower Murchison. His name is Neebrung, and he is well
known around Payne’s Find.
Neebrung was a boy of 15 years of age when John Forrest
travelled over his native country —across the mulga scrub and salt-
bush plains where Ningham Station now stands. At this station
is a very steep hill, and at the lower part runs a creek. Neebrung
said that at this creek John Forrest watered his horses and filled
up his water bags. On the top of this hill, Forrest took some


°f his observations. Here he built a pile of stones and studied
the “lay” of the land.
Neebrung said that when his tribe first saw Forrest and his
men coming it scared them. The white men’s long beards and
pale faces seemed to put terror to his tribe. The chief prepared
his men for war and put on paint. He said some of his tribe
■camouflaged themselves by running tip-toe along the creek, looking
serious. Others peeped over the low scrub, pointing at Forrest
and his companions. Some were inclined to follow him through
curiosity.
FORREST’S 1874 EXPEDITION
The party comprised: (Back row) Tommy Pierre, Tommy Windich, James Kennedy,
James Sweeney. (Seated): Alexander Forrest, John Forrest.
The country through which Forrest travelled was red soil
and mulga plains. At night the explorers put up their tents and
camped, and the tribe still followed on.
But Forrest never harmed a single hair of any one of the
blacks. They became friendly, and stood around his fire. He showed
his flour, sugar, and tea and offered them some, but they knew
nothing about these things. They soon got used to seeing Forrest
on his strange animal, with a long stick in his hand, which they
learned was a gun.
Where Forrest camped, he always made friends with the
natives. Forrest and his men walked over ground that was un-
known. How he reached South Australia nobody knows, for it
was hot, dry, and barren. As he passed inland from the Murchison
the natives passed the word along by making signals of smoke.


Qofin and dJomrnij
A native Boy’s account of an incident in which
John Forrest and Tommy W indie h took part.
REYNOLD HART (Class IV.).
Carrolup Native Settlement School.
John was passing through the spinifex country. Things were
looking black. It was lucky for him and his party that the rain
fell, and fulled all the holes up. John was a clever fellow. He
never went away from a place where water was unless he knew
water was ahead.
He wasn’t a magician to see if water was ahead; but he used
to send Tommy along to find water. John would see the smoke
signal, and he and his party would move on.
1 ommy saw a lot of tracks. He knew natives had been there.
When they had pitched their tents, John noticed a hundred of
natives, who were not looking too good. They had their war
paint on, and their boomerangs and spears ready.
“Try to stop them, Tommy,” said John.
Tommy walks up to the chief. “That white man does not
want to fight,” says Tommy.
So the natives go away.
Well, Tommy saved John’s life.
Forrest’s Party at Weld Springs
DULCIE PENNY .(Class V.).
Carrolup Native Settlement School .
Water began to get scarce with John Forrest and his party
when they were only 150 miles east of Geraldton.
Fortunately, they had a man by the name of Tommv Windich.
This man has a son, who is a tracker at the Carrolup Settlement,
and he is the'eldest son of Tommy Windich. He has told us about
John Forrest and his companions.
Tommy Windich, who knew the bush very well, took John
Forrest and his men to a well which is now known as Weld
Springs.
No sooner had they reached the well and pitched their tents,
than they noticed some of the natives coming over the horizon,
all painted for war. They knew that the natives were going to-
fight for their water-hole.


As the natives came up close to the well, shaking - their
and showing their boomerangs and making a terrible noise, Forrest
and his men were obliged to get their guns ready.
Tommy Windich went as near to the natives as possible,
and told them that they weren’t going to hurt them. They were
only getting water for themselves and their horses.
NATIVES ATTACK FORREST’S PARTY AT WELD SPRINGS.
Drawing by a native boy attending Carrolup Native Settlement School.
1 he natives wouldn’t stop, so the explorers fired one volley,
and they all fled through the bush.
After a day or two the natives would often creep up behind
trees to see what the white men were doing. One day Tommy
went up to them and told them in a kind way tbau they weren’t
going to hurt them. The natives could not understand him, but
realised that they wanted to be friends to the natives. True
to his word, John Forrest never harmed the blacks.
[Editor’s Note: The Flead Teacher at the State School,
Carrolup Native Settlement, writes ; “The children here are keenly
interested in Forrest, whom they view as a great friend to the
blacks.”]


~T onlb sW"e 6 ; Cou<«%e t
hM C ‘
WINDICH
GRACE REED (Std. VA.). Bayswater State School.
In the quiet bushland which fringes Esperance Bay lies the
grave of Tommy Windich. the faithful native who accompanied
John Forrest on all his explorations. When a pupil of the Esper-
ance School I had been told of this grave, so one fine day my
mother, my sister and I set off to find it. It was difficult going
through the mallee and over sand hills, as no made path to the
grave existed then, but eventually we located it. A white picket
fence surrounds the grave on which is an inscribed slab of granite.
At the time of my visit, white lilies were in bloom over the grave.
I read the inscription: “Erected by John and Alexander Forrest,
in memory of Tommy Windich. Born near Mt. Stirling, in 1840.
Died at Esperance Bay, 1876. He was an aboriginal of Western
Australia, of great intelligence a d fidelity, who accompanied them
on exploring expeditions into the interior of Australia, two of
which were from Perth to Adelaide.” And then follows: “Be
ye also ready.”
Tommy Windich was born near Mt. Stirling, in Western
Australia. When he was 29 years of age, he was relieved of his
duties as a native constable to join Forrest on his first expedi-
tion. Tommy was a tall, healthy native with a well-combed
beard. All through the trying journey he was always helpful.
He usually rode with Forrest at the head of the party, being
Forrest’s closest companion. To show his appreciation, Forrest


named Windich Springs in his honour. After one of the expe-
ditions, Tommy was presented with a singde-barrelled shotgun
with his name inscribed on it. He valued the gun very highly.
Whenever Tommy was asked to make a speech, he could never
muster enough courage to do so. But at a reception party Forrest
said, “Of Tommy Windich, I cannot speak too highly. He was
very useful' in collecting the horses, as well as being a first-class
bushman and really invaluable as a water-finder.”
Mr. C. M. Harris, F.R.G.S., of Bassendean, who has helped
me a great deal with this account of Tommy Windich, sent me
this extract from Tommy Windich’s story:— Sir John Forrest
had told the writer, W. A. Timperly, the following concerning
Tommy:—
“We were in a bad way: the water had all been used, the
horses staggered with difficulty under their loads, and as we
tramped along for our lives, with parched lips and swollen
tongues, every man was thinking of one thing only: When should
we reach water? This was a question none of us could answer.
At last I called a halt, and the party, worn out, thirsty and most
hopeless, threw themselves on the ground. After a short spell,
I said to Tommy Windich, ‘Tommy, you and I will go and
look for water. If we do not find some water soon, we will
die.’ Tommy’s reply was prompt: ‘Yes, master, I go along
with you and in God’s mercy we will find some water in a
rock-hole.’ Sure enough, in about an hour’s time, Tommy had
located water, and we were saved.”
In 1876 Tommy caught a severe attack of pneumonia while
travelling between Perth and Esperance. This is believed to
have been the cause of his death. Tommy left a pound to his
gin, to be paid in five-shilling lots for a month.
After Tommy’s death, Forrest wrote to the West Australian:
“ This faithful and intelligent native has passed away.
He was still quite a young man, and had been closely con-
nected with every exploration in this colony for the past ten
years. He accompanied Mr. Hunt, Mr. Alexander Forrest
and myself. Twice he crossed from Perth to Adelaide, and
took a prominent part in the expeditions. He has died away
from all his old friends, but his name is almost a household
word in this colony, and I shall take steps to have his grave
marked. To me, who have had him as my only companion
on many trying occasions, the tidings of Tommy’s death is
exceedingly sad, and I feel that I have lost an old and tried
companion and friend.”
Tommy Windich was one of those natives who, by bushcraft
and loyalty, have been of the greatest assistance to Australian
explorers. He well deserves a place in the Forrest Booklet.


THE FORREST BROTHERS IN
THE KIMBERLEYS
DAVID C. CRUIKSHANK (VB.). Perth Modern School.
By 1878 the fame of John Forrest and his brother, Alex-
ander, as explorers, bad spread so that when in that year some-
one was required to lead an expedition into the Kimberleys,
Alexander Forrest was chosen as leader.
Fie left the De Grey River station on February 25th, reaching
Beagle Bay on April 10th. The party struck east, and, coming to
King Sound, followed the Fitzroy River for some distance, finding
it deep and rapid. Once across this obstacle, Forrest tried to
penetrate the rugged fastnesses of the King Leopold Range. He
soon realised this was impossible, necessitating a long trip south
round the lower tip of the range. Steering a course up the valley
of the Margaret River, he discovered the fertile Nicholson Plains
while, when he turned once more eastwards, he came to the Ord
River. This trip had been heavy going for the party and, although
nothing could shake the courage and stamina of the leader Forrest,
sickness and lack of provisions were causing great suffering and
privations amongst the company. Forrest was compelled to set
out with all speed to the Overland Telegraph, which he reached
at Daly Waters Station in the beginning of October.
John Forrest proceeded to the Kimberleys in 1883, together
with a group of surveyors. Landing at Roebuck Bay, he examined
most of the Kimberley division from La Grange Bay to the
Fitzroy River, then took a wide sweep south as far as St. George’s
Range.
In 1886 he visited Cambridge Gulf in the extreme north,
founded the town of Wyndham, and established a government
settlement there.
Sir John Forrest remains to this day one of Western Aus-
tralia’s greatest sons. He achieved greatness by the whole-hearted
and indefatigable service which he rendered to his native State.
Not only did he prove himself brave in the face of danger and
a quick thinker in an emergency while he was Forrest the
explorer; but Forrest the statesman equally distinguished himself
by his wise counsels, clear thinking and broad outlook.
An Aboriginal Orator
Speeches by Tommy Pierre at the End of Forrest's 1874 Expedition.
At the Reception at Salisbury, S.A.:
“Well, gentlemen, I am not in good humour tonight. I am
very glad I got through. We got a capital gaffer that leaded us
through; but it wasn’t him that got us through, it isn’t ourselves,
but God who brought us through the place, and we ought to be


Forrest the Christian
1874 Expedition.
Remarks on the observance of Sunday.;—“The 19th (April)
was Sunday, and, according to practice, we rested. Every Sunday
throughout the journey I read Divine Service, and, except making
the daily observations, only work absolutely necessary was done.
VVhenever possible we rested on Sunday, taking, if we could, a
pigeon, a parrot, or such other game as might come in our way
as special fare. Sunday’s dinner was an institution for which,
even in those inhospitable wilds, we had a great respect.”
From Diary Entry for June 17th, when short of water:
“The weather is dark and threatening, and I believe there will
be rain tonight, which will be a great boon, and will enable us
to travel along easily. It is in circumstances such as I am at
present placed that we are sure to implore help and assistance
from the hand of the Creator; but when we have received all we
desire, how often we forget to give Him praise!”
Forrest the Resolute
From Diary Entry for July 4th:
“We can only crawl along, having to walk and lead the horses,
or at least drag them. The party have been following us, only
getting a little water from gullies, and there is very little to fall
back on for over 50 miles. I will leave what I intend doing until
I meet them. I am nearly knocked up again tonight; my boots
have hurt my feet, but I am not yet disheartened.”
From Diary Entry for August 2nd:
“Just when the goal of my ambition and my hopes for years
past was almost within reach, it appeared that I might not even
now be able to grasp it. The thought of having to return, however,
brought every feeling of energy and determination to my rescue,
and I felt that, with God’s help, I would even now succeed. I
gave instructions to allowance the party, so that the stores should
last at least four months, and made every preparation for a last
desperate struggle.”
Highlights of Forrest’s Journeys
July Ist, 1870, on Arrival within Sight of Eucla:
“On my pointing them out (the Eucla sandhills), every heart
was full of joy, and, being some distance away, I heard the long
and continued hurrahs from the party!' Eucla was all the con-
versation! I never before remember witnessing such joy as was
evinced on this occasion by all the party ... We are now again.
FORREST CENTENARY BOOKLET


in safety, Eucla being only seven miles distant, after having
travelled 166 miles without finding permanent water, —in fact
over 300 miles with only one place where we procured permanent
water ... I trust we all recognise with sincerity and thankfulness
the guiding and protecting Father who has brought us through in
safety.”
July 18th, 1870, on reaching a Road—the First Sign of Civilisation.
“• ■ ■ Billy (the native Billy Noongale), who was in advance
with me, and whom I had told to look out as he would see a road
directly, which he immediately did, began giving me great praise
for bringing them safely through such a long journey. I certainly
felt very pleased and relieved from anxiety, and, on reviewing the
long line of march we had performed through an uncivilised
country, was very sensible of that protecting Providence which
had guided us safely through the undertaking.”
September 27th, 1874, on reaching the Telegraph Line between
Adelaide and Port Darwin :
“Long and continued cheers came from our little band as
they beheld at last the goal to which we had been travelling for so
long. I felt rejoiced and relieved from anxiety; and on reflecting
on the long line of travel we had performed through an unknown
country, almost a wilderness, felt very thankful to that good Provi-
dence that had guarded and guided us so safely through it.”
Early Years of John Forrest
B. HOUSTON, lIF. Perth Modern School.
Titles and honours, the official recognitions of services to
his country, enable this great man’s name to be written as “ The
Right Honourable John Baron Forrest, in the Peerage of Great
Britain. Privy Councillor, Knight Grand Cross of the Order of
Saint Michael and Saint George, Member of the House of
Representatives, LL.D. (honoris causa), F.R.G.S., F.G.5.,” etc.,
etc. The title which he valued most, however, was that given to
him by the common settlers —“Jarrah Jack.” He used to tell
this true story: A new arrival from England wished to write to
Sir John Forrest, but did not know his address. On asking a
friend, he was told to just put “Jarrah Jack.” The letter duly
arrived, without even an official superscription!
John Forrest was born near Bunbury on the 22nd. of August,
1847. He grew up a bush lad, well versed in woodcraft and
familiar with the native mentality, methods and customs, and
often went out hunting with the black children. Eventually he
was sent to Perth to the “ Bishop’s School,” now named Hale
School after its founder, Bishop Hale.
FORREST CENTENARY BOOKLET


very thankful to God for getting us through. I am not in good
humour tonight to speak, but I will' speak when I get in Adelaide.”
At the Reception on Returning to Perth ;
“Well, gentlemen, I am very thankful to come back to Swan
River, and Bunbury, Fremantle and Perth. I thought we was
never to get back. Many a time I go into camp in the morning,
going through desert place, and swear and curse and say, ‘Master,
where the deuce are you going to take us ?’ I say to him ‘I give you
a pound to take us back.’ Master say, ‘Hush! what are you talking
about ? I will take you all right through to Adelaide;’ and I always
obey him. Gentlemen, I am thankful to you that I am in the Town
Hall. That’s all I got to say.” (Forrest comments on this speech:
“No doubt we all shared Tommy’s thankfulness, and I am sure his
homely language very fairly expressed the spirit in which all my
associates had shown their confidence in me during our long
journey.”)
Speech at the Banquet in Perth :
“I only black fellow, you know; nothing at all but just a
few words. I ought to give you a good lecture. Well, gentlemen,
I am very thankful that I got into the city of Perth. When I
speak so of city of Perth I don’t speak wrong at all; what I speak
is true and true. Well, gentlemen, I am very thankful to the people
in Perth at the Town Hall; I am very thankful to everyone that
welcome me; I am always very glad to see white fellows around
me. In Bunbury, Governor Weld spoke to me and say he left
me a present in city of Perth, and I hope I will get it too. Governor
Weld is a splendid fellow; splendid governor. Well, gentlemen,
I am thankful; my last word is, I am thankful to you all.”
Extracts from
"EXPLORATIONS OF AUSTRALIA”
Forrest the Patriot.
1870 Expedition.
May 24th. Celebration of the Queen’s birthday at Israelite
Bay. “All hands from the ‘Adur’ came ashore, and I drew them
up in line under the Union Jack, which was duly hoisted near
the camp. We presented arms; sang ‘God Save the Queen’ vigor-
ously, and fired a salute of twenty-one guns, finishing with three
cheers. I venture to record that our vocal efforts were as sin-
cerely and heartily made in that Australian wilderness as any
which rang that day in any part of Her Majesty’s wide dominions.
We were all highly delighted —not only feeling that we had done
our duty as loyal subjects, but other celebrations in more civilised
places were forcibly recalled to memory.”


Never in his life was John Forrest a brilliant individual.
He was a plodder. At school he was not brilliant, lessons being
rather boring to a lad who would rather spend his time in the
country. In this way he passed through school, and was then
put under the supervision of a surveyor to study his profession.
After a couple of years of this, he was employed by the Lands
Department in 1865. Here he made good use of his time, and
was soon well versed in the many details that go into the making
of a useful public servant.
In the middle of the ’sixties, “ Lost Leichhardt ” was a theme
which stirred the minds of men. Baron von Mueller offered to
lead an expedition to look for his lost compatriot. He was unable
to do as he desired, and so the West Australian Government
appointed the then twenty-two-years-ol'd Forrest to lead the expe-
dition. Leaving Perth on the fifteenth of April, 1869, he travelled
north in the company of George Monger, Malcolm Hamersley,
David Morgan and two natives, Tommy Windich and Jimmy
Mungaroo. To the former, Forrest became very attached. The
faithful native always went on Forrest’s explorations. “A good
friend and an excellent helper,” is Forrest’s answer to any question
concerning this lad.
Twelve months later, in the year 1870, Forrest undertook the
task of travelling a route to Adelaide via Eucla. The party set
out on the thirtieth of March of that year, and completed the
journey in 150 days. The result of this journey was that it was
found practicable to put a telegraph line between Adelaide and
Perth.
This gives, shortly, an idea of the life of John Forrest up
to the age of about twenty-five. There are many other interesting
episodes in the life of this great man —John, Baron Forrest to
posterity, but “J arra h Jack ” or “ Big John ” to his bush friends
always.
FORREST AS PREMIER
•STEFFONI KEATING (Std. VI.). Bayswater State School.
John Forrest showed qualities of good leadership during his
early exploration. These same qualities were shown when he be-
gan his career as the first Premier of Western Australia. He
was very patriotic, he had unshaken confidence in Western Aus-
tralia, and he had great courage, as shown in his expeditions to
regions where no man had been before.
Forrest was Premier for ten years. These years were the
most remarkable in Western Australia’s history. The population
increased fourfold, mainly because of the discovery of gold, and
wealth and prosperity came to this State.


Ihe first really big gold discovery was at Southern Cross
in 1888. Much heavy machinery was needed, and millions of
pounds were borrowed by Forrest’s Cabinet to extend the rail-
way line. Then another rapid increase in population began.
Among the many prospectors were experienced men who ventured
far inland. In August, 1892, Ford and Bayley discovered gold
at Coolgardie, while in 1893 Paddy Hannan discovered gold at
FREMANTLE HARBOUR IN THE EARLY DAYS OF STEAM
Windjammers are berthed beside steamships.
Kalgoorlie. Others ventured further north to such places as Mt.
Leonora, where Forrest had been on his first journey of explora-
tion. The men had to endure terrible hardships. Freights were
costly, while water was several shillings a gallon. On the Ist
July, 1894, the railway line to Southern Cross was opened for
traffic. Immediately new loans were arranged by Forrest to extend
the line to Coolgardie.
During this time large numbers of ships were arriving with
passengers.and goods every week, so a safe harbour was urgently
needed. C. Y. O’Connor, who was an expert engineer employed
by the Forrest Government, planned a new harbour at Fre-
mantle. Money was borrowed, and the work rushed through.
On 4th May, 1897, the first ship entered the new harbour.
Vast quantities of water were now required for the Eastern
Goldfields. Some of the water was condensed from water of
the salt lakes, but most of the water was brought by train from
Northam.


Because of Forrest’s faith in his Engineer-in-Chief, he
persuaded Parliament to agree to C. Y. O’Connor’s water scheme.
Although the population was only 140,0130, nearly £3,000,000
was borrowed by the Government to do the job, and the scheme
was commenced immediately. It was the largest pipe-line of
its kind then in the world.
Meanwhile, Forrest and his Cabinet did not forget the rest
of Western Australia. For example, they arranged the Home-
steads Act. Settlers were given an opportunity to acquire 160
acres of land free, but they had to show willingness to work, or
the land was confiscated. The Agricultural Bank was estab-
lished to help the farmer, because other banks would not lend
on sufficiently easy conditions. Forrest also asked for a Royal
Mint. The British Government arranged with Forrest to have
it built in Perth.
It was the greatest wish of Forrest to have something in
the heart of the city to remain in its native state forever. Forrest
frequently visited King’s Park to admire the view, and was very
pleased to arrange, during his term of office as Premier, for this
park to always remain as much as possible in its native state.
The grateful people of Western Australia have since erected a
statue of Forrest overlooking his beloved river. Forrest Place,
in Forrest’s time, was a small arcade, but when the General Post
Office and Commonwealth Bank’s head office were built, the
arcade was demolished, and a wide roadway was constructed. It
is very fitting that this fine roadway should have been named
Forrest Place. (
Although Forrest gained high office, he never forgot old
friends. He would chat in a very friendly manner to people in
the street, just as Sir James Mitchell, our Lieutenant-Governor
does. Also, like Sir James, he had a greeting for everybody.
At the close-of the century, Forrest was able to look back
on ten very successful years as Premier. The discovery of gold
During his lifetime
Lord Forrest laid
numerous foundation
stones. Here is the
foundation stone of-
Bunbury Hospital,
which was
built in 1897-


itiE
VALMA WILLIAMS (3Zii.) -
Perth Modern School.
Forrest is a name of magic!
When the isolated Westralia
Was looked down on and rejected,
He put on her golden slippers,
Helped her dance to' Federation;
Helped her farmers, made her prosper,
When he first was made the Premier.
Built her public works and railways;
Helped O’Connor build his pipeline,
Built it over hill and desert,
Built it right up to the Goldfields,
To the miners of the Goldfields,
So they could have clear, fresh water;
Helped him engineer the harbour,
Ftelped him build it strong and larger,
So that foreign trade would prosper
At the mouth of the Swan River.
Then completed he his life work,
Linking up our West with Eastward;
Opening up fresh gates of commerce,
With the Trans-Australian Railway.
In September died this great man,
In September, 1918 —
Loved and honoured by the people.
BILYA ROCK
GLENYS CARSLAKE (11 years, Class VI.)
Gutha State School.
I live at Gutha, which is a small farming district on the
Wongan Hills railway line, 287 miles north of Perth.
My father is a farmer. Adjoining our property, which is
five miles west of Gutha, stands a high, rocky outcrop which can
be seen for miles. This is known as Bilya Rock. During one of
Forrest’s expeditions, he evidently used this hill for a landmark,
as a cairn of stones was built and a carved stick bearing the
name of John Forrest was erected in the centre of it.
This stick stood for many years as a silent reminder that a
great man had passed that way. It was well preserved and the
inscription could still be plainly read.
During the visit of a surveying party of soldiers, several
years back, the stick was removed and a trig, placed there instead.
I have looked for the carved stick on numerous occasions,
but have been unsuccessful in my search.


SIR JOHN FORREST IN COOLGARDIE
COLIN TROTMAN (Std. VII.) Cunderdin State School.
Perhaps no other part of our great State is more closely con-
nected with the career of the late Baron Forrest than Coolgardie.
It is well known that before the discovery of Coolgardie in 1892
Western Australia was a small backwood State. Indeed, it was
the Cinderella State, and the census of 1891 showed a popula-
tion of only 49,782. However, following such wonderful dis-
coveries as Bayley’s Reward, Hannan’s (Kalgoorlie), the London-
derry and the Wealth of Nations, people flocked to our shores from
all parts of the world, and by 1895 our population had jumped
to 101,235. Many of these newcomers remained in Perth and
Fremantle, but the majority flocked to the new fields, and by 1898
Coolgardie was the third largest municipality in this State, with
a population of 15,000.
It is well for Western Australia that it had in its Premier,
Sir John Forrest, a statesman whose fearless courage and fore-
sight enabled him to overcome the tremendous problems brought
about by the gold discoveries. The chief difficulties were lack of
transport to the new fields and the provision of adequate water
supplies. On July Ist, 1894, the Northam to Southern Cross rail-
way was opened for traffic, but by the time it reached this latter
place the need for its further extension to. Coolgardie was even
more urgent than that for its original construction to Southern
Cross. In November, 1894, Parliament, under Sir John Forrest,
agreed to a Bill providing for this extension, and the work was
commenced in 1895. The contractors laid the rails at the rate
sometimes of a mile a day, and the line was opened at Coolgardie
on March 23rd, 1896. At the opening ceremony Sir John Forrest
promised the people of Coolgardie that he would bring them from
the coast a “river of fresh water.” Sir John, of course, was re-
ferring to the projected Coolgardie water scheme which, in the
space of a few years, was to be known as the “Goldfields Water
Supply.” Later —on March 24th, 1898—at the laying of the foun-
dation stone of the Coolgardie Exhibition building, Sir John
again referred to the Coolgardie water scheme in these words:
“I told them that in the future they would praise us for our far-seeing
patriotism. As you know, there is no greater authority I like to quote,
when I want to clinch my argument, than the Good Book which is the
foundation of our faith, and in the Words of Isaiah, I said: ‘We had made
ways in the wilderness and rivers in the desert’.” —Goldfields Morning
Chronicle (25/3/98).
Our State has cause indeed to praise Sir John Forrest and
that great engineer, Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, who designed and carried
out the scheme, for their far-seeing patriotism.
The Coolgardie Mining Exhibition, which was officially opened
on March 21st, 1899, received the utmost support from Sir John
Forrest and his Government, which contributed £5,000 towards
the cost. Furthermore, the Government agreed to charge no rail-


way freight on exhibits from the coast. It was at the laying of
the foundation stone of the exhibition building that Sir John paid
this tribute to Coolgardie: —
OPENING THE RAILWAY TO KALGOORLIE
Special train to Kalgoorlie for the opening of the Railway, September Bth, 1896. Visitors
included the Governor (Sir Gerard Smith), the Premier (Sir John Forrest), Mr.
Alexander Forrest and Mr. J. W. Hackett.
“As you all know, we have lived during the last seven years through
difficult times—times of great change—change in every respect, from a
position of obscurity to one of some importance ... We have had to build
our nest during the post six years, and, realising as I do to-night that in this
Coolgardie (that is a place with so good a name to conjure with) has had
so important an influence on the Colony, I all along said that the Exhibition,
if it came to pass at all, must be in this city of Coolgardie . . . because
to those interested in goldmining throughout the world at the present
moment Coolgardie will be known more than any place on the Australian
continent ... It was the pioneer city and it has done more than any other
place for Western Australia in regard to goldmining.” —Goldfields Morning
Chronicle (25/3/98).
Sir John was late in arriving at a banquet held the same even-
ing to mark the occasion and the Goldfields Morning Chronicle
reported the manner of his arrival, as follows:
“The whole assemblage arose as one man, and as the burly figure and
square, honest, determined visage of the country’s Premier stood before
them, a great shout of welcome arose. Cheer succeeded cheer in deafen-
ing vociferation. Never before had the Premier such a reception, probably
never before had any Premier such a reception, and it was easy to see
that Sir John, as he, smiling, boWed acknowledgments, thoroughly appre-


dated the spirit which actuated a company so thoroughly representative
of a goldfields community.”
As one gazes at the Exhibition Building site, now occupied
by tumble-down shanties of old prospectors, one can imagine the
scene on the opening day, March 21st, 1899. The building was
crowded out, and many were unable to gain admission. It was
estimated that 5,000 people were present. There were well-
trimmed green lawns, fountains playing and bands rendering
lively airs. The Kalgoorlie Miner of March 22nd, 1899, tells us :■ —
On the specially-erected dais between the orchestral and choir plat-
forms and the body of the hall, was a distinguished and striking gathering,
including the Premier (who was, like his Excellency, in uniform), military
and naval officers, clerical and civic dignitaries in their robes of office, and
ladies in very handsome costumes.”
In the course of his remarks at this ceremony Sir John Forrest
again referred to the Coolgardie water scheme, and said: —
“He was quite certain that the Exhibition had brought the Colony
into more prominence throughout the world. If they got a really good
display of gold and ores it would do a great deal of good. There was one
thing he hoped to see, the river of water which he had promised should
be brought into this place. Well, they were bringing it. People might be
unbelievers and sceptics, but he could tell them that the great water scheme
was raising itself silently, like the Temple of Jerusalem. There was no great
sound of hammers, but hammers were being employed, and the time would
come when the scheme would rear itself up and a river of fresh water
would flow into this town.”
The close of the year 1902 marked the fulfilment of Sir John
Forrest’s promise to the people of Coolgardie that they, “should
see a river of water coming into this city. The Coolgardie Miner
of December 23rd, 1902, writes:—
“Yesterday was an eventful day in Coolgardie. The ‘river of water
from the coast’ was started running into the reservoir on Toorak Hill, from
which the town and districts ‘will be reticulated . . . For this great advan-
tage the goldfields are deeply indebted to the late Mr. C. Y. O’Connor for
having designed this the most difficult and comprehensive water scheme
in the world. It is one thing for an engineer to design, and another for
a statesman to carry out. For the latter we are indebted to the great courage
and confidence of Sir John Forrest.”
The Coolgardie Miner tells us that the official opening day
for the Coolgardie water scheme was very hot, with a number
of willy-willies scattered over the landscape. The trains carrying
the official party from Perth arrived on time and were met by the
Mayor and Councillors of Coolgardie. Amongst the visitors were
the Hon. Walter James (Premier of W.A.), Sir John Foirest
(Minister for Defence), Sir William Lyne, Sir P. O. Fysh, General
Hutton. Hon. G. H. Reid, Mr. Jenkins (Premier of S.A.) and
Mr. E. O’Sullivan (Minister for Public Works in N.S.W.). Bands
were playing on the Town Acre, and a great procession set out
for the Exhibition Building, where Sir John Forrest was to
officially turn on the water. During the progress of the procession
the Burbanks gun team with cannon and troopers from Burbanks


fired charges at intervals of one minute. The Coolgardie Miner
tells us:
“Sir John and Lady Forrest were drawn in a finely-decorated phaeton
by twenty-six boys in sailor costume at the head of the drags containing the
other visitors. This portion of the procession was continuously cheered on
its progress to the Exhibition building. Sir John and Lady Forrest evi-
dently appreciated the marks of attention and cheering met with en route
and were all bows and smiles.”
COOLGARDIE, DECEMBER 23, 1902
Sir John and Lady F'orrest were drawn in a finely-decorated phaeton
twenty-six boys in sailor costume.”
During the course of the ceremony various speakers paid
tribute to Sir John. The State Premier (Mr. W. James) said
that “They had met to open the great scheme and to honour Sir
John Forrest.” Sir William Lyne (Minister for Home Affairs),
in addressing the gathering, said, “It is a marvel to us all that you
have struggled so long with the elements against you. By the
extreme determination of Sir John Forrest you are now placed
in a very different position . . . The memory of the man who had
carried out the great scheme would live long with them.”
The Mayor of Coolgardie, on behalf of the citizens, then
presented Sir John Forrest with an illuminated address, end con-
gratulated him on the great scheme. The Miner tells us; —
“The scorching air appeared to bring determination to Sir John
Forrest. Fie faced the crowd and the breeze as he faced the desert many
a time before. As he held his hand on the tap that Was to turn on the
water and addressed the people his face lit up as if he felt he had the
terrors of the desert and of the north wind at his mercy.”
During his reply Sir John told the people
“. . . that he was very glad to be among them that day to have the honour
of turning on the water. It was very fitting that such a ceremony should
take place in Coolgardie because Coolgardie was the name of all these great
goldfields. He was sure they would believe him when he said that that
was a great day in his life, and in the history of the country . . . On
March 23rd, 1896, when he opened the railway to Coolgardie, he promised


them that he would bring them from the coast a river of fresh 'water.
That river of pure water now flows into Coolgardie. After many diffi-
culties and trials the promise was fulfilled. It was never asked for by the
Goldfields, but was projected by the Government. He was not surprised
that some people thought that the scheme was beyond the country to carry
■out. Some good men thought so. It was a stern necessity that urged
them to carry out the work. It was hard to realise that and they would
not realise for some time that five or six million gallons of Water was
actually there for use every day. So long as the goldfields would last,
so long would the water be lt was not temporary, but for all
time . . . Perhaps the reason he took so much interest in the scheme 'was
on account of his early experience as an explorer in this region. In 1869
he travelled in the Mt. Margaret district, and as he told the settlers
afterwards, a man carried his life in his hands in those days. It was not
safe for him to go into the bush unless he had sufficient water to carry
him back to the last watering place, so uncertain were the prospects of
getting fresh supplies. Sir John then referred to his trip across country
to Adelaide and related the trying experiences he had had. Concluding,
Sir John said that he was thankful that he had been the instrument in
the hands of Almighty God to complete such a great, humanitarian work."
■Coolgardie Miner (26/1/03).
A silver-plated nozzle was presented to Sir John Forrest by
the Mayor of Coolgardie as a memento of the occasion, and silver
handles were presented to the Mayoress by Sir John Forrest
on behalf of the people of Coolgardie. A silver-plated valve was
presented by Sir John Forrest on behalf of Messrs. Bennie, Teare
& Co. to the Mayor of Coolgardie, and it is interesting to know
that this silver-plated valve is still in the possession of the Cool-
gardie Road Board.
At the conclusion of this ceremony the people adjourned to
the concert hall of the Exhibition Building, where Sir John opened
the Coolgardie School of Mines.
The conclusion of these ceremonies may be said to mark
the end of Sir John Forrest’s association with Coolgardie, and at
the time of which we have been dealing, the town itself was but
a shadow of its former greatness. Ffowever, sufficient has been
shown to indicate the part Coolgardie has played in the history
of our State. That this was recognised by Lord Forrest will
have been seen by his remarks quoted during the course of this
essay. It was indeed fortunate for Western Australia that the
fabulous discoveries on the Coolgardie goldfield were made when
we had a statesman of the calibre of Lord Forrest to take the
fullest advantage of them.




A GREAT SON OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Drawn by Paddy Malloch, Loreto Convent, Nedlands.


dJtiE tyVaisz dbafi EiriE
BRUCE CLAUGHTON. Forrest High School.
On 26th January, 1903, at Mount Charlotte Reservoir, Kal-
goorlie, Sir John Forrest declared the Coolgardie water scheme
open “for the use of the people.” It was a day of rejoicing for
the thousands gathered at the ceremony, for they realised that
they had been set free from the dreaded shortage of life-giving
water. It was a day of triumph for Sir John Forrest, for during
the seven years that had passed since he had expressed his deter-
mination to give the goldfields an adequate water supply from
the Darling Ranges, his faith in the great scheme had never
wavered. Proudly he said :
“The promise then made to give the people on the Cool-
gardie goldfields ‘a river of pure water’ is today fulfilled. The
intervening period has been one of great anxiety. Delays have
occurred; difficulties have had to be surmounted; the most
virulent hostility and misrepresentations have had to be con-
tinually watched and defeated, but today, I and all those who
supported me, are able to rejoice that not only have we kept
our word, not only has our great faith in the future of these
goldfields been rewarded by the complete success of our enter-
prise, but, even more important still, we have completed a
great necessary humanitarian work, destined to ameliorate
the condition of life on these goldfields for the future.”
Before the completion of the water scheme the great extent
of country in and around Coolgardie had no permanent fresh
water. The rainfall was scanty and unreliable, and the hot, dusty
plains had suffered from prolonged droughts. The discomforts
and perils of water-shortage increased as the Goldfields grew in
population and prosperity. In nine years “an unoccupied and arid
wilderness” had changed into mining districts in which there were
about 5,000 people in the chief towns, Coolgardie (where the
population was 6,000), and Kalgoorlie (3,000). Nearly all water
required for domestic purposes, horses and stock, and the boilers
of machinery was obtained by condensing salt water. Drinking-
water, almost boiling as it came from the condensers, often cost
2/6 per gallon. Many thousands of pounds had been spent in
bores and tanks, but in spite of all efforts little relief was gained.
After inquiring into suggestions for overcoming the great
difficulties, the Government decided to adopt a scheme proposed
by Charles Yelverton O’Connor, Engineer-in-Chief for Western
Australia. He planned to deliver to the goldfields 5.000.000
gallons of fresh water daily, pumped from a weir on the Helena
River and conveyed through steel pipes. The cost was estimated
at £2,500,000, and the water was to be sold at only 3/6 per
1,000 gallons.


The scheme would be the largest of its kind in the world. To
many people it seemed impossible or fantastic, and far too costly
for the State’s small population. However, it was approved by
A TRAIN-LOAD OF PIPES FOR THE GOLDFIELDS WATER SCHEME.
several of the leading engineers in England. In spite of its bold-
ness, the criticisms and doubts, Sir John Forrest was convinced
that it would be successful. He was the chief inspiration behind
the Act of Parliament that gave authority for its construction..
Work was begun on the weir at Mundaring in 1898. About
80,000 cubic yards of concrete were used in the wall which was.
in length 755 feet, greatest height above the bed of the valley
100 feet, breadth at the base 85 feet, and at the crest 11 feet.
By June, 1902, the weir was completed, its storage capacity being
4,650 millions of gallons and catchment area 350,000 acres.
Eight pumping stations were built to lift the water from Mun-
daring, 320 feet above sea-level, to the greatest height of 1,630
feet at a place about 307 miles away; the water then gravitating
for about 43 miles to Kalgoorlie. From No. 1 station, about
four hundred yards down-stream from the weir, to No. 8 at
Dedari, the distance was 295 miles.
The construction of the pipe-line went on while weir and
pumping stations were being built. Pipes 30 inches in diameter
and about 28 feet in length were made at Maylands and Midland
Junction from imported steel plates. So that they would withstand
corrosion they were coated with a mixture of asphalt and tar and
surfaced with sand. Four years were occupied in uniting them
into a long line stretching for 351 miles from Mundaring to
Kalgoorlie.


Since the great scheme was opened in 1903 many people, all
over the world, have paid tribute to Sir John Forrest for his
vision, his courage, and his triumph over the many difficulties
and disappointments that he encountered during its construction.
To-day as we tell about its great success we realise how well he
has earned the honour expressed in words which he used when
in 1895 he urged Parliament to undertake the scheme:—
“Future generations will bless us for our far-seeing pat-
riotism : and it will be said of us, as Isaiah said of old, ‘They
made a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert’.”
A monument to John Forrest and C. Y. O’Connor.
John Forrest’s Prayer
MAUREEN DAVIES (Std. VI.). Clackline State School
At the opening of the Goldfields Water Scheme, on January
25th, 1903, with his eyes clouded and his voice tense with feeling.
Sir John Forrest uttered these words;
“In the midst of our rejoicing I bring to memory the builder
of this great work. I pray God that this river of pure water
may give health, comfort, and prosperity to all those who come
within its life-giving influence, and that it may prove a benefit and
a blessing to the Kalgoorlie Goldfields, and be far-reaching in its
influence for the good of all Australia. I now declare this great
work open for the use of the people.”


g.°k
JENNIFER JENKINS (Std. IV.).
East Canna State School.
Forrest was an explorer,
Born in our own fair State.
His first journey was taken
To determine Leichhardt’s fate.
He discovered and named Lake Barlee,
But Leichhardt, he failed to find:
Forrest named two mountains
Where now much gold is mined.
His second expedition
Was over the Nullabor Plain;
He found good pasture inland,
And then turned home again.
His last and main trip eastward
Was to reach the Telegraph Line;
He did, and all Australia
Acclaimed his work so fine.
Whenever we remember
This great explorer’s name,
We children of Australia
Pay tribute to his fame.
Forrest Man of Vision
WILMA MEAD (Science VM.). Perth Modern School.
They say that history repeats itself: And how true this
is! Down through the years it can be seen how men, strong in
faith and courage, came to their country’s aid during times of
trouble or re-establishment. And to Western Australia, when
the State was still young and undeveloped, came John Forrest.
His was a distinguished life, passing on from one glory to
another. Early in his career he had commanded an expedition
in search of the explorer Leichhardt, and later, as a result of
his achievements, led parties from Perth along the Great Australian
Bight to Adelaide and crossed Western Australia from Champion
Bay to the Overland Telegraph—two wonderful journeys. During
these explorations, John Forrest underwent severe hardships and
adversities, but never once did he falter. Many times his men
begged him to turn back to home and safety, but he steadfastly
pressed on, refusing to give way to such tremendous odds that
lay before. His unfailing courage and self-denial in the face of
duty indeed rank him with the greatest explorers of his time.


He had a deep faith in the greatness of the State and appreciated
her importance. He was able to see past the present into the
future, and during his term of office as Premier, progress was
outstanding throughout the State. The Goldfields pipe-line, the
railways and the Fremantle Harbour were planned during his
government, and he always encouraged progressive organisations
and developments. As a politician he was admired and respected
by his political rival's. The people placed their utmost confidence
in his decisions and always trusted him.
Such a man, holding high office and considerable power,
receives much praise and admiration, but Forrest throughout his
successful life was always his natural self, modest and unassuming,
a warm and trusted friend.
John Forrest, a great man, explorer and politician, lived a
rich and full life, working continuously for the advancement of
his loved State and his fellow-men.
It may truly be said of Lord Forrest that he could “ walk
with kings, nor lose the common touch.”
FORREST MEMORIAL, KING’S PARK
Drawn by Nigel Ward, Kent Street High School.


BRIAN LEMON Perth Boys’ High School:
Brave heart, one hundred years have passed,
Since first you graced this land.
Son of our soil, a soil so vast,
Your striving made it grand.
Explorer, statesman, sage and guide,
Your counsels strong and wise
Gave us a name to honour wide
Beneath these southern skies.
We shall remember you, your deeds of yore;
Before your fame we humbly bow
Striving to honour evermore,
Greatness in one full life enow.
The Trans-Australian Railway
BETTY LOWE (Class III.), 10 years. Correspondence Classes.
I live at Naretha, on the Trans-Australian Railway, and
■do my lessons by correspondence. This railway was built mainly
by the efforts of Lord Forrest. When he first tried to get this
railway built he was known as Sir John Forrest. He was then a
member for Western Australia in the Federal Parliament. The
railway was opened in 1917.
There is a station about 200 miles from here called Forrest,
in honour of Lord Forrest. Here, the aerodrome is situated, also
the hostel where passengers on the planes to' and from Western
Australia are catered for.
The Trans-Australian Railway has the longest straight line
in the world; it runs for 330 miles without a curve across the
Nlullabor Plain.
This railway has helped Western Australia considerably,
•especially in the war years when there were so many troops to be
transported, also army materials.
The people living along the Trans-Australian Railway receive
their supplies from a mixed goods train, known locally as the
"“tea and sugar” train. This train comes twice a week, and from
it we get our meat, bread, groceries, fruit and vegetables.
Foxes and dingoes are here, and cause damage in the fowl
houses if they get a chance. There are also a few kangaroos, and
of course the barking lizard, a funny little lizard that barks like a
dog when he is teased. Wild turkeys and emus are also here; this
year both are plentiful.
We must not forget the wild flowers, as they are a very pleas-
ant sight; at times the “ dongahs,” or water holes, are covered with
flowers. I think the Sturt Peas are the prettiest of all, as the
-flowers are bright red with black centres; although I have seen


a few pink and cream ones. There are also several kinds of
daisies, including the everlastings and the big purple ones with
yellow centres. The trees are mainly mulga and myall, but further
east there are no trees, only bluebush and saltbush.
I think Lord Forrest was a wonderful man for West Australia.
FORREST HIGH SCHOOL
DES GIBSON Forrest High School.
The imposing building in Mt. Lawley to be opened officially
during August of this year is the first part or block of the “Forrest
High School” and contains rooms for technical and scientific
subjects. The plans show that when the school is completed it
will comprise additional buildings required for the secondary
education of boys and girls between the ages of 12 and 16 years,
A SCHOOL NAMED AFTER A GREAT AUSTRALIAN
Forrest High School, Mt. Lawley, opened in 1947.
assembly hall, library and gymnasium. With grounds and gardens
it will cover an area of over five acres adjoining the Forrest Park,
which will be available as an extensive playing field.
Shortage of material and the housing needs of the people,
which must be given first consideration in building, have caused
delay in carrying out the complete plan for the school. However,
the boys who have the privilege of receiving instruction in the
technical and science block remember with pride that Lord Forrest,
whose honoured name has been given to the school, began his
career in a technical service. As a surveyor, explorer, and Western
Australia’s first Premier and greatest statesman he was always
a practical man. He planned wisely and accurately, and at many
places throughout the State are examples of splendid workmanship
of his engineers and tradesmen. May the patriotism and faithful-
ness of his life and work always be an inspiration to all children
in the State, and particularly to those who receive their education
in the Forrest High School.


Lord Forrest A Peer of the Realm
BARBARA TILL (Class V 3.). Perth Modern School.
John Forrest: the name comes down to us through the years,
unsullied, steadfast and glorious. This man —explorer, statesman,
peer of the realm—is surely Western Australia’s greatest son.
Undoubtedly his most romantic expedition was the one which
commenced at Geraldton. He and his brother led a small party
from Geraldton eastwards to the Overland Telegraph Line, which
stretches from Adelaide to Darwin. When they reached the “Over-
land” they turned south and ended their journey in Adehide,
PICTON CHURCH CEMETERY.
A quiet old bush churchyard shaded by gums and surrounded by the graces of
humble pioneers.”
Towards the end of his life, he was created a peer —the first
Australian-born peer. On the voyage to England to receivt his
honour at the hands of the King, he died at sea on September 3rd.
1918, aged 71. Though it was not granted to him to die ir the
land he loved, his body was returned to Western Australia t> be
buried at Karrakatta.
At one time proposals were made to transfer his body tc the
cemetery at Picton Church, where his parents and brother are
buried. Their white marble headstones are conspicuous in the
tiny graveyard where many of the graves boast only a woden
plaque with peeling paint and faded inscription. It is hard tc say
where this great man would have preferred to rest —among the
State’s honoured sons, in all their hollow glory, and stately tombs
disturbed by the rattle of trains —or in that quiet old bush chirch-
yard, shaded by gums and surrounded by the graves of hunble
pioneers.




Stf
Wholly set up and printed in Western Australia by
S, H. Lamb Printing House, Perth and Fremantle,
