

pern Ppm
.3pvS^
LORD’S DAY versus SABBATH;
A LETTER
TO THE
RIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
THE
REV. ISAAC NEW.
. \ N
Y fieis ott)E6tre fie, 'O SiSdffKaXos kcu 6 Kvpios' ical KaXws Xejere, eipu jap.
“Ye call me Teachee and Lokd : and ye say well; for so I am.”
A
. IGIvN
. c-U'OLLtL'iim:A
A 'v. A
'■ c :
MELBOURNE : W. FAIRFAX & CO., COLLINS-ST. EAST,
Gr. ROBERTSON, J. J. BLUNDELL, & S. MULLEN.
GEELONG: FRANKS & JACKSON. BALLARAT: A. T. BIETCHNELL.
CASTLEMAINE: C. E. GLASS. SANDHURST: J. N. MACARTNEY.
HOBART TOWN & LAUNCESTON : WALCH & SONS.
SYDNEY; SANDS & KENNY. ADELAIDE: E. S. WIGG.
Price Is.
1860.




PK EFAC E.
It would be a source of regret to the Author of this Letter if
he could conceive that it would give rise to any angry discussion ;
he would deprecate it exceedingly. For no such purpose has he
written, but rather to give an exposition of sentiments more or
less entertained by pious and devout individuals, both in this
colony and in England. It would not have been difficult for
him to have burdened his pages with quotations from authors,
with respect to whose names, his own is as nothing ; but he
would much rather leave his argument to its own validity, based,
as he believes it to be, on a legitimate interpretation of the
Word of God. On one point, contrary to his wishes, he has
felt it to be desirable to fortify himself from any erroneous
imputation, by the opinions of others. And, in the views he
has unfolded, he desires it to be observed, that every great truth
in the economy of divine revelation is untouched, and the
influence of every truth is unvitiated by any pernicious sentiment;
at least he thinks so. He is not, however, presumptuous enough
to affirm that there is no fallacy in his argument, and no error
in his views ; all he can say is, that at present he can discover
none. And if the subject can but be kept free from any irri-
tation, the statement of its two sides may contribute to place it
in a clearer light. Truth never suffers from friendly discussion,
and we may contend earnestly for the faith without quarreling


about it. Hence, the author would be grieved if he thought he
had in the slightest degree violated the law of Christian
courtesy and kindness; if so his heart did not mean it. He is
not, however, conscious that he has written a line on which he
cannot invoke with his whole soul the Divine benediction.
IST.B.—The author utterly disclaims anything offensive in the
use of the word “ Sabbatarian,” he has simply employed it to
avoid circumlocution.


LETTER.
My Lord,
It is for no vulgar purpose that I thus address you, and I
trust you will not regard my doing so as an impertinent freedom. I
cannot boast of the privilege of a personal acquaintance with you,
but from the testimony of others, and from your public life, I have
long cherished a high esteem for your character, whilst I entertain a
profound respect for your office and position. This is the guarantee
I offer that no sentence in this letter will arrest your attention,
which, from the spirit of it in reference to yourself, will awaken the
slightest feeling of unkindness towards its author,
A series of Lectures has recently been delivered in the city on the
Sabbath question, the first of which was given by yourself. This
perhaps is the principal fact which has determined the direction of
my letter. The gentlemen engaged in those lectures I highly regard
as ministers of Christ; I give them full credit for their conscientious
convictions ; while the manly avowal of their convictions is not to
be treated otherwise than with honour and respect. But yet, in the
course of those lectures, I think there was discovered a disposition
to cast a little odium and reproach on those who may venture to
entertain sentiments at variance with their own, and as if there was
something like a thought that such persons ought rather to be
identified with the enemies, than with the friends of the Christian
cause. But when we remember that there are, and have been, great
and good men, whose eminent piety, whose loyalty to Christ, whose
devotion to the truth, and whose consecration to the interests of
Christianity are beyond a suspicion, who have variously differed on
the subject of the Sabbath, such a fact ought to induce a little more
toleration in our estimates and opinions of one another. lam not
going, however, to controvert the lectures in question. The reports
in newspapers are not sufficiently accurate on which to base an
argument or rest a judgment, hence to conduct a process of
reasoning on such statements might lead to erroneous conclusions.
My object is rather to attempt an apology for those who differ from
our Sabbatarian friends, but who, while they differ, entertain senti-
ments which they believe to be as conservative of the interests of the
church, of religion, and of society, as those from whom they differ.
It is at all times irksome to a writer of any sensibility to speak of
himself, but I may be forgiven a few words at the outset, to prevent


anything like a charge of heresy, and to neutralize any insinuation
against the orthodoxy of my views. lam not one of those, my lord,
easily caught by newly broached doctrines ; from the character and
habit of my mind I am, perhaps, too apt to regard them with
misgiving. Novelty in religion has no charms for me. I firmly
believe in the Divine Authority of the Bible, in the plenary inspira-
tion of the Scriptures, in the inseparable connection between the
Old and New Testament, and in all the great doctrines ot the
evangelical economy, as propounded in the 39 Articles of your
Church, or in the Confession of the Church of Scotland, without of
course subscribing to all in the one or in the other. I may venture
to think that none of the gentleman engaged in those lectures have
deeper or stronger convictions of the truth of these doctrines than
myself; while those who sit under my ministry can bear testimony
to the prominence and distinctness with which they are exhibited in
my ministrations. If, then, I agree with my brethren on these great
points, I trust I may be allowed to differ from them on the Sabbath
question without incurring reproach. And devoutly do I pray, my
lord, that I may be preserved from writing a word inconsistent with
the revealed will of God, or at variance with the interests of truth.
I shall classify my remarks under specific divisions, that I may
work out my views as distinctly and as clearly as possible.
§ I.—THE DIVINE DISPENSATIONS.
It needs but a cursory perusal of the Scriptures in order to acquire
an impression that in the divine dealings with our race, God has
limited the revelation of his mind to certain dispensations, or
economies, by which is meant certain conditions of religious arrange-
ment, which he himself has superinduced, in connexion with which
he has communicated his will. It is sufficient to mention the three
principal ones, —the Patriarchal, the Mosaic, and the Christian.
When man had sinned, and had been condemned by his Maker, yet
in the midst of judgment he remembered mercy, and announced a
promise which to us seems vague and indefinite amid the clearer
brighter light with which we are surrounded, but yet sufficient to
supply a ground of faith, and to awaken a feeling of hope in the
bosom of our fallen ancestors. But it is obvious, with this promise,
a religious constitution of things was established, involving sacrifice
and other means, by which men might become reconciled to God,
and share in his favour and blessing; thus, in connexion with
this arrangement, God became accessible to man again for purposes
of friendly communion. This is evident from the narrative of Cain
and Abel, from the brief statement respecting Enoch, and from the
ampler records of Noah. Under this arrangement Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, with their immediate descendants, lived, which was
continued till the establishment of the Mosaic Institute in the


desert. But yet another dispensation had virtually commenced in
the covenant of God with Abraham, which, in harmony with the
divine method, was disclosed by degrees. Just, however, as the one
was gradually unfolding in meaning and import, the other was
gradually waning in importance and influence, till it was wholly
superseded and virtually abrogated by the complete development of
the former under the legislative mediation of Moses. What was
designed to be permanent in the first was taken up, amplified, and
carried forward to a wider significance; but what was simply
nothing more than a transient expedient lost its meaning and
obligation, and disappeared.
The Jewish economy was now established, —an economy more
elaborate, complicated, minute, and extensive than the former. Every-
thing pertaining to it was by divine prescription. God most signally
connected himself with it. Symbols, types, ceremonies, sacred
persons, sacred places, sacred things, and sacred services, together
with inspired prophets and anointed kings, were put into requisition
through a long course of years, as a medium for the expression of
the divine mind. Thus the Jews became the depositories and
guardians of divine truth, which increased in volume and clearness
as time rolled on, preparatory to the radiant effulgence which was
awaiting the world.
The history of the Jews along their chequered course had been
marked by various fortune, by great unfaithfulness, and by a
succession of judgments. So that when “ the fulness of time ”
arrived, the national mind had become enfeebled, the energies of the
people were broken, the voice of prophecy was silent, their religion
had lost whatever vitality it had ever possessed, and had merged
into a lifeless formalism. The commandments of God had been
made void by the traditions of the fathers, and the cabalistic inter-
pretations of the Rabbis. Everything, in fact, bore the symptoms
of decay, the marks of a drivelling superstitious dotage. It was on
the eve of vanishing away.
It was during this state of things the Messiah came. And
though a new dispensation virtually commenced with him, yet, as in
the case of Abraham under the Patriarchal, he was born while the
Jewish Constitution was in force. He was born under that law ;
he was subject to its conditions, he was obligated to meet its claims,
and to fulfil all righteousness,—a truth requiring to be ever kept in
mind, in order to a correct interpretation of his teachings and his
ministry. And it was not until he returned to heaven, and sent
down his Spirit on his disciples, by which they were to be qualified
to communicate the divine mind, that the new economy was fully
established. “ The kingdom of heaven ” was then come. The
volume of revelation became complete, the canon is now closed, and
no further light can we expect than what comes from the Sun of
righteousness, till its brighter radiance bursts on our vision amid the
b y


splendours of heaven. The economy of the Jews having thus
become antiquated, began to lose its validity, and to retire before
the commanding presence and authority of Christian truth, till
at length the catastrophe of their city and temple completed its
extinction. “ The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ.” Whatever, from the nature of things, was of
a permanent character under the former became incorporated in the
Christian system, but exhibited in wider relations, presented in a
clearer light, and sustained by other and far higher sanctions; but
whatever assumed the aspect of a temporary expedient, adapted to
given conditions, and designed for certain ends, was numbered with
the things of the past, never to be reproduced again, including its
oblations, and sacrifices, and holy days, and new moons, and
sabbaths; in fact, the entire range of its ceremonial observances.
And it is with a reference to one of these temporary things that I
differ from my brethren who plead for it a permanent continuance.
“ God spake in past times unto the fathers by the prophets, but in
these last times he has spoken unto us by his Son,” We are now
therefore shut up exclusively to the authority and teachings of
Christ.
§ 2.—THE JEWISH SABBATH.
But before I proceed to remark on the Mosaic institute of the
Sabbath, it is needful to direct some little notice to the passage in
Genesis ii. I—3. Here I would call attention to the circumstance
that these words refer to what took place at the close of the six
days’ work of creation, before God had entered into any arrangement
or covenant with man, so that whatever objections may be started
against Paley’s argument based on a prolepsis, yet the record is
proleptic after all, even on the theory of our Sabbatarian friends.
“ And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had
made : and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he
had made, and God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
because that in it he had rested from all his work which God had
created and made.” Have we then any thing here but the record
of a divine fact ? Have we any expression of the Divine will to
guide the conduct of men ? If so, where ? My lord, I ask these
questions in no captious spirit. I say again, where 1 And let it be
remembered that humanity had been just produced, the race was
just entering on its career, it was in a state of comparative infancy,
when everything pertaining to duty required to be clearly affirmed,
and not left to an inference from a mere statement of fact. Had man
never fallen, it is highly probable he would have regarded the day
which his Maker had thus remarkably signalized with feelings of
reverential interest. But afterwards his mind became averse to his
God; his understanding was darkened, and his perceptions, with
respect to everything involving moral and religious claim, became


obtuse. But in the new condition of probation which God
established, with its religious arrangements, we find no immediate
enactment of the Sabbath. And if there was no law, there could
be no obligation ; and if no obligation, no transgression. If we
point to the circumstance that during the antediluvian and post-
diluvian period we have no allusion to any Sabbath being observed,
we are told that this is mere negative evidence, on which little or
no reliance can be placed ; but on the supposition that there was
no law on the subject, no other kind of evidence was possible, hence
the total silence in reference to it amounts to a strong presumption
that there was no such law. lam not ignorant of the manner in
which it is attempted to neutralize the force of this argument by
parallel cases ; but they do not strike me as parallel; for in this
instance it should be remembered that we have references to pious
men, to Abel, to Enoch, to Seth, to Noah, to Abraham, to Isaac and
Jacob, together with many allusions to their devotions, their altars,
their calling upon God, and other modes of communion with him,
but not the vestige of a reference to any specified Sabbath during
this long period. The opinion based on the 4th of Genesis and
the 3rd verse, about “the end of the days,” as it is rendered, is
purely conjectural, and one conjecture may be as good as another ;
while the appeal made to the early division of time into weeks is
very precarious, and supplies a very insecure basis on which to rest
an argument, for time might have been divided into weeks without
any requirement of the seventh day being kept holy to the Lord.
lam not ignorant of the tendency in all of us, more or less, to look
at subjects through the medium of pre-conceptions ; but aware of
this tendency, I can only say, I have solemnly endeavoured to guard
against it.
Let me then turn for a brief space to the 16th chapter of Exodus,
on which no small amount of attention has been spent. All I can do
is just to give my interpretation of it. I think it is evident from the
4th and sth verse, that Moses had had some special communication
on this subject, though the whole of it may not be contained in these
verses, “ Then the Lord said unto Moses, behold, I will rain bread
from heaven for you, and the people shall go out and gather a
certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they will
walk in my law or no. And it shall come to pass that on the sixth
day they shall prepare that which they bring in, and it shall be twice
as much as they gather daily.” Combine with this the 23rd and
26th verses. “And he said unto them, this is that which the Lord
hath said,” —hath ordered, hath commanded, hath authorized, either
of which rendering is equally allowable, —“ this is that which the
Lord hath commanded,” when 1 but in the interview he had with
him, as stated in the 4th and sth verses, for there is no such com-
mandment in Genesis either given or implied, “To morrow is the
rest of the holy sabbath unto the Lord; bake that which ye will bake


to day, and seethe that ye will seethe, and that which remaineth over
lay up to be kept until the morning.” “ See for that the Lord hath
given you the Sabbath, therefore He giveth you on the sixth day the
bread of two days : abide ye every man in his place, let no man go
out of his place on the seventh day. So the people rested on the
seventh day.” I think the emphasis in this passage is on the words
“ hath given you the Sabbath,” intimating that this was the first ex-
pression of the Divine will respecting the duty of his people on the
seventh day. Such is a conclusion to which an unprejudiced mind
may come.
But, my lord, we are apt to take too much for granted; we get hold
of opinions which for a time have been current, and we proceed to
reason out from them certain conclusions, with a sort of triumph, as
if they were incontrovertible principles. Permit me, therefore, to offer
a few remarks suggested by the above passage.
1 st. It is well known that there is no language on earth, perhaps,
in which the definite article is used with greater precision and ac-
curacy, according to clearly defined rules, than it is in the Greek ; but
it is used with almost equal precision and accuracy in the Hebrew.
2nd Probably in nothing were the Translators of our admirable
version of the Scriptures more defective than in their knowledge of
the laws which regulate the use of the article. Hence in numerous
instances they have inserted the article where there is none in the
original, and have not unfrequently left it out where it is employed.
3rd. It is a rule in reference to the article, that when anything
previously indefinite or unknown has been explained so as to be
understood, it is afterwards specified by the use of the definite
article. I call attention to this rule, as we have a striking illustra-
tion in the above passage.
4th. The 23rd verse of this chapter is the first place in the Bible
where the term Sabbath is used, and where it is referred to as “ a
rest holy unto the Lord.” A Hebrew Concordance will satisfy any
person on this point.
sth. The word Sabbath is Hebrew. But as this is the first
chapter where the word occurs, it had not as yet acquired its
technical or definitely religious meaning. I submit then, whether
consistency does not demand, that in a translation its literal
meaning should be given. I have therefore assumed the right of
rendering it literally, in order to bring out the sense more distinctly.
It is also to be observed that in the original of the 23rd verse, two
words are found, Sabbath and Sabbathon, the latter of which is
intensive, having a stronger and more emphatic meaning than the
former. There are only nine other places in the Bible where it is
used. Two in Exodus, and seven in Leviticus, in which its intensive
force is clearly revealed. Gesenius renders it “ a great Sabbath.”
Dr, Lee takes no notice of its intensive character, but simply renders
it “a cessation, a rest, a time of rest.” Furst, in his Concordance,


gives us “ feria magna,” a great day of rest, or a great holy-
day. But as the word is an. abstract noun (see Nordtheimer’s
Heb. Gr., vol. i. p, 210, § 513), I prefer the phrase an “especial
resting.”
I give then the following rendering, which, as far as the use of the
article and the meaning of the words Sabbath and Sabbathon are
concerned, I submit as strictly literal. “ And he said unto them.
This is that which the Lord hath said, To-morrow is an especial
resting, a rest holy unto the Lord : bake that which ye will bake
to-day, and seethe that ye will seethe ; and that which remaineth
over lay up for you to be kept until the morning ; and they laid it up
until the morning as Moses bade, and it did not stink neither was
there any worm in it. And Moses said, eat that to-day ; for to-day is
a rest unto the Lord ; to-day ye shall not find it in the field. Six
days ye shall gather it, but the seventh day shall be a rest; in it there
shall be none. And it came to pass that there went out some of the
people on the seventh day to gather and they found none. And the
Lord said unto them, How long refuse ye to keep my command-
ments and my laws 1 See, for that the Lord hath given you (hath
appointed, hath instituted) this rest, therefore he giveth you on the
sixth day the bread of two days. Abide ye every man in his place,
let no man go out of his place on the seventh day : so the people
rested on the seventh day.”
Let it be observed, then, under what circumstances this passage
was recorded. God had commanded them, in the sth verse, to
gather on the sixth day twice as much as they gathered daily. The
sixth day came, they did as they were commanded, and the rulers
came and told Moses, for as yet they did not understand it. Moses
then proceeds to give the reason, and the gradation of thought is
worthy of being noticed. I. “ To-morrow is an especial resting—a
rest unto the Lord.” 11. The morrow comes, then said Moses “ Eat
that to-day, for to-day is a rest unto the Lord.” 111. The seventh
day is then specified as the day of rest, in the 26th verse. Six days
shalt thou gather it, but on the seventh day, which is or which
shall be a rest, in it there shall be none. The elipsis in this verse
may be supplied either by the present or future tense. In all the
above instances the definite article is not used. But after he had
fixed on a period of rest, explained its nature as a rest unto the
Lord, specified the day on which the rest should be kept, he then
concludes, “ See that the Lord hath given, hath instituted for you
this rest." Here naturally and grammatically the definite article is
employed, which has its demonstrative sense. You know, my lord,
whether this rendering and criticism be founded in truth. And I
appeal with confidence to my brethren who will candidly and
ingenuously investigate the interpretation as to its legitimacy and
correctness. My convictions are deep and strong, unenfeebled by
any misgiving or doubt. If so, to what other conclusion can we be


conducted but that it was at this, and at no anterior period, the
Sabbath was instituted as “ a rest holy unto the Lord.”
We turn then at once to the Decalogue. But here we are met by
a question which requires to be settled, before we can proceed. Is
the law of the Sabbath a moral law, or a positive institute ? A
positive institute becomes obligatory from the sole will and authority
of the lawgiver, and may be altered at his pleasure. But a
moral law involves obligation from its inherent rightness,
from the authority of conscience, reinforced by the authority
of God. It is the law of man’s being, it is inwrought into his
very constitution, it is written on his heart, so that if it were
possible to imagine the Supreme Potentate withdrawing himself
from the government of our race, man is so framed that there is an
avenging power in his soul, capable of rendering him intensely
miserable for this violation of the law of his nature. But can this
be said of the Sabbath ? That it is a positive institute, I think, is
evident from the fact, that reason of itself never could have
discovered that keeping a seventh day as a day of cessation from
secular toil, would be acceptable to God as a duty, apart from a
divine revelation. Besides, we find both Moses and the prophets
again and again identifying the Sabbath with sacrifices, oblations,
new moons, and appointed feasts, which are admitted not to have
been moral but positive. Lev. xxiii. ; 1 Chron. xxiii. 31; 2 Chron,
ii. 4; Isaiah i. 12—14; Hosea ii. 14. The Apostle also
classes the Sabbath days with shadows which have disappeared,
now that the great reality is come. The language, however,
of our Lord is enough, one would think, to settle the entire
question, when he says, “ The Sabbath was made for man,” was an
expedient for man’s benefit, “ and not man for the Sabbath.” But
man was made for moral government, to be in subjection to moral
law. It is difficult, in fact, to conceive how a righteous and holy
God could have made a rational, intelligent, responsible being
capable of rewards and punishments in any other way. That every
positive institute rests upon a moral principle no one denies, which
principle is that it is the duty of man to submit to the will
of his God. That, however, is widely different from asserting that
the requirement itself is moral. And to me it would be an
astonishment for any one to attempt to impose aj moral character on
the Sabbath, were it not for those inveterate prejudices, to which we
all are more or less liable, prompting us frequently to resort to very
questionable reasonings when we have a favourite dogma to
support.
But the morality of the Sabbatic institution has been inferred
from its place in the decalogue, written on tables of stone. There
was, however, much written on these tables not moral. “I am the
Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage.” That is not moral. “ I the Lord thy God


am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me ;
and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep
my commandments.” That is not moral. “ That thy days may be
long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.” That is not
moral. These were expressions of that sovereignty which was
intended to signalise the administration of the Divine government,
determined not by moral principles, though not inconsistent with
them, but by reasons derived from God’s own good pleasure. Why,
then, should there be any reluctance to admit that the law of the
Sabbath was not moral 1
Much has been said about the circumstances under which the
decalogue was given, and not a little rhetoric has been derived from
the burning mount, the lightnings, the thunderings, the blackness,
and darkness, and tempest, which accompanied that event, as if these
added anything to the authority and sanctity of the law ; not the
slightest particle, my lord. These sublime manifestations of the
Divine presence were not intended for the sake of the law ; but for
the sake of the people ; not to enhance in their estimation the im-
portance of the law, but to make a vivid impression on their minds
of the majesty and authority of the Lawgiver. Look at the facts of
the case. God had taken the Israelites into covenant with him.
They were to sustain to him an especial relation. He was to be not
only their God but their King. The constitution under which they
were to be placed was to be a Theocracy. They were to be in sub-
jection to his Government; and the awful exhibitions on Sinai were
intended to affect them with a sense of his terribleness and power,
and that he was not wanting in means to inflict punishment if they
should violate his requirements. And they trembled and feared before
him. Hence the Decalogue is rather to be viewed in its political
relation to that Theocratic economy than in its moral aspects, and as
supplying the great principles on which the whole system of Jewish
law was to be based.
But those who are so ready to resort to the grand and fearful on
Sinai, to invest the law with unusual solemnity and interest, seem to
forget that the law was given twice. The first tables of stone had
been broken. The people had fallen into idolatry. God was
displeased ; he threatened to destroy them ; Moses interceded ; God
repented him of the evil which he thought to do unto them in not
destroying them. But Moses supplicated again for the continuance
of the Divine presence, and he found grace a second time. Hence,
emboldened by success, he said, “ I beseech thee show me thy glory.
And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I
will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and I will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom
I will show mercy.” “ And Moses hewed two tables as at the first,
and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up into Mount


Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his hands the two
tables of stone. And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood
with him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord. And the
Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed the Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in goodness and
truth. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgres-
sion, and sin.” If the manifestations of the terrible at the first
giving of the law added anything to its authority, the milder mani-
festations at the second must have diminished from it. But not so.
If, in the one instance, there was that which tended to frighten and
alarm, in the other instance there was that which tended to
encourage and allure. If the one aspect of the Divine character
was calculated to inspire reverence and awe, in the other there was
everything to inspire confidence and love. It was in this manner,
through the blended influence of fear and affection, that God sought
to secure their obedience and promote their interest.
But, in order to bring out a clear satisfactory result on this
subject, it is needful to observe that positive institutes under the
Jewish law, deriving their authority from the sole will of the
legislator, and being prescribed with the utmost minuteness, required
an accurate performance of every part in order to acceptance; it was
not allowable at pleasure to alter any of their requirements. Take
an illustration from the Passover. A lamb of the first year without
blemish was to be sacrificed, its flesh was to be roasted, it was to be
eaten with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. If, then, instead of
a lamb without blemish, a sheep old and diseased had been offered;
if instead of its being sacrificed, it had been put to death in any
way; if instead of the flesh being roasted, it had been boiled; and
if instead of being eaten with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, it
had been eaten with leavened bread and sweet herbs, that would not
have been the Lord’s Passover, but a mere human device. In fact,
a violation of the prescribed ritual, in any part of it, would have
invalidated the whole. Just so in reference to the Lord’s Supper.
Bread is to be broken and eaten, and wine is to be drunk; but if,
from some superstitious scruples, water be preferred to wine, and
some other kind of food to bread, no matter how professedly devout
and conscientious the recipient may be, that would not be the Lord’s
Supper ; but it would be rather a making void the commandment of
the Lord, by a pure invention. Just so in reference to the
Sabbath.
Having cleared away some obstructions in the course of my
reasoning, the Sabbatic law claims attention. I wish it here to be
remembered that my argument is with those who plead for the
perpetual obligation of the fourth commandment. Let us look then
at that commandment. “ Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy. Six days shalt thou labour and do all thy work. But the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God ; in it thou shalt


not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-
servant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that
is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth and sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day;
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it.”
Such is the law. Observe then :
Ist. It requires the seventh day of the week to be kept as a day
of rest from all manner of work. It seems to me little less than
trifling with sacred things to say it does not. The testimony of the
Jews, for 3,000 years, is incontrovertible evidence as to the sense
they attached to the law. To say it requires only a seventh portion
of our time is equivalent to saying that any day of the week might
be adopted at pleasure. And is that the way the positive institu-
tions of Heaven are to be treated 1 The moment we depart from
the strict requirement of law, there is no end to our aberrations.
It should be remembered, however, that we have various statements
and references in other parts of the Pentateuch, as an interpretation
of the Sabbatic law, which interpretation is just as divine and as
binding as the law itself. Then,
2nd. The Sabbath was to be kept from evening to evening,—that
is from sunset to sunset, corresponding to six o’clock of our Friday
to six of our Saturday.
3rd. The morning and evening sacrifice offered every day of the
week was on the Sabbath to be doubled. Instead of one lamb,
there were to be two.
4th. The shewbread in the tabernacle was on that day to be
changed.
sth. There is a statement, also, to the effect that there was to be a
holy convocation, or assembly. It is difficult to determine anything
precisely with respect to these holy convocations. But from other
instances in which holy convocations are mentioned, it would seem
that they were identified with the worship of sacrifices and burnt
offerings. For after referring to the different periods when holy
convocations were summoned, Moses says, “ These are the feasts of
the Lord which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations to offer
an offering made by fire unto the Lord, a burnt offering and a meat
offering, a sacrifice and drink offerings, everything upon his day.”
Lev. xxiii. 37. The probability, therefore, is that the holy convo-
cation on the Sabbath was the one convened to the morning and
evening sacrifice. If so, it should be observed, that this could only
apply, after the Israelites entered Canaan, to those living in the
immediate vicinity of the tabernacle, and subsequently of the
temple, and not to those located in other and more distant terri-
tories in Israel. For no sacrifices were permitted to be offered
anywhere but in the place of public appointment. Consequently,
no holy assemblies could be lawfully convened. And it should be
remembered that other forms of divine worship are not specified as


occupying the Sabbath. Each one seems to have been left to
sanctify the Sabbath by the exercise of a private or domestic piety,
as his feelings and conscience might dictate. And in this manner
the day was to be “ a rest holy to the Lord and honourable.”
6th. Among the prohibitions on this day, was baking, boiling, or
cooking food, the lighting of a fire, the gathering of sticks for
that purpose, or any manner of work.
7th. It was commanded that “ every man should abide in his
place on the Sabbath, that no man should go out.” It is not
improbable, that it was the extreme irksomeness of this restraint,
which led at a subsequent period to the ecclesiastical regulation,
permitting a journey of 2000 cubits, something less than an English
mile, (Acts i. 13.) But as this formed no part of the divine
enactment it is of no importance in our argument.
Bth. The penalty for violating the Sabbath was death.
9th. The Sabbath is also mentioned by Moses and Ezekiel as a
sign between God and the children of Israel for ever.
Such then was the law of the Jewish Sabbath, and we maintain
that those who plead for the perpetual obligation of the fourth
commandment, are shut up by necessity to its divine interpretation
and regulations. It will not do for them to take as much of the law
as they like, and leave out as much as they like. They must take the
whole or none. How then do they act in the matter 1 let us see.
Ist. They change the day from the seventh to the first of the
week. For this change Dr, Chalmers says, “we can find no
positive enactment,” of course he means no positive divine enact-
ment,'* and on the ground taken by our Sabbatarian friends
there is no such enactment.
2nd. They change the time of the day, which was from sunset to
sunset, to the period from midnight to midnight, and this they do
equally without “ positive enactment.” But some, as Jonathan
Edwards, for instance, adhered to the Mosaic law on this point.
3rd. They take away the morning and evening sacrifice; the
change of the shewbread; and the holy assembly, as distinguished
among the Jews.
4th. They do away, partially at least, with its prohibitions, to
cook anything, to light a fire, or to gather up sticks for that
purpose. For I apprehend none of them would go so far as to say
that it is now sinful to light a fire, or to cook a breakfast. They
may plead necessity. I deny the necessity, except in cases of
affliction. It might be very inconvenient with our habits. But no
* It is but right I should state, while I take advantage of this concession of the
Dr., that his three eloquent sermons on the Sabbath, are in harmony with the views
of those friends from whom I differ. It is enough for my purpose that he says,
“ we no positive enactment for this change.” But he adds, “we can quote the
uncontrolled observation of it, down from the period of the Apostolic I think
I can make it evident that in this he was mistaken, and that (his'’is one of the
gratuitous assertions so often made on this subject.


matter, God demands a sacrifice of our convenience when he is to
be served and his law is to be obeyed.
sth. They do away with its significant meaning. For it was to
be a sign of the covenant relationship between God and his people.
But as our Sabbatarian friends regard the law as binding on wicked
men; what sign can it be to them 1 Of a covenant relationship 1 But
there is none. That such a relationship is possible, if they believe
in Christ, is readily admitted. But so long as they continue wicked
and unbelieving there is no such relationship. And yet they con-
tinue obligated to a law which to them has no significant meaning.
6th. They do away with the penalty. For none of them, I
presume would assert that God has delegated to any power on earth,
authority to inflict death for breaking the Sabbath. But if there
be no penalty what becomes of the authority of the law 1 And if
there be no authority, where is the obligation 1 And when all these
things are taken away from the law, how much of it remains, my
lord ? Remember a Sabbath-day to keep it holy. Six days shalt
thou labour, but a seventh portion of thy time thou shalt rest.
Now, I ask, is this the way that the clearly defined institutions of
heaven, to which God attached so sacred an interest, and such a
solemn importance, are to be frittered away by human caprice with-
out any “ positive enactment.” But if the Sabbatarians claim the
right of doing this without any such enactment, then the Jews had an
equal right, and if they had such a right to alter that constitution of
things which Moses was commanded to construct most accurately
according to the pattern showed to him in the mount, just as the
fancy of each might dictate, then what became of the validity of the
divine requirements 1 Such are some of the conclusions to which,
as it appears to me, we are legitimately conducted, on the assumption
of the perpetual obligation of the fourth commandment. In fact, I
cannot see how we can be consistently released from being “ debtors
to do the whole law,” and thus becoming entangled in all the
liabilities of that Judaism against which Paul, throughout his
apostolic course, contended in most strenuous warefare.
\ 3.—THE ABROGATION OF THE MOSAIC CONSTITUTION
AS AN ECONOMY OF LAW.
I apprehend, my lord, there will be no question among those
from whom I differ with respect to the subject of my letter, as to
the abrogation of the ceremonial institute, or of the social polity of
the Jews ; but who yet may surrender themselves to some little
amazement and alarm at an attempt to prove the abrogation of the
decalogue. I frankly avow, however, that this is my attempt ; my
purpose is to supply that “ positive enactment,” which in one point
Dr. Chalmers denies, and in seeking to attain my purpose I shall
not travel beyond the Record, though I may adduce the opinions of
some eminent men, whose piety, talents and reputation may preserve


me from a little odium, as if I Avas broaching some unheard-of
heresy. But I wish it to he distinctly understood, that I seek no
support from their opinions ; if I cannot sustain my position by a
fair legitimate interpretation of the Avord of God, let my argument
go for Avhat it Avill be Avorth, which will be just nothing.
I must return again for a few moments to the character of the
decalogue. It has been called the moral law. This phrase may
be open to some demur. It is not a scriptural, but a theological
one, in order to distinguish it from the ritual ordinances, and civil
laws of the Jews. It would seem, however, to convey the idea, and
it is not unfrequently employed as if it involved the idea, that it
embodied the sum and substance of moral law. But there are
moral requirements which are not included, and by no possible
ingenuity can be made to dome under any of the prohibitions of the
decalogue. The fact is that they are but modifications of moral
law, adapted to given conditions, and specified relations. The
conditions may change, and the relations may change, and if so the
formal expressions of the law may change. The great moral law
is, “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul,
and mind, and strength, and thy neighbour as thyself.” This is
immutable and eternal. We cannot conceive of any change or
termination with reference to it so long as God remains what he is,
or intelligent and responsible beings continue what they are. The
ten commandments, however, are but adaptions of this law to special
circumstances, and as the circumstances may change, this form of
law may change. It will not be supposed, I presume, that the
decalogue will have any force in heaven. What ! where there is no
polytheism to solicit confidence, or idolatrous worship to ensnare the
heart, or disposition to indulge in blasphemy. It will not be pre-
tended that one day will be set apart there for cessation from the
fatigues of toil, and for the purpose of spiritual improvement; or that
the fifth and eighth commandment will have much validity, where all
domestic and conjugal relations will cease ; or that there will be any
necessity for the sixth, the seventh, the ninth, and tenth, in a
world where all is pure and perfect love. The moral law is one
thing, the form and expression of it, for given purposes and under
given conditions, is another, but they are often confounded. And
it is with reference to its form, considered simply as a code of law,
that we maintain that the decalogue is changed, superseded,
virtually abrogated, and is no longer binding. The reasons for this
will appear more clearly afterwards.
exception, refer to overt acts. The exception is the tenth which
pertains to one class of our desires, and that a limited one, embraced
within the sphere of selfish cupidity. The penalty of violation was
death. Idolatry was punished with death. Blasphemy with death.
Sabbath-breaking with death. Disobedience to parents with death.


Adultery with death. Murder with death. In fact it was the
ministration of death. No cognizance, however, was taken of the
thoughts or intentions as a ground for punishment. The law was
satisfied if the outward conduct was conformable to its precepts. On
this point considerable mistakes have been committed, and from the
brighter light of the Christian revelation, attempts have been made
to give to the ten commandments an extension of meaning, which
the phraseology will not admit, and in which, I am persuaded, the
Jew in his state of rudimental training, could discover nothing but
what had a bearing on his external life. The proper view, therefore,
to be taken of the decalogue, appears to be that which considers it as
simply intended to lie at the basis of that peculiar theocratic system
of government which was designed as preparatory to a better and a
purer economy to come.
Hence, there are many passages in the Old Testament which
intimate that the mosaic constitution was but a temporary one ; and
that it was to give place, on the coming of an illustrious Being,
variously predicted, who should be invested with mysterious authority
and power to set up another kingdom, more spiritual in its nature,
and more heavenly in its character, tendency, and results. And here,
my lord, I must trouble you with a variety of references, which shall
be as brief as the importance of the subject will allow, “ The sceptre
shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come” (Gen. xlix. 10) ; intimating that when the Shiloh
came, the sceptre and legislative authority which, in some sense, had
been identified with Judah, were to pass into other hands, “ I will
raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee,
and will put my words in his mouth ; and he shall speak unto them
all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him ” (Deut. xviii. 18, 19) ; conveying the
idea that Moses, the prophet and lawgiver of Israel, at some future
period was to retire before the presence of another prophet and law-
giver, whose words and commands were to be divinely authoritative
and to be final. References might also be made to the 2nd, 22nd,
72nd, and 110th Psalms; to Isaiah ix. 6-8, xi. 1-9, xlii. 1-4, xlix.
6 ; to Jeremiah hi. 16, 17 ; to Ezek. xxxiv. 20-31 ; Dan. ix. 24-27.
But the passage to which I would refer more especially is the one in
Jeremiah xxxi. 31—34, and I do so because I shall have to refer to it
afterward, inasmuch as it has been appropriated by Paul in support
of the truth to which my argument refers. %
In coming to the New Testament, John, referring to Christ, says,
“ the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.” Christ said, “ the law and the prophets were until John
clearly implying that the appearance of John marked a new era, when
some great change was to take place in reference to “ the law and
the prophets.”


But, perhaps, we shall acquire a distincter view of these passages
by considering those statements in the Epistles which bear more
directly on the subject. It is desirable, however, here to observe
that the term “ law ” is employed by the apostle in various senses ;
but when he uses it in reference to the Mosaic code, he speaks of it
as a whole, making no distinction between moral, political, or
ceremonial, but regarding it as the one volume of legislation, on
which the Israelitish economy was based, and by which, as a people,
they were governed. My object, therefore, is to show that the
decalogue was included in that judaic law which the gospel super-
seded.
I will begin then with the passage in 2 Cor. hi., premising that in
each passage to which I refer I shall simply advert to the salient
points bearing on my subject, leaving it to the reader to attest by
his own investigation the correctness of my statements. In the
above chapter then, the apostle is speaking of “ the law written and
engraven in stones,” —surely by this expression he means the deca-
logue,—and he calls it “ the ministration of death, the ministration
of condemnation,” in contrast to “ the ministration of the Spirit, and
the ministration of righteousness.” The former he intimates had a
glory while it continued, but the latter far exceeds it in glory, so
much so that the former fades away before it. Then he adds, “if
that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remaincth is glorious.” Then in the following verse he says, “ the
children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that which
is abolished.” What terms can be more explicit ?
The Galatian churches were composed principally of Gentiles.
They had been planted by the apostle Paul, for whom they cherished
a most ardent affection. But after he had retired from them
Judaising teachers came, disseminated among them pernicious senti-
ments, by which they sought to enslave them under bondage to the
Jewish law. They were only too successful. By this means they
were seduced from the simplicity of the faith in which they had been
taught. This was a source of distress to Paul, who wrote to them
his letter of expostulation and rebuke. The whole of his epistle has
a bearing on my subject, but I can only advert to a few passages.
Take then his statement in chap. iff. 23-25, “ But before faith came
we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should
afterwards be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after
|hat faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.” As to
whether the word schoolmaster is the best rendering here, it is not
needful to my purpose to determine. The question is, what was
this schoolmaster ? The apostle says, the law ; and that he means
the decalogue is evident, from the preceding verses. But he says
we arc no longer under this schoolmaster. In the 4th chapter he
pursues the same train of thought, and introduces his remarks by an


illustration wliicli he derives from the state of a heir during his
minority, who differs nothing from a servant but is under tutors and
governors, until he arrives at maturity. He then applies this illus-
tration, and says, “ Even we, when we were children, were in bond-
age under the elements or rudiments of the world.” These rudi-
the next verse are called “ weak and beggarly.” He uses
a similar expression in Colossians, and intimates that these rudi-
ments consist in ordinances, with reference to which he says,
“ Touch not, taste not, handle not, all of which perish in the
using.” Now the question arises here, why were these rudiments
called rudiments of the world 1 We have already intimated that
the Mosaic arrangement was a theocracy based on a worldly model.
It was a secular economy, a worldly commonwealth, even its sanc-
tuary was called a worldly sanctuary, denoting at least its temporary
transient character. As such it was distinguished by a compre-
hensive code of enactments, numerous, diversified, and most
minute, constituting a yoke which was difficult to be borne. These,
however, were the rudimental means by which God was seeking to
train and educate his people for something higher, purer, nobler,
and more permanent. When, therefore, the “ fulness of time ”
arrived, “ God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under
law, to redeem them that were under law, in order that we might
receive the adoption of children.” “ Wherefore thou art no more a
servant but a son,” Thus intimating that the rudimentary dis-
cipline had given place to a higher state of knowledge, privilege,
and blessing. After, therefore, they had known God, he accuses
the Galatians of turning again to the weak and beggarly elements
to which they desired to be in bondage. What possible conclusion
then can be legitimately drawn, than that, in the judgment of the
apostle, the Mosaic constitution had been set aside, and was no
longer in force.
But take the apostle’s allegory in the same chapter, by which this
conclusion is corroborated. Abraham had two sons, one by a
bondmaid, and the other by a free-woman. These represent two
covenants, the former the binaitic covenant which gendereth to
bondage, corresponding to Jerusalem in the time of the apostle,
which was in bondage with her children. But the free-woman
represented the heavenly Jerusalem which is the mother of all that
believe in Christ. But what saith the Scripture 1 “ Cast out the
bond-woman and her son.” Now, I submit, what can this mean,
but that the Sinaitic covenant is done away, and cannot be per-
mitted an identification with the Christian covenant. “So then
we are not children of the bond-woman but of the free.” We are
not under the old covenant, but under the new. “ Stand fast
therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free,” —
which you enjoy under the new covenant, “and be no more


entangled with the yoke of bondage;” as if he had said, be no more
enslaved beneath the yoke of the old, which neither the Jews nor
their fathers where able to bear. Other reinforcements of this
conclusion might be drawn from the sth and 6th chapters of the
same epistle, but we forbear.
But let us pass on to that wondrous epistle to the Hebrews,
which commences with the statement that Christ is the final
Revealer of the Divine mind. “ God who at sundry times and in
divers manners, spake in times past unto the fathers by the
prophets,, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he hath appointed Heir of all things.” From this point the
apostle starts forward in a strain of cogent eloquent irrefragable
reasoning, to show the infinite superiority of Christ to angels, to
Moses, and to Aaron, from whom the Jewish constitution derived
its importance and glory, and the object of which is to exhibit the
corresponding superiority, in every respect of Christianity to
Judaism—that worn out, effete, decaying and obsolete economy
which was on the eve of vanishing away. Passing by many
incidental allusions, in coming to the 7th chapter, we find it stated,
“ That the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the law,” which is called the “ law of a carnal
commandment.” “For verily there is a disannulling of the com-
mandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness
thereof. For the law made nothing perfect.” Compare Rom. viii. 3.
There is surely something like “positive enactment” here in
reference to “disannulling.” But in the Bth chapter, after alluding to
the “better covenant,” he contrasts it with the “old covenant” or
dispensation, which was not faultless, for had it been so no second
would have supervened. But that being defective, “ The Lord saith,
the days come when I will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah, not according to the covenant
that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by
the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt.” Then in the
10th chapter, after adverting to the grand purpose of Christ’s
coming, he says, “he taketh away the first that he may establish
the second.” Now what was that first covenant ? Did it not include
the decalogue ? Why not 1 It is called by Moses, Exod. xxiv. 8,
“ The book of the covenant,” and as such, written and engraven in
stones, it was enclosed in the ark, on which account it was called
“ the ark of the covenant.” If that does not teach the entire
supersession of the first by a second, what can it possibly mean 1
But in winding up his great argument, he concludes by that
remarkable passage of unusual force, beauty, and eloquence, “ ye are
not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned
with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the
sound of a trumpet and the voice of words ; which voice they that


heard entreated that the word might not be spoken any more :
but ye are come unto Mount Zion, unto the city of the living God,
and unto the heavenly Jerusalem.”
Now, what can be possibly understood when he says we are not now
come “to Mount Sinai, but are come to Mount Zion,” but that we
are not now under that economy of law and terror, but under an
economy of deliverance and love. Continuing, however, his remarks,
he says, “See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they
escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall
not we escape if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven ;
whose voice then shook the earth ; but now he hath promised
saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.
And this word, yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things
that are shaken as of things that are made, that those things which
cannot he shaken may remain." “ Wherefore we have received a
kingdom which cannot be moved.” We have come under a con-
stitution conclusive and final. And in the light of these statements
take other passages,—the one in Ephesians about the “ law of
commandments contained in ordinances being abolished,” and in
Colossians, in reference to the “ handwriting contained in ordinances
being blotted out, nailed to the cross, and taken out of the way ; ”
and in the seventh of Romans, about the woman being loosed from
the law of her husband when the husband is dead. “ Wherefore ye
also,” says the Apostle, “are become dead to the law by the body of
Christ.” And again, “now we are dead to the law wherein we were
held, that we should not serve in the oldness of the letter, but in
newness of spiritand again, “ye are not under the law but under
grace.” If then these passages do not teach the virtual abrogation
of the decalogue, as a form of law under the present dispensation of
religion, to me there is no meaning in words, and I feel myself lost
amidst the bewildering ambiguities of a fluctuating uncertainty,
hopeless of any definite result.
Our Sabbatarian friends, however, it is probable, will admit that
the Mosaic law is abolished as a covenant of works, but not as a
“ rule of life.” But what is meant by this 1 The fact is, this and
such like phrases get stereotyped in our theological creeds, and
theological books ; they pass current from generation to generation,
by which they acquire a sort of sanctity almost divine, without being
at all questioned, until it is regarded as approaching to a profane
audacity to dispute their propriety. But that the decalogue is
invested with the high distinction of being a rule of life, I do
nevertheless dispute.
In the first place as a “ rule of life” it is incomplete. Let us for
a moment glance at the people to whom this law was given. They
had just emerged from a state of bondage,—a bondage which had
continued through a long series of years. They had been cruelly
oppressed, crushed down, till they had become awfully degraded.


When brought out of Egypt, therefore, they were a rude, illiterate,
uncultivated, undisciplined and wayward race. God had taken them
to be his people, whom he had to train, by the most appropriate
means, to order, and to obedience to Him as their king. He had to
coerce them by power, intimidate them by threatenings, and punish
them by the severest judgments. Nothing therefore but the plainest,
simplest, most authoritative commandments could they understand.
Hence he gave them the decalogue, as the basis of his entire code,
in such a manner as to rouse their fears and awe them to submission.
Let us then look at the law in this light. We shall leave out for
the present that relating to the sabbath. It prohibits polytheism,
idolatrous worship, the profane use of God’s name, disobedience to
parents, murder, theft, adultery, false witness, and selfish cupidity.
Three of these prohibitions have a reference to the relation the
Israelites sustained to God; and the remainder to the relation they
sustained to one another, as members of the same commonwealth.
By means of this rudimental outline of law God brought them, so to
speak, under an educational institute, which was gradually sup-
plemented by other instructions conveyed through the medium of
the prophetical office, along the course of ages, as preparatory to a
final development of his will. It is, however, with the decalogue we
have here more especially to do. And can it be pretended that these
commandments cover the whole range of our moral obligations. It
will not do to carry back with us in thought the light of the New
Testament and endeavour to draw from them meanings for which we
are indebted to subsequent revelations, as many commentators, in
my opinion, have erroneously done. But we must take them in the
sense which the terms obviously bear, and in which they would be
understood by the Jews. If so, then I ask is not this code of laws
as a rule for us, living under this dispensation of superior light and
knowledge and glory, defective; is it not incomplete 1 According
to the apostle it was not faultless ; for God finding fault w r ith it set
it aside by another covenant, a far better and more perfect one. But
if by thus endeavoring to put the decalogue in what I conceive its
true light, it would be an intense grief to my spirit, were it to be
insinuated that I am attempting to cast a slur upon it, or to dis-
parage it in the relation it sustained to the ancient dispensation.
God forbid that I should do it. Bather let my right hand forget its
cunning than that I should knowingly write a line that would have
that effect. I reverence God, my lord; and I reverence his word
I trust with the profoundest homage ; and I hope I have religious
sensibility enough to tremble at the very thought of deliberately
recording a word that would in the slightest degree reflect upon any
thing which he has done. The decalogue, as an expression of
Jehoval’s legislative wisdom, stood alone; it was solitary in its
pre-eminence; there was nothing like it in the world. It was in-
vested with a glory above all that was human, and in fact, at the


time it was given above all that was divine. It was a new revelation
to humanity, of Divine will. But yet, as a “ rule of life” to us, it
fades away into darkness in comparison with the brighter light which
is radiating around us, from Him who is the sun of righteousness,
and who is our greater teacher and lawgiver. Using the expression
of the apostle, “It has no glory by reason of the glory that
excelleth.” But
Secondly: as a rule of life it is needless. Surely we are still in a
state of most imbecile pupilage if, after three thousand years, we
have not reached a state of fitness for something higher, as a rule of
moral conduct, than the mere rudiments of the decalogue. If so,
the prophets have prophecied in vain, and Christ’s visit to our earth,
as a Great Teacher, has been in vain. “ Christ was the end of the
law for righteousness to every one that believeth.” It may be
interpreted to mean that Christ fulfilled the law, and brought in a
righteousness by which ail that believed may be justified. That may
be true as far as it goes. But lam convinced it means something
more ; and that something more is, that he put an end (reXos) to the
Mosaic constitution of law, which involved men in condemnation,
and not only introduced another constitution, under which men
might be declared righteous, and thus be justified, but also be made
righteous and thus be sanctified, according to the terms of the new
covenant, “ I will put my laws into their minds, and in their hearts
will I write them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no
more.” If so the decalogue is superseded both as a law of works,
and as a “ rule of life,” by the introduction of another and a higher
law. The Jewish dispensation, as it has been already intimated, was
but temporary and preparatory ; it looked forward, it anticipated a
better one, in the presence of which it was to pass away. Not only
was the economy “ worldly,” and its statutes, ordinances, and laws
rudimental in their character, but its promises and threatenings, its
rewards and punishments were secular in their aspect. In fact, its
entire polity was just such as might have been expected under a
Theocratic constitution, of which God was their king. Hence a vail
was upon the spiritual moralities of religion, as well as upon the
spiritual doctrines of religion. The error of the Jews was that all
this was to continue, so that even until this day, though it be done
away in Christ, yet “ renmineth the same vail untaken away in the
leading of the Old Testament.” They therefore anticipated that
when the Messiah should come, it would be to confirm that con-
stitution more thoroughly, to establish it more firmly, to invest it
with greater splendour, and restore it to them, with far greater
privileges than they had lost; while he himself would rule over
them in visible pomp and majesty and power, so as to awe all their
enemies into submission at his feet. But because he came for
another purpose, and to set up a state of things widely different from
theirs, they rejected him and put him to death. His kingdom was


not of this world, it was heavenly, spiritual, and eternal; it was to
be set up, not on a national platform, but in human hearts, in order
to control all the spiritual elements of their being. His laws were
not such as were merely suited to a secular system of policy, but
higher, purer, more spiritual, and more comprehensive in their
relations, requirements and bearings, so as to mature men for the
perfections of heaven.
Let us then look at him in his legislative character, and for this
purpose we turn to his wonderful sermon on the mount. It is here
we see him, not only like unto Moses, but greater than Moses. “It
was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill: and whosoever
shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment; but I say unto you,
That whosoever is angry with his brother without, cause shall be in
danger of the judgment.” It is needful here to observe that in all
these passages the I is emphatic, more strongly marking the
contrast between the former legislator and himself as the new
legislator. “It was said of old time, Thou shalt not commit
adultery; but I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman
to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his
heart.” “It was said of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself;
but I say unto you, Swear not at all.” That this refers to''the third
commandment there can be no question,—a commandment which
simply prohibits false swearing, but Christ prohibits all swearing.
It was said, “An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth ; but I say
unto you, That ye resist not evil.” It was said, “Thou shalt love
thy neighbour and hate thine enemy; but I say unto you, Love your
enemies,” In the same tone of legislative authority he continued
his discourse, inculcating many things unknown to the law of Moses,
and concluding with the words, “ Whosoever heareth these sayings
of mine and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which
built his house upon a rock. And every one that heareth these
sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish
man, which built his house upon the sand.” To what then does this
language amount, but this, —Those were the commandments of
Moses, but these are my commandments. Ye are no longer under
the law of Moses, but under my law. Which then are we to take
for our guidance ? the former or the latter ? Which, I ask, is most
in harmony with the nature and genius orthe Christian Constitution ?
the ruder and more defective one of Moses, or the more spiritual and
complete one of Christ ? Obey the law of Christ, and there is no
occasion for the law of Moses. For he that is not angry with his
brother, is not likely to kill him. He that looketh not on a woman
with impure desire, is not likely to commit adultery. He that
sweareth not at all, is not likely to swear falsely. And he that
resisteth not evil, is not likely to retaliate evil for evil. In this
strain of legislative right, and of calm dignified authority, the Saviour
taught throughout the whole of his ministry, and concluded that


ministry in his final discourse with the pathetic but impressive
words, “If ye love me, keep my commandments ; he that hath my
commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me. If ye
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love.”
And if we turn to the writings of the apostles, who were inspired
by the Spirit of Christ, and whose injunctions are virtually the
injunctions of Christ, it is interesting to observe how they have
amplified and increased the moral requirements binding on men.
Take the law relating to the domestic relations, which in the
decalogue simply prohibits filial disobedience, but in the apostolic
code, while it still enforces the same obedience, but on another
ground, yet it branches out so as to include the duty of parents to
their children, of husbands to their wives, and wives to their
husbands, of masters to their servants, and of servants to their
masters. Will any one say that all this was in the decalogue %
Where ? The decalogue says “ thou shalt not commit adultery,”
but the Christian law takes in all the forms of fornication, lascivious-
ness, uncleanness, and sinful desire. The Mosaic law says “ thou
shalt not stealbut Christianity comprehends within the range of
its prohibitions all the modifications of unrighteous dealing in the
transactions of man with man. The ninth commandment says
“thou shalt not bear false witness.” The apostolic rule of life
forbids calumny, slander, censoriousness, backbiting, whispering,
all the forms of evil speaking which might tend to the detriment of
another. The tenth commandment says “thou shalt not covet
but Christianity gives to this sin a new character, and fixes upon it
the brand of idolatry, thus stigmatising it as base and as brutish as
that of worshipping stocks and stones, while it enforces its prohibi-
tions against it by a statement of the perilous consequences of it to
individuals and society. “ For the love of money is the root of all
evil : which while some have coveted after they have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.”
In fact, take any part of the Mosaic law which involved in itself a
moral, and consequently a permanent principle, and we find it in
the Christian scriptures carried forward to a farther reach, to an,
ampler development, so as to strike at the very root of all the kinds
and modifications of sin in the heart, the thought, the speech, as well as
the actions of men. If therefore it were possible for the decalogue
to be extinguished to-morrow, though we should lose an important
link in the chain of the unfoldings of the divine mind, yet as to all
the purposes of the moral life we should not lose a jot or tittle, for
we have it in sublimer forms and in more spiritual relations. Why
then be afraid to admit that the Mosaic law has been superseded by
the Christian law, and virtually abrogated. This is but in harmony
with God’s ways in other parts of his proceedings. Antecedent
revelations have been superseded by subsequent revelations ; ante
cedent arrangements by subsequent arrangements; antecedent


prophecies by their fulfilment, and antecedent types by their
antitypes. Why, then, should it be deemed strange that antecedent
laws should be superseded by subsequent laws 1 So peculiar indeed
is this to the entire method of the Divine government, that was it
not so in the sphere of religion, it would be an anomaly in the
divine administration. In short, everything in the divine economies
indicates a moving on to perfection, and as the more “perfect
comes that which is in part is done away.” The present, there is
reason to believe, is the completion of the divine dispensations on
earth, though it be but preparatory to an eternal one. All that is
permanent in its nature will be carried forward in heaven to its
highest state of perfection, while what is temporary and peculiar to
earthly relations will disappear for ever.
Were it not that this letter is likely to exceed all due dimensions,
it would not be difficult, my lord, to supply illustrations of this
principle in the divine method from every department of nature
and life. But for the sake of brevity I would just advert to the
history of nations, in which, in their first rude and elementary state,
corresponding to the history of the Jews, laws are needed adapted
to their condition, which, as those nations increase in population,
advance in civilization and culture, and become more complicated
in their relations, requires new and more suitable laws, by which
the former are gradually superseded and virtually abrogated. The
history of England might furnish abundant evidence in proof of
this assertion, if space permitted. The tendency of these remarks
is to shew that those who plead for the perpetual obligation of the
decalogue, plead for a strange fact in the constitution of things.
And in doing so confound principle with law, what is immutable
and eternal with what is temporary and expedient, relating to
conditions, circumstances and relations. That the moral principles
of the decalogue will remain immutable and for ever no one denies,
but that code of law in which those principles are embodied may
change, and in my opinion has changed, because it was incomplete
and defective, and under this higher economy is needless, both as
a covenant of life, and as a rule of life.
Permit me here, my lord, to adduce the opinions of three or four
Theologians whose piety is still odorous in the churches, and whose
character is above suspicion as to anythiag heretical in their creed.
But I wish it to be distinctly understood that I do not quote their
opinions as authorities in this matter; my appeal is to “thelaw
and the testimony; ” if I write a word, or record a sentiment that is
not corroborated by this supreme “judge in all controversies,” let
it pass for ever into the oblivion it deserves.
The first author to which I refer is Bunyan; he says, “ I say, as
to that, the nature of that law is moral, but the ministration, and
circumstances thereunto belonging, are shadowy and figurative.
By the nature of it, I mean the matter thereof; by the ministra-


tion and circumstances thereunto belonging, I do mean the giving
of it by such hands, at such a time and place, in such a mode, as
when it was given to Israel in the wilderness. The matter
therefore, to wit, ‘ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all
thy strength, and thy neighbour as thyself,’ is everlasting, and is
not from Sinai, nor from the two tables of stone, but in nature ;
for this law commenced and took being and place that day in which
man was created. Yea, it was concreate with him, and without it
he cannot be a rational creature, as he was in the day in which God
created him. But for the ministration of it from Sinai, with
the circumstances belonging to that ministration, they are not moral,
nor everlasting, but shadowy and figurative only. That ministra-
tion cannot be moral, for three reasons. 1. It commenced not when
morality commenced, but two thousand years after. 2. It was not
universal as the law, as moral, is ; it was given only to the church
of the Jews, in those tables. 3, Its end is past as such a ministration,
though the same law as to the morality thereof abides. Where
are the tables of stone, and this law as therein contained ? We only,
as to that, have the notice of such a ministration, and a rehearsal of
the law, with that mode of giving it, in the testament of God.”
He then goes on to adduce various illustrations and proofs of this,
too extended to quote. — Works , vol. ii., p. 367. Offer's ed.
Baxter says, “ The whole law of Moses, formally as such, is ceased
or abrogated by Christ. I say, as such ; because, materially, the
same things that are in that law, may be the matter of the law of
nature, and of the law of Christ; of which more anon. That the
whole law of Moses as such is abrogated, is more clearly proved.
I. By the frequent arguings of Paul, who ever speaketh of that law
as ceased, without excepting any part of it; and Christ saith, ‘ The
law and the prophets were until John,’ that is, were the chief doctrine
of the church until then. ‘ The law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.’ Ho Jew would have
understood this, if the word law had not contained the decalogue.
It was the whole law of Moses as such, which by circumcision they
would have bound men to. The Gentiles are said to ‘ sin without
law,’ even when they break the law of nature, meaning without the
law of Moses.” He then refers to a variety of texts, but fixes more
especial attention on 2 Corinthians, 3rd chapter. In reference to
which he says, “ They that say the glory and not the law, is here
said to be done away, speak against the plain scope of the text; for
the glory of Moses’s face, and the glorious manner of deliverance,
ceased in a few days, which is not the cessation here intended, but
as Dr. Hammond speaketh it, ‘ That glory and that law so gloriously
delivered is done away.’ And this the eleventh verse more fully
expresseth, ‘For if that which is done away was glorious, much
more that which remaineth is glorious.’ So that as it is not only


the glory but the glorious law, gospel, or testament, which is said to
remain, so it is not only the glory, but the law, which was delivered
by glory, which is expressly said to be done away ; and this is the
law which was written in stone. Nothing but partial violence can
evade the force of this text.” — Works, vol. xiii., p. 418, Onne's ed.
Dr. Pye Smith, whose name is his recommendation, says, “ The
doctrine of the New Testament is, that by the expiatory death of
Christ the whole Mosaic constitution was completed and finished as
to its design, and abrogated as to its obligation. It therefore
appears consistent with scripture to consider the decalogue as a part
of the superseded and abolished constitution or law of the Israel-
itish theocracy; and no longer binding as the law of Moses.
Everything in it that is moral is perpetually obligatory, but on
other grounds; and this opens a new view of it, the theological.”—
Christian Theology , p. 358.
Dr. John Brown, of Edinburgh, in his comment on the passage,
“For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or
one tittle shall on no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled,”
says, “ These words have often been considered as a declaration of
the perpetual obligation and authority of the moral law. That the
moral law must for ever remain unrepealed, and unrepealable, there
can be no doubt. At the same time, Ido not think that it is the
principle our Lord states here. ‘ The law ’is a phrase which to a
Jew conveyed the idea of the Mosaic institution, the peculiar order
of things under which the Israelitish people were placed, at Mount
Sinai. That is the law to which our Lord seems to refer, and I
apprehend interpreters would not likely have supposed that the
reference was to anything else, had it not been that they found
difficulty in explaining words, which seemed to them to imply a
declaration of inviolable stability to a system which was temporary
as well as local, and which has in fact long ceased to exist, if the
words, however, are carefully examined, they will be found to con-
tain in them, not an indefinite declaration of the inviolable authority
of the law, but a declaration of its inviolable authority till a certain
period, till certain -events had taken place. Now, the period
referred to is the period when divine revelation was completed by
the Son of God. That period I apprehend was the pouring out of
the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost, the giving that divine
instructor who was to ‘ teach the apostles all things, and lead them
into all the truth.’ From that period the ‘ law,’ the Mosaic insti-
tution, ceased to be of obligation; it had served its purpose; it
entirely, as a system, passed away. 1 The middle wall of partition’
was completely taken down.” — The Sayings of our Lord, vol. i., p.
199, 200,*
* I cannot make this quotation from Dr. Brown without the expression of an
opinion, that few commentators have had a clearer insight into the sense and spirit
of the iNew Testament, and of its dispensation, than he. The study of the scriptures


I am aware, my lord, I am exposing myself to the charge of
tediousness in this part of my letter ; but as the views I have
enunciated are the result of an overpowering conviction of their
truth, and as they enter essentially into my argument, I may be
forgiven a little solicitude to win the confidence of the reader. I
must trespass on his patience a little longer, in anticipating a few
objections to what I have advanced.
The first I would mention is derived from a passage in the sermon
on the Mount—Matt. v. 17, 18—“ Think not that I am come to
destroy the law, or the prophets: lam not come to destroy but to fulfil.
This passage is not unfrequently quoted as if the term law had an
exclusive reference to the decalogue. But it is admitted by all
commentators I have consulted that the phrase is a compendious
expression for the whole of the Old Testament scriptures, including
the Mosaic books, and the historic, prophetic, and devotional
writings. The word rendered “to fulfil,” does not signify only to
perform fully an enjoined duty; but, to fill out, complete, perfect,
accomplish, carry out to an ultimate result. The word translated
“ destroy ” has been variously rendered, subvert, dissolve, annul, put
away, and to make void. I would prefer the term “ invalidate.”
How, then, did Christ fulfil the prophecies relating to himself, but
by accomplishing them, and converting them into facts ? How did
he fulfil the Mosaic ritual ? Not by invalidating its types, but by
supplying their corresponding antitypes, by which he superseded
that ritual, as a divine requirement. How did he fulfil the civil
laws of the Jews ? Not by invalidating them, but yet he superseded
them by the enunciation of great principles, adapted to the civil
condition of humanity everywhere. And how did he fulfil the
decalogue ? Not by invalidating its principles, but by liberating its
moral elements from that restricted form, and expanding them, —
rendering them more comprehensive in their claims and bearing,
hence superseding that code of law, by a law of a far higher and
more spiritual character. In this sense the following verse is to be
understood, —“ Till heaven and earth pass one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass from the law till all be fulfilled till all be com-
pleted,—have fully attained its ersd. For the passing away of
heaven and earth, see Heb. xii. 25—27. The subsequent verse,
therefore, it will not be difficult to interpret.*
Another objection may be based on the apostle’s concluding
statement in Bom. iii. 31, “Do we then make void law? nay, we
with him amounted to a passion, and was the employment of his long life. His
works embody no small amount of learning, reading, and research, with but little
parade. Hence his Expositions, notwithstanding his often tediously exhaustive
method, will be a precious treasure to the church for generations to come, when others
of more pompous pretension are forgotten.
* The above paragraph was wholly written before Dr. Brown’s “ Sayings of our
Lord ” came into my hands; to which I would refer the reader for a more complete
answer to the objection.


establish law.” The article is not in the original. The apostle, in
the 28th verse, had expressed his persuasion that we are justified by
faith without the deeds of law. He then anticipates an objection to
this doctrine, from its supposed tendency to disobedience and
licentiousness. But he had previously shown that the propitiatory
sacrifice of Christ, by virtue of which we are justified, was the most
impressive manifestation of God’s righteousness, and of his regard for
law, and that instead of the doctrine tending to licentiousness, it
supplied the most powerful motive to obedience. He then concludes
with the words we have quoted. And how, we ask, can it be said
that the view we have given of the abrogation of the form of law
contained in the decalogue, tends to make “ void law,” when we
have shown that it is substituted by a far higher law, based on the
same principles of the decalogue, but carried forward to a far wider
development. We then say, “Do we make void law '( God forbid,
—we establish law.”
Another objection may be based on Romans vii. 19, “Where-
fore the law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and
good.” But those who may be considered as starting this objection
will admit, I presume, that the ritual law of Moses was holy and
just and good, just as everything must be that comes from God, and
that it involved principles as essential to the well-being of fallen
man as the principles of the decalogue. But yet the ritual law of
Moses is gone, while the principles abide ; and in the same way, we
maintain, the decalogue is gone as a form of law, while the principles
on which it is based are immutable and for ever.
It may be objected that the apostles Paul and James recognize
the decalogue as still in force. Rom. xiii. 9; Ephes. vi. I—3 ;
James ii. 11. But if these passages are fairly looked at it will be
seen that these are quotations simply to illustrate the Christian
law of love. For, in the one instance it is said that the quotations
are comprehended in this saying, “ Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself,” and love is the fulfilling of the law. In the other
instance, the apostle adds, “so speak ye, and so do, as they that
shall be judged by the law of liberty ,” and what is that law of
liberty but the Christian law? With reference to the passage in the
Ephesians, those who raise the objection, will not pretend, I
fancy, that the promise annexed to the fifth commandment, so
suited to that worldly dispensation during which the law was given,
is in force under the present more spiritual constitution. If so, it
shows at once that the words were quoted by the apostle simply as
an illustration, while the obedience of children to their parents is
put on new ground, it is to be rendered “in the Lord.” That is,
in subjection to Christ, and according to his will.
In this manner I trust, my lord, the objections are fairly met, if
in your judgment not conclusively so ; and so met as to leave every
principle of righteousness and truth unimpaired and untouched.


To what, however, does all this tend ? you may ask. It tends to
this, that we can determine nothing respecting the perpetual
obligation of the Sabbath from the Mosaic code; that with that
code we have nothing to do in determining anything with respect
to Christian institutions ; and that we are shut up entirely to the
New Testament on these matters. Now, but “ One is our Teacher
even Christ.”
§ 4. REFERENCES TO THE SABBATH IN THE NEW TESTAMENT.
I would here refer without quotation to the following passages
in the life of our Lord : Matt. xii. I—9,1 —9, 10—13 ; Mark ii. 23—26,
iii. I—s ; Luke vi. I— s, 7—12, xiii. 11—16, xiv, I—61 —6 ;
John v. I—l 7,1 —17, vii. 19 —24. These are all the texts in the
Evangelists to which a reference need be made. I call attention
therefore to the following statements :
1. There can be no question but that in these instances, our
Lord and his disciples violated the strict Sabbatic law, for which
he was accused by his enemies.
2. In his reply, he apologised, and defended himself. In the
case of the disciples plucking the ears of corn, he did it by con-
founding his adversaries with two instances, to which they could
not demur, the one derived from David eating the shewbread, and
the other from the priests in their daily both of
which resolved themselves into the principle of necessity. In the
other cases he met the charges by resolving them into the lawfulness
of doing good on the Sabbath day. But in the case mentioned in
John, he assumed a new line of defence, “My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work.” My Father hath been working ever since
the creation of the world, without ceasing, and I also work. Thus
placing himself on an equality with his Father in authority and
right.
3. It should be observed, however, that in all these instances he
took no refuge in necessity. For though, in order to silence his
accusers, he adduced two instances which could find their solution
only in the necessity of the cases, yet he did not plead that it was
necessary for his disciples to pluck the ears of corn to appease their
hunger. For it will not be supposed that there were no other ways
of satisfying their hunger than that. And that there was no
necessity in the other cases is evident from the fact that, while other
men are often controlled by circumstances, and are necessitated to
do what otherwise they would not do, Christ could have controlled
circumstances, and have thus avoided a breach of the law.
4. It is in connection with the first of these instances that the
words occur in Matthew and Mark which have so often been prest
into this controversy —•“ The Sabbath was made for man and not
man for the Sabbath. Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the


Sabbath day.” The latter expression is not unfrequently employed
as if it meant that the Sabbath is the Lord’s day, and that Christ claims
it for his own day; when, if there is any meaning in words, it
signifies nothing more or less than that the Son of Man had power,
authority, and confront over the Sabbath, to annul or continue it, to
work or otherwise, just as it pleased him. While with respect to
the former passage we have already quoted it in proof that it was a
positive institution, subject to the will of the lawgiver, and signifies
that the Sabbath was a divine expedient for man’s benefit. I shall
have to refer to this again before I have done. If the Sabbatarians
dispute these statements, let them do so ; if they admit them, let
them draw what legitimate inferences they may, I shall be satisfied.
They will not, lam sure, militate against any convictions of mine. But,
5. If the Sabbath was intended to be, in the estimation of Christ,
xmder the present dispensation, what those represent it to be, who
base its claims on the perpetual obligation of the fourth command-
ment, isit not somewhat strange that our Lord throughout his ministry
never takes occasion to explain his views on the subject 1 when he had
done so on every other part of the decalogue, but on this he is silent;
while in the charges brought against him by the Jews, in which he
was accused of violating the Sabbath, in no instance does he deny
it, but defends his right to do so on various grounds. What was
the meaning of this 1 But further, on the supposition that the
Sabbath was a positive institution, a part of the ritual typical code
of the Jews, is it not also strange that, while every other part of that
ceremonial code was to pass away, this alone was to survive and
continue in force under the coming economy, but that not a word
ever dropt from the Saviour’s lips, and that not a word is found in the
writings of his inspired servants in reference to this peculiar fact, on
the supposition that it is a fact. On the theory of our Sabbatarian
friends, this is strange, most singular—to me most unaccountable,
nay, utterly inexplicable, for there is no case parallel to it. But on
the views I have advocated in this letter it is not unaccountable at
all. But what increases the singularity is, that the only direct
reference made to this subject by the apostle in Gal. iv. 10, and in
Col. ii. 16, is in language, to my mind, so unambiguous as almost
to awaken a feeling of wonder that it should for a moment be
disputed, that the Sabbath as an Old Testament institution, is past,
and is no longer binding.* Here, then, as far as the New Testament
is concerned, which ought to be the Christain’s Statute Book ex-
cluding further appeal, not a passage is to be found supplying a
valid argument, in rny judgment, for the perpetual obligation of the
Sabbatic law. The “ conjugation of moral probabilities,” on which
* See Bloomfield’s Greek Testament on Galatians; Dr. Brown on Galatians;
Macknight on the Epistles; Ellicott’s Notes on Colossians; Eadie on Colossians ;
Alford’s Greek Testament on Galatians and Colossians, and Dr. Doddridge’s
Expositions.


the excellent Dr. Brown bases the obligation of the Sabbath, after
asserting the abrogation of the Mosaic law, is very far from satis-
factory to my mind, on a subject in which we need a clear expression
of the divine will.
§ 5. THE TYPICAL CHARACTER OF THE SABBATH
If I am successful in my exposition of this part of my letter, I
may contribute something towards a solution of the mystery of the
Sabbath. If I stand alone in my interpretation it will matter very
little to me, if I can supply satisfactory or even but strong presump-
tive evidence of the truth lam seeking to establish. And this is a
point to which I solicit especial attention from my readers.
That the Sabbath has a typical character I am justified in assert-
ing from the language of Paul, who speaks of it as a shadow of some
good thing to come, a fact which has been very much lost sight of
in the all-absorbing effort to establish its perpetual obligation on the
authority of the fourth commandment. The types of the Old Testa-
ment were based on a principle of appropriating and adjusting outward
visible things, persons, events, offices, and services, as emblems of
spiritual truths to the Jews, and to foreshadow future realities under
the Christian constitution. By this means God sought to get into the
minds of his people certain ideas which were to have the effect of train-
ing them gradually to understand and to anticipate the better things in
reversion. Of what, then, was the Sabbath an emblem, and a type ?
My reply at once is, of spiritual rest—rest in God—of that in fact which
all the sacrifices, and oblations, and washings and services prefigured to
secure. For just as men are brought to rest in God, and to find their
happiness in him, they are restored from all the ruinous consequences
and miseries of the fall. But if the Sabbath was not a type of this,
then that to which everything else tended and was subsidiary had
no type at all. For the rest of Canaan was a type of the rest of
heaven. And if the Sabbath was not a type of this, a type of what
was it ? But if it was, then the unspeakable value of the antitype
invests with a peculiar sacredness, importance, and glory, the type
which foreshadowed it; and, in fact, accounts for the marvellous
interest which was attached to the Sabbath under the Jewish law.
This is the point I must endeavour to prove.
Admitting that the seventh day was blest and sanctified by God
at the creation, yet we have shewn that there is no satisfactory evi-
dence to prove that after the fall, when an entirely new condition of
things was established, it was imposed on man as a requirement to
be observed, or set apart for man as a benefit to be enjoyed, till the
period of the Israelites in the wilderness. During the antecedent
era the divine communications were extremely limited. That God
was propitious to man through sacrifice, and was accessible through
prayer, appears to have been the almost total amount of his revelation


to the ancient world. And when we reflect on the gradual method
observed by God in unfolding his plans of mercy, it is not likely he
would select, at first, the day he had signally blest to prefigure that
perfect repose of soul from sin and guilt which involved a full re-
storation of man to God. But after the divine purposes had been
developed to a certain extent, and when he was on the eve of com-
pletely presenting his whole scheme of deliverance in a set of
symbols, there appears a peculiar propriety in putting his day of
rest into requisition. Then it was he gave to the Israelites his
Sabbaths, that is, his days of rest, to be a sign between him and
them. But a sign of what 1
Let us look at the facts. They were to rest from all secular
employment, to keep the day holy to the Lord, who had brought
them up out of the land of Egypt; had taken them into covenant ;
had become their God; had made them promises, and guaranteed
them blessings ; and while they rested from all fatiguing toil, they
were taught to rest in God as their benefactor and friend. Except
the morning and evening sacrifice, when the holy convocation was
convened, there was no public worship enjoined. Hence, it appears
that the day was designed to be a day of tranquil repose to the body,
in order that it might be an emblem of that serene mental repose
which should result from a holy resting in God as the source of their
satisfaction and blessing. The double burnt-offering, therefore,
every Sabbath morning and evening would remind them of the
principle on which only that rest could be enjoyed; while the
continual changing of the shewbread would be a significant emblem
of that provision God would make for them as his people, thus
supplying them with a reason for that rest without misgiving or fear,
Taking this view of the subject, we see the greatness of the sin of
breaking the Sabbath. It was equivalent to the casting off of God,
a rejection of his covenant, and a refusal to acknowledge him as the
source of their rest. Hence, we see a beautiful meaning in the
passages of Isaiah, where a blessing is promised on them that kept
God’s Sabbath from polluting it; that took hold of his covenant, and
that regarded his rest-day as a delight, holy to the Lord, and honour-
able. But while it sustained to the Jews the character of an emblem,
it was also an important type of that spiritual rest which would be
accessible to all, not to the Jews only, but also to the Gentiles, when
the Christ should come, —the Shiloh, the true rest-giver,—to whom
should be the gathering of the people.
But let us look at the authenticated antitype; and we think it is
distinctly brought before us in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that
grand key to the interpretation of the ritual system of Moses. We
would especially refer attention to the third and fourth chapters.
To enter into a critical disquisition of these chapters would be
incompatible with the length of this letter. I shall give my own
views of the argument in as few words as possible. The apostle had


spoken of God’s rest (my rest) ; but the Jews had failed to realize it
through unbelief. But the promise of rest is left us also, and we
are, therefore, exhorted to fear lest we should not obtain it. Those,
however, who believe do obtain it. “ For God spake in a certain
place of the seventh day on this wise, and God did rest the seventh
day from all his works.” “ Seeing, therefore, that some must enter
into God’s rest, but the Jews did not enter in through unbeliefthe
inference is that those only who believe do enter into it. “ There
remaineth, therefore, a rest to the people of God,” In the margin
it is a keeping of Sabbath, that is of a rest. But as keeping of a rest
is scarcely compatible with our idiom, I prefer rendering it, “ There
remaineth, therefore, the enjoyment of a rest for the people of God.”
“For he,” —that is the believer, —“that is entered into his rest,
he hath ceased from his own works, as God did from his.” That
it is the believer, and not Christ, that is referred to here, as some
suppose, is to my mind evident from the entire drift of the argument.
But from what works does the believer cease 1 Man is represented
as toiling and wearying himself in seeking rest and finding none.”
Matt. xi. 28-30. But on his believing he ceases from all his vain
and fruitless efforts, and obtains rest. “ Let us, therefore, labour
to enter into that rest, that we may not fall through unbelief.”
Such, I believe, to be an outline of the Apostle’s train of thought here,
in which we find the grand antitype of the Sabbath rest. How Dr.
Wardlaw, a. name I cannot mention without a feeling approaching to
reverential respect, and who, as a reasoner, is generally so fair, so
acute, and so accurate, could possibly find an argument in the ninth
verse, in support of an observance of a new Sabbath day, under the
Christian economy, is to me an astonishment. Were it becoming
at all, one might retort his own language in another branch of this
argument, that we could scarcely have conceived it, except on the
supposition that he had a “theory” to support, and that any
plausibility was better than none. But, my lord, such insinuations
are better unexpressed. For truly Christian men have no theories,
simply considered as theories, to support. Their one object is the
truth. I can only say, that if I thought I had nothing better than
a theory to support, not a line of this letter would have been written.
I am expounding, as far as I know it, the meaning of God’s word;
and if it be inconsistent with that word, may this letter perish at
once. But it is because I think that errors in principle and argu-
ment have been allowed to blend in this controversy, that I have
ventured to submit these thoughts to the consideration of others.
If they are unsound or unscriptural, I have, I can assure you, my
lord, no such overweening attachment to them as to wish for them
the least possible diffusion to exert any pernicious influence on the
minds of others. But believing, as I do, far otherwise, I ask for
them a measure of thoughtful and devout attention.


§ 6. THE LORD’S DAY.
This brings me, then, to a more inviting part of my subject, and I
take my stand on the passage in Rev. i. 10, “I was in the spirit on
the Lord’s day.” And I ask whether there is in the history of our
Lord or of his apostles any day so marked by what is peculiar as to
give to it the high distinction of being the “Lord’s day?” The
reply is not difficult. Our Lord arose from the dead on the first day
of the week. Successively he appeared on that day to his disciples
during his brief sojourn after his resurrection. However singular
this might have appeared had there been nothing further recorded,
it is possible it might have been regarded as a mere coincidence from
which, as to our duty, no safe or legitimate conclusion could have
been drawn. But when we find that grandest of all events, next to
the incarnation, which was to signalize the commencement of the
New Testament dispensation, occurring on that day, the descent of
the Lord’s Spirit on the disciples to qualify them for their great
work ; and when we further find the New Testament Churches, under
the sanction of apostolic authority, setting this day apart for purposes
of Christian worship and fellowship ; and when we find also, in the
96th or 97th year of the Christian era, one of the apostles, perhaps
the solitary survivor of the twelve, making a reference to this day
with such marked definiteness, as being the “ Lord’s day,” without
any explanation or comment, as a fact sufficiently well known to the
churches, all this is enough for me. But when, in addition to all
this, as far as ecclesiastical history supplies us with any information,
we discover the churches in succession from the apostolic age keep-
ing this day sacred to religious exercises, in imitation of the first, I
am abundantly satisfied and need no more.
With respect, then, to this Lord’s day, I offer the following
remarks :
1. It was a day of worship, and on this account was a day of rest
from secular toil. In this we think it differed from the Jewish
Sabbath, which was a day of rest from labour, but not a day of
'public worship beyond that of the morning and evening sacrifice, but
rather of individual and domestic worship. Were we to hazard a
conjecture based on a variety of expressions, in the absence of posi-
tive information, we should say it seemed to have been designed as a
day of calm devout holy thought, and that in this way it was “ a rest
holy unto the Lord.” But the primitive Christians assembled on
the Lord’s day without any reference to precise times. They prayed,
the scriptures were read, the gospel was preached, they listened to
the teachings of truth, they brake bread, they enjoyed the communion
of saints, and poured their contributions, as each one had been pros-
pered, into the treasury for the support of their sacred cause. And
they did all this, as if from the instinctive operations of an implanted
principle. It was love to their Lord that constrained them. They


were urged to it in commemoration of his redeeming acts on earth,
consummated by his resurrection from the tomb. It was, therefore,
an expression of their fealty, and devotion to him who had purchased
them with his blood ; of their believing attachment to Ixis truth,
and of their conscious interest in his affections, and in the blessings
of his friendship and grace. It was,Consequently, a day of gladness
and hallowed joy, of inestimable privilege and blessed instruction.
But we have no positive precept inculcating anything on the church,
or on those without the church, as to the keeping of this day. It
was their duty to love the Saviour, to honour him, to worship him,
to be observant of his ordinances, and guided by the teachings and
example of his inspired servants to gladly avail themselves of that
day which had been so remarkably signalised by his rising again and
the gift of his Spirit. But—
2. Have we the slightest evidence that the Lord’s day was
intended as a substitute for the Jewish Sabbath 1 ? As far as I can
discover, not a jot or tittle, not the shadow of a shade, not the
smallest conceivable particle, direct or circumstantial, can I find.
The two days are different in their characters, they rest on different
grounds, they are sustained by different reasons, they have different
ends. They are, in fact, as different from each other as the two
covenants are different. And as to any proof that the one was simply
intended to be a continuation of the other, enforced by the same law,
and sustained by the same sanctions, except in a change of the day,
it exists nowhere but in the conjectures of theologians. But further,
is there any evidence, during the first three centuries of the primitive
church, that the one day was a substitute or a continuation of the
other? Were they not always kept distinct, .and mentioned as
distinct in their character ? I am aware thet% is one passage in
Irenseus which may seem to militate against this statement. But
when we .remember the extremely imperfect state in which his
writings have come down to us : that while he wrote in Greek, only
one book of his most important work exists in that language, and
that the rest are found only in a wretched Latin translation, which
there is reason to believe has been greatly tampered with ; very
little dependence can be placed on a single sentence quoted from
him.
The case, as far as I can gather it, appears to be this : In the
primitive church there was a twofold type of Christianity—the
Jewish and the Gentile. The former was represented by the apostles
of the circumcision, the latter by the apostle Paul. According to
the former, Christianity was but a graft on Judaism, the institutions
of which were regarded as of perpetual obligation. But against
this view Paul battled with all the energy of an unrelenting determina-
tion And it is to this fact that we are indebted for the clear
enunciation of his sentiments, as to the abrogation of the Mosaic
constitution. With respect, therefore, to the Sabbath and the Lord’s


day, by the Jewish Christians, especially in the Eastern churches,
where the Jewish element prevailed, both days were observed ; but
yet they were regarded as distinct, and resting on different grounds.
Hence the Lord’s day was never called a Sabbath. In the Western
churches, in which the Gentile elepient prevailed, the two days are men-
tioned, but the Sabbath was either not observed at all, or if observed,
it was a day of fasting and mourning ; the Lord’s day, however, was
celebrated as a day of privilege and gladness. In process of time, as
the Jewish element was gradually overborne, but not until it had
vitiated the whole current of Christian thought, a sort of compromise
was effected j the Jewish Sabbath was put aside as a religious
observance, and the Lord’s day began to be regarded as the Christian
Sabbath, when laws were enacted assimilating it as much as possible
to the requirements of the fourth commandment. Thus, what at
the first was determined by Christian principle, operating under
the influence of the spirit of Christianity, and in subjection to
apostolic teaching and example, began to be determined by human
and ecclesiastical law—law which contributed not a little to corrupt
the Christianity of the New Testament from its simplicity, and to
pervert it greatly from its grand design. I peremptorily ask, then,
what authority had the good Dr. Chalmers for the assertion, that “he
could quote the uncontrolled observation of this change ( i . e. from
the seventh to the first day of the week) from the period of the
apostolic age.” My decided opinion is, he had none at all.
Such, then, are my views of the Lord’s day. I regard it as an
independent Christian institution, deriving no authority whatever
from the fourth commandment, and having no connection with the
Jewish law, but jesting entirely on a Christian basis, as a day of
worship, privilege, and more than ordinary blessing ; and as such its
value to individuals, to families, and to communities has been
incalculable. Streams of divine, spiritual, beneficent influence
have flowed from it along the course of ages, beyond any human
capability to estimate. Hence I should regard it as an unspeakable
calamity to any people among whom a diminished sense of its
inestimable importance should prevail And that Christian who
would wilfully employ himself in any needless secular pursuits, to
a neglect of the engagements and services by which the Lord’s day
is distinguished, would supply, in my judgment, painful of
a feebleness of Christian principle, and a vitiated state of Christian
feeling, dishonourable to his profession and perilous to his best
interests. Let those friends from whom I differ employ all the
terms which reason may dictate, or all the figures which imagination
may supply, to enhance the worth, magnify the importance, and
brighten the glory of this day, they will not surpass the elevated con-
ceptions I entertain of its inestimable value. And only let C hristians
be stedfast in the truth, and faithful to their Lord ; let them be
regular in their attendance on public worship, and liberal in their


support of Christian institutions ; let them show that they highly
estimate their religion, and that they diligently train their offspring
to a high appreciation of its privileges; let efforts constant and
unabated be put forth to bring the unbelieving portion of the
community to a recognition of the truths which they believe,
and to mingle in the services which they delight ; let
them do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with their God ; let
them be honourable in their proceedings, upright in their transac-
tions, benevolent, kind, and charitable in their spirit, putting on the
meekness and gentleness of Jesus Christ, and they will do unspeak-
ably more for the interests of Christianity, and for upholding the
honour and sacredness of the Lord’s day, than all the efforts they
may expend in order to enforce the divine authority of a Sabbath
based on the injunctions of the fourth commandment. Let them do
that, and they will have no occasion, with trembling fear, to antici-
pate in this colony the scenes exhibited, on that day, in Paris and
Berlin. It is the unfaithfulness of Christians to higher and more
sacred principles; it is their imperfect manifestation of the pure
spiritual morality inculcated upon them by Christianity, which robs
their religion of its force, and their days and sanctuaries of worship
of their attraction and power. Only let the followers of the Re-
deemer be loyal-hearted to him, and true to themselves, in the
diversified relations they sustain, and they cannot fail to win a defer-
ential respect for that day which to them is one of sanctified enjoy-
ment. But let them be untrue, compromising their profession by
questionable doings, and a questionable spirit in the varied proceed-
ings of life, and to that extent, disastrous consequences must ever
follow to the cause of truth and goodness, which no reverential
regard for a Sabbath will ever compensate. “ I believe,” my lord,
“ and therefore I have spoken.” These are not the convictions of
yesterday. And while, in my judgment, the views I have unfolded
have the advantage of simplicity, they necessarily disengage the
subject from many complexities, and relieve it from many responsi-
bilities, incurred by a different, and in my opinion, a mistaken line
of argument. And as to whether they are not calculated to promote
the best interests of the Church, of religion, and of society, equally
with those from whom i differ, I leave for others to determine.
g 7. A DAY OF REST.
This, my lord, is entirely a different subject from the Lord’s day,
and rests on different grounds. I might, therefore, safely dismiss it
without a word. But as a day of rest has been blended very much
with the Sabbath question, my views may be regarded as incomplete
without a few remarks on this point; they will, however, be only
few.
The design of the Jewish Sabbath was complex. It was designed


to answer various ends. It was a display of that divine wisdom
which secures a diversity of results by simple means. The pro-
hibition of “ all manner of work” on that day, was one of its
distinguishing peculiarities, but yet would seem to have been sub-
sidiary to other and far higher purposes. It involved, however, an
important truth, which desirableness of a periodical day
of rest as contributing to man’s benefit; and it is here where we
find the key to the interpretation of our Lord’s saying, “ The
Sabbath was made for man.” And there were many of the social
arrangements, and even ceremonial institutions of the Jews, which,
though they may appear to us to have been entirely arbitrary, inas-
much as the reasons for them we cannot always see, yet the more
they have been investigated, the more they have been discovered to
be a result of divine kindness, intent on promoting the well-being of
his people ; but which have nevertheless ceased to be obligatory to
us on the ground of any such enactment. That a day of repose
from the pressure of continuous toil is a blessing to our race, both
physical and intellectual, there can be no question. But instead of
saying that man has a right to a day of rest on the authority of the
fourth commandment, I would widen the statement and say, that on
the authority of the law of nature he has a right to everything by
which his physical, mental, social and religious interests can be pro-
moted, not to a day of rest any more than to many other things.
Hence I think it is legitimately within the province of the civil
power to legislate, especially for the dependent classes of the com-
munity, so as to ensure them a weekly period of leisure from the
harassing and subduing engagements of daily life. And as, by
universal Christian consent, Sunday is the Lord’s day,—a day of
worship, and on that account a day of cessation from secular work,
which Christians voluntarily and gladly observe in subservience to
their spiritual and eternal welfare, the legislature in every Christian
community would naturally and for various reasons select that day,
by which it would not only protect Christians in the peaceable
enjoyment of their religious privileges, but would preserve them from
social wrong, which otherwise would be inflicted by those who,
heedless of such privileges, might carry on business to the detriment
and loss of their Christian neighbours. I am aware that human
rights are strangely intermixed and not a little complicated in a state
of society, a fact which constitutes, as every one knows, a source
of unusual difficulty frequently in human legislation. But the
difficulty, in this instance, is greatly diminished by a universal feeling
as to the propriety, desirableness, and advantage of the end to be
attained.
With respect to public means of transit on the Lord’s day, even
on the ground that works of necessity and mercy were allowable on
the ancient Sabbath, any legislative enactment that would lay an
absolute interdict upon them on that day might in numerous cases


involve an inconvenience that would amount to hardship, cruelty, and
wrong. But it would involve no hardship, cruelty, or wrong, to
reduce them to a minimum. And it would not be difficult to
arrange that the few, out of a great number of servants, that might
be employed on the Lord’s day should alternate with others not so
employed, and to guarantee that those .employed on the Lord’s day
should have the loss compensated by a day of rest during the week.
By some such arrangement various interests would be harmonized
and benefits secured involving no essential damage to any one,
physically, mentally, socially, or religiously. It is not, however, my
province to settle questions of this kind, but to indicate what I
conceive to be perfectly allowable on principles of humanity, and
not at all incompatible with the claims of religion.
But I have done, my lord. lam afraid I have already overtaxed
your patience, as well as that of my readers. Never before, since I
have been in the colony, have I written a single line on this subject,
either in magazine or newspaper, and I have written now partly in
self-defence ; partly because I did not feel it precisely grateful to be
indentifiedon this subject with the enemies of the divine and good ;
partly to give shape and consistency to the floating sentiments in
many Christian minds which cannot yield a willing assent to
Sabbatarian views ; and partly to help those to a satisfactoxy issue
on the subject whom the recent lectures did not convince. But it
would be a source of regret to me, if I could imagine that in what I
have written I should give the slightest offence to any of the
gentlemen who have been the advocates of other opinions. I say
again, I give them credit for conscientious convictions; I honour
them for the manly avowal of their convictions. And the right I
concede I doubt not they will generously grant. Of your candour,
my lord, I have no misgiving.
Praying for you many years of extensive usefulness in this colony,
and that from your character and high position you may be ever
shedding a hallowing and beneficent influence which shall be a
blessing to multitudes,
I am, my lord,
Yours very respectfully,
ISAAC NEW.
Barely Terrace, Grey Street,
East Melbourne,
September 10, 1860.
Vf. FAIRFAX AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS-STREET, MELBOURNE.


