

m F p
81 o
Ernest Scott
Lord
Robert
Cecil’s
Gold Fields
Diary
Melbourne University Press




LORD ROBERT CECIL'S
GOLD FIELDS DIARY


LORD ROBERT CECIL
From a drawing by Richmond, R.A., in 1861


LORD ROBERT CECIL’S
GOLD FIELDS DIARY
With Introduction and Notes by
SIR ERNEST SCOTT
LATE PROFESSOR OF HISTORY IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Publishers in association with Oxford
University Press, Melbourne and London


First published, 1935
Second edition, 1945
Printed in Australia by
Melbourne University Press
Carlton, N. 3, Victoria
[copyright]
Registered at the General Post Office,
Melbourne, for transmission by post as
a book


INTRODUCTION
'T'HE diary of the visit to the Victorian gold-helds by
Lord Robert Cecil in 1852, which this little book
contains, is printed from his manuscript, preserved at
Hatfield. Permission for a copy to be made was kindly
given by the Marquis of Salisbury, K.G. Thanks are
offered to the son of the writer of these very interesting
pages for making available a record which presents a
vivid picture of the life of the diggers on Bendigo Creek
and at Mount Alexander ; and to Lady Gwendolen
Cecil, the author of the official biography—“ Life of
Robert Marquis of Salisbury” —who found the diary
among her father’s papers when studying them for the
purpose of her work, and generously arranged for the
making of the copy herein printed.
The illustrations are from drawings by S. T. Gill,
except those of the Chief Commissioner’s Camp at
Castlemaine (Mount Alexander), and the junction of
Pegieg and Sailor’s Gully, which are from drawings by
C. Rudston Read, published in his book, “What I heard,
saw and did at the Australian Gold Fields,” (London,
1:853). Gill’s drawings are reproduced from a set in
the possession of Mr. E. C. Dyason, who has also lent
his copy of Read’s rare volume.
Ernest Scott




LORD ROBERT CECIL’S
GOLD FIELDS DIARY
ChN March 25, 1852, "The Argus” published the
following small item of news among its Shipping
Intelligence :
Arrived, Amazon barque, 400 tons, Thomas C. Law,
master, from Adelaide. Passengers : —(Cabin), Lord Robert
Cecil, Sir Montagu Chapman, Mr. Turner and lady, Mr.
Jones, Dr. Wright, and 150 in the steerage.
The tall young man who stepped off the ship in
Hobson’s Bay, wearing a white top-hat and a black suit,
was Lord Robert Cecil. He was then just over 22 years
of age, having been born at Hatfield on February 3,
1830. He was not the heir to the title then, having an
elder brother who did not die till 1865. He had taken
his arts degree at Oxford in 1849, an( f afterwards read
law, but owing to ill-health did not continue his studies
far enough to be called to the bar. A young medical
practitioner whom he knew at Oxford, Henry Acland —
afterwards the famous Sir Henry Acland, Regius
Professor of Medicine in the University —recommended
him to take a long sea voyage. Lord Robert acted on
the advice, and left England for South Africa in July
1851, in a sailing ship. From Cape Town, after a stay
of three months, he sailed for Australia. The great
Victorian gold rush began in 1851, and, as he intended
to have a look at Australia and New Zealand in the
course of his tour, he determined to accompany a fellow-
passenger, Sir Montagu Chapman, an Irish baronet, who
intended to go to the diggings. In due course Lord
Robert Cecil was to become Marquis of Salisbury, twice
Secretary of State for India, four times Foreign Secre-


tary, and three times Prime Minister of Great B;tain.
But in 1852 he was just a person with a distingished
name touring the world ; and so little notice was aken
of him that no reference to him occurs in “The Agus”
in the letters of “Our Own Correspondent” at Bedigo,
or at Mount Alexander, nor was his return to Melburne
chronicled, nor the date of his departure.
Lord Robert Cecil arrived in Australia in tin ship
Amazon on January 30, 1852. He landed at Port
Adelaide, “where we heard from the port masteithat
gold had been discovered at Melbourne, and that
Adelaide had been gradually drained of its popmtion
by the mania which the news had raised.” He wlked
two miles over a sandy peninsula, broiling hot, ancthen
was driven in a cart about eight miles to Adelaide city.
“In consequence of the emigration mania, excitd by
the discovery of the gold-fields, the colonial re'enue
has for the time almost vanished. The Customs, vhich
used to produce £3,000 a week, have fallen to zero land
is unsaleable, property on which £1,500 has beenspent
has sold for £43.” On February 16 he visitei the
Burra copper-mine. l “On arriving we went ft the
hotel, where we found the landlord and landlady h the
point of starting for the diggings.” He was shorn all
over the mine, admiring especially “the beautiful olour
of the malachite.” The captain of the ship was nable
to sail for Melbourne for a fortnight after the dmdate
because four of his crew had deserted. But the Arazon
put to sea on March 14, and reached Melboure on
March 24. The voyage ought to have lasted fouriays,
but it occupied ten because of head winds or calmiuntil
Cape Otway was rounded.
Lady Gwendolen Cecil, in her biography of Lord
Salisbury (Vol. I, p. 30) summarizes from the prt of
1 Copper was discovered by Francis Dutton, overseer for dptain
Bagot, on Kapunda sheep-station, in 1843. The Burra mi:;, dis-
covered in 1845, is said to have revealed its great wealth trough
the wheel of a bullock dray striking an outcrop of copper or:


his diary relating to his short stay in Melbourne, his
impressions of the influence of the gold discoveries on
life and manners in the city. He found it “thronged
with ephemeral plutocrats, generally illiterate, who
were hurrying to exchange their gold nuggets for velvet
gowns for their wives and unlimited whiskey for them-
selves, and who made the streets and hotels clamorous
with drunken revels which now and again culminated
in crimes of audacious violence.” Strange as it may
seem, he found less objectionable conduct on the
diggings than in the town. In a letter written a few
weeks later to an English clergyman, Lord Robert
said :
“The most interesting point of view in which the
diggings appeared was the marked contrast they pre-
sented to California. The rush of population was nearly
if not quite as great ; the temptations to come were as
powerful; the country in which the gold lay was as
wild and desolate ; but the government was of the
Queen, not of the mob ; from above, not from below,
holding from a supposed right (whether real or not, no
matter) and not from ‘the people, the source of all
legitimate power,’ and therefore instead of murders,
rapes and robberies daily, Lynch law and a Committee
of Vigilance, there was less crime than in a large
English town, and more order and civility than I have
myself witnessed in my own native village of Hatfield.”
If this diary of 1852 had been written by any John
Smith who happened to visit the gold-fields, it would
have been valuable. Its qualities of shrewd observa-
tion, bright description, and warmth of feeling speak for
themselves. It is, however, immeasurably more inter-
esting as coming from the pen of the man who in later
years played so great a role in the drama of British
history. Of one thing those who read the diary will be
convinced. It was, of course, a distinct advantage for
the young man who wrote these lively pages to have


been born a Cecil; but he did not need that initial
“lift" to enable him to carve out for himself a istin-
guished place in the world. His gift of clear, bnical
speech and writing—there are specimens of it i this
diary—his immense force of character, and his mssive
mind would have served him well in any voation.
John Morley related that he once went with Prlessor
T. H. Huxley and Mr. Gladstone to visit Charles larwin
in his hill-top home at Down. They were fascinaed by
the statesman’s vigorous, varied conversation ; nd at
the end of the afternoon, when Gladstone was sriding
away down the hill, Huxley shaded his eyes agarst the
sunset light with his hand to watch him, and aid :
“If you were to put that man on a moor with rbthing
on but his shirt, he could become whatever he plased.’’
That was said of Lord Salisbury’s famous r/al in
British politics, but it might equally well hav been
said of Salisbury. He had the stuff of greatnss in
him from the beginning ; it was innate.
Strange, distinguished company this diary hs been
keeping, at Hatfield, for 80 years or more ; dt the
Cecil archives contain much of the raw matdal of
English history. There are papers —many oJ them
have been printed by the Historical Manuscript Com-
mission—in the hand-writing of Queen Elikbeth,
addressed to the Robert Cecil who first bee the
Salisbury title. She called him “her little seertary,’’
and he was in fact almost a dwarf in stature, hough
uncommonly astute. Approaching another coection
of papers, a visitor might be pardoned for aying,
“What ! do I smell gunpowder ?’’—as, indeed, Robert
Cecil and James I did on November 5, 1605.1 Much
later come papers revealing the personal relatinships
between the writer of this diary and Benjamin Israeli,
who at first thought that “his invective lacked nish,”
though afterwards he was fortunate to have it dblayed
on his side. Shelved among these manuscripts written


by the great ones of the earth, has lain this narrative
of a visit to scenes of rough labour, where eager men
toiled in holes in the earth, scratching out pellets of
gold with penknives sometimes, or, if they were for-
tunate, discovering nuggets ; or unhappily toiling des-
perately and getting nothing. It was with a kindly,
humorous disposition that the Lord Robert Cecil of
1852 viewed these labours ; and more than once he
testified to the courtesy with which he, a stranger, was
received by the diggers.
On Friday, March 26, Lord Robert and his companion,
Sir Montagu Chapman 1 started for the diggings, and at
the first resting place he wrote in his diary his impres-
sions of the journey.
1 Sir Montagu Chapman, Bart. (3rd baronet of the creation,
which dated from 1782) had a house and estates in Westmeath.
He was born in 1808. From 1830-41 he was a member of the
House of Commons, for Westmeath.


THE DIARY
Under date March 24, the diary relates ;
We anchored in Hobson’s Bay this morning. We
had heard many terrific accounts of the carelessness
with which luggage was shipped into the steamer which
meets the ships, with the almost certainty of breakage.
But like many tales before and since with reference to
the horrors caused by the diggings, it proved utterly
untrue. We got our luggage on board with perfect
ease, and landed it without the slightest damage and
went to Passmore’s Hotel. 1
Thursday, March 25. — Melbourne. Breakfasted
this morning at the table d’hote. Provisions decent,
but butter infamous. After breakfast Sir Montagu
sallied forth to take places for us by some conveyance
to the diggings.
After a desperate struggle with my carpet bag I
started, together with Sir Montagu, in a spring-cart for
the diggings. Our fellow passengers were five. There
was a Californian digger—by his accent and some of
his expressions evidently a Yankee. He was a coarse,
hideous, dirty looking man, without an attempt at
ornament or even neatness in his dress ; yet he wore
in his ears a pair of earrings about the size ard shape
of a wedding ring. He wore a pair of pistols in his belt,
and the words “put a bullet through his brain” were
continually in his mouth. There were besides him (1)
a young runaway merchant’s son from Sydney, (2) a
man who was going up to serve as postmaster at Mount
Alexander, a very civil and quiet man ; (3) a nan who
told us that he had walked 80 miles in 19 hours; and
1 Passmore’s Hotel stood at the north-west corner of Elisabeth and
Lonsdale Streets. The Melbourne Directory for 1853 describes it as
a "family and commercial hotel,” at that time conducted by Joseph
C. Passmore.


(4) his wife, who was fashionably timid, and supplied
the shrieking whenever the cart dipped sideways into
a hole. The whole road up to the diggings was a very
bad one, so that she had plenty of opportunities for
the indulgence of this propensity. From the conversa-
tion of these men one could gather that there had been
more robberies on the road than the Governor was
willing to admit. 1 The favourite manoeuvre among the
thieves seems to be what they call “picking up,” that
is treating a successful digger to grog until he is drunk
enough to be plundered with impunity.
We stopped several times on the road in order to
refresh the inner man at coffee shops—a euphemism,
generally speaking, for unlicensed (sly) grog shops. I
was struck at all these places with the perfect civility
with which everyone treated us —a strange contrast to
all that we had heard. At one of them we saw a digger
in his jumper and working dress walking arm in arm
with a woman dressed in the most exaggerated finery,
with a parasol of blue damask silk that would have
seemed gorgeous in Hyde Park. She was a lady (so
the driver told us) of Adelaide notoriety, known as
Lavinia, who had been graciously condescending enough
to be the better half of this unhappy digger for a few
days, in order to rob him of his earnings. A ci-devant
digger informed me that when he was at Bendigo a lady
had offered “to be his wife” for the moderate charge of
1/6. These women are no rarities at the diggings.
About 5.30 we arrived at the Bush Inn, where we were
to lodge for the night. 2 The inn was crowded, and all
our fellow travellers were refused admittance on that
1 This and later allusions to the Governor (Charles Joseph La
Trobe) show that Lord Robert Cecil had a conversation with him
during his short stay in Melbourne.
2 Mr. A. S. Kenyon, than whom there is no more reliable authority,
states that the Bush Inn, well known in the digging days, was situ-
ated near to the present town of Gisborne. The Bush Inn is also
mentioned in T. M'Combie’s "Australian Sketches,” second series,
P- 52.


ground. But we, on the strength of our blac, coats,
were admitted at once, and found the inn comortable
enough. We were shown to a private sitting-r>om, to
which no one else was admitted, except a Dr. Siymour,
who came in late. He had been in India, aid was
rather a pleasant companion. From some cmse or
other I hardly slept an hour during the night.
Saturday, March 27. —Next morning we vere up
punctually at six. But the driver, with characteristic
Australian unpunctuality, had not even begun :o catch
the horses which were to take us to the mine, and which
were supposed to be wandering somewhere neir us in
the forest. It was 8 o'clock before we got off. I With a
late start, an infamous road, and the fagged horses
which had brought us yesterday from town, our pros-
pects were not bright. We had 50 miles to do; and
as we had five miles to walk after our arrival through
the very thick of the diggings it was material that we
should get there before dark. On the whole the roads
that we passed to-day were the worst I had hitherto
seen. There were no single places so dangerous as
many I saw at the Cape ; but they were more uniformly
impassable. Through the Black Forest, the scene of
many a tale of bushranging exploits, the road, which
was a mere pathway hewn through the forest, was not
only a foot deep in dust and pitted with as many holes
as a rabbit warren, but it was at times so nanow that
the naves of both wheels grazed the trees on eadi side. 1
To complicate the navigation still more, it wls inter-
sected by large roots, and dotted over with stunps half
I C. Rudston Read, in his book “What I Heard, Saw, aid Did at
the Australian Gold Fields’’ (London 1853) travelled though the
Black Forest in the same year. He wrote (p. 124) : “I eltered the
Black Forest, through which I understood there were :wo roads
(? bogs). Observing a man on horseback, I rode up anl inquired
whether he could inform me which was the best. His aiswer was
that one was bad enough, and the other a great deal w;rse—only
expressing himself, as a matter of course, in bush language, which
may be better imagined than described.”


buried in the sand. To lighten the cart we had to walk
a great part of the way.
Once out of the Black Forest the road was good
enough until we arrived at the Coloban 1 (vulgo Colum-
bine) River. But here—about 20 miles from Mount
Alexander —the road grew worse and worse. The holes
grew more numerous, and the hills far steeper. The
dust was absolutely unbearable. It hung in a dense
cloud about the cart, getting into eyes, ears, mouth, and
nose, stopping respiration utterly and clinging to hair,
whiskers, and beard as if it were flour. The particles
were so small that they penetrated through the thickest
clothing and choked up every pore of the skin. The
horses were quite unable to get through it ; and we
more than once stuck fast in the deep holes which it
concealed and which the driver, who in the course of
the journey had nearly finished a great bottle of brandy,
was too drunk either to get out of or to avoid. On
such occasions the passengers had to get out and push
the cart back into the hard road. The timid female
was the only one who was left in the cart ; and she
gave vent to her emotions by a succession of inarticulate
moans, now and then bursting forth into a fretful lecture
to the driver on the evils of intemperance. Of course
up most of the hills we had to walk ; but at last the
driver got so drunk and the horses so fagged, that there
seemed no little prospect of our spending a night in the
wood ; and so we should had not the Californian taken
the matter into his own hands.
By incessant flogging he contrived to get us into the
diggings before it was quite dark. We had been more
than once warned that we could not penetrate to the
commissioner’s tent after dark —that it would be mad-
ness at such a time to brave the dangers of random
bullets, unseen pitfalls, and wandering brigands. But
our experience of Australian exaggeration induced us to
1 i.e., the Coliban.


try. There was indeed, both then and during the whole
night, a desultory feu de joie kept up from i various
quarters of the huge encampment; but most of the
cartridges seemed to be blank. It is the habit of the
diggers to discharge their firearms every night, to warn
ill-disposed persons that they have got them. This
platooning, together with the rows of camp fires which
lined the glen, gave the mines a very military air.
However, the moon was bright, and we walked our five
miles along a good unbroken road, without approaching
pitfalls or being molested by brigands. We had been
specially warned by a post-office official just as we
started on our walk, not to speak to any wandering
passers-by for fear of being robbed ; yet, whichever we
asked our way, which we did of almost everyone we
met, we were always directed civilly, and onceior twice
even guided for a short distance. When we reached the
commissioner’s camp we went into the mess tent where
they had just had dinner, introduced ourselves to Mr.
Wright, the chief commissioner, and presented the
Governor’s letter. 1 He received us very kindly and
gave up to us one of his tents.
After washing ourselves—no slight luxury in his land
of dust—we had some dinner in the mess tent; There
were there two Independent Ministers who had arrived
that evening on horseback, and whom we had fallen in
with and spoken to on the road. When they foind that
we were the foot passengers who had spoken to them
they gazed at us with breathless wonder for a moment
and then let out, with exquisite naivete, that hey had
taken us for bushrangers. We had observed them
making a most serpentine course towards ihe com-
missioner’s camp, and going through a series of very
I William Henry Wright, formerly of the 50th reginent, was
appointed Chief Commissioner of the Victorian Gold Fiells in 1852.
He advised that the license fee imposed upon the diggersiras unjust
in its incidence. If his advice had been taken the Eurek Stockade
riot at Ballarat probably would not have occurred.




lsilpl
From a drawing by S. T. Gill
ROAD IN THE BLACK FOREST


*
w
w
cd
u
H
W
ai
O
u<
s
O
ctf
u«
d
o
S
£
w


O
u
5
2
UJ
CQ
h*
<
uj
h
2
O
2
U 4
o
o
5
6
hi
?s
60






t/M-- i ' '$&■ >*■ *
s* *■ *■'
■ I
* d '•' '' "
*3: >. • • f
&$ JK
■ ; , '”^3
j&jji
I
■4~ I
» * * . t *■ , - I
1 » *'' %
1 §
r .♦*
111
R #i *
• c ii • ,*■
■ .
From a sketch
by C. R. Read
CHIEF COMMISSIONER’S
CAMP, CASTLEMAINH (FOREST CREEK)




0
o
5
z
w
CQ
>
D
V
<
X
w
o
<
w
0
H
1
u
<
o
PC
Pi
Ch
<




From a drawing by S. T. Gill
NUGGETING






From a drawing by S. i G ill
LICENSE INSPECTED


From a drawing by S. T. Gill
GOLD BUYER, EACIEHAWK


From a drawing y S. T. Gill
FOSSICKING


From a drawing by S. 7. Gill
TIN DISH WASHING




From a drawing by S. T. Gill
LUCKY DIGGER THAT RETURNED


From a dramg by S. T. Gill
UNLUCKY DIGGER THAT NEVER RETLNED


complicated manoeuvres without any apparent object—-
but we had never dreamt that we were the centres of
repulsion. They were a delightful pair—so self-com-
placent and so simple. Their faces were just what
Leech would have delighted to copy, and their conversa-
tion would have been a perfect treasure to Dickens.
Their names were Higgins and McNichol—of course
they went in the mess by the names of Higgins and
Stiggings. The same evening the Roman Vicar Aposto-
lic, Dr. Gagen 1 had arrived. He was a fat, droll, merry
little Irish priest, very shallow and superficial, with a
great deal of low cunning, and an evident desire to be
"all things to all men" by a display of liberality and a
series of profane jokes.
All these assured me, especially Mr. Wright, that the
stories current of murder and outrage being rife at the
diggings, were simple falsehoods. No homicide, either
from private motives or in resistance to authority, had
occurred since he had been there. Two men had been
shot and nearly killed by the rashness of a frightened
policeman ; but they were recovering. No resistance
was ever attempted either to the fines inflicted by the
magistrate or to the burning of sly-grog shops by the
police. The culprit always looked on himself as the
victim of an inevitable fate. I observed the same on
the road. To the question "What has become of that
coffee shop that stood here ?" “Oh ! they’ve burnt it
for sly-grog selling" was the regular answer, creating
neither dissatisfaction nor surprise. In illustration of
the extent to which exaggeration is carried in this
colony, he told me that on his appointment here, as he
was starting from his home a digger whom he knew
told him that a horrible murder had been committed on
Fryar’s Creek ; that one man had successively murdered
his four mates in their hole ; that the diggers on dis-
x The Rev. Dr. Geoghegan, afterwards Catholic bishop of Adelaide.
Lord Robert Cecil spelt the name as he heard it pronounced.


covering it had tied a stone round his neck and sunk
him in a waterhole, and that the police had seized the
lynchers and taken them to Melbourne for trial. As he
came nearer to the diggings he was told—by a respec-
table man—that the lynchers had been convicted at
Melbourne and were on their way down under Captain
Mair’s charge to be hanged. 1 He continued his journey
cursing the ill-luck which gave him such an inaugural
duty to perform—and arrived at Mount Alexander.
What was his astonishment to find that the whole story
from beginning to end was an utter fabrication ! Mr.
Wright also told me that when the Bishop arrived at
Melbourne the Vicar Apostolic left his card on him, and
the Bishop actually sent it back !—a piece of bigotry
I believe he has since regretted. 2
Sunday, March 28.—A man came up to the com-
missioner this morning to complain that he had been
robbed of his gold on the road to Melbourne. Many
robberies had been committed, the commissioner told
us, on the Friday evening—the evening we slept at the
Bush Inn ; and there were several patrols out now
hunting for the robbers. One man had been robbed
by a mounted bushranger, while there were nine other
persons in the cart who looked on unmoved. Doubtless
the numbers going down to the races had been the
temptation, for no such outrage had occurred for many
weeks previously. We slept, of course, last night in a
tent, there being no other sort of dwelling place on the
diggings. But it is a very comfortable way of living.
Their fare was very good barring the absence of butter
and milk ; and altogether it must be anything but
unpleasant mode of life for those among them who have
x Captain Mair (formerly of the 99th regiment), was commandant
of the mounted Gold Escort.
2 The Bishop was the Right Rev. Dr. Charles Perry. He was con-
secrated Bishop of Melbourne in 1848. Formerly he had been a tutor
at Trinity College, Cambridge. William Westgarth, in his “Personal
Recollections of Early Melbourne,” p. 118, also relates the story of
the Bishop and the Vicar Apostolic.


nothing to do—-tie officers for instance. . . . After
luncheon Mr. Wrifht offered me a horse ; proposed a
ride to Specimen ffilly, which I had expressed a wish
to see. Mr. Doveon 1 and Mr. Armstrong accompanied
us. Sir Montagu was engaged in hunting out some
former tenants of lis who were working at the diggings
so that he could rot come with us.
On our road wemet two diggers, each with a sack of
earth on his bac which they were taking to some
waterhole to wasi. They were “prospecting" as the
phrase goes ; tha is, they were raising and washing
earth in various sots, in the hope of discovering some
valuable auriferou vein. But by the regulations of the
police all work isforbidden on Sunday ; so that this
prospecting was a/iolation of the law. Mr. Armstrong
(superintendent d police) dismounted, gave his horse
and whip to one othe offenders to hold, took up the two
sacks, and scatted all the valuable earth upon the
road. Mr. Wrigt, who was a spectator of this act of
summary justice,told them that it served them quite
right for working on a Sunday. They neither made
resistance nor shwed any discontent. One of them
only said, “Well, Sr, I hope never to do it again." lat
first stood quite rhast at this specimen of submissive-
ness in Anglo-Sasns and colonists, especially after all
that I had heardd their independent and unruly dis-
positions. But, n reflection, I am convinced that
turbulence as we as every other evil temper of this
evil age belong no to the lower but to the middle classes
—those middle cisses of whom in our folly we are so
wont to boast. Ir. Wright assured me that the police
had never met wih any serious obstruction in any act,
however severe, nd that their measures had been so
severe that he hd been compelled on his arrival to
enforce a little roderation. In this spirit he was a
little displeased £ Mr. Armstrong’s riding off from us
Kb A. Doveton, fctnerly of the 51st regiment, was an assistant
goldfields commissiocr.


to stop some fellows who were playing at quoits. There
were comparatively few men working at Specimen
Gully, though the earnings were pretty regular and
certain, and though—as Mr. Armstrong, who has been
in California, averred —the auriferous quartz extended
for more than half a mile. But they never meet with
here those large prizes—few and far between —which are
the delusive attraction of the other diggings. All the
gold here lies embedded in the quartz which they crush
with a hammer in order to extract it. They make —one
of them told me—about an ounce (equalling £2/13/-) a
day. Much, very much, is thrown away by them which
might be extracted with the aid of a crushing machine
and mercury. They enjoy here, what they enjoy
scarcely anywhere else, a well of pure cool water.
Mr. Armstrong and I gathered a few specimens on
the ground, and I bought four others. While we were
returning through Forest Creek we came up with a party
of fellows who bore unmistakable traces of the sly-grog
shop in their gait and appearance, and who shouted to
us as we rode by, “Who stole the donkey ?” a favourite
piece of chaff here directed against white hats —on what
ground Ido not know. 1 This was the only piece of
incivility I met with while at Mount Alexander. I was
often in one part or other of the diggings and I never
met with any sort of rudeness, and frequently with
singular civility. Sir Montagu, who from his Irish
connections was still more among them than I was,
gave exactly the same account. 2 My black coat, which
x At the time when white top-hats were commonly worn, it was
believed that they were made from the skins of donkeys, and that
donkeys were frequently stolen because the thieves could get good
prices for the skins. Consequently, when rude boys saw a white’
top-hat, they would call “Who stole the donkey ?’’
2 “I can safely say, in justice to the miners, that during the whole
time I was a Commissioner at the gold fields, I always received the
greatest civility from the men whom I should call gold diggers.
There were plenty of ruffians loitering about the place, who gave a
little slang sometimes, but there were many more disposed to respect
and support authority.”—C. R. Read, p. 160.


by the account of so many—even of diggers—was to
procure me so muci hooting, never excited the slightest
notice. Strange hat people should take such trouble
to tell lies. I likwise observed that throughout the
diggings the ordery quiet with which the Sunday was
kept was very renarkable and very creditable. There
was less noise and less apparent (more I cannot speak
to) revelry than a passing stranger would notice in the
town of Hatfield. The reverent demeanour of those
who attended our service this morning was also very
noticeable.
Monday, March 29.— Went down with Mr. Arm-
strong into a neighbouring glen to make a seizure of
a sly-grog shop. As we were walking over the hill
under which the amp lies, we came up with a digger
who was erecting j sort of tent with poles cut from the
forest. It was a Irge tent and involved a good deal of
work for a single man ; but it was nearly finished.
But as this hill ws destined in winter for the camp, it
was of course sacrd ground, and Mr. Armstrong told
the unhappy man Tat he must pull his erection down.
He grumbled, as natural, inasmuch as he had not
heard of the resevation before ; but like the rest, he
submitted. Wher we arrived at the grog shop we
found a policemai already standing as sentry at the
door, and others, carbines in hand, standing round.
Mr. Armstrong wet in, ordered all he found inside to
be handcuffed, ad proceeded to search. The man,
however, had bee too much for him—we only dis-
covered half a kej'of port. However, the selling had
been sworn to police spy, and so the tent was
doomed. The culrit’s own spade was used to knock
his tent down, am his wife actually helped to pull the
stakes out of the gound. All the woodwork was piled,
and a glorious bofire was made. The kegs and the
tent were confiscjed for the use of the authorities.
Meanwhile a crowcwas gaping round without venturing


to offer one word of interruption ; both they and some
diggers who were washing their gold in the waterhole
beneath seemed to look on with the most perfect un-
concern. At Ballarat, in more lawless days, when Mr.
Armstrong had it entirely his own way, he used to
collect a bundle of faggots, pile them up in the middle
of the forfeited tent, and set the whole concern in a
blaze —burning them out, as he expressed it, “rump
and stump,” destroying bedding, furniture, merchandise,
and clothing ; and yet, even to this, unauthorised as it
was, they never offered serious resistance. On the
present occasion the culprit seemed to fear that Mr.
Armstrong was going to do the same, and humbly begged
an exemption for his “traps,” which was graciously
granted. In the course of the day this man was fined
£IOO (it being a second offence), which he paid before
night; such are the profits of the illicit trade.
Mr. Armstrong made another seizure to-day, at which
Sir Montagu was present. While the bonfire was going
on he asked one of his ci-devant Irish cotters who was
standing by, “Well, what do you think of all this ?”
“Oh ! quite right, Sir, quite right; they’re a very wicked
set of people.” I think public opinion here seems to be
against them. These seizures are pretty frequent; Mr.
Armstrong tells me he has had as many as nine bonfires
blazing together at night in various parts. He attributes
the passive submission of these rascals to their being in
great proportion escaped Van Diemonians. Mr. Latube 1
told me that no fewer than 400 (false) were missing from
Van Diemen’s Land, and were doubtless at the diggings.
These men, though bad characters, 2 have a wholesome
respect for the law from having been experimentally
X C. J. La Trobe.
2 “Victoria had attracted the refuse of the adjoining penal settle-
ment of Van Diemen’s Land, who herded together and were ready
to undertake any crime.’’- —M’Combie “Australian Sketches,” p. 85.
It was to prevent immigration of this nature that the Victorian
Legislature passed the "Act to facilitate the apprehension and prevent
the introduction into the colony of offenders illegally at large.”


made acquainted with its terrors ; and they dare not
brave it openly. This doubtless may have its influence,
but I suspect thel submission is in at least an equal
measure due to thel personal character of Mr. Armstrong.
He is a very striking man, well made, tall, muscular,
with keen “flashing” eyes, a splendidly clever counten-
ance, perfect temper, and a quiet, fearless energy. His
fame has gone far and wide through the diggings—he
goes by the sobricuet of “the flying demon." He is a
Scotsman, and in nany of his expressions and gestures
and the curtness aid shrewdness of some of his remarks
he reminds me a pod deal of Mitchell.
After luncheon : walked over the hills to examine the
quartz and the sardstone which lay about it. It was
in a part where ro gold had been found. I observed
that when the quartz was broken it displayed the same
sort of cavities wlich in the auriferous quartz are filled
with gold. They told me here that of the different
sorts of quartz tiat which was dirty white was the
richest in gold ; tiat which was streaked with pink was
the next ; and tie pure white was the poorest of all.
I sent down my money this evening by the escort to
Melbourne. Witl so many robberies on the road I
thought it unsafe to take it down as I had brought it
up. Mr. Templeton, the escort officer, brought in
intelligence this evening that a robber had been shot
by a passenger, aid was lying, in great danger, at some
roadside inn.
Tuesday, Ma±h 30. —At 7 this morning our tent
was besieged by I a number of Sir Montagu’s former
tenants, who caim to send money home by him to their
relatives in Irelaid. Generally their wish was not to
make money enough to return themselves to Ireland,
but to bring ther starving friends out here. “It’s a
wonderful country this for the poor man, sir, especially
now," was what they all told him. Not among the
least of the difficrlties the digger has to surmount is the


danger of treachery in his mate. One of these Irish
fellows had been considerably victimised from this cause.
When, after digging some time, he and his mate had
arrived at a vein of rich mineral, his mate, who seems
to have been the keener hand of the two, used to send
him to a waterhole to wash worthless material while he
himself was snugly “nuggetting” (picking out nuggets
with a penknife or oyster-knife) on his own behalf.
This seems to have been a very common trick. But the
treachery of the mates sometimes went further. I sub-
sequently met a digger who told me that he had gone
up with a large party, but that he had been obliged to
break it up on discovering one of them in the act of
secreting the weapons used for their common defence,
of course with a view to further plunder.
At 10 o’clock we set off together with Mr. Clowe 1 and
Mr. Cockburn in a two-horse cart for Bendigo. Mr.
Cockburn is the commissioner who resides there. Our
vehicle was of a description I have never seen in England.
It was an ordinary spring-cart with one horse in shafts
and beside him another whose traces were attached to
an “outrigger”—an iron bar projecting from the right
side of the vehicle. To an inexperienced driver this is
of course a very awkward machine to steer ; and Mr.
Cockburn joined to a total ignorance of the art a very
inconvenient liability to brown studies. The result of
all this was that we were twice dashed against a tree
and three times within a hair’s breadth of being upset
in a gully. However, we arrived at Bendigo without
any material damage. The commissioner’s tent is
pitched at some distance from the actual diggings for
the greater convenience of obtaining water. There is a
waterhole close by bearing the elegant name of Sheep-
wash Creek, where he draws his water and the diggers
wash their gold. The water is very nasty, being strongly
flavoured, like much of the Australian water, with the
X J. M. Clow, assistant commissioner.


essential oil of the I‘stringy bark." It is certainly un-
wholesome, and oneamong many causes of the dysentery
prevalent here. Tiough it did me no harm it com-
pletely upset Sir Mmtagu’s internal arrangements.
From this camp the commissioner rules a body of
100,000 men ; exaits their licence fees, punishes their
offences, and guard) their gold. For this latter purpose
his only coffer is a in paper box secured by a sixpenny
padlock ; and his oercive force consists of three police-
men, two carbines md a sword. And yet his tent has
never been robbed lor his authority resisted. To-night
Mr. Cockburn had j. prisoner to guard, which, as he had
only one spare mai and no spare tent, was somewhat
embarrassing. In the course of the evening the sentry
sent in a humble petition that he might be allowed to
sleep handcuffed tc his prisoner, as there was no other
sentry to relieve him, and he could not answer for his
own vigilance during an entire night ; a request that
was graciously granted. The commissioner received us
hospitably, and gaye us of his best; but certainly the
accommodations an not calculated to confer much ex-
ternal dignity upo| the office of Her Majesty’s repre-
sentative. There vere but two tents (besides those for
the men), one for tie commissioner and one for his clerk
—a young gentlenan reminding me strongly of Mr.
Jefferson Brick.
One of these teits was given up to us. In it the
dinner was served.; It was a solid meal, consisting of
damper, mutton, md potatoes —the two latter half
cooked in the embus of the camp fire. We ate these
provisions in a species of widened pannikin, something
between a wash-hard-basin and a soup plate, ingeniously
constructed so as tc be inconvenient in either capacity.
Such a conventiondity as a tablecloth was, of course,
not to be expected. ' But I pitied the poor commissioner,
who, being deprivec of his only pair of knives and forks
by his guests, was educed to the tantalising expedient


of carving with his penknife. I was honoured with the
only chair in the place ; Sir Montagu sat upon the
truckle bed, which his weight immediately brought to
the ground ; Mr. Clowe had a stool, Mr. Cockburn sat
in a corner upon an inverted bucket, and the poor little
clerk retreated from public view and squatted on the
ground. Our beverage was tea, with a strong lash of
stringy-bark. Afterward brandy made its appearance —
good fiery stuff, and no mistake. We sat up some time
drinking grog, and the three officials smoking.
This hermit-like frugality is very amiable, but where
a control has to be exercised over large masses of men
it is certainly unwise. It is much to the'credit of the
diggers that the feebleness and meanness of this estab-
lishment does not seem to have weakened their respect
for constituted authority. Mr. Cockburn told me a
story in point which rather struck me. As the drought
of this summer increased, the water-hole which he had
appropriated was almost the only one which continued
to afford a good supply ; and numbers of the diggers,
cut off from that, were barely able to get enough to
drink. As the prospect increased of dying of thirst,
they assembled at the commissioner’s tent, and in a
body begged him to allow them to use his tabooed
water-hole. Mr. Cockburn declined; a fellow was
insolent ; Mr. Cockburn seized him and locked him up.
The crowd might easily have taken for themselves what
he refused to grant, and have rescued their comrade
from the clutches of his three policemen. But instead
of that they peaceably retired, and proceeded to draw
up a petition. Then Mr. Cockburn thought it both
more just and more prudent to give in. He also told
me that whenever he goes among them they are always
too glad to appeal to him to settle, as arbitrator, any
differences they may have. They distrust each other’s
arbitration, but have full reliance on that of one above
them.


Wednesday, 3l. — I slept pretty well during
the night, except hr the intense cold. It was a very
cold night, one of he sudden changes of temperature
peculiar to Australi; and we had nothing but regula-
tion blankets to coer us (no sheets). I had my large
cloak, which came in very usefully; but what poor
Mr. Cockburn mus do in general I cannot conceive.
At 8 o’clock we stated for Bendigo itself—the Golden
Gully as it is callei. 1 The road is very bad, and the
dust even worse thn on the approach to Forest Creek.
There is a good del of traffic over it; for many of the
diggers cart their erth from Golden Gully to wash it at
Sheep wash Creek, a distance of eight miles. I was
amused at the def.rential haste with which the carts
drew aside at the :erce bidding of our orderly—one of
Mr. Cockburn’s twcsolitary mounted men. Mr. Wright
declares that wherthe diggers address a policeman in
uniform they alwcts call him “Sir,” but they always
address a fellow in blue shirt with a carbine as “Mate.”
“Mate” is the ordnary popular form of allocution in
these colonies. M Cockburn was coming over himself
not only to lioniseus, but to inquire about a murder,
the news of whichhad reached us last night. As the
story ran then a mn had entered another’s hut at 2 in
the morning, had een seized by him, had shot him in
the mouth, and ha been rescued from his resolute grasp
by the surroundig crowd. This did not seem very
likely, and when e arrived at Golden Gully the tale
assumed a totally different form. It had been 9 at
night, not 2 in theiorning ; there was a doubt whether
the robber had coie to steal the other’s gold, or only
to demand some mney of which, it was said, the other
had the day befoi defrauded him ; and the crowd so
far from rescuing im, had seized him, passed him over
I The first gold disccered at Bendigo is said to have been in the
bed of the creek nea:Golden Gully ; and shortly afterwards the
metal was found at lihbark Gully and Pegleg Gully.


a slow fire, and had hardly been restrained from lynching
him. Anyhow the robber was afterwards caught, and I
believe the victim ultimately died. The sequel Ido
not know. On arriving at Golden Gully Mr. Cockburn’s
heart was delighted by the news that 10 muskets had
been sent up by the Government for his protection.
They had not yet gone so far as to send men to use them.
Golden Gully deserves its name ; it seems wonder-
fully rich. The whole of the glen is perfectly honey-
combed with holes. The very paths which run between
the holes are undermined. I cannot but think that
when the winter floods come they will wash down the
whole into one dead level again. I went down into the
hole of one of the diggers, a friend of Mr. Cockburn’s,
and observed the manner in which the deposit lies. He
was lying down at the bottom of his hole picking out
the nuggets comfortably with his penknife from a sort
of conglomerate about 4 in. thick, consisting of quartz
and clay. The nuggets varied in size from that of a
pin’s head to that of a flattened pea, and the stratum
of conglomerate which contains them seems to be about
8 ft. from the surface. Below it is a very thick stratum
of pipeclay. In California gold is found beneath a
similar formation. This has led to much useless labour,
for, though some have gone to the depth of more than
30 ft., none has succeeded in penetrating through it.
Ihe expectations formed by the diggers seem most
extravagant. One of them came to Mr. Cockburn and
asked him to take charge of his gold—-“it was only
200 ounces.” In the same way, on Sir Montagu’s
asking one of his Irish friends “how so-and-so was
getting on,” the answer was, “Oh, sir, not very well.
I believe he has got about £SOO !”
There is at present no escort from Bendigo, which
very much diminishes the price of gold. Here it is sold
at £2/11/- or £2/12/-, whereas at Forest Creek it is £2/14/-
to £2/15/-, and in Melbourne £2/18/- to £2/19/6. The-


gold-buyers I take i; are making a great deal more than
they have, commercially speaking, any right to. They
are shrewd, and tin diggers simple and rich. After I
had wandered abort; the holes for a sufficient time and
seen all I wanted tc see, I went up with Mr. Cockburn
to get a luncheon o! tea and damper at a tent of rather
more workmanship and pretension than the generality
could claim. It wa> just a gigantic umbrella, with the
handle stuck into tie ground and the canvas prolonged
over the sides so as to fall down to the ground. There
was a table fixed round the handle, and there was
moreover room for a truckle bed, a chest, and two chairs.
It was curious that both in this, and in another digger's
tent (the only two) which I entered, the only volume
to be seen was a cohection of what Mr. Hartshorn would
have called “amatoiy verses of a voluptuous character.” 1
After the luncheon was concluded we got into our
cart (Mr. Clowe driving) and took our leave of Mr.
Cockburn. In the& diggings as in the others we were
generally treated with great civility. Once, while I was
moving about by riyself, one fellow chaffed me about
my white hat in the formula I have before mentioned ;
but my dress was sc nondescript, consisting of a jumper
over a black coat, vith a white hat, that it might well
have excited his feelings. But this was the only
instance of rudenes. We drove home through a bad
and dusty road, sopping for half an hour at the
Porcupine Inn.
Thursday, Apri i. —After breakfast this morning
I rode up with Mr. Armstrong, Mr. Berry, and Captain
Berkeley 2 to start ly the mail from the old post-office
(where the cart whch brought us up had landed us).
Captain Berkeley 3 Mr. Armstrong’s appointed suc-
cessor. The lattei has resigned his office, chiefly
I The allusion may be ) the Rev. C. H. Hartshorne, the Cambridge
librarian and antiquann, author of “Ancient Metrical Tales,”
“Book of Rarities in th University of Cambridge,” &c., who was
living in 1852. 2 Berkeley was a police superintendent.


because the Government have refused to put him in
the Commission of the Peace, as they have done to all
the crown land commissioners. Mr. Wright thinks
they have done wisely in this ; to a stranger it does not
seem so. Captain Berkeley is a very different man
from Armstrong—piano and redtapish, but I believe
he has had experience in the Adelaide police. We found
the mail had not arrived. It did not arrive till 3.30 p.m.,
and then the horses were so fagged that the driver
refused to take any passengers. So I was obliged to wait.
Friday, April 2. —Rode this morning with Mr.
Rawnsley to the old post-office to arrange if possible for
an early departure. Found that nothing started before
Sunday. Mr. Rawnsley has made himself extremely
unpopular by his uncourteous manner and arbitrary
acts. At Freyer’s Creek rumours even of tar-and-
feathering have been heard. To-day he contrived to
get up a quarrel with a policeman which compelled Mr.
Wright to suspend one of his best men, and also to
prevent Mr. Rawnsley from doing further mischief, by
removing him from Forest Creek. As a sample of his
mode of dealing, Mr. Wright related t 5 me his device
for luring an unlicensed digger from his stronghold in
his hole. He asked him if he had a licence, and on the
digger’s replying in the negative he said, "Come up,
then, my good fellow, and I will give you a licence,"
and the moment the digger had emerged from his hole
on this invitation he seized him by the collar crying
out, "I arrest you in the .Queen’s name for not having
a licence." Such things'seem to create more ill-will
than,Tent burning or arbitrary fines.
Saturday, April 3. —After luncheon to-day, Captain
Blanker, 1 Mr. Finch, 2 and Dr. McCrae 3 and I walked
I Captain Blamire, formerly of the 99th regiment, a police officer.
2 Lieutenant Finch, nth regiment officer in command of mounted
gold escort.
3 W. McCrae, formerly a surgeon in the Royal Navy ;at this time
assistant colonial surgeon. Before the gold rush he had been a
pastoralist on the Dandenong.


over to Specimen Cully. On the road they showed me
what the natives tall ‘‘blackfellows’ sugar.” It is a
species of manna Ming plentifully from the white-gum.
It tastes very muci like the second layer in a wedding
cake. At Specimei Gully we found the diggers sitting
very comfortably ii a shady bower, leisurely smashing
the quartz out of rhich they extracted the gold. One
of them told me tlat "it was not very profitable work
- —a man could onb get an ounce a day,” equalling £l6
a week.
Sunday, April p —A Mr. Cheyne performed service
here this morning. His congregation was a small one ;
his sermon of couse very Lydian. At last the mail
came. I very neaiy missed it, for it went away again
from the camp witiout any of the commissioners being
aware of its arrival However, Mr. Wright lent me his
horse, an orderly bok my knapsack, and we arrived in
time. I took leavs of them all and of Sir Montagu. I
rode on one of tie driver’s horses—so he wished—to
Kyneton, guided l>y a small boy ; and I got there at
6.30, about half ai hour before him. The roads are
getting worse and worse, and it is universally expected
that when the rain come they will be impassable. The
result is that the jrice of cartage has risen enormously
in proportion to tie anxiety to obtain it before winter
sets in. It is nov 25/- per cwt. This has its effect
upon the price of provisions. Beer is 3/- a bottle. A
sheep is 16/-. Tlis again—joined to the mania after
gold—raises the pice of labour. Here at Kyneton a
servant gets io/-ia day, whereas the best wages in
Adelaide are only3o/- a week. Shoeing a horse is at
least 25/-. But tie fact that labour can be got, and
readily got (near he diggings), as Mr. Gibson assured
us, 1 shows that figging is anything but universally
I Possibly Mr. Stewfft Gibson, who in 1852 held the Ravenswood
run in partnership wth F. Fenton (Billis and Kenyon, Pastoral
Pioneers of Port Phillb, p. 221).


profitable. At a distance from the diggings the squat-
ters can hardly obtain it for love or money. Mr.
Cockburn told me that he and Dr. Palmer, 1 the Speaker
of the Legislative Council, of Melbourne, had calculated
by comparing the number of diggers with the estimated
amount of gold raised and the price of necessaries—
that on the whole digging did not pay good wages. As
there are many who make more, there must obviously
be many who make less. The report of Messrs. Dutton
and Bagot at Adelaide was much to the same effect.
They said that five made fortunes, 45 good wages, and
50 did not pay their expenses. But the statistics from
which these results are deduced are excessively uncer-
tain.
Monday, April 5. —Started early this morning by
the mail for Melbourne. There were four diggers in the
cart with me, to whose conversation I listened, though
I hardly spoke myself. They all spoke with satisfaction
of the destruction of the sly-grog shops. Mr. Rawnsley
did not seem to be more popular with them than with
anybody else. I got to Passmore’s about 6, and should
not have been given a bed had not the waiter fortunately
passed and recognised me. At dinner the playful
diggers took to abusing the waiter and throwing bread
at each other ; and I came in for my share of the
pellets. I was obliged to sit up late in order to mend
my cloth, which was a good deal torn.
Tuesday, April 6.—Spent the morning making
inquiries for vessels going to Launceston, in Van
Diemen’s Land. Finally took passage by the Mariposa
which professes to start to-morrow.
’Afterwards Sir James Palmer. He was President of the Legisla-
tive Council from 1856-1870. He was knighted in 1857.




