

Lord Howe Island
Cruises
STEAMERS :
S.S. “CHANGTE”
S.S. “TAIPING”
G. S. YUILL & CO. LTD.
Managing Agents
6 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY
JOHN SANDERSON & CO.
in WILLIAM STREET, MELBOURNE


The following particulars have been supplied
by the authorities for the information of
those who are visiting Lord Howe Island on
the cruises of A-O. Liners, “ Changte ”
and “Taiping
Administration of the Island
The administration of Lord Howe Island has been
placed, by His Excellency the Governor-in-Council,
in the hands of a Board of Control. The Board
at present comprises Mr. E. B. Harkness, C.M.G.
(chairman), Mr. F. W. Kitching and Mr. S. L.
Anderson (members). The Board is vested with
complete control of the Island and its affairs. The
Chief Secretary is the Crown Minister.
In order that the requirements of the Board may be
supervised on the island, a Local Advisory Com-
mittee (elective), consisting of three persons, has
been set up. The present committee consists of
Mr. W. S. Thompson, who is chairman, and Messrs.
P. W. Dignam and W. C. Whiting.
Descriptive
When one sets foot on Lord Howe Island he stands
in a land where there are no hotels, ho theatres
or picture halls, no policemen, no magistrate or
Court of Law, no newspapers, no telephones, no
street lighting, and no roads in the ordinary sense
(just narrow well-formed strips). The only Govern-
ment Official on the Island is the schoolmaster.
The Island enjoys the advantages and protection
of a powerful Wireless Station (receiving and
transmitting), which is under the direction of
Amalgamated Wireless Limited. The permanent
population of the Island is less than 200. There is
always, however, a floating population (tourists)
on the Island, ranging from 25 to 75. Tbe Island
citizens are white people and constitute an intensely
loyal British community.


The scene presented to the mind and eye of the
visitor is one of transcendent natural beauty. The
two mountains (Gower and Lidgbird), the densely
wooded natural slopes, the absence of bare and
uninteresting outcrops, the coral reef, the blue
lagoon, the beautiful beaches and other features,
create a charm which is irresistible. The Island, in
fact, by reason of its healthful climate, the spirit
of mutual trust and respect for each other’s interests
that prevails, and the absence of Government
Officials or other Controlling Authorities, may be
described as a veritable “ Garden of Eden.”
Electorally speaking, the Island is part of the King
Electorate for State purposes, and is embraced by
East Sydney for Federal purposes.
Location, Proportions, and
Steamer Action
The Island is 436 miles north-east of Port Jackson,
is about 7 miles long and varies in width from 1 to 1J
miles, contains an area of 3,220 acres, but as it is of a
very mountainous nature (Mount Gower rising in
altitude to 2,840 feet, and Mount Lidgbird 2,504
feet), less than 500 acres are available for cultivation
by the residents.
Historical, etc.
When the British Government was engaged upon
the project of despatching the First Fleet to Aus-
tralia, they adopted a suggestion which had been
made by Captain Cook that as soon as possible
after founding the Colony at Botany Bay a settle-
ment should be formed at Norfolk Island. Ac-
cordingly, a week after the inauguration of Govern-
ment at Port Jackson, Governor Phillip, acting
under his instructions, despatched H.M.S. “ Supply ”
on this mission. The “ Supply ” was placed under
the charge of Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball, and
the party for Norfolk Island consisted of Lieutenant
Philip Gidley King, a small staff, and some servants.
Lieutenant King had come out with Captain Phillip
as Second Lieutenant of the “ Sirius.”


The “ Supply ” left Sydney on the 14th February,
1778, and on the 17th fell in with a beautiful island,
which Lieutenant Ball called “ Lord Howe Island,”
in honour of Lord Howe, then Secretary of State
for the Colonies in the British Cabinet. The
“ Supply ” visited Lord Howe Island again on her
return and arrived in Sydney on the 19th March,
bringing a glowing account of the place. It was
also visited by other vessels of the First Fleet in the
following May.
As long as frequent intercourse subsisted between
Sydney and Norfolk Island, Lord Howe Island,
which is situate about mid-way between the two
places, was often visited, and it was also, from a very
early period, the resort of whaling ships and trading
vessels.
The first “ Settlers ” arrived at Lord Howe Island
in 1833, or 1834, and consisted of three men, ac-
companied by Maori women and two Maori boys
from New Zealand, who were taken to the island
by the whaling barque, “ Caroline.”
The late Mr. Richard Dawson, an iron-founder,
of Sydney, in conjunction with a Captain Poole,
a military officer, bought out the first settlers for the
sum of £3O0 —Ashdown, one of the number,
however, getting an extra £5O for his improvements.
Poole sold half his interest to the late Dr. Foulis.
The original inhabitants then left the Island, and
were replaced by others, who were sent there by the
firm or left ashore by passing whalers. Captain
Poole had a difficulty with one of his men, whom
he imprisoned in a cask and brought to Sydney.
Poole escaped the legal consequences of this act,
but had afterwards to buy the man off by paying
him the sum of £5O.
Lord Howe Island is specifically mentioned in the
Constitution Act, and in various Proclamations and
Governors’ Instructions, as a dependency of New
South Wales, the reason of it being thus distin-
guished from other Islands that are dependencies
of the State being that it lies east of the 154th degree
of longitude, which is the limit of the jurisdiction
of the Government of this State in that direction.


Dawson and party abandoned the Lord Howe Island
enterprise in 1846, or 1847, partly because they did
not succeed in making it pay, and partly because
Captain Poole had failed to obtain the tenure that
he applied for from the Government. The in-
habitants thenceforth were left to their own re-
sources.
Physical Conditions
The flora of the Island is in great variety, forming
in all directions the most picturesque of shady
forests. The prevalence, however, of palms (of the
genus Kentia, of Howea) and of banyan form,
perhaps, its most remarkable feature. Single trees
of the latter, in many instances, covered acres of
ground, while the palms, countless in number,
run up to 50, 00 and 70 feet, all of which, added
to the colour of the water and the mountain. Island
and cliff scenery, give to this little isolated spot an
unmistakable charm. Mount Gower is 2,840 feet
high, with grey-black basaltic cliffs on its southern
side, 2,000 feet and upwards sheer to the ocean,
while Mount Lidgbird, which is particularly in-
accessible, is 2,500 feet in height. The Island
climate is peculiarly equable. Frosts are unknown,
whilst in summer the thermometer seldom rises
above 80 degrees. Rain is abundant and frequent.
The natural beauties of the Island render it most
attractive to visitors. Fish are very plentiful and
good sport can consequently be had.
Land
No land on the Island has been sold, and the people
(the shareholders in the Kentia Palm Seed Industry)
pay no rent, holding their areas on a Permissive
Occupancy basis. A shareholder in the industry
desiring to obtain a piece of land submits his appli-
cation to the Board of Control, which, after in-
vestigation, arranges for a suitable area to be
allotted.
The Lord Howe Island land tenure is intriguing.
No individual on the Island or elsewhere holds any


transferable or saleable right, title or interest in
land. The entire Island is vested in Permissive
Occupancy in the Board of Control, which body
has allotted various areas of land to Islanders on
the same basis—Permissive Occupancy. No rent is
paid—not even a “ peppercorn.” The occupying
Islander, subject to good citi2enship and proper use
of the land, holds it for himself and his direct
descendents from generation to generation. The
land and improvements revert to the Board of Con-
trol in the event of the particular family becoming
extinct. All the Islanders have erected most com-
fortable homes and effected other improvements
oh their holdings. At one time there was a feeling
amongst the occupants that, having effected im-
provements, they should be the possessors of some
form of title, if not fee simple then some form of
leasehold tenure. That feeling, however, has passed
away and has been replaced by an atmosphere of
complete contentment with the present basis, i.e.,
ownership by the Crown and permissive occupation
by the individual family concerned. An inspection
of the Islanders’ homes and the improvements
they have made impresses on one the measure of
trust which the Islanders have placed in the Crown,
as represented by the Board of Control.
Palm Seed Industry
The Kentia Palm is indigenous to the Island,
and the sale of the seeds of these palms constitutes
the principal means of income of the community.
The palms are regarded as the community’s property,
and when collected on the order of the Board of
Control, are despatched to Sydney for sale. After
paying all expenses the balance is held in trust by the
Board for the Islanders, and from this amount
monthly payments are made to the shareholders
in the industry. By this means the Islanders are
assured of a regular monthly income and arc enabled
therefrom to live in complete comfort and content-
ment.
Thete are four varieties of Kentia Palms on the
Island—Forsteriana (colloquially known on the-


Island as “ Thatch ”), Belmoreana (locally called
“ Curly ”), Canterburyana and Mooreii. Although
the Kentia grows and seeds in other parts of the
world these ex-Island grown seeds do not have the
complete (high percentage) germination of seeds
grown on the Island. The Board of Control,
therefore, in marketing the Kentia seed practically
enjoys a world’s monopoly. The price is fixed
by the Board of Control each year after careful
consideration, and is always based on a level which
will assist in preventing the worlds market being
captured by other forms of decoration, such as
Japanese ornamental trees and other types of palms,
such as the Phoenix and the Cocos, etc.
The palm crop varies considerably and has fluctuated
during the last 13 years between 841 and 4,140
bushels. During the last few years owing to eco-
nomic conditions and the inability to effect sales,
there has been a very decided falling away in Island
receipts, but this notwithstanding, the Board has
continued to make substantial payments to the
Islanders by being in a position to call upon its
reserve of funds which had been accumulated during
the bounteous years of 1927, 1928, and 1929.
Some years ago the rat obtained a footing on Lord
Howe Island and increased at a remarkable rate.
So much so that the bird life of the Island was
practically exterminated and serious inroads were
made upon the palm seed. Experience showed
that the best method of coping with this pest,
however, was by the introduction of owls to the
island and the prosecution of a vigorous campaign
of hunting and trapping.
To induce the Islanders to co-operate as actively
as possible in the rat campaign the Board of Control
has been paying a bonus for some considerable
time at the rate of (id. per tail. Owing to the need
for economy, however, it was recently found
necessary to reduce this payment from 6d. to 4d.


per rat. Furthermore, the Board supplies guns and
ammunition to Islanders at nominal charges, and
also makes rat traps available at less than half price.
Special Notice
Visitors to Lord Howe Island are reminded that
permission to land is given on a definite under-
standing that before they return to the ship, repre-
sentatives of the Local Committee may require
the opening of parcels to ensure that palms or other
native plants are not being taken away irregularly.
Passengers on these cruises are respectfully asked
to note ;
1. That all vegetation, such as palms, ferns, etc.,
is absolutely protected.
2. Likewise the Islanders’ homes, orchards and
gardens are private property, just as we under-
stand the term on the Mainland of Australia.
3. The evils arising from the use of intoxicating
liquors have never arisen on the Island. There
is no such thing as a drink question and it is
confidently believed and requested that the
esteemed citizens of the Mainland cruising on the
“ Changte ” or “Taiping” will respect this
condition of affairs.
4. Fires should not be lighted on the Island, except
in places indicated by the Local Authorities.


TO THE EAST
British (Oil-Burning Steamers
“CHANGTE” - “TAIPING”
7 WEEKS HOLIDAY TRIPS
to HONG KONG
Queensland Ports, Thursday Island,
Manila, Philippine Islands and
The Great Barrier Reef
FIRST CLASS RETURN FARE
(NO EXCHANGE)
SAILINGS MONTHLY
A-O LINE
|w. I. lAKER 1 CO ITO
| ENCHAVtUS AND PHINTtH |
