

LOR N E :
% Seaside .Slutclj,
FROM LETTERS WRITTEN TO THE DAILY PRESS,
W. L. (Ballarat).
There is a pleasure in the pathless woods,
There is a rapture on the lonely shore;
There is society, where none intrudes.
By the deep sea, and music in its roar.
—Btroit.
vjr'HERE is a curious incident, whether true or not I cannot saj (writes
Dr. Gumming), alluded to by more than one of tbe Fathers, that St. John
was in the habit of amusing himself when very old with a partridge which he
had tamed. One day, it is related, a huntsman, who was a professor of the
Gospel, came to John with his bow and arrows on his shoulder, and laughed
at so great and venerable a man finding amusement in such a manner. John
replied by asking the huntsman, why he did not always keep his bow bent;
and the answer was, because the string would be weakened and the bow lose
its elasticity. John answered, “ That explains the reason of my amusing
myself here; the bow must not always be on the stretch—the string must not
be always under its severest tension.” A number of Ballarat and other
pilgrims, of somewhat lesser note than the hero of Patimo, holding similar
views, hied away last Christmas to that out-of-the-way place, Lome, —id est,
Loutitt Bay, —to eat their immolated goose, and dilate on the season—not
of the goose, but of the year. Being so favorably impressed with the
locality, I am induced to publish my impressions to make it better known, as
Queenscliff and similar popular maritime resorts have, A mon avis, lost their
first attractions by becoming too fashionable and expensive. It is a matter
for congratulation that a new spot is found with the varied surroundings and
terra incognita, which are fast making Lome famous, an Elysium far from
“ towered cities and the busy hum of men,” where one may rusticate at a
moderate outlay, with a chance of complying with the Horatian couplet,
“ Be every look serenely gay,
And drive all cloudy cares away.”
No other excursion of equal distance need excite less pre-anxiety in the way
of packing, and require fewer bewildering bandboxes, since no mid-day toilet


at Lome robs excursionists of precious time, nor does fashion enslave the mind.
There the coat is not the measure of the man, nor the dress that of a woman.
No block, thank goodness, there, for the latest Regent-street cut or Parisian
millinery. No; in outward value all are mostly “as like as two peas ; ” city
and village, judge and jury, master and servant, mingle in impenetrable dis-
guise.
Should, reader, your spirits be depressed by the attentions of too familar
creditors, the strain on the over or under-religious pressure of your life,
the constant whirligig of daily routine ? Then, go to Lome, where banks
(save of sand) and “ three days after sight ” are not; where one may worship
God in fern-tree groves, Nature’s church, domed with a blue azure and star-
spangled canopy, and revel in quietness and contemplation, away from the
wear and tear of religious or profane excitement —the rigs and bears of stocks,
newspapers, politics—and smoke the calumet in an atmosphere undisturbed
by man’s alarms. Does a Romeo seek to efface a Juliet from his memory ?
then it is for him to say with Montano, “ Let’s to the seaside, ho!” for he will
there find an “ oblivious antidote” as effective as that ordered for Lady
Macbeth. Does the philanthropist or merchant need a tonic for exhausted
energy? then a trip to such a place will, subject to certain conditions, tend
to make a Howard of the one and a Budget of the other. ’Tis, moreover, in
the “ dead ” season a perfect paradise for the ascetic, who may there, in true
Pythagorean fashion, eschew the world, the flesh, and the devil.
Lome is distant from Winchelsea twenty-seven miles, to which latter place
the passenger books himself per train, thence for a six hours’ trip by coach.
Half way to Lome, at Bell’s store, Dean’s Marsh, the wants of man and
beast are most handsomely provided for. Up to this point the road is through
Mr. George Armytage’s station-freehold, about eight miles at a stretch, dotted
here and there with grand Hereford stock, thence through five miles of Mr.
Robert Calvert’s run. After this the road, I may safely say, is not level.
Parts of it are like the back of Cooper and Bailey’s Bactrian camel on a large
scale, or a ridge of the Balkans, with a Schipka Pass or two thrown in. At
one time the coach takes a direct route to the stars ; at another moment the
reverse takes place ; so much so, that were the all-important coach-brake to
break, I fancy one’s downward career would be pretty soon ended by a break
of another kind. The road is beyond dispute one vast panorama of ever-
changing gorgeous scenery. One time you are in the midst of a dense forest
of trees, whose trunks are as much as 20 feet in circumference near the
ground; at another time an open space suddenly reveals a vast woodland
landscape, retreating in terraced beauty as far as the eye can reach. At
another turn of the track a bird’s-eye view is obtained from some lofty range,
whence the Mounts Buninyong, Warrenheip, Elephant, Anakies, Gellibrand,
and the Warrions, are plainly seen, also the lakes Modewarre, Murdeduke, and
Corangamite, with Arthur’s Seat, Cape Schank, &c. By the roadside are ever
and anon clusters of various ferns and lycopods, including the towering Dick-
sonia Antarctica, with their beautiful horizontal fronds, and the tiny Adian-
tum cuneatum, hiding below. Of the 135 specimens of the genus Eucalyptus,


the following, and may be others too, are found on the ranges referred to :
White gum, blue gum, peppermint, box, ironbark, stringybark, and messmate,
some of which are of extraordinary size, a fact attested by Mr. F. M. Krause,
the Government surveyor, in a departmental report in August, 1873, and who
measured a fallen tree—at the butt 53 feet in circumference, at 12 feet from
the ground 32 feet ditto, at 20 feet from the ground 17 feet ditto, at 110 feet
from the ground 11 feet 6 inches. There are also the she-oak, cherry-tree,
lightwood, blackwood, dogwood, white wattle, muskwood, and honeysuckle.
Mr. Brough Smyth refers in a Parliamentary report to trees in this locality
250 feet high.
The weary but delighted traveller at last, after a sudden twist in the
hillside road, rests his eyes upon the “ township” of Lome, as it snugly nestles
in the small indentation of the coast line about midway from Queenscliff to Cape
Otway, on a plateau of about 80 acres, sheltered by towering ranges, densely
wooded, at the outlet of the Erskine Creek. The buildings comprise
Messrs. Mountjoy’s establishment, the Lome hotel, and four or five small
cottages, in addition to a jetty which the Government are in the course of
constructing. On reaching Mountjoys, the excursionist is at once made at
home by being received with rustic unsophisticated simplicity, '‘full o’ the
milk of human kindness,” and that is so acceptable to the tired traveller.
Their generally-crowded house of 64 rooms, accommodates about 120 visitors,
and owing to the increasing demand, further additions may yet be necessary.
The table-d’ hute is good, and well supplied, the latter being a qualification
which one very soon appreciates after the wear and tear consequent on the
exertion of pleasure-hunting in that rugged region, which, with the bracing
sea breeze, creates an unmistakable appetite.
Fishing is an agreeable amusement when the season is good and the weather
favorable. There are to be had mountain trout, fresh water herring, salt
water herring, bream, mullet, salmon trout, cod, flathead and crayfish.
The bait mostly used is small fish, minnows or pilchards for bream and salmon,
while sandworms are found with difficulty for mullet. Meat is used for flat-
head, and sometimes the fly for salmon, mullet and herring; and limpets for
the rest. Ladies devote hours to shell-gathering, the genus Trivia, commonly
known as the Kawri, being most prized; else they wander over the sand and
rocks by the shore, or enjoy a dip in the sea, near the remains of the wreck
of the Osprey, where the waves at times roll up with great grandeur, creating
foam enough to make an army of Grecian Yenuses.
The geologist is likewise here furnished with abundant pabulum for reflec-
tion and investigation. Dank overhanging rocks, gullies, and gorges flanked
with carboniferous rocks, all green with clinging vegetation growing from
interstices, —huge mesozoic boulders in the creek-beds, mossed over with
parasites, —make locomotion now and then difficult. It is not at all an
uncommon thing to see the enthusiast discover a sudden and unwelcome
“ testimony of the rocks,” at least as to their hardness, by slipping as he jumps
from ledge to ledge.


In writing a description of Lome and its vicinity it will be necessary to
preserve some order. I will then commence with the north-eastern beach.
A mile from the so-called township is situate Stony Creek, three miles up
■which are tree ferns, with trunks thirty feet and more high, and nine feet
round. A mile further along the beach is Reedy Creek. Again another mile
are the Big-hill, 500 feet high, covered with ironbark and scrub, and the Big-
hill Creek, two miles inland from which is Kelsall’s Rock. Five miles from
Lome is Grassy Creek, five and a half miles Spout Creek, with its shale layers,
eight miles Mogg’s Creek, and ten miles is Airey’s Inlet, marked by a bluff
120 feet high, separated sixty yards or so from the main cliff, and known as
the Bird Rock or Eagle’s Nest. It is ascended with great difficulty, a fact
demonstrated by a gentleman some three years ago. He slipped and injured
himself so that he lay in a critical condition for some days. Seven miles still
further on is Swampy Creek, from which place Queenscliff is distant about
twenty-three miles. All those creeks rise in the Dividing Range, some-
where about five or six miles inland.
Two miles along the beach in the other direction from Larne is the hill
well known as Teddy’s Look-out, between which and Mount St. George
constantly flows St. George’s Creek. Up this creek are two rapids and a
seventy-feet waterfall, styled the Phantom, from the circumstance that about
four years ago some men out after wild cattle came across these falls, but
they were not found again for two years, notwithstanding some efforts were
made. Herring are caught up this creek, and mullet at the mouth. Beyond
this point is Mount St. George, 650 feet high, covered for the most part w,ith
blue gum. It is extremely precipitous on the side facing the sea. A mile
further on are She-oak Creek and Range. Beyond these, and a mile on, are
the three hills known as the Twins and the Cumberland; the latter is 600
feet high, having on the far side an enormous sandstone precipice. At the
foot of it flows the Cumberland Creek, paved with great boulders of greyish
sandstone, with Ironstone nodules and shales, distant four miles from Lome
—a place of resort for Waltonians, as two miles up the creek are herring
and at the sea mullet. On the south side of the creek is Mount Defiance,
700 feet, with a perpendicular bluff 600 feet high. These hills, like most of
the others, are covered with gum and undergrowth. Eight miles from Lome
still along the beach, is Jamieson’s Creek, and twelve miles is the Wye Creek.
Then comes the Kennett River and Addis Bay, distant sixteen miles from
Lome. It is somewhat smaller than that at the latter place. Kennett River
rises, like the neighbouring streams, in the Dividing Range, but the exact spot
can only be conjectured. It is a fine creek for mullet. Further on is Cape
Patten seventeen miles, Apollo Bay thirty, Cape Otway forty-seven. I may
here note that the miles are unusually long at Lome, and travelling either
by rocky shore or scrubby steep hill is a very difficult task indeed, a fact
shown from the circumstance, that although the Mountjoys have for fifteen
years rented from the Government a selection nine miles along the shore by
three deep (of which Lome is about the centre), yet they have hardly seen the
whole of it, owing to its wild and impenetrable nature.


Let the brief foregoing suffice for the coast line. We will now turn inland
to the more attractive spots, viz., the falls, known as Splitter’s, Straw’s,
Erskine’s, Kyle’s, and another above the last, not named. The three first
are ones chiefly known to visitors, and are reached in the order stated. All
flow into the main Erskine River, thence into the Rapids, which, after
continuing for three-quarters of a mile in a sinuous course over great sand-
stone boulders, through a deep ravine, are finally lost in the surf of the sea.
In summer one can walk over these boulders, but during the rainy season the
banks must be kept as the torrent is deep and violent. At the top of the
Rapids meet the two water-courses known as the left and right hand
branches. About two and a half miles up the latter are Kyle’s Palls,
discovered three or four years ago, and seldom visited since, and half a mile
or so further on are falls not designated and not seen a second time. It is
the left hand branch, however, which furnishes the prime attractions. The
explorer, after reaching the top of the Rapids, where the two branches meet,,
follows a track cut between them leading up a steep hill, whence the tops of
ridges and spurs 1100 feet high are traversed with varying difficulties, till at
the end of four miles the top of Splitter’s Palls is reached, so named after two
men of that occupation who found them. They commence at an elevation of
800 feet above the sea level, and have a fall of 200 feet from ledge to ledge.
Prom this point a splendid view is had. The spectator looks down on terraced
hills, deep gorges and umbrageous forests of primeval density. Leaving
Splitter’s Falls, a zig-zag course is taken for a mile and three-quarters till the
top of Straw’s Fall is reached. These were found about four years ago by a
gentleman of that name. The water dashes from ledge to ledge a distance of
250 feet, making the milky white spray glisten again in the sun’s beams,
and would, if transferred behind a stage-curtain, make the fortune of the
manager of a Christmas pantomime. A prospect is had here not inferior to
that at the former falls. A detour is then made to the left, and the steep hill
is descended, the manner of getting down which simply beggars a faithful
description. The visitor, after leaving Straw’s Palls, reaches, at a 970 feet
elevation, the farthest falls, which have a drop of 120 feet, namely, the
Erskine, by keeping, according to necessity, either the stony bed or side of the
creek for a quarter of a mile or so. Here are mingled a silvan sight and
undignified proceedings. One moment one is crawling up a big boulder on
all-fours, or along a fallen tree, or diving through dense groves of ferns by the
bank. These last falls are simply superb, amply repaying the toil of reaching
them. They were but a few years ago discovered, I believe, by one of the
Mountjoys, and beyond this point the country is comparatively unknown,
and waits the bold adventurer. The felices or ferns near these falls are of
Brazilian density—grand beyond description, and of gigantic dimensions—3o
feet high, with great branching lacy fronds, laden and fringed with seed cases
or sori, and forming a canopy which excludes the hottest meridian sun, and
whose stems, rooted in humid places, are covered with mosses and a kind of stag-
horn and elk-horn ferns. In almost inaccessible sequestered nooks are
varieties of the smaller species clinging to massive rocks, that rise high


on either side of the creek like mighty bulwarks, the sight of which, added
to the sounds of cascades and meandering waters, lend unexcelled effect to
the whole, making up a sylvan scene fit for the elves and sprites of a
“ Midsummer Night’s Dream,” and a spectacle by moonlight in harmony with
Shenstone’s lines :
“ Here in cool grot and mossy cell.
We rural fays and fairies dwell;
Though rarely seen by mortal eye,
When the pale moon, ascending high.
Darts through yon limes her quivering beams,
We frisk it near these crystal streams.”
The ferns at this and other spots exist in great variety, and for the informa-
tion of amateur florists, I may add, include the generas Lomarias, Aspleniums,
Polypodiums, Gleichenias, Adiantums, Pterises, Trichomanes, Aspidiums,
Cyclopeltis, and towering far above these dwarf species are the tree ferns
Dicksonia Antarctica (so called after Mr. James Dickson, the English
botanist), Alsopilla and Squamosa, also, it is said, one or two of the grandest
of all the tree ferns, the Cythea Medullaris, better known as the black tree
fern, whose fronds sometimes measure from 10 to 15 feet in length, and stems
20 to 50 feet high—in fact, Dr. Mueller mentions a fern fifty feet high found
somewhere in these ranges. Also, the tiny Adiantum Cuneatum —the maiden
hair fern—which is a universal favorite. In short, Nature’s charms are pro-
fuse enough to inspire England’s poet to sing of them —
“ These are Thy glorious works. Parent of good.
Almighty, thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair; Thyself how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who sitt’st above the heavens.
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these Thy lowest works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine. 1
Of the nearly 200 known species of Australian ferns, upwards of forty are
found in the Otway Eanges. Returning homeward the creek bed or side is
kept as far as the second falls, shortly after which the hills are again taken.
On the return, Ledge Ealls, of secondary note, and Jebh’s Pool, are seen.
The latter is half a mile past Splitter’s Ealls, and was named after a
Mr. Jebb, the Agnomen, one of the discoverers of the spot, which dis-
covery nearly ended with a coroner’s inquest and grave conclusion. Mr.
Jebb’s enthusiasm got the better of his legs, for he extended his researches
in a manner as unexpected as it was disagreeable to himself. At the moment
of success he slipped, and was washed down the slanting, slimy flat incline of
the creek-bed, and was landed, if I may use such a term, in a dark deep pool,
and was rescued by his own efforts and the timely aid of one of his friends,
thus furnishing a modern version of an ancient incident. Achilles pursued
by Scamander, for invading his watery domain (at the siege of Troy), was
“ borne down in crossing by a wintry brook,” and rescued from a terrible
death by the seasonable help of his friend Neptune. A lady, during our


previous trip to the same spot, was within an ace of doing likewise, and but for
timely effort there would have been a fine opportunity for a display
of chivalry.
And here I may observe that it is interesting to witness the accidentals
connected with trips to these falls. The night preceding the event, the sub-
ject is seriously canvassed and sat upon by the proposed excursionists. An
early breakfast is ordered, and hostess Mountjoy is duly interviewed and
solemnly impressed with the magnitude of the case, and of the necessity of
providing the customary “ billy” and a big noon-day feed. At early morn
the adventurers in old clothes and boots set out with lustly cheers and alpine
sticks. The preliminary canter is given in the true fortissimo fashion so
well known to musicians; by and by the first scrubby hill reduces the
exuberance to a forte-, then, as difficulties and prickly burrs increase, a kind
of mezzo forte sets in ; followed by a long, quiet, piano cadence, relieved only
by an occasional forzando —a sharp exclamation, brought about by some
unfortunate comrade coming to grief in the bed of a creek or down a steep
sideling —somewhat, I suppose, after the manner usual in shooting a rapid.
At length the falls are reached, which, after all the wear and tear of getting
to them, are, of course, truly beautiful. Anyhow it is necessary to say so, if
only by way of affording mental compensation for the cost of reaching them.
The afternoon return journey generally uses up any exuberance that may happen
to remain. The silent, footsore, and more or less Falstaffian ragged company
return in twoes and threes, so that the finale, is ignominious, and in fiddle
language, very con sordini, compared with the going forth in the morning.
I have never anywhere felt during my peregrinations the symptoms of
hunger so unmistakably pronounced, so quickly set in, and so hard to appease,
as at Lome. Nature, I suppose, from the consequent friction from travel, de-
mands recouping. Anyhow, this I know, that, before one has reached any of
the sights, the necessity for boiling the inevitable “billy” has arrived, just as
surely as ever Greek Kalends revolved. I have found too that the appetite,
seasoned by the unmistakable longing after flesh-pots when doing any of the
“ lions” of the spot, has been intense enough to make the most leathery
sandwich seem as tender as must have Dean Swift’s stewed one-year-old
babies. As a tourist, I say Byron is right,—the dinner bell is the tocsin of
the soul; and it was wondrous to see how many held similar views at the
first tinkle of that bell, and the sudden movement that is made to the dining
hall, where the mutton is attacked with all the zest that Don Quixote de La
Mancha did the flock of sheep. Freedom and equality are characteristics
within Mounfjoy’s house, and, as night spreads its mantle over outside scenes,
the company is formed in knots about the premises, discussing the past or
planning excursions for the future ; singing, impromptu games and contests
are likewise much indulged in. Terpischorean votaries of the Muse dance in the
hall, con amore , to the rich tones of a brilliant Schwechten. Sparkling fresh
water from the Eapids has been laid on to the premises at a cost of about
£350, so that warm and cold water baths are obtainable.


The Mountjoy visitors’ book is teeming with good recommendations from
His Excellency and artisan, and as varied as anything in the repertory of
a Weston or Holloway. Some are severely prosy, some are intended to be
poetical; while others are facetious trifles, with an undercurrent of humor
best understood on the spot. The following is part of a clever impromptu,
recently subscribed to by a company of Ballarat visitors :
“ If we withhold our peace, the very stones
Might shame us for our silent, tuneless tongues ;
Yet could we utter all we would express,
Thy praises still were all too faintly sung ;
Thy sylvan shades, thy sweet gem-dusted shores.
The broken moonlight rippling on thy streams.
Are fairy touches in a fairy scene,
Are sweet delights within a radiant dream.
Here solitude has charms ! The iciest breast
Must warm and glow beneath thy beauties rare.
Must recognise the Father’s hand, and own
“ Creator God” is written everywhere.
Thy loveliness will ever haunt our hearts.
An odour of sweet incense, memory born;
And Paradise must be most wondrous fair,
When earth can boast such spots as lovely Lome.”
By way of a codicil, let me say I am not an apologist for Lome, nor
retained in its interests. Conscience requires me to state that there are
drawbacks. It is not all “pippins and cbeese.” It is not tbe place for
the bait, the lame, or the blind to'go, nor for children in arms to be taken.
The visitor who gets best value for his money is he who has genial companions,
and who is a kind of Hercules in strength to reach the places of beauty, and
a sort of Argus to see them when reached. There is no “ royal road ”to sights
at Lome. The only method of conveyance is that supplied by nature ; not
even a Spanish mule could find a footing or occupation in such a region.
Finally, may the Mountjoys have long life and prosperity—a sentiment
elegantly conveyed in the classic(F) pentameter, culled from the visitors’ book—
Mountorum—joyumque,forevarum,
Et etiam omnes youngoxi, joyt.
January , 1879.
James Curtis, Printer, Armstrong Street, Ballarat.
