

©3^ll
LOUIS NAPOLEON:
HISTORICAL AND PROPHETICAL.
A. HiEOTTJ^EI
Delivered in aid of the Building Fund, of the Presbyte-
rian Church, Clunes, October 10th, 1865,
&
IROT. fit)
VFR(
VFBOSI, PRINTER, 123, ARQILE-ST., PITZROT.




fit 06 it
LOUIS NAPOLEON,
HISTORICAL and PROPHETICAL.
.A. LECTTJBE
Delivered in aid of the Building Fund of the Pvsbyterian
Church, Clunes, October 10th, 1865.
By B. CASS.
MELBOURNE:
fFROST, PRINTER, 123, ARGYLE-ST., FITZROY,




XjOTJXS IsTAPOLEOXT;
HISTORICAL AND PROPHETICAL.
The importance of the Historical and Prophetical
knowledge of Louis Napoleon, the present Emperor of
France, is so great, that I have an anxious desire to
set before you some of the gems of Holy writ; but
in particular to speak of him who would usurp the
throne of Christ. You will remember when the Sa-
viour came, about 18 centuries ago he suffered himself
to be tempted by the Devil, who, taking him up into
a high mountain, offered to give him all the kingdoms
of the world, on the condition that he should render
homage to Satan. This the Saviour declined; but
there cometh one who will accept this honor; he it is
of whom 1 am now about to speak.
In delineating the character of a public man, now
a days, it requires considerable caution to avoid being
led away by appearances in the character about to be
considered. That is, not to mistake greatness or no-
toriety merely, for goodness and true excellence.
Any man may be a hero. He has only to lift his
head a little above the crowd, to do or to say some
trivial thing, that nobody around him has the courage
to do or to say, and straightway he becomes the people's


man—the hero of the day. Fortunately the mystic
number 9 limits his days, when he drops to his former
level.
Even the brute who, for money or fame, or for
bloody revenge w T ith one fell stroke cruelly sends a
soul to Hades or to Paradise, and a nation to grief;
even he gets his por rail bandied about the civilized
world as if he bad been the noblest of patriots, and
had delivered a nation from accursed tyranny.
And this absurd peculiarity of the age, is often seen
to favor the rich, or the unscrupulous, or the vile,
because of their greatness; in preference to the noble,
the generous, and the true, who, although they may
not be great are nevertheless good. In treating my
hero to night, I shall endeavour to avoid this common
frailty, I shall not hold up my man to public admira-
tion simply because he is rich and exalted. I shall
not hold him up to scorn and ridicule, for his wisdom,
his courage, his greatness do not permit of it. Neither
shall I say all nor a tithe of what might be said either
of his apparent excellencies, or of his enormous
villanies ; but all I attempt is, to put you on the track.
that you may follow at leisure, the developments of
that wonderful man Napoleon 111.
It has often been said, “there is nothing in a name,"
and while in many instances this may be perfectly true;
in the present case nothing could he more erroneous.
1 shall endeavour then to show you that *• Napoleon”
is the name of names! It shall yet make nations
■p tremble. Kings will turn pale at the sound of it. The


'world in amazement will yet worship the name.
Amongst living men there’s not one can be compared
with him who rules the destinies of France, And
strong as is his faith in his own destiny as dictator oj
the world; equally strong is my faith in his accom-
plishment of all that his towering ambition aims at;
and however men and nations now may deride wdiat
in him they regard as a mere ebullition of ignorance
and impudence, rest assured of this, that subsequent
successive developments of this extraordinary man
will shortly sta/tle them into unmistakable convictions
of the most wilful blindness on their part, and of the
most alarming power on his.
The name Napoleon as applied to the present dy.
nasty on the throne of France, was originally given to
Napoleon the Great in honor of a saint whose glory
had long since departed ; so long indeed, that the man
became the patron of the Saint, by reappointing
(through the favour of the pope) the day of his fes-
tive observance. The name itself is composed of two
Greek words, “ Napos Leon,” the strict translation of
which is “ 7he lion of the thicket,” a singular and
striking fact, when considered in connexion with the
prophecy in the 4th chap, of Jeremiah, “ The lion has
come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the
Gentiles is on his way.’
It may not be generally known that Louis Napoleon
is of Greek origin. In order to his being the man I
take him to be, this is essential. The following
account of his family is given in the memoirs of the
3


Duchess D'Abrante published at Paris 1835. “ Louis
Napoleon has come forth out of Greece, one of the
four horn Kingdoms, because he derives his origin
and is lineally descended from a Grecian family of
high rank. One of his ancestors, David 11. Empercr
of Trebisonde, was the rightful heir to the throne of
Constantinople but was put to death by Mahornmed
II.; his only surviving son George Nicephor Com-
nene fled to Mania in Peloponesus in 1476, and was
made Protogeras over the community that was settled
there. This official dignity was held by ten members
of the Comnene family in succession, until 1G75,
when Constantine Comnene, the tenth Protogeras was
induced, from fear of being subjugated by the Turks,
to emigrate from Mania to Italy with 3,000 of his
fellow countrymen Arriving at Genoa on January
Ist 1676 he obtained from the Genoese Senate a grant
of some tracts of land in Corsica, which were thence-
forth colonised by him and his descendants.
One of his sons Colomeros Comnene, subsequently
settled in Florence in Tuscany, and as the Greek word
Calomeros signifies in Italian huona parte he therefore
adopted the name of Buonaparte. In 1719 Antonio
Buonaparte a member of this Buonaparte branch of
the Comnene family, emigrated from Tuscany to
Corsica, and Napoleon Buonaparte who was born at
Ajaccio in Corsica on August loth 1769, was his
grandson. Corsica was ceded by the Genoese to
France in 1768. The descent of the Comnene family
from David 11., last Emperor of Trebisonde, was
4


attested by letters patent of Louis XVI. issued Sep-
tember Ist 1783.
The present Emperor is the son of Louis Buona-
parte formerly King of Holland and brother of the
first Emperor, and of Hortense Beauharnais daughter
of the Empress Josephine. He was born, same say at
St. Cloud, others say at the Tuillenes in the month- of
April 1808, And he is of course, the nephew of
Napoleon the Great, the offspring of that bloody
reign of terror which towards the close of the last
century deluged France in blood and opened up to the
civilized world the high road to anarchy and ruin, and
whose boundless ambition was brought to a speedy
and ignoble end on the rock of St. Helena.
In 1815 after the defeat of Waterloo, Prince Louis
fled (with his mother and brother) an exile To Swit-
zerland, whence after receiving a military education
he, in company with his brother, proceeded to Italy,
and there espoused the democratic cause initiated by
his uncle.
This took place in 1830, and shortly afterwards
(having narrowly escaped being poisoned to death, as
his brother was, at the hands of some Bourbon assas-
sin) he sought admission to the French army, but was
ordered to quit the Kingdom, which he did, and re-
turned to Switzerland, But although exiled, he waa
yet subjected in various ways to the annoyances of
the persecuting Bourbons until the 30th October 1836
when he left his maternal home on a pretence of join-
ing iu a day or two’s hunt with some friends, while


in reality he set oat post haste for S'rnsbourg, and
having reached that place he at once found himself sur-
rounded by friends prepared toespouse his cause and who
without delay at an early hour on the following morn-
ing presented him, amidst deafening cheers, to the
regiment most favourable to the Napoleon interests.
And as no time was to be lost, the would be Emperor
with his accustomed promptitude placed himself at the
head of a column and proceeded in the direction of the
chief barracks where the main body of the infantry
were to be also enrolled under the banner of “Liberty;"
but by some unfortunate oversight in the arrangement
of the advan-e before the main body could be made
aware of the presence amongst them of the Prince
Louis and of his intentions, the two forces had met in
the court yard of the barracks, and, thinking it w'as
the work merely of some harebrained pretender, and
not a Napoleon, the General in command of the infan.
try ordered his men to fix bayonets, and such a scene
of confusion and discord ensued as to baffle descrip,
tion. Officers and men of the same army face to face,
each threatening to annihilate the other; one or two of
his body guard meanwhile offering to hew with their
swords a passage through the crowd for the Prince
who was unexpectedly surrounded with a thicket of
opposing bayonets. And in this desperate plight, for
the sake of peace, and to avoid recklessly shedding the
blood of those upon whom he depended some day to
support him, he consented to be taken prisoner, and
thus ended the Strasbourg affair.


The Prince was despatched to Paris, tried, and sub-
sequently put on board a steamer, and carefully
deposited on American soil, where he soon made
friends, and as his policy induced him to conduct him-
self becomingly he had an excellent opportunity of
making the acquaintance of American manners and
politics, and which opportunity he did not fail to
improve.
1840 found Napoleon in England, still an exile, as
he had been since he was seven years of age, and on
the 6th August of that year he entered upon his cele-
brated Boulogne enterprise, and which, to his great
indignation broke down just as simply as did that of
Strasbourg; but certainly if personal courage could have
given success no man ever better deserved it, he liter-
ally cut his way single handed through a densely
crowded square, and hastening to the beach escaped
by a boat, amidst a perfect shower of bullets; and in
the noble self-sacrificing effort to save a veteran friend
who was swimming after him, but who was on the
point of sinking, the boat capsized and all were preci-
pitated into the water, those who could, swam back to
the shore under the incessant fire of the enemies, the
Prince among the number, who, when he had landed
stood like a statue, with folded arms, a target for the
murderous bullets of his assailants, his faithful friends
dropping one by one at his side till he was left alone ;
when despairing of ever finding a ball that could hit
him, his enemies at last summed up courage to seize
him, and thus ended his second expedition which
7


nearly broke his iron nerve, and which brought down
upon him the ridicule of Europe; and had he been any
other than a Napoleon he would have lost his head as
well as his reputation ; but Louis Phillippe was too
much of a coward to guillontine a Napoleon ; and as
exile merely was not a sufficient guarantee of safety
from this revolutionist, the only course left was to im-
prison the Prince for life, and accordingly the young
man was hurried away to the fortress of Ham, where
for six mortal years, to him a century, he wiled away
his life between hope and despair, in the enjoyment of
little more than the bare necessaries of life.
Still this imprisonment was of service to him, in that
it enabled him to mature his plans for future action,
without the hindrances of ordinary and outside life.
Time wore away, destiny prevailed, not all the jails
of Christendom united could detain for a single
hour, the man whose appointed time of deliverance had
arrived.
On the 25th of May, 1846, Napoleon made his
•scape from the grim old fortress, dressing himself in
the well known garb of a workman (during some alter-
ations that were going on) and carrying a plank on his
shoulder, and a pipe in his mouth, he almost to his
own surprise, reached the outer gate in safety, where
a carriage with fast horses was waiting to conduct him
beyond the reach of his enemies, by the time the trick
should be discovered.
He quickly escaped to England, (whither all politi-
cal exiles have been glad to flee for refuge from con.


tinental storms) and where, for a couple of years he
very rationally employed his time, avoiding the absurd
and ruinous pleasures of the fashionable world, in
which most men of his circumstances would have too
freely indulged.
He was specially fond of the English hunt, and rode
his horse with skill second to none on the field. Many
a pleasant hour too, he spent in literary pursuits, as
his works can testify, and on the whole he was tolera-
bly happy amongst the English; a people he liked
much, and with whose language, customs and manners,
he became thoroughly familiar.
He had, however, one grudge against them, namely,
that they had dam his uncle; and he could not revive
that dynasty, and not revenge that defeat. Thus we
subsequently find him, after the coup d’etat of 1851,
addressing his army in these words: “Soldiers, I have
given you now two revenges, one for 1830, and one
for 1840. The third 1 now promise you is for Water-
loo, And as certain as that we are living creatures
will he fulfil his promise.
Silently though surely is he even now plotting
England’s ruin. Say not it cannot be. Boast not of
her wooden walls, they are gone, gone for ever. Bri-
tain no longer rules the waves. Her army is rotten at
the core. She grows not the bread she eats. She has
lost her old and powerful allies. She is sinking ! I
grieve to say it, she is sinking.
But to proceed. The notable revolution of 1848
brought Louis Napoleon to his feet again. In the


month of February of that year, Louis Phillippe was
compelled to abdicate in favour of an unruly and
murderous mob, led on by the Red Republican scum
of Paris, who sacked the Palace and assumed the
Government ; one dirty vagabond even sleeping one
night on the throne. Drenched with wine from the
Royal cellars, I suppose he sat in mock majesty and
there fell asleep, no doubt wonderfully surprised on
the return of daylight to find himself monarch of
France.
The feeble Phillippe under the familiar name of
Smith, sought refuge in England, where “ Napoleon
the Little" (for such was his nickname) was impatient-
ly awaiting the fit moment when he should throw
himself once more upon the nation, burning with de-
sire to work out his unfinished destiny, in the luxuri-
ous city the Bourbon had forsaken for ever.
The moment arrived. Trusting to the enchantment
of the name alone, he appeared on the scene. He was
a candidate for legislative honours, and succeeding,
took his seat in the National Assembly on the Bih of
June, about a fortnight before the dreadful three days’
conflict, between the Guards and the Red Republicans,
in which 1500 barricades were built of Parisian furni-
ture, and between which the streets were deluged with
blood !
Peace being partially restored, the election for Pre-
sident commenced, and the 30th of December J.B4S
found Napoleon President of France, by the votes of
6,000,000 of his countrymen !


He now breathed more freely. He had gained the
key to power. The Empire, with all its glory and all
its majesty now revived before his imagination. He
had relaid the corner stone upturned in 1815 by the
“ Holy Alliance,” who had then declared, in the face
of Europe “ no Napoleon shall henceforth sit on the
throne of France.”
Time has shown how utterly futile were their efforts
to subvert the Napoleon destiny, for those four very
nations were about the fDst to acknowledge the reviv-
ing power they thought to have stifled for ever.
Three years afterw-ards at the expiration of his term
of office, the President wished to be re-elected for a
term of ten years. The Chamber objected ; but he
was not to be foiled. With only two men in his con-
fidence, he arranged that all powerful obstructionists
should be suddenly removed out of the way, either to
jail, or into exile. The army were ordered to stand by
their arms, and every preparation was made, and se-
cretly brought to bear on the scene, on the memorable
morning of the 24th December 1851, when, to their
dismay, the whole populace were awed into submission.
The result w r as, that through the influence of the
priests, Napoleon succeeded in obtaining 7,000,000
votes in ratification.
A year afterwards, December 2nd 1852, on the an-
niversary of Austerlitz, and of the coronation of his
uncle, he resumed the title of Emperor.
I have now brought you to a period in the history of
Napoleon, truly startling. Henceforth, in effect, ha
11


becomes the successor of his uncle in the Empire of
the Caesars. His whole being is brought to bear upon
the accomplishment of the great Napoleonic “idea,” the
“ Organization of Democracy himself the head
and soul of that monster.
It now becomes his work to obtain and control the
power of the people; to realise, in fact, the clay-iron
condition of Government predicted in Nebuchadnez-
zar’s image, and explained by Hippolytus the martyr,
to mean, “ the vesting of power in the people;” and
thus you see the modern theory 11 universal suf-
frage ” is predicted in the Bible.
From December 2nd, 1852, then, we may date the re-
vival, in part, of that Empire which, 37 years before,
had been the scourge of E irope; but which, having ef-
fected its purpose, was set aside. It was slain, and with
its founder the Empire also died, and its death was
the signal for rejoicings throughout liberated Europe.
It was “slain with a sword,” but it should yet live
again. The predictions of able divines (such as Faber,
Frere, and others,) were not to be slighted. An Em-
peror of France was to arise who should disinter this
fallen Empire, and raise it to more than its original
splendour and power; and that man is Napoleon III;
a man of cunning and deceitful policy, great daring
and extraordinary resources, and having an overpow-
ering consciousness of supernatural direction and
support; yet withal the butt and ridicule of Europe;
despised of men as a monomaniac, not wise enough if
he had the power, nor powerful enough if he had the


wisdom, to direct the affairs of a nation. The man
who had spent many of the best years of his life in
prison, and the remainder in exi'e, was not expected
to leap from the dungeon to the throne; and for the
time his Strasbourg and Boulogne expeditions would
seem to confirm this view of him. But this man of
destiny was not to be deterred, not an obstacle he
could not surmount, not a difficulty lie could not over-
come, not a danger he need fear, the time arrived, he
struck the blow, he secured the Empire, a usurper;
but it mattered not, be was Napoleon. Poor, and
despised; but he was Napoleon. One day with a
policeman’s baton quelling the riotous excesses of a
chartist mob ; the next sitting in the Presidential chair,
the elect of France , he was Nopoleon ! and once
secure under the protection of French bayonets, he
contrived by his subtle policy and by the coup d’etat
of 1651, to become permanently invested with su-
preme authority as Emperor. He waded through
blood to the throne ; the streets of Paris were thick
with human gore : but it mattered not how many fell,
a Napoleon had risen'
Europe, who had previously laughed the young and
wild aspirant to imperial power to scorn, now stood
aghast at the sight of a reviving Napoleonic Empire,
and now it was that the spirit of prophecy was
stirred up to a remarkable degree of earnestness, and
which resulted in the recognition of the septirao-octave
head of the great Roman beast of Daniel’s vision of
more than 2,400 years ago. Bible students were npw
13


more than ever devoted in their searchings of the
scriptures, for a better knowledge of the age in which
they were living, and for a clearer insight into the
future of the world ; and for a time, many Christian
people were startled at the discoveries made and pro-
mulgated ; but they soon relapsed again into their old
state of ease and comfort, as they will again, and again,
until overwhelmed in the fiery trial of the great and
final tribulation.
I have spoken of Napoleon’s belief in his destined
greatness. A belief not entertained in conspquence of
bis successes; but which was born with him, or at
least supported him under his multiplied reverses. Hear
what Alison the historian says of him : —“ 1 he idea of
a destiny and his having a mission to perform was
throughout a fixed one in Louis Napoleon’s mind. No
disasters shook bis confidence in his star or the belief
in the ultimate fulfilment of his destiny. This is well
known to all who were intimate with him in England
after he returned from America in 1837. Among
other noble houses, the hospitality of which he shared,
was that of the Duke of Montrose, at Buchanan near
Lcchlomond, and the Duke of Hamilton, at Broderick
Castle, in the Island of Arran. His manner in both
was in general grave and taciturn ; he was wrapt in the
contemplation of the future and indifferent to the pre-
sent. In 183!), the present Earl of W— —, went to
visit a friend after having been some days at Bu-
chanan House. One of the first tilings he said was :
—“Only think of that young man, Louis Napoleon,


nothing can persuade him that he is not to be Emper«
or of France, the Strasbourg affair has not in the least
shaken him; he is constantly thinking of what he is
to do when on the throne,” The Duke of N ,
also said to the same in 1854 : “Several years ago,
before the revolution of 1848, I met Louis Napoleon
at Broderick Castle in Arran. We frequently went
to shoot together, neither cared much for the sport,
and we soon sat down upon a heathery brow of Goat-
fell and began to speak serioudy. He always opened
these conferences by discoursing of what he would do
when he was Emperor of France. Amongst other
things he said he would obtain a grant from the Cham-
bers to drain the marshes of the Dries, which you
know once fully cultivated, became flooded when the
inhabitants, who were chief!} Protestants, left the
country on the .Revocation of the edict of Nantes ;
and what is very curious, I see by the newspapers of
the day that he has got a grant of two millions of
francs from the Chambers to begin the drainage of
those very marshes.”
Here then, we have upon the throne of one of the
great powers of Europe, a bold usurper, with unlimit-
ed faith in the greatness of his destiny, but with
nothing to recommend or endear him to the nation
save that which lie derives from the possession of a
name which no other family on earth can claim, and
yet despite all defects, alnxst unaided, possessing him-
self of an Empire, powerful, intellectual, and rich ;
but the other day the harmless occupant cf a dungeon;


now, a prince swaying the sceptre over 40 millions of
people ; and at once, and for ever, the envy and the
fear of all the Monarchs of Europe.
Surely this man is of no ordinary caste, and if we
know not by what secret spelt he has attained this
giddy height, we can at least trace outlines cf his
character in the operation of his power. Let us see
then. “ The Empire is peace" was about the first
declaration of the Oracle, notwithstanding it was ob-
tained through blood. Here then is a lie to begin
with.
Next, while professing the greatest friendliness to-
wards England, he was making gigantic preparations
for a descent upon her coast, I suppose as a reprisal
for Waterloo ; but the British lion showed his ivory,
“ the light little island ” was alive with patriots, and
the other ‘‘ lion ” went back to his “ thicket.”
And whilst England’s peacemakers were busily
engaged in throwing dust in the eyes of the nation,
the man of mystery ceased not to prepare for the inev-
itable struggle, and the rapid and gigantic strides made
in French naval armaments show the result.
Then came the Crimean war, a fierce and bloody
contest in which England lost, about 50,000 men (in-
cluding the choicest of the nation’s blood) and a hundred
millions of money ; a war which arose nominally, out
of a dispute between the two Emperor despots respect-
ing the protectorship of the Holy Places. Actually
from a spirit of aggrandisement which sought to
cripple the great power of England in the East. The


Prince of Meshech and Tubal was more than a match
for the little Island Kingdom, and thus a fine oppor-
tunity presented itself for the exhibition of the power'
and influence of the new Empire. The French army,
through the sagacity, forethought, promptitude and
business habits of its Imperial head; whilst in the
camp were comparitively happy in the enjoyment of
life and luxuries ; while the British, through the gross
stupidity and neglect of a conclave of Lords, became
a “ noble army of martyrs/’
And in the field , though I by no means speak dis.
paragingly of the valor of the British troops, yet am 1
bound to confess that the chief victory fell to the
French.
The fall of Sebastapol was enough to shew Europe
Napoleon’s power in war, sudden and unexpected
cessation from hostilities showed his power in policy.
The Turk was dissatisfied, and England growled, but
France grew in power every day.
In due course, there happened the Italian war, in
which Austria was punished, and the submissive Victor
Immanuel for considerations rendered on the bloody
fields of Solferino and Magenta, was mulcted in the
small amount of two provinces. The work was rapid-
ly executed ; peace, by the treaty of Villafranca was
quickly restored.
Austria cried, and Italy raved, but Nice and Savoy
vere added to the Crown of France ; and the Empire
■ew in power every day.
A little in advance of events the “Destroyer" sought
17


nominally, to protect French interests in Syria, but
the presence of a forest of French bayonets in the
land of the Druses, created in Europe a well
founded alarm : and the Emperor had to withdraw his
troops ; but the time is certainly not far distant when
he will have another and a better pretext for flourish-
ing his sword in the East.
All the world knows (or if they don't know they
soon will) that Palestine is the great bone of conten-
tion. The Sultan is supposed to possess Palestine,
although as lam informed it stands pledged to cer-
tain wealthy Jews as security for a Turkish loan ob-
tained at the time of the Crimean war, and no less a
personage than the Emperor Napoleon is third party
in the treaty, whose duty it is in the event of the non-
fulfilment of conditions by the Turk, to secure to the
Jew's their ancient possessions.
And the northern Bear, also wants Palestine, but
he won't get it. And although he may fill the whole
land (which he will) with his warlike hosts yet it will
never be his.
And Napoleon too, wants Palestine ; but though he
may assist in rebuilding the Temple and plant his
tabernacle in the TJohj Gift/ (a site of an ancient
palace, by the way, being already presented to him for
that purpose) it will never strictly speaking be his in
undisputed possession.
The latest pet scheme of the Emperor, the Mexican
Expedition, affords perhaps one of the best evidences
of the depth of his cunning, and of the extent of his


power, failing to obtain the subserviency of England,,
in this war of aggrandisement, and noth withstanding
the distance from France, he entered upon the contest
alone; ostensibly for the protection of the Latin
Church over which he claims headship, but no sooner
with the aid of the Church party was a firm footing ob-
tained for French power, and a creature of the Emper-
or placed on the throne, than the Church itself was plun-
dered, and its influence destroyed, and Napoleonism,
through the subservient Maximillian reigns in Mexico.
And the consideration in this case is a depot for
French troops though not at French cost) as a check
upon the annexation propensity of the Yankee, and
the small donation of a few Provinces in the north of
the Mexican Empire, as another ornament in the crown,
of France.
England has acknowledged the Mexican Empire,
but Heaven preserve her from defending it.
The wily Emperor Napoleon, conscious of the dan-
gers which threaten Mexico, would make a tool of
England under pretence of mutual aid against in-
roads upon that country or 'Canada : knowing full
well that, if Canada were in danger, she could take her
own part without French aid ; while Mexico might re-
quire for her defence, more troops than France could
well spare in the present unsettled state of Europe.
Thus while the Emperor declares “the Empire i»
•cnee’’ his troops are everywhere at war. In Flurope,
Lsia, Africa, and America, French arms are working
nt the destiny of the Napoleon Dynasty.


Assuming the right of arbitrament among the na-
tions, Napoleon makes war just when and where he
pleases ; and when he pleases he dictates peace.
Did ever man live who could thus make Kings his
catspaws and build or destroy empires at pleasure?
And while thus engaged settling the disputes of almost
ail nations, can yet in the amplitude of his wisdom,
direct the internal affairs of his own nation so as to lead
to the most unexampled prosperity. It is a recorded
fact that while in 1851, the Foreign Commerce of
France amounted to only 614 millions of francs ; in
the present year (I 860) it has reached the astonishing
amount of 2,149.000,000. Well might the prophet
Daniel write, “By his policy shall craft, (that is
trade') prosper in his hand."
Hear what the editor of a Paris journal says of the
Emperor as a Statesman ; “every day he presides in
silence at his Council of Ministers ;he listens to every-
thing that is said, speaks but little and never yields ;
with a phrase brief and clear as an order of the day
he decides the most disputed questions. ’’
He is also a man of letters. He is the author of a
number of works, though all tending to develop the one
thing, “the Napo'eonic Idea but his chef deavvre
is the “ History of Caesar ” —a book with all its faults
nevertheless in the opinion of some learned reviewers
henceforth and for ever a text-book on Roman
History.
But it is something more, it is a text-book on
Legislation. Its sole object is to prepare the nations


for the mighty Roman Monarchy now reviving under
Napoleon its head and founder.
it is a feeler the “Beast” has put out just to test
the nations, (as exhibited with a cunning caution the
publication of the preface first in the columns of the
Moniteur) and I am quite sure from the character of
the reviews of this wonderful book, that its author
must he considerably gratified at the gullibility of the
world and will not fail to tread his onward course with
steady step. It will not be long before the next
volume will open up to the world another and a more
startling chapter of Napoleonic ideas. As to the first
volume its character is well summed up by the Satur-
day Review of March 14th in the following words;
“It is a politic al discourse addressed to all peoples,
nations and languages. Here is the arbiter of the
world’s fate addressing the world on the Sovereign and
Supreme laws moral and political, which govern the
destinies of mankind.” —Prophecy says of him “He
shall change times and laws.”
To Napoleon nothing comes amiss, no subject is
beneath his attention, nothing is too hard to be under-
stood by him. He has time too for all things. He
can hold seances and communicate with spirits of the
dead; or he can operate upon the weakness and credu-
lity of the living and yet maintain his position as “the
executive soldier of Europe ’’ ns he is styled in the
fuurnal des Dcbals. He is the mystery, the living
migma of the age.
Hear what the limes says of him (2nd Mar«h,


I 860), “The voice of Napoleon 111 was expected up-
,on this occasion with more than ordinary interest,
whether or not it be to his glory, it is certain that this
monarch has succeeded in attaching lo himself and to
his country, the most earnest expectations or appre-
hensions of every civilized nation—whether it be to his
future credit or advantage, we do not affiim ; but it is
undoubtedly the fact, that Napoleon 111. has made so
many men afraid of what he may be about to do, and
has succeeded in making himself the arbiter of so
many destinies, that his is the most important voice
that can now be heard among the nations.”
And the Daily Telegraph bore similar testimony
in the same month thus: “The French Imperial
speech reopens the question whether Louis Napoleon
is or is not the leading statesman of Europe. It must
be admitted that he is the most conspicuous persou
living; that his shadow is cast over the entire globe ;
that the civilized world listens when he speaks ; that
he is the enigma which millions “ are ambitious to
solve.
The “ arbiter of so many destinies,” or “enigma to
so many millions this great statesman and executive
soldier; this Napoleon 111, is none other than the
very anti-chnsl that shall be. Read him in the
language of inspiration, and the mystery vanishes ;
he has many names, but they only make his character
plainer, such as; “ The man of blood and deceit”
Psalms sth and 6tb, “Oppressor” Isaiah 13th and
1 st, “ Vile person ” Daniel 11 ill and 21st, “ The idol
22


shepherd” Zechariah 11th and 17th, ''‘Man of sin,’”
2nd Thessalonians 2nd chapter, “ Apollyon.’
This last-mentioned name is much disputed in its
application to Napoleon in consequence of the want of
the first letter “ N but when we read in r,he book of
Matthew of Elias, for Elijah; Jeremy for Jeremiah,
Ezekias for Hezekiah, and Roboam for Rehoboarn, I
think we ought not to stick at “ Apollyon ” for Na-
poleon.
Also the number 666 existing in the name of Anti-
christ (“ the name of a man ”) and as applied to
Napoleon is a matter of much controversy, and though
I attach not much importance to this yet is is not a
little remarkable that, taking his name in various
ways we may in all make up the number 666.
Thus if we take Louis in Latin “ Ludovicns ” we
get 666 ; or if we take Napoleon in Greek, “ Napole-
onli,” we get 666; or, if we take Louis Napoleon
Buonaparte in Hebrew we get the same number 666.
To be the anti-christ Napoleon must be “ Emperor
of the Romans.” In him the Roman Empire, as of
old must be revived. The same iron crown of Lorn,
bardy that successfully graced the heads of Charle-
magne, Barbarossa, Charles sth, and Napoleon I.
must grace his head. Let us see then how matters
stand on this point. - Hippolytus said (in the year
200) “ The system of Augustas Caesar, w T ho was
founder of the Roman Empire shall be adopted and
established by him (Antichrist) in order to his own,
aggrandisement and glory.


We will proceed then, in as few words as possible,
just to give some direct proof, however little, of the
assertion that Napoleon 111 is the veritable anti-christ
that shall be. Further discussion on this point not
being convenient within the limits of a single lecture.
First then. It will not be disputed that the 4th Beast
of Daniel means the Roman Empire, which is further
represented in Apocalypse as having 7 heads and 10
horns. The 7 heads are seen to stretch through a long
period of lime, whereas, the ten horns reign only
▼ears with the last head of the beast, and together
with him and the False Prophet, are destroyed by the
presence of the Lord, who then descends to the earth.
These 7 heads, or foims of Government, are usually
(and no doubt correctly,) supposed to be those seven
kinds of ruling power that have from time to time
swayed the destinies of the Roman Empire, viz,,
Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvers, Dictators, and
Emperors ; and the 10 horns, or individual kings, usu-
ally, though erroneously, supposed to have been the
Gothic Kings, who were mainly instrumental in break-
ing up the old Empire, are in reallity or rather will be,
those 10 subsidary kings into whose hands the whole
of the revived Empire will yet be placed by Napoleon.
I am aware that on this point, I am opposed to the pre.
vailing opinion, and shall remain so until popular
opinion comes up to my standard.
This £may appear to be very boastful, but when it
can be proved wiih mathematical accuracy, which it can ,
that the Gothic Kings were not the kings spoken of as


the “ ten horns” of the Roman Beast, then I'think I
am justified in setting up my opinion, thus backed,
against the general belief.
I will just mention three reasons however, why
popular opinion cannot be right. Ist, Because there
never did exist at any one time 10 Gothic Kings in
the Roman Empire. 2nd. That those kings and their
armies, when they ceased to reign, were not destroyed
by the visible presence of Christ. And 3nd, They
did not destroy the papacy, which still exists,
and therefore they lacked the three essential charac-
teristics.
Five of the heads of the beast we are told, had fallen
in John’s day, and one was then in existence, which,
history shews was the imperial power, the last of
those just mentioned, while the 7th had not yet Come.
Thus have we traced to an absolute certainty, up to
the 6th headship which continued till Francis of Aus-
tria threw up all right and title as head of the Empire
in 1603, when Napoleon I. who was the 7th head
assumed it.
I am aware that many expositors are under the
impression that Augustulus was the last representative
of the sixth headship; but they evidently either forget
or altogether ignore the existence of an old Roman
law, which permitted of the division of the Empire into
parts without in any degree weakening the unity of
the whole. So that, if divided, the representative of
one portion might, if occasion required, represent ibe
tvhole t


Now this isjust what occurred under Zeno who resi-
ding in Constantinople, represented the Eastern leg
of the Empire at the time that Odoacer deposed Augus-
tulus in the west.
I pass by the various other erroneous opinions exist-
ing with respect to the decline of the 6th, and the rise
of the 7th head, and proceed, from two sources to
prove that my opinion is the true one.
First, then, we are told in the Apocalypse, this 7th
head, when he should come, he should continue but a
short time, should be ‘ slain with a sword,’ and after a
state of death, or non-representation, he should be revi-
ved in the person of a relative, so much like the
original, that it should be as one raised from the dead,
(this revived 7th is of course the antichrist who should
embody the characteristics of the 7 heads). Now Na-
poleon 1., represented the Empire for nine years only.
At Waterloo he was finally defeaied, and the Empire
for the first time since its foundation was without a
representative, until the Nephew partially assumed it
in lbo'2. 2ndly A history of Napoleon published by
Murray, without reference to prophecy thus notices this
transfer of power.
“ The establishment of the Confederation of the
Rhine rendered Napoleon, in effect, the Sovereign of
a large part of Germany, and seemed to have so totally
revolutionized central Europe, that Francis of Austria
declared the Imperial constitution at an end. He retain-
ed the title of Sovereign of his own hereditary domin-
ions ; but the Holy Roman Empire having lasted full


a thousand years, was declared to be no more; and of
its ancient influence, the representative was to be
sought for, not at Vienna, but at Paris.” Thus in the
year 16( 6 did Francis formal'y renounce the Imperial
dignity held, till then by German princes, since the
breaking up of the vast dominions of Charlemagne, and
Napoleon I. succeeded the honor ; not as successor
of the same line, nor of the same form of Government.
His was a distinct headship, known by prophetic his-
torians as the “ 7th head,” and its distinguishing
feature was, that it was a “ despotism founded on the
very principle of democracy” Universal suffrage, a
peculiarity found in no previous form of government.
That Napoleon I. thus succeeded to the Empire of the
Caesars we have his own testimony (at any rate that he
thus considered it.) He writes, “Though our Lord
Jesus Christ sprang from the blood of David, he sought
no worldly empire; on the contrary, he required that
in the concerns of this life, man should obey Caesar.
His great object was the deliverance and salvation of
souls We, the inheritors of Caesar’s power, are firmly
resolved to maintain the imlependance of our throne,
and the inviolability of our rights; and this pretension
he re asserted in a remarkable manner, when he an-
nounced the birth of his son to the high functionaries
of state in these significant wmrds, “It is a king of
Rome.”
Hereditary succession in this dynasty was obtained
by upwards of millions of votes, concerning which,
Alison writes, “ History affords no instance of a nation


so unanimously taking refuge in the stillness of despot-
ism.” And alluding to this peculiarity, the present
Emperor, who himself was elected by the votes of
8,f)00,000 of his subjects, said, “ From the day that the
dogma of the sovereign of the people supplanted that of
divine tight, it may be said that no government has
been so legitimate as mine.”
And that the present Napoleon is but the representa-
tive of the First, that his policy is but a revival and
continuance of the Ist Napoleon’s all the world knows.
Hear his own words, “ Proud of the nobility and purity
of my intentions, I resolved to elevate the Imperial
Eagle once more, or to fall the victim of my political
faith. I may be asked what induced me to abandon
a happy existence ; to run all the risks of an enterprise
so hazardous ? I reply, a secret voice led me on.”
Again the present Emperor once said to the French
Senate, “ What most affects my heart is the thought
that the spirit of the Emperor is with me, that his
mip/d guides me, and his shade protects me.” And in
accordance with the wish of his uncle, Napoleon 111.
signs all his Imperial decrees, “Napoleon," and for the
same reasons did he affix “ Napoleon” to his history of
Caesar ; because as I have intimated before, that book
is nothing less than a state paper,—a compendium of
his policy, or the Gospel according to Napoleon.
And if any thing further in evidence be required, to
show the policy and aim of Napoleon to be the reali-
zation of-the wishes of hia uncle, we have it in the brief
telegram received by a recent mail, viz., " that the


Emperor Napoleon has declared that he will henceforth
adhere to his uncle’s policy admitting hut one will and
-one course of action or in other words, that the one
idea which under the reign of his uucle cost Europe a
million of human lives shall be developed under the
tyrannical reign of the nephew, even though it should
cost the world ten millions of lives ; which indeed it will,
and more, ere the nations follow the path traced out to
them by this pseudo Messiah, ere the ten confederate
kings, swear allegiance to the mighty universal monarch
and follow him with their countless hosts to the last
great battle. You have indeed but to note what the
uncle aimed at, to know what the nephew will effect.
There is in Paris, a triumphal arch erected to tbo
honour of the present Emperor, on which is inscribed
these remarkable words ; M The uncle was, the nephew
is.’’
But say you, there exists no such confederation in
Europe: true, but I unhesitatingly assert that there
soon will be such a confederation. The old landmarks
are rapidly being removed ; nation after nation is yield-
ing to the pressure of democracy, the Napoleonie
idea.
And slice after slice of country that never properly
belonged to the old Empire is being snatched away
from countries that do belong to it. Such as Hanover
from England in 1837.
While those countries that do belong to the Empire
but which are now (or were recently'! under the Go-
vernment of Kingdoms which do not belong are being


rapidly brought in. Such as the separation of Belgium
from Holland.
Baden, Wirtenburg, and Bavaria also which belong
to the Empire, must be detached from Germany which
does not.
We have but recently witnessed the consolidation of
the Italian states under one King and Government;
done as if by magic, in the face, and against the con-
sent of many nations.
Then, in the future, we have Bessarabia, Moldavia,
and Wallacia, which must be given up by Russia, and
added to those countries that are included in the Em-
pire, most likely to that Kingdom having Constanti-
nople for its capital; while Syria, (in order to the
re-formation of the four Grecian Kingdoms,) must be
separated from Turkey. Ireland also which nev< r be.
longed to the Umpire, must be detached from England
which did, and do you not see the gigantic prepara-
tion making to effect this in the Fenian bro herhood?
The colonies of England, France, Spain, and Portu-
gal also, must he relieved of the restraints of their
parental Governments.
The Austrian Empire roust he completely rent in
twain, and its capital, Vienna, and ail those parts south
of the Danube which were in the Empire, must be
separated from those countries above the Danube, such
as Bohemia, Moravia, and Gallacia, which do not
belong to the Empire.
Such are some of the territorial changes we may be
constantly looking for.


I grant you also there is no immediate prospect of
Napoleon being crowned King of the Romans ; still his
secure possession of the ancient capital of their once
famous Empire, goes to shew that such is not impro-
bable.
It was in opposition to all the powers of Europe,
that Napoleon in the first year of his Presidency occu-
pied with French troops, the city of the Caesars. And
neither the cry of united Italy fur their new capital,
“ Rome or death,” nor the powerful influence of that
noblest of patriots “Garibaldi” was of any avail
against the irresistible will of the Emperor. So per-
sistently contested, Rome once his, Napoleon will
never let it go. And why ? Because his uncle de-
clared “ The papal territory to be united with the
French empire,” and because he cannot be king of
the Romans and not hold Rome. Again; For what
purpose has be recently purchased of the ex-Royal
Family of Naple those gardens in Rome {orti Fame-
sninr ) which enclose the spot on which once stood the
palace of the Caesars; and beneath which he is prose-
cuting some mysterious archeological researches? Let
O *■
history reply. I have a strong conviction that Napo-
leon will yet attempt to prove to the world that he is
the rightful heir, not only to the empire of the Caesars,
but also to that of Alexander the Great. The mys-
terious man himself knows what he is about. It is
not a mere speculatiou. He is not ruled by chance.
His policy is well defined, the end of which he can
see clearly from the beginning, and the means to that


end pre generally shaped long before execution. He
may be premature, as in the case of the twice propos-
ed conference of crowned heads; but in the end he
will succeed: and so when the time comes, when the
western world shall be governed by ten kings, and ten
only, then the conference will he held, and Napoleon
will be elected supreme head, and with such pomp and
magnificence as the world has never yet displayed,
crowned monarch of the Roman Empire.
It was not without a depth of meaning that Napo-
leon, years ago, declared himself “ Emperor of the
Arabsand it is now by his recent mysterious jour-
ney to Algeria that the fir't step towards its realization
is being taken. And henceforth it is enacted that any
Mussulman who chooses may become politically a
Frenchman, and claim all the privileges of that people.
Reconciliation between that gigantic delusion, Ma-
hommedanism, and the Papacj (which will be effected
through the agency of Napoleon) will immediately
lead to some of the most astounding exhibitions of
supernatural power in which modern “ spiritualism,”
will most likely play the chief part.
These real miracles , these tricks of the devil, will be
put forth for the express purpose of attesting to the
Divinity of the false Christ, Napoleon III.; and of
making men (already prepared) to “ believe a lie
the great lie, that shall hurry millions to perdition.
This astonishing delusion, the work of Satan, is
unquestionably one of the three evil spirits destined to
gather together the nations of the earth around Jem-


salera for their final overthrow. And however intel-
ligent men, may pooh, pooh the thing, those who will
take the trouble to inquire into its nature, its object,
and its rapidly increasing influence, will easily discover
its origin to be Satanic, and its end Armageddon.
For the information of those who are not aware of
the extent to which this fearful evil has reached, I may
state: It is now preached from pulpits in America as
a religious “ creed.” It claims an extensive library,
altogether of spiritual authorship, and it counts its
votaries by millions.
Its distinctive feature is that it sets forth a “ new
revelation ” to man, which any and every Christian
well knows is contrary to the tiuth of God.
But perhaps the earliest of the future acts of the
Emperor, and which may be calculated to point out
unmistakeably his true personage, will be the making
of a treaty with the Jews, (who are even now going
back to Jerusa'em to meet their final tribulation and
subsequent deliverance and conversion) for a term of
seven years. This is the covenant referred to in Dan.
ix. 27, and includes the last of the 70 weeks of years,
the close of which is to finish their transgression, to
bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal up the vision
and to anoint the most Holy place. And this com-
pact with the Jews will very likely be made this year
(if it be not already made), certainly not later than
IS66—a year that will be laden with the history of
events of vsst importance. And when we remember
how anxious the Ist Emperor was to lead back the


Jews to Palestine ; that he even called a conference of
wealthy Jews for that purpose, and, that faithful to
the very letter in carrying out his uncle's policy, the
present Empeior pledged his imperial word to the
Jewish House of Representatives (Universal Israeli-
tish alliance) in Paris iB6O, “that he would lead them
back to their ancient land when the proper time had
come and moreover has now, in June last, called p
meeting of influential Jews in Paris. When we bear
these things in mind, it does rot require a very great
«tretch of imagination to suppose the time of making
this compact to be at hand. And once made, and in
operation, there are but seven years and two-anda-
half months to the descent of the Lord with his saints
upon the Mount of Ulhes!
The necessity for this Franco. Jewish covenant, will,
no doubt, arise out of the complications of States,
when it will he deemed necessary for the safety and
peace of Europe that a neutral power should be placed
in Palestine. Its object will be to check Russia in
her march westward, and he who makes it will pledge
himself to protect and support the Jews in their ancient
mode of temple worship, which will commence about
10 months after the making of the treaty. And 1
venture to assert that the mosque of Omar, which the
Empress Eugenie is about to rebuild and embellish, at
the cost of the crowned heads of Europe, is the iden-
tical building in which sacrifices will yet be offered on
Jewish altars. The Jews themselves say this can be
the only place where they can worship, since it is the


consecrated spot on which stood S domon’s Temple,
About a year and five months after the recommence'
xnent of Jewish worship or two years and from four to
six weeks after the co\enant, (if not earlier) will
occur the mightiest event, (excepting only the first
advent) recorded in all ages of the world to this time.
I refer to the resurrection of the righteous dead and
the instantaneous removal of the righteous living who
shall be “accounted worthy ” to escape the ‘‘great
tribulation ” So astounding an event would seem to
demand further notice; but as it forms no part of the
policy of Napoleon, 1 reluctantly pass it by.
Another and a most wonderful event which pre-
vious to the removal of the Philadelphian Church,
will be the w»r in Heaven in which Satan with all his
hosts will he Cast down from the Heavenly places they
now occupy, to the earth — to which place the exercise
of tiieir power will be limited. Satan now appears
before the throne of God accusing the saints ; but
then he wi 1 embody the great arch-rebel who he is
now raising to power and influence preparatory to that
day r . Then mankind will be possessed with devils,
peace will be taken frcm the earth, nation rising
against nation, city against city, house against
betrayal and murder within, persecution and death
without* “ Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of
the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having
great wrath, for he knoweth that he hath but a short
time.”
Shortly after this, and exactly in the midst of the


time Napoleon will break his covenant with the Jews,
reference to which is made in Isaiah xxviii. 18. “Your
covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with Hell shall not stand.” Having pre-
viously overcome many nations, England amongst the
number, “ the man of blood ” now goes forth with
all the fury of Hell utterly to make away with whole
nations. To wipe them from the face of the earth,
sparing neither men, women nor children. The Devil
having fully entered into him, the Roman earth fully
restored, the ten confederate kings elected by their
people and the King of Kings elected at the conference
of kings, head over all, the fourth Beast, “great and
terrible,” is now fully revived. The Waterloo wound
is now completely healed. Napoleon by this time has
become the Antichrist, and enters upon the last three
and a half years of time. He fills Palestine with
troops, and “plants the tabernacles of his palace be-
tween the seas in the Holy Mountain,” i.e., he resides
in Jerusalem.
The Devil having entered into him, andenergizing
all the mental strength, and intelligence of our unre-
newed nature, acting now', creates him universal mon.
arch. He proceeds to reign in the fullness of his power.
The whole world now wonders at him, and cries, “who
shall be able to make war with him,” (of course the
inference is none can make war with him). All Europe
is entirely in his power, and its armies at bis disposal.
Besides which, by that time America will probably bo
a monarchy, with a friend of the Emperor’s on the
36


throne. And Russia, who was a match for the uncle,
will be subdued at last by the nephew, who will indeed
have “power over all nations.”
The result of such an acquisition of power in the
hands of fallen man, naturally enough tends to exalt
its possessor above the level of humanity; consequently
we find in prophecy that the antichrist being possessed
of all the kingdoms of the world, which the devil offer-
ed first to the Saviour, he sets himself up as the
Messiah, proclaims himself “ God above all Gods,” and
declaring he will set his throne above the stars, com-
mands men everywhere to worship him.
That a man, now living, should attain to such aston-
ishing power and blasphemy as I have described, and
in so short a time, may appear to most of you as very
wonderful if true; but when we remember what “Im-
perialism ” has already done, and attained to, and to
what the present Emperor has already submitted, and
appreciated in the way of manworship, we need wonder
no longer. I will give you an extract or two, to shew
the readiness of Napoleon to receive divine honours.
Referring to the revival of the Empire, the Emperor
writes : “ This is an inherlance of inspiration, it is the
inspiration of a principle, or rather of an idea, which is
the only civilizing cause in Europe , which rests its
system on the principle of eternal justice, disciplines
democracy, levels mountains, crosses seas, obliges all
nations to be at peace ; of an idea which has burst from
the tomb of St Helena, as the moral of the Gospel has
risen triumphantly, spite of all the torments of Calvary,


which, springing out of the French Revolution, with a
helmet on its head, fell to rise again, imitating the
Divine Example.”
Again. A well known admirer of the Emperor, and
a recipient of his bounty, M. de Persigney, thus writes ;
“We claim exclusive possession of the Napoleonic
idea, tortured and put to death on the rock of St. Hele-
na. Napoleon died under the weight of his task, and
his work was left unfinished. Like Charlemagne, he
promulgated his laws amid the thunder and lightning of
battle, and he confessed it to his last hour, in the face
of his executioners ; thus embodying in himself the
double characters of Moses and Jesus Christ.”
The willingness of Napoleon 111. to receive divine
honours is foreshadowed by his reception of addresses
in his journeys through the French provinces, styling
him “ the Saviour, Regenerator, the Elect of God, the
Messiah of the French nation,” and the parady of the
Lord’s Prayer: “ Our Father who art in power, thy
kingdom come, thy will he done at home as it is abroad,”
&c. He is reported to have rewarded with a gold
snuff-box a preacher who described him as equal to, if
not greater than Christ Himself. In like manner Na-
poleon 1., intoxicated with breathing the incense of
constant adulation desires to be addressed by the title
of ‘ Votre Providence.’ (Frere on Prophecy.) Also in
March 1807, when he convoked the Jews at Paris, he
was styled by them ‘ The Lord’s Anointed Cyrus, the
living image of the Divinity,’ &c. ; the ciphers of his
name and that of Josephine’s were blended with the


name of God, and inscribed over the ark of the cove-
nant, which was further surmounted by the imperial
eagle.”
We have now arrived at the time of ‘‘ Jacob’s trou-
ble,” referred to in Matthew xxiv, and Daniel xii and
i, as a time of such awful tribulation, as “never was
since there was a nation,” and “never shall be” again.
The mock Messiah now makes Jerusalem his chief
city. He will have other cities as well, such as Paris,
London, and Rome ; but Jerusalem will at this time
be his chief city. The false prophet, his secretary, who
in every thing does the king’s bidding, causes the
world to build a large golden image, to the beast
whose wound was healed ; and which being set up in
the temple in place of the Jewish sacrifices (by this
time caused to cease), he gives it power to breathe and
to speak , and thus to cause “ That as many as would
not worship the image of the Beast should be killed.”
Both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free,
so that none can'escape except by punishment.
Also that none but such as receive the mark of the
Beast (just as slaves formerly were branded, and as
cattle now are) such only should be permitted to bug
or sell. What a dreadful state of things ; and at our
very doors too ! and yet we heed not, although the fiat
of the Almighty hath declared that though Heaven and
Earth should be removed, yet should not one jot or
tittle of His word fail of accomplishment.
There is hope however, even in that fiery conflict,
for all believers will not be cut off. For God has


declared that “for the elect’s sake those days should be
shortened,” “ else could no flesh be saved.”
Well, what becomes of those then, who will not
worship the Beast nor receive his mark and yet are
saved ? They “ flee into the wilderness,” where God
feeds them, as he fed the millions of Jews for 40 years
in the desert of Arabia ! “ When ye see the abomi-
nation that maketh desolate, &c., then flee ye to the
mountains,”
And, now, just as Antichrist is getting comfortably
settled in universal power, just as he commences his
mock millennium, for it’s all a mockery ; he mocks
the true Messiah in bis advent, he mocks Christ’s
judgments upon those who are rebels to his authority,
and he promises a millennium of peace in mockery ;
just at this time, when the whole earth is in awe of
him, he is suddenly surprised and startled from his
usual serenity, by the appearance of two strange look-
ing men parading the streets of Jerusalem, clad from
head to foot in sackcloth, and openly and fearlessly
setting him and all his myrmidons at defiance. These
two men I think are Moses and Elijah, the two pro-
phets of old.
They are come from Heaven charged with a mission
of mercy, and endowed with miraculous powers in
support and defence thereof.
They cry aloud, calling upon the Jews to repent for
the advent of the true Messiah is at hand. They warn
the people at the peril of their souls, not to believe in
this false Messiah (a very necessary caution seeing the,


Jews have already received no less than 26 of them)..
This wild beast, say they, who claims to be the savi-
our of the world, is the world's destroyer, He is the
very “angel of the Bottomless Pit,” the “Son of
Perdition,” he will only lead you astray, he will ruin
you to all eternity.
They appeal to the testimony of the prophets in
proof. They show that he was foretold to come just
as the Rabbis ages before, showed Cyrus from the pro-
phets, that he was the Lord’s anointed, even called by
name. The people hesitate.
The beast becomes infuriated, he sends an armed
detachment to seize them, poor deluded wretch, he
might as well grasp at a shadow The prophets only
breathe on their adversaries, and they are consumed.
Again and again, are forces sent to destroy these
two “ prophets and again and again are those forces
thus destroyed; (Rev. xi. 5.) “if any man will hurt
them, he must in this manner be killed,”
Aha! What means this ? says the mighty monarch.
Have I conquered a world ; have I all the potency of
earth at my disposal, and yet am I to be set at defiance
by two men ! No! no! Something must be done, or the
world will withdraw its allegiance, and I shall after all
be proved to be only a man, or what is worse, a
Devil!
The false prophet enters the arena. Hell must be
called into requisition to combat with heaven ; and as
the true God helps his prophets ; so the great usurper,
Satan, helps his prophet, and so there is fire for fire,.


blood for blood, like as it was between Moses and Pha-
roah ; and like as Aaron’s rod, not the Egyptian’s was
the consuming one ; so the fire of the true prophets,
and not that of the false one, will consume its enemies.
Still, in the eyes of the world it will only appear as
match for match, strength for strength ; and as the
present glory will be with the false, so they will cling
to the false, and hate the true.
They will enroll themselves under the banner of anti,
christ, receiving his mark, or the number of his name
666, while thousands upon thousands in Christian lands’,
who will by this time see their error and repent, will
be subjected to the fiercest persecution, that ever stain-
ed this fair world with the blood of martyrs
The guillotine, so clearly predicted in the scriptures
will dispatch its myriads ; fire, and swoid, and numer-
ous other and more excruciating instruments of torture,
will do their bloody vrork till victims are wanting.
Meanwhile, as there will not fall a drop of rain during
the years, there will be famines and pestilences,
and a multitude of evils all in aggravated forms help-
ing to make up this dire calamity, this unequalled
tribulation, this “Day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the
year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion.”
Persecution Everywhere of the most terrible sort.
All nations of the world up in arms. The weak every-
where saving “I am strong ” for the battle. The
ploughs and the pruning-books everywhere beat into
swords and spears. Valleys and rivers running with
blood. The world’s last baptism.
42


Three years and a half of awful strife, in which the
world will be deluged with blood, dead bodies too nu.
merous for burial, filling the air with their pestilential
exhalations. The judgments of the Lord in the earth
too, in varied and awful forms each worse than b ack
Death , which in the Fourteenth century slew twenty-
five millions in Europe alone.
Such will be the character of the reign of the uni-
versal monarch during the brief period that the Devil
will give him his seat and power, and great au-
thority and which the despot will not fail to employ
to the utter destruction of many nations, going forth
with fury against any and all who shall dare defy his
wondrous power, until at last backed by the countless
hosts of the ten subordinate Kings he is drawn to his
last battle-field around Jerusalem, where also all the
nations of the earth (filling Palestine like caterpillers)
meet for the final conflict, and Antichrist in awful
blasphemy and daring, denies and defies the Almighty
One and the hosts of heaven ; when in a moment of
awful suspense, ere a blow is struck, the ethereal vault
is rent, and the shining hosts are seen, and the battle
between Heaven and Earth begins.
The Prince of Light above, the Prince of darkness
beneath ; and amidst earthquakes, plagues, fire and
sword, millions fall, a river of blood runs for 200
miles, in depth to the horses bridles : and Antichrist
with the false prophet, his high priest and secretary are
cast alive into the Lake of fire !




3 1508 01361168 1


THE
“CHRISTIAN BANNER.”
A Beligious Paper first printed in 1860,
The CHRISTIAN BANNER, is a Monthly
Paper, free from Sectional peculiarities. the
objects desired by its publication, are. the diffusion
of religious instruction to all irrespective of creed:
and to bring before Christians the predicted events
joining on the earth.
This Paper is regularly and gratuitously sup-
plied to Hospitals, Asylums, and Gaols; and
grants are made for a free circulation among Sai-
lors and other classes of the people, and in the
Bush districts.
Every Annual Subscriber, receives a copy
monthly for twelve months, and considerably as-
sists thereby the gratuitous distribution.
Price 2s, a year: delivered 2s. 6d: by Post 3s
City Missionaries, Open-air Preachers, and other
Laborers in the Lord’s vineyard, may have it at a
reduced rate for distribution.
Dear Sir,
In ray own name, I have the
pleasure of thanking you for the valuable donation
of 500 of the “ Christian Banner,” for free distri-
bution. • »•*»♦#*#* *
With the Divine blessing may they truly be as
bread cast upon the waters. i
I am, Yours, very truly, Kerr
Seamen’s Chaplain.
Sandridge, July, 1865.
Office: 123, Argyle-st., Fitzroy, Melbourne ,
