

FREE DISTRIBUTION
Love and Liberty
versus
Materialism and
Force
Melbourne :
ARBUCKLE. WADDELL & FAWCKNER, PRINTERS
20-22 McKiUop Street
fpiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii




Love and Liberty
versus
Materialism and Force
In the name of Love and Liberty I throw out an appeal
to the public with regard to the crisis that has developed in
the Commonwealth through the war. When the minds of
our public men are working to find a way out, it is up to
every man and woman to help them. I might state before
I go any further, that I am under the military age, and,
as far as my knowledge goes, I can pass the military
test.
I have had direct challenges thrown out to me through
the Christian Churches to volunteer for active service,
and I am going to take it up and throw out one to them.
The conditions are these: That I will volunteer for active
service, that I will volunteer one-half of my last year’s
income, also the pay which the Government gives me
after I join the A.1.F., to a fund to be paid through the
Churches of the separate denominations to the Federal
Government, to wipe the debt off the public hospitals,
and to help pay the costs of the war. The conditions I
put upon the Christian Churches that hear this are: That


they will call a meeting of their separate congregations
on the same date and the same hour, as near as possible,
and put this motion before them; that every man and
woman who believes in the Christian religion will
volunteer one-tenth of their last year’s income, and do
the same every year while the war lasts, pay it through
their separate organisations. If you put this motion
before your congregations, I will do my part. I do not
ask you to pass it. I think lam judge enough of human
nature to know it will not be turned down.
Now, I do not want to leave the impression on any
person’s mind that I am looking for a cheap advertise-
ment. lam out to do my best, and no man can do more
than that. I have not had much education, but I have
got understanding, and I know we cannot use force to
control this mass of humanity on this earth. If we cannot
lead them, Jesus Christ’s mission on this earth has failed.
We can’t use force; it is contrary to the law of nature,
and it is contrary to the law of God. Let any man or
nation run contrary to those two forces, and I know who
is going to get crushed. Germany tried it, and she is
going to get crushed; but if we do not take warning, she
will drag us down with her. Listen to a few words from
the Bible, “The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent’s head, and it shall bruise thy heel.” Now, did
Christian men and women ever think deeply over those
few words, and find out what they mean? This is the
way I interpret them. The good imparted through the
mother to the child will prevail. It must prevail in the
long run, if only by natural selection; it is the mother
that has everything to do with the child from its concep-
tion until it is born, and after it is born, in nine cases
out of ten, it is the mother that exerts her influence with
the child. I venture to say there have been hundreds of


thousands of children born since war broke out who will
never see their fathers; they have been killed in the
battle, and no good woman will teach her child evil, so
the good must prevail by that course alone. But how
long it is going to take no man can say. Jesus Christ,
the greatest student of human nature that was ever on
this earth, and ever likely to be, saw all this, and set
out to teach the mass of humanity the way to stamp out
the evil which was amongst us, and what hearing have
we given Him? By not one organised voluntary action
through the Church in the past, except the Hospital
Sunday collection, which, when we come to sum it all up,
would not amount to i/- per head. I know by my own
Church it is no more, and we are as liberal as any in
the Commonwealth. That .£26,000 debt on the Melbourne
Public Hospital alone stands as a living lie to what we
have been in the past. If we had followed the main
principals which Christ taught us, that debt would not
be there to-day. It should not be allowed to stand
another month. The bruise to our heel is laid down upon
us by the Lord of nature for the strong to help the weak,
and what a little sacrifice it is! It is not a sacrifice; it
is the duty we owe to Christ. The bruise to our heel is
one-tenth of our income paid through the Christian
Churches to stamp out the evil. If the heads of the
Christian Churches take this up, I think we will find it is
the way out. If it is worked properly, we can reach the
furthest end of the Commonwealth in less than a fort-
night. It is the test for us to decide whether it is a
religious war or a commercial war. If we turn this
proposal down, we decide that it is a commercial war.
Then how do we who associate ourselves with Christ
and take communion stand? It is running contrary to
the Lord of nature and the God of love who controls this


mass of humanity, and we can’t stand. If we decide for
it, we have got those two forces with us, and they are
more than all that can be against us. I have heard the
minister who is the head of the church to which I belong
repeat that over and over again, and I know he is right.
We have showed the world our fighting spirit, and the
neutrals are watching us to-day in Australia as never any
nation or any part of a nation was watched before to see
what we are going to do about it, and I appeal to you
Christian men and women here in this Commonwealth to
show the greatest spirit of all, charity, and you will draw
all good men and women after you. You will show that
great mass of people in America what manner of men
and women we are, and do more to stop the war than
putting a million more men in the trenches. I appeal to
you Australian workers. I know you to be some of the
fairest-minded men in the Commonwealth. I have
worked side by side with you all my life. You were clean
when you started out; you have been poisoned since. You
are sanctioning the use of one of the vilest and most
vicious forms of force that was ever allowed in any
Christian country—that is, the boycot. There is a force
that will rise up against you here in self-defence, that will
crush you, and it will crush you by the law of nature,
and if ever you let that time come it will not be the men
who will suffer the most, but the poor little innocent child
and its mother. You have been warned by some of the
fairest critics on the face of this earth. You have been
warned by nature, but you won’t take heed how you hear.
The Church is beaten, and the Government is beaten. We
don’t know where to turn; we have had the highest
educated and cleverest men in the land at work, and they
cannot show us a way out.


I know the Church is beaten by the action of those two
men, Dr. Deeper and Archdeacon Hindley, two of the
highest educated men, and heads of one of the greatest
Churches in the land, when they moved and seconded that
motion sanctioning the use of force. Jesus Christ never
taught any man or nation to use force. The Church is
beaten because we never acted up to any of the prin-
ciples which Christ taught us. We can only tramp this
earth for seventy or eighty years at the most, so we
might as well make it as bright and happy as we possibly
can; and if human lives are not worth more than all the
money we possess individually, or ever will possess, then
the God of love has deserted us, and those men at the
front are fighting for the pure love of it, and I refuse to
believe that. The Churches, to my idea, want reforming.
What is the use of putting highly-educated men in the
pulpit to preach sermons that only the trained mind can
understand, and to the same class of people Sunday after
Sunday? Worship by faith is the proper thing for the
youths who are not out of Eden, but when they reach
maturity you must give them knowledge. Get the
ministers of the Gospel to come amongst you to impart
to them the knowledge which they possess, and ninety-
nine times out of a hundred you will hold them for life.
If you take this referendum through the Church as I
have suggested, you will get a vote that is not
influenced by any outside material force, and every man
and woman will be put on their honour with their God.
If you take it through the Church it will cost about £200 ;
if we take it through the Government it will cost
£IOO,OOO, and we will be just about where we were
before. Our system of government is rotten to the core,
and it will go down to its grave rotten. Every man who
is elected to Parliament should be made a judge. He has


got to take the evidence of public opinion, weigh it, and
give a fair and unbiassed vote when the question is put
before him, otherwise it is the man who governs.
The Church was beaten, and the Government is
beaten, so in common fairness we ought to give this
appeal of a “Sucking Babe” a chance. I am only a farmer,
but I take heed how I hear. I have backed this appeal
to the best of my ability, and it is up to every man and
woman in the Commonwealth to do the same. And,
after all, we are the Church just the same as we are the
Government. Which should we put first? Which? Let
your light shine before all men, so that they can safely
resist the wiles of the devil or evil which was imparted
to the child through the immoral man when this mass of
humanity was in its Eden or innocence, and, according
to the law of nature, through the seed of the woman there
is more good than bad in every child which is born into
this world. It is after it becomes contaminated with the
world that it develops evil, and who are the “stumbling
blocks”? We are not doing our duty to Christ if we do
not do our best to develop the good after they reach
maturity. Jesus Christ said (through the Lord of nature),
“My spirit will not strive with you for ever.” It cannot.
We have got to get knowledge before we are cut off from
this earth by the law of nature, and no human being
knows when they are going to be cut off. Worship by
faith is the proper course when we are young. But we
want worship by knowledge when we reach maturity.
It is all very well for a minister of the Gospel to stand
up in the pulpit and tell a congregation to get knowledge,
and never give them a hint as to what the knowledge is.
You cannot do it from the pulpit; you have got to come
in contact with them personally, and the best time to
impart it is when they reach maturity. No Church can


stand, no Government can stand without Jesus Christ at
the head of it. He wrote the whole of the Holy Bible,
and on His words hang all the laws and the prophets. That
is why He called for volunteers. He asked for bread,
and we gave Him a stone. We gave Him a church with-
out a temple. This great mass of humanity is the City
of Babylon which He spoke about, the city of the plain
beneath the stars. There is only one flag that can rule
over this earth, and it has got to have a-figure of Him
and the woman who bore Him printed upon it. Every
word He has told us about the past has come true. He
saw how we originated. He saw a great mist go up out
of the earth. We know this earth was warm at the
beginning, and the mist He spoke about was steam, warm
enough to germinate ali life that is on the earth. If this
earth was to become hot and moist again, and if we
could live to see it, we would see all the old vegetation
and life die away, and new forms and growth would
spring up, and history would repeat! itself. Every word
He has uttered about the future will come true. We
know there is a heavenly body travelling through space
that will destroy the life on this earth. We call it
Halley’s Comet. When it gets within a certain distance
of this earth it will draw it along with it. That is why
He said those who were on the earth when that time
comes would see the end gradually. He specially men-
tioned thq people on the ships; quite naturally they would
see the most of it. He mentioned about the Devil being
let loose a little season; that is quite natural. If we
knew this earth was to be destroyed in a year or so, all
those who were afraid of death would say, “Well, if we
are going to be cut off from this earth in a little time, we
might as well taste of the fruits of this life,” and they
would become lawless. But all those that are not afraid


of death will see the resurrection, and we will go on
travelling through space to see the beauties of the
universe. That is what He meant by His father’s house
having many mansions.
We have been appointed by Him to lead the way in
regenerating this earth. We have been appointed by
nature. We have got the seven stars to guide us, which He
spoke about. The milky way is the fleecy wool, a symbol
of Himself. Six of the stars which comprise the Southern
Cross are the flying eagle, a symbol of liberty; and the
seventh is the proper evening star. It is low down on
the southern horizon, and it is not fixed; it leaps and
sways about, beckoning us to follow a symbol of love. I
have watched that star for fifteen years, and I knew there
was some message in it. Jesus Christ was never in
Australia, but He knew those stars were there. “In one
condemnation of folly stands the whole Universe of men.”
The man who wrote those few simple lines was one of
America’s greatest sons, Ralph Waldo Emerson. He
understood the law of nature. He tried to teach his
doctrine from the pulpit, but the Church was too narrow-
minded for him, and he left the ministry to become one
of those silent preachers of the Lord of Nature, with
Jesus Christ at the head of it.
Jesus Christ was the first man to originate life on this
earth. He saw all life develop; He saw it take its natural
course. He saw the immorality spring up in the human
race, and He knew it would exterminate it by the law of
nature if it was not stopped. He saw all the vices that
He had mentioned in the Bible spring up. He had to
write it as He did, because He knew the ignorant people
of His day could not understand the laws of nature. We
have only got to go back in our British history to under-
stand that. This earth is not as old as it is supposed to


be; it is a portion of Halley’s Comet which had become
attracted to the sun when that moving body was passing
close to it. It has been red hot; it cooled down when the
sun attracted it and held it. As soon as it became fixed
by the sun the rain came down upon it in floods. These
are the floods He spoke about in the Bible—the oceans
that hold the balance of this earth. If they dried up, this
earth would fly towards the sun.
Jesus Christ had passed the alloted span when He was
crucified. He saw that comet approach the earth. He
spoke about it in Revelation adorned in the robes of a
bride. He knew in the course of its travelling it would
pick this earth up again and take it along with it. Then
will come the second resurrection. The first resurrection
is when death takes place, when the soul leaves the
body. Then the mysteries of this life are explained. The
hell we will suffer will be remorse for all the good we
might have done on this earth. We will have to suffer
that until the second resurrection.
He said He would appear in clouds of fleecy wool, the
symbol of a lamb, girt about with a golden girdle of the
stars. The calf which gambols and frolics about its
mother is a symbol of natural love. This is the promised
land which He spoke about where we will have His stars
shining down upon us for ever. He was a child of nature,
and it could not destroy Him. All things are ours by
nature, and we are Christ’s. Through Him we have got
all our knowledge, and Christ is the Lord of Nature.
Babylon the mighty is fallen, the city of the plain. We
advanced in knowledge and science and skill, but we
never advanced His Church. We made this city of the
plain the home of the whoremonger and harlot, and all
the abominations which He spoke about, and the pity of
it all was that the poor little innocent child and its
mother suffered the most.


Every word that He has conveyed to me through His
Spirit has come true. My first love, quite naturally, was
a woman; my second love was His Church alone.
Anyone who reads this can see when I set out to write
that it was my whole thought. It was after I had started
it I became controlled by His Spirit. I started to write
it on Sunday, September loth. I put down September
gth because, when I started to write, I thought it was
only going to be a business proposition. I had been
writing for about three hours when I put down something
on the paper which was not in keeping with His teaching,
and I got suddenly pulled up. I could not think. I was
troubled all the next day. I did exactly wha't He said I
would do. I came into my room. The little Book was
lying on the table. I took it up. I read the third
chapter of Revelation. I went about my work in the
afternoon, turning the thoughts over in my brain, but
could not make anything out of it. At night I went out
under the stars. While I was watching the moving star,
the symbol of love, a little meteor fell towards it from
high up, and I saw His meaning. I went in and wrote
down the meaning of the seven stars. I was troubled for
the next three days. On Sunday morning, September
17th, I was greatly troubled. In the afternoon I wrote
down what had occurred to me in the morning. I then
got stopped. I went out into the paddock. I came back
and lay down and went to sleep for a few minutes. I
got up and wrote some more, then I got suddenly
stopped. I did not go to bed until 12 o’clock. I went
out under the stars twice, but could not get any inspira-
tion. At half-past two on Monday morning I was
awakened by nature through His Holy Spirit. I went
outside, and there were His symbols in all their glory.
The Milky Way was spread out just as He said He would


come. At His head was the moon, “the pillar of fire,”
and at His feet the Southern Cross. Out of His mouth
was the two-edged sword, a shaft of light, and it was
pointed direct at the planet Mars, and Mars is the God
of War that is ravishing His human race to-day.
The stars He spoke about as being like beasts are His
symbols on this earth to-day. The lion is the symbol of
the British nation. Every word that He wrote in Revela-
tion in the past has come true. Every word He wrote
about the future will come true. The beasts fought with
floods of liquid fire and flame, just as He said they would.
The mother earth helped to stem the tide. St. Michael
and St. George are other symbols of His in the British
nation. Gog and Magog are two more. The enemy will
be destroyed just as He said they would.
Babylon the mighty is fallen. We made ourselves
lower than the beasts. Not one stone of the Temple will
He leave. We will have to re-organise all our Govern-
ments. The great whore that sitteth on the water is the
British nation. She had her sins, the same as others.
Ireland was punished for banishing the New Testament
from their Church. The Americans took the word
Philadelphia from the book of Revelation. They
neglected their Church in favour of the material things.
They had Emerson’s spirit to guide them, but they would
not listen. Britain condemned herself by her own action
through their Church when she sanctioned the use of
force. He put the test on us; it was His Spirit, the love
of liberty, that brought our parents out to this clean
country. We did not obey His laws; we made it the home
of all the vices of the old land. We got our punishment
in the recent wars. He had to put us through the great
tribulation before we could understand. Jesus Christ
was never on this earth in the flesh. It is the immortal


spirit of man that watches over us. The Jews crucified
the mortal man. The immortal spirit will live for ever.
It is His immortal spirit imparted to the mortal man
which works for the good in the human race. It was
the immortal spirit that watched the beginning. It saw
this earth become attracted to the sun when that great
comet was passing it. The beginning was quite natural.
When the sun caught and held it, the vapour would
condense and fall upon the molten mass. Great steam
would go up, condense, and keep falling. Great
eruptions would take place, such as we could not imagine.
The oceans were formed by those eruptions. The earth
would be warm enough to germinate all life. We have
the species amongst us that are of neither sex. They
have frequently come under my notice in the animals.
They have just reverted back to the original. From the
smallest insect to the largest animal there is male and
female. The same with the vegetation. The seeds of
both sexes have got to be mingled before it can bear
fruit. As the earth cooled off it took its natural course,
the same as it is doing to-day.
The end will come the same as He said it would. When
that great comet approaches this earth, it will over-
shadow everything. The heat will become greater, the
water will evaporate and condense, and come down in
great rain and hail; quite naturally it will. When the
struggle begins between the comet and the sun, the earth
will be rent asunder, the mountains will come tumbling
down, the seas will dry up by the friction. But they will
last the longest, as the friction will be less upon the
water. That is why He specially mentioned seamen.
His immortal spirit will watch us for ever. In the course
of time that comet will approach the sun, and it will catch
and hold this earth, and history will go on repeating itself


for ever. Otherwise there must be an end. The mothers
which sprang from the earth were the virgin mothers; the
second generation were the natural mothers. The
immortal spirit of man named Jesus the Christ speaking
to the mortal man through the Lord of Nature explains in
the Bible that man came last upon earth. That is quite
natural, as the human family takes longer to come to
maturity than the animal kind. We have all been on this
earth before. That is how we learn and reason. It is
just the memory tracing back the long-forgotten past.
We have been definitely promised one thousand years’
peace under Church government. The Churches are the
people, as mentioned in the Bible. The temple of God or
love is within us. The law of nature allows a little force
in regard to plant and animal life. If left to nature it is
a case of the survival of the fittest.
It is just here at the, beginning of life on this earth that
the God of love lifts the human race away from the
animal kind. The immortal spirit lives for ever. If the
immortal spirit had not worked for good in the human
race through the law of nature, we would not have been
any higher than the animals. The whole history of the
Bible is just the history of the human race as we know
it. The Christian races are as old as any on earth. It
was the Christian nations which discovered all the new
countries and populated them. “Ye blind guides which
strain at gnats and swallow camels.” We were not
satisfied with our own history to guide us, but must go
fossicking about amongst the heathen nations which
speak a language which no Christian can understand to
find data as to the age of this earth. “Verily a prophet
hath no honour in his own country.”
The symbols in the book of Kings and Chronicles bear
directly on the past and present wars which have taken


place in our own history. The parable of the two women
quarrelling over a child is right in our midst to-day. The
child is Christianity and the two women are the warring
factors of love and liberty and materialism and force.
Which mother are we going to represent? Which? Other
symbols which are in our midst to-day are the sermon on
the mount and the destruction of Jerusalem. The whole
of the Christian nations are crying out to nature to-day
to deliver them from the curse and the yoke that binds
them. “Those who say they are Jews, and are not,” owe
their existence, all they have on this earth, to the Chris-
tian race. It was they who saved them from extermina-
tion by the infidel Turk, and took them in and nurtured
them. It was the army sent out by the Christian nations
known as the Crusaders that saved them. The Crusaders
had no Red Cross to follow them up. When a man fell
by the wayside from sickness or wounds he was left with
his weapons. He had the choice between a lingering
death or that by his own hands. To those men the Jews
owe their existence. The Turk has been the persecutor
of the Christians from the beginning. He is the Judas
which is another symbol on this earth just now. The
Turks sold us just lately when they joined forces with a
Christian nation to baulk the spread of liberty and justice.
Had the German nation cultivated a voluntary Govern-
ment instead of the one of force, they would have spread
that kind of “Kultur” to the end of the earth. The law
is laid down for us in the Bible that we are not to use
force of any description in governing the human race.
No man can associate force with a freshly slaughtered
lamb. His symbol is in this sky to-day. The word
Australasia is derived from the heavenly bodies and the
Bible, “Starry Asia.” The seven Churches of Asia are
the seven States of Australasia. We have been appointed


by nature to take the lead; we have the stars to guide
us. We have been appointed by Jesus the Christ. We
are the youngest and fairest of them all. The law is
laid down in the Bible that we have got to govern our-
selves by a voluntary system of government, with twenty-
four elders or judges to give decisions on the questions
which are put before them by the public. The churches
spoken of in Revelation are the whole of the people. We
should take lessons from the past. We are born into this
world by nature, and we are supposed to be cut down
by nature, not by force or by wilfully violating the laws
of nature. Why should the little children be condemned
to be brought up in unhealthy surroundings? Why should
men work in the unhealthy surroundings of the silver and
lead mines? These metals can largely be done without.
The unkindest cut of this war has been the way the toil
of some of our best manhood, the Broken Hill and Mt.
Lyell spelter miners, has been turned against us for our
own destruction. Coal also can largely be done away
with; we can harness, the power of nature, which is clean,
to generate electricity for our railways and lighting
purposes. No man should be condemned to work in the
mines for more than four hours a day; it is not natural
for a man to work underground. The law is laid down
for us to increase and multiply and populate the earth.
We are not doing that. If my memory does not trick me,
there are less men farming the land by about 80,000 than
there were twelve years ago in Australasia alone.
We have violated all the laws of nature in the past, and
it has brought its curse upon us. We should live simpler
and cleaner lives. The Medical Board points out to us
every year that prevention is better than cure for the
diseases which are ravishing the human race to-day. I
have not written this for any sordid reason. “If any man


willeth to do my will, let him take up his cross and follow
me.". I threw down everything when I started to write
this, and the truth was revealed to me gradually. After
I get this into print my conscience will be clear. If I
had withheld this I would have gone insane. There is a
lot of people who will call it insanity now. The scientists
and Biblical students will also pick it to pieces, but I will
not argue with anyone. I have stood for Love, and
Liberty, and Truth, and no mortal man can harm me.
Whatever it costs me will come out of my own pocket.
I don’t ask you for anything, and I will accept nothing
from you. When I started out to write I had nothing but
the love of my fellow-man at heart. And all I ask from
you is to come out and fight this out in the light of day,
and show to the world to which mother “the child
belongs.”
I witness this as it was given to me to write by the
immortal spirit of man through the Lord of Nature.
JOHN BROCK,
Inverleigh.
