

LOVE AND PARENTAGE,
APPLIED TO THE
IMPROVEMENT OF OFFSPRING:
INCLUDING
IMPORTANT DIRECTIONS AND SUGGESTIONS TO LOVERS AND THE MARRIED
CONCERNING THE STRONGEST TIES AND THE MOST SACRED AND
MOMENTOUS RELATIONS OF LIFE.
0, S. FOWLER, PRACTICAL PHRENOLOGIST.
DEDICATION.
To all who have ever tasted the sweets of Love ; or felt its sting ;
or consummated its delightful union or who anticipate its hallowed
cup of tenderness ; or expect to fold its “ dear pledges ” in parental
arms—more especially to Woman, the very embodiment of this angelic
emotion—to all who would enjoy its heavenly embrace, avoid its pangs
or render their prospective children healthy, and talented, and lovely,
I dedicate these pages.
The Author.
INTRODUCTION.
That- its Parentage determines whatever is constitutional in the nature of
every herb, tree, fruit, animal and thing endowed with life—its shape, texture,
aptitude, characteristics, and whether it shall be strong or weak, sweet or sour,
good or bad, &c., throughout all that is primitive in its nature—is a law of
things, governing man, as well as brute and herb; that which gives existence,
tby virtue of its own inherent power, also determining whether its products
shall be herbs, or trees, or animals, or human beings, and of what kind, and
thereby their anatomical structure and physiological constitution; their ori-
ginal strength or feebleness of body and mind ; their predisposition for virtue
or hankering after vice—all that goes to constitute the sum total of their
natural characters. Its law is, “ Each after its kind.” Nor “ each after its
kind” merely, but “ aftei its kind’; at the time the being or thing received
existence. That is :as are the parents physically, mentally, morally, when they
stamp their own image and likeness upon progeny, so will be the constitution
of that progeny. Education may modify, direct, increase, diminish, &c.; but
remodel what is constitutional it never can. It can neither create nor
eradicate any primary capability or quality of any animal thing. Though,
“ J ust as the twig is bent the tree's inclin’d,”
the bramble cannot be bent, to bear delicious peaches, nor the sycamore to bear
grain. Education is something, but parentage is almost evert thing; because
it “ dyes in the wool,” and thereby exerts an influence on character almost
infinitely more powerful than all other conditions put together, maternal be-
fore and after birth not excepted. This is the great sower of humanity
If it sows tears, humanity reaps sorrow—reaps the whirlwind when it
No. 1.


town the wind ; but Ita good seed bears fruit a hundred fold, to the glory of
God in the highest happiness and perfection of his creatures, here and here-
after. Nor can that corrupt and bitter stream of human depravity and woe
now bearing on its dark waters most of. mankind, be purified and sweetened,
except at its fountain head. There it may be —must be, if at all. Morality
may weep in anguish; Christianity may preach and pray ; education may
teach; and philanthropy may labour; but it will all be comparatively in vain
till parentage takes up the herculean labour of human reform and perfection
Thoughtless mortal I sport not on the brink of relations thus momentous I
By all the happiness your children are capable of experiencing, if endowed
constitutionally, with the very perfection of our nature, mentally and physi-
cally, I conjure you, before you allow the first goings forth of love, to learn
what parental condition in you will confer so great a boon on the prospective
bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh ! By all the happiness it is possible
for you to enjoy here and hereafter in your children, or for them to enjoy in
themselves and their descendants, if they should be beautiful, healthy moral,
and talented, instead of diseased and depraved, as it is your imperious duty to
impart to them that physical power, moral perfection, and intellectual capa-
bility, which is nearest to perfection! Prospective parents ! oh, pause and
tremble ! Will you trifle with the dearest interests of your unborn children 1
Will you, in matters thus momentous, rush headlong! Yet how many parents
tread this holy ground completely unprepared, and almost as thougtlessly
and ignorantly as brutes—entailing even loathsome diseases and sensual pro-
pensities upon the fruit of their own bodies ! whereas they are hound, by obli-
gations the most imperious, to bestow on them a good physical organization
.along with a pure moral, and strong intellectual constitution, or else not to
becomes parents ! Especially since it is easier or happier to generate human-
angels, than devils incarnate.
Once more : words are utterly powerless to portray the amount, the aggra
vation, and the almost universality, of the perversion of that element, designed
expressly to perpetuate our race. Nor can any other means whatever obviate
or prevent either this perversion, or its consequent misery, but sanctifying
this propensity. This work proposes this high object, by the simple but effec-
tual instrumentality of properly directing the love, and promoting the affeo-
turns of mankind.
CHAPTER I.
PARENTAGE AS TRANSMITTING ITS VARIOUS PHYSICAL AND MENTAL
CONDITIONS AND QUALITIES TO PROGENY, BY MEANS OP THE NATURE,
FUNCTIONS, AND ADORNING INFLUENCES OF LOVE.
Love is the fulfilling of the law. Those that love most, are most god-
like ; for ‘ God is love.’ This Divine sentiment forms a constituent
element of man’s primitive constitution. None are wholly destitute of
its charms, of its sweets. Blot it from the soul of man, and you blast
his nature !
But there is a ‘ friend that sticketh closer than a brother.’ There is
a tie stronger than life. It is that oneness of soul ‘ which binds two
willing hearts’ indissolubly together, and makes ‘of them twain, one
flesh.’ Connubial love! Thou ‘holy of holies’ of human emotions !
Thou queen of earth ! Thou glorious sun of our nature ! Thou gar-
land of terrestial loveliness! Thou solace and sanctifier of man !
Thou life and soul of woman ! Thou precious relict of Paradise ! Thou
Paiadise of itself! Oh, God, we thank thee for emotions thus holy ; for
bliss thus divine ! We bless thee for a foretaste of heaven so rich, so
enchanting ! The gold of Ophir,, the nectar of Eden—all earthly bles-
sings—aue but as stars, and this the sun 1
SECTION I.
ADAPTATION OF PARENTAGE, AND FUNCTION AND LOCATION OF
amativ enkss.
Parentage perpetuates our race. Besides re-supplying the ravages of
2
LOTH AND PARENTAGE.


war and pestilence, of death in all its insatiate cravings, it even far out-
strips him in swiftness, and rises above him in might, literally defying
his power to annihilate the species. Man will multiply, the earth void
be replenished, in spite of him !
What magnificent results from an arrangement so simple! Wastes,
but yesterday desolate,to-day it is beginning to people, and anon will have
crowded with homes, hamlets, villages, and cities, swarming with count-
less millions, and teeming with life and happiness. It plants its seeds
of humanity upon solitary islands, and then fills them with throngs of
busy occupants. It sends its hardy progeny almost to the icy poles, to
multiply in spite of all that is terrible in the utmost of cold, and wind,
and storm. Anon it takes possession of the tropics, still urging on its
grand process of propagation, though melted to weakness, and scorched
to blackness. In short, wherever life can be sustained, thither does
this prolific principle send the swarming trophies of its power to
‘ multiply and replenish the earth,’ till it is literally full. But for this,
or a kindred arrangement, our earth would have been a solitary waste,
without one living soul, except the first parents of our race, to have
enjoyed its beauties and its bounties. Even beast, bird, fish, reptile,
insect—animal life in every form and grade, other than the first-
created pair—would have had no existence ; and all the adaptations of
water, air, and earth, to their subsistence and happiness, would have
been in vain. Even the entire vegetable kingdom would have passed
away in its very infancy, to return no more forever; because reproduc-
tion here also is effected by that same great principle of parental agency
which obtains in the world of animation and sense.*
Considering, then, either its extraordinary efficiency in reproducing
such vast hordes of herbs, trees, animals, and human beings—or its own
philosophical beauty or perfection, surely no department of creation evin
ces more the very infinitude of his concurrent wisdom and goodness who
made all things,than this arrangementof parentage; nor is anymore pro-
motive of human progression in numbers and happiness; for it is the be-
ginning and foundation of all the interests of man—those myriads of hu-
man beings who have thus far inhabited our earth, and the millions that
now enjoy its luxuries, each being but the products of this great con-
trivance, as will be all those who, in all coming time, may rise up, in
successive generations, to people this world and another.
Nor is an end thus important, thus all-essential even to human existence,
left to be carried forward by intellect or morality alone ; it is enforced,
by all the resistless authority of a demand of our natures. ‘Be fruitful
and multiply,’ is a law of our very being , written in ever-living charac-
ters upon our primitive constitutions. Otherwise man—all that lives—
would soon cease to be! As, in case he had been created without appe-
tite or hunger, left to eat what and when his other faculties dictated,
he would probably never have known that he required food ; or
knowing, might have forgotten to eat for days together; so without
some primary faculty devoted expressly to propagation, how few, even
of our own selves, would ever have been born 1 Or, destitute of its
promptings, how many of us would voluntarily subject ourselves to all
the expense, trouble, and various pains, consequent on bearing and rear-
ing children? Not one in thousands, especially of mothers. We pro-
bably should never have known even the use of some of our organs,
' To become fruitful, any and every kind of seed must of necessity hare a
male and female parent, and the pollen of the latter receive impregnation from
the former; just as must the eggs of fowls, fishes, &c., before they can bring
forth their chick or spawn. If this idea should be new to any reader, he will
find its investigation exceedingly interesting. But, however instructive and
philosophical this whole subject, yet, as this work proposes to discuss it as
applied to man only, these its other applications are dismissed with this pass-
ing allusion to their existence merely.
3
CONSTITUTIONAL.


and certainly could never have used them. Blot this faculty from the
sou of man, and it is doubtful whether even another generation would
be brought forth to carry on thiU ceaseless din of business, happiness,
and life, with which this arrangement compels all earth to teem, and
all time to subserve. Hence, that same Infinite Wisdom which devised
this arrangement of Parentage, has ingrafted it upon a primary element
of the human mind, the promptings of which form a constituent and
necessary part and parcel of human existence, in order that it may be
effectual in subserving its end.
This faculty is called Amativeness, and is adapted to man’s parental
organs, and male and female constitution and relations, and they to it;
so that the action of either calls the other also into exercise, on account
of the reciprocity existing between them ; love being the mental emo-
tion, and this inducing that parental function which perpetuates our
race.
That this whole range of mental operations is exercised by means of
a cerebral organ, located in the cerebellum, is here assumed, it having
been demonstrated in the Author’s other works. When this organ is
large, or very large, it fills out the head between and behind the ears,
and enlarges the top of the neck. It was immensely developed in Aaron
Burr, who was one of the most extraordinary men of his own age or
any other, for its manifestation in character. It was also large in a
“ State Prison Female, in the Auburn Prison, where she was sent solely
in consequence of her total and shameless abandonment in this respect ;
as well as in that of Patty Cannon, who was notorious for its manifes-
tation, and lived habitually in and by its unrestrained indulgence, and
had a remarkable faculty of captivating the opposite sex thereby.”
[See American Phrenological Almanac for 1841.]
When it is very large, and Parental love is small, the hind head rises
almost perpendicularly above the back of the neck.
When this organ is small, the head, on a line with the eye and top of
the ears, projects far back over the nape of the neck, slopes in, and be-
comes narrow as you descend. This form of head obtains in most
infants. See the back of their heads.
The array of proof establishing the existence and location of this
organ in the cerebellum —a location peculiarly adapted to its office—is
so great as to have compelled its admission by most scientific men.
Connubial love and attachment to the opposite sex, are in proportion
to its size and activity. The husband in whom it is active, and directed
upon his wife, loves her with proportionate intensity and fervor; dotes
upon her, cherishes and protects her, almost idolizes her, and does what
he can to render her happy ; but when feeble, or not directed towards
her, he cares little for her, serves her with reluctance, seldom bestows
marks of affection on her, mostly leaves her to take care of herself, per-
haps cordially hates and abuses her. So, too, the wife in whom this
element is strong, active, and directed upon her husband, thinks all the
world of him, his society, advice, services, and caressess - ; is blind to his
faults, but overrates his virtues ; is completely devoted to his interests,
and esteems it a privilege to promote his happiness, even at the sacrifice
of her own; literally living in and for him, and desiring nothing so
much as reciprocity of affection ; but when feeble, or not exercised
towards him, she magnifies his faults, depreciates his virtues, disregards
his advice and happiness, is unwilling to be beholden to him, refuses
his marks of affection, and literally loathes his embraces. It also ren-
ders man fond of woman as a sex, and causes him to appreciate and
love the feminine in proportion to the intensity of its normal action, and
so of woman as regards man.
Its exercise, therefore, becomes a duty. As no department of our
nature was made in vain, so this was not created to slumber. We are
under a moral obligation, solemn and imperative, to become parents, and
4
APPEARANCES GIVEN BY BARGE AMATIVEXESS.


thus fulfil this high function, this exalted testimony of us Ml ; nor can
they attain the perfect stature of men and women, who do not.
taking its dignified rank, then, among the primary elements of the
human mind, its proper exercise, like that of every other function of
our nature, is promotjve of happiness, and in a pre-eminent degree.
As, in the proper exercise of the eye, or in and by the very act of seeing,
we naturally experience a great amount of pleasure, and thus of eating,
breathing, accumulating, talking, sympathizing, constructing, remem-
bering. reasoning, &c., throughout every function of our own na-
ture; so the legitimate exercise of this faculty is designed and calcu-
lated’ in and of itself, to yield a great amount of pleasure, besides that
experienced by its living products. Indeed, happiness, both in its own
independent exercise, and in its influence over every other department
of our nature, is its sole end and aim, its only constitutional product.
More, Besides that wide range of pleasure consequenton itsoiw individual
action, it furnishes to Parental Love the only objects capable of calling
forth its full-toned and pathetic energies; which, thus roused and quick-
ened, calls industry into new and more powerful action, in order to pro-
vide for their constantly returning wants; adds increased zest to Appetite
in feeding and eating with them; pleasurably re-augments Cautiousness
to guard, provide, and care for them ; fans the ready spark of Approha-
tiveness into a blaze of delightful action in hearing them praised ; redou-
bles the action and consequent pleasure of Language, by furnishing new
listeners and talkers, and those the most delighting and delighted in the
world; provides reason with new listeners to its logic, and new “ ways and
means’’ for promoting their happiness to he planned and executed, as well
as opens up a new and vast field for contemplation ; presents Mirthfulness
with new and most amusing subjects of merriment, ami incentives to
laughter; furnishes Benevolence with new objects of sympathy ; Devo-
tion with new subjects of prayer, and pupils of religious instruction ;
Authority with new' and obedient vassals ; Hope with new' and most
enchanting buds of promise ; and thus of every other faculty of man ;
thereby redoubling, a thousand times over, their action, and consequent
enjoyment. Reader, when you grasp this subject in all its hearings,
you will see why Love and its accompaniments exert so all-powerful an
influence over the weal and wo of man , how, when well directed, thev
swell the placid stream of human happiness from the rivulet to the
mighty river ; gently irrigating the whole vale of life till its enriched
soil bears, in full perfection, every flower, every fruit, every sweet,
which the exhaustless capabilities of our nature can experience. IN or,
in all probality, has the most happy of mortals in the domestic rela-
tions ever yet experienced to the full of that flowing tide of per-
petual pleasure which this element is designed and calculated to pour
forth upon every son and daughter of the human family. Behold how
inexpressibly happy it renders some who neither understand its laws,
nor apply intellect to its guidance, and that with even only moderate
physical and mental endowments. How much more, then, mankind in
after ages, who shall both understand and apply its laws, and possess an
organization incalculably superior to any now attained !
But, like all the other elements of our nature, it has its >aws, aud
thev broken, inflict pain, and pain proportionate to the pleasure con-
sequent on their obedience. Nor could the eloquence of angels portray
the agony of body, and the torture of mind caused thereby. Families
gone into perpetual mourning for a dissolute sou! 'Talents, moral
worth-all that is noble and god-like—forever blasted-ottered up a
living sacrifice on the altar of lust ! And by the uncounted million .
Confiding daughters of virtue defiled, and sent into hopeless bondage,
for a short hut most miserable existence, in the land of shameless prosti-
tution ! All the nectar of female, loveliness and bliss turned into the bit-
terest gall our natures can drink, and in thickening draughts without
number ' Husbands and wives innumerable estranged, and rendered m-


tolerably miserable for life! Our race , even, corrupted, debased, be-
praved, and tortured, in ways without number, and degrees beyond
computation! Oh! if one deep, continuous wail of the woe caused
thereby, could break upon the ears of all flesh, ten thousand thunders
could not be heard ! All would exclaim, ‘ Where is the ark of virtue
and safety?’ Oh youth! pause and tremble, for you walk upon the
very verge of this frightful precipice, ignorant of impending danger!
Oh ! take this friendly warning. And, ye, who have sinned and suf-
fered, sound the alarm. Scatter light ! Impart knowledge I We
may, perchance, light upon the observance of these laws without under-
ftanding them, and should, if our natures were unperverted ; but infin-
itely better with understanding them. Concerning no other faculty,
f>robably, exists an equal amount of ignorance and perversion—of Flo-
ated law, and consequent suffering. On no other subject do we equally
need that information which it is the one specific object of this work to
impart, namely, to show what exercise of this function will secure the
highest happiness it is capable of bestowing, and what must necessarily
induce suffering. If it shall disclose this, it will become a great public
benefaction. Bear in mind that it comes to increase these pleasures, not
to abridge them. Let us, then, proceed to investigate this incalculab y
momentous subject with clean hands and pure souls, and in order to
augment our virtue and happiness, and escape all the terrible consequen-
ces of perverting this portion of our nature.
SECTION II.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF PARENTAGE, OR MODUS-OPERANDI BY WHICH IT
STAMPS ITS ‘OWN IMAGE AND LIKENESS* ON PROGENY,
ILLUSTRATED BY ITS FACTS.
That progeny, vegetable, animal, and human, both derives its prim-
itive constitution, physical and mental, from its parents, and also re-
sembles its parental nature, is a conclusion established by the universal
fact, that the products of all genera, species, and individul things re-
produced throughout the vast range of creation, ‘take after* their paren-
tage ; those of man being human beings ; those of whales, whales ; and
those of every animal, tree, herb, and thing, being similar to their
parent animal, tree, herb, or thing. To perceive that the natures of
children are but the perfect transcripts and blendings of those of their
parents, requires neither the learning of a Burritt, nor the philosophy
of a Bacon, but it is a conclusion thrust upon us by universal observa-
tion and experience.
Nor is this department of nature left to chance. Like every other, it
is governed throughout, even to its minutiae , by its laws, one of which is
‘ each after its kind. 9 Else, our children might be born brutes, or trees,
at perfect random. But this law renders them like their parents , and
thereby preserves the unity of both our own species and every other.
This great law of things, ‘ Hereditary Descent’ fully proves and illus-
trates, in any required number and variety of cases, showing that pro-
geny inherits the constitutional natures and characters, mental and
physical, of parents, including pre-dispositions to consumptions, insan -
ity, all sorts of disease, &c., as well as longevity, strength, stature,
looks, disposition, talents— all that is constitutional —and in those various
degrees in which they obtain in parents, and even derive every physical,
intellectual, and moral element and shade of character directly from
similar ones in parents. From what other source do or can they come,
Indeed, who can doubt a truth as palpable as that children inherit some ,
and if some, the whole of the physical and mental nature and con-
stitution of parents, thus becoming almost their fac similes.
Moreover; for precisely the same reason that they inherit the consti-
tutional or permanent character of parentage, do they also take on
6
tub philosophy of parentage.


them those particular parental conditions existing at the lime they re-
ceived being and character. In other words ;as they inherit theconrti-
tutional character of parents, so when circumstances excite even feebler
faculties in the latter to temporary predominance long enough to affect
the character of those materials employed in the manufacture of life and
mentality, children imbibe along with their very being, these tempor-
arily prevailing characteristics of parentage, by the action of that same
creat law which transmits the permanent physiology and mentality
when they predominate. That is, the mental and physical character
then, existing in parents, is fully and completely transmitted to offspring.
But how transmitted ? By what instrumentality is either the consti-
tutional or the temporary character of parentage transmitted to ott-
epring ? Perhaps by magnetism,* through the instrumentality of the
secretions , and their intimate relation of both body and mind. The tew
that governs this whole matter seems to be somewhat as follows : Man
has a two-fold organization ; the one, anatomical—the other magnetic
or vital • which are intimately interwoven throughout; the latter, by
means of its affinities and natural superiority, controlling the form, tex-
ture &c., of the former, and securing its action through the instrumen-
tality of various magnetic connexions, depots, &c., called poles, which,
put in action, produce and constitute all the phenomena of life. I his
magnetic constitution has two great centre poles ; the one, in the head
—the other, in the chest. This magnetic nature of parentage is impart-
ed to the germ of life, or imbodied in it, only that it is yet folded up or
concentrated in that great central pole in the chest, where embryo life
commences, and then deposited, hy that function which imparts being
in the place provided for its nutrition, where, also, nature has stationed
a full supply of maternal vitality, to feed it till it can germinate, as
the egg germinates when subject d to incubation, or when seeds sup-
plied with terrestrial magnetism. , . , ,
If this theory requires confirmation, it has it m the analogy existing
between the geneiation and the germination of all that live and grow
from the most inferior vegetable, up throughout all gradations of animal
and vegetable life. Seed, animal, child, all require the intercourse of
male and female parents, from whom they all receive that vital germ
which imbodies and constitutes their entire character. All grow, and
grow much alike, The human germ bears a resemblance to that of
fowls so close as to be called ovum, the Latin word for egg, aid evefi has
* Magnetism, or electricity, or galvanism, all only different names for the
same thing differently applied, is now generally conceded to be the grand
agent or instrumentality of life in all its forms, all varieties of human, animal,
and vegetable life included—the bones, muscles, organs, &c., being only the
rones pulhes and tools, while this is the master workman, or grand executive
of every animal function and mental exercise. When applied to gram, roots,
herbs &c. it accelerates their growth a thousand per cent Animals, also,
are found to be organized on the principles of the galvanic battery and to
aerate those positive and negative forces, the alternation and expenditure of
"which produce every motion and function of nature. [See American 1 hren.
Journal 18-15. pp. 129 and 359.] Strongly corroborative of the doctrine is
the fact established by the experience of most persons who have suffered the
imputation of a leg, for example, in feeling pain in the foot, or where the foot
would have been if still on—a fact perfectly explainable by the doctrine of a
in acne tic organization as well as anatomical, but on no other ; on the ground
that amputation destroyed the anatomical organization, but not the magnetic.
if this doctrine be true, it is the magnetic constitutions of ffie materials
employed in imparting life, which gives them their vitality, efficiency and
power to produce character. And what agent equally befitting this function
—equally subtle, ductile, transferable, efficient, and all-pervading—every thing
required for transmitting this vital or magnetic nature of parentage to the off-
Boring with all that accuracy and minuteness actually attained 1 b U. he Uds
agent what it may, probably nothing will furnish ns with a better illustration
of its power and modus operandi than magnetism.


that nutritious deposite called yolk, which serves instead of the st omach,
though that of the egg contains all the nutriment required for incuba-
tion and formation, while one in the human germ, sufficiently large to
sustain it several months, besides forming all its complicated parts,
would be exceedingly inconvenient; and hence it receives its nutrition
into this stomach from the maternal placenta, as do all species of the
mammalia, and for a kindred reason. See, also, the male and female
spawn of fish, and their analogy to the ovaries of all mammalia animals.
Quite analogous is the germination of all grains, seeds, roots, nuts, &c. ;
their body, bulb, root, meat, &c., being to them what the yoke is to the
egg, and the placenta to the young mammalia, namely, furnishing
nourishment till they can put forth their roots and draw it from the
ground. That they, in common with eggs, contain nourishment is evi-
dent from the fact that they impart it when eaten ; yet germination con-
sumes it, and unfits them for food. Now, since true analogy is a certain
guide to truth, and since so striking an analogy exists between the gen-
eration and germination of all seeds, nuts, grains, vegetable, &c., and
the egg, and between the latter and all mammalia animals, may we not
rest upon correct inferences drawn from this law ? Still strong as it is,
those not content to receive instruction from it in this important re-
spect, should bear in mind that it furnishes a good illustration of that
fundamental basis on which proceeds the generation and germination of
all that live and grow.
Whence and how , then, or by what law , does this germ of human lif§
derive its magnetic constitution or mentality, physiology, every thing,
appertaining to its product 1 Mark well the answer. All the secretions
partake largely, not merely of the general condition of both body and
mind, but also of their particular states for the time being. Thus, not
only do fevers, jaundice, * other physiological conditions, greatly
affect, even so as to the urinary, excrementitious, and
other secretions, and control their odour, consistency, character, &c., as
well as accelerate or retard their discharge, so that physicians often in-
quire concerning them, and prescribe accordingly, but strong emotions
of various kinds have a similar influence on both these and all the other
secretions ; sometimes effecting copious secretions and discharges of tears,
sometimes, as thinking on a favourite dish, ‘ making the mouth water
that is, causing a copious manufacture and discharge of the salivary
secretion • pleasureable emotion augmenting the vigorous and healthy
of the liver ; and grief retarding or impairing them—nothing
equally inducing dyspeptic and kindred affections—and vice versa of joy,
and thus of all secretions. Now, since the organic and mental con-
ditions actually control the character of even these secretions, much
more do they control the character of the secretion employed as
the messenger of life. And the more so, since this secretion in
particular , is known to be so intimately related to the mind, that
it cannot be avoided, even in sleep, without the concomitant exercise
of its corresponding mental emotion, and often can be voided simply by
its indulgence ; which always effects that distention requisite and pre-
paratory thereto. Indeed, what stronger proof can be required or had,
of the perfectly sympathetic relation actually existing between its char-
acter, discharge, and everything appertaining to it, on the one hand,
and the states of the mind and body on the other, than that furnished
by the experience of all who have experience in this matter 1 Now,
since this reciprocity is known to exist in part, it is of course complete ,
and thereby the existing magnetic conditions of every element and
function of both the mind and body of parentage, and in all their shades,
and phases, and degrees of action and conditions, are transferred to this
secretion, and through it transmitted to that physical and mental con-
stitution of progeny derived therefrom !
This reciprocity is still farther established and facilitated by the
location of Amativeness, the cerebral organ of this function ; it l*in*


situated at the upper extremity of the spinal cord—that great central
railway of nervo-magnetic travel, by which every organ of the system
communicates with all the other organs and parts—and this secretion
taking place at the other ; its place of starting on its mission of life
being immediately at its base. The destruction of life always conse-
quent on severing this nervous track, and of sensation in the arm, or
any other part, consequent on the cutting of the nerves that connect it
with this cord, and thereby with Amativeness, and much more to the
same effect, all going to show how intimately Amativeness is related to
both this secretion, and to the existing condition of every other portion
of the system.*
By way of illustrating the how this transfer of both the permanent
and the existing physiology and mentality of parents to this secretion,
and through it to offspring, probably occurs, let us suppose this mag-
netic agent of such transfer to be composed of various ingredients which
might be denominated sub-fluids, one of which represents and produces
anger, another kindness, another love, and others reason, taste, and thus
of every other mental faculty, as well as of every bone, muscle, and
physical organ of parentage. * Now, those children that receive exist-
ence and constitution when all these, sub-fluids maintain their u ual
relative power and activity in parents will resemble these parents
in every particular ; but those that receive being and impress when the
angry, or the kindly, or the intellectual, or any other sub-fluid prevails
in parentage, and is therefore imparted in existing relative predominance
to the materials of life, will inherit those sub-fluids in their then exist-
ing predominance or deficiency ; some of which may be greater in the
child than in either parent, because augmented by increased activity in
both parents, and others less than in either, because little excited in
either; while those begotten when circumstances have conspired to
diminish the combative sub-fluid, and increase the moral, for ex-
ample, or any other, will receive from parentage a proportional endow-
ment of the temporarily prevailing sub-fluids and consequent character-
istics : and the same when any other faculty or element prevails, or
becomes deficient, in parents at this period*; its existing degree of
parental action being fully and faithfully represented in these materials,
and thereby transmitted to progeny. Furthermore, when one sub-
inagnetic fluid prevails in one parent, and another in another, at this
period, the progeny takes on the then existing combination of these
magnetic fluids, forces, or qualities ; and thus of all their other combi-
nations ; nor does it matter so much, perhaps, whether they prevail
temporarily or pcrmamently , so that they prevail at this period.
If the preceding illustration of how children take on them the exist-
ing conditions of parentage is defective, or even erroneous, this would
not invalidate the great law attempted to be illustrated by it, namely,
that children do actually take on the existingmentality and physiology
of parentage-
Some means, some instrumentality, are employed in effecting that re-
semblance borne by children to their parents in physiognomy and
character already shown to exist. B.t what ? Shape is transmitted
that of fathers, even, though their parental relations cease with the
deposite of the materials of life. But hoio transmitted? The maqnctic
nature of every living thing determines its form, texture, aptitudes
character, every thing constitutional. (See note to page 25.) But the
magnetism of the tiger into the embryo calf, and it will assume the
shape and habits of the tiger. It is thus that malformations occur, as
seen in ‘Hereditary Descent,’ p. 218. Kindred magnetic natures there-
fore assume kindred shapes and characters ; and since children derive their
* For a much more complete view of the perfect reciprocity sustained
by the cerebellum, and of Course by Amativeness, (o all portions of the sys-
tem, see American Phrenological Journal for 1815, page U59.


magnetic nature from this germ of life, and it is from the existing
magnetic constitution of parents, by means of that perfectly sympathetic
reciprocity already shown to exist between the two, they of course are
like their parents by nature, and therefore look like them. That this
explanation is the true one, is evident from the two incontrovertible
facts , that magnetism embodies the principle or instrumentality of life in
all its forms and functions, and that this germ of life is so intimately
related to, and so fully charged with, the magnetism, that is, the
vitality of parents. This explains the rationale oi some, and since of
some, consequently of all transmission, from sire to son, throughout
all the generations of all animals and things that propagate, and shows
i chy and how rheumatic, cancerous, inflamed, and all the other diseased
and healthy conditions and affections of any and all the organs and
parts of parents, are so transmitted, as to stamp all their healthy, dis-
eased, rheumatic, inflamed, and all other affections and impresses, upon
the corresponding organs and parts of offspring—explains why and how ,
when the heart, lungs, liver, stomach, muscles, nerves, brains, phreno-
logical organs, <fec., of fathers even, are vigorous or feeble, healthy or
diseased, &c., throughout all their ever-varying conditions, during the
secretion and deposit of these materials of life, the child’s magnetic
grrm of the heart, lungs, muscles, brain, &c., will be similarly con-
ditioned, and of course the organ or part formed therefrom ; and thus
of all parental conditions, qualities, affections, everything whatsoever.
Special stress has been laid on paternal conditions. Is then the mother
deprived of all participation in forming the constitutional character of
progeny ? Has she indeed ‘ neither part nor lot in the matter’ of
stamping her own ‘ image and likeness, physical and mental, upon the
fruits of her own body 1 Are not her physiology and mentality also
both represented and transmitted ? If not, why should she experience
the orgasm !* And why no product, however well the paternal seed is
sown? She at least furnishes the ovum, which of course partakes of
her magnetic nature, and her offspring of its. That each parent fur-
nishes an indispensable portion of the materials of life, and some how or
other, contributes parentally to the formation of the constitutional char-
acter of thsir joint product, appears far more reasonable, than to ascribe
as many do, the whole to either, some to paternity, others to maternity.
Still we need light on this subject very much, nor can all there is ba
brought to view without entering somewhat more fully into its physio-
logy and philosophy. Still this decision, go which way it may, does
not affect the gteat fact that children inherit both the physiolopy and
the nxcntaWy existinj in parents at the time they received being and con-
stitution.
But facts, which even if these reasonings are fallacious, constituto
a sure guide to truth. George Combe, high a thonty truly, in his
‘ Constitution of Man,’ gives the following case in point:—
‘ln the summer of 1827, the practitioner alluded to was called upon
to visit professionally a young woman in the immediate neighbourhood,
who was safely delivered of a male child. As the parties appeared to
be respectable, he made some enquiries regarding the absence of the
child’s father; when the old woman told him that her daugher was
still unmarried ; that the child’s father belonged to a regiment inlre-
land ; that last autumn he obtained leave of absence to visit his relations
in this part of the country ; and that on the eve of his departure to join
his regiment, an entertainment was given, at which her daughtej
attended. Bering the whole evening, she and the soldier danced and
sang together; when heated by the toddy and the dance, they left the
cottage, and after the lapse of an hour were found together in a glen, in
a state of utter insensibility, from the effects of their former festivity ;
and the consequence of this interview was the birth of an idiot, lie
* The sexual paroxysm.


la now nearly six years of ape, and his mother does not believe that he
is able to recognize either herself or any other individual. He is quite
Incapable of making signs whereby his wants can be made known—
NMlh tins exception, that when hungry he gives a wild shriek. This is
a case upon which it would be painful to dwell ; and I shall only re-
mark, that the parents are both intelligent, and that the fatal result can-
not be otherwise accounted for, than by the total prostration or eclipse
In the intellect of both parties from intoxication.’
In a conversation on this subject with a distinguished judge, he said
he employed the principle here involved in regard to his youngest child.
Determined at the end of several successive sessions, to dismiss bu iness
and recreate awhile with his family, he invited several of his legal and
other intimate friends to accompany him, for the purpose of having a
delightful festive occasion. Meanwhile, his wife had ordered out the
carriage and came to escort him home. All entered, heart and sonl
into the dance, mirth, and music, of the occasion. In the exceedingly
agreeable frame of the minds of its parents thus induced, this child
received existence and character, and, accordingly, rarely cries, or frets
or complains, but will sit on the floor for hours together and amuse her-
self, always appears perfectly happy, and is one of the best natured
children in the world. Behold the contrast!
A whaleman in N., was severely hurt by an harpooned and desperate
whale turning upon the small boat, and smashing it to pieces, one
of which, striking him in his right side, crippled him for life. When
sufficiently recovered, he married, according to previous engagement,
and his daughter, born in due time, and closely resembling him in
looks, constitution, and character, has a weak and sore place corre-
sponding in location with that, of the injury of her father.
Tubercles have been found in the lungs of infants born of con-
sumptive parents, at birth —a proof, clear and demonstrative, that
children inherit the several states of parental physiology existing at the
time they received their physiological constitution. The same is true of
the transmission of those diseases consequent on the violation of the
law of chastity, and the same conclusion established thereby.
And now, reader, in the name of truth and sound reasoning, do you
require any further proof of this doctrine? Can you open the eves of
intelligence upon it, and yet reject it? Is it so improbable in itself ? Is
it so at variance with what we already know of this matter ? Let parents
recall as nearly as may lie, their circumstances and states of body and
mind at this period, and place them by the side of the physical and
mental constitutions of their children, and then say whether this law is
not a great practical truth , and if it he, its importance is as the happi-
ness and misery it is capable of effecting! The application of this
inighty engine of good or evil to mankind, to the promotion of human
advancement, is the one specific object of this Work, to which we now
address ourselves.
SECTION III.
THE PHYSICAL CONDITIONS OF PARENTS AT THIS PERIOD TRANSMITTED
AND NECESSITY OF HEALTH AND ABUNDANT VITALITY IN ALL THEIR
ANIMAL ORGANS AND FUNCTIONS.
The inquiry then becomes truly momentous. What parental con-
ditions, at this period, are requisite in order to confer on offspring the
strongest and the best physiological organization possible, and at the
same time endow them with the most pure and elevated moral, and the
higlie st intellectual, constitution capable of being 1 conferred or received?
The answer to this eventful inquiry, nature has already furnished at
our bands, in having instituted this great law of things for our sure and
specific gu ide, our immutable landmark, onr pole-star always in sight


and throwing npon this whole matter the clear sunlight of perpetual
day, namely, that whatever is best in itself is always most pleasurable,
and whatever affords the most happiness, is therefore the best in itselt ;
and vice versa as to what is injurious. In other words, the more per-
fectly we observe the order and laws of nature, the greater the happiness
consequent to all concerned ; and vice versa as to their infraction and
the misery consequent. And since the laws of transmission are among
the most important of our whole being, their observance yields a
measure of happiness the most exalted imaginable to both parents and
offspring, while their violation is proportionally painful to all concerned.
Or thus • every thought, word, and deed, consumes that magnetism, the
expenditure of which constitutes our very life and being, and happi-
ness as well as executes every function of our "hole nature ; so that
our happiness is as the amount of magnetism expended, and this is m
proportion to the number and the intensity of th & functions brought
into simultaneous and harmonious action, except that its abnormal ex-
penditure is proportionally painful. The correctness of this law every
philosophical mind will readily perceive, and its application to the case
in hand fully assures us, that whatever conditions render parents the
most happy at this period, there n and therefore proportionally endow
and bless offspring; and this is effected by whatever enlists the greatest
number, and promotes the most intense action, of one and ail the organs
and functions of parents. Let us then proceed to apply this principle
in that twofold aspect, the first physical, the other mental, in which it
naturally presents itself. . , , ...
By what instrumentality, then, is our animal nature and organization
transmitted, and what physiological conditions must parents observe at
this period, in order to confer on offspring the greatest degree of physical
perfection possible, and what conditions must they avoid, lest they
entail suffering, disease, and premature death?
Unless effectually prevented by some means , some efficient instru-
mentality always acting at this period, human beings might have
been born, some without a heart, others without lungs, or muscles or
eves or brain, &c. How, then, are such fatal results prevented ? What
law necessarily acting at this period, endows all human beings consti-
tutionally with every physical organ and function? This: Just as the
stomach has its cerebral organ in Alimentiveness, and the reproductive
system its organ in Amativeness, so the heart, lungs, muscles, every
physical organ, has each its cerebral organ located in the cerebellum, or
at 'the sides, and all around, Amativeness; so that on the principle that
organs located together naturally act together,* its exercise always and
necessarily promotes that action of each individually, and of all collec-
tively, so indispensible to their respective transmission ; which harmo-
nizes perfectly with the fact, that this parental function constitutionally
and necessarily excites, and in a degree proportionate to its intensity, the
combined and simultaneous action of every bone, muscle, organ, and physi-
cal function of parentage. Probably no other function of life equally
so. Behold, in the experience of all, how it accelerates the labouring
pulsations of the heart, promotes perspiration, and augments respira-
tion, till its subjects, paternal in particular, pant for bieath
sufficient to supply the increased demand. Nor, in this enormous tax-
ation of all the vital organs, is that of the entire muscular system
omitted, or its tax light; but, besides being absolutely indispensable , the
more powerful and perfect its action, the more perfect both this function
and its product, because the more forcibly do those spiral muscles
which bring the materials employed from their permanent station,
deposit them in the place of their final this force being
•See illustrations in the American Phrenological Journal for 1844, the
series of articles entitled, ‘ The Philosophy of Phrenology,’ he.
+ so exceedingly delicate are these seeds of life, that, unless planted in a
place of perfect security, they must all be destroyed, and our race itself ex-


all essential to the energy and stamina of offspring. Behold, in this
imperfect explanation, the instrumentality employed by ‘ heaven’s high
Architect for effecting ends thus indispensable; and behold, moreover,,
the perfection of its operation in the fact that every human being is
endowed with every animal organ and function !
From this demand, imperious and almost compulsory , for the vigorous
and powerful action of the heart, lungs, stomach, muscles, and entire
physical man ; in short, for health, let parents learn the practical lesson
taught them, namely, that the only way they can secure living and
healthy children, is for them to render themselves vigorous and
healthy at this eventful period.* And that in proportion as they
perfect the power and activity of their own physiology as a whole,
as well as of each individual organ, will they impart them thus
perfected, to their progeny, and moreover, that their physical de-
bility and disease, general and local, proportionally enfeeble the cor-
responding organs of their children. Is it not a law of things, that
the product of any given function is more or less perfect in propor-
tion to the perfection of'the function itself ? Thus, is not breathing both
beneficial and pleasurable in proportion as it is more perfect, and thus
of every function ? And shall not the health or disease, vigour or
feebleness &c,, of offspring be according to the energy or tameness of
that function which gives them being and capability ? And is not its
perfection and power in proportion to the vigour of the health, with
which also its various degrees of pleasure fluctuate 1 Health is but a
full supply and powerful expenditure of that magnetism which is life,
and hence the more vigorous the former, the more magnetism it furnishes
to this function, to its materials, and to offspring, which takes on the
condition of quantity as well as every other ; so that children are pro-
portionally vigorous when this function is vigorous, and feeble when it
is feeble. Indeed, nature has even proved this already at our hands by
omiting its product when this function is tame or imperfect, and by
rendering the former the more certain as the latter is the more energetic
—a fact cognizable by all who know the alphabet of this matter. How
often does improved health obviate that barrenness occasioned by de-
bility and disease, as those consulted in such cases know full well?
And how often , too, when the debility is not so great as actually to
prevent offspring, does it fail to charge them with vitality enough to
secure them health and vigour of constitution, so that they barely live
along a while ‘ between hawk and buzzard,’ too feeble to enjoy life, and
then die, because so slightly made. Corresdonding with this, is the fact
that the most healthy classes have the most numerous families ; but
that, as luxury enervates society, it diminishes the population, by en-
feebling parents, nature preferring none rather than those too weakly to
live and be happy, and therefore rendering that union unfruitful which
is too feeble to produce offspring sufficiently strong to enjoy life.f A
tinguished. And what place as secure as that chosen, where they can be
reached only with the utmost difficulty, and then only at the £eril of even life
if self? But, to plant them thus deeply requires that powerfully existing
apparatus furnished, which, that it may he out of the way when not want'd
retires except when its function is required. Behold the efficacy of this
iutsance of Divine Causation! Nor less perfecty adapted to its office, is the
place selected for their deposit, in its allowing both the required plexibilitt
and room por growth
* And therefore of course at all periods.
+ The idea prevails, that those predisposed to consumption, insanity, or any
other transmissible disease, should not become parents, lest they entail them
on offspring. Though the author has advocated this doctrine, yet mature re-
flection has satisfied him of its fallacy. To preach it, while physical education
ia thus miserably conducted, may do as a partial offset; but strictly speaking,
whenever there is sufficient physical stamina in parents to secure offspring, the
latter will have strength enough to be capable of being raised and becoming
13
TAXATION OP ALL THE ANIMAL FUNCTIONS,


counter fact is, that, without exceptions, talented men are from a healthy)
ami therefore a long lived stock. (See Hereditary Descent, p. 9(!,
Still, great men often have weakly children because they generally
woik up all their strength, and usually impair their health, in those
arduous labours which accompany their greatness, thus leaving them-
selves too little remaining vitality to produce vigorous offspring. As no
function can go forward without being fed, or farther than it is fed, with
vitality, and as this function combines in simultaneous activity, and that
greater or less in proportion to its intensity, every organ and function of
our nature, and thereby becomes proportionally exhausting, parents are
required to bring to this work a great amount of animal energy, in order
ti> put forth and sustain, at least for the time being, the powerful effort
required.
Especially should parents cultivate their muscular system preparatory
to the perfection of this function, and of their children; because, to
impart strength and stamina to offspring, they must of necessity both
possess a good muscular organization, and also bring it into vigorous
requisition at this period. For this reason, if for no other, let those of
sedentary habits cultivate muscular energy preparatory to this time of
need. Shall Roman orators practise gymnastic exercises merely to
strengthen their muscles preparatory to the forum, and shall not pa-
rents assiduously cultivate muscular power preparatory to an end
infinitely more important ? Even the LIFE, as well as health and
talents, of offspring, depends thereon ; because, for reasons given be-
fore, parents having weak muscles cannot possib'y produce children
sufficiently strong to grow up, or talented to be worth the raising, and
must die childless ! The sedentary habits of so many of our citizens are
alarming, truly frightful even, in view of their dest ruction of offspring,
and will break more parental hearts, and prematurely bury more vic-
tims, than all the wars and all the pestilence of all Christendom, if not,
in proportion, than even heathen infanticide. For every ‘ foreign
missionary’ sent to preach against infanticide, we require to employ a
score or so at home, to proclaim, in the ears of all parents, present and
prospective, the great truth embodied in this section, as a means of pre-
venting that frightful infanticide perpetrated perpetually in our very
midst, and perhaps actually or prospectively committed even by soma
of our readers!
Inquire whether one or both the parents of those numerous children
that die around us, have not weak lungs, or a debilitated stomach, or a
diseased liver, or feeble muscles, or else use them but little, or disordered
nerves, exhausted animality caused by excess, or some other debility or
form of disease. The prevalence of summer complaints, colic, cholera
infantum, and other affections of these vital organs of children, is truly
alarming, sweeping them into their graves by the million. Shall other
animals rear nearly all their young, and shall man, constitutionally by
far the strongest of them all, lose half or more of his ? Is ilfo’sthe order
of nature ? No, but their death-worm is born in and with them, and
by parental agency. Take grave-yard statistics in August, and then say,
whether most of the deaths of children are not caused by indigestion, or
feebleness of the bowels, liver, <tc., or complaints growing out of them?
Rather, take family statistics from broken-hearted parents ! And yet,
in general, those very parents who thus suffer more than words can
tell, were the first and main transgressors, because they entailed those
dyspeptic, heart, and other kindred affections so common among Ameri-
happy, provided they are carried and reared in the best manner possible
Otherwise nature would war with herself; but now, that very debility or disease
which would render offspring too sickly to live and be happy, kills both tha
desire and power of becoming parents. Any child strong enough to be bora
alive, is capable of enjoying life, and of living to a good old age; else nature
Would nut let them begin to live


can parents, upon their own children* and thereby almost as bad as
killed them by inches ; thus depriving them of all the joys of life, and
themselves of their greatest earthly treasure. These fashionable ailinga
of adults, and these ravaging summer complaints of children, are the
same in their nature, and differ only \nfortn. Children may indeed die
■whose parents are healthy, but they almost must die whose parents are
essentially ailing in one or more of their vital organs ; because, since
they inherit this organ debilitated or diseased, any additional cause of
sickness attacks this part first, and when it gives way, all go by the,
board together. When one parent is healthy, and the other sickly,
those children that take after the healthy one, (and nature more often
secures this desirable end,) are more likely to live than those that
resemble the sickly one ; but why hazard the lives of any, since, by
preserving or establishing their own health, parents can just as well
save all, especially if they will also properly rear them ? Let then,
those who would avoid that terrible anxiety occasioned by watching
over the sick-beds of thei- own dearly beloved children, as well as all
that direful array of health-ruining and heart breaking feelings conse-
quent on their death, provide against them beforehand by preserving
their own health, and let the unmarried choose healthy companions or
none.
The importance of health in parents as such, must not be dismissed
without urging, in a special manner, the absolute necessity of health of
brain, and nerves, and phrenological organs. As their several states of
health and vigour, or debility and disease, are of course transmitted in
common with those of all the other organs, it remains to inquire, What
effects have nervous and cerebral diseases on the mind and morals of off-
spring ? Most pernicious, always. They even cause depravity ? Does
not dyspepsy produce depravity, by rendering the feelings and disposi-
tion morbid and bloodshot ? What is that increased irritability, fretful-
ness, ill-temper, &c., which usually accompanies this malady, but in-
creased depravity, caused by this physical disorder ? Children naturally
obedient and sweet tempered, when unwell generally become irritable,
cross, disobedient, sullen, spiteful, &c. Is not this depravity ? Then
pray what is? And is it not caused disorder? Because,
restore their health, and you obviate these depraved manifestations.
Let a citizen, naturally moral and good, become intemperate, and he
therefore becomes more sinfid, swears or blackguards, does not pay his
debts, perhaps fights, and abuses his family or even commits murder;
none of which he would do if temperate. Does not intemperance always
and necessarily augment depravity ? But reform this wicked man in
this single matter of drink, and he stops swearing, pays his debts be-
comes kind and provident to his family, and an excellent citizen again.
And all because temperance promotes moral purity. Indeed, the point is
too clear to require proof, that intemperance augments sinfulness. How ?
By disordering and inflaming the physiology, and thereby the brain ,
especially its base, or the organs of the propensities, because of the in-
timate reciprocity of those relations existing between the body and the
base of the brain which serves it.+ This cerebral disease of course
deranges those mental functions produced by the diseased brain, because
every function becomes diseased, that is abnormal, or, in other words, un
natural, when its organ is diseased ; and this consequent departure from
nature is of course a departure from her laws, which, occurring in the
• They are also quite as miserably nursed. Mothers understand almost
aothino about how either to diet themselves while carrying or nursing, or
tiheir children afterwards ; and hence the importance of a separate work on
this subject.
+ In “ Fowler on Temperance,” this principle is fully demonstrated, and also
run out in its detailed application to the production of various species ot
wickedness. The law there shown to govern this matter, will be found full ot
interest in itself, and rich in its applications. It may be had for 3d.
15
CAL'S it or INFANTILE DEATH.


organs of the mind, produces, and even constitutes depravity. And all
occasioned by that diseased or inflamed state of the stomach and body,
which has imparted its inflammation to the animal propensities, and thus
roused them to that undue and abnormal action which occasions and
constitutes depravity. In short, the inflammation or disease of the bodily
organs, causes sickness ; that of the brain, sinfulness and depravity, ex-
cept that inflammation in the intellectual organs warps judgment, distorts
conclusions, leads men to adopt error for truth ; and thus depraves
opinion, conduct, every thing.
So bold and startling a doctrine as that physical disease occasions
moral depravity, requires demonstration, and has it, in the fact that those
nervous diseases consequent on cerebral disorder, always and necessarily,
render their afflicted subjects most miserable, by making them gloomy,
fretful, fault-finding, &c., and even revengeful, and therefore deceitful
and dishonest, by way of retaliating wrongs merely imaginary. Let
such live in paradise even, and they would be wretched still, wretched
always, as Cowper said he w’as, and would be, even if in heaven, with
a body as his then was. In the absence of real cause of grief, they
make cause, even out of their blessings. That which, if healthy,
would render them happy, now only augments their sufferings : nor
could anything whatever make them happy, because their nervousness,
ipso facto , turns all they touch, not into gold, but into occasions of suf-
fering. But cure them, and what before only gave them pain, now
becomes pleasurable, simply because their brain is restored to its healthy
and normal, and therefore pleasurable action. All who have ex-
perienced nervous affections, know full well that they cause pain, and
that the most intense possible or bearable ; nor will any other kind of
anguish equally eke out life by wretched inches, or hasten its termina-
tion.
Now, what but violated law causes this pain, or any pain ? Does
pain ever occur except in consequence of violated law ? and is it not its
necessary consequent, and its universal concomitant 1 That such viola-
ted law alone causes such pain, is fundamental truth—one of nature’s
axioms even. Now, since these cerebral and nervous diseases cause
mental anguish, and since this anguish is but the sign and consequence
of violated law, and since this violated law is sin, therefore cerebral and
nervous diseases cause and constitute sinfulness. Nor is the demonstra-
tion of any mathematical truth more conclusive. It is even immutable
truth itself.*
Now, since children take on the existing physiology and mentality of
parents, and since almost all forms of physical disease, whether of
the heart, stomach, lungs, or any other organ or portion of the body,
disorder the nerves of the diseased part more or less according to their
aggravation, and thereby proportionally disease the nervous system as a
whole, and of course the brain, thus rendering parents more and more
unhappy and depraved as they are more diseased, their children will of
course inherit, constitutionally, whatever of these painfnl or depraved
conditions appertain to parents at this period. This painful or de-
praved condition therefore, thus born in and with them — “ dyed ik
the wool” —becomes most difficult of cure, and liable to increase,
and hence predisposes to this abnormal, painful, depraved, condi-
tion of their mental faculties for life ! Beware therefore, oh ! parents,
how you entail either physical or cerebral disorder and therefore pain
and depravity, upon your own children, and that both constitutionally
and for life, unless cured, which is much less likely than increase 1
* Not that all depravity has this origin, but much. Nor that such disease
al ways, or even oh en, confines to the sick bed. The degree of either depravity
or sickness, is not the point, but the principle involved.
Besides, sickness in another way induces thought, reflection, activity of
conscientiousness, reverence, &c.—Ed


How infinitely tnore virtuous and happy would they be, and you ia
them, if you should be healthy in body, and happy in mind, so as to
beget in them a constitutionally healthy and vigorous physiology, along
with a serene and happy frame of mind ! Words are utterly powerless
in answer, and so is every thing but a life-time of consequent hap-
piness or misery ! Learn and obey, then, the laws of life and health,
that you may both reap the rich reward yourself, and also shower down
upon your children after you, many and most exalted blessings.
SECTION IV
DOVE AND MARRIAGE, AND THEIR ADORNING AND PERFECTING
INFLUENCE.
But however indispensable the transmission of the whole physical
inan, the transmission of the entire intellectual and moral being as
infinitely exceeds it in importance, as the happiness experienced in
mental perfection and power exceeds merely physical gratification. So
does also the Divine Causation employed for affecting it. Do you then
eagerly inquire : By what instrumentality is mind transmitted, and
soul propagated ? Would to God I could transfer to your minds this
answer as it exists in toy own ; but here again words utterly fail. Oh !
that all might experience it in the own souls !
That parental function which imparts being and character to offspring
besides exciting at this period, in order to transmit, ever y physical organ
and function, also awakens, by virtue of its own inherent nature, every'
intellectual and moral function and faculty, preparatory to their trans-
mission, and instrumental thereto. The machinery employed for effect- ‘
ing this greatest of God’s terrestrial works, is love —that mental
emotion which constitutionally precedes, accompanies, and induces,
parentage, and which, in and by its very nature, quickens all the feel-
ings, purifies and elevates all the moral affections, and augments all the
intellectual powers, as the means of their transmission. Bear in mind
here, that love and parentage, when they have their perfect work,
constitutionally go together, accompanying each other as uniformly
as warmth and summer ; nor is it possible for either to exist in any-
thing like perfection without the concomitance and co-operation of the
other. Indeed, the parental function is but the very perfection and
climax of love, the legitimate and only natural Urminus of all its various
stages and appurtenances, parentage being hut the ultimate of w hat love
is the element and various incipient stages, and the two being only
different degrees of the same elementary function of Amativeness.
Would that they were consociated in the minds and conduct of mankind
as they are in the oFdinances of nature !
Hence, in order to ascertain the constitutional character of parentage,
as well as its most favourable Conditions as applicable to the intellectual
endowment and the moral perfection of offspring, w r e must first ascer-
tain the constitutional nature and character of love, to which, therefore
we now proceed*
Tiie fundamental basis of love is laid in the adaptation, especially
mental, of the sexes to each other, ami their mutual capability of
bestowing and receiving happiness. That is, man is capacitated and
calculated to take pleasure in woman—in her physiological constitution
beauty of form, modes of action, feelings, and whatever characterizes
and goes to constitute, the feminine ; and woman, also, is rendered
happy by the masculine in person, intellect, and soul. Now it is a law
of mind, that w r e love whatever renders us happy, and in proportion
thereto; (see demonstration of this law in Fowler on Matrimony, p. .‘3O).
Since, therefore, the feminine is adapted to promote the highest happi-
ness of the masculine, it enamours the latter, and the more so the more
it contributes to its enjoyment, and vice versa as regards the masculine.
No. 2.
17
LOVK AND PARENTAGE.


Hence in proportion to the amount of pleasure, and that of the most
exalted kind, which each sex is calculated to pour into the soul of the
other should they toe each other, and this capability of conferring
Md receiving pleasure being mutual, their love consequent thereon
should also be mutual: and thus it is. , , « ,
On the principle that the ‘ tree is known by its fruits we shall be
able to derive important instruction touching the nature and consti-
tutionality of love! by first observing its effects, and to this we devote
the main body of this section, with the view of learning therefrom its
natural character and function, in order to the more spccificapphcation
in the next. What, then, are its effects on, its possessor % What, qua!i-
ties, virtues, beauties, charms, &c., does it develope % W hat collateral
Thou eh the world is full of books attempting to pourtray this pas-
sion—though tales, novels, fictitious writings, love-stories, &c., by far
the most numerous class of books, are made up, m warp and woof, of
love • though even the Bible itself is laden with descriptions injunc-
tions and directions, concerning it ; and though no events of life cast a
deeper dye of destiny than love and marriage—yet how imperfectly
understood is this whole subject! How much error prevails! And
how much sin and suffering are consequent thereon !
Perfectly aware that neither his organs nor talents adapt him to
encircle this passion with that poesy and romance generally thrown
around it* the Author is content to adduce its plain, every-da>,
matter-of-fact effects on character, in illustration of its functions, and
CX lts attach boys to their mothers most, and girls
to their fathers. It is the same faculty winch attaches the son to his
mother, and the husband to his wife. Hence that son who is affectionate
to his mother, is generally (and always capable of being) devoted to his
wife. Mothers, moreover, reciprocate this attachment with their sons ,
nor should they fail to convert to the best possible account, that tre-
mendous influence over their yet plastic but rapidly forming characters
imparted by this beautiful arrangement of our nature. Constituted to
prize the masculine above all price, they are of course thereby fitted to
develope bv culture that in their sons, which they love m their husbands.
Fathers, too, reciprocate this affection with their daughters, and are
thus calculated to develope and mature in them all that is feminine,
and thus prepare them to become the pride and prize of prospective
than In this manner, love rarely manifests itself till from
the fifteenth to the twentieth year, varying somewhat according to the
backwardness or precocity of its subject, except when brought forward
prematurely by those artificial stimulants mentioned in Amativeness.
And then only in its faintest shades, barely tinging the cheek with its
modest attractions, as the first rays of morning faintly yet effectually
light up the face of approaching day. At first, it just softens and
slightly subdues the manners and expressions of the sexes as regards
each other. Gradually, it creates a modest deference, accompanied by
a slight attraction of each towards the other ; which nature, howev r,
restrains by the always accompanying feeling of native modesty' inhe-
rent in all. And woe to that youth whose modesty is obliterated, or
even essentially seared ; nor should it ever be trifled with, because it im-
poses a much needed and almost insuperable barrier to undue familiarity
all lts riSfperceptTble influence augments the charm, and developes the
beauties of the human character, by rendering woman more graceful m
e verv look, action, and expression, and making man more polished,
bland, elevated, and noble, substituting refinement for grossness, pro-
• His Amativenees being only moderate, and his Ideality none the largest.
18
10VB KNOWN BV ITS FUUIT3.


priety foE vulgarity, manliness for boyishness, mildness for harshness
and blandness for roughness ; besides superinducing in a woman, the
sedate instead of the trifling, and the womanly in place of the girlish.
Still, love exchanges characteristics in woman less than it augments
those constitutional perfections previously existing, by throwing a halo
of loveliness around her entire being.
It was once our pleasing lot frequently to see and converse with a
betrothed bride, both before and alter her lover arrived in town prepa-
ratory to their contemplated marriage, as well as at and after their happy
union. Though accomplished and charming before, she was much
more so afterwards ; not only walking with a lighter step, and moving
with new grace and elegance, but giving additional fascination and per-
fection to all she said and did ; and thus far, every day augments those
heavenly charms. Oh ! if man as a sex only knew, as did that hus-
band, how to culture and develops the natural attachments of the
female character, by completely enlisting and properly directing the
affections of woman, no words could pourtray the extent to which her
improvement might be carried, and his own and her happiness thereby
promoted ! But alas ! he neither duly appreciates her loveliness, nor
properly cultivates her virtues.
The beautifying effects of love on the intonations furnish another
illustration of its adorning influences, the charms of which, however,
can be heard and felt, better than transmitted to paper. These tones in
men, before they are softened and subdued by this tender passion, are
seldom smooth or flexible, but generally grate harshly upon the ear,
being essentially defective in both compass and expression. But the
tones of love are always soft, tender, subdued, and insinuating, and in
proportion to its intensity.
An illustrative ancedote. To a fellow passenger whose intonation
evinced an unusual amount of this tenderness, w r e said : ‘ Will you
allow a plain, perhaps impertinent question V ‘ Most certainly,’ was
the courteous answer. ‘ Have you not recently been dissappointed
in love V With commingled confusion and amazement, he turned and
inquired : ‘ Pray, sir, how did you know it V * Then you confess the
fact V He then admitted that he had just bid adieu to a young lady
at the south whom he loved devotedly, and who reciprocated his affec-
tion, but his marriage with whom was attended with difficulties insur-
mountable. We then analyzed his intonation, pointing out to him its
subdued and almost plaintive notes of tenderness, accompanied with
shadings of sadness, discouragement, and disappointment. From these
tell-tale intonations and other similar indices, can the precise state of
the affections of almost any individual be correctly deciphered. When
the love has simply been excited, but not yet either fully centered or
disappointed, they become proportionally the more rich, melodious,
sweet, tender, and touching, yet not so in perfection. When called out
but partially interrupted, these vocal charms will be perceptible, yet
proportionally merged in tones of plaintive sadness, and become more
and more sharp, cutting, shrill, husky, or withered, <kc., according to
the extent of the disappointment. The tones in which gushing affection
chooses to array and express itself, are always low, soft, flexible, insinu-
ating, and tender, uttered generally almost or quite in a whisper,
and falling sweetly upon the ear like the notes of the iEolian harp ;
as those will remember with delight, who have over loved or been
loved. The intonations of the same speakers and individuals when
addressing their own sex exclusively, will be found less bland and
persuasive than w r hen addressing the opposite sex or a promiscuous
audience, because the mere presence of woman, by acting on this
faculty, imparls that insinuating intonation which, besides making its
appropriate impression on her to whom it was especially addressed,
finds its way directly to the soul of man, and thereby gives that com-
mand over mind and conduct which nothing else could impart. Nor is
19
LOVE AUGMENTS THE CHARMS.


nny ono fnllv qualified for public speaking:, till this tender passion has
polished, sweetened attuned, and modulated the intonation, and also
added that hlandness of manner, delicacy of sentiment, and elevation of
idea, which captivate and swav the human mind. Hence, public men,
moralists in particular, should seek the society of refined and accom-
plished women, if they would perfect themselves as teachers and guides
of the souls of their fellows.
But it is the intonation of woman that love renders most delightful
and bewitching. Though that of the girl is sweet, yet it is still light
and immature, and its modulations comparatively few, because neither
varied by emotion nor mellowed by pathos ; nor is it till love opens up
every fountain of her nature, and brings forth from its rich store-
house and spreads upon the table of life, all the exhaustless treasures
of woman’s soul, that the female voice becomes adorned with its last
touches of perfection, all its modulations being delightfully diversified,
and exquisitely rich, soft, tender, and almost angelic ! Words are tame
paper is comparative blank, in describing either their power or per-
fection ! Mark the intonations of the truly splendid wife, whose
affections hare been called forth and delightfully reciprocated, and
which remain at rest in the bosom of her fond husband ; every sight of
whom awakens a new thrill of holy pleasure in her soul, which adds to
her already attuned voice another note of delicious sweetness !
But how different her voice, whose love has been blasted I Her into-
nations irritable, or dried up or parched, by disappointment, or rendered
husky, or tremulous, or short, by excessive, or conflicting, or unhappy
feelings. Analyze her tones who lives unhappily with her man. Need
we lift the veil ? Reader, lift it for yourself. Take notes. Open your
ears to those musical intonations of love, and then to those withered,
grating, repulsive accents of reversed affection and unfortunate wed-
lock ! By the application of this touchstone of the affections, their
existing conditions in almost all can be correctly inferred ; and, though
it will disclose discord between many husbands and wives who have
thus far contrived to hide it from the world, yet both the principle
involved and its various applications, at too valuable to be lost.
Since, then, the intonations of woman are sweetened and perfected in
the ratio of her domestic happiness, let those who delight to listen to
the sweet warblings of gushing feminine emotion—let man, as a sex, do
all that, can be done to promote her domestic felicity. If man won 1 d
hut do his part, woman would laden every breeze with notes sweeter
and richer than the morning warbles of feathered songsters, till they
diffused throughout his whole soul a perpetual thrill of holy pleasure.
Oh ! how infinitely thankful should he be for the bestowment of the
purifying, elevating, perfecting, and indescribably enchanting voice of
woman ! May it be fully appreciated by him, and improved by her ;
for, as yet, it is but the voice of infancy compared with what it might
be, and with what it will one day become!
The inference is obvious, and coincides with the fact, that woman
must love before she can sing. Not before she can learn the gamut, or
thrum the piano, or rehearse tunes by note or rote, but before she can
sing with soul, or reach the soul.* We need not enlarge. The knowing
will understand.
If asked how these delightful results are effected, an illustration must
answer. As some existing connection between the mental faculties and
the face impresses the ever-changing operations of the mind upon the
face, so a connexion probably similar between the mind and the
voice, reports all our states of feeling and shades of intellect, those of love
of course included, through the instrumentality of our intonations.^
* Tbe fact is in point, that birds of song sing their love, and sing more
sweetly when they woo than at any other season.
f The principle and quo modo by which both these phenomena are pro-
duced, will be found fully explained in the American Phrenological Journal
for 1346, and some most beautiful phrenological indices derived therefrom.
20
TVTT.UESCK OF 1.0 VI! ON TUI-: INTONATION.


In like manner, love beautifies the expression of the conn 'ennnee
Beauty eon S ! sts far more in expression than in the form or amusement
of the features in that emanation of in the sparkliim eve the
glowing cheek, and entire aspect beaming with emotion” than in
configuration merely. Contrast any countenance when listlessness
lassitude or vacuity, has banished expression, with that same counte-
nance when animated in conversation, lighted up by strong emotion, or
beautified and adorned by the harmonious blending and intense action
of the whole mind. To confine attention to a single point—that of the
colour. I hough beauty of form and symmetry of features essentially
<xid beauty, yet this species is unspeakably lower in kind than that o‘f
expresion, of which colour forms an important part. Where no feel
mg i s colour forsakes the cheek, as in fainting, and the leaden hues of
death brood darkly over the soulless face. But call out the intellect
and arouse all the faculties of the same man, and especially woman to
the. highest pitch of pleasurable and commingling emotion, and that
countenance before vacant, and therefore uninteresting, now beams with
that almost superhuman expression which mainly constitutes beauty
and adorns the ‘human face divine’ with hues and shades before nn-
sem, but now beyond the power of language to depict. Even ordinary
features, it up by expression, become attractive, if not beautiful, whereas
we turn disappointed or dissatisfied from features however finely mould-
cd, if destitute of expression, or distorted by the expression of hateful
passions. By as much as we instinctively contemplate intellect and soul
the highest department of creation, with more interest and pleasure
than we do inanimate shape merely, is the expression of the former
more truly beautiful than outline merely. And since love, as already
shown, almost incalculably augments and intensifies that action of the
various faculties which alone gives expression, and therefore mainly
constitutes beauty, it of course proportionally increases beauty, so as
often to render those features deeply interesting, which otherwise would
charms ’ lrradiates tllose natural l v beautiful, with almost angelic
All this in addition to the fascinations of love-itself—to its lan-mish-
ing, insinuating, bewitching, and almost voluptuous expression’of the
eye, its exquisite touching play of the lips, its modest blush, and all
the other charms and beauties imparted by this soul-melting passion,
i ut in this case also, as in that of the voice, words are utterly power-
less and empty. Yet there is a book which expresses, or can express
all Ihough hut poorly printed, and in its first edition, it is almost
infinitely more significant than generally supposed. Its exhausfcless
language, even the alphabet of which we scarcely yet understand future
ages will read. Study that book—the human countenance—and then
declare, if words thou hast, how almost infinitely love beautifies and
adorns its delightful pages !
Other similar illustrations of the adorning influences of love mi<»ht
be drawn from the increased zest and expressiveness it imparts to the
merry laugh ; from its natural language, which renders the person more
erect, and reclines the head affectionately backward and a little to one
side, thus carrying the whole person foward proudly and freely • from
its augmenting the hilarity, elasticity, animation, life, and buoyancy of
the entire being, physical and mental, and increasing every power every
pleasure of life ; but these must suffice. How all this is-effected remains
to be shown, hut the effects themselves must have been experienced more
or Jess by most readers, and observed by all.
Not that love augments the charms'of all alike, because all are not
equally endowed with those materials by means of which it operates.
As all beauty consists in the manifestation of human nature, that is in
the exhibition of our several powers and faculties, those whose faculties
are feeble have but little human nature in them, so that Jove cannot
augment that nature, that is, increase their charms, as much as it du-.j


theirs whose human nature, or constitutional charms, are more abun-
dant. Hence it beautifies, adorns, and perfects, those most, who are
endowed originally with the greatest amount of human nature or soul.
The rationale of this beautifying influence of love, and, indeed, of this
whole matter, is, that in and by rendering the sexes attractive in the
eyes of each other, it may induce each to do and to become what will
please the other, in order thereby to secure that reciprocity of affec-
tion which mutual endearments may ultimately develope till they ripen
into, and thus rivet, that love which naturally superinduces marriage
and eventuates in offspring—that great finale of all man a domestic
feelings and relations.
But, though love and its accompanying charms eventuate in mar-
riage, yet they do not terminate with it. As its ultimate object is the
propagation of the race, it should last as long as we are capable either
of being parents, or exerting an influence on the character of our
offspring. In other words, it should last as long as life. Its waning
with the honey-moon, would be like autumn supervening directly
upon spring, before the happy pair had tasted the luxuries of summer,
or feasted upon the golden fruits of autumn. Courtship is but the
mere alphabet of love, and the wedding season its first lesson. When
properly placed, its natural tendency is to increase with years, nor ever
to diminish till age impairs both it and all our other faculties together.
The blushing bride, tho’all dissolved in the melting tenderness of gushing
affection, does not, cannot love equally with the middle-aged wife, or
even the declining matron. She has not yet tasted the virtues or tasted
the perfections of her beau ideal. It is only after years of the continual
interchange of reciprocated kindness and sentiments between husbands
and wives—after they have ascended together the hills of prosperity,
and perhaps travelled the vale of adversity, till they have thoroughly
tried each other’s souls, and called forth their mutual spirit of self-
sacrifice, perhaps not till they have watched over each other when pros-
trate by sickness, and reciprocated a constant succession of endearing
offices of kindness and tokens of love ; above all, not till they have become
parents together—that they can be completely enamoured of each other ;
because it is her maternal relations which most of all endear the wife to
her husband, besides making her love him inexpressibly the more for
being th c. father of her idolized children. Perfect love also requires that
perfect confidence which nothing can establish but those fullest and most
diversified tests which married life alone can furnish. Mistaken they
who suppose that years naturally weaken love. Animal love they may
weaken ; but that blending of soul, that love of moral excellence which
constitutes love’s crowning perfection, and even quintessence, grows
slowly, matures gradually, and reaches its zenith only after the fierce
fires of youthful passion have given place to the live coals of mature or
declining age. Matrimony is the very garden and paradise of love,
and therefore every way calculated constitutionally to strengthen and
perfect it, and thereby'augment its every charm and sweet. With
this, the experience of few may coincide, because so few husbands and
wives cordially and completely love each other ; but, chosen and bless-
ed of God this happy lew ! Yours is the sweet cup that never sates.
Yours the dainty luxury that never cloys, but only increases your
relish while it feasts your souls perpetually on its delicious bounties !
Ye who have lived affectionately in wedlock’s sacred bonds for a score
or so of years, can bear testimony to this. The fact that the experi-
ence of so few harmonizes with this blessed reality, only shows how
few truly love ! Ye, then, who have your die yet to cast, cast it in
view of this principle.
To perceive how happy wedlock continues to improve the agreeable-
ness of man, is easy ? because by drinking in continually those soften-
ing, refining, elevating, and ennobling influences exerted upon him
perpetually by a good wife, he becomes more polished, and of a better


disposition day by day, and year after year, till all hia powers are
bedimmed by age or eclipsed by death. Much more is this true of
woman. Happy wedlock constitutionally developes both that physical
and mental sexuality which imparts these finishing touches of perfection
to her grace and elegance of manner, her sweet smiles, fascinating looks,
exquisite intonations, beauty of expression, and which,in short, heightens
every charm and perfection of the female character. By embuing her
whole soul with love for the masculine in her husband, because it so in-
describably exalts her happiness, it makes her -prize his sex in proportion
as she loves him, and this arrays her in all her charms as a means of
rendering herself agreeable. Nor is this in the least improper. It is tha
nature and highest happiness, as well as the main constituent element
of the wife and mother, both of which it perfects. Properly to know
man in the person of her husband, developes ike feminine , and thereby
augments every female charm and perfection ; because it calls out and
fulfils her whole nature. But the maiden has exercised only a part of her
nature, nor that the most important. She has not yet fulfilled its great
duty and destiny, and hence she is below the wife and matron. N°t that
she should be underrated, but, bashful and blushing, she labours under
perpetual restraint, which marriage removes. Sweet, lovely, is the
blushing maid and the blooming bride ; sweeter still, more lovely far,
the full blown matron. Let others sip the nectar of female loveliness,
as it gushes from the handsome features, lovely looks, graceful motions,
fascinating smiles, and enchanting conversation, of maiden purity and
undeveloped love ; but let us commune with married woman. Give us
the well developed wife and mother , whether for elegance of manners,
exquisite tenderness and flexibility of voice, ease and propriety commin-
gled with freedom of conversation, and those practical lessons of expe-
rimental wisdom which flow perpetually from her lips. We admire
the maiden, but we almost worship the matron , and gather more infor-
mation, as well as derive more pleasure, from an hour’s conversation
with the wife of forty, than from weeks of chit chat with the simpering
helh of eighteen. The latter is only just beginning to put on her fair,
but yet immature forms and rich colors ; while the former is fully
ripened ; her form filled out and perfected ; her colours enriched and
variagated, and their flavor most delicious—every element being com-
pletely consummated.
But the opinion prevails almost universally that married life neces-
sarily diminishes female beauty. The fact is admitted. Its necessity is
questionable. One of its efficient causes consists in the loss of health
generally consequent on marriage. Both the exercise and expression of
love and all its charms,* expend that vitality which health alone im-
parts ; and thereby enfeebles love itself, and that power by which alone
it can manifest itself and its charms ; besides furrowing and fading the
cheek of beauty, emaciating the form, substituting the frowns and
scowls consequent on pain, for the brisk and happy expression of health,
•—bedimming the otherwise sparkling eye, ami weakening, and pervert-
ing, and depraving all the faculties. Hence the female invalid ceases
to throw that interest, animation, expressiveness, soul , into her looks,
action, conversation, &c., which health would enable her to put forth
and impart ; while disease, by rendering her looks more or less haggard
and ghastly, and her intonations sorrowful or hackled, makes that re-
pulsive which health would render charming. How much an animated
walk, or ride, or dance, or frolic, &c., promotes circulation, heightens
colour and expression, and augments the whole collection of woman’s
charms, simply by rallying those animal energies which manifest both
her love and her loveliness; and what this does for beauty temporally,
health does permanently.
That the matrimonial, and especially maternal, relations require and
* If Indulged in to excess.
23
WEDLOCK IMPROVES THE AGREE ABLENESS OF WOMAN.


consume a great amount of those vital energies, is a fact attested bv th»
expeiience and observation of all married women; maternal duties bein'*
so particularly exhausting, that few retain strengtli sufficients re-supply
the immense dram, and fewer still know how, at this period, to econo-
Tuin the * V ha l 0 ’ S .° aS !° Save their constitutions from utter
rum. Hence, women die by thousands after having borne two or
ree children, and most of those that survive become feeble or in-
valid, and therefore lose their charms. Still, there is nothing in the
Relations of the wife or mother necessarily injurious to either health or
TTT laS a good cons t ; tution, and then obeys the laws
| &r d hcal [ h \ °? contrary > aII ‘hese relations are directly caE
lated to promote health, and enhance beautv ; for never is woman more
attractive in the eyes of her husband and of man, than when fulfilling
famUv heT almo t° nS ‘ T 6S a ° d ’ to ° ° fteU ’ the drud of the
mily, her almost perpetual confinement within doors, her seeing so
little company and, above all, the miserable dietetic and other habits—
the worst possible for health-of most women, together with otW
l e3 \°°i llume l rous t0 menti °n, and the one specified in ‘ Ama-
tiveneSs breakdown the constitutions of ninety-nine wives and mothers
in every hundred, efface their beauty, and hasten them and their charms
mto premature graves ! Ye wives and daughters of loveliness, therefore
U l P reSer - Ve ° r regam your charms > preserve or regain your
health, that coming years shall only enhance your beauty, and feed the
fires of love with new fuel continually, so that its flanms sLll grovv
ughtei and warmer as life’s happy months fly swiftly on, till mafurer
E" 1 crow ? y°U with a husband’s whole-souled love, and a mo-
leaf f w ° r ’ fi cd f ° r lm T rtality ’ green old a ? e shall fold vou up,
iZI , y i preparatory to that angelic bloom which fadeth ‘not for
. And ye husbands, who will, can preserve, in still increasing
freshness those very charms which first swelled your heaving bosom
f r tbem 101 ! 8 oft . end . ernes » and love, till you have no farther occasion
loi them or her who bore them.*
effiVf of affection too often consequent on marriage still more
effectually bhgh s both the charms and the soul of woman In many
S l he 7 lf ® 18 j e « beloved than was the sweetheart; and nothing will
Jej ax thp°eWi hari T the ° nCe lovely face with wrinkles,
r lax the elastic motion, cause the sprightly step to falter, and becloud
or obscure all traces of female beauty, so rapidly or so effectually as the
oss or even diminution, of a husband’s affections. Escape her prac-
W f! ye ’ h M n*- C f Ching ear ’ they never can ; but will waken all
l 6r hopes ’ bIi S ht all her pleasures, necessarily and
Tha/\o f - ne f d WOnder ’ Her aU is at stake-embarked for life. .
uhat lost, ad is lost beyond recovery, and she compelled to go down to
flowers ve mournmg . Nor is it possible to comfort her. Say, ye blasted
floweis of former fragrance and loveliness-care-worn, dispirited, heed-
less even of life, and prefering death to a life so completely miserable-
what canker-worm is that which preys perpetually upon vour inmost
their 7 not ■ Nor need ye reriew .Y°ur griefs by recounting
then cause ; for they are written in doleful characters upon vour fur-
rowe 10 "j an d insciihed in plaintif and forlorn notes upon vour
every intonation! Ye have married, but not congenially > The dol-
ing dove has lost its wonted mate ! Happy if only lost! Strayed to
another, perhaps! Alienated ! Your souls transfixed with manv sor-
XI; S ° C /‘ anged froin expectation’s happy dreams ! ' And
ail this but the mere beginning of sorrow J Compelled • but,
enough. No wonder that your beauty fades; that you' drag out a
miserable existence while you live, and die before your time 1
? C muSt , again refer you to ‘ Amativeness,’ for an explanation of one of
the principal injuries to female health and loveliness namely, the want of
tempei anco in matrimonial pleasures.


But, as we shall soon reach, from a more advantageous position, the
effects, mental and physical, of unrequited love on both parents and
children, we dismiss this subject, lor the present, for one more congenial.
SECTION V.
SPIRITUAL LOVE AS COMPARED WITH ANIMAL : ITS OFFICE IN THINS
FITTING THE MENTALITY.
In what, then, consists that love which induces marriage, and secures
offspring ? What constitutes its component elements. What are the
conditions requisite, that parents may both enjoy its sweets themselves
and thereby perfect their prospective children? Especially, by what
instrumentality is mind transmitted, and soul propogated ;
The answer to this great question embodies the one’main subject
matter and gist of our treatise ; namely those states of mind in parents
most productive of moral purity and mental excellence in offspring. Same
means are employed in transmitting the mentality of parentage to pro-
geny analogous to those already shown as propagating the physiology
1 hose means, that instrumentality, is love. Fully to expound it we
must first explain the nature and fundamental laze of that love, already
sht *^ vn constitutionaly to accompany and induce parentage.
'Physical gender alone does not exclusively constitute” the whole of
either the masculine or the feminine. Though the sexes have each the
same number of physiological and mental organs and functions yet
their temperament and texture , or tone of organization, differ essentially
and this causes a corresponding difference in the mode of action of their
faculties, and, consequently, of all they say, do, and are. Thus the
male is the broadest, deepest, and strongest, in the chest; the female the
most fully developed at the hips, from which she tapers every way he-
cause her maternal constitution and relations require a much greater
concentration of energy here than any where else. This organic differ-
ence causes a difference, clearly perceptible, in their movement, walk,
gait, &c.; those of men naturally exhibit strength; of woman, taste
and elegance ; a difference in their hand-writing, always distinguishable
and by similar indices ; m their forms of head and corresponding phre-
nological developments, always distinguishable from each other - and.
consequently, in their entire social, intellectual, and moral constitution
Moreover, the tone and cast of all their feelings and mental operations*
their respective styles of conversation, composition, &c., differ so per-
ceptibly and universally, that experienced critics, by reading a few sen-
tences inany unknown work,can determine by which sex it was penned
bandar remarks apply to the female sentiment as compared with that of
man—to her jokes, retorts, modes of reasoning, her religious, and all her
other feelings and affections, and, indeed, to all her other mental charac-
teristics as compared with those of man. In short, the masculine and
feminine are not contra-distinguished from each other in physical gender
more than in that mental and spiritual sexuality (we use these appella-
tives tor want or better,) here intended, and which allows and creates
that indescribable communion and commingling of the spiritual in
man with the spiritual in woman , which make ‘of them twain one
rentage° nStitUteS * ot * J ' e aa< * man ' ia g e > and paves the way for pa-
I he quo modo, or how, of this assimilation, magnetism may yet fully
explain, and even now furnishes an illustration doubtless fundamentally
coriect. buppose then, as shown before to be probable, that this
mental entity, or the being and agent of mind, consists in magnetic
w‘‘ S f| anJ thafc those mental fluids of the sexes are in accordance
characters. Now there is n law of mind by
winch kindred spirits blend and commingle, each as it were holdino- the
other in solution, as water and sugar do, in which all the particles of


each commingle perfectly with all those of the other. Now is not that
inter-communion of kindred spirits which constitutes love ana*oguons
to this commingling of electric and other fluids? Ur thus Phe man in
his every word, look, and action, gives off a portion of his masculine
fluid or mentality, which his loving consort imbibes, and incorporates
with her own, and vice versa as to woman : and hence that loss, lonely,
desolate, forsaken feeling, as if torn from, their own selves, consequent
on their separation ; because both have m fact imparted of their own
mentality or selve's, and taken on a portion of that of the other , and
hence both their loneliness of soul, and their desire to be with each other.
Moreover; these magnetic natures of the sexes have a strong adapta-
tion, attraction or affinity, for that of the opposite, like the opposite poles
of the magnet for each other, similar to what we all have for food, air,
&c. which induces each to seek the company of the other, because
hannv therein. And this masculine mentality, or intellect and soul, has
the same affinity for that of the feminine, and vice versa, which the sexes
have for each other physically-the same inclination, attractiveness,
and drawing towards ; the same assimilation and connexion, as well as
analogous pleasure therein. Nor is the latter better adapted to hold that
intercourse productive of off spring, than the former to hold that spmtuo-
‘ ual communion which constitutes love, and which is quite as essen-
tial to the high mental endowment of children, as is the other to their
physical generation. Nor is this physical sexuality of each more pleas-
U or charming in the eyes of the other or better calculated to excite
emotions of love, than this their mental sexuality. Indeed, true love
in its most exalted exercise, appertains mainly to the mind, and. consists
in this cohabition of soul with soul, which proceeds, accompanies, and
induces generation, and constitutionally governs it. It is this spiritual
affinity of the mental masculine and feminine for each other, and inter-
course therewith, which constitutes the very embodiment and heart s
core of true love, and encircles this heavenly emotion with such a halo
of holy purity and sacred sweetness. Tins it is which makes a man even
forsake < father and mother, and cleave unto his wife, and which binds
the fond and willing wife to her adored husband in those divine bands
which absolutely nothing can sever. This perfect oneness of feeling and
confluence of soul; this complete solution of every feeling and faculty of
each with every feeling and faculty of the other, and longing foi its
attendant spiritual communion, alone constitute true marriage—t at
divine ordinance which entitles those who thus love each other to the
rights of wedlock* Nor should that intercourse whicffi multiplies our
race, be more sexual than mental and spiritual. For the laaer, nature
has provided even more amply than for the former, both m havjn-
rendered it more promotive of connubial enjoyment in parents, and in-
dispensable to the intellectuality and morality of offspring. Indeed,
the spiritual love alone sanctifies the sensual—alone makes it truly
human. All else is vulgar, debasing, and comparatively insipid,
because consisting, as far as mind is concerned, m the sensual in-
dulgence of a single animal propensity, and therefore yielding compar-
atively but little pleasure, because of the small amount of brain called
1D WeshaHsee more fully how effectually love promotes moral purity,
in the light of that great law of mind, the sanctifying influence on pro-
pensity, of the intellectual and moral faculties, ihus anger, without
J-eason or object, that is, unguided by intellect and unsanctified by
moral sentiment, becomes mere brute force and hot-headed passion,
which is both sinful in character, and painful to its possessor and all
affected thereby ; but that same amount of anger, directed by intellect
upon something deserving indignation, and also converted by the higher
sentiments into mOi'al courage,resistance to wrong, defence of rights , op-
*See this point fully proved in Fowler on Matrimony.


position to evil, <tc., thereby becomes virtuous in character, and plea-
surable to its possessor and all concerned, simply because sanctified and
directed by the higher faculties; whose influence is truly wonderful in
purifying and elevating propensity, and rendering that virtuous and
pleasurable, which would otherwise be vicious and painful. But, hav-
ing fully expounded this law' in ‘ Education and Self-Improvement/
and also, ‘ Religion/ this single illustration of the sanctifying influence
of the higher faculties over the lower, must suffice here.
To apply this law to love : Let Amativeness combine in action with
the higher faculties—that is, let man love woman for her goodness, in-
telligence, fine feelings, and virtues —for her intellectual and moral
worth —instead of for her personal beauty merely ; let him love her as •
one with whom to hold this high and holy communion of kindred spirits,
rather than as a mere sexual being calculated to gratify his sensual
propensity—and this exalted sentiment will exert a most purifying
and elavating influence over his whole character, conduct, and being ;
because it fulfils that great law of virtue and goodness just illustrated,
by subjugating his lower propensities to his higher faculties, which
elevates as much as unmixed sensual love degrades, by subjugating all
that is high and godlike in man to low-lived lust! The constitutional
influence and effect of this love therefore, are to sanctify and subjugate
propensity, and develops the moral and intellectual. Say, ye who have
experienced this holy emotion, has it not exerted this influence over
your entire feelings and conduct—purifying, sanctifying, elevating,
adorning, perfecting all ? Did it not inspire within you an abhorrence
of all sin, and a longing after moral excellence in all its variety and
perfection? Say, ye who now love, be it husband, or wife, or some un*
wedded kindred spirit, does this love corrupt your souls by inflaming
sensual desires ? Does it not tend to chasten and subdue them, and to
spiritualize your whole nature? These its everts, disclose its character.
But, since love dwells in its greatest purity, perfection, and power,
in the soul of woman , pervading her whole nature, constituting its warp
and woof, and staple commodity, the tone and character of her love, and
whether it be spiritual or animal, furnishes a touchstone and sample of
true love incomparably superior to that furnished by man. Being the
very personification of love itself, in addition to being endowed with all
the sexual impulse requisite for parentage, she is our umpire. On her
verdict rests the issue.
What, then, fair reader, constitutes the leading feature or element of
your love ? Consists it mainly in a desire for sensual pleasures ? Or
almost exclusively in luxuriating in this spiritual repast under discus-
sion ? Though your beloved must belong to the opposite sex, yet does
your love center in this his physical manhood as such ? Suppose this
done away, and your pleasures in this respect cut off, his mind retain-
ing the same, would your love go down, and go out, in consequence ?
Would it even be essentially weakened thereby ? Somewhat, perhaps ;
because he, being less perfect, mentally and physically, would be less
worthy of being loved ; but does this his physical manhood constitute
the principal incentive to your love? Or, is your attachment, to this
endowment subordinate to your love of his intellectual capabilities and
moral excellence ? This is the question. Your answer is the required
verdict. We will not frame your answer for you, but leave you to
answer practically in your various circles and general conduct,
Man, too, carries within the inmost recesses of his own soul a spon-
sor to this spirituality of true love : less in degree , but kindred in
character. Let memory bear the hallowed testimony touching the sex-
uality, or spirituality, of your first whole-souled and tender passion.
As you partook, day by day. of this mental repast, did it not satisfy
you fully ? As you imbibed, for hours together, those lovely looks,
soft accents, and melting intonations, which literally ravished your very
soul, did you brutalize this holy converse by contemplating and loving


her mainly as your prospective partner in sensual indulgence ? These
recollections of ‘love’s young dreams’ are my vouchers, and the
almost universality of their spirituality in all well organized persons of
both sexes—put the doctrine of this section—of this volume—complete-
ly beyond the reach of doubt or cavil. Testify, ye who have never yet
forgotten, who never can forget, the holy spell of your first mature and
whole-souled affection : Was it the personal beauty and physical sexu-
ality of your adored one that you mainly loved 1 Profanation, the very
thought ! You sought communion, but it was sexual only as a second-
ary accompaniment. And this spirituality of love increases with the
perfection of that of the organization.
Reader, there are those who have loved each other’s spirits , instead of
their persons —carnality, as such, having ‘ neither part nor lot’ in this
holy union of their inner natures, not even enough to move its corres-
pondent, but as one with whom to hold that angelic communion of
kindred spirits which constitutes love, but banishes lust! Their Jove
was as immaculate as that of the spirits of light—as ethereal as the-
converse of angels in heaven ! It was indeed the very distillings of
heavenly bliss— was that bliss itself! The very ground on which they
walked and loved was consecrated— hallowed, by this sacred emotion I
How it quickened to new life, and etherealized, their every feeling,
every aspiration, every element of life, and enhanced its every function 1
Oh ! crown of life ! Thou life itself ! Oh ! blessed memory 1 Most
blessed reality ! A common life-time for a day like this !
But why this most intense action and confluence of all the better ,
higher, holier feelings and aspirations of our natures ; this combination
apd concentration of every' function of the body, every faculty of the
mind, every element of our entire being? In order to their trans-
mission to offspring ! A sentiment thus embodying the very climax
of both Divine Causation, and human happiness—so glorious in itself,
so fraught throughout with the most consumate enjoyment mortals
can taste this side of heaven—w'as not created in vain ; nor merely for
its own sake. It subserves some divine purpose. That magnificent
purpose is the intellectual endowment and the moral perfection of man-
kind. But for the employment of some instrumentality, self-acting, and
always efficient, here one, and there another, of man’s moral faculties
would he wanting in offspring, and man be born a brute I Bat the ten-
dency of nature being to perfect all her works, man especially, and his
intellectuality and morality constituting the crowning elements of hu-
man nature, their transmission, in that supremacy required to guide
and govern the animal, becomes indispensable, both to his well-being in
this life, and his endowment with that spiritual and holy eternity which
lives with God beyond the grave! This mentality, spirituality, and
immortality which ally him to angels and to God, it is the one distinc-
tive office of this spiritual love in parents to impart to offspring—their
perfection and power in offspring being proportionate to this spiritual
love in parentage. While sensual love, as such, transmits the bodily
organs and animal functions, it remains for this spiritual love to call
forth into the most delightful and intense action possible, the entire in-
tellectual and moral nature of parents, preparatory, and in order to its
conferring on man this boon of angels, this ‘ image and likeness ’ of
God ; besides purifying and sanctifying the animal by the ascendancy
of the moral, and guiding all by reason. And it is this combined and
concentrated, as well as high-wrought inter-communion of every physical,
every intellectual , every moral element and function of hunanity in genera-
tion, which renders the pleasure attendant on this double repast so in-
describably exalted and beatific to those who spiritually love each other,
or in proportion thereto ; besides being the only means of augmenting
and perfecting the intellectuality and morality of its product—redoub-
ling more and more, as its handmaid love becomes more and more per-
fect, and thereby enhancing, and also uniting in this holy alliance,
28
LOVE DFVELOPES THE MENTAL FACULTIES.


faculty after facility, till finally, when both love and generation have
their perfect, and of course united, work, they embrace within the wide
range of their sanctified enjoyment, ev'ery animal, every intellectual,
every moral, organ and function and element of man’s entire constitu-
tion ! And herein consists their power to away the weal and woe of
parents and to propagate the godlike mentality of man J
SECTION VI.
DIVINITY OF MATRIMONY ; ITS DUALITY ; CARNALITY INSIPID AND
PAINFUL ; MORAL PURITY AND MORAL REFORM ; FEMALE PASSION ;
FEMALE SANCTITY MAN’S SPECIAL CARE ; THE ABANDONED, AND THEIR
TREATMENT ] TEST OF LOVE.
Consequent on this vital truth of the spirituality of love, several
important inferences require exposition before applying it more speci-
fically to the promotion of connubial love and human improvement.
matrimony a divine institution.
This element of love is primitive and constitutional. It forms a con-
stituent part and parcel of man’s very nature. This cerebral organ and
its accompaniments are as universally developed as the hands or head,
mid its mental faculty is as inseparable from the human mind as self-
defence or love of life. Nor can its spontaneous promptings be annul-
led or set aside, any more than appetite, by any possibility’ whatever.
Man must love sometime , and woman always, after fully enrobed in the
garments of womanhood. No man or woman lives thirty years without
becoming thoroughly imbued with this divine emotion. It intercepts
the life’s pathway of every human being. Or, rather, it is that sun of
life, whose all-pervading light must he seen by all, and whose genial
warmth all must experience. No frigid soul exists,
“ From Greenland’s icy mountains, to India’s coral strand,”
umnelted by its beams. No‘nation, or kindred, or tongue,’or indi-
vidual, under the whole heaven,’ can either put it out, or put it off.
Jxtve being thus constitutional and universal—a constituent element
of man’s very nature —matrimony’ of course becomes equally so ; be-
cause its natural terminus, and the only state in which it can be legi-
timately perfected. Hence matrimony is ah institution of nature and
of nature’s God. This position is self-evident, and requires neither
argument nor amplification.
Still more : Love is a necessary ingredient in human perfection and
happiness. As any one born blind, or maimed, is sadly deficient, and
still more so if bereft of reason, or speech, or taste, or memory ; because
destitute of a constituent element of humanity’ and capacity’ for enjoy-
ment ; so whoever lacks this sentiment of love, or does not exercise it,
is mentally deficient or deformed, idiocy of love being as great a blemish as
that, of reason, or memory, or devotion, or self-preservation. Other
things being equal, the perfection and the happiness of every human being
ere proportionate to the power, the purity, and the right exercise of this
heaven-horn sentiment. The unmarried may he virtuous, may be-
happy, in the other departments of their nature, hut must be either inac-
tive ar depraved in this, and therefore less happy in all the others. They
neither fulfil their destiny, nor link themselves into that great chain of
human succession by which all mankind are woven into one common
brotherhood ; but are cut off from all the joys of parentage, and aie un-
comiection with posterity. Bachelors especially must allow the com-
parative torpidity of their connubial and parental elements, and the
consequent diminution of energy in all their other faculties, and com-
parative insipidity of life, its motives and objects, or else pervert thorn
ail. Hence they' rank far lower in the scale of being and estimation
than their true sphere in other respects ; because, wherein consists ex
29
M.VTKliinw A DIViNK INSTITUTION.


cellence, except in living up to our natures ? Nor have they the shadow
nf a valid excuse. Accordingly, they are less esteemed, and of less ac-
count in society, whilst the married feel that their domestic relations
add to their dignity, weight, responsibility, and tend to elevate their
character and standing ; hence people feel more like men and women
after marriage than before. Nor can the maiden exert that influence,
or effect that good, or obtain that measure of happiness, secured by
marriage. Still the present usages of society forbid her taking other
than a passive part in consummating these relations : but of this in
another connexion.
MATRIMONY T>CAL, OR THE UNION OP TWO ONLY NATURAL.
Nor does this love roam unrestrained abroad, sipping its sweets from
every beautiful flower. Duality is its very nature. It centres on a
tinqle object, not on scores. Say, ye who have loved. Did that first
mature affection described in the last section, diffuse itself over the op-
posite sex in general, or did it select and hover over one individual in
particular, whom it regarded as its choicest flower, Its very beau ideal
of perfection ; Can that man be found whose first spiritual love was
not individualized ? Still, since woman is as much better qualified
than man to decide matters appertaining to the nature of love, as she
is more affectionate, here also she shall be our umpire. Woman, what
sav vou ? Did the first goings forth of this holy emotion embrace all
men? Preposterous! Utterly repugnant ! True in uo solitary in-
stance. It selected one in particular, preferred above all others, in
whom it discovered beauties and virtues amply sufficient to satisfy its
widest range of desire. Where is the well constituted man or woman
whose experience does not tally with this exclusive individuality of love?
And there are thousands—aye, nearly all, in their young love—who
gladly give and take the pledge of ‘ single blessedness,’ in case their mu-
tual union shall fail of consummation. And the very best specimens
of love, feel the transfer of their affections to be too great a sacrilege to
perpetrate, and hence shut themselves out of the kingdom of matrimo-
nial and parental felicitly, solely on account of this instinctive constancy
of love to onfe object, and its native repugnance to any other partner in
its love. Reader, tallies not thy experience with this doctrine of love’s
duality ? and did it not require a mighty effort to break from its de-
sired consummation? Nor, unless insuperable barriers had intervened
to prevent the consummation of this dual reciprocity, could you have
sundered its exclusive ties, and given your love to another.
Again : Is not the natural tendency of love always to overlook faults
and magnify virtues, and thus come to regard its object as better than
all others, and therefore more lovely ? Ask any truly devoted husband,
or wife, or lover, if they do not infinitely prefer their own favourite,
over all others ? Just hear them extol their virtues. Hear them com-
mend even their faults —faults in fact, but converted by love into ex-
cellencies. It is human nature to prefer our oum, be it even inferior,
and love always, and constitutionally, selects its mate, whom it appro-
priates to itself, and this partiality and individuality increases with the
pnrity and intensity of love.*
* To attempt to ‘ cut of others in love matters, is the very worst possible
.species of robbery ; because, in regard to no other thing la either the strength
of the feeling of ‘mine’ or the validity of the claim, or the worth of the object,
at all comparable to this. Much more wicked and contemptible, when the
offender, as is generally the case, does it out of mere devilment, without once
intending to marry where ho supplants; but breaking up the affections of
both ! Such, however, always have their reward. Woman commits this sin
less often than man, yet I know the woman, who, though loving and beloved,
and merely to eclipse a rival belle, courted and married her rival’s htau, but
who now thoroughly loathes and cordially hates her husband, refuses the mar-
riage rites, and leads a most wretched life, (nor is he much less miserable).
rro
MATRIMONY DUAL.


But why amplify or argue a point attested by the perpetual expe-
rience, of every virtuous mind ? Who does not know and feel that spi-
ritual love lights upon a single object, by which it becomes completely
engrossed, and to which it is wholly devoted 1 Not to have experienced
this exclusiveness, is not to have loved ; and not to have observed its
universality, is not to have seen what is always apparent. As well
argue that two and two make four, as that love constitutionally becomes
dualized and exclusive. And if love, of course matrimony, which is
love’s consummation and home.
This quality of marriage and its rites are still farther sealed by
nature as her ordinance, over both polygamy and promiscuous concu-
binage, by her requiring both parents to rear and educate its products,
the father to provide, and the mother to nurse and train. For nature to
allow the parents of one child, each to unite with others, and still again
with others, in the parentage of other children, would be to divide
every house against itself, bybringing together into the same family all
sorts of conflicting dispositions and interests, to engender implacable
jealousy and hatred between different sets of parents and children, and
to annul that law of nature by which we love our own children, and de-
light to provide fof them, but not those of others. Nothing but this
duality of parentage—all the children of either parents being by the
other—will secure that concord between parents, and that suitable rear-
ing of children, so essential to both domestic happiness and the contin-
uance of our race. By making the sexes about equal in number, and,
in a variety of other ways, does nature dictate as clearly as that we
should eat or breathe, that both marriage and its intercourse should oc-
cur only between two individuals of opposite sexes, so long as both live.
CARNALITY INSIPID AND PAINFUL.
Now since that function which perpetuates our race is but love per-
fected, if the laws of love are allowed to govern this function, this
duality and exclusiveness of love not only renders marriage equally so,
hut also restricts this function to one individual beloved. No species
of proof can establish any point more clearly than nature has thus de-
monstrated the exclusive duality and restriction of this indulgence. Re-
striction however is not an appropriate word. We are not restricted
from eating stones, or swallowing poison. To follow' the ordinances of
nature is neither restriction nor self-sacrifice, but our own highest hap-
piness. In allotting to us but one connubial partner, nature does not im-
prison us with this one, but promotes our own happiness thereby, in se-
curing that exaltation of pleasure consequent on both spiritual love and
all the joys of parentage, neither of which promiscuousness allows.
Our primitive constitution is all right, and the most perfectly adapted
possible to subserve our own highest happiness ; so that limiting these
pleasures to the sacred pale of wedlock, is the very way, and only way
to perfect them, and enjoy them in their highest state of fruition.
Nature’s ordinances are not arbitrary. Her interdictions of both liber-
tinism and carnality is based in man’s own interests —in the greatest
earthly good of parents, of children, and of mankind at large. Nor do
the law’s of chastity and virtue derive their main sanction from either the
civil code, or the book of morals and religion, but from # that fundamental
arrangement of man’s constitution, of wdiich both at best are only
transcripts—a source as high as the throne of God, and compared with
the sacredness of which all human\&w is as nothing. Chastity is inscribed
on man’s innermost soul by this exclusiveness of love ; and since nature
*olely because she violated the laws of love just to supplant her rival. * Served
right.’ Nor have I ever known the-individual who committed this wicked
deed, afterwards to live happily in wedlock. ‘ Good enough for them.’ All
who can consent to do it are probably too depraved to be happy. The mark
of Cain is on them all. Targets to be shot and transfixed by the unerring
shafts of nature’s violated laws.
?1
CARNALITY INSIPID AND PAINFUL.


invariably rewards all obedience to her laws, as well has punishes their
infractions, she will neither postpone the pleasures of continence, nor the
penalty of carnality ; hut in and by the very act of our living in vir-
tuous wedlock, bestow upon us the greatest possible amount of even
hymeneal, as well as connubial aud parental pleasures ; whereas the sen-
sualist, in and by the very breach of this Jaw of his primitive constitu-
tion, both curtails the very pleasures of hymen sought, and incurs all
the direful penalties of violated natural law. Nor can he possibly Iw
happy even in his carnality. His very sensuality itself renders him
miserable. To he happy, he must live in accordance with his nature ;
That is, must partake of his hymeneal repasts exclusively" within the
narrow enclosure of virtuous wedlock. There alone can they be truly
pleasurable. But there it can be all pleasure, and limited only by the
■capacities for enjoyment. If promiscuous indulgence had been more
promotive of human happiness than continence, nature would have pro-
vided for it, and even ordained it ; but her interdicting it by this exclu-
sive preference of love, is proof more ‘strong than holy writ’, that licen-
tiousness is misery. Nature does not grudge us our pleasures. She
embodies all that even a God could invent or do to promote them.
And does He not know what will render us the most happy ? Or, know-
ing, not also do ? In case unbridled lust could have yielded more enjoy-
mentthau wedlock, would He not have incorporated it among the insti-
tutions of our very nature, so as even to compel it ? Contracted are his
views of things, who expects pleasure in violating an ordinance of hia
being; that is, in licentiousness. Ignorant are they, who do not know
that virtue is bliss ; and miserable they who do not live accordingly.
Let then tne libertine revel in his lustful, and therefore comparatively
tasteless, pleasures, so soon to become the gall of bitterness to his inmost
soul! Let the abandoned, prostitute themselves for gold—fora living even
—hut, while the world stands, will the bed of lust be comparatively in-
sipid, even for the time being,* besides ultimately torturing the body
and polluting the soul! Mistaken they, who expect happiness in either
promiscuous indulgence or unbridled licentiousness. Partial and tem-
porary pleasure they may sometimes afford, but only to fill a lifetime with
unmitigated sorrow. How completely foolish the sensualist! Blasting
the very pleasure he seeks ! Bartering the most luxurious apple of
paradise, for the green, bitter, and poisonous grape of lust! Virtuous
love arid wedlock, so far from curtailing even the sexual gratification he
seek, would unspeakably enhance it! because then, his Amativeness
would both co-operate with intellect and moral sentiment, so essential
to its sanctified pleasures, and also fulfil an ordinance of his nature ;
whereas in the sensualist, it is compelled either to act independently of
both, or else in their very teeth, and thus to violate his nature j for, the
moment his higher faculties are exercised, they interdict its cravings
except governed by that spiritual love which limits them to one beloved
object. Oh ! pitiable victim of carnality, if thou but knewest what a
heavenly birthright thou hast lost—squandered for a paltry ‘ mess of
pottage’—thou wouldst indeed repent and reform ! Pleasure in thy car-
nality thou wilt never find ! But holy love yields it in quantity com-
mensurate with thy utmost capacity for its enjoyment, and in quality
the most delicious fnorsel thou canst taste on earth ! But thou art
wandering from it, and incapaciating thyself for partakiug thereof.
Would to God and thine own soul, thou knewest that on this spiritual
love grows the very pleasures thou seekest. And ah ! thoughtless
youth, yet unloving and unloved, neither the gold of Ophir, nor the
treasures of Egypt, nor the crown of the whole world, nor any, nor all
other blessings combined at all compare in value with the experience
• Milton has well said, that the embrace of harlots is tasteless. The context
ami previous section show why, namely, because it gratifies so small a portion
of the faculties, and poisons all.
32
VIRTUE IS UVJIE.VIAL BLtSS.


of virtuous love, in place of raging, torturing lust! Fulfil this spiritual
and dual condition of love and hymeneal pleasure, and a world of
perfection and bliss will it shower down upon thyself, thy companion,
and thy children! And let those who would literally revel all their
lives without satiety in enjoyments the most luxurious this side of
heaven, duly govern and sanctify this passion.
MORAL PURITY, AND MORAL REFORM.
No man or woman thoroughly indoctrinated with this cardinal truth
of the spirituality of love and greatest pleasure of virtue, can become
or remain licentious. To know and feel that it alone embodies even
sexual pleasure in its most perfect fruition, in addition to all its other
luxuries, will root out sensuality and substitute moral purity. It will
bury lust by converting it into virtuous and therefore happy love, what
sinful passion perverts and therefore renders miserable. It will quench
those raging fires of sensuality which consume both soul and body
together, and light up instead that sacred flame of moral purity which
sanctifies the soul. Men do not love misery. By a law of their very
being, they shrink therefrom. They seek happiness, constitutionally,
and universally ; and as instinctively shun both suffering and its cause,
as they do the envenomed viper ; and for the same reason. They there-
fore simply require to realize that sensuality always and necessarily
induce misery, whereas virtuous love embodies all the pleasures even
of Hymen, to be induced to seek the latter and to shun the former.
Anticipated enjoyment is their only motive for sinning. Hence let
them fully realize, in their inmost souls, that spiritual love alone yields
in perfection the very pleasure sought, and that sensuality is misery,
and they could never consent either to inflict this self-torture on the one
hand, or, on the other, to rob themselves of hymeneal pleasure. Pure
selfishness—the happiness of virtuous love and the misery or vice—these
incentives are the great practical motives urged so feelingly upon us by
our Heavenly Father to entice, compel us to choose virtue and avoid
sin * besides being more efficacious than all others combined j those
drawn from eternity not excepted. We can neither drive men by law,
nor shame them by exposure, as effectually as entice them by this con-
duct-reaching motive of self-interest.
Reciprocated affection still more effectually subserves moral purity,
while interrupted love is the principal cause of moral pollution in all
its forms— a doctrine completely established by the entire constitution
of love, its exclusiveness in particular. As long as this spiritual love
is reciprocated, so long both parties pre perfectly satisfied with each
other. Neither wishes to reciprocate one single item of love with any
other,' but both regard a change of objects as moral treason in its worst
aspect, and infidelity as sacrilege, than which absolutely nothing is
more utterly abhorrent, because a breach of the most sacred relations
of the soul. As long as the affections remain reciprocated, neither has
the least occasion to stray abroad, because completely satisfied at home.
Until that exclusiveness of love already shown to constitute its leading
condition, is interrupted, it almost compels virtue by discerning desira-
bleness in no other, and regarding all perfection as centering in their
dearly beloved. But, this holy spell broken, temptation now takes
effect, whereas before it could not be admitted even to a hearing, because
the whole soul, already completely pre-occupied by love, was perfectly
shielded throughout against all desire of another love ; much more
against seeking to enjoy its foreign repast. As long as the human soul
remains bound up in its first bundle of devotedness, so long the tempta-
tions of even a Joseph can take no effect. If my all depended on the
continence of a thousand youth of both sexes, as long as their recipro-
cated affections were fanned by frequent endearments or cherished by
anticipated marriage, I should feel perfectly safe as regards them all,
even if they were surrounded by all the allurements of a lascivious
No. 3.


world ; because reciprocated love is a perfect antidote of passion. For
lovers to seek foreign indulgence while warmed by the sacred fires of
reciprocated affection, is morally impossible, and a mental anomaly.
But this barrier, love’s chief protection, swept away, not one in hun-
dreds but could be enticed to make shipwreck of virtue, and defile the
soul. Before, this sun of love excluded from the enchanted vision every
star of beauty, itself alone worshipped with exclusive and devoted ho-
mage : but this sun set, star after star of unhallowed passion rises on this
same horizon, and lures from virtue’s sacred pathway. Even high-toned
moral principle, though it may sometimes prevent transgrersion in deed ,
yet cannot so completely shut out all foreign desire as to prevent the sin
of the sow/. The cravings of unrequited love sigh in secret for some kin-
dred spirit on whom to lavish its gushing though bleeding tenderness.
Spontaneous, and therefore no more to be kept at bay by force of will
than appetite or memory, this element hungers and thirsts, not primarily
for mere carnal gratification, but mainly for this spmtao-sexual com-
munion of our subject, robbed of which in the interruption of its first
love, it naturally seeks for it elsewhere. It cannot lie dormant after
once awakened, any more than any other primary faculty. That licen-
tious young man fell in and by the interruption of his affections ; and
every daughter of infamy was first ravished in soul, and then either
cared naught what became of her person, or else sought in passion what
she was denied in virtue. Know you the husband who does not cordially
love his wife ? If he does not love and go abroad, it is not for want of
desire ; and he who does go abroad, is not perfectly cordial at home ;
because connubial bliss effectually kills all wandering desires. So, too,
it is not difficult to gain the affections of that woman who lives unhap-
pily with her man, or who has experienced interruptions, because all
alive with susceptibility, and panting for reciprocity ; and they ob-
tained, her person falls an easy sacrifice, unless prevented by a mighty
effort of self-restraint. Nor can that man or woman be found who has
been induced to practice this iniquity before their affections were
blasted. Who ever knew any one become lewd while their first love
was nurtured by a prospect of marriage ? The annals of moral pollu-
tion furnish no such record, whereas every son and daughter of vile-
ness will be found to have become inflamed by passion in and by inter-
rupted love. Bear the painful testimony, ye carnally minded men,
and ye lascivious women. Was not this the wide gate that opened you
into ‘ the broad road of depravity? Upon the unhallowed records of
passion, upon universal observation and experience, we rest this dread-
ful issue. •
If this great practical truth, that disappointed love is the principal
cause of carnality in all its forms, in all its heinousness, requires farther
proof, it has it in that constitutional law of love, that the person natu-
rally goes with the affections. That function instituted to perpetuate
our face, is but the ultimatum and the constitutional accompaniment of
love. But for this union, love would not promote offspring any more
than memory, or devotion, nor effect any end whatever ; whereas the
constitutional union of love with this function renders propagation cer-
tain. . Love being thus indigenous in all, and then tending directly to
induce this parental function, almost compels man to fulfil this natural
duty and destiny of multiplying his race. Explain on any other ground,
the bridal sacrifice on the altar of love, of what is held dearer than life,
and consequent cheerful submission to what otherwise native modesty
would generally repel. Spiritual love is Matrimony.
Candid reader, is not this the correct philosophy, and the actual fact ?
Learn then, and practice the great practical lesson it teaches, of bestow-
ing the affections only where the person also may be lawfully surren-
dered for life, and thereby quell all the soul-polluting cravings of in-
continence, and secure all the felicity of wedlock.
The inference now becomes obvious and most forcible, that man will


never be virtuous as long as he thus ‘ courts by the quarter,’ and loves
* here a little and there a little nor woman, so long as her affections
are thus wantonly rifled. To break oft the loving pair, is virtually to
convert their love into lust; and yet purse-proud parents —some who
even pray for Moral Reform—do so, and thereby ruin the moral purity
of their children by the thousand. The prevalence of licentiousness is
both the witness, and the legitimate and necessary product, of this ex-
tensive blighting of love. Love, constituting matrimony, its interruption
is an infraction of the laws of matrimony, the legitimate punishment of
which is licentiousness. Meet penalty for so great a crime, and follow-
mg directly in its wake. No crime, not even murder, is greater than
breaking these matrimonial relations ; for frequently it either takes the
life of its broken-hearted victims, or plunges them into infamy and woe!
No penalty, therefore, should be greater ; and, accordingly, what is
more fearful than the wages of this sin 1 The holiest feelings of hu-
manity polluted, and trodden into the dust! The flood-gates of every
species of wickedness hoisted! Pandora’s box of physical and moral
malady opened upon man ! And all only the natural consequences and
penalties of trifling with connubial love—that most sacred element of
our nature ! Would that mankind duly estimated this consecrated
emotion, and trifled with it no more than with death ! That they con-
sidered its violation, as indeed it is, the crime of all crimes, the greatest
destroyer of human happiness, and incendiary of human passion!
Labourers in the glorious cause of moral purity ; our subject lays out
your course of procedure. It tells you to say less about licentiousness
as stick , and more against this almost universal flirtation and coquetry
of both sexes. These are the chief causes of moral impurity. Remove
them, and properly direct and sanctify the affections of both married
and single, and one generation will bury this vice in all its forms, and
substitute moral purity in its place. Other efforts but lop off the
branches of this deep-rooted and wide-spread tree of human corrup-
tion and woe, while this lays the axe at its very root.
FEMALE PASSION.
Woman is freely accused of being the tempter to licentiousness. The
prevalence of this, or a kindred sentiment, even among the moral and
enlightened, is so general as to require canvass.
Woman’s endonment with the sexual passion is admitted. Deprived
of it, she would be shorn of every female charm—bereft of her peculiar
loveliness, and incapable of fulfilling the end of her female constitution.
But its relative strength — this is the question. — On this point let
Phrenology be the judge, and its experienced practitioners the witnesses.
Testify—ls not this organ smaller relatively in woman than in man ?
This is the inductive observation of the Author, which his extensive
practice entitles to some consideration ; nor has he seen the practitioner
whose observations have led him to a different conclusion. With this,
that description of her love already given coincides. Constitutionally,
therefore, she is more virtuous and less passionate than man.
Still she often sins. Females in high lepute for virtue and propriety
sometimes surprise us by elopement, or premature maternity, or throw
themselves away on a sensual vagabond ; and not a few allow liberties
construed by man into signs of wantonness ; while very many ply the
enticing arts of courtship with an assiduity and earnestness evincing a
pretty strong desire for wedlock. All this and much more is set down
to the score of female passion or unfaithfulness, and the blame of her
own fall, as well as much of man’s sensuality, is charged on her.
But is not this female frailty, and even the occasional paradox of
truly excellent women becoming fascinated, perhaps seduced, by men
known to be corrupt, all explained on the ground of that concomitance
of love and person already shown to be both a law of love, and the in«
strumentality of multiplying our race ? Woman’s affections once en-


listed her person is too often surrendered at discretion ; hut she cannot
possibly be seduced except you first gain her love. Testify, ye whose
experience qualifies you to judge. Was virgin purity ever first to prof-
fer or solicit pleasure ? . Independently of love, and before her affections
have been called out, have you ever found her the enticer ? Never.
Man, besides being the universal aggressor, is obliged, in nine hundred
and ninety-nine cases in every thousand, to break her into the harness
of- passion by dint of both s’tratagem and perseverance. True, when
thus broken, she often pays him back in his own coin ; but our inquiry
relates to her natural bias. Proffer sexual pleasure at first, if you dare,
and she will both spurn it, and despise you. Take liberties before you
get her love, and you ‘ catch a Tartar.’ Nothing equally rouses her
deep indignation, her implacable hatred. But her affections once en-
listed, she tolerates what would otherwise be utterly repulsive ; partly
because, though deeply pained by your conduct, her love throws the
mantle of charity over your faults, and partly because, where she loves,
a disposition to' oblige’ ia -as natural as breathing. Because she lacks
sufficient firmness to resist, and yields to your importunities mainly
out of kindness, (though she would infinitely perfer propriety,) yon
think your liberties acceptable, condemn her as wanton, and proceed
with increased boldness ; little realizing that her apparent passivity,
perhaps even reciprocity, is far more likely to result from her strong
native (though in this case unjustifiable) dispositiou to oblige, and dffi-
culty of resisting those she loves, than from carnality. And now,
woman, I appeal to you : Does not this tally with your own conscious-
ness, and cause and account for some of your derelictions, otherwise
unaccountable even to yourselves ? Depraved man, are you willing to
effect her ruin by means of this her native kindness ? Bear in mind
that often, nay, generally, she simply tolerates, from kindness, what she
loathes, but has too little sternness to resist.
FEMALE SANCTITY SHOULD BE MAN’S SPECIAL CARE,
But man should give woman no occasion to govern either her person
or her love. Well married, she would not have any ; nor would she
have any before a suitable age for marrying. Properly develope and
direct her affections by giving her a suitable, seasonable object, and not
one in ten thousand could be seduced by any possibility whatever.
While ripening into marriage, or concentrated on a husband, that ex-
clusiveness of love already demonstrated, precludes even the possibility
of her fall. But, break this off, and her affections will shoot out in
some other direction. Arrest their primitive flow, and they will seek
another channel. Flow they must. Death alone can stop them. This
overwhelming power of woman’s love is that alone which fits her to
become the wife and mother. What would she be without those strong
affections 1 A drone. Even less, because of no service in her feminine
capacity. But behold how they exalt her nature ! _ See how they trans-
form her from nothing to a terrestrial angel. This devotedness of her
love renders her the most perfect work of creation’s Architect. Even
an angel’s power of speech could not pourtray the exaltation added to
her nature by this endowment! Is it Cod -like to ‘ love our enemies,
and ‘ return good for evil?’ Behold her ! clinging even to her betrayer,
with a devotedness bordering on madness ! Mind and body a complete
wreck, effected by arts the most diabolical! so that one would expect
her to arm herself with fiendish vengeance, and drink his heart s blood;
yet, behold her fondly embracing him, and still delighting to serve him,
even to the utmost that devotedness can possibly devise I Keeping
sleepless watch night and day over his sick bed ! Seizing every oppor-
tunity to load him with kindness! Closing her ears to whatever is
uttered against him ! Blind to his faults, though as palpable as Egyp-
tian darkness ; and pertinaciously defending him, though as black with
crime, committed even against herself, as a devil incarnate ! Utterly


regardless of self, and patient under all the misery she suffers, because
inflicted by him ! And devoted still! ! Aye, even wrapped up in him,
and meekly enduring any and every torture he inflicts ! Oh, woman !
thy love is indeed a marvel! Could angels more than requite such evil
with such good ?
But if she can thus love and bless even her betrayer, and a human fiend,
what can measure her love for virtuous man, intelligent, pure-minded,
and reciprocally devoted? Her greatest happiness is to render him
happy! A living sacrifice of seif equally complete, a devotedness
equally entire, a power of emotion equally intense and divine, mortals
are privileged no where else to behold ! ‘ Entreat me not to leave thee!
for where thou goest, I will go ; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge ;
thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God.’
And now, oh, man! how can you convert this ecstacy of her love,
and its consequent concomitance of person, into your chief instrument
of her ruin ? Will you pervert what was instituted expressly foi your
own highest good into an instrument of death to her body, pollution to her
soul, and destruction to all her angelic excellencies ? Granted, that her
ecstatic love puts her within your power, will you seduce her because
you can ? Will you not rather refuse indulgence attainable, and even
proffered ? Will you make her weakness, or rather, her highest female
ornament and crowning excellence, your dagger ? Shall not the very
fact that you can thus easily win her love, and through it possess her
person, protect both? Is it contemptible to tantalize a helpless victim,
or break the bones of a helpless foe, and is it not infinitely more so to
torture a helpless suppliant, and she our best friend, and greatest earthly
blessing ? A pirate once captured a merchant ship. The piratical cap
tain encountered, in deadly combat, a resolute seaman of the latter
Long and desperately they fought and thrust, each doing his very utmost
to imbue his sword in the heart’s blood of the other. An unlucky blow
at length broke the seaman’s sword at its hilt. Baring his breast, he
cried, ‘ Stab, for I’m in your power.’ ‘ No,’ exclaimed the pirate, ‘as
long as you fought me, I sought your life ; but now, your helplessness
is your safety. So far from killing a defenceless foe, I will protect
your life even with my own.’ All nature through, helplessness is
safety. Shall the fond mother love and cherish her feeble offspring most,
and shall we avoid treading on the worm because of its impotence, and
shall man stamp woman'into the very dust because in his power ,
though put there for his own good ? Or is it so great a victory to cap-
ture her affections and through them possess the citadel of her person ?
Will you dispoil it because you can ? Will you rob her of her priceless
jewel—and all the diadems of earth are trash compared with woman’s
virtue —because you have her in your power ? Shall not such possession
render you responsible for her safe keeping ? Why vaunt yourself
almost to bursting, because you can commit, or have committed sacri-
lege 1 And yet, how many men recount their female conquests, ob-
tained by whatever stratagems and false promises, as exultingly as
Indian warriors pow wow over their scalps, thus glorying in their own
shame ! Even those whose consciences prevent actual indulgence, often
go far enough to see that they could go farther, and then boast of their
power over woman’s passion, and jeer at the ‘ easy virtue’ of the sex !
We would not, by any means, weaken woman’s efforts at self-
protection, by throwing the responsibility wholly on man, but we
would save her from ruin by charging her to bestow her affections only
where she may properly surrender her person. This done—-her love
governed by that great law of the ascendency of the moral sentiments
and intellect already developed, she need not be for ever on the alert
lest she fall. Properly to guide and govern her affectiojis, is perfectly
to protect her person ; because her person is utterly inaccessible, except
through the gateway of her affections. Keep that closed, and the
fortress of her person is absolutely impregnable. Guard but the be-
37
WEAKNESS ALWAYS A PROTECTION.


ginnings of love, and restrain its first goings forth till you are certain
of happy wedlock, and the wily arts of the seducer will make no im-
pression. Does this scientific safeguard weaken resolution ? Does it
not nerve to effort, by pointing to complete salvation, easily attained ?
So far from casting you into the stream of passion, and promoting
passivity, while its fearful current sweeps you on to destruction, it puts
the only oar of self-preservation into your hands, and tells you how
effectually to ply it, or rather, it keeps you secretly housed on shore,
till you may virtuously and happily embark for life. This intimate
connexion between the person and affection— your only vulnerable
point—your betrayers fully understand, yet you do not; and hence
you too often open the door of affection to their solicitations, through
which they then too readily violate the sanctuary of your person, to
pollute and destroy both,'
Woman ! pray mark well this principle, and hail it as your deliver-
ance. Scorn and neglect it at your peril!
< But why break the secret, and thereby help to make men seducers,
and thus ruin woman by wholesale V Are seducers then ignorant or
fools I Do gamblers understand their black game better than these
devils incarnate understand the art of seduction ? Could a means thus
palpable and efficacious, escape their eagle vision ? But who has be-
friended woman , by pointing out to her his weapon, and her danger ?
And now, oh, man ! I carry the appeal home to thy inmost soul. By
all your love to the mother who bore you, to the sister who dotes on
you, and to the dear one whose gushing tenderness you have won, as
well as to the gentler, angelic sex, I beseech you, guard the sanctuary
of female love and virtue ! But, should this appeal prove unavailing-
even though you ‘ fear not God nor regard man’ nor woman yet at
least, for your own sake, preserve both her affections and her person.
She defiled, what becomes of man's domestic happiness ? Her every
instance of frailty re-acts on him ; so that even his own interests should
induce him to preserve her pure. Especially, since she does not seduce
herself, should he charge her frailty to his own perfidity and carnality.
Ten-fold is his guilt, since he cannot possess her person without first
ravishing her affections! And defiling her body, though a mountain
in itself, is but a mole-hill compared with blighting her affections !
Look at that injured one. Her soul humbled ! Her whole nature, with
all its charms, all its capabilities of conferring and experiencing enjoy-
ment, and all its angelic perfections , laid in ruins ! All her joys con-
verted into sorrows ! Accursed is that fiend in human shape who does
this wicked deed ! Hurled—aye, even hunted —should he be from so-
ciety ! Scorned by man —spurned by woman! Uncheered by any ray
of love. Compared with this crime, murder is a trifle. Even hanging
is too good for him. The deepest place in hell is his. And he is in a
perpetual hell, on earth, whose flames he himself has lighted ; while
from the heaven of love, and all its joys, he has for ever shut himself.
The raging fires of his hellish passions are lit up all around him, all
within him. Pestilence is.his very breath. Moral stench his only atmos -
phere! Gross sensuality his perpetual wallowing place. That very
blackness of depravity which can ruin unsuspecting woman, is that
deepest sin and suffering which constitute hell.
Him I reprobate, his victim I pity. Pity loth— him for his ignorance
and depravity, her as his sacrifice : him for driving the car of passion
thus recklessly, her as being crushed beneath its wheels. Neither know
what they do. Still, I commisserate her most, because, though least
guilty, she is most severely punished by that false state of public senti-
ment which condemns her as most vile, and her very presence as moral
pollution, while it censures him less than for committing some trifling
misdemeanour. Though plighting his solemn vow of marriage as the
only means of accomplishing his diabolical end, yet he suffers little or
none in either standing or business, while she is turned out to starve or
88
AN APPEAL TO MAN.


else to live on the wages of her shame and sin. He flirts again, and yet
again, ruining victim after victim ; while she is spurned by all. Oh
society, thou art a tyrant ! Why this fish of one and fowl of another?
And of the wrong oifaj This proscriptive spirit is not Christianity, is
not humanity, is naßfahilosophy. Nor does it deter others, while it
ruins uncounted thpamrSds of those whom forgiveness would save. The
odium heaped uponlnose who have made one false step, drives them
down to destruction. This unjust state of public sentiment is the great
peopler of houses of infamy, which the restoring spirit would rob of
their tenants. Does God forgive us our trespasses, and shall not we
also forgive one another 1 Shall we pray, ‘ Our Father, who art in
heaven, forgive us our trespasses as we forgive’ others, and yet be re-
lentless towards our fallen sisters 1
ABANDONED WOMAN AND HER REFORM.
Abandoned females are generally considered as constitutionally he-
scum and offscounng of mankind. Of some this is true, but not to
all. Many of them are naturally superior women, mentally and phy-
sically—splendid looking as well as truly beautiful and intellectual.*
Indeed, it was, their beauty and its accompanying intensity of feeling,
which ruined them. The taste of no epicure for his delicacies and
viands equals that of seducers for their prey. Ordinary women tempt
their appetite less. ‘ The best, or none,’ is their motto. I appeal to
observation, whether the majority of premature mothers, and of those
seduced, have not warm temperaments, and cordial, whole-souled
feelings—-just the elements, properly directed, for making excellent
wives and mothers. Talk to them, before case-hardened, of their fall,
and they weep and sob as if their very heart would break. _ Their ex-
isting depravity, admitted to be without a parallel, is less innate than
artificial, induced by circumstances the worst possible. They are more
unfortunate than naturally corrupt. Unless they had been seduced by
artfulness the most consummate, they would now have filled important
places of interest and usefulness in families and social circles. And may
yet. Their case is bad, but not hopeless. They have the material upon
which to operate, and require only effort, and asylums or kind families,
in which to commence reform and restoration. Shall W r ashingtonianism
rescue from the gutter loathsome drunkards, cast off and cast out for a
score of years, the pests and detestation of all, and reinstate them in
society—converting beggars into princes, aye, making them eloquent
aud intellectual —and shall not similar means shed equal blessings on
this forlorn class ? Are they not equally valuable, and equally capable
of restoxation ? Is not their salvation equally desirable ? Granted that
the labour is more arduous, shall humanity rest till it is achieved ?
Our neighbour’s house is on fire, we run to the rescue, nor heed danger.
Shall we then behold the souls of the fairest portion of creation set on
fire by the torch of perdition, unconcerned? ‘God forbid.’ Fathers
and mothers, brothers and sisters of philantrophy and virtue, let us ad-
dress ourselves to this neglected but most needed work of humanity.
We can save them by thousands if we will, and dry up this fountain of
sin and woe. But we can do nothing at arm’s length, nor by prayers
and pi’eaching alone, but mainly by personal effort. Nor by regarding
them as vile things, whose very touch contaminates, but by looking on
them as sisters of humanity, and treating them tenderly, never taunting
them with their past frailty.
Especially must we prevent their fall, by removing temptation, by
purifying our literature, aud especially by banishing novel reading,
that hot-house of pollution. We must shut up the grog-shop also.
Above all, we must reform man. What a burning shame that he should
* See illustration of the principle that shape and looks are as character and
cast of mind, in the American Phrenological Journal, 1845 and 1846.


prowl, wolf-like, about every neighbourhood and family, seeking, by
that taking bait of pretended courtship and marriage, to devour all
female virtue, and making such terrible havoc! The most execrable
bandit on earth ! A mighty work, but it will be done. The dawning
reformation must disperse this vice. Ten years will witness effort, and
twenty, a mighty change.
TEST OP LOVE : SUDDEN LOVE.
In exact proportion as the love of any individual tends to sexual
gratification as such , is it debasing and brutal; because unguided by
intellect, and unsanctified by moral purity. Shun such therefore as
vipers ; for their lust will vanish with indulgence, and embrace any
other sexual thing that will feed this flame of sensuality. No reliance
can be placed on their continence or constancy. The very nature of
their love precludes it. Whereas love based on the higher faculties,
kills sensuality as such, and it finds its satisfaction chiefly in spiritual
inter-communion.
Let young women universally apply this unerring test of love to the
conduct of their suitors. It will reveal in all its nakedness of defor-
mity, the designs of many a villain, however solemn his protestations of
true love, and thereby save many a worthy and unsuspecting maiden
from all the miseries of unhappy wedlock.
It also condemns sudden love as more sensual than spiritual; because,
by supposition, the latter has not yet had time to discover that moral
beauty on which alone it can be founded.
Our subject also determines a question which has long divided man-
kind, viz.: Whether love is sensual or spiritual; Most contend that it
is only refined sensuality, and that even the most Platonic consists in a
desire for animal indulgence. The love of those in whom Amativeness
predominates, is sensual, and they accuse all others of similar sensuality ;
whereas predominant moral sentiment purifies and spiritualizes this
love in its possessor, so that he takes ground for Platonic love—shown
by our subject to be the highest in character, and happiest in effect.
It is easy to determine the characters of given individuals from their
doctrines as regards love ; they who argue that love is only refined
sensuality, being themselves sensual ; while in them who maintain that
the sensual ingredient is subordinate, it is subordinate. Still, the two
do naturally go together , but the spiritual department should always
guide and govern the sexual.
SECTION VII.
STATES OF MIND IN PARENTS MOST FAVOURABLE TO TALENTS AND MORALITY
IN OFFSPRING.
The sum of this whole matter is this : Parentage perpetuates our race.
Offspring take on the physical and mental qualities and conditions of
parentage existing at generation. That function which gives being to
offspring, necessarily awakens all the physical functions, in order to their
transmission. By means of love, its constitutional predecessor and ac-
companiment, it also augments all the mental faculties, as the means of
their transmission, and in that supremacy required for happiness.
The great practical inference from this is, that those parents who
desire intellectual and moral children, must love each other ; because
this love, besides perpetually calling forth and cultivating their higher
faculties, awakens them to the highest pitch of exalted action in that
climax, concentration, and consummation of love which propagates their
existing qualities—the mental endowment of offspring being propor-
tionate to the purity and intensity of parental love.
Next, they should exercise those faculties most which they most
desire in offspring. Not immoderately , for that might exhaust those
faculties, and thus injure offspring. Those who would have religious
and devont children, must exercise their own religious feelings.


Religious education must commence here. If children remain hardened,
perhaps scoffers, after all the instruction and efforts of pious parents,
the cause may perhaps be found in this very omission.
We should also exercise Conscientiousness habitually. We especially
should not violate it in a matter so all-important; because, dethroned
here , it gives the whole field over to propensity ; but, victorious here,
few things strengthen it equally ; for, if it withstand this temptation, it
can withstand any other. Allowed to speak out here, it kills base de-
sire. It must dethrone, or be dethroned. Words cannot express the
importance of parental rectitude, and the moral glory with which it
crowns its offspring.
Spirituality (Marvellousness) should also be continually exercised, It
is this which imparts that feeling of purity, ecstasy, heavenly sweet-
ness, and sacredness, which always appertain to love. This emotion
etherealizes the soul, and raises it above mundane affairs, and creates
holy longings and heavenly aspirations.
Ideality should also be exercised during the period of their youthful
love and onwards. Has not nature taken special pains to banish gross-
ness and vulgarity, and associate purity, propriety, taste, refinement,
and elevation, of ‘feelings and manners, throughout all the stages of
love ? Does not love naturally chasten, polish, refine, all that lovers
say and do when together, and tend to reader them bland, graceful, and
accomplished 1 Let universal observation and experience answer. The
reason has already been given. Then should not this refinement be
carried into both marriage and parentage ? Taste is the twin-sister and
only sanctifier of this function, and alone converts it from vulgarity ajid
gross sensuality, into a pure and delicate emotion. Woman especially
will testify as to its existence, and its sweets; yet, alas! she is often
compelled to mourn its absence when she most desires its presence, and
to endure an uncouthness and indelicacy utterly incompatible with her
native sense of propriety and modesty, as well as at war with both her
daily converse with her husband, and her dearest relations to him.
Husbands ! pray mark this point; and avoid whatever can offend the
refined feelings of your partner in all things pertaining to matters of
feeling and affection. Those coarse jests, improprieties, and vulgarities,
in the conversation and conduct of husbands and wives, deteriorate and
degrade their feelings and character to a degree little suspected, and
diminish affection, where mutual propriety would greatly strengthen it,
and proportionately improves offspring.
Mirthfulness should also be exercised by parents, so as to render
their offspring brisk, cheerful, light-hearted, animated, buoyant, joyous,
and happy. The pleasurable excitement love affords will also greatly
enhance matrimonial enjoyment, and consequently aid the endowment
of offspring. Nor should parents fail ever to be agreeable, mirthful,
cheerful, towards each other.
Approbativeness is also essential, in order to give both that accept-
able, winning, taking manner, requisite to secure the commendation of
each other, and thus promote both the agreeableness of their fellowship,
and the.pleasantness of offspring. In short, parents should habitually
and always endeavour to be all that they would wish their offspring
to be.
Behold, in this union of intellect and moral sentiment with love, and
then of love with the parental function, the Divine Causation employed
to endow man with mind. Behold in the fact, that that love which in-
duces this function, calls forth, when she has her perfect work, the ex-
ercise of both the intellectual faculties and moral virtues, the means em-
ployed to transmit mentality and create soul! Wise, infinitely be-
yond human conception. Efficient beyond the possibility of failure.
As perfect as even a God could render him. As no other work of the
Deity compares in magnitude with the creation of man, so the machinery
employed in effecting none, is equally fraught with the very infinitude
41
SPIRITUALITY OF LOVE AND PARENTAGE.


of Divinity. Love and its constitutional influence in awakening the
intellectual faculties and the moral affections of parents at this period
to their highest pitch of healthy action, is this Divine instrumentality!
Learn, then, oh! prospective parents, the necessity of regularly exer-
cising intellect and the moral affections throughout the whole of life, that
they may never fail to have their proper influence in conjunction with
the parental function. How incalculably would that intellectual con-
verse and moral communion, so agreeable to yourselves, enhance the
intellectual and moral endowment of your offspring ! Will you not
perfect in yourselves by culture, what nature requires by instinct?
Shall your intellects lie dormant, when their exercise would stamp the
impress of talent, perhaps of greatness, upon your beloved offspring ?
Shall your moral affections slumber when their activity, 4 besides exalt-
ing your own happiness, is so indispensable to the moral endowment of
heirs of immortality ? But alas, how few parents exercise any more
mind or employ any more knowledge in reference to these important
matters, than they are compelled to do by the very nature of the
function itself!
Behold, again, in this spontaneous accompaniment ot intellect and
moral feeling with love, and of love with the parental function, an in-
strumentality for
PERFECTING ODR RACE !
Progression is a law of man’s very being, written in living character
upon every department of his nature. He will not always remain that
stupid, degraded, depraved thing he now is. A brighter destiny is
before him. A thousand years to come, he will be incalculably superior
to what he now is, in physiology, in health, in intellectual capacity
and attainment ; in short, in every conceivable aspect.
This is to be brought about, we say, by means of spiritual love and
its stimulating influence on the higher faculties of parents, particularly
when they unite to stamp their existing mentality on offspring. The
constitutional effect of this love being first to exalt the action of the
higher faculties, and soothe propensity, and then, by means of that
natural accompaniment of love with person already shown to be an or-
dinance of nature, to induce that function which transmits this exalted
moral and intellectual action to offspring, it of course renders children
better than their parents. Or thus : Children take on the existing con-
ditions of parentage. Love renders the higher faculties of parents greater
in action at this period than they are by nature. It then induces, while
the action of these higher faculties is thus preternaturally exaltea, that
parental function which is but the very climax and consummation of
love and which transmits this then-existing increased moral and intel-
lectual action to offspring. Since then the children of affectionate
parents receive existence and constitution when love has rendered the
mentality of their parents both more elevated and more active than it
is by nature, of course the children of loving parents are both more in-
tellectual and moral by nature than their parents. Now if these chil-
dren and their companions also love one another, this same law which
renders the second generation better than the first, will of course render
the third still better than the second, and thus of all succeeding genera-
tions. Hence, by a law of our very being, this spiritual love, when
love has her perfect work, renders every succeeding generation, so long
as man continues to propagate, more and still more intellectual and
moral than the preceding, and thereby constitutionally perfects our race.
As yet, man is but a comparative pigmy in every thing. He is still in
his childhood compared with what this very principle will one day ren-
der him. ‘ Eve hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into
the heart of man to conceive,’ the extent to which this principle will yet
carry man s physical perfection, his intellectual power and attainments,
and his moral virtues ! Philautrophists, behold the grand lever of human
42
PERFECTING OUR RACE,


reform and improvement. Other reform efforts are brass and copper;
this is fine gold ! Others lop off the outer brances of the great tree of
human depravity and woe ; this lays the axe at the root , and plants,
instead, the trees of Eden. Others improve, this perfects the germ of
humanity. Education modifies and trains, this creates goodness and
greatness. To reform and perfect parents as parents, is to reform and
perfect mankind. To promote connubial love — this, philosophers, is
your talisman. This, moralists, is your mighty Archimedean lever.
You may preach and pray till doomsday—may send out missionaries,
may circulate tracts and Bibles, and multiply revivals, with little
avail; because, as long as mankind go on, as now, to propagate by
animal impulse merely, so long must their offspring be animal, sensual,
devilish! But only induce parents cordially to love each other, and
you thereby render their children constitutionally more talented and
virtuous. Oh! parents, by as much as you prefer the luxuries of
concord to the torments of discord, and children that are sweet dispo-
sitioned and highly intellectual to those that are rough, wrathful, and
depraved, be entreated to ‘ love one another.’
IMPORTANCE OE KNOWLEDGE.
Reader, thou hast now fairly before thee the gist and substance of
our treatise.
If any knowledge on earth is worth possessing, a knowledge of these
fundamental principles of human nature, human virtue, and human
happiness is worth possessing. Here, pre-eminently, ‘ Knowledge is
power,’ power to perfect offspring : and ignorance is imperfection, as
well as misery. Parents may perchance stumble upon favourable con-
ditions, and avoid the unfavourable, without understanding them. But
how incalculably would knowing what conditions in themselves sub-
serve both connubial love and the intellectuality and the morality of
offspring, and what deteriorate them, preserve from error. In reference
to no other work of life is skill equally available, or knowledge more
essential to skill. However, let those who love darkness rather than
light, both close their own eyes, and then bark at others for using theirs.
But let those who will learn and apply these principles, reap therefrom
the richest harvests, and gather the most delicious vintage of life, to
both themselves and pr ospective offspring.
The consequences of this function being thus momentous, it should
neither be treated with jest, nor participated in thoughtlessly. Since
parents thereby determine the physical, intellectual, and moral desti-
nies of immortals, they should make preparation commensurate with
these its undying results. As we do not eat even without a double
preparation, first of ourselves by hunger, and next of our food by
seasoning, so men should prepare themselves to be parents, so as to work
out the future talents, virtue, and happiness of their children. Our
preparation for visitors, is proportionate to our estimation of them.
Shall then such visitors for life be unprovided for 1 Indeed, prepara-
tion is as much a part of every work of life, as the work itself, and
often its most important part. Much more so as regards this. Let
there be no chance-comers, feebly endowed, because unintended, unde-
served. No supervening on previous exhaustion of either mind or body,
but the most vigorous state of both. Sufficient exercise to promote all
the animal and mental functions; but not enough to exhaust.*
Above all, the previous and present commingling, and mutual exer-
cise of that love shown to be so promotive of desire in parents, and of
endowment in children, should not be neglected.
* Farmers never sire their stock (encourage copulation.) when either parent
is fatigued, they even allow them to rest and feed for days before to promote
preparation. The steed is never ridden or driven, except for exercise. Would
that men took proportionate pains to secure the health and happiness of their
offspring.


But these suggestions, and many others like them, grow so percep-
tibly out of our subject, that readers can make their own specific ap-
plications. But contrasts deepen impressions, and what follows will
serve greatly to enforce our leading doctrine— the importance op
CONNUBIAL LOVE.
SECTION VIII.
EFFECTS ON OFFSPRING OF PARENTAL DISAGREEMENT, AND UNREQUITED LOVE.
Fully indoctrinated with the great law of things, that children
resemble their parents, the counter fact, that the children of truly ex-
cellent and religious parents were sometimes irreligious and wicked,
puzzled the Author exceedingly for a long time. So also did the fact,
that children sometimes excel both parents in talents and goodness. In
short, he could not account for either the degeneracy of some children
as compared with their parents, or the superiority of others. He no-
ticed this superiority in one family of children, whose parents lived
together most affectionately. He had before observed, ‘in boarding
round,’ that the rough, selfish, bad children of a school he once taught,
were from parents who disagreed; but that his amiable and knowing
scholars were from affectionate parents His profession had also shown
him, that those children, one or both of whose parents were intemperate,
were less favourably organized than either parent, and that those born
after the father ‘ took to drink,’ weie inferior to those born before. _
All these knotty problems were solved by the two cardinal doctrines
our work ; first, that children take on the condition existing in
parents at the time they received being and character j and, secondlv,
that affectionate wedlock, more than all. 4 other influences combined,
calls forth all the higher faculties, not only habitually, but especially at
this period ; while nothing harrows up all the an.mal passions so much
as either matrimonial disagreement, or unrequited love. In the very
nature of things, marriage increases the action of all the faculties for
good or evil —happy wedlock increases their action for good ; unhappy,
for evil. What, equally with blighted affection or matrimonial dis-
cord will keep Combativeness in so perpetual a foam of fretfulness a,nd
anger ? It will make almost any woman, however good her disposition
by nature, as cross and hateful as Xantippe it will make an angel a
devil. It animalizes, sensualizes, and demonizes the whole being,
body and soul together. It steels them against all goodness and great-
ness. More fatal still : It engenders that lost, reckless, don’t care
state of mind, which blasts ambition, cripples effort, quenches the spirit
of elevation and aspiration, shrinks from sight and hearing, and bleeds
Si desire to die I
But to see the full force of this subject, we must bear in mind the
power of the affections over the entire mental and physical being. Re-
ciprocated love infuses new life into both soul and body, increases
appetite, digestion, muscular elasticity, power and disposition to labour,
moral purity and intellectual capability and desire, and augments everj
power and function of life. But disappointed love weakens musculai
energy, exchanges the sprightly step for the heavy drag, enfeebles
digestion, supplants the keen appetite by a loathing of its wonted food,
diminishes that fulness of respiration which reciprocated love promotes,
renders the looks dispirited, careworn, perhaps haggard, as though
some dire calamity had befallen them ; unstrings the nerves, fevers the
brain, dissipates the mind, renders desire turgid, drives sleep from the
pillow, or fatigues by dreams of evil, irritates the propensities, plants
disease in body and mind, aud bears its unhappy victim down into a
premature grave ! See that loved maiden, all life, and health, and
44
UNREQUITED LOTH.


happiness. Her eyes sparkling with joy. Her step graceful and
elastic. Her full cheek glowing with health and beauty. Her whole
nature overflowing with happiness. But behold her now! Her affec-
tions withered by disappointment! Her fondest hopes for ever blasted!
She vacates her seat at table. She becomes pale and languid. She
wearily ‘ drags her dull slow length along.’ She is sad, subdued, and
broken-hearted. She rolls restlessly on her fevered pillow. She pines
in mind and sickens in body. She becomes incurable—the best medical
aid having lost its power. She finally sinks into a premature grave
from a broken heart! The welcome grave alone can assuage her grief.
Young women die by thousands, ostensibly of consumptions, fevers,
nervous affections, and female complaints, but caused in fact by
blighted love— one of the most prolific parents of these and other
forms of disease. As well bury them alive as blast their love, because
the latter will kill them by inches. Well is it called a broken heart,
because it is a matter of life and death both to body and soul. Let
experience and observation disclose what words can so poorly express—
that sinking and blighting in every corner and crevice of the soul, that
palsy of the whole being, occasioned by both unrequited love and
unhappy wedlock!*
Look again. Behold that weeping mother, just bereaved of a darling
child. She is now healthy. But anon, she becomes pale, and wastes
away with grief. She, too, becomes an invalid and sickens, and dies,
solely in consequence of the influence of reversed affection on health.
Note yonder mourning widow. If she shakes off her grief, she will
survive the shock. But if it continues to prey upon her, it impairs
digestion and disturbs the sleep ; and these great vital functions im-
paired, life itself is enfeebled or else destroyed. The uniform and the
necessary consequence of disturbed affection in all its forms, is injured
health, deteriorated intellect, depreciated moral feeling, and increased
and depraved propensity.
Once more. Disappointed love and unhappy wedlock are almost cer-
tain to derange the nervous system. Nothing more painfully excites it,
and painful excitement is prolific of disease. Few things take so
thorough a hold of all the interests of life, as love, and hence its inter-
ruption proportionally pains, and thereby disease ; for painful action
always diseases the whole nervous system, the brain especially. Now
a diseased nervous system necessarily and always diseases the 'propen-
sities, and this as already shown, depraves them. We need not digress
to prove this point, but, taking it for granted, we see how and why dis-
appointments in love render its subject peevish, cross, irritable, mis-
anthropic, and even wicked : namely, disappointed love irritates Ama-
tiveness, and therefore the organs of the body around it : as recipro-
cated love smoothes passion and promotes moral feeling!
Besides, when love remains rivdtted, we feel that, though the whole
world be untrue and unworthy of confidence, our loved one is a resting
place for our soul. But when that trusted friend proves untrue, wo
feel that no trust can be reposed in any one. This awakens Combative-
ness to resent the injury, perhaps Destructiveness to revenge it, and
thus both rouses propensity, and deteriorates the moral tone.
Still more prolific of all these evil consequences, is discord between
husbands and wives. Married life brings every element of both parties,
not perfectly harmonized by love, into direct collision, and excites a
perpetual succession of heart-burnings, and a mutual sense of having
been injured, if husband and wife do not cordially love each other,
they must hate, except that when they partly love and partly hate they
are unable to live together or apart, and are thus rendered pro-
* The fact is a little remarkable, that most of those who are dissappointed
in love, or live unhappily with their consort, care little about life, or else de-
sire to die.
45
THE BROKEN-HEARTED.


portionally miserable in both states. Discord, in the exact proportion
in which it exists, kindles the sour, hating, hateful, animal feelings in
parents, and depreciates their moral feelings, and therefore transmits
this moral depreciation and animal exaltation to offspring.
Besides, since love heightens the ardour of the parental embrace, and
thereby improves offspring, the absence of love renders the parental
function tame and insipid, and thus enfeebles its product.
As the person goes with the affections, mutual hatred, if carried far,
not only annuls desire, as regards each other, but produces natural
disgust: pure-minded woman prefers death to this living purgatory!
But having thus drawn attention to this point, we forbear to prosecute
it farther.
The inference is conclusive, that those who do not cordially love each
other, should keep apart, even though married by law ; because, first,
law cannot possibly justify what nature has unequivocally condemned ;
and secondly, because such union can never be anything else than mere
animal indulgence. Hence their offspring must ox necessity be far be-
low their parents in intellectual and moral endowment, because parental
intellect and moral feeling were not called forth by love, and therefore
not transmitted to offspring. Moreover their offspring must necessarily
be essentially animal, because the supposed disagreement of parents
rouses all their animal passions, and transmits them, thus roused, to
offspring. Such sensual intercourse is morally wrong, even in those
legally married to each other, because it may, must , beget human
animals only, but never human intellect and soul , except of an inferior
grade. Oh! parents, pause and tremble in view of relations thus
fraught with weal or woe to yourselves, your children, and your chil-
dren’s children for ever.
SECTION IX.
ALL-IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS TO THE MARRIED I RECIPROCITY.
Love always requires a return. Reciprocity is a constituent in-
gredient in its very nature. Without it neither man nor woman can
ever be happy in either love or wedlock. Its absence is misery to the
ardour of the one, and repugnance to the coldness of the other. A
cardinal law of both love and connubial bliss requires, that the more
tender the affection of either, the more cordially should it be reciproca-
ted by the other. Both must love each other, in order that both may
participate with each other in parentage.
The absence of reciprocity here is of course the bone of contention.
If similarity in other respects is essential to love, how all essential is
hlis, the very essence of the marriage covenant and compact ! Matri-
tmonial felicity can no more be had without reciprocity and mutual
peasure here, than noon-day without the sun; nor can discord co-
exist with reciprocity here, any more than darkness and sunshine can
co-exist; because they who cannot make each other happy in the
ultimatum of love and marriage, cannot make each other happy in minor
matters ; while those who can make each other happy will find all the
minor causes of discord drowned. Riciprocity here being the heart s
core all the happiness of both love and wedlock—their basis, and
frame-work, and superstructure, and all in all those who are qualified
to confer on each other this summum honum of matrimonial felicity,
are bound together by the strongest bond of union connected with our
nature ; whilst those who cannot confer and receive mutual pleasure in
this respect, cannot possibly be happy in married life, and conse-
quently cannot possibly love each other; and therefore should never enter
together the sacred enclosure of wedlock. On nothing does the bride-
groom set an equal value. All else in married life is of little value to
him compared with reciprocity and happiness here.
46
RECIPROCIT


This doctrine of the necessity of reciprocity must commend itself to
all who have experience concerning it, while the uninitiated will find
ample proof of its truth in the fact, that those husbands and wives either
of which went reluctantly to the hymenial altar, never lived happily
together. Scrutinize all the cases in which either party was over-
persuaded by the importunity of the other, or by officious parents or
friends, and every one, except those few in which the requisite recipro-
city has been afterwards established, will be found to have resulted in
misery to both. Let this principle and fact effectually warn all against
persuading or being persuaded to marry against their feelings. Ardent
love in one can never compensate for the want of it in the other. On
the contrary, warmth in one and coldness in the other, is as ice to fire.
Reciprocity is indispensable. Then let all beware how they marry,
unless both love and are beloved.
SECTION X
FREQUENCY.
It remains to define nature’s boundaries in this important respect
thereby to restrain exorbitant demand on the one hand, and to prevent
excessive taxation on the other. Such bounds exist, and to observe
them is the height of hymeneal bliss. That a most ruinous excess is
generally indulged in, is certain. What, then, are the dictates of in-
fallible nature ?
An infallible guide as to frequency, is to be found in its effects on
love and offspring. This function being the embodiment of love, and
the servant of offspring, whatever am ount of frequency is promotive of
spiritual love, and the consequent endowment of offspring, is right, and
even duty. Admit that this function may have two primitive offices,
and that the secondary office of this function is to promote connubial
love, by augmenting connubial happiness, and we are furnished with
the largest liberty not injurious or dangerous to health.
One universal guide as to frequency should undoubtedly take prece-
dence over all others. We have already adduced woman’s love as the
touchstone of the nature of true love. We have also shown that this
parental function, the frequency of which we would now determine, is
only the ultimatum of love—that both are governed by the same laws.
Why, then, should not woman be the umpire in this case ? And this
view is both sustained and rendered conclusive by the law of woman’s
nature. She, then, is that final umpire by which every husband should
abide. And if she be allowed to control this matter of frequency,
nearly every married pair will be conducted to complete connubial
felicity.
Of course, only healthy wives are qualified to regulate this delicate
matter. Either disease or prostration may render her decision erroneous.
Yet, even then, more than she desires would be injurious to her ; and
the husband must conform to the required denial. His lot is less for-
tunate, yet non-conformity will only increase his misfortune. Even
then his wife is his judge ; and his only appeal consists in restoring
her to health, and thus increasing the enjoyment of both.
Yet the opposite sometimes occurs. When female complaints cause
slight inflammation instead of torpor, or a chronic fever, the result is
undue desire. Nor will the desired frequency here effect a cure. It
will only aggravate. So that voluntary restraint in such cases becomes
indispensable.
Undue desire or torpor may arise from other causes—may be heredi-
tary—yet these exceptions leave our great governing rule the same. If
parents in general would diminsh their frequency, they would be incal-
culable gainers in the amount of pleasure experienced, besides doubling,
47
FREQUENCY.


perhaps quadrupling, all the endowments of their offspring. No mis-
take can be greater than the prevalent supposition that hymeneal
pleasure is in proportion to frequency ; it is the reverse. Do we not
enjoy a single meal, when really hungry, more than scores when not
so 1 Frequency begets satiety, and gluts the appetite and enjoyment.
The married pair should be abstemious, if it were merely as a means of
securing the pleasure sought.
Strict temperance promotes all enjoyment. Intemperance is destruc-
tive of the very pleasure sought. We go for self-enjoyment in the truest
and fullest sense of the word, that exercise of this function which
yields the most enjoyment, both of itself, and in its various and mul-
tifarious bearings on our other enjoyments. But as a single meal, eaten
with the keen relish conferred by appetite, gives more exalted pleasure
than scores without it, so hymeneal temperance is the secret of hymeneal
pleasure ; while the cloyed advocates of unrestricted indulgence de-
prive themselves of most of the pleasures they seek, and the few which
are left, are embittered. We shall be remembered with gratitude for
advocating this doctrine of abstinence by all who put it in practice.
Our doctrine is the true interpretation of nature’s ordinance.
Compare the effects of unrestricted indulgence, with the effects of
strict temperance. Their difference is infinite. The former sensualizes
and depraves. It also breeds disgust for its paramour. We regard the
partner of our intemperance as a kind of animal tool , a mere sexual
thing , gross, low, and sensual. This shows why the libertine, however
intently he pursued his prey before indulgence, becomes indifferent to
her after, and finally casts her off. This is always the case. It
is based in the law of mind, that sensuality, in and of itself, degrades
its joint partner in their own eyes, and breeds disgust of self and one
another, deteriorates the moral tone, and demeans and animalizes the
entire being! This abasement is inherent in excessive indulgence. Nor
does marriage wipe away the polluting stain. Carnality is carnality,
in wedlock as much as out of it, and constitutionally ‘ breeds contempt,
disgust,’ and hatred, even between the married. This must always be
the case.
Does not this principle develope one cause of the great difference in
the estimation in which many lovers hold each other before marriage,
compared with their estimation of each other afterwards ? That such
depreciation often takes place is too true. Yet these deteriorating effects
on love are experienced only by those who do injustice to their nature,
or violate the laws of temperance.
Far otherwise is the effect with the strictly temperate. With them
this intercommunion, so far from lowering them in each other’s estima-
tion will greatly elevate them.
Intemperance vitiates and poisons all it touches ; while virtuous and
temperate indulgence sanctifies, and purifies, and perfects !
Choose, then, between the blessing and the curse. May a vigorous
intellect determine thy choice, and moral purity guide thy proceeding.
God forbid the sacreligious prostitution of this high and holy function
to brutal lust!
May this treatise tend to promote conjugal affection —to sanctify
enjoyment —to endow offspring with the best physiology and the
highest mentality in the power of parentage to confer, and thus adorn,
perfect, and bless mankind, both now and for ever. Amen.
Printed by G. Turner, Stoke-upon-Trent, Staffordshire.
48
FREQUENCY.
