

pent
j fe£k .laious FHIHS
Boa f ,
LOYE IN RELIGION:
A MYSTERY.
H. K RUSDEN.
Read before the Free Discussion Society,
16th April, 1882.
PE;IOE-SIXPZ:ITOE.
MELBOURNE :




FIS
LOVE IN RELIGION: A MYSTERY.
H. K, RUSDEN.
[Read before the Free Discussion Society 16th April, 1882.]
“God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten son, that who-
soever helieveth in him should not perish hut have everlasting life.”—[John iii, 16].
“Christ died for the ungodly.”—[Romans v, 6].
“Let love he without dissimulation.”—[Rom. xii, 9].
“Behold I show you a mystery.”—[l Cor. xi, 51],
Even accepting Christian doctrines as true, there is
surely something very anomalous in the fact, or rather
statement, that God so loved this wicked world —so much
better than his own good son —that not only did he scourge
him and put him to grief, but actually caused him to be
murdered — for the benefit of the wicked ! ! Now if God
be a good being, how can he love the world, which is said
to be so desperately wicked , and the sinners in it in par-
ticular, and sacrifice for their benefit his own only son —
said to be without spot or blemish? Why is it that he
loves sinners and ruffians exactly ninety-nine times better
than virtuous persons ? “ There is more joy in heaven,”
Jesus said, “over one sinner that repenteth than over
ninety and nine just persons who need no repentance.”
(Luke xv, 7). One would have thought that such pre-
ference and love of sinners instead of good persons would
rather have been characteristic of hell , and that in heaven
one righteous man would have been preferred to at least
ninety-nine sinners. The moral apprehension of the
world, though greatly susceptible of improvement, has
certainly made a considerable advance upon that of Jesus,
and of Christianity —the religion of sinners. Let us hope
that the next religion may be one adapted to the require-
ments and advantage of good moral men, rather than of


the worst. To love the evil better than the good is not
only obviously immoral, but is possible only in complete
misconception of good and evil, and can produce none but
immoral results.
But though this doctrine of divine love was confessedly
devised in the particular interest of sinners, can it be
shown to have resulted in any advantage to them ? Though
G-od gave his own good son for the special benefit of all
these bad sinners that he loved so much better, yet it ap-
pears not to have benefited them at all; for they have still
to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling
just the same as before. In fact they are now much worse
off; for they have not only still to save themselves as best
they can, but they have the additional difficulty put in
their way of having also to believe that Christ has already
saved them, though they have still to save themselves. I
fail to see any honesty or propriety in wishing to be saved
from the appropriate consequences of one’s own acts. We
could not then learn wisdom. What we should want is
justice and fair play as we earn it—which is scarcely to be
expected from a God who loves the evil ninety-nine times
better than the good, apparently for the exquisite pleasure
of torturing them eternally afterwards.
What, then, has this divine love done for any one here?
Has it, as stated, introduced peace on Earth and good-will
to men? Nay ! I tell you —In the words of Jesus —it has
brought “not peace, but a sword :” a had he been a real
prophet, he might have added—the flames of Smithfield,
the massacre of St. Bartholomew, and the tortures of the
Inquisition. Christianity is remarkable for having, even
more than any other religion, aroused what the prince
of historians calls “the exquisite rancour of theological
hatred.” b
How is it, then, that love has been put forward as the
leading feature of Christianity, unless to take away our
breath at starting with a monstrous camel, so that every
other absurd doctrine may be afterwards swallowed whole,
(a) Mat. x, 34.
Q>) Gibbon’s “ Decline and Fall,” Yol. 11, 438.


and with ease, as a mere insignificant gnat ? What love,
what respect, what feeling but of radical antipathy can
possibly subsist between the creator of a hell and those
for whose torture he created it P Or between moral beings
and one who loves the wicked ninety-nine times better
than the good ? Why is the word love used in such a
connection at all, when the word hate would evidently be
so much more appropriate ? The man most like the
Christian God is, in my mind, Frederick the Great, who
once, it is said, had a man flogged for saying he deeply
respected His Majesty. “ But I wnnt you to love me, you
rascal,” exclaimed Frederick, “ and I’ll make you !” So
he ordered him fifty lashes to compel him to love him!!!
•There can be nothing more immoral or absurd than the
teaching of Jesus on the subject. He says, in nearly the
same words, in Mat. v, 43-4, and Luke vi, 85, “Ye have
heard that it hath been said thou shalt love thy neighbour
and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, love your
enemies ; bless them that curse you ; do good to them that
hate you; and pray for them that despitefully use you and
persecute you.” And in Luke xiv, 25-6, we* read, —“And
he turned—(yes, he turned) —and said unto them, ‘ If any
man come unto me and hate not his father and mother, and
wife and children, and brothers and sisters, —yea and his
own life also, he cannot he my disciple .” Thus you are to
love your enemies and hate your friends and relations \\\
Could any teaching be more outrageously immoral and
absurd ? Whence came such contradictory and incon-
gruous nonsense ?
“ Beh«ld I show you a mystery.”
The word love originally meant and still mainly
means — sexual feeling ; and its use now in religion is
altogether extravagant and illegitimate, not to say hypo-
critical. It was at first, and is still, so used, —not because
it represents a truth, as we have seen that it does not, but
because it appeals most powerfully to human sensual
sympathies, and was—and is, therefore—the most efficient
engine of priestcraft. Of course the love of God is now
represented as of that less passionate description which is


known as filial, or parental rather than sexual; though the
terms used to describe it are frequently as extravagant as
if it were sexual. And the fact is that there is less
justification for the former than the latter ; for the sexual
feeling had far more than the aesthetic faculty to do with
the origin of religion, and was the main basis of it for
thousands of years before the invention of the doctrines
of a future state of existence, or even of a personal (rod.
And this was not unnatural. The fact of facts which
attracts and engrosses the attention of philosophers to-
day, almost as much as it did in the childhood of the world
is the reproduction of organic beings. The generative
power in Nature has excited the wonder of philosophers,
as well as of the superstitious, in all ages ; and it is not
very surprising that its instrument should have formed
the first object of worship, or that the cunning should—
as its priests —have traded upon the ignorance of their
neighbours. In all ancient mythologies this was a uni-
versal and prominent feature —to an extent which it is
scarcely compatible with modern ideas of decency even to
mention. Rites and ceremonies now regarded as too
obscene for description, but which are not without mention
in the Bible, 0 were certainly public and compulsory in
Egypt and Syria, and probably everywhere else. It is to
such religious sacraments that allusion is made in Genesis
vi, 2-4, where it is stated that “ when the sons of God ”
which really means the priestly caste —“saw the daughters
of men that they were fair, they took them wives of all
which they chose. There were giants in the Earth in
those days; and also after that, when the sons of God ”
{the priests) —“came in unto the daughters of men, and
they bare children to them, the same became mighty men
which were of old, men of renown,” Eor reviving similar
mysteries long afterwards in Rome, the worship of Isis,
which had been there introduced from Egypt, was pro-
hibited. Hence originated the numerous stories of heroes
divinely born of virgins ages before the similar birth of
Jesus ; and hence naturally arose accidents like that for
(c) 1 Kings xv, 12. 2 Kings xxiii, 7, &c.


which Joseph teas minded to put away his wife privily. These
were anything but idle fables. They had everything to do
with the origin of religion, and particularly with that of
the doctrine of divine love. There is much of this in the
Bible which I cannot even quote, for the same reasons that
make it so difficult now-a-days to follow this clue, and
discover that for which there is yet ample evidence, but
which it is next to impossible to publish outside a Free
Discussion Society.
j ßeligion, as ancient historians confess, was originally
invented as a means whereby the few who then held a
monopoly of knowledge—the then priestly caste —might
control and govern the ignorant masses. It is also certain
and admitted that religion for ages consisted of a system
of double doctrine —the esoteric, —which was the secret or
sacred doctrine and knowledge held by, and taught ex-
clusively to, the initiated in their mysteries ; and the
exoteric, which was thought safe and proper to be, and
was, taught to the people. The esoteric secret doctrine it
was made heinously criminal to reveal to the uninitiated ;
and thus not only was the esoteric knowledge, which was
power indeed, preserved as a priestly privilege and mon-
opoly, but thus also has this come to be now only with
great difficulty ascertained. Diodorus Siculus, Herodotus,
Plutarch, and many other ancient authors mention the
fact, and tantalise us by frequently touching upon for-
bidden subjects, but stop short, adding that it is not per-
mitted to reveal more. Upon the best authorities, we
know that the severest penalties were threatened and
executed upon any of the initiated who divulged the
secret doctrine, and upon any of the uninitiated who
attempted to learn it. This seems to me obviously the
true key to the story of the Garden of Eden, in which
knowledge was absolutely prohibited, and those who pre-
sumed to divulge and to learn it were both eternally
cursed. The plural Elohim —mistranslated as the singular
Lord God (who had not then been invented) means the
priestly caste ; and all the absurdity in the 22nd verse
of Gen. 11l thus vanishes. It was the priests —not the
Lord God —who said, “ Behold the man has become as one


of us, to know good and evil, and now, lest he” get more,
let us degrade him to the servile class for ever. Had he
gone a little further, and taken an apple off another tree,
death would have been the inevitable penalty.
There is no room to doubt that an ancient people
subsisted , pre-historically, who had made considerable pro-
gress in arts and sciences, of which its rulers —a priestly
caste, —carefully maintained a strict monopoly. The site
of their power is known to have been somewhere between
the 40th and 50th degrees of north latitude.* 1 It was
there that they used the lost parent language, from which
most European languages, including Greek and Latin,
and, of course, English, &c., were derived, in common
with the scientifically constructed but now obsolete lan-
guage —the ancient Sanscrit, the recent study of which
has thrown a flood of light upon this subject. The power
of this ancient people was apparently destroyed by some
means in pre-historic times Its name, language, and
precise location are alike unknown. The approximate
date of the collapse of its power, and of the migration of
its probably lineal descendants (the Brahmans) thence to
India —where alone is maintained to this day its identical
system of Caste —is reckoned by Bunsen at some six to
eight thousands of years ago, which is most likely a con-
siderable under-estimate. We know that this people
existed. We know, philologically, that “there is no speech
nor language where their voice is not heard. Their line
is gone forth through all the Earth, and their words to the
end of the world.” —(Psalm xix, 3). We know astrono-
mically that the oldest observations preserved in India of
rising and setting stars are calculated for a high latitude,
and indicate, so far, their location as about latitude 50°. e
We may discern also that many of our customs and con-
ventional ideas can, from their persistence and strength,
their peculiar nature, and even their unreasonableness.
(d) See Sir Wm. Drummond’s works; Godfrey Higgins’ “Anaca-
lypsis”; Bailly’s “Astronomie Ancienne” ; Proctor’s “Saturn and his
System” (appendix).
( e ) See Bailly’s “Astronomie Ancienne,” and “Astronomie In-
dienne and Proctor’s “ Saturn and his System ” (appendix).


have had their origin only, in the very remote past, in such
a parentage.
The religion of this ancient people —judging from the
rigid persistence, and almost universality, of some special
modes of thought and action which they have bequeathed
to us, and which still prevail among us, though utterly
incongruous with the later acquisitions and present ten-
dencies of the human intellect, must have been the original
parent of nearly all other existing religions. It is known
to scholars as the obsolete Phallic worship, the relics of
which abound, recognised or unrecognised, throughout
Europe, Asia, Africa, and even in America, although the
worship itself has long been superseded. But in India we
find still subsisting the veritable esoteric Phallic worship
itself—surviving as Lingam worship —among those Brah-
mans who brought it with them from Upper Asia many
thousands of years before the date of the Christian and
Jewish alleged Creation; —the Brahmans being, there is
thus reason to believe, the direct descendants of the
governing class of the old Phallists. Their religion was
based entirely upon sexuality. Its representative emblem
was also the actual object of worship, as it is—as the
Lingam —in India to-day ; and by means of a system
erected upon this basis they appear to have tyrannised
over their ignorant slaves to an almost incredible degree,—
probably so much as at last to provoke their own
destruction. Their method consisted of exoteric impost
tion of arbitrary restrictions upon sexual commerce, and
the enforcement of them to an extent which is now
scarcely comprehensible. Although the system has been
more or less transformed or disguised in Europe for many
thousands of years, the relics are visible at every step.
Gigantic Phallic emblems used to be placed singly or in
pairs, upright at the doors of the temples ; and this is the
real origin of all our church towers and steeples/ and of
the curious unsymmetrical position that they frequently
occupy, which has, I believe, no other explanation. The
(f) See Dulaure “ Histoire abregee de differens Cultes,” vol. 2,
page 84, and R. Payne Knight’s “ Worship of Priapus,” and “ Sym-
bolical language in Ancient Art and Mythology,” page 172.


cross itself was a Phallic emblem ages before Christianity.
Thus some of the most prominent ornaments of our city
are really genuine Phallic emblems. This is scarcely sur-
prising when it is known how the whole Bible teems with
Phallic legends. The manorial right of cuissage, which
survived to the fourteenth century, was a survival of
Phallism, though it had relaxed into mere mercenary
extortion.
I have already pointed out that the story of Eden is
one descriptive of punishments for intrusions upon the
sacred mysteries. That the first effect of the acquisition
of knowledge by Adam and Eve should be the perception
of their own nakedness is very peculiar and unaccountable
unless as a direct Phallic allusion. There is no room to
doubt that many of our other conventional notions of de-
cency are not only entirely artificial, but arose in Phallism
alone. The strength of a prejudice is an infallible symptom
of its age. Children are at first quite unconscious of any
feelings of this sort, though they soon acquire them with
facility. Such a feeling, therefore, is not original at all,
but learned ; and the strict method of Phallism —of en-
forced early exoteric instruction—was obviously the most
certain to create the public opinion in which their
power, as that of a small minority —lay, and the best fitted
to hand down what they taught to a distant posterity.
Would those who are now so unnaturally shocked at the
sight of a nude human form be as confident in upholding
their prejudices as moral if they knew that they were but
mechanically conforming to a tyrannical exoterical precept
of obscene Phallism, as they would call it?
Phallism existed solely by exoterically prohibiting—or
licensing—to the uninitiated what was esoterically the
sacred monopoly of the privileged caste. What was kept
secret became sacred; and “ sacred ” has meant ever since,
simply, protected from free criticism. Many of our con-
ventional notions on the subjects of modesty and chas-
tity are indisputably due to the same source, and even
the rapid growth of the principle of individual liberty has
as yet done little towards breaking down ancient Phallic
exoteric prohibitions, though their effects are beginning to


be seen to be both immoral and pernicious. What was
strictly forbidden exoterically to the people was sacred and
legal within the temples to the initiated. The general
prostitution in the Phallic temples of Babylon, Syria, and
Egypt, and the worse practices at Jerusalem and elsewhere
—for which we have the testimony of the Bible —(1 Kings
xv, 12, and 2 Kings xxiii, 7, &c.), —were there honorable
and holy, as at this day in India, The deep degradation
of European civilisation in its prostitution is the exot-
eric brand originally imposed for the profit of the Phallic
temples. It is my deliberate opinion that, until the subject
is understood in this light, nothing effectual can be done
towards the removal of this putrid sore of modern society,
which I nevertheless believe to be quite preventable — hence
this paper. Our practice is even more demoralising than
that of Phallism or Brahmanism. For the essence of im-
morality consists in doing what is admitted and felt to be
wrong and evil. “ There is nothing unclean of itself-, but
to him that esteemeth anything to be unclean, to him it is
unclean.” (Rom. xiv. 14). The consistent recognition of
this principle is essential to the successful treatment of
this subject.
Now the Christian Church has been the principal
means of exaggerating and intensifying the evil of the
legacy left us by the old Phallic priesthood, and is to-day
the great obstacle to all improvement. It is itself a
natural offspring of Phallism, and of the worst part of
it —its ignorant exoteric side. It maintains many of
its tyrannical prohibitions against freedom of individual
action, and blindly condemns altogether what Phallism
condemned only exoterically. It has not only perpetuated
but actually sanctified a prostitution of a far more de-
graded type (because esteemed to be unclean, and there-
fore —to it—actually unclean) than even that of Phallism
and Brahmanism, which was not esteemed to be—and
therefore was not —unclean. By its contradictory in-
troduction of love into its theology it has added insult
to injury, and has furnished a bitter satire upon good
intentions generally, which Paul seems almost to have
had in view when he wrote, “ Let love be without dis-


simulation.” The men who did this evil thing doubtless
meant well, like the old Phallists. It is the results of the
system that I condemn and proceed to expose.
Phallism was the origin and parent of nearly all known
religions. It probably began in wonder at the mysterious
phenomena of organic reproduction. Able and energetic
men arose far superior to the herd of ignorant slaves and
half animals by whom they were surrounded, whom they
found it impossible to enlighten, but whom it was neces-
sary to govern. They found that the sexual instinct was
a means by which they could most effectually control the
stupid masses, and—doubtless with the best intentions—
they traded upon it, —probably for the good of all. They
did so by enforcing a strict monopoly of the superior
knowledge which they possessed and assiduously culti-
vated. They governed the people—probably well at first,
for they brought them through a long period when pro-
gress must have been most difficult. But in doing so they
inevitably organised and firmly established a priestly caste,
and then naturally followed abuse of the enormous power
they wielded. Then, after long ages of tyranny, the
people, goaded to desperation, and probably assisted by
traitors among their governors, rose in their numerical
might, and destroyed not only the power —but also the
civilisation and culture of their oppressors. These had
certainly lasted for ages ; for a system which has left such
enduring vestiges behind it must have prevailed for many
thousands of years. When afterwards the Phallic power
was annihilated, some remnants of the ruling caste mi-
grated to India and established themselves there; while their
exoteric doctrines overspread the nations of Europe, which
adopted as real religion being unable to divest them-
selves of—the fictions that had been taught them. Doubt-
less a few of the priestly class were also dispersed through
Europe, and made the most of their superior knowledge as
priests and hierophants. The mythologies and traditions
of which we have the earliest historical intelligence were
the result of several thousands of years of confusion of
conflicting systems ; but all had a common phallic source,
and preserved the leading characteristics of Phallism.


These were, first—a dominant priestly class, who maintained
(and of course abused) the monopoly—as far as possible—
of knowledge; secondly, the practice of sacrifice , which
originally was provably nothing but contributions exacted
from the uninitiated by the priests—first in their own
behalf, but afterwards in the name of Gods; and thirdly,
together with the worship of a host of personified local
deities, that of the supreme generative power of Nature
generally identified with the Sun, as the obvious periodical
regenerator of life. In many places Phallism itself sur-
vived for some thousands of years, and even into histo-
rical time. We have distinct accounts of it at Babylon, in
Syria, and in Egypt. The worship of Isis and Osiris was
entirely Phallic, and so was that of Mylitta, Atys, Adonis,
Demeter, and Bacchus. At Byblos Venus was at first
adored under the form of a plain round black pillar—a
true phallus; but eventually the worship of personal
deities superseded that of the phallus itself. Through
pre-historic ages the Phallus had been adored at Mecca,
and Mahometanism was an unconscious attempt to restore
the primal worship of the Great Original generative
power in a personal form. The subordinate deities were
abolished as idolatrous, but the sacred white and black
stones which the faithful Hadjis now kiss in the holy
Caaba at Mecca are really the old Phallus and Cteis them-
selves. The worship of Priapus, which was nearly identical
with Phallism, was common —later —not only at Eome, but
through the greater part of Europe; and the emblems are
to be seen by any one to-day in the exhumed cities of
Herculaneum and Pompeii, although elsewhere they have
been generally removed on grounds of decency. Up to
the middle of the last century it was customary in some
Italian churches, till attention was called to the fact by
visitors, for pious women to make votive offerings of
waxen phallic emblems, of which a full description is given
by Payne Knight in his work on the worship of Priapus,
Similar Phallic emblems, but said to be made of gold,
were, you will remember, placed by the Philistines in a
coffer by the Ark of God at Ekron, according to the 6th
chapter of the Ist Book of Samuel, which is essentially a


phallic legend like all the early Jewish books. The then
Jewish Grod —who, as a pillar of cloud by day and of fire
by night, was plainly the Phallus itself—was evidently
pleased with those phallic offerings, and accepted them,
though he slaughtered 50,070 Jews because some one
looked into the ark. The Jews are clearly proved by their
own books to have been Phallists from the beginning up
to the time of the captivity, when the books (so-called)
of Moses were first produced, and Jehovah, as a great
original generator or phallus, the pillar of cloud by day
and of fire by night, was promoted over the local phalli
or wooden ashera—mistranslated groves in the Bible to
disguise the fact. These ashera or genuine phalli were
set up in the temple itself, and the women wove hangings
for them in the phallic houses that were by the temple.g
The phallism is unmistakable through the books of Samuel h
and Kings 1 and Ezekiel •> also. Circumcision was ob-
viously a phallic rite, and the asserted conception and
birth of Jesus —may not improperly be called —a phallic
wrong.
The idea of a future life appears, according to Dio-
dorus Siculus, to have arisen in Egypt, and to have spread
thence almost within historical time. The doctrine of love
is of course phallic in origin, but the aesthetic or spirit-
ualised form of it, adopted by Plato first and afterwards by
Christian enthusiasts, was evidently only one feature among
others derived from Buddhism, which has a superior title
to be called the Religion of Love, as it is without the in-
congruities and many of the extravagances that disfigure
and stultify Christian theology. Buddha’s affection was
really that of a good man for men, and pity for their
besotted ignorant miserable condition. I know nothing
phallic about Buddhism. To assert the subsistence of
anything of the nature of love between an almighty good
deity and bad men is to ignore the moral attainments of
man and court solecism on every hand. Christianity pre-
serves more of Phallism than Buddhism , and deserves
rather to be called the religion of hate , whether as ex-
(g) 2 Kings xxiii, 7. ( h ) 1 Sam. vi. (>) 1 Kings xiv, 24; xv, 12.
(j) Ezekiel xvi, 16-17.


hihited in the alleged relations of the Deity and his
creatures, or in the conduct of its votaries to each other.
Both inductively from history and deductively from
doctrine it thus appears, then, that love is entirely out of
place in religion, and has been improperly associated with
it —either “ with dissimulation” or in utter ignorance of
its origin and effect. Yet there can be no doubt that
there is an intimate connection between the religious
sentiment and sexuality, whether it originated in Phallism
or not. No religion was ever initiated without some
attempt to innovate upon or qualify the relations of the
sexes. The Nunawading prophets and the Wroeites here,
the Shakers, Spiritualists, and Perfectionists in America,
the Muckers in Germany, and the Saints of the Agape-
mone in England, all illustrate this observation in various
ways. The larger sects (Buddhism alone excepted) equally
corroborate it and prove a connection between the pheno-
mena. Mahometanism and Mormonism were both revolts—
the former against ancient, and the latter against modern,
monogamy as the expression of exoteric Phallic prohibition.
The Great Protestant Reformation was simply the cul-
mination of the persistent struggle—during more than
1,000 years —between the Christian Church on the one
hand and the Clergy and Laity on the other; the Church
insisting upon clerical celibacy (which meant general
prostitution), and the Clergy and people fighting for
clerical marriage. History bears witness that the Chris-
tian Church maintained this struggle, not to enforce the
ascetical principles upon which celibacy was first osten-
sibly introduced, but with a purely mercenary object ; for
it tolerated and encouraged illegitimate sexual connections
of the Clergy, so long as they did not marry; while the
Clergy, to their credit be it said, and the Laity also (for
obvious reasons), contended for clerical marriage to obviate
the necessity for illicit connections. The mercenary ob-
ject of the Church was this : Erom the early part of the
4th century married priests almost always misappropriated
for their families and themselves the revenues of the
Church, and so detracted from its wealth and power.” k The
( k ) Lea’s “History of Sacerdotal Celibacy,” pp. 148-9, 324, 342-8,
396, and 401.


interest of celibate clergy centred in the Church, and
they could excuse themselves to their lay charges in the
words of St Paul (1 Cor. ix, 11). “If we have sown unto
you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall reap
your carnal things.” To such an extent did they reap them
that the monasteries and convents had become, in the
fifteenth century, huge brothels; that in some places the
children of the Clergy are known to have outnumbered
those of the lay population 1 ; that some bishops were known
to have from 60 to 70 natural children, while others kept
as many concubines 111 ; that the priests, until the 16th cen-
tury, customarily paid a regular license called “ cullagium”
to keep concubines, whether they did so or not; n and that
there are numerous historical proofs that it was a usual
thing throughout Europe for the parishioners of a new
pastor to assemble and insist, for the protection of their
wives and daughters, upon his taking a concubineforthwith. 0
It was for such irregularities that indulgences were openly
sold hy the Church, until the people could stand it no
longer, and the Reformation ensued —not, as pretended, to
vindicate freedom of religious opinion, but to secure pro-
tection from the wholesale prostitution of the women of
Europe by the Christian priesthood, l3 The Church, to get
temporal wealth and power, had actually converted Europe
into a sacred brothel as completely as if every chapel or
convent had been a Phallic temple, and these facts con-
stitute the only real title of the Christian Church to be
called the Religion of Love! This is the way that the
Clergy used to keep up —as the Bishop says —the morals
of the people\\\ Public opinion compels secresy in such
matters now, but it is impossible to doubt that the same
rule prevails.
This is not, however, all that the Christian Church
has done to saturate European Society with sanctified
prostitution. Its perpetuation of the Phallic Institution
of marriage as an ecclesiastical ceremony, and, as an
(1) lb. p. 349. (m) pp. 322, 349. (n) pp 271, 389, 422, 423.
(°) pp. 324, 355, 386. (P) The Emperors Maximilian and Fer-
dinand represented this fact to the Pope and begged him to remedy
it.—[See Lea, p. 457-61.]


indissoluble contract, has contributed largely to the same
result, and the Protestants are therefore, of course, so far
implicated, as much as the Roman Church. This evil is
culminating in England, and a social revolution to remedy
it is but a question of time. For the excess of the number
of women is nearly 4 millions now, and is rapidly increas-
ing ; while, maugre the augmenting population, the number
of marriages is steadily and not slowly diminishing. This is
the work of the religion of love !! Marriage is too often
miserably unhappy, and must remain so while legally
indissoluble. Inducement is thus offered to misbehaviour.
Marriage should last—like any rational contract of as-
sociation — solely during good behaviour, for which a reason
would then exist; and the contract should be at once dis-
soluble without expense —at the desire of either party to
it. The evident tendency of modern opinion, and even
legislation towards increasing the liberty of individuals,
and the steady though slow decline of religion, afford
some prospect of progress in the direction of rational
morality in this respect. The obstinacy, however, of pre-
judices derived from sources so ancient as Phallism is
necessarily enormous, and is the principal cause of the
delay. Our Phallic inheritance appears also in the con-
ventional objection to modern Malthusianism; the sole
feasible defence against poverty. Good things come, and
bad things go ; but very slowly.
To summarise. The doctrine of love in Religion, and
in Christianity in particular, is not only a contradictory
absurdity, but also a cruel insult to those who are treated
as if they were hated. It is a direct though unrecognized
relic of obscene phallism, which is really also the basis of
all our religions (except Buddhism), and of most of the
errors in our notions of Morality; such as sanctity, —
meaning—protection from criticism ; modesty and decency,
—which mean simply —hypocrisy, for they veil no foulness
that they do not create ; also chastity—which is really public
tyranny in strictly private matters, and respecting which
public opinion is notoriously one-sided and divided. Its un-
equal application stamps it as an error, and its evil physical
results, together with its social product— Prostitution —


demonstrate it to be a monstrous evil. All these have
their bases, not in utility but solely in ancient Phallic
exoteric tyranny, and should be fearlessly examined and
treated. The Christian Church has—for mercenary ob-
jects — perpetuated the foulness of phallism under the
cloak of ascetic and aesthetic piety. A strictly rational
morality is possible solely by understanding the whole
subject of prostitution in its origin and history, as I have
endeavoured to trace them under obvious difficulties. I
have taken much paius to acquire this information —of
which I have given you only the heads—respecting the
causes of prostitution; with the view of cleansing our
society from the foul stain upon our vaunted morality.
There is no other way.
• I hold that one who is not prepared to trust and follow
his intellectual judgment, wheresoever it may lead, is un-
worthy of its possession. In asking you to discuss my
conclusions, I hope for free criticism to test them in every
possible way. I cannot expect you to apprehend my
position perfectly from such a short and inadequate
account of it, but if I stimulate enquiry into the matter,
I scarcely look for more at present. That will be a great
step gained; for the problem appears to have been
generally given up as hopeless. And remember that
“ There is nothing unclean of itself; but to him that
esteemeth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean .”
[My principal authorities are, Diodorus Siculus, Hero-
dotus, Plutarch, the Bible, Wilkinson’s “Ancient Egypt-
ians,” Bailly’s “ Astronomie Ancienne ” and “ Astronomic
Indienne,” Higgins’ “Celtic Druids” and “ Anacalypsis,” Sir
Wm. Drummond’s “ CEdipus Judaicus,” Dupuis’ “Origines
de tousles Cultes,” Dulaure’s “Histoire abregee de differens
Cultes,” R. Payne Knight’s “Worship of Priapus” and
“ Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and Mythology,”
Dr. Inman’s “ Ancient Faiths embodied in Ancient Names ”
and “Ancient Faiths and Modern,” Colonel Kennedy’s and
Coleman’s works on “ Hindoo Mythology,” “ The Dabistan,”
Sale’s “Koran,” and—an invaluable book—H. C, Lea’s “His-
tory of Sacerdotal Celibacy.”—H.K.R.]
PRINTED BY J. WING, 33 WELLINGTON STREET, COLLINOWOOD.




