

1 fall
Ulijnrrlj of England Qjnrla’ Grammar
1
1C P a
Iti' Snail, Eaamiimt, llirtmia.
K
I
> ~^r
O"
TELEPHONE: FU 6400
cr
O
2
r
ro
_ _j




liinri
Lowther Hall.


Introhwrtoy Note.
HALL, Essendon, the Church of England
111 Girls’ Grammar School for the Northern line, is one of
those founded during the episcopacy of Archbishop
Lowther Clarke, in pursuance of his policy to provide for
girls educational facilities on a religious basis comparable to
those already provided for boys. Until 1933 the School was
under the control of the Council of the Diocese. But since
1934, it has been leased to Miss Nora Collisson, 8.A.,
formerly headmistress of St. Margaret’s School, Brisbane,
and from 1929 till 1933, Secretary of the Bureau of Social
and International Affairs, Melbourne.
To teachers of to-day is entrusted a task as difficult
and as inspiring as any that fell to their profession in
bygone centuries. Amid the prevailing fear and confusion,
when old foundations are rocking and old values are being
dissipated, they must find firm ground upon which to enable
their boys and girls to build the secure future of a full and
happy life, lived to the glory of God and the good of their
fellow men.
“The new age needs a new type of character .... a
new kind of courage—not that of the 'conqueror and the
crusader, but the essentially Christian form of heroism
which dares the adventures of co-operation. The artist,
the teacher, the healer, the parent, the engineer, the maker
and the saint, all who in their several vocations have the
touch which conserves life and love—these are the artificers
of the new world-order and the symbols of the coming
Christianity.” (From “The Relevance of the Church,”
by F. R. Barry).
The secondary education of yesterday produced the
Empire Builder. The secondary education of to-day must
produce the type of character of which Canon Barry speaks—
that of the Christian citizen of the new world order. It is
natural therefore, that to meet the new conditions, the
spirit of reform should be sweeping through the education
of the adolescent, just as in the last century it began in the
Kindergarten and spread to the primary school. All over


to, a A'S
the world, leaders of education have been preparing the way
for this reform. Upon what lines should it proceed in our
own country? In the first place the school leaving age must
be raised to 15, and provision made for post-school courses
for those who leave at that age. Next, the system of public
examination must be overhauled; matriculation should be
separated from the school-leaving certificate; in awarding
the school-leaving certificate, the pupil’s school record should
be taken into account and the number of subjects for exam-
ination, whether taken externally or internally, should be
materially reduced.
So far the secondary school curriculum has been domin-
ated by the requirements for matriculation, for which only
a small percentage of pupils ever wish to prepare. There
must be greater freedom for the schools in the planning of
courses that will provide both for sound general education
and also for the development of each pupil according to the
individual tastes and requirements. Less emphasis should
be laid on the superficial study of many subjects, and greater
emphasis on mastery of the fundamental processes, i.e.,
English expression, both oral and written, and quick and
accurate calculation. Since education is directed not only
towards the training of good citizens of our own democracy,
but also towards world citizenship, that there may be a
better understanding of the modern world with its ever
widening interests and ever more complex problems, the
school courses for girls must include a study of world affairs
through History, Geography and Economics, and appreci-
ation of Music, Art and Literature, as well as training in
Handcrafts and Homecrafts. Elementary Mathematics,
Elementary Science and some study of languages may be
added, as seems desirable. Having completed a general
course of this kind, the girl will then be in a position either
to proceed to preparation of matriculation, or to vocational
training such as commercial work, or to continue her general
education.
Finally, since education is for life, not only as a citizen
of the State, and of the world, but also of the Kingdom of
God both here and hereafter, it must include the funda-
mentals of a sound religious faith, so that these varied
aspects of life may be set in their right relationship.
In the last century, the Schools of the Church played
no mean part in the training of Empire builders. They must
be worthy of their great tradition as they proceed with
the task of training the future “artificers of the new world
order.”
A/,Asi iil+o&l/z


SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND PLAYING FIELDS.
Lowther Hall is situated within four minutes walk of
the Essendon Station, and within five minutes walk of the
electric tram to the city, and of the Brunswick, Coburg and
other cross-country buses. The school charters a bus each
term to carry to and fro at moderate cost, the children too
small to travel by train and tram.
The day school quarters include eight modern class
rooms, with kindergarten, laboratory, domestic science room
and assembly hall. The house is a fine old mansion with
accommodation for 30 boarders. The large and airy dormi-
tories are suitably equipped. Hot and cold water is laid on
to the bathrooms. Every effort is made to keep the life of
the boarders as friendly and home-like as possible. They are
under the care of a competent matron.
In addition to tennis and basket ball courts and a
baseball field, there is a splendid playing field. The games
are in charge of a trained mistress. During the summer
term swimming is popular and the girls attend the City or
Brunswick Baths. They are prepared for the examinations
of the Royal Life Saving Society. There is also an excellent
system of Physical Training, with daily exercises, through-
out the school.
SCHOOL CHAPEL.
In March, 1934, a large room in the house was set aside
as a temporary Chapel by the Archbishop of Melbourne.
Simple and dignified, it is a quiet place for rest and worship
for girls and staff amid the bustle of school life. There is a
weekly celebration of Holy Communion and daily prayers
are said morning and evening. The boarders are trained
to use the Chapel for a brief period of quiet at the beginning
of the day. The Chapel is cared for by the Chapel Committee
which has just set up a special “Corner” for the very small
girls. It also manages a Chapel Library where may be had
devotional books and those suitable for spiritual reading,
together with interesting stories of the Mission Field.
RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION.
The school exists to provide education on a religious
basis and in particular to train its girls to be loyal and
instructed members of the Church. It is natural, therefore,
that great importance should be attached to Divinity as a
subject of the curriculum. Divinity is compulsory for all
girls. Pupils are not accepted who are unable to take it
on account of religious scruples. Both the content of the
syllabus and the method of teaching are kept up-to-date.


The instruction is in the hands of the Principal, assisted
by mistresses who are communicant members of the Church.
Each week an address is given at Assembly by the Vicar of
Christ Church, Essendon, and each term courses of addresses
or series of discussions are arranged for the senior girls by
visiting clergymen. Girls are encouraged to attend their
parish Church and to take an active interest in its life.
The communicants are given careful and constant training,
so that they may have formed good habits by the time that
they leave school.
In 1936, the Middle School was formed into St. Mary’s
Company of the Soldiers of the Cross. This is a method
whereby the principles of Guiding are applied to the study
of religion. The Company is divided into patrols led by the
older girls. It meets once a week and is doing effective work.
Dramatic work and hand-work play a large part in the
religious studies of the members.
Parents may rest assured that' girls will be given a
thorough and comprehensive training in the principles and
practice of their religion.
CURRICULUM.
The general range of the School Course is from Kinder-
garten to Leaving Honours. In each section of the School,
the course has been carefully planned so as to enable the
different groups to be suitably instructed according to the
best modern methods. Divinity is compulsory throughout
the School.
A. Lower School (up to age of 11 plus)—Aim :to give
control of fundamental processes, i.e., Reading, Writing,
Number and Calculation. Nature Study, simple Social
Studies (History and Geography), Drawing, Handwork,
Sewing, Musical Appreciation and Class Singing are also
included.
B. Middle School (11 plus to 14) —Aim: to give ease
in English expression, together with common course in
Mathematics, Elementary General Science, introduction to
Study of Languages, Social Studies, Practical Civics, Draw-
ing, Musical Appreciation and Class Singing. Each girl
should also take a course in Arts and Craros and in Simple
Cooking.
C. Upper School (14 plus to 17) —Course provides for
English, History in various branches, Geography, Economics,
Modern Languages, Latin, Mathematics, Botany, Biology
and Class Singing. Courses in Commercial Work, Domestic
Science, Art, and Simple Home Crafts with First Aid are
available.


It is most desirable that girls should take a common
course up to the age of 14 plus. At this stage, their future
occupation being taken into consideration where possible,
they should choose courses that will carry on their general
education and at the same time, prepare them for their
life work. It is unnecessary for all girls to take all the
subjects provided in the curriculum. Consultation between
parents, principal and girls will result in the choice of the
best course for each individual pupil.
PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS
The School is registered in Class A for purposes of the
Intermediate Certificate, which is awarded on the results
of internal examinations taken in conjunction with the
School record over a period of three years. Girls are also
prepared for the Leaving, Leaving Honours, Matriculation
and other preliminary examinations, and for those of Music.
SCHOOL RECORDS AND REPORTS.
A record card is kept of the school career of each girl.
Report books are sent out each half term. Actual marks
are awarded only in those subjects where precision in mark-
ing is possible. Other subjects are classified by means of
letters.
ORGANISATION.
The School is divided into three Houses Clarke,
Hindley and Lees, which compete in games and work. The
Upper School is also divided into Committees which help
to run the extra-school activities. These are the Tuck Shop,
Chapel, Library., and Grounds Committees. Among the
School Societies are the Heralds of the Science Club
and the Music Club. There are also debating, dramatic and
public affairs groups.
UNIFORM.
(Colours: Air Force Blue and Gold).
Required by each girl.—School tunic frock, with fawn blouse,
school tie, sports tunic with sports blouse, pullover and
blazer. Cotton frocks for summer.
Air Force blue or dark blue overcoat.
Winter and summer hats and gloves.
Fawn stockings or socks, brown shoes, tan sand shoes,
brown ribbons.
Complete list of requirements for boarders may be had
on application to the Principal. >
The uniform is supplied by the Myer Emporium and by
Buckley and Nunn. It can only be purchased, in whole or
in part, on presentation of an order form obtainable from
the Principal.


The Altar in the School Chapel.


FEES PER TERM.
There are three terms in the year, commencing in
February, June and September. Accounts are rendered
within the first three weeks, and must be settled before the
half term.
Equivalent Grade Average Fixed
Form in State School. Age. Tuition Charge
Kindergarten 4 years £2 2 0 10/
~ 5 yearns £2 12 6 13/
Form I Grade I 6 years £3 3 0 15/-
Form lib & Ila Grade II & 111 7& 8 £3 13 6 15/
Form Illb Grade IV
Form Ilia Grade V
Form IVc Grade VI
Form IVb Grade VII
9 years £440 15/
10 years £4 14 6 15/-
11 years £5 5 0 17/6
12 years £5 15 6 17/6
Form IVa Grade VIII 13 years £6 6 0 17/6
Form Vb Sub-interm’ate D 14 years £6 16 6 £1
Sub-interm’ate D 14 years £6 16 6 £1
Form Va Intermediate C 15 years £7 7 0 £1
Form Vlb Leaving B 16 years £7 17 6 £1
Form Via Leaving A 17 years £8 8 0 £1
The term “tuition” covers teaching in all subjects
proper to the ordinary course in any given form. Subjects
not included in that course must be treated as “extra”
subjects. The fixed charge is a convenient way of grouping
together various small compulsory fees and subscriptions
in a secondary school. It covers:—Kindergarten Materials;
General school materials, such as ink, chalk, nibs, pen-
holders, blotting paper, staff note books and mark books;
Materials for experiments in the laboratory in geography
and science (except in Honour VI) ; Sports charges, i.e.,
subscription to Sports Club, provision 'of equipment such
as tennis balls, basketball nets, etc., and the upkeep of
Reference Library. •
Sewing materials, music (including songs), materials
for project work, stationery and text books are charged
for in the book account rendered each term.
FEES FOR OPTIONAL SUBJECTS.
Pianoforte from £1 11 6 to £4 14 6
Theory for Public Examinations £llO
Dancing .. “ £1 11 6
Swimming—Each half term £0 7 6
Drawing and Painting from £1 1 0 to £2 2 0
Arts and Crafts £0 10 6
Bookkeeping and Typewriting £llO
Dressmaking (Class of three) £1 11 6
Cooking (Class of ten) £0 10 6


Board £16
15
0
Laundry (according to requirements), usually about 2
2
0
Day Boarders 2
2
0
FEES FOR BOARDERS.
(In addition to Tuition and Fixed Charge).
BURSARIES.
Day 'Girls: —Entrance bursaries carrying remission of
half fees are awarded by examination each November, to
three girls under 12 and three girls under 14.
Boarders: —Bursaries reducing fees for board and tuition
to £2O in all (exclusive of laundry and fixed charge) are
available on application. They are intended to assist girls
who would otherwise find it difficult to secure a secondary
education at a Church School.
PAYMENT OF FEES AND REMOVAL OF PUPILS.
1. All fees must be paid in advance, that is, before the
Half Term. Payment may in no case be deferred
beyond the currency of the Term for which the fees
have been charged. It is taken for granted that no girl
returns to School if her fees for the previous Term have
not been paid.
2. A term’s notice must be given of the intention to re-
move a pupil, of discontinuance of an extra subject, or
of a boarder becoming a day girl. In default of such
notice payment of fees for the succeeding Half Term
will be required.
GENERAL REGULATIONS
1. Articles of any kind whatever brought to the school,
must be clearly marked with the owner’s name. Bor-
rowing is not permitted.
2. All excuses must be signed by the parent or guardian,
and addressed to the Principal. Absence for a day or
part of a day requires an excuse stating the reason for
absence. Verbal messages will not be accepted.
3. Except for those who go home for lunch, girls may not
leave the school premises without permission during the
lunch hour.
4. Boarders must he at the school on the day before the
opening of each term.
5. Boarders may visit relatives and friends on Saturdays
by arrangement. Once a month they may go out from
Friday evening till Monday morning. Sunday visiting
and visitors are not allowed.
6. In the case of any pupil or any member of the house-
hold where she is resident being affected by an infectious
disease, notice shall be given immediately to the Princi-
pal, and the pupil shall not return to the school until it
is certified by a medical man or to the satisfaction of
the Principal that there is no risk of infection.


Miss
N. W. COLLISSON, B.A.
Divinity and History
Miss
E. T. CHAPPLE, B.A.
Mathematics and Latin
Miss
L. B. TULLOH, B.Sc.,
Dip. Ed. -----
Science and Geography
Miss
M. B. COX, M.Sc.,
Dip. Ed. -----
Science
Mrs. 0. L. H00PPELL, M.A.,
Dip. Ed. -----
English & Mod. Languages
Miss
J. UHLAND, Special
Subjects Registration
Modern Languages
Miss F. MAVIN, Trained Pri-
mary and Sub-Primary
Teacher -----
English and History
Miss F. C. NEWSON, Trained
Primary & Sub-Primary
Mathematics and Sports
Teacher -----
Mistress.
SPECIAL SUBJECTS.
Miss
E. E. SAMPFORD,
Mus. Bach. - - - -
Pianoforte and Singing
Miss
N. GRANT, Dip. Paint-
*
ing and Drawing - -
Drawing and Painting
Miss
L. BEER, F.P.C.V.
Physical Training
Miss K. H. LASCELLES - -
Dancing
Mrs.
R. WARREN, Dip.
Domestic Science Vic.
Needlework, Cooking and
Ed. Dept. -----
Dressmaking.
Mrs.
V. C. BENCH,
L.C.A., L.I. C.A. - -
Commercial Work
STAFF 1938.
Principal - - Miss NORA W. COLLISSON, B.A.
Vice-Principal - Miss ETHEL T. CHAPPLE, B.A.
LOWER SCHOOL.
Miss M. STEWART, Trained Infant Teacher, Ed. Dept.
Miss G. EDGAR, Trained Sub-Primary Teacher
Miss J. L. DADSWELL, Trained Kindergarten Teacher
Miss J. LOCKE, Leaving Honours, Melbourne
Miss J. PERKINS, Matriculation, London
STUDENT TEACHERS
Miss R. J. YELLAND - Matron
Miss G. LOW CHOY - Bursar


Gll|r HEnntut&mt GUjurrlj nf HEtujlattfo
(Sirin’ Grammar i^djoal
HCmutljer ifali, HRaafo, Hi. 5
Form of Application for Entry.
(To be filled in and forwarded to the Principal).
I desire to enrol my daughter as a pupil of Lowther
Hall, Church of England Girls’ Grammar School, and here-
with send particulars required, also her last School Report.
I have read the Prospectus and agree to the conditions
relating to School regulations, the payment of fees and the
giving of notice of the discontinuance of a special subject
and of withdrawal. I am prepared to co-operate with the
School Authorities in all matters of discipline.
Signed
Parent or Guardian.
Dale
Girl’s Name in fu11....
Boarder or Day Girl
Birthday and Age last Birthday
Name and Address of Parent or Guardian
Occupation of Parent or Guardian
Names and Addresses of two Referees to whom Principal
may apply. —•
Religious Denomination .
Previous School (if any )
Standard Attained
Probable length of Stay at School
Date when Admission is desired. ..


• , T
' % - '■ ' ' !
!.• S - i




3 1508 00T65700 5
