



(h,


J.G. DUN CAN-HUGHES
1882-1962




LOYAL ENEMY


By the same Author:
GEORGE ELIOT
(Great Lives Series ) 1932
THE WYNNE DIARIES
(in two volumes ) 1935-36




MARMADUKE PICKTHALL
Aged forty-two.


LOYAL ENEMY
ANNE FREMANTLE
With a Frontispiece
HUTCHINSON & CO.
(Publishers) Ltd.
LONDON


NOTE
As Colonel T. E. Lawrence said : “ Arabic names are spelt
anyhow, because the sound of many Arabic words can legitim-
ately be represented in English in a variety of ways,” and added
that he spelt them anyhow “ to show what rot the systems are.”
Marmaduke Pickthall used the following variations :
qu’aran
CORAN
KORAN
KHALIF
KHALIFA
CALIPH
KHALIFAT
KHALIFATE
CALIPHATE
MUSTAFA
MUSTAPHA
QTj’IBLAH
KIBLA
CADI
KADI
MAHOMET
MUHAMMED
MOHAMMED
MAHUMED
MOHAMED
SULEYMAN
SULEYMAN
JIHAD
jihAd
MUSLIM
MOSLEM
AGA
AGHA
If there are others I have not noted, what Colonel Lawrence
said applies to them too.
A F
Made and Printed in Great Britain at
The Mayflower Press, Plymouth. William Brendon & Son, Ltd.
1938


PREFATORY NOTE
THE primroses were almost over, and the long lime
avenue leading to the lake was pale green with sticky
buds. These, as I walked, I stripped off and nibbled,
filling also my companion’s hands. Politely, without evident
relish, he ate what I provided. At last we reached Ox-
pasture, a fair-sized wood of oak and chestnut, with scrub
of nut-bushes, maple, honeysuckle trailers, and what we
were come to find—bluebells : a sea of them, mist-blue
as a sun-drenched horizon, or as autumn bonfire smoke,
stretching away on every side. Here, where a few young
bracken shoots sprang up to show a clearing, light caught
the flowers and whitened : there, under a tangle of travel-
ler’s joy, £hey grew wine-dark, an indigo stain on the
prevailing green. We checked, and breathed deeply, as
though we could take in, with their scent, something of the
very essence of what lay about our feet. Then we went on,
knee-deep in hyacinths, to where, between high banks,
flowed the young Cuckmere, its iron-saturated stream red-
gold as any faery river. My short legs refused the jump, and
Marmaduke Pickthall lifted me across. Undeterred, I
went on talking even in his arms.
“ It’s death frightens me so,” I complained, “ I daren’t
even scrub my legs with my loofah in my bath at night in
case I burst a blood-vessel.” And he, unsmiling, “ Death is
never as terrible as you imagine. Allah always makes it
easy for one. It is written in the Qu’aran : ‘ Whosoever
surrendereth his purpose while doing good, his reward is
with his Lord, and there shall no fear come upon them,
neither shall they grieve.’ ”
I was seven when so comforted, and the friendship which
began with my confession of cowardice ended only with his
death, which abundantly redeemed his promise. He was


granted the swift ending that is every Muslim’s desire, and
which is for him the highest visible guerdon of a good life.
The words he had used to calm a scared child were the last
he wrote, as he finished an essay on tolerance, the night
before he died.
His widow has done me the very signal honour of asking
me to write something of his life. To produce a straight-
forward biography would be nearly impossible, for two
reasons. First, because he kept few records even of his
outward life—and, being shy, confided to no one his remini-
scences. He was, indeed, quite extraordinarily sensitive,
armouring himself equally against inquisitive and critical,
and merely admiring, fellow-creatures. He lived continually
a dual life : outwardly essentially gay, easy, good-humoured,
witty; inwardly still, disciplined, almost stern, looking
always towards that c other goal ’ of complete self-surrender
and utter detachment from all human bondage and ties,
which was the end of his faith. ‘ Not to kill the senses or to
hate them,’ writes Charles Morgan in The Fountain , ‘ but to
discover an inviolable ghost in the sensible body, is the
highest and most difficult art of the saints.’ For Marmaduke
Pickthall that discovery and that reconciliation were
complete. Uhomme moyen sensuel that he was, that we all
are, he transmuted, as few have succeeded in doing, into
pilgrim and paladin.
Secondly, the man I knew left me still a child when he
went to India, and during the last twelve crowning years of
his life I saw him only through his letters and on his brief
visits. My knowledge of him narrowed, as other people
came into my life and crowded it: but a man sees a
woman always as he first saw, and for him I remained the
child he had comforted at Possingworth.
So of all who find this ‘ Life ’ lame and inadequate, and
of the many who would have written with greater knowledge
and understanding of the man and his work, I ask alike
forgiveness.


Pacing towards the other goal
Of his chamber in the east.
MILTON: Comus
CHAPTER ONE
SPEAKING of Marmaduke Pickthall to Lady Evelyn
Cobbold one day, the late Aubrey Herbert called him
‘ England’s most loyal enemy.’ “ There is only one thing I
deplore about him,” she assented, “ and that is his absurd
name.” “ I delight in it,” Herbert answered. “ I have
never known another Marmaduke, but I am so fond of
Pickthall I shall always love all his namesakes and their name
because of him.”
It was an old family Christian name, inherited from his
North Country ancestors, together with the * JDaleman’s
legs ’ which to the end of his life were seven-leagued boots
to him. I used to chaff him, as a child, on his Pictish blood,
on being a mere Piet’s thrall, and a dwarf, like all his race.
Actually, though not tall, he was over five foot seven, and
his ancestry was French, and Poitevin, not Pictish. He could
trace his ancestry directly back to Sir Roger de Poictu,
appointed warden of the Cumberland Marches by William I
—the Conqueror himself.
Sir Roger chose to settle at Broughton on Furness, in the
centre of his property, where in time the Pickthalls formed a
colony of their own, refusing to have anything to do with
their neighbours, who, for their part, ‘ hated a de Poictu
rather more than they hated Satan.’ Their coat of arms,
adopted during the Crusades, was a shield sable, goutte or,
bearing a lion rampant d’or surmounted by an Eastern
crown, and carried the canting motto ‘ Vir Tutus ’—recall-
ing family prowess in the Holy Land. Marmaduke was very


glad of his armorial bearings, as of their Oriental allusions,
when, in the nineties of last century, he was land hunting in
Syria, and had to bargain with farmers and Druse chiefs, for
in Palestine, signature and seal were not enough : a man’s
bond was his coat of arms. Once, on an old coach in a
museum in Naples, Marmaduke found emblazoned the de
Poictu arms, which he recognized as his own. He tried to
find French cousins, but the de Poictous are now extinct
and he could trace no descendants.
The Pickthalls were ‘ out ’ in the ’45, and Charles, and
Charles Edward, were thereafter family names, but the
first individual member of the Pickthall family who left
any record was a William Pickthall, of Craig Hall, Cumber-
land, who married Ann Cockayne and subsequently came
south. The Cockaynes were also a Northumberland family
of remote antiquity, and were famous at one time for having
nailed a Dane’s skin to the door of their parish church.
William and Ann’s son, Thomas, entered the Church, and
was accounted, in the golden age of squarsons, the tallest
man and best shot of his cloth. He was chaplain to
George 111, on whose death, feeling himself, no doubt, out
of place in a court where 1 Prinny ’ was King, he left town
and was appointed by the Bishop of Rochester to his living
of Broxbourne, in Hertfordshire, as successor to William
Jones deceased.
There he exchanged the ardours of the chase for those of
matrimony, and in 1828 his wife, Eliza Reeves, produced a
son, whom he named Charles Grayson, and subsequently
another called Wallace. Thomas and Eliza seem to have
fallen on times far removed from the splendours of Craig
Hall, for both boys became clerks in the Bank of England—
walking daily from Broxbourne Rectory to Threadneedle
Street to save their fares. With their economies they reached
Cambridge, although when there the younger had to serve
as ‘ sizar.’ Charles, after taking his degree, took also Holy
Orders and, returning to Hertfordshire, became curate
to his father.
Broxbourne was a pleasantly social neighbourhood, and
amongst the families settled there were the Christies, who


lived at nearby Hoddesdon. They were brewers, a branch
of that East Coast family which had ruled the town and
electorate of Woodbridge so long and so masterfully. Young
Charles Grayson successfully courted Ellen Louisa Christie,
doing very well for himself, for thereafter he never lacked
money or comfort, in spite of a quiverful which must have
seemed goodly, even to a Victorian curate. Caroline,
Constance, Dorothea, Ethel, Arthur, Josephine, Adelaide,
Charles, Neville, and Grace : it took all the fingers of both
hands to count them.
Charles was given as a wedding present, by his wife’s
people, the living of Chillesford in Suffolk, whose advowson
became his absolutely. Thither the Pickthalls moved :
to the roomy vicarage, whose nurseries were capacious
enough to contain the whole brood. Ample, white, with
green shutters and a brown veranda, the house had a faintly
southern look. Potted plants galore stood out to catch the
rain or enjoy the sun : squelchy houseleeks, with variegated
leaves: a selection of prickly cacti; the übiquitous
aspidistra, as much at home here, on a draughty Suffolk
porch, as in a Florentine Corpus Christi procession, a
Japanese university (where the arranging of its leaves
qualifies for a degree) or a Harlem slum ; and maidenhair
ferns with discovered roots and lank stems as tangled and
matted as the slatternly maid-of-all-work’s hair.
The village snuggled low, trying to crouch in its vegeta-
tion, but no hare ever found form so skimpy ; over the bare
straight furrows and even rows of beet that marched
relentlessly up to it, blew the bitter North Sea winds. Yet in
that winter-long uninterrupted gale the vicarage was a cosy
enough place. Noisy, untidy, it was yet very much of a
home, a focus. When Mrs. Pickthall died, worn out with
childbearing, the comfortable feeling of security went with
her. Although Arthur was already at South Lodge, Lowes-
toft, under Miss Ringer’s care, Neville, Charles, and Grace
were babies still. The elder girls took charge valiantly :
Caroline, Constance, and Dorothea coping masterfully
with the housekeeping, the infants, and their bewildered
father. They enjoyed their authority.


Nearby, in Woodbridge, was their uncle’s spacious and
important house, with the noise of rolling casks from the
adjoining brewery a pleasant and perpetual rumble. The
great wistaria that serpented, grape-flower laden, impartially
over yard and garden walls, the big sloping garden, the
atmosphere of leisure—solid, not luxurious, but ‘of a
competence ’ —have been well described by Marmaduke
Pickthall in his Bundle —although he knew these glories
only from his half-sisters’ boastful accounts, and never
himself visited the formidable Peter Charles Christie. The
girls used Woodbridge as their shopping town, dropping in
for eleven o’clock tea and biscuits or two o’clock dinner at
Uncle Peter’s, and sometimes giving the shy curate a lift
in their dog-cart. They found it all great fun : mildly
flirting, bossing the little ones, feeling that their ‘ playing
at houses ’ was become, by some white magic, true
and real, and the pious knowledge that ‘ poor papa has
only us now.’
Two years later the Rev. Charles still managed—or was
managed by—his ten children, single-handed, and perhaps
would have continued to do so ‘ for the term of his natural
life ’ but for a chance encounter. He was on his way to
Broxbourne, to visit his own brother and his dear dead wife’s
relations, when getting into the train rather late in London
he found himself, as they moved out of the station, in a first-
class carriage alone with a lady. Flee he could not, since
corridor trains were as yet a continental luxury, so he hid
behind his Times. He was aroused by a “ Charles ! ” and,
looking up, saw his companion was addressing him. “ You
haven’t forgotten Mary O’Brien ? ” He would never have
recognized her : twenty years of tropical sun had fretted her
lovely Irish skin and long wearing of a topee had dulled
and dispirited her once glorious hair. Yet the name recalled
so much.
Mary’s father, Admiral Donat Henry O’Brien, the hero
of Marryat’s Masterman Ready and author of an amusing
chronicle of alarums and escapes entitled My Adventures
during the Late War —Boney’s war, of course —had settled in
Hoddesdon. His children —Hannah, Donat, William, and


Mary, were taken to Sunday worship at Broxbourne. The
Admiral’s wife, Hannah Walmsley, was a most long-suffer-
ing woman, whose husband ruled her and the children
with true nineteenth-century tyranny, his habit being to
ring once for his butler and twice for his wife. But he had a
streak of Nonconformity unusual in the Navy at that date,
for if a guest got drunk at his table he was never asked
again.
Mary O’Brien, of the Inchiquin clan and descended from
Irish kings, was no bride for a penniless young curate ;
she had married one William Hale, with whom she had gone
to India, twenty years before this chance encounter with the
Rev. Charles in the train. William had been dead two
years—they had no children—Mary told him. She was
going to stay with Hannah. (Mary’s sister, the widower
remembered, had married another Hoddesdon neighbour,
by name Hoskins.) The Admiral was dead, and William
had got a wife. Charles expressed surprise that she should be
travelling unattended, but Mary explained Mrs. Ward was
with her. Mrs. Ward, who had been her nurse (and some-
thing more to Mary’s father than his children’s nurse, the
Rev. Charles reflected) now had a son who was in love,
Mary told Charles, with her maid. She had promised
them they should marry as soon as she was settled in England,
and hoped she would be able to have the boy as her gardener.
That meeting was a prelude to others. Mary and her
sister Hannah came to Cliillesford, and Mary, though a little
overawed by so much noise and bustle, could screw up her
eyes and laugh and joke and enjoy it all as though she were
herself a child again. The. vicar delighted in her company :
to his children, he was ‘ poor papa,’ to her, a man in the
prime of life. When she returned to town, he followed,
and they were married shortly after.
It was a love match for them both, though it was fool-
hardy to take on such a burden for his sake, and Mary found
her stepchildren resented her bitterly. Her coming was for
them the end of their brief, enchanted reign : she was over
forty, childless, with no experience of young people or of
English life and ways, and with her came Mrs. Ward and


Jones, now wedded to his Fanny. The children loathed the
bossy old nurse even more than their stepmother, for she was
a duenna, whose malevolent vigilance—in spite of her age
and immobility—was almost inescapable. Jones, on the
other hand, who could make a catapult from an ash prong
and a rubber band, or a bow from a yew stick and a piece
of string, or a whistle from an elder stem, was almost an
ally.
Mrs. Pickthall soon found herself unaccountably ailing :
sickish, dizzy, uncomfortable. She ascribed it to change of
climate —of air—of life—to everything, indeed, but to the
real and obvious cause. But at her age, after a consummated
and childless married life of twenty years : could it indeed
be? Mrs. Ward, whose new daughter-in-law was by now
in the same interesting condition, assured her it was.
Caroline, Constance, and Dorothea —(the others were
too young to know) —were bitterly shocked. Like their great
queen, they disapproved their father’s middle-aged trans-
ports. But Mrs. Pickthall sat nursing herself, oblivious of
their hostility, their disgusted, inquisitive stares. She read
to herself all day : not improving works, as became a
clergyman’s wife : not nursery lore nor medical text-
books, as would have become a woman well into middle age
about to embark on a new career of which she was utterly
ignorant. No: she read always that same inimitable
book, the Arabian Nights , in a funny old-world translation —
not even the grand new one made by the famous Burton—
but an old copy bound in a lovely Russian leather binding,
that smelt somehow Oriental and outlandish. Always these
Paynim stories, in the same scented book.
When her time drew near, she went to London, taking
Mrs. Jones with her. Both were glad to escape from the
country, to return to the familiar noises : Mrs. Jones could
not sleep ‘ for the quiet ’in Suffolk, she complained. On
7 April, 1875, Marmaduke William was born in Cambridge
Terrace, W. 2. Mrs. Jones’s son Frederick saw the light about
the same time.
They returned to Chillesford, where life went on as before
though it was still more crowded. When about six months


old Marmaduke fell desperately ill of measles, complicated
by bronchitis. During the course of this illness he was
circumcised, which made his conversion to Islam in late
middle age less painful than is the case with many adult
male converts. Caroline, her bitterness vanishing at sight
of a sick baby, nursed him devotedly. For Mrs. Pickthall
was once more in ‘ the family way/ and bore, less than a
year after Marmaduke, his brother, Rudolph George.
Soon the little boys were trotting about the lawn in long-
sleeved, high-necked galateas. Marmaduke was early in
learning to talk. But he had certain peculiarities in his
vocabulary—for instance, he would never call a bird a bird,
or starling, thrush, lark, or whatever it might be. The
whole genus of flying things were for him ‘ Gok-kok,’ and
he would insist, in the face of all corrections or ridicule, that
‘ There’s a Gok-kok,’ as any feathered thing flew by.
Not until he learnt Arabic did he realize the true inward-
ness of his seemingly unreasonable insistence : for the
Arabic for bird is in sound what his childish imagination
knew it was. He had, too, another curious habit that seems
either an echo of a former existence, or an ‘ experiment
with time ’ after the heart of J. W. Dunne : or some rare
race memory derived from who knows what remote Crusader’s
Eastern bride. If he were scolded, out of doors, he would sit
down, plonk, on the ground, and with two hands grub dust or
earth or mud and pour or smear it on his head, to the
consternation of nurses and elders. Merely, perhaps, an
early apprehension of the ‘ memento , homo , quia pulvis es et in
pulverem reverteris ,’ or some foreknowledge of his fate ? Who
shall say ? He was a precocious baby, very musical and
early distinguishing people, sounds, names, words : indeed,
one half-sister declares that at six months he knew all ten
of them apart. (Though how he displayed his knowledge
she could not tell me.) One of his chief delights as a baby
and little boy was a strange native hat which Mrs. Pickthall’s
aunt, Mary O’Brien, who had married Edward, brother to
Fletcher Christian of the Bounty , left her niece : a Pitcairn
Islander’s hat.
Arthur had already been promoted to Great Yarmouth


Grammar School, where Dr. J. J. Raven was headmaster,
and so was out of the house, but in the holidays he added
to the crowd his friend, Ernest Cooper, later to become a
writer of Suffolk lore and a lifelong friend of Marmaduke’s.
When Marmaduke was five his father fell ill, and Mrs.
Pickthall found the only way to nurse the invalid and give
him even comparative peace in that noisy crowd was to
forbid the sick-room to all others than herself. But even
this precaution proved unavailing, and the Rev. Pickthall
died.
His widow, her stepchildren, her own two sons,-Mrs.
Ward, and her various dependants moved together to
London shortly after the funeral. Ninety-seven Warwick
Gardens, where they settled, was a steep house, and Mrs
Pickthall, to save Mrs. Ward’s legs and the endless grumbling
caused by carrying of trays, installed the nursery in the base-
ment. It was, to all accounts, a cold, comfortless house,
perpetually gas-lit and linoleum carpeted ; full of the
smells —frying onions, stewing scrag-end-of-neck, damp
sprouting souls of housemaids and a continuous etiolated
haunting aroma of perspiration—that Mr. T. S. Eliot has
immortalized.
It is hard to understand why there need have been such
implications of poverty, for Mrs. Pickthall had been left
j£goo a year by her first husband, and her stepchildren
contributed each £9O annually towards the housekeeping
expenses. Yet the poor girls with chilblained feet and
chapped hands suffered continually from cold and hunger.
Dorothea, indeed, covered like Job with an outcrop of boils,
was told by her doctor that she was undernourished. “ You
tell my stepmother,” she urged him, “ I dare not.” Once,
too, when Suffolk friends sent a hamper of country fare to
the famished girls, they wolfed it down, first offering pro-
pitiatory tit-bits to Mrs. Ward : but in vain ; when Mrs.
Pickthall returned next day the wicked old woman, full of
lovely fresh eggs, told on them and they were properly
punished.
The dreary fog-bound existence did not affect Rudolph,
for since in each child the whole history of man is repeated


da capo from gill-breathing tadpole to arrow-carving savage,
an infant is as naturally at home in a smoke-blackened
Kensington villa as in the stale-smelling cave that was its
prototype. It is when it grows beyond such escape as the
false artificial parks provide, that the growing organism
needs to feel real soil under bare toes, running water against
naked legs, tree branches under hands; pony’s muscles under
knees.
For Marmaduke, leaving Chillesford was a casting out
from Paradise. He hated the grey confining streets, the
puny patches of trapped sky, after the wide horizons, the
infinite air of Suffolk. All his life he had an insatiable
passion for empty skies, bare landscape, and a hatred of
towns and of all urban life. The sky was to him something
infinitely more than
‘ . . . that inverted bowl ....
Whereunder crawling cooped we live and die.’
For him, as man, it remained what it had been to the boy :
an earnest of infinity, the most important part of every view,
the ultimate expression and excuse of earth.
His greatest friend and comfort in London at the age of
six, was the nursemaid. The daughter of a local game-
keeper and a gipsy mother who had soon wearied of con-
ventional wedlock and left both husband and infant daughter,
Enid satisfied, in the noisy, unlovely city, all Marmaduke’s
childish craving for beauty. She was a gracious, gentle,
merry creature, with vitality that neither Mrs. Ward nor
Kensington could diminish. One day, as she was shaking
her duster out, a rich man, passing, looked up, fell madly
in love, and insisted on marrying her. He was an aristocrat,
yet treated her always as his equal and that of his friends,
though to the end of her life she spoke with a broad Suffolk
accent.
This entirely happy and successful experiment was heartily
approved by Mrs. Pickthall, who was oddly blind to class
distinctions, a failing her son was later to describe as ‘ far
from unbecoming in a woman of assured position.’ He
both inherited this trait and imitated it from her, and for


him Enid’s romance was one of earth’s happiest love stories.
One of his novels is actually based on it, whilst in many
there are allusions to such social misalliances, some happy,
others the reverse. His great tenderness for all subject
races may well be due in germ to the gratitude he felt for
the kindness and affection of his nursemaid, who never
made him feel, as his stepbrothers and sisters did, how
infinitely inferior he and Rudolph were to Christies and to
Pickthalls of the first bed. Marmaduke adored his brother,
and was the most unjealous of children, never resenting his
mother’s preference for Rudolph (or ‘ Bob ’ as he was
always called), which later turned to fear of him.
Mrs. Pickthall was a quiet and undemonstrative woman,
finding in her faith, and in her memories of India, and her
work there, a citadel into which she fled from her step-
children’s bitterness, and her own incompetence. Yet she
was very popular with all her Pickthall in-laws, as well as
retaining always the affection of her first husband’s people.
Soon after the move to London the three elder girls went off
and lived by themselves, and the younger stepchildren
divided their holidays and their loyalty between stepmother
and real sisters. Marmaduke was no trouble to her : she
declared him born with an Eastern mind : he was ever
content to play alone, quiet and self-absorbed.
He went at first with Grace, and later with Rudolph also,
to a little day-school, kept by a Miss Wiistli, where he
much enjoyed the dancing and the learning poetry and the
acting of little scenes —he had an absurdly retentive memory
and need read a thing but once to know it by heart. He may
have been infected there by his real passion for languages :
his German was perfect always, and he had the rare gift of
liking impartially Teutonic and Latin tongues.
Neville and Charles had already been some time at
* Ringers ’ when Marmaduke joined them. His first
cousin, Fred O’Brien, to whom he was always devoted, was
there too, and B6b soon followed. Marmaduke found the
Rider Haggards there, together with plenty of other East
Coast neighbours, and seems to have been happy, though
it may be permissible to wonder if the following, written


in his commonplace book in 1898, refers to ‘ Ringers.’
‘ The master of a private school. He had the conciliatory
purring manner of a great black cat when any of our
parents or guardians came to visit us. These found him
charming. We, poor mice, saw in him only the beast of
prey.’
Marmaduke was precocious and. brilliant, overworking
himself from the first. His special joy was * mental arith-
metic,’ at which he was constantly being ‘ shown off’ to
visiting parents. In the holidays he stayed with his mother
or his many cousins, which latter found him ‘ to our thinking
a curious little boy. He had no love of games which we were
always playing.’ As he grew older, his violent distaste for
competition became more and more marked : he never
wanted to compete or contest. Such sports as team races
he simply could not begin to understand. Nor did he care
for shooting, snaring, fishing, or kindred schoolboy delights.
“ You know, Field, I must be the wrong sort of Englishman,”
he once said to a friend. “I have never wanted to kill
anything.”
After a short time at ‘ Ringers,’ when he was only nine,
he got brain-fever and had to be sent home to Chillesford,
whose then incumbent, the Rev. E. Patrick, let him run
wild. This kindly parson taught the boy good Latin and
some Greek, and inspired him a little with his own two
passions : roses and astronomy. He is, in Marmaduke’s
novel, The Myopes , the unwilling author of the young people’s
misery—and therein is charmingly remembered. It was
one of the happiest times of Marmaduke’s life, and for ever
after he had a very warm corner in his heart for country
clergy-folk, and numbered parsons amongst his best friends,
in memory of the gentle eccentric who let him loose in his
own garden and library.
Coming home to his father’s house, yet finding a strange
master there, taught him early the vanity of possessiveness,
and he had always the rare power of enjoying without any
wish to grab, to collect, to arrest. Though he recovered
quickly from his brain-fever, Marmaduke found he had lost
for ever his capacity for arithmetic, mental or otherwise ;
B


henccfoward he could barely keep accounts, and his in-
ability to do c maths ’ was a continual stumbling-block.
But he found leisure to devour Byron, Swinburne, Meredith,
Thackeray, Scott, and Dickens, whilst Disraeli’s novels
introduced him both to the East and to an attitude towards
our Eastern Empire and peoples which he was to make
entirely his own. And living that retired, yet fully active life,
he became a good swimmer, a competent horseman, a tireless
walker.
Always deft and agile with his hands, he had at his finger-
tips all the lore then rare, now happily made proletarian
through the Boy Scout movement: of fires and strings,
compasses and winds, sails and kites, tools and mortar.
It was at this time, when he was just nine, that he suddenly
became bitten with the idea of learning Irish —ancient
Irish, and ‘ did in a very short time master that tongue and
called me names in it, which I well remember,’ his youngest
stepsister, Grace, wrote. The end of this gloriously savage,
or rather perhaps Rousseauesque, existence, came when his
mother took a house in Harrow, and entered both her sons
as day boys at the school.
How bitterly the iron then entered into his soul can be
guessed from a letter he wrote to my mother, forty years
later, when I first went to Cheltenham ; ‘ poor darling—
she will call herself miserable when she means malheureuse.
I remember my own first day at school sufficiently well to
know what she is going through.’ It was not the bullying
he minded. ‘ Picktooth the Homebug ’ they called him —
but by now he was used to the despision and contempt of
elder brothers, ‘ gamey ’ cousins, and seniors in school
rank. Physical pain, roughness, cold, vile food—these he
accepted : what repelled him was the stable-boy language,
the bantering obscenity, and the constant infliction of what
he himself, in his novel about his Harrow days, Sir Limpidus,
calls ‘ the greatest insult manhood can suffer.’
Always a romantic, an idealist, he disliked having to allude
to his fags’ mothers in terms he was naturally reserving for
tarts, and that his equals in length of residence, and, of course,
his superiors, should so apostrophise his own now aged only


remaining parent, was a source of continual irritation.” He
soon learnt that only one thing was required of him : the
utmost idleness compatible with avoiding punishment;
this was the first essential of conduct. There were a few
miserable saps who had scholarships and were obliged to
work, but, otherwise, swotting was regarded as the gravest
abnormality by both masters and boys.
Of course, working at a fad or hobby was different —
chaps who regarded it terribly infra to do a stroke in school
hours did hard reading in the library or made experiments
in the school laboratory for their own pleasure, and Marma-
duke, who was devoted to geography and languages, found
every encouragement to follow these bents ; even swells
honoured him by allowing him to coach them five minutes
before a class was due in either of these, which were admitted
to be his subjects, for that was the custom —captains and
kings stooped to question the expert when the shadow of the
cane crept near. But neither captains nor kings nor their
fags ever worked at ‘ lessons.’
It was before the days of games-worship : sport was not
the universal evacuant it is now, and, as he explained, ‘ we
were not keen on games unless we happened to be good at
them ’ : public opinion did not then reprehend the boy
who frankly said he hated violent exercise in wind or rain
or the sun’s heat. But nearly everyone had some sport
he was keen on : it might be fencing, rackets, or the
rifle corps. Boys who slacked at school were often good
horsemen or crack shots. ‘Yet we all liked football in
moderation, or to lie on the grass in summer and watch
cricket, or swimming if the pool were not too crowded.’
Mrs. Pickthall had obtained from her London doctor a
certificate saying Rudolph was not to play games, because
of his eyesight—his father had died blind. A cousin of
Marmaduke’s wrote to me about him, ‘ His going as a day
boy always seemed a pity to us, and I think that doctor’s
certificate affected their whole lives and made them feel
they were different from other Englishmen. Duke had his
Eastern interests and made friends through his writings, but
Bob remained painfully self-conscious with a strong inferiority


complex to the end of his days.’ Yet Marmaduke fielded at
cricket and belonged to the Harrow Volunteers. Indeed jhe
quickly became, outwardly at least, a fairly typical schoolboy.
In his day there were fewer Public Schools, and few boys at
any of them had any reason to suppose they would ever need
to earn their own bread and butter. So he idled with the best,
was constantly reported for inattention in class, for truancy,
for stravaging about during school hours with no lawful
object, and was very proud, when caught, of his ingenuity
and the brilliance of his entirely mendacious excuses—a
pride so strong that years later he was to boast, before a
thousand boys whose headmaster he was, of his Harrovian
fibs. He has pictured himself well: ‘ not sociable at heart.
The crowd of boys rather appals him. He prefers to be
alone. He responds immediately to overtures of friendship
made by individuals and thus is particularly liable to drift
into bad company.’ His hero at school, whose praises he
sang each holiday, was the idlest boy in the whole of Harrow,
‘ who had a perfect genius for idling,’ he declared once,
prophesying a great future for one so adept. Nor was his
faith vain, for before Marmaduke was forty, Winston
Churchill had been Cabinet Minister.
There was much in the school he grew to love : the
solidarity of the boys against the masters ‘ our opponents in
the game,’ the freedom of the higher forms, a goal sufficiently
near to be worth striving for, sufficiently far to inspire such
awe as one was never to feel for mortal man again, and the
sense of continuity—the knowledge that greater men than
he could even dream of emulating had undergone the same
experiences in the school before him. The system was
indefensible : the life lousy : but there is something about
every institution where men have been young that pertains
to the ‘ mortalia quae mentem tangunt ,’ and he never forgot
the Harrow songs. Years later, thousands of miles from
England, he would quote :
‘ Byron lay
Lazily lay
Hid from lessons and games away,
Dreaming poetry all alone,
Up on the top of the Peachey stone*


All in a fury enters Drury,
Sets him grammar and Virgil too,
Poets shouldn’t have work to do.
Peel stood,
Steadily stood,
Just by his name in the carven wood,
Reading rapidly, at his ease,
Pages out of Demosthenes.
“ Where has he got to ? ”
“ Tell him not to ! ”
All the scholars around him cry :
“ That’s the lesson for next July.” .
Byron lay, wearily lay,
Dying for freedom far away,
Peel stood up on the famous floor
Ruled the nation and fed the poor.
None so narrow the range of Harrow,
Poet and statesman are welcome too
Doer and Dreamer ! Dream and do.’
Yet he was a realist for all his memories. He could not
help reflecting that what it really boiled down to was that
one’s mater was spending 56400 a year that one might learn
a few swear words, be encouraged to the greatest imaginable
idleness, and inspired to do as one’s father had done, i.e.
beget a son to send to Harrow in his turn. In his later
life he admitted and preached the value of this idleness,
admired the example (which he regretted being unable to
follow), and even found the swear-words useful—when he
enlisted as a private in the ranks in 1916.
Being a day boy was not entirely the misfortune it appeared
to his relations. It was relief, in the evenings, to escape
the circumscribed monotony of school ‘ shop,’ to be saved
the dormitory life, and to sleep alone. It meant when prep,
was over one could really open a door and walk out: into
books, into pictures, into talk, into sleep. On the other
hand, home reminded one of such forgotten things as
poverty, widowhood, dead father, ordinary class distinctions,
difficulties of communicating with grown-ups—all of which
school extinguished, or more truly engulfed in a blinding,


all-embracing, pitiless light: the light of seven hundred
small sharp eyes seeing and judging as one.
Marmaduke tried hard to win the acceptance, if not the
respect, of his schoolfellows by attaining that bland indis-
tinguishability from the herd which is the secret of success
in Anglo-Saxon countries, and which, as Sir Limpidus
shows, remained an amazement to his sardonic humour
until his life’s end. He kept steadily to the safety of the
via media : on the one hand, neither ‘ boozed nor kept a
harem,’ on the other, refrained, in the summer holiday, from
leading revivalist meetings on August beaches—extremes
the ‘ none so narrow ’ range admitted of in his day ; but his
sacrifices, his abstentions, and his efforts were doomed to
failure. He never became a typical Harrovian : the gallic
quality of his wit, that made him discover the pose under
whatever humbug or hypocrisy of disguise, and make merry
over his discovery, even when the object of it was himself,
marked him out as queer, as . . . not . . . quite . . . quite,
and kept him from becoming a real public-school man.
Besides, he was potty about poetry, and though not a bad
little fellow was obviously a bit gone : yes, of course, that
was it, he was absolutely bats. Yet he enjoyed ragging the
masters, and delighted in all the traditional class-room
gambits : such as keeping a ball going from hand to hand :
or throwing well-chewed pellets of pink blotting paper on
to the blackboard, or leaving one day a fictitious and the
next a real pool of spilled ink on the master’s desk, or
filling notebooks with hallucinary diagrams. Harrow
neither corrupted nor cured him : he left, after only two
years, owing it nothing.
The one really live influence there —the personality of
John Farmer —he seems to have missed, although he
was not unmusical and had a lovely baritone voice. He
adored shouting hymns in chapel ‘ the utmost of which
British lungs are capable ’ is his description of the noise.
And he wrote once to me, from India, when I was thirteen,
‘ I do not in the least wonder at your passion for hymns—
indeed, I share it. The tunes are so pathetic that they make
me weep. But they seem to me palliative, a soporific like


strong drink, which also I gave up when I became a Muslim,
though I like it very much. Hymns plunge one into a sort
of hot bath of sentimentality, which is not quite healthy, do
you think ? * At Harrow he regarded with distant awe the
building ‘ specially set apart for instrumental music, whose
disciples, a few - queer-looking boys, considered cranks or
foreigners, made squeaks and moans which caused saner
and more manly youths to class that kind of music as a
beastly row.’
When he was just sixteen he left. He wanted to get into
Woolwich, and his mother, a little horrified by his worship
of idleness, thought if he were removed from the home of this
cult and sent to a crammer’s, he would more likely succeed
in passing the ordeal of examinations. His languages had
deteriorated : “ You can’t expect me to talk differently from
the others,” he complained when she suggested the words he
once knew as * mignon, allons voir si la rose ’ could not
have been intended by the deus qui gestat per Francos to be
transmuted into ‘ menjong allong voir see lar rose.’
She had found little margin of money for holiday amuse-
ments whilst both were at school, but after Marmaduke left,
she could afford an occasional excursion, leaving Adelaide
in charge of Bob and the Harrow house. (Bob remained
his full four years at school and then passed on for another
four to Oriel College, Oxford.) She took Marmaduke
travelling with her, to improve his languages. Of all human
rationalizations, perhaps the one that has been most
conducive to happiness has been this necessity for learning
languages. What golden hours in Paris, what evenings on
Lido’s sands, what sunrises, over Alps and sunsets over
Fuji do we not owe to our parents’ desire that we should
perfect our French, our Italian, our Japanese ? Babel was
not the least of God’s miracles and is still one of his kindest
mercies.
Marmaduke and his mother stayed with a Pasteur Gauvain
at Neuchatel and walked the Jura ; there Marmaduke had
his first taste of mountain climbing, which was always one
of his greatest delights. In Florence with Donat Orsi, one
of the great banking family, he spent all his pocket money


on photographs of antique statues. He loved and reverenced
human beauty all his life —especially male beauty on the
large scale —somewhat pathetically, for he was himself
somewhat birdlike, and insignificant in appearance. Walk-
ing the Welsh hills, attending Welsh services, he mastered
that language : duck-shooting with O’Brien cousins in
Ireland he practised his Gaelic : one holiday he had a
Spanish, another a German, tutor. Always his desire was
to get under the skin of the people he was amongst; to
smite himself into their very souls, as Tennyson’s Grail
smote itself into the bread : this was the driving force that
inspired his talent for languages : this the compassion that
made him first a great novelist and later a great teacher.
Often Marmaduke, his mother and brother made no plans,
leaving the choice of holiday till the time came, and deciding
on places because they had names which pleased them —as
Marazion, Dolgelly, Aberdovey, and Stranraer.
But these delights were but interludes —peeps at heaven
from behind muslin curtains. He lodged in Pembridge
Square, with an old crammer called ‘ Tommy.’ London
seemed as dreary to him as it had when he was six : only
now he could better appreciate its unpleasantness. From
his window he looked out over uneven slate roofs, relieved
only by an occasional flutter of grey undergarments drying
on a line. ‘ Tommy ’ himself was an old dear : completely
ga-ga, but kind. “ Have a cigar, sir, have a cigar,” he
would offer, whenever one of his pupils came for advice or
correction. He would reflect aloud, ‘ nice gentlemanly
chap, Pickthall is,’ and repeat, whether the need were money
or forgiveness, “ I say, have a cigar, sir ! ” Here Marmaduke
met his first Oriental: a delightful, idiotic, creature nick-
named by all ‘ Brown Geegee.’
Marmaduke’s great friend at * Tommy’s,’ however, was
Frank Buller Robinson, who remained devoted to him until
his death, and may well have been the original of the baronet
in All Fools, Marmaduke’s first novel. The identity of
‘ Bunny ’ —the hero of that work —still remains unknown,
unless he flayed himself in that character. Marmaduke
was both very shy and very homesick, with far too much


courage to admit to either. He spent a great deal of time
leaning out of his window, or out of Brown Geegee’s, from
whose room one could watch, with palpitating heart, the
‘ bits of skirts ’ come hurrying by. How much time he
spent doing this, and how devotedly, who wades through
All Fools may realize.
The land beyond Exhibition Road was as remote then
from London as Ruislip now is, and with suburban ‘ naicety *
gloom descended on young Marmaduke. He broke down
completely from overwork and lost his memory. Although
sent down to Tonbridge to a famous coach when he re-
covered, he failed outright in maths., and so in the whole
exam., which ruled Woolwich out completely. His failure
sent him once more to the country.
Throughout his life, whenever depressed or ill, he had only
to go to the country, and, hey presto, he recovered. Antoeus-
like, it seemed as though the touch of earth cured him, was
to him holy and healing as Jordan or Ganges to a pilgrim.
He went first to his relations at Broxbourne, until he was
entirely restored, and then, early in 1892 (the winter before
his seventeenth birthday), he entered St. Catherine’s School
there as boarder. The headmaster, the Rev. H. P. Waller,
coached him for the Consular Service exam. There were
three vacancies in the Eastern Department, and since
Marmaduke showed such early interest in the East, it was
hoped that he might carry off one of these prizes.
It was at this time, when he was just seventeen, that he
met at a party a Miss Muriel Smith, whose father, Mr.
Cadwallader Smith, had been first a schoolmaster, then an
inspector of schools, and now worked for a firm of educa-
tional publishers. Marmaduke proposed to her at once,
on the way home in a hansom, and was accepted : he
confided his engagement only to his best friend at the Rev.
Waller’s, one Fatty Smith, who kindly wrote to me the details
of that confidence —how the two boys went together to the
theatre in London two nights running, to see Miss.Decima
Moore, in whom Fatty was deeply interested. Coming
home after the second visit to the theatre, Marmaduke
confided his news to Fatty, who was so moved he wrote the


lovers an ode, which, happily, has been lost. Summer
came, and with it the exam. But Marmaduke, though top
in languages, was only seventh on the list. Feeling himself
an all-round failure, he went down to Hollinghurst, to his
cousins, the Wallace Pickthalls, a large, gay family, three
of whose members he specially adored : Ettie, Ella, and
Maud.
c A Paris je sais trois filles,
Londerirette, lou, lon, la
Toutes les trois sont fort gentilles
Londerirette, lou, lon, la
L’une coud, et l’autre file,
La troisieme c’est Petronille
Londerirette, lou, lon, la.’
One of these cousins he was most deeply attached to :
but she repelled his advances, treating him as a silly boy.
He bore her no ill will, for she is the gracious and lovely
Gertrude of The Myopes , who, brought up with her cousin
and adoring him, by a foolish marriage loses him, and
realizes too late that ‘ She knew him now to be the only
man she could have endured for husband without shame or
weariness.’ Though they escape for an enchanted fortnight,
resulting in a child, there is no help for them : time, in
complicating their relationship, and encumbering it with
better or worse halves, has blurred and coarsened the fine
edges of their love. The dew is off the grass, revealing it,
no longer April tender, but stubbled, leathery, and parched.
It seems as though Marmaduke was ‘ through ’ with his
falling in love by the age of eighteen : his English novels
are all concerned with his adventures before that date :
in All Fools the proposal is in a hansom to a young lady
met for the first time, who lives in a remote suburb ; in
Bundle, the lovely Jenny, the carpenter’s clever school-
teaching daughter, marries the rich brewer’s rebel son, in
spite of the protests of his indignant and snobbish family, to
realize too late that he adores, and always will, the rich and
wayward Stephanie, his near neighbour. In Enid there is
the enchanting nursemaid, and the foolish girl who romantic-
ally and quixotically is forced by her parents to marry a


young man with whom she went off platonically to escape
her family. She, too, makes a loveless marriage and finds
‘ A wind-flower for Adonis, a shower of cold white bloom
instead of fruit, moonlight for warmth upon a winter’s
night, ah ! ah ! the poor exchange. She was self-frustrated,
a thing to toss, and moan and yearn eternally. For her
there could be no fruition, only famine and regret beneath
the flouting, triumphant banner of conscience. She hated
conscience as men hate a bloodless tyrant.’
In his last English novel, Larkmeadow , which is set in his
beloved Suffolk, the evocation is even more obvious.
Marmaduke describes a callow young man, coming to the
country with no knowledge of it but a real love that saves
him from the more dangerous vices of youth ; he is the
eldest son of pretentious parents, who have grand ideas for
him : he, however, finds true happiness in marrying, very
young, his first cousin and near neighbour, the daughter of
a simple yeoman farmer, whom her future father-in-law
describes, not untruthfully, as ‘ that maypole, that great,
long-legged, staring hoyden.’ It is not necessary to be either
a Father Brown or a Freud to see, in this medley of
fact, and phantasy and wish-fulfilment, the portrait of a
man who, as a lover at least, ‘ by backward steps would
move.’
Maud’s rejection of him, her failure even to take him
seriously, was very bitter. ‘ I was eighteen "years old,’
Marmaduke wrote in the preface to Oriental Encounters ,
‘ and, having failed in one or two adventures, I considered
myself an all-round failure, and was much depressed. I
dreamed of Eastern sunshifie, palm trees, camels, desert
sand, as of a Paradise which I had lost by my shortcomings.’
(Here is a curious echo of Richard Crashaw’s c Shady City
of Palm Trees.’) Whilst he was thus utterly cast down, his
mother heard from her ex-sister-in-law, Miss Caroline Hale,
to whom she had written when there was still hope of her
son passing into the Consular Service. Miss Hale wrote
that a friend of hers, a young parson called Dowling, was
going out to Jerusalem to become chaplain to the Bishop,
Dr. Blythe, whose retiring chaplain, William Hastings


Kelk, had been promoted to a cure of souls upon Mount
Lebanon.
‘ Since my longing for the East seemed to indicate a
natural instinct with which she herself, possessing Oriental
memories, was in full sympathy,’ Marmaduke explained,
his mother offered him the choice between joining his
brother at Oxford and travelling out to Palestine in the
company of Mr. Dowling. Marmaduke unhesitatingly
chose the latter, and his mother comforted his family by
explaining he might, after all, if he learnt the languages and
studied the people, find some consular employment on the
spot, or even some sort of honorary attache-ship.
Through his despondency his troth to Miss Smith shone
out for him a beacon light. He had not seen her again, as
both her parents and his thought better not, but she, she
only, had neither rejected him nor scorned : he would come
back for her, he vowed, and come back worthy of her.
He first set his face towards the Qu’iblah —though as yet
he was unaware of its existence —one day early in 1894
when he joined his ship at Marseilles.


CHATTER TWO
‘ TT is delightful to lie in a deck-chair and slide on over
X this blue ruffled sea, always in the centre of a perfect
circle. A 1 Mutanabhi (an Arabic poet of the third Islamic
century) talks of camels in the desert moving always in the
centre of a circle, and though always hurrying forward,
making no advance because the circle on the sand always
moves with them. The same description would apply to
this blue halcyon sea. A tumbled summer sea is the very
picture I would choose to indicate pure joy, ideal joy.’
So Marmaduke wrote to me from the Mediterranean in
1920, when on his way to take up a strange and uncongenial
job in an unknown and generally hostile country.
In 1894, on the ship that took him from Naples to Port
Said, his joy was as much more perfect as youth is than
middle-age, as holiday adventure than hard and unappetiz-
ing work. Then Marmaduke, gifted with that youthful
white emptiness of mind that is the prerogative of the
pilgrim and the child, absorbed new impressions with the
virgin receptivity of unused blotting-paper. Mr. Dowling
proved an unburdensome chaperon and faded tactfully out,
and while on board ship Marmaduke met a man consider-
ably older than himself, with whom he struck up one of those
shipboard intimacies that are mushroom-sudden, inexpli-
cable, and so often indigestible as well. His mentor, it
appeared, knew most of the folk to whom he had letters of
introduction, and, as he himself was obliged to stay in Cairo
for some weeks, suggested Marmaduke should also.
Marmaduke needed no coaxing—the more that, since
his new friend would be very busy on shore, he would be
left to his own devices and have a chance to explore,
uncramped by another’s Englishry. For, from his first
glimpse of the sun-intoxicated harbour at Port Said, Marma-


duke knew that this was the beginning for him : that all
experience, all study, all emotion, he had ever felt, had been
leading up to this, preparing him for it. Here, in these
utterly carefree crowds, for whom time ‘ is not a dimension,
but merely a state of mind,’ he found happy people for the
first time. They were, as he, uncompetitive by nature,
and like himself, without class consciousness : money they
lacked, yet never felt the loss of that which they had never
had, and every one, from the scurviest fellah to the richest
bey, had two inestimable gifts : humour and imagination.
Marmaduke could listen from morning to night to their
stories, and never fail to be both enchanted and amused :
whether they were of evading authority in the shape of
tax-collector or medical officer, or merely such fables as
those of Mansur and Musa.
At the end of his life he wrote : c When I read Alf Leylah
wa Leylah (The Arabian Nights) I see the daily life of
Damascus, Jerusalem, Aleppo, Cairo, and other cities as I
found it in the early nineties of last century. What struck
me, even in its decay and poverty, was the joyousness of
that life compared with anything that I had seen in Europe.
The people seemed quite independent of our cares of life,
our anxious clutching after wealth, our fear of death.
c And then their charity ! No man in the cities of the
Muslim empire ever died of exposure at his neighbour’s
gate. They undoubtedly had something which was lacking
in the life of Western Europe, while they as obviously lacked
much which Europeans have and hold. It was only after-
wards that I learnt they had once possessed the material
prosperity which Europe now can boast, in addition to that
inward happiness which I so envied.’
Before he left Cairo, he had already decided that his
mother’s suggestion, that he should struggle into the back
regions of the Foreign Office by some local tradesmen’s
entrance, could never be realized. It was not as representing
England that he could get to know the East: every European
seemed to him out of place in that smiling, sleepy landscape,
a tactless anachronism—either a Lilliputian in Brob-
dingnag, or a Brobdingnagian in Lilliput: he was not yet


sure which, but bought a fez and determined to find out.
Already he felt better : more secure, in that un-English
head-dress, a little removed from the we-are-carrying-the-
white-man’s burden pomposity with which a topee shadows
even the most kindly face. But how penetrate the gay-
coloured world, from which he was excluded by the very
salaams of fawning dragomans, he, their prey, their daily
bread, how was he to become their ally and equal ? The
change could not, and did not, take place in Cairo.
Indeed, he confessed once to a friend from whose house he
later learnt more of Egypt than at this time he thought
possible, that he never really got under the skin of the
Egyptian fellahin, as he had done with Arabs and Syrians
and Turks. The well-to-do, the effendi, yes —these he
came to understand, but not the peasants. Yet these first
weeks unchaperoned in Cairo were certainly not wasted :
he found an old khoja to teach him Arabic, and he visited
the poorer parts of the city, and watched the shadow plays
—the Kheyyul-el-Zull—and made the acquaintance of the
immortal Karakash.
These shadow plays are a combination of our Punch and
Judy shows and puppets. Direct representation of human
beings is forbidden in Islam, and drama has always been
disregarded, as it is considered to be beneath the dignity
of a Muslim to dress up and pretend to be what he is not,
and of course unthinkable for a Muslim woman. But the
shadow plays, performed at all public and domestic festi-
vals, and brought to such perfection that even the most
intelligent could take delight in them, created, before the
cinema was thought of, that curiously faery and remote
illusion which is only obtainable by restricting vision to
two dimensions.
As for Karakash, he is the Emir Beha-ed-din, ‘ the learned
judge 5 par excellence , and remains always one of the most
essential figures of the Near East, a faithful lieutenant of
the great Saladin. He was a wise judge, and based his
pronouncements always strictly on the evidence in each
case with which he was called to deal. Curiously, these
judgments inevitably savoured of the ridiculous, as in the


famous case of the thief who put his eye out on a weaver’s
needle as he was entering his shop after dark to burgle it.
“ This poor man,” said Karakash angrily to the weaver,
whom he had summoned before him at the thief’s demand,
“ lost his eye through your carelessness : so you must lose
yours.” “ But he came to rob me : he had no right to be
in my shop,” protested the indignant weaver. “ Did you
find anything damaged or missing ? ” asked Karakash.
“ No.” “He has done you then no harm, and it is adding
insult to injury to cast his profession in his teeth.”
In vain the miserable weaver offered money to both
robber and judge —the righteous and impartial Karakash
refused to be moved, until the weaver brightly suggested
that as he had a wife and children and a profession which
depended entirely on his eyes, surely it would be fairer to
put out the eye of his next-door neighbour, who was a
bachelor, and, moreover, a gunsmith, who, of course, only
needed one eye at a time for looking down the barrels of
his guns. This reasoning convinced the upright judge, and
the gunsmith’s eye was accordingly put out.
Karakash, like the legendary Turkish khoja whom Mrs.
Ewing last century translated so amusingly, is a half-
national half-mythical figure—a mixture of Dr. Spooner,
Horace Cole, and Mr. Justice McCardie seen through the
mists of seven hundred years, and beatified by people for
whom humour is more important than bread, nearly as
precious as water.
The best Karakash of all, perhaps, is that of the carpenter,
the builder, and the girl in the red dress. A carpenter was
fitting doors into a newly built house, when a lintel, over
one of the windows, fell and broke one of his legs. He
complained to Karakash, who cited the owner and charged
him with culpable negligence. “ Not I, but the builder,
was at fault,” pleaded the landlord, so the builder was
summoned. He said he could not help it because as he was
laying that particular stone a girl passed by in so red a frock
that he was momentarily blinded and could not see what
he was doing. The girl was sent for by Karakash, who
said : “ O veiled one, that red dress you wore, on such-


and-such a day, has cost this carpenter his leg : therefore
you must pay damages.” “It is not my fault, but the
draper’s,” said the girl, “ when I went in to buy stuff for a
frock he had nothing but that bright red which, perforce,
though it does not suit me, I had to buy.” “ Fetch me the
draper,” said Karakash. But when the draper came he
said it was not his fault, because of all the materials he had
ordered, the English manufacturer had only sent the red.
“ Son of a dog,” said Karakash. “ You deal with the
heathen ! You shall be hanged from the lintel of your
own door.” But when the soldiers were going to hang him
they found the door of his house was too low, for he was a
tall man. “ Idiots,” said Karakash to his servants, when
they came back to ask him what to do next, “ go quickly
and hang the first short man you can find.”
Marmaduke may have, at this time, wandered beyond
the city, but I can find no evidence that he did and no
trace of such excursions. Certainly, after a short stay, he
took a ship again and arrived at Jaffa. There his mentor
deserted him, leaving him in a comfortable little guest-
house run by Germans, in the heart of the German colony.
Poor Mr. Dowling, who had not dallied with them at Cairo,
carried tales of Marmaduke’s vagaries to the Bishop of
Jerusalem.
The German colony at Jaffa, amongst whom Marmaduke
found himself, was extensive, composed for the most part
of respectable and respected merchants and agriculturalists.
Many of these were Swabian Protestants, from South
Germany, believers in the Second Coming, who had arrived
at Jaffa to wait the arrival .of their Saviour, and, whilst
waiting, filled in the time with such occupations as orange
farming, bee-keeping, and small trading. The orange
growing was a very live industry : the little oasis of Jaffa,
only five miles wide, produced at that time over thirty
million oranges annually. The place enchanted him : all
around, as far as eye could see, the grey sands that lay far
off beyond the blossoming orange groves were white-starred
with narcissus (quite possibly the true rose of Sharon), a
little flower which year after year covers the desert’s dusty
c


face as with snow, and lasts, not an hour or two, but a
couple of weeks, and then is gone. The scent of the oranges
round the city was so strong that he was sometimes forced
to get up in the night and shut his windows, lest he suffocate,
as some Roman victor, choked in their blossoms’ sweetness.
The fact that in the city the narrow streets were muddy in
winter and dusty in summer, that 5000 people were com-
pressed into hovels, the natural nests of disease, did not
depress him ; nor streets steep and paved in steps, terraced
houses, roofs rising tiered above each other, bare brown and
burning. The sun, against whom the mud houses huddle
together, envious each of the other’s shadow, excused and
exonerated pestilence and famine: so disinfectant its
action, so cheering its aspect. Besides, for Marmaduke,
already a novelist in embryo, the individual was all: the
crowd nothing.
In Egypt, Marmaduke had found the annexation of
North Africa, begun by the French conquest of Tunis, and
completed by the recent Italian victory over Abyssinia, in
full swing. England, as a result of her excellent and speedy
handling of Arabi’s revolt, had assumed the protectorate of
country and Khedive, and the latter now was subject to
the power which had preserved him at Tel el Kebir and
Alexandria, even against the power which had created him
—the Porte —as events were soon to prove.
In Syria, the European Powers had not yet arrived so
far : here Turkey, that £ living sore of European legiti-
macy,’ as Karl Marx had described it, was still supreme,
although her efforts to keep up the status quo were about as
effective as trying to maintain the same precise degree of
putridity in the carcass of a dead donkey.
The English, Marmaduke found, were not as entirely
absurd as they appear when they claim synonymity for the
British Empire and the Kingdom of God. In every case of
conquest, annexation has always been preceded by the
peaceful penetration of missionaries : Bibles have always
been landed before troops, and, as inevitably, followed by
them, when the native converts or their mentors come into
conflict with members of the earlier faith. For the mis


sionaries then appeal to their government to protect the
Christian minority, and British ships are dispatched to the
offending shore. The sequel is best told in the words of
Abdulla el Rashid, who to Colonel T. E. Lawrence com-
plained of the British soldiers daily landing at Rabegh :
‘ Soon they will stay nights, and then they will live here
always, and take the country. 5 Already, in the ’nineties,
English travellers to the Holy Land echoed the hopes of
Aubrey Herbert and Gertrude Bell, whose diaries are full
of such sighs : ‘ I confess I left . . . looking forward to the
time when this country should be controlled and developed
by Great Britain. 5
In these far-off days, before that great Hay was fully
come, Syria was divided for administrative purposes into
the province of Sham, the vilayets of Aleppo and Beyrouth,
and the Sanjaks of Lebanon (this already under a Christian
governor, and European protectorate) and Jerusalem. But
in nearly every case authority lay lightly on the native
populations. Despotism of the Oriental kind is a form of
State Socialism, its rigours mitigated for the people by the
patriarchal village government and by the liberties secured
to many little corporations. For the first act of all Orientals
is to appoint a sheykh. Even the gangs of workmen doing
forced labour on public works, men more miserable than
prisoners, elect each their foreman, who stands between
them and their taskmaster. The very thieves have their
headman, as Marmaduke found when his purse was stolen ;
he went to the sheykh of the thieves to try and recover it.
Unluckily, the thief had already spent the contents, but
Marmaduke got the purse back ; for though individual
thieves are pursued by the police and hated by all honour-
able folk, the thieves 5 headman is trusted and respected by
all, including the police.
The Englishman coming to the East and doing a bit of
building who thinks he can be his own foreman, has no
idea with what intense horror such an idea is viewed by
Orientals. His own foreman ! Why, the foreman is the
men’s, never the employers’. “ How many times have I
been mobbed in out-of-the-way places, and escaped


disintegration by the simple question : “ Where is your
sheykh ? ” ‘At once the rabble became orderly and, curious
to say, whatever their tribe or condition, a sheykh was
always present in the twinkling of an eye.’
The civil population of the Turkish Empire was divided
into' three classes : freemen, subjects, and allies. The free-
men were all Muslims ; the subjects, Jews and Christians
of the various conquered races ; the allies, certain lawless
Arab tribes, not conquered, but nominally brought into a
loose confederation : and such exiles as the Circassians, or
Jews who fled Russian pogrom and Catholic Inquisition to
find the safe shelter of the Khalif’s rule. Local government
was controlled by three officials, with the mudir, at the
bottom of the scale, in charge of a village, and at the top
the Vali, governing a whole province.
The Turkish method of government shocked the doc-
trinaire English who visited Eastern lands with the one
idea that natives of those lands have the same minds and
require the same government as English people. It also
shocked the resident English, who would argue that Arabs
ought to be the same perhaps as Anglican peasants, but are
not : they are a lower race, a generation naturally degraded,
mischievous, and tiresome, who require the treatment one
would give to naughty children. The Turk looked on and
laughed at both these attitudes. He said, of the Arabs :
“ Their minds are altogether different from ours. Praise
be to God—Who made them different.” He never quar-
relled with the fact of their dissimilitude nor sought to
change it, but remembered it in all his dealings with them.
The natives over whom he ruled were for him folk of his
household whom he had known since childhood, and he
knew the way to make his meaning clear to them. Being
of the same faith he could employ religious language
debarred to us, and even in his tyranny there was a sense of
brotherhood. It was accepted, as all accomplished fact is,
by his fellow Muslims, were they Arab or Albanian.
It was absurd, as Gertrude Bell saw, for foreign printing
presses to issue inflammatory Pan-Arabic leaflets. ‘ There
is no nation of Arabs,’ she truly wrote, and Lawrence


echoed her with his : ‘ Patriotism, ordinarily of soil or
race, is here warped to a language. Arab Government in
Syria, though buttressed on Arab prejudices, would be as
much imposed as the Turkish Government, or a foreign
protectorate.’ Lawrence goes on to say that the very
Akhua itself, the ‘ Arab mother society ’ preferred ‘an
Arabia united by Turkey in miserable subjection, to an
Arabia divided up and slothful under the easier control of
several European powers in spheres of influence.’
After a time, as no message came from Jerusalem, Marma-
duke began to grow restive and, at the end of the second
week, in spite of the kindness of the good Germans, since
there was still no sign of any message, he was really bored.
Then Mr. Hanauer, the English chaplain in Jaffa, hearing
of his plight, came to see him, and changed the whole of
life for him. He took him walks, and, being a famous anti-
quarian and also an enthusiastic botanist, folk-lorist, and
Arabic scholar, taught Marmaduke much about the
country and the people. He rescued him, in fact; and,
moreover, blessed his half-ashamedly admitted desire to get
to know the natives and fraternize with them. Together
they first explored the suburbs, visiting Colbert’s farm
schools, and the gardens of the Alliance Israelite. This
school cultivated some seven hundred acres of market
garden whereon Jewish children were trained, but it was a
somewhat pathetic experiment, for, as fast as the children
gardened, the sand made vain their toil.
The native Jews were mostly descended from refugees
fleeing the Inquisition and other pogroms; they often
retained the speech of their country of origin—thus the
Sephardim always talked an antiquated form of Spanish.
Originally there had been only some forty thousand Jews
in Palestine, but they were increasing tremendously from
the beginning of the nineteenth century onwards. Marma-
duke talked also to many of the decrepit Russian pilgrims
who landed here on the last lap of their pilgrimage. They
came from all parts of the empire ; creeping, crawling, in
the final stages of disease and decay, for, if one had the
good fortune to die in the Holy Land, they told him, at


the Resurrection one would be carried instanter to Abraham’s
bosom : if one died elsewhere, one could not rise immedi-
ately, but must burrow through the earth until one reached
the neighbourhood of Jerusalem. At a later date he wrote :
c I carry, and shall carry, to my dying day, a certain
picture in my memory ; on the outskirts of Jedda a crowd
of Russian pilgrims was arriving: men, women, and
children who seemed to have had their vitality crushed out
of them, who seemed to have been deprived of earthly
hope, headed by long-haired priests who treated them like
cattle. They might have stood for a procession of the
damned, if it were not for a strange dreamy look in pale
blue eyes which suggested they saw some hope a long way
off. The ancestors of these poor serfs had been free men and
women : the yoke of Czardom had degraded them thus
and chief among the instruments of their enslavement was
the Russian Church. And skipping round them, chaffing
them, caressing them, trying to sell them souvenirs of various
kinds, there were the “ persecuted ” Christians of the
Turkish Empire, clad in rich colours, with their fezes set at
rakish angles, swaggering along, independent, laughing,
full-blown to the point of arrogance. The contrast and the
truth which it revealed were unforgettable.’
It was his first meeting with Russia, his arch-enemy, who
all his life stood for the politics, the superstition, the tyranny
he hated. The British Empire in the East: England as
the leader, the guard and guide of the whole of Asia, this
was the vision Disraeli had given him. As a child, he
remembered his mother subscribing towards a tomb for
Gladstone, in the hopes that a sufficiently heavy monument
might keep him underground where he and his cant
belonged, and here he was come face to face with the
Power Gladstone hoped to see enthroned in Constantinople
—Russia —and no doubt in India, Marmaduke reflected
bitterly—since it had already crept to within twenty versts
of our frontier there —(and a verst is less than two-thirds of
an English mile !) without Gladstone or his successors
showing any alarm.


As yet, Marmaduke had not come across Islam —a few
Mohammedans he had, indeed, conversed with, but "knew
as little about their faith as a Nonconformist holiday-maker
in Rome would have gathered of Catholicism from the ice-
cream vendors. It was only when there came to his Gast-
haus one of the most famous dragomen in Syria—a well-
known joker and a very great character, that he began to
know something of the working of the Syrian mind. This
dragoman, Suleyman, who is the hero of Oriental Encounters ,
found Marmaduke as educable as Mr. Hanauer had done.
He helped him to throw off the Englishman, and put on
the Oriental. There are many people who maintain that
no Englishman can ever be mistaken for an Arab, that his
accent, his manner, and the texture and colour of his skin
must inevitably give him away. But that is not always the
case.
T. E. Lawrence, it is true, never entirely lost his original
Jerablus accent, and, as Sir Ronald Storrs admits, ‘ never
could have passed as an Arab with Arabs ’ ; but Marmaduke
. was, in later life, consulted by the highest Islamic ecclesiasti-
cal authorities on points of Qu’aranic spelling. As he wrote
to his agent, * my knowledge of Arabic is better than that of
most of the Muslim Ulema. I have even been asked to
issue fetwas (or decisions) on what are considered moot
points of Qu’aranic teaching and could, if I had wished,
have been acknowledged leader of the Qu’aranic or reform-
ing movement. Among Muslims, indeed, I find that I am
so regarded in my despite.’
This was, of course, many years later : but his Arabic
continually improved, for he never stopped working at it:
ceaselessly reading and perfecting his grammar and pro-
nunciation and losing no opportunity of speaking. As for
appearance, though his skin was fair, he was small, as town
Arabs often are, and had the merry, very dark brown eyes
that are not unusual among the Arab aristocracy. The
Arabs did not necessarily think him an Arab—they generally
mistook him for a Turk, or perhaps a Persian : but once he
had really soaked himself in the languages and the life of
Palestine, few Orientals suspected him of being a European.


At Jedda, in the spring of 1894, however, he was as yet
far from such metamorphosis. With Suleyman, who hired
horses for them both, he now began to wander farther
afield —beyond the reach of a day’s walking, which had
hitherto been the limit of his explorations. With Hanauer
he had learnt the theory, as it were, of Syriac life and legend :
now with Suleyman he practised it. Every morning, at
dawn, before the inmates of the little Gasthaus were awake,
they would set off, on horseback ; the dragoman, a saffron
sash round his waist, a scarlet dust cloak streaming from his
shoulders, a white-frilled shirt of lawn showing above a
vest of fawn-coloured velvet, soft skeepskin boots, and a
snowy turban twisted round his tarbush, leading the way
on a superb stallion, that in very joy of life jumped and
danced and curveted unceasingly. Marmaduke, for whom
had been found a decent and serviceable cob, followed
soberly.
One April day, there, as here, half storm, half sunshine
(they say in Syria that on such a day the sheykh of the
Haradin gives his daughter in marriage), they rode across
the country along the edge of the sea marshes to Nebi
Rubin—Reuben’s tomb, where a great annual pilgrimage
had gathered.
It does not matter that the Prophet of Islam forbade
men to worship at his tomb, or at any other : monotheism
is, in April, too hard a creed for any man, and the
Syrian, as much as the Sicilian, longs then to ‘go on
pilgrimages.’ There is, in that annual urge, a consecration
of the eternal restlessness, in statu via , of man. Whether we
own one God or many, or none at all, after the long
winter sleep and stagnation we must stretch our minds
and souls no less than our limbs : must convert the
stagnant ablative that follows the question übi, where are
we? into the sharp accusative that answers quo , where
shall we go ? We are indeed blessed if we can travel, as
Suleyman and Marmaduke did, across the flowering plains
around Gaza, without compulsion of return. No journey,
unless undertaken as part of one’s job, should have a
specified moment of ending. For, seen framed in their


context of what-we-saw-yesterday, and where-we-are-ciue-
to-morrow, places assume false values.
Each new mountain or village or monument should be
judged objectively, sub specie aeternitatis, not as site or view or
quaint custom, not at all, relatively to the traveller, who
must submit himself wholly at each halt, be so persuaded
and dominated by each place that he will stay as long as it
requires, go on only when he is bidden. Thus alone can he
learn, not what Jerusalem, or Cairo, or the yellow primrose
were to him, but what they are. And Marmaduke could not
only ride when and where he pleased, his own master, but
he also was free from the daily clutter that besets all our
travelling. The Mediterranean lay between him and such
banalities as, have I packed my tails ? shall I need my
brogues ?
Doctors declare all illness is due to faulty elimination :
surely and unquestionably all failure is. If only we could
slough our memories every spring, sulphur and brimstone
and scrub out our hearts, rinsing off even one winter’s caked
and layered accumulations, Easter would be Resurrection
for every one of us indeed.
As they cantered gaily along wadis fringed with oleander,
gay with every sort of anemone, Suleyman told his pupil
that this was the first moment such a ride was possible :
earlier they would probably have found flood and torrent
everywhere, legacies of the ‘ borrowed ones ’ —el Mustak-
razat. These are the last two days of Shubat, or February,
and the first three of Adar, or March : they are borrowed
in order that February may kill off the old men and make
the old women break up the wood of their spindles for
firewood before March tulips signal spring.
Marmaduke found a most delightful company gathered
for the pilgrimage, only too pleased to find him a willing,
if as yet inaccurate, listener. And the handsome dragoman
had the art of collecting a crowd : his voice ‘ attracted
people like a drum ; and the matter of his talk had power
to hold them. It was a weighty voice, of studied modula-
tions, which promised wisdom on the brink of laughter.’
On this occasion he, too, was content to question : to


account for this group and that, to persuade one man, then
another, to explain to Marmaduke the reason of their voyage.
Talk was at first of the state of the road ; and the four
sorts of Syrian road, each of which was to be found in
those neighbourhoods, were passed under review : Balat, or
roads of paving stones, which were unanimously condemned
as the worst of all: hard, shapeless limestone slabs and
sheet-rocks, set at almost every angle, flat, rounded, pointed,
or inclined, they could be white or ochre or pink ; the
second sort, watercourses, with worn channels, were safer,
but a horse might catch its feet and trip and fall on the
uneven stones, and when dry, the shining, slippery surface
was as polished as glass. Then the chalk paths, burnt by
the sun into molten streams, white as tumbling water, were
discussed : these, though wearying to the eyes and hot
cinders to feet, were dubbed good foothold ; lastly, the
tracks of sandstone and basalt were unanimously acclaimed
best for both man and beast.
The ways to Nebi Rubin were good, and around the
mosque itself, standing up nobly on the desolate shore of
the big marshes, booths had been set, and, as at a fair,
sherbet- and coffee-sellers, and vendors of fried cakes and
biscuits, sweetmeats and fruits, cried their wares. For the
rest of the year the mosque would serve only a few peasants :
now the approaches to it were crowded, and with rich men
as well as poor, with merchants as well as countrymen.
Everybody talked to everybody : with inequality they had
a true fraternity. For the first time in his life Marmaduke
saw a happy crowd, not grumbling and grousing, not riling
nor reviling those above or below, but free from such worries
as rent or wages, entirely content to live from day to day,
and to make the best of such holiday circumstances. The
Arab, discovering impermanence to be the only virtue
of existence, immobilizes the present by the intensity of
his enjoyment, fixes, as a moving-picture camera, each
enchanted moment on his mind’s film.
The tiny village, when they reached it, was merry with
thousands of chanting pilgrims : the sandhills were covered
with tents : on the small harbour fishing boats were being


unladen, silvered with freshly caught fish to feed the multi-
tude. It was an intensely hot day, and Marmaduke sat
with Suleyman in the shadow of some rocks. The latter
explained they came from Jaffa, and the fellahin around
murmured, politely : “ Ah, a lovely spot.” “ Cadi Abdallah
el Mustakin, he was of Jaffa : a very wise man, may he
rest in peace,” said one, and “ There are many of his de-
scendants still in the city,” added another. “For what was
he so remarkable ? ” Marmaduke ventured to ask. “He
lived under El Mansur,” 1 was the reply, “and his strict
impartiality won him the name of the Honest One.”
“ How came he by such an honourable title ? ” “ Once,”
said an old sheykh (sheykh, Marmaduke learnt then,
literally means ‘ grey-haired, 5 and is a title of respect only
when followed by a proper name), “ as he was leaving
his house early, he met a poor woman weeping bitterly,
accompanied by a small boy, who was driving a donkey.
On being asked what made- her weep, she burst out, ‘ I am
a widow, and, as my husband lay dying, he made me swear
always to keep this piece of land we live by, and to teach my
son to till it and get his children’s food from it in his turn,
as his forefathers have done for generations. But the Khalif,
who is building a new palace near here, required my small
field to round off his garden, and, after he had three times
offered me a fair price for it, and I had thrice refused,
he caused us to be driven thence by his slaves, and seized it
for himself, leaving us with nothing but each other and this
donkey and this empty sack that is upon it; and none may
now help us, for none is greater than the Khalifa. 5
“ ‘ Lend me your ass, and the empty sack, 5 said the Cadi,
‘ and remain here in my house for a few hours : I have the
honour of the Khalif’s acquaintance, and will do what I
can for you. 5 The widow agreed, and the Cadi went on
until he came to the widow’s field and found standing in it,
giving orders to his architects, the Commander of the
Faithful. After due salaams the Cadi asked for a private
audience immediately, and the ruler of El Islamiyeh, who
had a great respect for the righteous judge, accorded it.
1 In our sixteenth century.


In vain, however, did the Cadi plead for the widow :
nothing would move the Khalif. The Cadi finally said,
‘ Grant me, then, one small favour : that I may fill this
one empty sack with earth from the widow’s land.’ ‘ Ten
sackfuls if you will,’ laughed the ruler, c but I fail to see that
it can help your client or yourself.’
“ The Cadi made no reply, but loosened some earth and
diligently shovelled it into the sack. Having filled it, he said,
‘ One more small request: be so good as to help me lift
this sack on to the donkey. By all we hold sacred, I adjure
you to help me yourself: the sack would lose all its virtues
if other hands touched it, and you yourself would be
immeasurably the loser.’ ‘ Very well,’ the ruler good-
naturedly agreed, and seized the bag. But he found it was
far too heavy : he could not even move it. ‘ln that case,’
said the Cadi seriously, ‘ how will you, who cannot bear
the weight of that sackful of earth that you are willing to
restore to its rightful owners, support at the judgment day
the whole weight of this land which you have stolen from
the fatherless and the widow ? ’ The Khalif, stricken with
contrition, gave the widow back her land, and to compensate
her for the misery he had caused, remitted for ever all
dues and taxes on it.
“ Such a man was Abdallah el Mustakin, and such were
his judgments.” “ Would he were alive to-day,” said
another, “ now that our lands are molested by two ruffians
who fear neither God nor man, who take what they will
from all, and who have no fear of Turkish power.” “ Rih
and Rihan are but miserable outcast Bedawi,” grumbled
a young man, “ whose own sheykh cast them out, and since
their own Hamadan will not have them, we must submit to
their incursions as best we may.” “ Since they stole the
saddle of the tax farmer, surely they have left the poor
in peace ? ” queried another. “ How did they that ? ”
inquired Suleyman, winking at Marmaduke as though to
say, Of course I know the answer, but let us hear it. “ The
saddle of the tithe farmer,” explained the first speaker,
“ is interposed between the fattest region of his person and
the horse’s back.”


“ One day,” the second speaker took him up, “ as -Rih
and Rihan were out in search of exploits, they met a man on
horseback, armed to the teeth with every kind of weapon
that could by any means be stuck or slung about his person,
seated upon this monstrous saddle, which hung about with
coins and jewels could in the sunlight be seen afar. He was
attended by a troop of Turkish soldiers; but these, being
ill mounted, were a mile behind when Rih and Rihan
accosted him, inquiring in a friendly way how much the
saddle cost, who made it, and why he was condemned
to ride on such a cumbrous thing. For all reply, the
horseman called them sons of dogs, and bade them haste
away or they would get a beating from his armed attendants.
“ Such language from a townsman being insupportable,
Rih and Rihan seized the boaster, one on either hand,
moving him clear out of the saddle to the ground. Rihan
leapt down and sat upon him, while Rih removed the
gorgeous object from his horse’s back. Then they reset
him on his naked steed, and were themselves remounting
when the soldiers, summoned by the great one’s cries, came
within range. Then, for a moment, there was fear from
bullets, and the cousins crouched along behind their horses’
creeks : but soon their thoroughbreds had borne them out
of danger, and up before Rihan was set the saddle of the
tax-farmer.”
“ Yes, and it was for that shameless deed they were dis-
graced by the chief of their nation, for the townsman had a
safe conduct.” “ And moreover, they lied when the sheykh
asked them where was the saddle, and that he cannot
forgive.” “ They grow daily more bold,” mourned another,
hitherto silent; “ they have to-day cut off the road between
Jaffa and Gaza, hoping to take much grain from pilgrims.”
“ Over there, in Yebna,” pointed another, “ dwells the
wife of Rih, daughter to a poor fellah.” “ That would be
the way to take him, if the caimmacams but cared.”
“Justice is then slow here, and unsure? ” queried Mar-
maduke. “ Nay,” said Suleyman, quickly, “it is not that,
only our Government leaves us in peace, except on great
occasions, when the public weal or the honour of our faith


is threatened. We are not like you Franks, who will not
eat your dinner contented unless your Government has
given you permission for every mouthful : Franks require a
tezerah 1 before they relieve nature,” he added, whilst
approving nods greeted his remarks. A pettifogging
Government that demands, scheduled and on a form, the
very privacies of life, is utterly alien to the Oriental mind.
Even Mrs. Burton, whose dislike of the Turkish Empire
was only equalled by her desire that we should annex
Syria, stated that c the districts with the maximum of home
rule and the minimum of interference by the authorities
are peaceful and prosperous.’
The countryfolk, for the most part, minded little such
rogues as these two gangsters, who although they required
food and grazing for their horses and help in hiding from
the shadirmas of the village where they pitched their tent,
yet generally attacked not the poor, but the rich. The
soap and oil merchants of Lydda, Jaffa, and Gaza, and the
Christian usurers who lent seed and claimed the harvest as
interest, travelling through the hill-side villages on mules,
their purses so laden that the gold clanked, and it were a
sin not to relieve them of such noisy and onerous a load ;
these were their customary victims.
As Marmaduke and his companions talked, the sun set
and night fell with the suddenness of tragedy, for where
there is no twilight, evening is a daily reminder of death’s
certainty. Suddenly neglecting their guest, all the company
stood, stooped and rose again in prayer.
That night, when the crickets in the stubble were silent,
and over all the country from hill to hill the jackals called
to each other, Rih and Rihan shot the son of the Cadi of
Gaza, and though every man of Yebna heard the shot, and
many moaned all night in terror of the ruffians, none dared
be near the place till day dawned. And then, although
they buried the young man with all honour and wailing of
believers, the murderers were not called to account, for
Yebna lies half-way between Jaffa and Gaza, so who was
to say which caimmacam was responsible ?
1 Permit.


It was Marmaduke’s first encounter with desert Arabs, for
whom livelihood by any means except battle was still
impossible, for no self-respecting Bedouin could be either
farmer or tradesman. The cleavage between the town-
dwellers, who were peaceful and ‘ lacking the fibre which
responds to valiant deeds,’ the farmers who lived in the
rich valleys between the Lebanon and the sea, and the
dwellers in the deserts behind the Jebel Hauran who were
still subject to nothing except the most primitive tribal
discipline, was complete. It is of these last T. JE. Lawrence
was to write : ‘ Since swords have passed out of fashion,
life was grown too complicated for this childlike people.’
Already the opening up of Syria to foreign emigrants was
crowding out such types as Rih and Rihan, who were as
unamenable as our gipsies to education or improvement, as
we know it.
It was amongst such folk as Rih and Rihan’s chief, the
Sheykh Hamadan, that Marmaduke first heard talk of what
would happen on the downfall of the Turks. The older
men looked to Egypt, remembering the conquests of
Mehemet Ali, and the gospel of an Arab empire under the
Lord of Egypt which Ibrahim Pasha preached in Palestine
and Syria. That gospel, he gathered, was still being
preached in secret by missionaries sent from Egypt. Of
such talk he wrote : ‘lt astonished me, at that early age
when I had faith in all things English, to hear those Arabs
ascribe the recent material prosperity of Egypt not to
England, but to the action of Mehemet Ali. The English
in their projects figured as a tool, and the British occupation
was an incident which could be used to their advantage, a
step towards the Arab Empire which they had in view. I
gathered then, and subsequently, that the sherif of Mecca
was to be the spiritual head of the reconstituted realm of
El Islam, the Khedive of Egypt the temporal head.’
These views, which later became of such tremendous
importance, he hardly then took seriously: seriously
enough, however, to remember them twenty years after,
when he heartily disapproved the plan adopted by the
British and so passionately advertised by Colonel Lawrence


—of transferring the Khaliphate to Mecca and founding an
Arab empire. This Pan-Arab scheme frightened him con-
siderably. As an Englishman, it seemed to him fantastically
unsound : to allow the spiritual power of Islam to be
removed from a progressive Muslim country close to
Europe to a Muslim country the reverse of civilized seemed
folly : Egypt, strongly disaffected as soon as Lord Cromer’s
iron hand was removed, was the home of a race { whose
mentality,’ he declared, ‘ is so different from us that it is
impossible for them to understand us perfectly ’ : and he
added : * Personally, I should incline to back an Arab
Khaliphate against the British Government in a struggle
lasting over fifty years.’
Sitting in the coffee shop of Ramleh, after the killing of
the Cadi’s son, Suleyman and Marmaduke heard the
murder discussed, as also many other deeds of blood, and
gradually, as he rode about the country —they went out,
day after day, from dawn till dark—he became accustomed
to seeing men dead and learnt to look as calmly and com-
passionately on a corpse as on a living fellow-creature. He
began now to subtract from human life its Occidental, and
credit it only with its Oriental value. By our intensifying of
life for life’s sake we have lengthened and stretched it in all
directions, but we have lost in depth and vividness what we
have gained in measurement.
Of our charity we patch up war victims so they may live
in agony to die some eighteen years after the Armistice, of
wounds received in action : we commute to penal servitude
the more passionate or clever of our criminals; but in our
terror of death —which we regard as the greatest of all
evils, postponing it with every possible excuse and thinking
all else endurable so long as God lends life —we lose what
dignity and what delight life may have. For it is from
death’s certainty, and by fixing our imagination on skull
and tomb, that we can best teach ourselves the value of
every instant.
The Arab finds his happiness simply and continuously :
green trees, sweet waters, and a kind face, as his own
proverb says, are sufficient to banish care, and there is no


sorrow which may not be eased by grass growing, water
flowing, and the beauty of women. Dying is for them a
question merely of chronology, and since ‘ the fate of each
is tied about his neck and no one laden may bear another’s
load ’ —as is written in the Qu’aran —the respect for
individual liberty is carried to what may seem to us to be
extremes of laissez-faire.
For example, once, when Marmaduke was riding with
Suleyman, on the seashore, a sudden storm got up : the
wind, tearing through the sharp dune-grass, beat itself on
to the churning sea, and both men, closely followed by
their muleteer, galloped madly for shelter to a village on
the nearest headland. This proved to be a stronghold of
Circassian settlers who had fled from the Caucasus, to
escape the yoke of the accursed Muscovite, and proclaimed
themselves not subjects of the Turkish Government, but
allies. There the three drenched riders were entertained by
an old man. This old exile, when he heard Marmaduke
was English, was very thrilled, and explained to them the
secret of British influence in the East.
“ An Englishman is good, any Englishman is good, and
his word is sure. I remember the defence of Kars. My
son, here, does not remember it; he thinks, when I tell
him, that my mind wanders. But that day (during Shamil’s
revolt, in the Crimean War —an insurrection which we first
encouraged, and then, conveniently, forgot) three English-
men behaved like warrior angels, they fought like devils.
And while they fought for us their Government betrayed
our country. With you,” the old man went on, “ personal
honour is everything : you will never, any one of you, lie
or cheat. But your national honour is not: you may say
one day one thing, and the contrary on the morrow. With
us it is different. An individual may sometimes, occasionally
cheat; but if a tribe or community or a country pledges its
word in solemn conclave, you may trust that word for
ever.”
He set food before them : a bowl of eggs cooked in clari-
fied butter, sour milk, Arab bread, and fragrant coffee,
apologizing the while for the meagreness of the fare. Next
D


day he sped them on their way with c zad ’ —food for the
road —in the shape of two roast chickens. Yet hardly had
they regained the shore when they found a group of Turkish
soldiers surrounding a dying Englishman and his dead
servant. These men, the soldiers told them, had been
murdered by those same Circassians by whom they them-
selves had been so hospitably entertained—indeed, it was
their host himself who had killed the camel-driver and
wounded Marmaduke’s young fellow-countryman: the
latter had been taking a large company down to Lydia with
the idea of setting up a business there.
As Marmaduke and Suleyman rode on to fetch a doctor,
the dragoman made the following remarks on what they
had lately seen : “ It is like this, my friend, each man must
see with his own eyes and not with another’s ! Whosoever
sees, as the Qu’aran says, sees to his own profit: Whoso is
blind, is blinded to his own hurt. People are as one finds
them, good or bad ; good to their friends, bad to their
enemies. They change with each man’s vision, yet remain
the same.”
Gradually they visited in turn all the three zones into
which is divided the land that lies between the sea and the
violet, snow-covered heights of the ‘ Mountain ’ and its
satellites. The sea-board strip, or Sahil, on which the
coastal towns from Tyre to Tripoli are built, is now flat,
now broken : a piece of land in some places very wide in
others narrowed down to a few miles. In pre-classical and
classical times densely inhabited, it is now a happy hunting-
ground for all digging and deciphering folk. In spring corn-
fields stretch as far as eye can reach, stained with patches
of scarlet tulips, and broken by sudden crops of mud huts,
some round-topped, which are villagers’ houses, others
conical, serving as granaries and store-houses. In their
midst rise generally one or two date-palms, crowned each
with plumes of fountain-spreading leaves and clustering
swarms of reddish ripening fruit.
The streets are narrow lanes winding between low mud
walls, enclosing small courtyards. Each hut has two open-
ings, a low door, and a hole from which the smoke escapes.


Generally, they found the inhabitants squatting in street or
court, and hardly troubling themselves to move out of the
way of the horses’ hoofs. In the summer, all this land is
desert, only the thistles, blue and yellow, survive the
drought, and the white mosque of Ramleh shines like a
mirage. Farther north, at Gaza, the fight with the sand is
continual —every fruit tree has to be dug out, swept out,
whilst the wind that sweeps the orchards and houses buries
them daily afresh.
Dark, slim, hand-woven dresses, with a single bright
stripe, white with blue, yellow with red, red with blue, with
long, tight sleeves, a square waist-cloth and a long white
head veil were worn by the women of these parts : by the
men, a loose grey or brown coat, the abayeh, and under it
the long striped kumbaz, or shirt.
After the Sahil, the Wusut, or middle region, might seem
empty, so thinly planted are the mud huts, but it is even
more extensively cultivated and fertile. Vast olive groves,
English-willow coloured, that in this strident landscape are
as effective as grey nuns in the pageantry of a medieval
court, tapestry the gentle slopes, affording dappled shade to
horse and rider. The olive tree is sacred in Syria, for when
Muhammed —God bless and keep him—died, all the trees
shed their leaves, as in winter, for grief; but the olive did
not, and when taxed with lack of sorrow, bade Gabriel
cleave it with his axe : its whole heart was found to be in
mourning, black for the prophet’s loss. The kharrub grows
here, too, but is a tree of which to be careful, for, together
with the fig, the sycamore, and the caper-bush, it is used as
a perch by various kinds of demon.
The villages are often enclosed with hedges of nubk or
lote-tree, for is it not common knowledge that Paradise
itself is so walled ? And the little shrivelled apples set
among the thorns are much prized as a delicacy. Above
the villages there is often on the top of the nearest steep
hill a sacred grove, sometimes of this tree, sometimes of
tamarisk, which, when the wind blows through it, soughs
the name of Allah. If the trees are more than forty years
old they are often visited by saints whose spirits come and


sit in them, especially every Thursday, which is a weekly
Muslim all-souls’ day.
The high land, the Jurd, beginning at about four thousand
feet, was the most exciting country of all, Marmaduke
thought. Here, long-eared hares, with pale ash coats, ran
across their path, and they saw plenty of foxes, a few lynxes,
and hyenas (although luckily they escaped the sad fate of
many travellers, against whose legs, of an evening, a hyena
has rubbed itself; they are then bewitched, and must
follow where the hyena leads, crying after it, “ Wait for me,
Oh, my dear, oh, my uncle,” until, arrived at its den, they
are eaten). Black and white duck rose out of the wadis,
and when the travellers had climbed up into the woods of
Syndyan oak, terebinth, and kaykab (maple), wild boar
were to be met.
Marmaduke loved going out after them, and was content
to pursue them all day long, but failed always at the end
either to catch or kill —an unsporting attitude to the chase
which was deplored by Suleyman, who was horrified at
his lack of zeal. Once for a whole day amongst the rocks of
En-Gadi he chased a solitary partridge, and here in the
hills was willing to endure any amount of real discomfort,
such as frost-bite, only to neglect to fire when his chance
came, because dawn, too, was come, and in the face of the
sun’s rising he could only stand and stare and praise : “ Eum,
qui omnem hanc pulchritudinem regit et tuetur -” 1 He says of
himself, *it was lurking in wild places at unusual hours
which pleased me, not matching my strength against the
might of beasts.’
The air itself was heady—the pure ‘ yailak ’ to which the
natives drove their flocks up into the highlands from their
c kishlak ’ or winter quarters. When Suleyman stopped for
prayer, lizards would run out of their holes in the hot rocks;
with red and green coats they had bright blue heads that
bobbed up and down as though in mockery of his devotions.
Often he and Marmaduke would eat their lunch under an
overhanging mass of gishar—the wild white honeysuckle—
1 ‘ Him who is Ruler and Guardian of all this beauty.’ Cicero: De
Senectute.


or under red mistletoe that hung in huge-acorned oaks, or
under the Sinauber pines, light as larches but evergreen.
For breakfast they would stop and eat leben (curds) and
Arab bread, and in the evening, if too far out from Jaffa
to get back, would put up at the village guest-house. If
it was feast day, or they were feeling rich, they would have
sheep roasted and stuffed with olives and nuts, or pigeons
fried with oily rice, but more often just a mess of lentils or a
stuffed vegetable marrow, followed by haleweh —cakes of
sesame and honey, or dibs—grape syrup and molasses, or
baklaweh —a kind of fine pastry powdered with sugar.
Coffee followed and a narghileh ; then to sleep on the
mattresses laid in rows in the long upstairs room, with a
glimpse of stars seen through the lattice and the night air
as cold to breathe as a drink of ice-water.
Marmaduke found in this life and in the Arab dress he
wore as much release as T. E. Lawrence was to find twenty
years later. But Lawrence always felt he had become a
Yahoo, had * bartered his soul to a brute master ’ and ‘ quit
him of his English self/ wholly destroying the West in him,
whilst averring he ‘ could not sincerely take on the Arab
skin : it was an affectation only. Easily was man made
an infidel, but hardly might he be converted to another
faith/
Marmaduke felt no such tearing ; no such division. He
had no axe to grind ; nor knowledge of that grinding to
destroy all his assurance, as, on his own testimony, it had
destroyed Lawrence’s. He never felt with Lawrence *as
for honour, had I not lost that a year ago when I assured
the Arabs that England kept her plighted word.’ His
release was complete : the content of one, born in a foreign
country, who, when he reaches home, finds that by some
trick of race memory he has recognized the place.
Mr. E. M. Forster wrote of him in Abinger Harvest: ‘He
appears to be one of those rare writers who only feel at
home when they are abroad. As a pose, such an attitude is
common, and can easily be detected by the scorn with which
the poser always treats tourists, Oriental Christians, and
Levantines generally : they are on his nerves, because they


remind him of the civilization to which he really belongs.
Unadulterated Islam alone will suit him, and he returns to
Paris or London to say so. Mr. Pickthall is much too serious
to be scornful : though Islam is indeed his spiritual home,
his most charming novel is about an Oriental Christian and
his most ambitious novel about a Muslim of the bad type :
a cruel and treacherous swaggerer. He does not senti-
mentalize about the East, he is a part of it, and only
incidentally does his passionate love shine out.”
Plato’s legend of the creation of man and woman as an
entirety, split by Zeus into two, and thereafter condemned
ceaselessly to search for the missing half, which is found in
only one of every several thousand copulations, is not less
true when applied to man and milieu. Very rarely—almost
as rarely as he makes a perfect marriage—does a man find
himself in the century, the place, and amongst the people
where he is at home. Often, even were he so to find himself,
he would not recognize nor realize the place ; alien habits
of thought, constantly superimposed by education, environ-
ment, and convention on his original make-up, strange
modes of dress, of speech, and of life, have so warped him
that he is become nor flesh nor fowl nor good red herring.
Not so Marmaduke. From the first moment, when still
little more than a boy, he woke up and found himself in the
Near East, he knew himself come home. At first he thought
it was Syria and the Arabs that were his long-lost, new-found
country and people. But as he grew older he realized it
was not perfumed Arabia
‘ where the princes ride at noon ’
that had ensnared him, nor any glamour of Eastern magic or
Turkish delight—meretricious, glutinous joys invented by
steamship companies, and c the mysterious power called
Kuk.’ This is the faked East of which Mr. Forster writes so
bitterly as being an invention of the ‘ dahabiyeh school ’ :
‘ it is often sumptuous and skilful, but it exists to be the
background of some European adultery.. This faking began
long ago, Cleopatra was the original excuse, and the
Emperor Augustus (wishing to keep the Egyptian corn trade


in his own hands), pretended that the country would corrupt
his pure-hearted Romans, and forbade them to land without
a permit. It is a long cry from Virgil to Mr. Hichens, but
the germs of the exotic fallacy may be found in the eighth
book of the Aeneid. Adultery in the East is no more univer-
sal than the mummies with which the writers of the dahabiyeh
school entwine it. Cancel it off against sin in England and
pass on.’
Marmaduke’s taste for this synthetic Orient passed. ‘He
was very fond of dressing up, but outgrew it,’ as one friend
of his wrote. He came to realize that ‘ notions of the
country ’ bought for friends and people in England c lose
significance when taken out of their setting,’ so, too, he
learnt that * living in Arab garb ’ a la Lawrence was to
disguise oneself only, not to change. Play-acting em-
phasized separateness, as Lawrence knew and complained
when he found * the corroding sense of my accessory deceit-
fulness towards the Arabs ’ and the ‘ mental tug-of-war
between honesty and loyalty ’ settling down ‘ expediently
into deadlock.’ Change is a chemical process, which can
take place only under the influence of strong positive
emotion : love only can ‘ find out the way,’ and by the will
to identify produce the necessary identification.
Marmaduke, when he found the real East, discovered
what he had really found was the great brotherhood of
Islam : a fraternity that has bound innumerable classes
and many nations in a unity so strong that hostile armies,
foreign conquest, and the whole efforts of all the capitalist
Christian nations have not shattered it. And in that unity,
which is without comparison,-for it has gathered together in
complete agreement and complete equality black and white
and brown and yellow races, and created a solidarity of
peoples which has survived the political break-up of the
Muslim world, he found himself accepted, caught up.
All the peoples and tribes he wandered amongst, Lawrence
said : “ Lay open to us through the master key, Arabic ” ;
but with greater insight, Gertrude Bell wrote : ‘ Islam is
the bond that unites the western and central parts of the
continent, as it is the electric current by which the trans-


mission of sentiment is effected, and its potency is increased
by the fact that there ; is little or no sense of territorial
nationality to counterbalance it.*
Marmaduke was accepted by Muslims as the young
Dane, Knud Holmboe, was to be later, because he himself
accepted the two only essentials of their faith : belief in
God’s sovereignty, and in conduct as the only test of faith.
No wonder he grew out of c dressing-up ’ : for what he hated
most in Europe was this instinct to escape into play-acting :
the dressing-up in a different speech to persons of a different
class : at different times of day : the continual refusal to
face the facts either of life or of death simply, without
affectation or pose.
For twenty years after his first journey East he remained
a Christian : but he had already found, as Holmboe did
later, that Muslims are, as their Prophet said, “ as a wall,
one part supporting another. Muslims are all one body.”
And he was not to be completely content until he was a
stone in that wall, an integral part of the masonry. Other
men have had more of that touch of Chanticleer which
Mr. E. M. Forster so rightly considers necessary to a true
understanding of the East, and which Wilfred Blunt so
completely typified. But no one has ever more wholly
fulfilled Mr. Forster’s other essential : ‘it is desirable to be
young. Only in youth, or through memories of youth, only
in the joyous light of the morning, can the lines of the
Oriental landscape be seen.’
Marmaduke at nineteen was what the French call
‘ avrileux ’ : he was a perfect mixture of fool and philosopher
—sometimes an ass, but always a Golden, Apuleian ass.
And he was young as though no one had ever been young
before—as though he were fresh out of Eden, archetypical
of all youth, enjoying life as though no one had ever enjoyed
it before. There was a continual naivete about him which
he kept to his life’s end ; and at nineteen he was always
surprised and nearly always delighted.
Adventures he had in plenty ; but in the strangeness of
this new life each day was itself the best adventure. The
danger from marauding Bedouins; the everlasting flies and


filth and other such trivial discomforts provided the necessary
hardships, which are so essential, for without them can be
no pretence of pilgrimage, and for lack of such make-believe
a journey becomes merely a getting from one place to
another. To the traveller hardships are the magic which,
by some divine sleight of hand, transform and enchant even
the most ordinary happenings.
To obtain the necessary handmaiden miseries, men will
spend winters alone in ice huts, nauseating pemmican, or
summers blown in Gobi sandstorms, or exposed, toes
dropping off, ripe fig-like, on the slopes of Everest, and
will show only annoyance when their strange antics are
interrupted, their self-sought martyrdoms disturbed. Any
objective—a saint cave-hidden in the perpendicular cliff
face of Mount Kailas, a mythical colonel in a Brazilian
jungle—is applauded excuse for adventure, whereas really
comfortable travel cruises on super ships, blue trains, pullman
aeroplanes, Rolls-Royce excursions, and de luxe hotels, are
despised and ridiculed. Nor is this only the compensatory
attitude of the have-nots—the tailless do not jeer loudest.
Though Marmaduke had not yet acquired the wonder and
worship that drives men of all ages across every continent
to kneel beside an empty tomb, he was goaded already
as by a spur, to go, it mattered not yet where ; and as he
moved he discovered around him obstacles to overcome.
‘ How many miles to Babylon ?
Three-score miles and ten.
Can I get there by candle-light ?
Yes and back again.’
Suleyman introduced Marmaduke to the only Europeans
who had ‘ gone native ’ —the Baldenspergers, a French
Alsatian family, with whom Marmaduke was to make life-
long friends. They were the pioneers of scientific bee-
keeping in Palestine, and Marmaduke travelled with them
reviewing their innumerable hives all over the country.
They parked these, in the orange groves of Jaffa, in the
mountains south of Hebron, by Askalon and Edron, and
from time to time moved them on camel-back to new fields


and flowers : from gardens to mountain meadows, thus
securing several crops of honey in the year.
The three brothers, Emil, Samuel, and Henri, were young
men after Marmaduke’s own heart. They told him how the
Government had, for a long time, ignored their activities :
then rumour spread that their industry was extremely
profitable, whereupon a special tax was imposed, a very
high one. The Baldenspergers refused to pay it, but said
the Government might remove the hives if they wished.
Soldiers came, but the owners had taken the precaution of
lifting out the bottom of each hive, so out flew the angry
bees and away the soldiers, thereafter leaving owners and
hives in peace. In the days when the young Baldenspergers
grew up there was no European life in Palestine, so the
young boys had lived in close association with Oriental
Arabs, and in an Oriental atmosphere, and in closer associa-
tion with Arabs than could any European of the present day.
Then one day Suleyman came sadly to announce the
tourist season had come and he must quit holiday-making
and go forthwith to Jerusalem to ply his trade as dragoman
in earnest. Marmaduke decided it was the moment to
present his introductions. To the walls of the Holy City they
rode, and there Marmaduke, memory hot upon him,
dismounted and walked into the town. (Years after, when
Allenby was about to enter Jerusalem in triumph, his sister
got special leave from the war office to wire her brother and
ask him to enter on foot. And Marmaduke at that same time
begged Lady Valda Machell to do what she could to prevent
Allenby wounding Arab susceptibilities by riding where
Another had walked. Allenby took their advice, though
Sir Mark Sykes telegraphed back suspiciously to discover
from whom it came.)
To Bishop Blythe, who had been expecting a Harrow
schoolboy, Marmaduke, dressed in Arab clothes and cheer-
fully chatting in Arabic to the Palace servants, came as
rather a shock. The boy found himself once more in the
old reproving atmosphere, beset with social conventions
as to ‘ done ’ and ‘ not done,’ which were the only criteria
of conduct and taste. In the good Bishop’s circle he found


the only subject of conversation was religion : what scandal,
news, gossip, and politics provided in Europe was catered for
in Jerusalem solely by the various sectarian views of the Deity.
In spite of the kindness of the various English people to
whom he had invitations, he found this life, confined within
the city walls and to the society of missionaries, terribly tame.
And he was shocked by the narrowness of Christianity.
It was true that when the Crusaders took the Holy City the
streets had run so deep in Muslim blood that their horses
waded up above their fetlocks (as Suleyman said, “ That was
a glorious massicration ”), but towards each other, surely,
and in the nineteenth century, Anglicans, Catholics, and
Orthodox might feel more benevolent?
He remembered continually the Emperor Julian,’ who
invited representatives of all the leading Christian sects to
wait upon him and endeavour to convert him, not, however,
mentioning to the spokesman of any one sect which was
individual that the invitation had been extended to any
other than himself. The Emperor was purposely late for his
appointment, and the various divines found themselves in
each other’s unwelcome company. At last, when they had
come to actual blows bn the finer points of the jilioque clause,
and blood was beginning to flow, Julian stepped into sight on
the balcony from which, unobserved, he had been spectator
of the whole scene. In a voice that could be heard above the
din, he remarked to his entourage : “ See how these
Christians love one another.”
The pettiness of sectarian snobbishness, which restricted
the Bishop’s visiting list to the European missions, and even
whittled it down to the various Protestant communions,
first bored and then shocked Marmaduke. Surely here, he
thought, where Christ died that they might all be one ;
Catholic, Anglican, Protestant, Orthodox, and Uniate
might pass the time of day? In the face of the infidel,
could they not even make up fours at whist? What
must the Muslims think—they, whose prophet had said :
c Difference of opinion in my community is a manifestation
of divine mercy,’ and : ‘ Let there be no compulsion in
religion ’ ?


As he heard his chers confreres lamenting the converts made
by other, older sects, he could not but remember the
Qu’aranic texts : ‘ The right direction is henceforth distinct
from error. And he who rejecteth vain superstitions and
believeth in Allah hath grasped a firm handle which will
not give way. Allah is all-seeing, all-knowing. And hold
fast, all of you, to the cable of Allah, and do not separate.
Verily, those who believe, and those who keep the Jews’
religious rule, and the Christians, and Sabaens —whoever
believeth in Allah and the last day, and doeth right—
surely their reward is with their Lord, and there shall no
fear come upon them, neither shall they suffer grief.’
It was Christianity, that had driven so many of his con-
temporaries into the arid wildernesses of Darwinian scepti-
cism or Spencerian atheism, which finally led him to Islam.
Partly his youth revolted against the prune-like consistency
of mind of the good Bishop’s satellites, but mostly his over-
whelming sense of reality refused, in this holiest of all cities,
either to limit the means of Grace or to arrogate to any one
community the ownership of the places where that Grace
had manifested itself most clearly.
Ruh’ Allah, the spirit of Allah, was the Muslim name for
Jesus, and this conception tallied better with his childhood’s
faith than did the ornate, be-tinselled mummy, whose
worship was, to his passionate monotheism, idolatry, or
‘ bogey-bogey ’ —his name for it to me. He found Muslims,
who objected to the idolization of anything (and even were
afraid of music as an adjunct to religious worship, because
it associated religion with something tending to produce
illusion), were kindred spirits, for he held with enthusiasm
their conviction that through disillusion only lies the path
to truth. The adoration of one god, without mother or
mystery, was the only creed bare enough for him. He was
as sensitive as the Arabs, for whom ‘ each morsel which
passed their lips might, if they were not watchful, become a
pleasure. Luxuries might be as plain as running water or a
shady tree,’ yet their very rareness might lead to misuse
and turn them into lusts. His God must be what he himself
longed to become ‘ without body, parts or passions.’


Marmaduke never suffered from even the mildest attack
of what Mr. Burton calls ‘ Holy Land on the brain.’ He was
the most naturally Protestant of men, and for him a place’s
identity was only the sum of its inhabitants. Mankind is
ultimately divided into those who think dogs right in their
insistent affection for people, and those who agree with
cats that it is places which matter. .
For Marmaduke, Tobermory was nothing without her
fisherfolk, and he knew the Cannebiere for dull when its
crowds were abed : for him, too, Sinai, widowed of its ill-
tempered, damp-cloud emantled deity, was an uninteresting
mountain, and, but for the creaking of a wooden horse and
the shadow of Creusa, he believed Troy powerless to draw
men still. Jerusalem for him was its markets, its gay crowds,
its childishly hostile creeds : bones and stones gave it no
value in his eyes. Virgil for him created Mantua, not
Mantua Virgil, and he had no use for those who insist that,
citizen of a meaner city, Socrates had not so learnt to die ;
or that, walked daily on Glapham Common, instead of in
Hyde Park, the scions of the English aristocracy would
grow into lesser breeds.
All the influences that were to determine his life came to
him in places both ghost- and relic-ridden, but nevertheless
he always denied Barres’ contention that ‘ a race, a soul, an
atmosphere, and a genius manifests itself as such only in
proportion as it is closely linked with the land and its dead.’
He carried this Frazerian 1 iconoclasm of mind very far, as
is instanced by the fact that his chief delight in the chapel
of the Holy Sepulchre ‘ was another chapel cut in the rock,
known as Calvary but under it. This is the traditional
tomb of Adam, and round its walls are some quaint old
Oriental frescoes which depict the whole long legend of the
tree of life. I once spent a summer afternoon and evening
listening to an old Arab telling me the story, which began
with Lilith and somehow ended with Krumer.’
Marmaduke managed, indeed, to find amusement and
make some very close friends, even amongst the ministrants
of the various creeds in the Holy City. For example, a very
1 If one may use the name of the Golden Dough's great author adjectivally.


learned Jewish Rabbi who would tell him legends of the
‘ evergreen one,’ El Khadhr, mysteriously, also Elijah and
St. George. Another friend, a member of the Orthodox
Church, would enchant him with such ribald legends as
the story of the Young Man who married the Sister of his
Brother’s Wife —a thing forbidden by the canons of the
Greek Church, to whom such a marriage is incestuous.
The priest to whom the sinner applied for forgiveness at
first declared that for so monstrous a crime there could be
no forgiveness, then at length suggested the following
atonement. The village was getting sadly slack : what it
needed to revive its faith was a miracle. If the young man
would consent to let himself be tied by cords on to the cross
in the place of the great Christ during next Sunday’s
service and, whenever the priest made a point from the
pulpit, nod his head vehemently as though in assent, he
might, just possibly, be forgiven.
The young sinner gladly agreed, but, when Sunday
came, insisted the priest must show him how. Safely tied
to the cross, the priest was horrified when the young man
picked it, and him, up and threatened to expose him and
tell the whole story unless suitable forgiveness were forth-
coming. This agreed upon, priest and sycophant changed
roles and the young man made such a handsome living,
what between performing and blackmailing, that he was
able to have his son educated to become a priest in his
turn. When Marmaduke went out to visit the teller of this
tale in his suburbs, he had to stop every few yards and light
matches, all the way, to keep the jackals, who crowded
after him, from biting his heels, and in Jerusalem matches
were not so easily come by as on the Lebanon, where there
was always an open match-box in every Druze grave, to
which non-Druze passers-by could—and did —help them-
selves.
Another of his friends ‘ without the City Wall ’ was an
old khoja who, whilst teaching him Arabic from J. S.
Wilmore’s Manual of Spoken Arabic , also told him stories in
the Daraji, the dialect Arabic of Palestine. This khoja
was very anxious to impress his pupil with the importance


of worldly wisdom, and, to encourage him, bade him make
Heylim his rule of life. “ What is this Heylim ? ” questioned
Marmaduke, and was told that the English words ‘flatter,
insinuate, ingratiate yourself, and dissimulate ’ all together
hardly expressed the full significance of the Arabic. As
illustration of the proper practice of this difficult art, he
would be told the following tale. •
An impoverished poet, thinking to better his fortunes,
wrote two odes in honour of the Commander of the Faithful.
He then had to spend his little all on paying his way to an
audience with the Khalif. The great one listened to
his verses, smiled kindly, and gave him ten dinars. As the
young man looked crestfallen, the Padishah, who was in a
good humour, asked him the reason of his disappointment.
Hearing it, he bade the young man make Heylim his rule of
life. Still more depressed, for advice was to him insult
added to injury, the poet left the presence, and, on his way
home, met an Orthodox priest. Him he fell upon, and
forced to change clothes with him. Then he lived in retire-
ment long enough to grow the long beard and hair affected
by the Orthodox clergy. When these were grown, he went
to the Sheykh-ul-Islam, and asked for an audience, which
was courteously granted. ‘ Three nights ago,’ said the
supposed priest, ‘ I had a most disturbing dream. A
venerable old man ? —and here he described the traditional
appearance of Muhammed— ‘ appeared to me, and, telling
me he was sent to teach me true religion, made me repeat
the following prayer after him. When I awoke, to my great
surprise, I remembered it.’ And he proceeded to recite
the first chapter of the Qu’aran with great unction. The
Sheykh-ul-Islam, after cross-questioning the visitor carefully,
had to admit that here, to all appearances, was a very
interesting convert —a Christian priest, to whom the
Prophet himself had taught the rudiments of the Faith. He
therefore housed him, and treated him with every possible
care and consideration. Next day the convert electrified
his host by saying the old man had visited him again, and
taught him the whole of Chapter 2 —the Surah of the Cow,
which happens to be one of the longest in the whole Qu’aran:


he repeated it flawlessly, with every accent and vowel point
correct.
Next night the third, thereafter the fourth, and every
succeeding night yet another chapter was revealed to the
pseudo-priest, until the Sheykh could no longer conceal his
prodigy, and invited his learned friends to witness the
marvel. Though, when they came, they did their best to
confound him, they found him more than a match for all
the lot of them, and soon the chief topic of conversation
was the great Christian theologian who had been converted
by the combined efforts of the Holy Prophet himself, and
the highest living authority in Islam. But when it came to
divesting himself of his habit, and submitting to circum-
cision, the priest insisted he had been forbidden by the
Prophet to embrace El Islam except at the hands of
the Khalif himself. Hearing of this mysterious Nazarene,
the ruler’s suspicions were aroused, and, when he saw the
young man, confirmed, in spite of locks and beard. Bidding
all others leave the room, the Commander of the Faithful
heard the poet’s story to a close, and was so delighted that
he sent word to the Sheykh-ul-Islam to say he would himself,
in future, be responsible for his pupil. Thenceforward the
young man, shaved and dressed once again in believer’s
clothes, was one of his private secretaries, and by degrees
worked his way up to ever higher posts in the Government.
Another of Marmaduke’s delightful Jerusalem acquain-
tances was an old English lady, who, firmly believing the
Second Coming imminent, climbed every morning the
Mount of Olives before sunrise with a picnic basket and a
thermos, and there waited, certain that when the Messiah
arrived He would be glad, before the hard work of Judgment,
of a hot cup of really good early morning tea. When she
found He did not come, she quietly breakfasted and
returned to Jerusalem for lunch.
One of the Baldensperger brothers turned up in the nick
of time, when Marmaduke was rather languishing for lack
of any contemporary companionship. They did many
things together. Baldensperger took Marmaduke to all his
childhood’s haunts : together they slid down Zion—a little


snow fell that winter, a rare occurrence, happening some-
times late in February. Also, they went to the assembly at
Mamillah where, under a big terebinth, was held the
jousting. It was old Bedouins fighting : with palm branches
stripped of their leaves for spears. The challenger first
hurled his Jerid at the champion, who crouched along his
horse’s neck : then the latter would spring up and pursue
the thrower. They went, too, out to Bir Ayub, which the
melting snows and the heavy rain had caused to overflow.
Siloam fellahin brought the glad tidings, and, as it was a
fine day, immediately there was a general exodus. All
Jerusalem set off to Job’s tomb (the Muslims do not appear
to have heard of Joab, whose memorial it actually is). The
rushing water was a rare and lovely sight for those accus-
tomed only to see it still, in cisterns. Temporary coffee-
stalls were set up beside the stream, for Ayub is a very popular
prophet, and it is here he was cured of his boils. It hap-
pened thus. When his boils grew really very uncomfortable
his wife decided to go and look for work, so she slung him
into her abaya, and carried him on her back for seven
years.
During their wandering, Iblis appeared to them in the
guise of a handsome young man, and asked Mrs. Job to fly
with him. She indignantly refused, but Job was so angry
with her for parleying with the Evil One that he vowed to
give her a hundred lashes. One day, when they were
arrived at the spot where Bir Ayub now is, his wife set Job
down whilst she went on an errand. As he waited there,
Jubrail (Gabriel) appeared, and, striking the ground with
his staff, caused water to appear. “ Wash yourself,” he
ordered Job, “ and drink of this water which now is red,
but which will soon turn green, and then white, and then
sink below the level of the ground.” Job did so and at
once became young and healthy. He was worried about
his vow, but Gabriel, whom he consulted, said : “ Take a
palm branch with one hundred leaves and strike your wife
gently with that,” which Job did. His spring still cures
boils, childlessness, and many other complaints.
The same Baldensperger also showed Marmaduke his old
£


school, and the dark stairs where the terrified boys thought
Dr. Roth, a murdered tourist, lay in wait for them. For
jackals had taken some of his bones before his body had
been found in the Jordan valley, and he was reputed to try
and snatch a rib or a bone to complete his skeleton. There
were many ghosts in that country, for human blood,
sinking into the 'thirsty ground, penetrates deep, and the
spirit of the slain haunts the place for a hundred years.
One of the Bishop’s serving maids, coming home from
shopping, saw on her doorstep a tall shape higher than a
palm tree, and saw, too, the dim human face lamenting,
its sighs dilating and contracting the whole figure like an
accordion, its sad voice distinctly saying : “ Ya Hasreti ”
O, my torments. All ghouls, affrits and Marids (these
last commoner in Egypt, because at greater liberty beyond
the confines of the Holy Land, where prophets and
welis —holy men who were already in Paradise before they
came to earth —are more scarce) could be exorcised by the
mere showing of iron, from which one and all would flee,
terrified.
Doubtless, Baldensperger explained, now able to laugh at
his childish fancies, they were a memory of Bronze Age
dwellers who must have survived in wild places long after
their conquest by the men of iron. Baldensperger could
remember when he was still young enough to be taken by
his mother to visit the Muslim women, and whilst she and
they talked ‘ fasatin 51 he would play with their tiny pots
of flowers : their favourites were mantur and rihan, 2 for
though they idolized roses they could not grow them in
their minute pots. As they talked the women would grind
the day’s burghul ß and would sing melancholy songs. One
told his mother that the only way to rid a room of flies and
mosquitoes was to strip a new-born baby naked and smear it
with honey : the flies would then collect and the baby be
taken out of the room and dusted.
Marmaduke found the Turkish soldiers, who stood even
in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre itself, where they were
1 From ‘ fastan,’ a petticoat. 2 Levkaja and basil.
8 A kind of dressed wheat broken into pieces.


essential to the keeping of the peace, far less offensive than
he had imagined them to be. He went out prepared, with
an English, or even more with an Irish, enthusiasm for
subject races, to find the Turks loathed conquerors, aggres-
sive bullies. He found, on the contrary, as even Gertrude
Bell (who was to work against them no less bitterly than
Lawrence himself) was forced to admit, that : ‘ There is no
nation of Arabs : the Syrian merchant is separated by a
wider gulf from the Bedouin than he is from the Osmanli.’
And he found, as she had, that in Syria it was the Turkish
Army which earned pity and praise : ‘ There iS no more
wonderful and pitiful sight than a Turkish regiment on the
march,’ she wrote. ‘ Ragged, half-fed, ill-clad, often bare-
foot, pinched and worn, they are indomitable.’ Of the
peasants who made up that army : ‘ I am prepared,’ she
added, ‘ to lay tokens of esteem at the feet of the Turkish
peasant. He is gifted with many virtues.’ And for once
Marmaduke agreed with her.
The merits of Turkish government, as Marmaduke saw
it, were that it was rough in the hand, but genial in the
head, allowing great liberty to the individual and furnishing
rich material for song and story. But though he found the
Turks both amiable and admirable, it was the Arabs whom
he preferred above all races. At that time such a passion
was quite incomprehensible : even when, much later,
Lawrence was to put the Arab communities on the map in
so many senses, his affection for them was understood by
few and shared by fewer. (Smuts, for example, said : “We
had forgotten that one could not do with hireling Arabs,
however romantic they seemed to Lawrence —I never saw
any romance in them myself—what one could do with one’s
own people.”)
Whilst he was still living in episcopal circles in Jerusalem,
Marmaduke led what he says ‘ might be described as a
double life : until Suleyman, the tourist season being ended,
came with promise of adventure, when I flung my discretion
to the winds. We hired two horses and a muleteer, and rode
away to the north together. A fortnight later, at the foot
of the ladder of Tyre, Suleyman was forced to leave me,


being summoned to his village. I still rode on towards
the north, alone with one hired muleteer, a simple
soul.’
It was his final breaking loose entirely from Western
civilization, from which, Mr. E. M. Forster says, literature
has gained so much. ‘As soon as we open Marmaduke
Pickthall’s cheerful pages,’ he writes, ‘ the Western world
vanishes without a valediction, like night at the opening of
the day. We sell carpets in Damascus or visit Tanta fair
with no sense of strangeness: it seems our natural life,
when our'’compatriots do stray across the scene they seem
quaint and remote, just as they must seem to an Oriental,
so completely does the writer capture the reader that it is
the West, not the East, that has to be explained.’
Marmaduke, now on his own, was entirely unmindful of
Murray’s most emphatic warning, in the famous guide-
book : ‘ One must be careful against any undue familiarity,
which is apt to lead to even worse results than bullying or
force.’ Never once, not only in Palestine, but throughout
his life, did he find Murray’s admonition come true, or his
confidence abused by either Arab or Turk.
In the stuffy straitlaced immediate entourage of the
Bishop, Marmaduke had found the Bishop’s former chaplain,
William Hastings Kelk, his one ally. Kelk, son to a friend
of Marmaduke’s mother, was, to quote one who knew him, a
little yellow fellow—very queer-looking, whom Marmaduke
praised as ‘ the most unparsonical of men.’ Kelk had been
on a visit to Jerusalem, having been promoted to the charge
of a rich and eccentric female missionary, Catherine Worsley.
She, married to a poor parson, had bullied him as of right,
and when she set out for Palestine with a pantechnicon full
of furniture to look for Hittite conglomerates, she had taken
him with her. She landed at Beyrouth, the city El created
out of lime, and made, in the words of the Dionysiac litany,
‘ fountain of life, foster-mother of all cities.’ The harbour
of this Paradise would not admit of the pantechnicon’s
landing ; it had to be taken ashore on specially built lighters.
Many, many mules were then hired to drag it up country.
At one place even these failed. It was a small village to


which serpented upwards a pebbly road among terraces of
fig and olive.
At the entrance to the group of stone-built huts grew a
giant sycamore, and the elders of the place were gathered
round it, peacefully smoking. When the mules stuck they
got up and came to jeer. William Bennett, Mrs. Worsley’s
manservant, rode up to the omdeh, or head-man, and be-
laboured him with his riding whip, commanding him to set
to and help, together with all his men. The Sheykh was so
horrified that he obeyed, and the lady’s reputation was
made : if her servant were so great and powerful a man
she must indeed be second only to The Widow herself! She
throve on the legend, but soon after their arrival her husband
died.
The southern valley of the Orontes was generally accepted
as the headquarters of the Hittites, and Mrs. Worsley set up
house in a Druze village, Ain Anoub, on the south-western
slopes of the Lebanon. Here she displayed to all visitors
one solitary piece of stone she had found, declaring it was a
Hittite conglomerate ; this meagre evidence proved her
contention that the Hittites had their own conglomerates.
Bennett, her cook, and chaplain made up her establishment,
appropriately called Mizpah.
Kelt, on leaving to resume his duties, had warmly invited
Marmaduke to visit him and promised him an amusing
time. After Suleyman’s desertion Marmaduke decided to
make his way up to the Lebanon to stay with his friend.
On his meandering journey he collected both a kurbaz—
a whip of rhinoceros hide, mounted and ringed with silver,
given him in gratitude for some imagined favour by an aged
Arab—and a servant, whom he bought out of the Turkish
army for five pounds.
Rashid, as this man was called, is one of the most lovable
people in all Picktkall’s books, and his affection for the whip
is the subject of one of the best stories in Oriental Encounters.
The whip itself also figures in Said the Fisherman and The
Valley of the Kings.
Marmaduke stayed in many places. He first crossed the
noble plain of Esdraelon, where 70 square miles and 120


villages were owned then by a single Greek merchant, one
Sursuk, who made £40,000 a year out of farming and
exhibited the worst characteristics of Oriental despotism
and occidental capitalism : an absentee landlord who re-
duced the entire population to misery. Then from the
Roman Road at Nawaran, Marmaduke looked down on the
green, swampy plain where the Jordan flows into the blue
tranquil waters of Merom ; at Kuneiterah he camped in
the desert and ate * semen ’ —curds of camels’ milk (the
Bedouins first boil the milk, then hang it, and finally it is
churned in a sheepskin by the women and sent to all parts
of Syria, where it is esteemed above oil, butter, or lard),
and learnt the ritual, too, of Arab coffee-making. Men
only are allowed to prepare it. The berries are first roasted
in a shallow pan called a mahmash, and when half roast
are pounded in a stone or wooden mortar with a great
pestle (mahbash), the pounding being carried on to the
rhythm, one, two-three, four, five ; one, two-three, four,
five. The bukraj (coffee-pot) is then placed in the fire, and
when the water boils the meal is put into it. The pot is then
put on the fire again, taken off when it is boiling, then put
on and brought a third time to the boil. Each cup is in
turn warmed with the contents of the first, which is poured
on the ground, a libation to the Sheykh-es-Shadilly, patron
of coffee-drinkers. Always the most honoured guest is
offered the first cup, half-full, for a full cup is an insult;
then each guest in precedence is served. A second cup is
always offered and accepted ; but never a third : for the
first cup is for the guest, the second for enjoyment, the third
for the sword.
Amongst the desert Arabs Marmaduke found almost as
many variations of Christianity as of Islam, in large measure
due to the results of Western propaganda and of the wide-
spread knowledge and acceptance of the blessed message of
Salvation. One man, however, did puzzle him. Over the
inevitable coffee Marmaduke asked him what communion
he followed, and his reply was “ Biramouzi, effendim.”
Although acquainted with all the four hundred and four
divisions of Christendom, Pickthall had never heard of this


sect. As his host could only repeat the word, without
definition, he set to work on philological principles.
‘ The Arab cannot easily pronounce “p ” nor “ th,” ’
argued Marmaduke to himself, ‘ and the terminal “i” is
merely “ follower of,” or “ denizen of” : therefore, we will
recast the word as Pramouth.’ Aloud : “ Look here ! ”
he said, ‘‘just what message did your faith bring you? ”
“O, my lord, a most wonderful message ! All Christians
look forward to their Salvation, but we alone are assured
of it, above all men.” “ Then I’ve got it,” said Pickthall.
“ Do you mean, by any chance, ‘ Plymouth Brethren ’ ? ”
“ O, sayyid, wisest of all men, thou knowest all things,”
came the answer, “itis as thou sayest, ‘ Biramouzi Brezren! ’ ”
On his journey Marmaduke found, too, every variety of
costume, climate, and condition. From the snow-capped
height of Hermon, 10,000 feet above, to the Dead Sea
Valley nearly thirteen hundred feet below, sea-level the
country offered every form of life and climate, from the
tropical to the alpine. In the Moab desert he rode through a
waste of sand, surrounded by piles of burnt red limestone
rocks : the women wore long blouses, shapeless, and hitched
two or three times round them with variously coloured
sashes.
In Transjordan the smart girls had loose trailing sleeves
caught up round the head, the dresses themselves being most
often dark blue, stitched with red embroidery. The men,
if they were Bedouins, wore a kumbaz, a garment, generally
white, with long, hanging, pointed sleeves ; and over all they
wore the abaya, the loose coat that is common to all men all
over Syria and Palestine, and-is generally of black coarsely
woven goats’ hair. Their sandals had Louis XI long points
before and behind. On his way to Hasbeiyah he found a
village where the inhabitants thought, on the night of an
eclipse of the moon, that their neighbours over the hill had
stolen it: bravely they set forth with sticks and staves to
climb the hill that divided them, but when they reached the
summit, there, shining benignly upon them, was their moon.
“ Praise be to God,” they exclaimed, “ the neighbours,
hearing we were come out to attack them, have let go our


dear.” But when Marmaduke arrived at the thieving neigh-
bours, he heard a very different story. “ They are such
fools, those over yonder,” he was assured, “ they are always
fussing about the moon. One night they saw its reflection
in the river and rushed home for their nets and pails, think-
ing it had fallen in, and came running to pull it out. And
any April morning you can see them crouching in their
fields with their ears to the ground, listening to their wheat
growing.” Around here grew pistacia, with long clusters
of white flowers, camphire, and the apple of Sodom, the
poisonous egg-plant nightshade, and henna.
In Galilee the women went unveiled, their dark hair
plaited, and over it they wore a heavy waka, or coif. In
Bethlehem high and hood-like, in the Ramallah district
the hair was decked with coins—local coins and heavy
Spanish dollars. In the field their gay print trousers, of
Manchester-made blue and white, pink, or pink-striped
cottons, as full as the wearer could afford, and the fuller the
smarter, gathered tightly at the ankle, gave them a ballooned
look, so that they strutted, flamingo-gay geese, against the
rich red earth and opaquely white rocks. When Marmaduke
got into the really high hills he saw coins plaited into the
hair and worn in the caps, and in each village a different
cap, and a different way of wearing the square-folded
waistcloth : now as a pocket, now embroidered as a sash.
At last he arrived at Ain Anoub. This village, on the
main Beyrouth-Damascus road, lived up to its name
‘ Fountain of Palm Trees.’ The way up to it lay through
groves of olives and mulberries, and gardens of peach,
apricot, orange, lemon, pomegranate, and fig. He found
his friend Kelk had been installed in a pleasant little house
of his own, built of white stone and rubble. Two-storied,
set into the steep hill-side ; the flat roofs of the lower apart-
ments formed terraces on to which the principal rooms
opened, and where the friends hung their laundry out to
dry.
Kelk had for a servant a magnificent old fellow, nearly
seven feet high, a Druze, who remembered well the rebellion
of the year iB6O, and was Marmaduke’s chief authority


for the happenings related about that rising in Said the
Fisherman. He had killed, he averred, fifty Maronites in the
slaughter, and then, hungry, had slaughtered a sheep and
eaten it whole and raw and warm. Since that massacre
the Lebanon had always been under a Christian governor,
traditionally devoted, ever since Lord JDufferin saved the
Druze nation from extinction, to the English. The Druzes
were, Marmaduke found, a thrifty, energetic, and industrious
people : for example, the high village of Shimlan, 3000 feet
up, contained one of the largest silk factories in Palestine,
employing 6000 souls —all the cocoons, even then, came
from Japan !
The Druze faith had for him the immense attraction it
has always had for Europeans. It is a very secret faith.
“ The gate is shut; none can go out and none in,” is their
saying, though no people are more ready to welcome the
stranger to see the externals of their belief. The Khalweh,
the Druze meeting-house, can be visited upon request by
Europeans, men and women equally : it contains a few
mats, a few sacred books ; sometimes eatables and bedding
for visiting Druzes. No one is ever refused admission to the
Thursday meetings, and if the visitor is a Christian the
Bible will be read, if a Muslim a few suras from the Qu’aran.
Then, when he is gone, the real meeting will proceed.
This second meeting is very largely political : the organiza-
tion and conduct of the various villages is discussed. It
ends with the chanting of epic poems describing the destruc-
tion of the world by Druze armies led by the five ministers,
who will come, as they believe, out of China. Whenever a
Druze dies he is born again -elsewhere : when one is born,
another dies ; the number cannot vary. Whatever faith he
may profess, matters nothing : a Druze may be baptized,
can communicate, or can profess the Unity with Muslims.
‘ The colour of a man’s shirt will not change his skin.’
One thing they will never do is to marry outside the com-
munity. Their faith, a jumble of Egyptian legends, of
Zoroastrianism with something culled from the Greek
Plotinists, from Christianity, and from Islam, divides be-
lievers into three classes. Those who confess the Unity


first seek Him with their eyes, and with the testimony of the
corporeal view ; the next strive to know Him by the use of
words, reason, and sophistry ; the third, the fully initiate,
confess him by the intelligence only, ‘ for all religions are but
painted cloaks, the knowing say, which those who bear the
Truth in mind may don and throw aside as seems expedient.’
Life is for them an endless wheel, and death, together with
both good and evil fortune, and reincarnation itself, are
incidental and purely transitory.
The Akkas, or Knowing, differ from th tjahhal, or Ignorant,
even in costume : the Akka wear a tall cap, wrapped round
turban-wise with a white cloth. The rather short and
narrow abaya is sleeveless and the trousers are mere bags,
with a hole at each corner for the leg, hitched plus-four-wise,
to the knee. The women wear a black velvet crown-shaped
head-dress, and a long black shirt, with a characteristic
rounded neckline, over coloured cotton trousers.
Marmaduke “ gained the complete confidence and
friendship of the Druzes,” as one of his sisters tells me;
“he was pledged in blood brotherhood with a Druze
chieftain, and actually initiated into their secret religion.”
How far this initiation went no one, now he is dead, can
say. If he knew their secrets he kept them. He certainly
was conversant with their passwords, for in one of his
Tales from Five Chimneys , The Just Steward , he describes
the old Druze asking chance passers-by : “Do they sow
the seed of halilaj in your country ? ” But he may have
learnt that phrase from other travellers, for the question
(sometimes the seed is called mysobalamus ) is a stock one,
and the proper answer is known also : “It is sown in the
hearts of Believers.” But his power of recognizing Druzes,
and of persuading them to help him, stood him in very good
stead when he was in Egypt in 1907 : he found a whole
colony of them in Cairo, another provided him with much
useful information about the state of the country and the
extent of the discontent.
Whilst in the Lebanon Marmaduke travelled widely,
from one Druze stronghold to another : to Baaklin, to Deir
el Kamr (the Druze capital, although actually containing


more Maronites than Druzes), to El Bajada on the slopes
of Hermon, to Homs and to Condor’s newly discovered site,
south-west of it, of the great Hittite city of Kadesh, the holy,
where Ramesesllin 1361 b.c. won the victory commemorated
in the Rameseum of Thebes. Ibrahim Pasha had also
stayed at Homs, and whilst he was there the groans and
squeals of the mill-wheels annoyed him, so he gave orders
that they should stop working—and none of the regular
inhabitants could sleep a wink for lack of the accustomed
rumbling.
Marmaduke went also to Hamah, where Hittite hiero-
glyphics, discovered in 1812, still defied deciphering. In
the vast triangle formed by Hamah, Aleppo, and Antioch,
there are, according to the Arabs, more than 365 buried
cities. Mrs. Worsley, before Winckler or Hrozny had found
the key to the Hittite language, did her best to unravel the
affinities of those remote people and their script, and to
interest Marmaduke in them. But no one can make a
cucumber grow straight, and he remained profoundly
, unmoved by the possible or probable descendants of Heth,
son of Canaan.
He and Kelk shared the house and the expenses, and
Marmaduke remained there a considerable while, often
entertaining friends. From Ain Anoub he went to Damas-
cus : the train took nine hours to cover the ninety miles
from Beyrouth. The sea mist hung about the long mulberry
groves of the coast when he started. The train climbed
and, panting and spitting, reached the level of five thousand
feet, then stumbled along the sunny plateau between the
Lebanon and anti-Lebanon.. Next came a valley, smooth
as an English squire’s lawn, but surrounded by snow-capped
hills. Past vines and farms the train ran into the rocky
gully which is the stony prelude to Damascus, along the
Abana, until suddenly, round a coil of the river, a foaming
white ostrich-plume fan seemed flung open : the blossoming
plain lay before him, and all around.
Julian had called this city ‘ the Eye of the East,’ and
though, numerically, it is second to Smyrna as chief town of
Asia Minor, it is supposedly the oldest city in the world ;


on the Karnak Stone it is enumerated as one of the cities
paying tribute to Totmes 111, 3800 years ago. Everything
that earth can contain, lovely or desirable, is, for the Arab,
contained in the vast garden that surrounds Damascus.
Marmaduke described the first sight of Es Sham as it
appeared to a poor fisherman from one of the villages on
the coast: ‘ White domes and minarets, mosques and
palaces, loomed wanly in the heart of a vast grove, which
stretched, far as the eye could ascertain, towards a smooth
horizon which was the desert.’ Said’s heart leapt as he
beheld the mistress of his dreams, set in her endless gardens,
seeming the fairer and more desirable for the grim, treeless
mountains which were her girdle. “It is paradise,” he
murmured in ecstasy. Such paradise that Muhammed,
gazing on the city from a neighbouring summit, turned from
it with the words : “ Man can have but one Paradise, and
mine is fixed above.”
In 1897 the streets were still shut off at night by doors
which divided the different quarters of the town from each
other, and Marmaduke found the houses so tightly packed
that to encompass the whole city was hardly more than a
morning’s walk. It was dotted with gardens, with little
thickets and tufts of rose trees, the river murmuring through
them, sparkling over pebbles in the sunlight of mid-stream,
but willing enough to dawdle in deep pools under the shade
of the great walnut trees. Without the walls it was ringed
with orchards and still-green gardens, in whose depths
reigned the most unbroken quiet: under the laced and
laden boughs it was always cool; even in the hottest summer
there are green deeps so profound the sun cannot fathom
them.
Marmaduke would spend long hours, in the heat of the
day, lying on the bed in his room at the end of a blind
alley, up a flight of nine stone steps. From here he could
look out into the narrow crowded street, bordered with
shops and many-coloured wares. He would alternate
between reading chap-books such as The Rare Things of Abu
Nawwds and looking out at the colour and movement of
that street, which, like all Damascus streets, was narrow,


cobbled, and perpetually seething with people. Once, as
he lay and read, a thief came in and stole his belt, which
had about fifteen pounds of English money sewn into it.
Marmaduke, panting after him, saw him vanish safely into
a bazaar, and went quietly back to his reading.
There are, luckily, in Arabic, many books containing
nothing else but folklore : some Muslim, others of a
Christian tinge, which have circulated amongst the people
for the last thousand years. The best ancient work, Marma-
duke found, was the Unsifl-Jalil of Majr-ud-Din , wherein he
learnt the legendary Muslim cosmogony : how the earth is
supported on the shoulders of an angel, the angel on a great
rock of emerald, the rock on the horns of a bull, the bull on
a dragon which swims in a great sea, which is upborne by
air, which is surrounded by darkness.
It was in Damascus that he finally acquired his great
mastery of Arabic, and this, in turn, led him to the Qu’aran
which is the greatest poem, the most superb achievement of
all Arabic literature. What delighted him first about the
book was its rationalism : here was a faith that drew no
shutters down over the human soul, that refused to put the
mind in blinkers, a creed that glorified knowledge. ‘He is
indeed successful,’ he read in the Qu’aran, * who causeth
the human soul to grow aright. And he is indeed a failure
who stunts and starves the soul.’ The full development of
mind and soul is the end and aim of every Muslim— ‘ he is
successful who groweth ’ —Marmaduke learnt now. Such
was his own secret faith, which he had found in no practising
Christian sect, only in such lonely seers as Gerrard Win-
stanley, whose Law of Freedom in a Platform was one of
Marmaduke’s favourite books’.
Here, in Islam, he found, re-stated as a living creed, his
best-loved quotation : ‘To know the secrets of nature is
to know the works of God : and to know the works of God
within the Creation, is to know God Himself; for God
dwells in every visible work or body. . . . For to reach
God beyond the Creation, or to know what He will be to a
man after the man is dead, if any other wise than to scatter
him into his essences of fire, water, earth and air, of which


he is composed, is a knowledge beyond the line or capacity
of man to attain while he lives in his compounded body.
. . . God manifests Himself in actual Knowledge, not in
Imagination. 5 Or, as Muhammed put it, ‘an hour’s
contemplation and study of God’s creation is better than a
year of adoration.’
In the Qu’aran, men are bidden to observe the phenomena
of nature, the alternation of day and night, the properties
of earth and air and fire and water, the mysteries of birth
and death, growth and decay—evidences of a law and
order which man never made and which man can never
bend or alter by a hair’s-breadth—as proof that man is
not the sovereign of this world ; his province of free-will,
research, and fruitful effort is but a delegated power within
an absolute sovereignty ; which absolute sovereignty belongs
to Allah, the Creator and Sustainer of the Universe, the
Lord of all the Worlds.
Man does not, as a rule, realize the marvels of his natural
condition and of the providence encircling him. Sur-
rounded by a wonder of creative energy which never fails;
placed in a universe subject to a code of laws which are
never broken ; manifestly subject, being unable to inhale a
breath, or lift a finger, or speak a word, or think a thought
without obeying laws he never made ; man in general
thinks but little of such matters, absorbed in the interests
of his own restricted sphere of energy, like any insect.
Idolizing this sphere, he looks for a providence which will
back him in his special aims, oblivious of the needs of the
whole creation and of the purpose of the Creator.
Obviously, once a Creator and a purpose is admitted,
special treatment cannot be expected by any human being,
but each individual must seek to conform to the definite will
and purpose of creation ; then only can they hope for success.
‘ Nay, verily man is rebellious
That he deemeth himself
Independent;
Verily unto thy Lord is the return.’
Whilst the Inquisition tortured Giordano Bruno by burn-
ing him at a slow fire for upholding the Gopernican theory


of the revolution of the earth, the revolving terrestrial globe
was already part of the equipment of the Muslim univer-
sities. “ Seek knowledge though it be in China,” com-
manded the Prophet, who further declared the ink of the
scholar to be holier than the blood of the martyr, “ he
dieth not, who takes to learning.” Spelling his way through
one of the great traditional Muslim authors, Marmaduke
further learnt that ‘ having thus created the world, Allah
next called Mind or Intellect into being. And Allah said to
it “ Imbibe knowledge ” and it imbibed knowledge. Then
said Allah : “ Receive the ability to manage matters,” and
it was so. Then God told it: “Of all things which I have
created by my glory and majesty, I love none but thee. By
thee will I deprive and by thee bestow, by thee will I
confirm and by thee punish.” Man’s mind, Marmaduke
discovered, is in Islam, God’s vice-regent upon earth, with
full liberty of judgment over everything which it is capable
of understanding.
Islam brought religion back into its proper sphere of
action, which is daily life. The light of Allah, spoken of in
the Qu’aran, is known to everyone who follows Allah’s
guidance, for it is the light of every day transfigured and
glorified by the knowledge of His immanence. The aim of
religion is no far distant object, situated in a future life ; it
is present here and now, in service of our fellow-men.
Muhammed, Marmaduke read, said that a man may
have performed prayers, fasting, almsgiving, pilgrimage,
and all other religious duties, but he will be rewarded only
in proportion to the common sense which he employed.
And he said that he who has learning but knows not how to
apply it to the conduct of life is ‘ like a donkey carrying
books.’
‘ The first thing created was reason.’ ‘ Allah hath not
created anything better than reason. The benefits which
Allah giveth are on account of it, and understanding is by
it; and Allah’s displeasure is caused by it, and by it are
rewards and punishments.’ He said : ‘To listen to the
words of the learned and to instil into others the lessons of
science is better than religious exercises.’


* He who leave th his home in search of knowledge, walketh
in the path of Allah.’
‘ Acquire knowledge. It enableth the possessor to dis-
tinguish right from wrong ; it lighteth up the path to
Heaven. It is our friend in the desert, our society in soli-
tude, our companion when friendless. It guideth to hap-
piness, it sustaineth in adversity. It is an ornament among
friends, and an armour against enemies.’
‘Lo ! the angels offer their wings to the seeker of
knowledge.’
Only Muslims are forbidden to attempt to define the
Deity in human terms, as that is a transgression of the proper
limits of man’s thought. The sort of lethargy, comforting
ignorance, and superstition, which has weighed upon
Muslims for the last three hundred years, he saw as he read
the Qu’aran, came not from their scriptures, but was the
result of historic circumstance very like that which darkened
Europe in the period before the Renaissance. It had little
more than a geographical connection with the Mohammedan
religion. With the revival of scientific religion it would
end, he hoped, and he lived in daily expectation of the
beginning of a great Islamic revival. The darkest hour is
before dawn, and Allah had promised ‘ by the early hours,
and by the night when it sheds darkness, thy Lord has not
forsaken thee nor does He hate thee, and verily the latter
portion shall be better for thee than the former, and verily
thy Lord shall give to thee and thou shalt know His favour.’
This was what his mind, first awakening to the scientific
discoveries of the nineteenth century, yet unwilling to cast
God overboard, whispered was the truth. He wanted pas-
sionately to become a Muslim : to profess a creed so pro-
gressive, offering so infinite a scope to human inquiry.
Here was no distinction between secular and religious :
lectures on chemistry and physics, botany, medicine,
astronomy and jurisprudence were given in the mosque,
and these were taught there on the same footing as the
Qu’ aran itself. The mosque and the university were one :
and ‘ this unity and exaltation of all learning gave to the
old Muslim writings,’ as Marmaduke wrote in his Cultural


Side of Islam , * that peculiar quality which every reader of
them must have noticed : the calm serenity of orbed minds.’
The New Statesman , reviewing in 1930 his translation of
the Qu’aran, said : * Mr. Marmaduke Pickthall was always a
great lover of Islam. When he became a Muslim it was
regarded less as conversion than as self-discovery.’ This
discovery he made in Damascus : the light that Paul had
found there was ever thereafter about him also dazzling,
blinding, though at times he saw it through a veil of tears.
When I was a child, I wrote and asked him once if it
were true that he had longed to become a Muslim in his
youth, and memory of his mother had held him back. His
answer was:
* The man who did not become a Muslim when he was
nineteen years old because he was afraid that it would
break his mother’s heart does not exist, I am sorry to say.
The sad fact is that he was anxious to become a Muslim,
forgetting all about his mother. It was his Muslim teacher
—the Sheykh-ul-Ulema of the great mosque at Damascus —■
a noble and benign old man, to whom he one day mentioned
his desire to become a Muslim, who reminded him of his
duty to his mother and forbade him to profess Islam until
he had consulted her. “No, my son,” were his words,
“ wait until you are older, and have seen again your native
land. You are alone among us as our boys are alone among
the Christians. God knows how I should feel if any
Christian teacher dealt with a son of mine otherwise than
as I now deal with you.” Then, pointing to a candle
burning near, he said : “ Observe this fire. There is a
shapely flame, the light that shines around us, and when I
put my hand out, there is the heat as well. I blow, and all
is gone. How many things ? You answer three in one, I
answer one. We both are right.” If he had become a
Muslim at that time he would pretty certainly have repented
it—quite apart from the unhappiness he would have caused
his mother, which would have made him unhappy—because
he had not thought and learnt enough about religion to be
certain of his faith. It was only the romance and pageant
F


of the East which then attracted him. He became a Muslim
in real earnest twenty years after.’
From Damascus he rode across the Lebanon up to Tripoli,
then down to Beyrouth, where he stayed in a little hostelry
built on piers above the sea. He made great friends there
with Drummond-Hay, the British Consul, and Gibson, the
American representative. Then he went back to Ain Anoub,
and after a time he and Kelk were joined by two other
young clergy, Lestrange and Walker. They remained
together for some months, Marmaduke perfecting his
Arabic and writing home to know if he could buy land and
settle down in Syria. Consent came, upon condition he
did not spend more than a certain sum of money, not a
large one, and he and Rashid, assisted by Suleyman (when-
ever he could escape from his duties), began house-hunting.
Innumerable were the sheykhs who seemed to be in
money difficulties and wished to sell their land : Milhem
Bey Talhook, Sheykh Ali Abu, Naum Pasha, all befriended
him, and suggested suitable estates; but Marmaduke had
been warned ; firstly, not to buy land from any relative of
anyone he knew nor in any village peopled by the relations
of anyone he knew ; and secondly, to master the land code
and be quite sure only to buy freehold land. So he sternly
refused all land whereon the trees, for example, belonged
to other owners than did the land. Sometimes the villagers
owned twelve kirats of the olive trees, or fifteen kirats of the
water supply, and such rights were liable to be extremely
troublesome. A kirat is the twenty-fourth part of anything,
and the famous story lately told of someone having a square
foot in a Moscow room, after the Revolution, originated in
this legend.
Johha inherited a small house, but, being in need of cash,
he sold it, all but one kirat , driving a tent-peg into the wall
to show the extent of his reservation. Some time after,
when the new owner had moved in, Johha bought a bag of
lentils, which he hung on his peg. A few days later he
removed it and hung up a basket of cabbages, which in
turn yielded place to a dead cat. This he left there until
the occupants of the house, finding entreaties were of no


avail, and knowing that an appeal to the law would be
useless, resold the house to him for a nominal sum.
At last Marmaduke found the perfect house, belonging to
a great Druze chief, Nesib Bey Joomblat, who lived in the
splendid Muktana Palace. He required, for house and land,
only that Marmaduke should pay off an Armenian creditor
who was holding a small mortgage on the land. Marma-
duke went down to Damascus to pay the debt, and while
there had his seal cast in readiness to sign the purchase
deed, for stamp and signature were not enough—he must
produce his actual seal. The sad story of the British Consul’s
interference with his plans, because the house he purposed
to buy was without title-deeds, is told in Oriental Encounters.
Marmaduke and Rashid rode back to the Druze chief to
get the necessary transfer signed by witnesses before the
caimacam, but unfortunately the Druze chief and the
Turkish Government were at loggerheads. The former
offered Marmaduke that all the village, the chiefs of all his
people, every head of every family, should witness the
property was his, and promised to lay on them a solemn
charge to defend his right. Such an obligation, laid by a
chief on his people, ‘ would have been worth a good deal
more than any legal document in' that wild country,’ Mar-
maduke knew. But the Consul thought otherwise, and
forbade, and the English colony cried out in unison that
the boy—for Marmaduke was still under age —was being
* had,’ and for fear and shame of them he let their counsel
prevail. But the bitterness of his disappointment and his
shame remained with him all through his life. Writing in
The New Age in 1915 he tells'how : ‘ I knew a man who,
having received a solemn promise from the Druze chiefs of
the Hauran, asked for a written contract to confirm it. The
document was given, but you should have seen their faces ! ’
Several of his relations tell me the reason he did not buy
a farm was that some trouble arose between England and
Turkey at that date, resulting in a law which forbade the
English to buy land in Syria. But though I have searched
thoroughly, I can find no evidence of such a prohibition.
I find only a recurrence of the perennial Armenian question :


but with regard to that Marmaduke took Gertrude Bell’s
advice to her fellow-countrymen : * One of the objects that
the traveller should ever set before him,’ she wrote in The
Desert and the Sown, ‘ is to avoid being drawn into the meshes
of the Armenian question.’ Psychologists talk of ‘ accident
prone ’ individuals : they will find in the annals of Europe
massacre-prone peoples, and of these Armenians are th(
best example. For all their real miseries, their doubtlesi
estimable virtues, no single traveller, from Doughty to
Freya Stark, no historian, from Herodotus to Gibbon, has a
good word for them.
Whilst still smarting from his disappointment, Marmaduke
fell very ill of typhoid, and was devotedly nursed in the
German hospital of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem,
at Beirut, where the good sisters coaxed him back to health.
In the next bed was a fellow-sufferer, a young American.
Together, as they recovered, starved still on milk and soda,
they planned banquets which would have made the most
hospitable sheykh, or Lucullus himself, seem stingy.
When he was convalescent, his Arab friends flocked to
see him, and his bedside was crowded with visitors. At last
he was discharged from hospital and could travel back with
Rashid to the mountains, where innumerable feasts were
given in honour of his recovery. Not always out of the
purest affection —one sheykh came daily to hospital and
stuffed Marmaduke and Rashid with food—and all for the
sake of Marmaduke’s very ancient -210 gun —which he had
borrowed and did not wish to return ! Marmaduke, in the
kindness of his heart, gave it to him, stopping his profusion
of thanks with : “ Oh, it’s only an old one and never was
very good—you don’t have to be so grateful.” Rashid was
horrified at this Chinese deprecation by the giver of his
gift: in Arabic countries one should, on the contrary, laud
one’s own presents to the skies ! It was then Marmaduke
learnt to sit, cross-legged, on the floor and sing Arab songs
—a strange performance which delighted me when given
after a dinner party in a London drawing-room, in obedience
to my seven-year-old commands.
Kelk and he were later visited by two more clergy from


England —missionaries on leave —and the sister of one of
them came, too. They were not altogether tactful guests,
and Marmaduke was relieved when they proposed a sight-
seeing expedition to last about ten days. His relief turned
to horror when the reverend father suggested they should
take Rashid with them—and Marmaduke’s stallion. He
demurred, but the only result was that they persuaded him
to go, too. The caravan set off.
It was the maddest journey ever made, for Ibrahim, the
cook, and Rashid had taken the measure of the missionaries :
“ They are of those whom you can never please : having
dwelt among the savages of Africa, they believe they know
how to manage us poor Syrians. We must be kept in
perpetual fear : we must never be allowed to do anything
right lest the knowledge thereof should breed complacency,
which in base natures is the same as impudence. They say
repeatedly : ‘ Let me manage—l understand these people.’
May their homes be destroyed.” So the whole assembly,
‘ from the resplendent dragoman to the most ragged mule-
teer,’ bethought them how to please the English, or, failing
that, how to get even with them. They resolved c to be the
filthiest of human idiots. They are accustomed to bad
servants : they shall have them. They must be teaching
everyone—let all be fools henceforward.’
The plan worked admirably—for all except Marmaduke,
who, though he thought the joke a good one, would rather
not have suffered for his friends’ faults. The donkeys were
persuaded to bray all night: no morning could the party
set out without inspection by the Uganda missionaries :
the luncheon hamper was not unpacked until they approved
the spot chosen : the cook, bursting with laughter, feigned
madness and tweaked the larger Khawajah’s red moustache.
Finally the servants all fell sick, riding on the donkeys and in
the litter whilst the English walked. Nor was their deception
ever discovered, except by Marmaduke, who praised them for it.
But wasps have stings to their tails. No sooner were the
missionaries home than they reported ill of Marmaduke to
his relations: he was running wild : he was wasting his
time and their money. He was nearly twenty-one, and his


fiancee waited : he should be made to come home. When
the summons came, he was utterly wretched : ‘ L’Asie est
un mets delicieux, mais qui empoisonne que le mange, 5
wrote the Comte de Gobineau, and Marmaduke had
gobbled of the lotus-food. Richard Burton himself had
said that ‘ for those who have gathered flowers in mid-
December : who have for once seen and felt the sun, to the
benefit of the physical man, whilst the moral man has felt
and seen the attention and affection these people have to
bestow, there is no charm nor memory to equal these. 5
For one blessed moment he thought he had found a
reprieve : he was officially offered the post of Vice-Consul
at Haifa, without examination, but when his age was dis-
covered he was told he he was too young to be appointed,
so there was nothing to be done but to pack. W'hilst he
was in Jerusalem he had been offered, by post, a job on the
British Museum staff, without competitive examination, on
account of his unusual knowledge of Welsh and Irish
languages and antiquities, but the East had entered his
soul, and, hoping still to stay, he had refused. Now,
jobless, he must go home to no job.
Marmaduke foolishly bought everything he could lay his
hands on that would remind him of the life he had so
abundantly possessed. Years later, when my father died,
and all his estates were broken up and sold, Marmaduke
wrote to warn me against the snares of possession. ‘ I can
see you, 5 he wrote from India, ‘ standing outside the gates
of Possingworth, a peri at the door of Paradise. But do
remember, and believe, that everything in the world is
yours, until and unless you try to grab it and keep it for
yourself alone. 5 At twenty-one he was far from such con-
stancy of abnegation. He bought Arab costumes, Arab
pottery, and every sort of souvenir. *ln after days, when
leaving Syria for England, the one thing I would purchase
for myself was a supply of reed pens for Arabic writing.
But on that first occasion I wished to carry the whole
country with me, 5 he wrote. His shopping took many days.
At last he was ready : said, weeping, good-bye to the
weeping Rashid and Suleyman, and embarked for Smyrna.


CHATTER THREE
SMYRNA was a come-down after Syria : Levantine in
an ugly, mercantile sense. It left him with no memories
but with a very agreeable taste in the mouth : that of
its many excellent sorts of pistachio-nut sweets, on which
Marmaduke, who had a tooth for such delicacies, fattened.
He went up to Constantinople by land, and the nearer
he got to the seat of Turkish government, the less he liked it.
‘ Oppression seems to beget in its victims,’ he wrote, ‘ a
longing to oppress in their turn. The little boy at school
who was so bullied, whose cries used to be so heart-rending,
no sooner becomes a big boy than he is the greatest of
bullies. Every subject of a tyranny is a potential tyrant,
or, to make the epigram still more comprehensive, everyone
who has suffered is not only capable but is desirous of
inflicting the same misery. One sees that daily in Turkey,
where the aim of everybody down to the meanest fellah is
to hector it over some inferior, be it only a beast of burden
or a woman.’
Yet there was much in which he delighted : the archi-
tecture, for example, and the gardens, which, like the old
Greek ones, were planned architecturally, and were, he
considered, one of the wonders of the world. He loved, too,
the ‘ vaulted buildings and great covered bazaars, whose
beauty is like that of mighty caverns of the hills or the sea-
shore : objects in them have the shimmer of things seen in
depths of water. Coolness in the shadow, colour in the
sunshine, strength, majesty, and power combined with
grace and delicacy : these are the marks of Muslim archi-
tecture the world over. There were never such gardeners,
nor such beautifiers of landscape as the Turkish Sultans.’*
He loved the language, too, and the poetry which * is


usually sad, as is but natural to a race of men who, when
they thought a little deeply, had always to reflect that
death was near to them : but it is never despondent, and
the passionate—almost desperate—love of nature it displays
is really sincere, a characteristic of the people. From birth
to death the life of every Turkish man and woman moves
to poetry ; the inscriptions on the headstones of a Turkish
village cemetery, no two alike, and most of them in verse,
are gems not only of poetical expression but of thought.
The Turk is thinking all the time of such serious matters
as the origin of life, its transiency, the meaning and the
worth of human life, the ordeal of life and death. His life
is beautiful with this poetic earnestness, which finds expres-
sion in the work of his hands—white marble colonnades
and domes and spires, rose gardens by the sea, and solemn
cypress groves. Unfortunately for the Turks, they have a
language that is more akin to Chinese than to any European
language, and is quite extraordinarily difficult to master.’
It is to Chinese again that Marmaduke refers, when discuss-
ing their poetry, which has that same power to dissolve,
reduce, and crystallize emotion.
He admired, too, the story-teller of the c Samar ’ or
‘ stories which delight the common folk.’ The word itself
means sitting up late at night, and Marmaduke loved so
sitting in public coffee-houses, or at street corners. He was
very impressed, too, by ‘ their beautiful home life ’ and
insisted that it was their greatest contribution to Muslim
culture. ‘lt has the nobility and depth which everything
acquires for those who are prepared to die at any minute
for a cause which they regard as worthy ; the way they
go to death and the way their women bear it —the dignity,
the grace of every action of their daily life, are achievements
every nation may envy. They are an aristocracy, the aristo-
cracy of the whole Muslim world, and its natural leaders.’
Those who have seen the Turkish soldier idling in his
house can have no idea of his conduct in the field. In
peace-time he is slow and somewhat indolent, considering
he has earned the right to rest. But in time of war he is
changed utterly. Some nations hire their fighting men :


the Turks have always hired their peaceful workers. In
war they are alive : it is their business, their genius. A
Turkish army without boots or proper clothing, subsisting
upon olives and plucked ears of corn, can be invincible as
long as it has good ammunition and artillery. These
natural soldiers care for nothing else. That is why the
Turkish Khaliphate commanded the loyalty and devotion
of the whole Muslim world. For the first, and principal,
duty of the Khalif was to be defender of the faith, and
not in the sense Henry VIII gave the term.
Selim I did, it is true, conquer by violence, but the then
Khalif, who had been living as a purely religious figure
under the aegis of the Sultans of Egypt, of his own free will
abdicated in favour of the Ottoman conqueror and invested
him as Khalif, considering the highest rank in Islam ought
to be vested in the greatest Muslim ruler. And thereafter,
for over four hundred years, the House of Osman defended
the faith and the liberties of El Islam, until, in 1914, the
Sultan was the last independent Muslim ruler, and when
he fell there could be no other, for the Protector may not
be protected, nor rule only a protectorate or protected land.
Marmaduke adored Anatolia, the birthplace of most of
the Turkish soldiers whom he so much admired. Scattered
in all the corners of the Ottoman Empire as functionaries
or soldiers, the Anatolian peasants were absentee farmers
and tenants. Westerners still think of these regions through
a quivering haze of Trojan legend or Oriental fairy tale.
The reality was pathetically different. In the fundamentally
Turkish vilayets there were immense stretches where only
rank herbage and undergrowth upholstered waste lands
dotted at intervals by little wooden villages and a few
scattered cultivated fields. The forests had disappeared,
sold by the Sultans to Greek charcoal-burners. Manure
was unknown, as also was the law of alternating crops.
Although the birth-rate was high, mortality was enormous,
due to the interminable wars. The peasant bore the full
brunt of military service, for until 1908 the middle and
upper classes and all the Christian minorities were exempted
on payment of a fine. The apathy of agriculture in Turkey


was accounted for very naturally by the fact that hardly
had the unfortunate soldiers got home and changed into
civilian clothes than they were called up again. The coastal
districts were in a less parlous state owing to the possibility of
communications by sea : there were none in the interior by
land. But the peasant himself was, and still is, a primitive,
natural, essentially moral creature with a great sense of
having inherited his tiny plot and of the continuity of his
tenure. Sober, courageous, loyal, the Turkish peasant is in
his rare moments of joy what he is in his even rarer moments
of evil, simple, straightforward, infinitely patient, and as
infinitely pathetic, with a dignity that is in striking contrast
to the scum of the Levant which seethes around him.
Marmaduke’s reputation preceded him, and he was
offered the overlordship of a group of villages in the Troad,
which he very much regretted refusing. He went on up
through the Balkans, finding little evidence of Muslim
fanaticism, but plenty of what Gantimir, Voivode of
Wallachia, told Peter the Great, that ‘ profit might with
patience be derived from a close study of the privileges of
self-government enjoyed by Christians in the Turkish
Empire.’ The Christians were allowed to keep their own
languages and customs, to start their own schools, and
to be visited by missionaries of their own faith : they were
exempt from military service : and the charter which
Muhammed himself granted to the monks of Sinai was the
model for all subsequent dealings by the Muslim authorities
with their Christian subjects.
Amongst the privileges enjoyed exclusively by the Chris-
tians, one of the most profitable was the keeping of brothels.
They are strengst verboten in Muslim lands, for Muhammed
insisted most rigorously on every man making himself
entirely responsible before the whole world for every
woman with whom he has had intercourse. If he can afford
it, a Mohammedan may have four wives; even, under
strict legal guarantees, he may have concubines; but he
must maintain them properly, and if a child is born—and
there was no birth control in the East in those pre-war days—
marry the girl and support the child, for in Islam the


man alone is responsible for the fate of every child he has,
and of its mother, whatever the conditions of its begetting.
But the Christians are bound by no such rules, and Marma-
duke found Christian parents doing a roaring trade in
daughters with the brothel-keepers.
The horrified Turks were powerless to close these houses,
or stop these abuses, for the proprietors (in almost every
case, foreign subjects) were protected in their privileges by
some Christian power. Marmaduke found, also, everywhere
Russian religio-political agents, stirring up Serbs, Bulgars,
and Rumanians against Turkey, as they had stirred the
Greeks in the War of Independence. The result of their
propaganda, then, had been the wiping out of the whole
Muslim population of the Morea —three hundred thousand
souls, as well as many thousands in the northern parts of
Greece-: the results now Marmaduke was to see in his
lifetime in the massacres of Muslims which followed on the
Christian conquests of Adrianople and Constantinople.
As he travelled north he gradually lost the sun, which
disappeared in Flemish fogs as he reached the northern
sea coast. He felt the shutters he had lifted, with the whole
strength of his youth, fall to again, trapping him. With a
sinister definiteness, too, for he had failed to find a job out
East: failed to establish himself in any way. What he
brought back, apart from a few trinkets, were intangible
things : fluency in Arabic, a thorough acquaintance with
Arabic literature, and the fact of having been sunned
through. Never, until after the war, had he a job out East;
whatever his spiritual approach to it, actually, until 1921,
he was a visitor only. Neither digging nor evangelizing, the
two major non-commercial, non-political British avocations
in Palestine, tempted him. Yet in every sense and with
every part of him, after this first visit, he subscribed to the
whole of the Chaldean hymn to the sun, written some four
thousand odd years before he was born. ‘ I have invoked
thee, O Sun, in the midst of the high heavens. The countries
have called towards thee eagerly ; they have directed their
looks towards thee, O friend. I have taken refuge in thy
presence, thou who. annihilatest falsehood. Settle also,


O Sun, the light of the great gods right into my marrow,
that I may rejoice, even I.’ This passion, coequal with his
life, he shared with every Turk. Even the Turkish women,
he discovered, would hardly ever miss a sunset: shrouded or
in closed carriages, they would steal out into their gardens
or the city’s suburbs, to watch it.
He found, at home, bitter weather, but a very warm
welcome. In April 1896 he celebrated his twenty-first
birthday, and that summer paid several visits to his brother
at Oriel, where he met T. W. Hickes, who was to become
one of his greatest friends, and eventually to marry a favourite
cousin. He met Muriel Smith again, too : the years had
not lessened her attractions for him, and he fell desperately
in love with her all over again. Indeed, as he paced up and
down 97 Warwick Gardens, his sister Grace ticked him off
for being ‘just like an old Tom cat.’ His mother en-
couraged the young people to marry at once ; which,
despite the disapproval of some of their relatives, they did.
Mrs. Pickthall believed in early marriages ; her Chris-
tianity was Pauline, and she thought to marry, however
impecuniously, a lesser evil than to burn. Ever since her
husband’s death, without a penny of assistance from
Marmaduke’s father’s family, she had paid the piper ; she
was, therefore, entirely justified in calling the tune : and
Marmaduke and Muriel were married on September 30,
1896. Marmaduke fasted until after the ceremony, which
took place at St. Matthew’s, Addison Road (which neither
of them ever visited before or after), because marriage is a
sacrament, and he thought thereby to show it more respect.
But he did not care for mere conventions, and thought
it no disrespect to wear, at 11 a.m., an ordinary old suiting.
There were only relations and a few intimate friends present
at that morning service. Immediately afterwards the young
couple left for Paris, where they remained for a week, a very
gay and memorable week as it happened, for the Czar and
Czarina were also in the city, and there was much merry-
making in their honour.
From France they went on to Geneva. They had decided
to winter in Switzerland, partly from.motives of economy,


partly because Marmaduke was still feeling the effects, of his
typhoid, and his doctors did not advise his remaining in
England for the first winter after he had got back. They
stayed in a pension, and Marmaduke joined a literary and
dramatic circle, to which young Jacques Dalcroze also
belonged. They led a quiet, ordered life, and Marmaduke
began to write —short stories, some of daily, local interest,
some based on his Eastern memories.
c Es bildet sich ein Talent in der Stille, sich ein Charakter
im Sturm der Welt * : and in the quiet of pre-war Geneva,
Marmaduke digested the living of the past two years, and
translated it into art. For very few, and very lucky people,
are life and work simultaneous. For most, life is divided
between the brief periods when they ‘ hear the prayer
from the minaret echoing over Arabia, moments of
exaltation,’ which ‘ have not been extraordinary,’ and those
infinite stretches when :
‘ nothing that matters will ever happen
nothing you’d want to put in a book
nothing to tell to impress your friends
the old old story that never ends,’
as Messrs. Auden and Isherwood put it so well. For
many are alive only during their annual fortnight’s exodus
to Brighton or Bognor : their spiritual lung capacity is
stretched to the full by that one single taking aboard of
fresh air. These are swimmers, doing a crawl stroke through
life, taking their breaths as rarely as they can, and for
the most part breathing out only under water. The
occasional bubbles that break the surface are the one sign
by which anyone may know there are human creatures
present.
For Marmaduke, at least until 1914, living and working
were alternative, rather than contemporary, functions. His
natural rhythm was breathe in, breathe out: live an action,
create an emotion : now an interval for excitement, now one
for translating that excitement into words : for purifying
and petrifying what had been experienced into what was
to be written. Assimilation with him took always a con-
siderable time, as did elimination : when he was the


editor of a great national daily, and his processes were
inevitably speeded up, obliging him to reconcile emotion
with action, he was acutely uncomfortable, and, indeed,
suffered from spiritual dyspepsia.
Now in Geneva he began a novel; purely English, based
on happenings that had preceded his Eastern journey. He
had, mentally, the constitution of a camel: he could carry,
as it were, in two stomachs, or in two different pockets of
consciousness, the ordinary memories of public school boy
and squireen, and the accumulation of his Oriental exper-
iences, seemingly unleavened, yet actually undergoing a slow
continuous process of selective digestion, whose result was
to be the splendid sequence of novels beginning with Said the
Fisherman in 1904 and ending in 1921 with The Early Hours ,
in all of which * the angle of vision remains steady, and not
until Veiled Women is there a hint of fatigue.’
When the bise, whistling through the city, drove the
Pickthalls to seek comfort elsewhere, they went up to St.
Cergues, then unknown, and Marmaduke became, for those
remote nineteenth-century days, very good at ski-ing. He
was supremely happy to find a sport that called neither for
balls nor blood, and it remained, always, his favourite exercise.
When the worst weather was over they returned to Geneva,
and to the novel which Marmaduke, because of the extreme
idiocy of its hero, dubbed The Bunny Book. They stayed in
the same pension as before, chez Madam Guyler, 22
Boulevard Helvetique.
Marmaduke grew very fond of the dour city that, sans
South American tarts, sans night clubs, sans international
crises to come between English vice-consuls and their
dinner, was a pleasant but provincial and sleepy place.
For him it was a place of learning : here he steeped himself
in French, writing to his friend Hickes : ‘ I have enjoyed
latterly a succession of the rarest treats. Literature certainly
flourishes on this side of the Channel, though virtue, perhaps,
does not.’ On the whole he was himself very happy, and to
Hickes enthused about the town : £ I forget if you know
Geneva. It has interests apart from Calvin. It is beautiful,
for one thing, lying in a wide plain between distant moun


tains, with the lake pouring the Rhone through it continu-
ally. It shows the perversity of human nature, that in such
a place a hellish system 1 should have taken root and
flourished, while dull places have been constant in their
love of light and beauty.’
He seems to have soaked himself in the views, in the life,
and in the country around, for his commonplace book —a fat
black exercise book that took five years to fill—is full of such
descriptions day by day. Never did he cease noticing,
registering, thinking : whatever else he was doing, and his
fixity of concentration argued a high degree of mental self-
control. Sitting on the beach he watches a sunset: choosing
his words to describe it as carefully as an artist his paints :
cads red, vermilion, crimson lake are equalled by : ‘ Looking
out into the west, there seemed a range of mountains behind
the distant shore, and amid those mystic heights I thought I
descried the domes and minarets of a city glorious in purple
and gold. At the foot of the mountains was a lake of flame,
red and burning, whose glory was reflected on land and sea.
The ripples at my feet were threaded with red gold—a
burnished path to the west broken only by the dark shadow
of the distant shore. . And a blue mist stole up in the shadow.
Then all the sea grew black as ink, and only the path was
fiery red : that faded to pink, then to white, and lastly, died
altogether : the blackness with it; and the world was
grey under a pale green spirit light.’
He enjoyed it all: the morning, when a thick fog c hung
over the city, like a veil on the face of a plain woman,
hiding blemishes and defects, softening all hardness of out-
line, soothing with the suggestion of a non-existent beauty.
It is a law of nature,’ he moralized as he walked out before
breakfast to stretch his legs before the day’s work, ‘ as it
is of art, that half-revelation is more attractive than naked-
ness. Unhappily there is another law which forbids a man
to rest content until he has stripped his ideal and beheld it
naked. Hence the end of most men’s dreams is disappoint-
ment. And this disappointment is proportionate to what the
world calls success.’
1 Marmaduke was suffering from a high church reaction.


Or market day, when under the plane trees every open
space was crowded with booths. Some of the widest streets,
he noted, ‘ are bright with fruit displayed in baskets along
the edge of the pavement —a continuous jewelled fringe.
There are huge pumpkins, mountains of grapes, heaps of
great capsicums, red, green and yellow, tomatoes of gold
and vermilion, dusky pears and rosy apples, piled in rare old
baskets —warm brown and mellow, of the colour of a sun-
dried apricot. The saleswomen —Savoyardes from the
little villages across the frontier, have an old-world freshness
in their broad-brimmed hats, quaint gowns, and bright
ribbons. The faces of the young are brown and rosy as ripe
apples, those of the old wrinkled as the same pippin after
long sojourn in the garner. Here an old peasant dame,
wearing her string of onions like a stole, exalts her stock-in-
trade for the benefit of the passers-by. There, under a little
awning, in the shade of a plane-tree, a young village beauty
poses and ogles for custom amidst a glory of flowers —Arcadia
is come to town. The river flows under a low bridge, and
that, too, is covered with booths, as is the embankment on
either side. Striped awnings, yellow and white, red and
drab, blue and white, the throng of buyers and sellers, gay
parasols and light summer dresses shimmer and fade in a
mist of sunlight. The eye finds relief in the blue of the
stream winding away through the far-away arch of a high
stone bridge. There are pale mountains in the distance,
coloured as the fading petal of a violet. I love to stand by
the weir and watch them : the world-enduring river and the
throng of a day. The one is so quiet, so deeply conscious
of its strength, the other busy, humming as a swarm of bees,
oblivious of yesterday and of to-morrow.’
The heat of the noonday sun, whose appreciation is the
prerogative of mad dogs and Englishmen, was a delight to
him. He described c the sky, veiled in diaphanous cloud,
faintly luminous, with the sun behind. The heat was
intense. All objects —trees, houses, walls, men, and women
—seemed black on the pale haze which blinded the distance.
Earth steamed —the very birds twittered faintly from enerva-
tion. Geneva has taught me something of the value of


distance in a landscape. As I walked on the Qpai du Leman
to-day, the lake was fairy-blue, pale, illusive, and unsub-
stantial as the sky itself. The distant shore, too, was faint
in haze. But the near promontory with its trees, its
villas, and their shadows in the water, the boulders of
the shore, stood out massive and dark as though cut in
bronze.*
In the afternoons he would go out to Coppet or Crassier,
or farther afield to the Savoyard side of the lake. Or would
climb Sal&ve, that most favourite of all Genevese excursions,
from the top of which, ‘ on a lonely ridge, bare as a Scottish
moor or Lebanon itself,’ he would watch the sun sink upon
‘ the waves of the Jura, northwards across a wide plain on
which the twilight began to gather like blue mist ’ ; then,
turning, he ‘ could see over a plain no less vast, and mark the
flush on that mighty amphitheatre of Alps with Mont Blanc
in the centre. Great heights are always more impressive
from a distance. When one is among them, it is hard to
realize their vastness, harder still to estimate their relative
forms and height. But from a distance of forty miles or
so there can be no mistake. The giant is recognized at a
glance by the head and shoulders which tower above his
fellows. The flush of sunset lingers on his snowy head, with
a stain as of spilt wine, long after his companions are old and
grey. As the sun, a golden, rayless disc, sank, the landscape
swelled in sheen and shadow to the warm grey of distant
woods.’
Home again, to see a * pearly mist delicately flushed from
the sunset, on lake and mountains. The twin sails of a barque
and the hull itself seemed motionless, yet were surely
slipping past the piers. There was something remote about
the whole scene, or so it appeared to me. I was able to
separate myself from the landscape : to stand back, as it
were, and admire it as one admires a fine painting. I
crossed a bridge : starless night on the one hand : dying
day on the other. There was a mist about the city : a mist
that glowed with a blue spirit light which burned every-
where or nowhere, out of which the yellow lights looked
over their dancing semblance in the water watchfully, as
G


from a citadel. The distance of the streets was inundated
with stagnant grey light, from which the last warmth of
light had just faded. As I penetrated the city it had no
other light than that which the street lamps gave it, and the
glow from a lamp-lit window here and there. But the sky
was still pale and green, with a softness as of velvet. The
great round globules of electric light, rising up on the bridge
against illimitable space, and their lengthened reflections,
caught the eye and blinded it.*
When summer was done, Marmaduke and Muriel were
summoned back to England, and wintered in London,
in his mother’s house. Though he never liked living in
town, he was more reconciled to it now, and could bring
himself to walk in the park and enjoy the children sailing
their boats on the Round Pond. He despised the rich,
who, dressed in velvet and point lace, had fine nursemaids in
waiting, and perfect models of real ships, with spotless white
canvas and every rope and yard of rigging correct. The
ragamuffins, with cheap, queer boats of their own making,
sailing their wretched fleet from pure love, aroused, on the
other hand, his admiration.
Here, as in the East, it was light—or the obscuring of
light—that fascinated him, and he struggled almost daily to
describe every sort of fog and haze and diffusion or suffusion
of sun. He loved the City and the docks : loved, too,
Richmond Park and Kew, where, in great glass houses, he
smelt the hot damp of his beloved Dead Sea cities. Life in
London, with no job and a beginning only, as yet, made
with writing, threw him more and more in upon himself.
He, who had voyaged so far, during the winter of ’gß made
short journeys only ; to Oxford, or to Twickenham. Instead
he explored the ‘ deserts of vast experience ’ hinted at in his
black exercise book. His two planes of consciousness were,
as yet, entirely unreconciled, as the contrast between his
letters—banal, trivial, frivolous, and childish—and his
Keyserlingesque jottings show. The eight years of effort,
which followed upon his Eastern jaunt and led to Said,
were spent by him in experiencing, and from his own
experience proving, the truth of Augustine’s words : ‘ Noli


longa itinera meditari: ad Eum enim qui übique est,
amando venitur non navigando.’ l
He was already a little afraid of what his reading and
thinking had discovered for him. For example, of the
contrast between the confined medieval view of the universe
and the infinity of modern scientific horizons, so horribly
indefinite, he says : *ln old times, men thought the whole
universe designed for them alone. The firmament with its
countless stars was the roof, of their palace—above it and
beyond lay Heaven, their future home. They looked upon
the daily change from light to darkness, from darkness back
again to light: on the Seasons bringing divers gifts ; on
the sun, moon, and stars ; as a pageant designed by an
unseen Power for their delight and profit. They were lords
of all this fair domain for the space of a lifetime. And, for
the most part, they lived in the present —ate, drank, fought,
loved, lusted, lied—yet in those days men were reverent
towards the Unseen Cause. In our own time, we know the
planet on which we live is but one of the least of many such
spheres ; we know there are many systems such as that we
live in ; and that the only reality is an eternity we cannot
even conceive. Yet we live as they lived—eat, drink, love,
lust, He, seek present pleasure, and profess no reverence for
the infinite cause and motive of all this order. Our great-
ness is in inverse ratio to the greatness of our surroundings.
The ancients were justified in self-absorption : within their
imagined limits they were lords. But we—that the faculty
of wonder is almost extinct among us is the greatest wonder
of all. Yet one cannot dwell long on such matters as
eternity—that nightmare, that lurking darkness in the back-
ground of the mind —or madness would be the result. I
believe our intelligence was made limited on purpose
that it should not seek to sound the great infinites.
Much pondering on them induces madness in some ; a
reckless plunge into the “mud-honey” of life for
others.’
Yet for all his fears he was no ostrich. Pleading for more
1 ‘ Do not work out long journeys: He who is everywhere present, is
reached by love and not by sail.’


tolerance towards the iconoclasm of the scientist, he
wrote :
‘ Someone is trying to tune a piano. We stuff our ears,
lest the discordant clappings and clangings drive us mad.
Yet, when the man has done, the tone of the instrument is
truer than before. The scientist is the tuner of the Universe,
himself unskilled in its music. The instrument is never to
blame. The tuner himself cannot improve it, can only
clean it of the dust we have allowed or caused to accumulate
within. He tries to place it as before in its original per-
fection, though he often makes a terrible din about it, and
takes a good deal of honour to himself for the improved
melody others, playing after he has finished, will know how
to produce : no honour to either. Both are but mechanics :
the music is the thing.’
He was one of the first to foresee in chimney and crane,
in concrete and steel, the c ordered beauty of a great
machine ’ which Rupert Brooke was to praise.
‘ When stone tools were first used,’ Marmaduke wrote,
‘ their form was crude and unlovely. So with iron. Our
nineteenth-century inventions are yet in the crude stage of
novelty : all is for use. When wonder about them shall be
dead, it may be that men will turn them to some artistic
purpose : for beauty is in all things earthly, let the artist
but show it forth to us.’
He had found in the East the release from his home
circle, from the fetters relations, school, and society had put
upon him. Now, since his journey there was to result for
him, spiritually, in a mere straining backward after the
unsure, ephemeral, and unrepeatable liberty of childhood,
he had to translate that release into terms of European,
nineteenth-century life. Except he become a Peter Pan, he
must get a move on : forward through the tangled mazes of
his own mind. As he laboured, he realized, too, that, like
the recurrent sequence of emotion and action, any photo-
synthesis by which the sunlight he retained should meta-
bolate to become his continual Viaticum, must, also, be a


dual process. He must think out, and travel in : must
face up to such external conflicts as religion and science ;
to such antithesis as faith, as he had seen it, both East and
West, and conduct as based, here or there, on faith. He
must simultaneously, however, work in : penetrate the
onion-numerous layers of his own self, surface upon surface
—underneath which lay those, two only unassailable
certainties : his soul and God.
His note-book reflects the difficulties of this transition
period and shows him in a rare muddle. He senses duality—
and writes: ‘An enthusiasm for virtue hardly ever lasts
long and is sure to give place to a reaction in favour of vice ;
the happiest is he who takes both virtue and vice in such
doses that he is always in a state of enthusiasm for one or
the other. Action and reaction take place in moral and
social, as in material, evolution. Often the man who pro-
motes an attitude of thought or a cause most actively is but
paving the way for a reaction which will sweep that cause
from men’s minds for ever. History has more of the
pendulum about it than the wheel.’
In such a whirl of problems he acclaims Marx’s c Opium
of the People ’ in no uncertain words : ‘ Religion under the
Church’s rule is a Heaven-sent narcotic. Strange that our
souls and bodies should be healthiest in ignorance. Wilful
blindness—a bandage, or at least a coloured veil—is the
resource of the wise man. Think of civilized life divested of
all its mental narcotics and shudder with me.’
But he is too alive and too healthy, too young and already
too free, to feel so unhealthily despondent long. He, for
whom, when he found Islam, ignorance, and, above all,
that wilful blindness he now vaunted, were the sin against
the Holy Ghost, could not long remain deluded. Avery
little while after the defeatist entry he is writing : c A man
must have some scheme or theory of life to cling to, or he
will be swayed by every wind that blows. In accepting
preconceived notions of the world one obtains a certain
laudanum peace of mind. One agrees as it were to abdicate
free sight in favour of blinkers. But if you are a being
addicted to thinking, strange doubts will arise often to make


you wretched. You will doubt: for a time you will believe
in nothing. 5
Then the everlasting process begins again—and man,
God-starved, fashions Him anew after his own likeness.
* Man seeks his own image first in his study of the universe :
peoples the spheres with beings of a like nature with himself
—personifies trees, cities, rivers, mountains, ocean, sun,
moon, and stars. We read : “ God made man in his own
image. 55 But more probably the reverse is true. 5
In later years, having passed this stage of inflicting his
image of creature and Creator alike, Marmaduke was apt
to forget he had ever suffered it: c I remember altars I built
to Apollo that he destroyed : candles I lighted to Mary
that he put out. 5 However, at twenty-two a zealous High
Churchman was he, to his wife’s disgust, preaching the
Apostolic Succession, frequent communion, and the neces-
sity of fasting, to her in, and out, of season. Islam is laid
aside: he is giving Christianity its chance, living it,
believing it fully, seeking through it to recapture the light
he found in the East.. Nor does he abandon it until it
abandons him : he did not become a Muslim until the
behaviour of Christian Europe forced him to it.
But the trouble was, as his wise Damascene Sheykh had
said to him, that: “ Christ was a dervish, and you and I
are not dervishes.” The confusion and incoherence arising
from this contradiction between a mystical Oriental idea,
accepted grossly, i.e. literally, and the laws of human life,
seemed to him deplorable. In one of his last writings—a
story, published in the Cornhill in 1924 under the title of
‘ The Quest s—the 5 —the young Indian seeker, who has come to
Gandhi, and whom Gandhi has turned away, speaks of the
Eternal Unity ‘ which is—which must be —beyond all
diversity of creed or of interpretation, 5 in the following
terms : ‘ I see a lamp, upon the glass of which men have
painted pictures for remembrance. But people gaze at the
pictures and forget the light. They think of it as far away,
beyond the pictures, not as the blessing which enables them
to see at all. Thus the light is here, but people are, to all
intents, immersed in darkness because they see the lamp as


a restricted, distant object, and are unconscious of the light
it sheds for them to use.’ Such parables he used to clear
his own mind ; here is another, one from his commonplace
book : ‘ Time is as it were a little chamber in Eternity,
lighted and furnished. Breaths from the unknown blow in
through the keyhole of the door and take form : they are
all important for a space, until their own draught drives
them up the chimney and, the spell of the room gone, they
dissolve again. The chamber is the box of Phantasmagoria,
and it is used in the school of the sons of God to illustrate the
properties of captive willingness. The results of the experi-
ment call it Time or the Universe, and deem themselves
*ods for the brief term of embodiment. But they pass up
the chimney and are not. Only that little breath of Eternity,
which is the Spirit, remains to lose itself in the boundless
nothing whence it came.’
In his Allegory of Christendom he captures something of the
spirit of the great Parable of Truth in Olive Schreiner’s
Story of an African Farm. I give it in his own words :
* Once a great Master coaxed forth an air—grand and
simple, the bare notes without accompaniment —from the
great Music-chaos in which we live. After his death, the
musicians said one to another : Here is a glorious piece of
music : the master piece of all; yet to the many it would
seem of no account, for it has no accompaniment, is not
scored for orchestra, has no words set to it. And they were
divided, some preferring that it should be used as a song,
others as a march. Some few preferred the notes as they
stood, and hummed the air to themselves, desiring no
accompaniment, no blare of instruments. The melody was
perfect in itself. But these were very few. And the world
was divided because of the piece of music. In one city it
was arranged as a song and became popular, in another as
a dance and became popular, in a third as a march and
became popular. But when those who loved it as a march
heard that in the neighbouring city it had been set to words
and was admired as a song, they were scandalized. So they
took arms and went out against the singers. On the way,
the band playing their march, they fell in with the army


of the enemy, which was come out, singing the detested
song, against them. For the singers had heard of the march
and were scandalized. So a fierce fight took place and while
they were yet fighting, appeared a third army dancing to
the same strain, which fell upon them both. And there
was great confusion. Before they could sort themselves,
came a man by that way, humming the strain of the Master,
neither singing, nor dancing, nor marching. Then they
all, who beheld him, turned on him and slew him.’
At the same time as he was wrestling and writing thus,
he was also working at short stories and at his novel. The
novel is despicably childish, but the short stories very
humorous : already spiced from his long reading of Arab
wits, and savoury through his very successful conversion of
Eastern idiom into English. Of his slow inward struggle to
find some sheltered via media between pneumatic bliss and
the ‘ heroic for Earth too hard ’ no outward signs appeared.
But in a very sympathetic letter to Hickes he shows some-
thing of his mind.
‘ I had heard of your fresh trouble. The choice of a
private asylum must be a terrible business for so dear a
relative ; indeed, the whole tragedy is far greater for you
outside than for the sufferer, who, by a merciful dispensa-
tion, is prevented from seeing it whole. Insanity is so
terribly near to men like me who indulge imagination : the
slightest blow on the head might produce it, that whenever
I hear of trouble like this of yours, I naturally identify
myself with the patient rather than with the relatives. And
I believe, from much thinking about it, that for the patient
it is made endurable.’
Again, later, reproached for not writing, he explains :
c If I have not written before, it is not that I was ungrate-
ful, but ever since I came here I have been wasting paper
trying to begin something worth writing, and have hitherto
done nothing worth speaking of. At such times one has a
grudge against the world, or against oneself, which is,
perhaps, the same thing, and one’s correspondence is


restricted to business communications, where one can hide
any amount of spleen and boredom in the cold formality of
“ yours truly.” *
When Hickes is ordained deacon, he writes again :
* In some ways I envy you your calling, which will bring
you ever more and closer in touch with all the varying types
of mankind, and in every sense I envy you the qualities
which make your vocation a true one. A clergyman’s life
is, I consider, or may easily be, the most artistic of which
our modern life admits. Understand “ artistic ” here in its
highest sense, as at once constant, beautiful, and for good.’
In the spring of ’9B he went for a walking tour in Wales
with Hickes. They visited Llanfairfechan, and scrambled on
Penmaenmawr, tearing up it early one morning, and trying
hard to find the Druids’ circle, were caught in the rain
coming home, horribly late, to lunch. There was ‘ Tumner
with a team of mules and a bell, and a holiday face,’ and
‘ fine florid port winey sunsets, genuine English,’ to be
watched from the beach by the railway arch. A walk from
Aber to Llanfairfechan late on an April afternoon, with
primroses and celandines in the hedgerows, and hedges
themselves * here fluffy and soft with willow palm, there
foamy with blackthorn ’ is remembered a year later.
c Anglesey and Puffin Island seemed a hippopotamus with
a little bird perched on his black shoulder deep in ether.’
In the summer Marmaduke and Muriel went back to
Switzerland and stayed at Champery, in the Hotel Dent du
Midi, where they were joined by his mother and Bob, by
Etta and several other Beasleys—cousins of his mother’s,
by Hickes and by some friends called Wilmott. They did a
lot of scrambling and some serious climbing ‘ with a guide
and the inevitable ropes and ice-axes.’ There he met
Welldon—Bishop designate of Calcutta —on the platform at
Brigue and received a highly episcopal blessing from him
at St. Maurice, also an invitation to go and stay as long as he
liked with him at Calcutta, ‘ where,’ he says, ‘ we can have
half his house.’ Later, when Kelk and the other friends
were all gone, he becomes serious again : ‘ I have been


reading the Lessons in the conventicle the last two Sundays/
he tells Hickes, ‘ not without much shaking of knees and
imaginary cries of “ this is a Mass shop.” *
When he and Muriel went back to Geneva for the winter
he finished the Bunny Book. It took three weeks to copy
out, and Marmaduke started hawking it, sending it first to
John Lane, by whom both it and its successor, The Unravel-
ling of Cyril Baldwin , were refused. He kept Hickes posted
regarding their fate, and tells him Cyril Baldwin took eight
months to write. It was never published.
‘ It is rather a curious book,’ its author wrote, ‘ I hardly
know what to make of it myself. It came like that: that is
all I can say. There are some passages in it which make me
wonder whether I could have written them —a dash of
inspiration here and there. All the characters seem alive.
General Baldwin, the hero’s father, whose death (his last
words are, “ Will someone give Roger his supper ” —Roger
being his dog, called after Hickes’ dog) gives a pathetic
touch to the book, is, in my opinion, a success ; and a
certain nobleman (very young) of the name of William
George Portcullis Fitzscutcheon Blazon, Viscount Blazon by
courtesy of the realm, by discourtesy of his friends “ Little
Billy ” or simply “ that ass,” is ludicrous I hope. There
are upwards of forty characters, all kicking, except the hero,
who has come out a trifle insipid, in spite of the pains I
took with him. Compared with All Fools it is rather a
placid sort of novel. I’ve never read anything much like it,
so perhaps it’s good.’
For Christmas they went up to Champdry to stay with
friends, and Marmaduke had some ski-ing. Then Muriel’s
sister joined them, and they found a flat, 5 rue de la Plaine,
which they took for a year from 1 January 1899. They had
no servant, and his wife or her sister or both did the cooking.
Marmaduke was suffocated in a cloud of domesticities.
* Housework,’ ‘ unseemly energy,’ c charwomanly activity ’
are key words in his letters, and he complained this c could
not go on, or I shall have to drop over the bannisters and
fall to the bottom of the house, five stories, in self-defence.’


He is lonely, amidst such alien femininities, and despondent;
‘ the sight of a real English friend would do us all a lot of
good. Our acquaintance here is of the most motley descrip-
tion —Yanks,'hybrid English, Swiss, Germans, Rumanians,
French, and I know not what. It would have amused you
to have seen me the honoured guest of the literary and
artistic club at their annual banquet. Luckily I was not
called upon to make a speech. I felt all the time as if I were
there under false pretences : they seemed to think me such
a very great man. At twenty-three, with only two little
magazine stories behind me, I felt very in the nature of an
imposter, not to say a fool, and had a lurking fear that some
really great author might come along and expose me to
general ridicule. It is sometimes trying to have friends too
eager to blow your trumpet.’
The flat was anew experience for him. He found having
a woman always about the place unexpectedly was fun.
Almost as a painter might, he describes his wife doing her
hair ‘ with arms curved out and upwards from the shoulders
like handles of some exquisite vase. She managed to read a
novel in the intervals of observing her pretty in the
mirror. The rapidity with which she turned the leaves
threw light on her manner of reading. She read as an
accompaniment to whatever she was doing.’ The outlook,
that was not very different from that of Pembridge Square
days, is very differently envisaged. ‘ The chimneys, sun-
illumined, shone red and yellow above the blue slate roofs
in whose hollows there yet lurked a shade and coolness of
the night. There was a telephone wire close to the window
to bear the somewhat peevish voice of the singing woman
who lived underneath all over the town. A tall chimney,
like the stump of a mast, rose behind a large black building
with windows picked out in white like port-holes.’
Summer is one long continual delight. At last he achieves
early rising : takes in the milk, opens the persiennes, and
sets the kettle on the stove he has lighted before walking
through the quiet streets, steeped in the fresh dawn shadow,
to glimpse the weir. The water c carven malachite ’ makes
him long for pine stems and solitude, and this Werther


sighs for a ‘ mossy seat, and a little solitude, a little peace, a
little leisure apart from the world to muse, and dream and
commune with oneself.’ All before 4 an hour’s work ’ :
then breakfast and the morning pipe. His longings are
satisfied when they go up to Ballaigues, for their 4 summer’s
outing,’ to a tiny hotel set amongst processional firs, 4 near
the bottom are the stragglers, who seetn weary and listless,
in despair of ever reaching the top. Then there is the dense
crowd, elbowing each other in black waving mass : then
along the topmost ridge, the winner standing on, tiptoe
in the hope of seeing farther.’
The Pickthalls overspent themselves on their jaunt, and
were obliged, when they returned to Geneva the ensuing
autumn, to live servantless and on a diet of milk, cheese,
and bread, 4 sometimes without the cheese and a peaceful
saveloy instead. I never worked better or more steadily :
a little effort of that sort seems to nerve a man all round and
clear his head,’ Marmaduke told Hickes.
The two published short stories were in Temple Bar:
4 Monsieur le President,’ January 1898, 4 The Word of an
Englishman,’ July ’9B. They were followed in January ’99
by 4 A Question of Precedence.’ In March 1899 he writes :
4 1 had an offer this week from a Geneva friend, at present in
Paris, who is anxious to translate my three short stories into
French and says he is sure of placing them in first-class
French reviews, my full name is to be put to them, with the
pseudonym (E. Greek) in brackets.’ In the same letter he
announces that, despite some wire-pulling on the part of
Hickes, for which the author is truly grateful, the Bunny Book
has been returned by John Lane. It had been dignified
with the name All Fools. Marmaduke repacked it instantly
and despatched it to Fisher Unwin, 4 with no hope, I am
glad to say,’ and his comment on the rejection is Panurge’s
‘ Babillebabod.’ For a last fortnight they went to the
Hamiltons at Champery : at the beginning of November
they returned to London, 4 going first to London lodgings
with my mother, then on into the provinces a-house-
hunting.
Said the Fisherman was already half written.


‘ The second part, which I shall begin as soon as ever I
get a peaceful day in England, will be rather more ticklish.
My puppet gets to London and wanders about the streets
till he swoons from cold and starvation. He is taken to a
hospital whence, through the instrumentality of a missionary,
he is sent back, convalescent, to the East—an idiot, more
through general numbness than from any actual loss of
faculties. He leads a happy life in Egypt, content to bask
in the sun and forget all the darkness and cold of that
Northern land, where he suffered, and is at last killed by the
bursting of a shell in the bombardment of Alexandria, or
else shot by British soldiers as taking part in a rising, I am
not sure which.
‘ That is somewhat the idea of my second part, the first
part being entirely Syrian. The change to London may
strike you as an inartistic break in the atmosphere, but I
don’t intend it to be so. Part II will open in Syria, and of its
nineteen chapters only four are concerned with London.
Also, he will see London entirely from an Easterner’s point
of view, as a sort of dark mysterious Ebleh, with Eblis
himself lurking doubtless somewhere in the depths of it.
All this gives you not the slightest idea of my plot, which it
would take me too long to make clear. Let me say, however,
that the book has an artistic motive as well as that of
interest, and I hope it will turn out all right. During the
three weeks or so we spent in London I mean to go about to
the various regions Said visits, and by favour of a note-book
and an Eastern eye, hope to amass a goodly mound of
useful details.
‘ Thanks to an old lady living here whose husband
(deceased) was British Consul at the neighbouring city of
Aleppo at the time Said took a leading part in the massacres
of Damascus, I have been able to get my history absolutely
correct. Of the various books she lent me I have extracted
all the juice, all, that is, which bears of my subject, as well
as sundry little items of more general information. Among
other things I have noted a history of the Armenian Church
—a mere precis, of course —as related by themselves with an
account of some of their ritual and pious customs, I had


you in my mind at the time, and will impart that knowledge
to you, as soon as ever I get the chance.’
After much search and a bad fit of gout in the form of
eczema —‘ isn’t the “ sins of the fathers ” a nuisance ? If
my great-grandfather, or some old codger whom I never
knew, had been a little more sparing in the matter of port,
I should have had a clear skin at this moment ’ —Marmaduke
found a house, ‘ small, old, and inconvenient: but the
grounds are really magnificent—an excellent garden,
winding pinewoods, a paddock, a coachyard, small group of
farm-buildings, tennis court, more pinewoods, and a fine
stretch of heath on which is a picturesque windmill. There
are eight acres in all, and the rent is £65. It is at Holton,
only ten minutes’ walk from Halesworth station on the
Great Eastern main line. The present name of the place
is Ash Cottage, but as it is such a big place I think I shall
drop that title altogether and give my address as Holton,
near Halesworth, Suffolk.’
All Fools was accepted at last by Swan, Sonnenschein and
Company, and in February 1900 he is announcing ‘ another
three weeks or four and it will be published. I only wish
the war may take a better turn ere then : for in the present
state of public feeling, novels seem rather out of place.’
Said was finished in rough by March. “It really seems
good, and, I think, has more staying power in it than any-
thing I have yet achieved. If only All Fools could wax
popular and smooth the way for it. I hope to get it pub-
lished in the autumn,” Marmaduke told Hickes. In April,
All Fools appeared, and was greeted ‘ with kindness ’ by the
Scotsman ; with ‘ a little cockcrow of enthusiasm, very grate-
ful to the author’s ears ’ by the Glasgow Herald , whilst the
best notices he received were those in the East Anglian Daily
Times and the Dundee Courier. His mother thought it coarse,
its chief objection, in her eyes, being its repeated reference
to ‘an article of ladies’ underclothing—namely stays * ;
his sister, Lina, c prurient,’ and a lady district visitor in the
parish severely censured the author for degrading his
talents and regretted ‘ she could not, in conscience, recom-
mend the book to her friends.’


Marmaduke was very upset by these unfavourable com-
ments from his nearest and dearest. “ All this makes one
doubt one’s sanity : I regret that I have asked the Bishop
of Jerusalem to order it,” he confided to Hickes. Little
wonder the poor young man —he was just twenty-five—
wrote to consult a doctor about his nerves. What they
could have objected to, other than its extreme banality and
a schoolgirl tendency to giggle at least once in every chapter,
is difficult to see. It is pretty dreary stuff, but there are
glimpses of reality : c Why, he wondered, did she always
avoid his mouth ? ’ And one very good Irish story, tradi-
tional in the O’Brien family, which is worth quoting :
‘ There was once an Irish gentleman, the descendant of a
thousand kings, the son of one baker. He was a Member of
of Parliament, an orator, a poet, a novelist, a patriot, a
Fenian, an anarchist, a socialist, and would have been a
king if he had had his rights. He died, poor fellow, upon
the terrace of the House of Commons, from mixing meta-
phors in his cups. One of his speeches has come down to us.
‘ The Secretary of State for Ireland, arch-enemy of all
true patriots, had just made a statement.
‘ “ Lies,” said the Irish gentleman, rising and glaring at
the Minister, who, it is reported, quailed beneath his glance
—“ lies are as prolific as rabbuts; but although ye
cannot do with less than two rabbuts if ye are wishin’ to
start a warrun, one single, dastur-rdly lie has power booth
to begit and to bring forth a hool bivvy of hilthy and robust
prevar-rications, which strut abroad like paycocks, desavin’
by the brightness of their plumage, impoosin’ upon the
behoolder, and swellin’ and growin’, until he belaves them
to be very lions of ver-racity. Ye will not shoot them like
young rooks, neither will ye catch them with a lampoon
like whales. They are vampoires suckin’ the life-blood
from the dry boons of truth. Like swine, they drag ye where
ye were not wishin’ to go, runnin’ between your legs,
hangin’ on to your trousers, and causin’ ye indless embarrass-
ment, until at lingth they rise, and catchin’ ye on their
hor-runs, toss ye hidlong into the black abyss where there
burruns the fire of Hill ! ” ’


* The badness of this, and indeed, of all Marmaduke’s
English novels is instructive,’ 1 and it is lamentable that All
Fools ever found a publisher. Its author himself grew to
have a very poor opinion of it, for, after the success of Said,
he withdrew it from publication, and destroyed all spare
copies.
Whilst the new house was being set to rights, he and
Muriel lived in lodgings in Southwold with his mother.
Bob joined them often ; he was reading for the Bar, as he
‘ likes the idea of rooms in town and classic brieflessness.’
Bob liked Muriel, too, more than she him : but Marmaduke,
when she complained of his being in love with her, said
gently : “I don’t blame him : he can no more help it
than I ” ; When they moved into Holton, their mother
went with them and Bob, at first spasmodically, visited
them : then, after his failure to pass the Bar exams, joined
them permanently and became part of their establishment.
Marmaduke, though such a life must have been the via
negationis in all its bitterness for him, did not grumble : his
letters are full of local gossip : great doings on Ladysmith
Day, ‘ speeches in the market-place, endless God save our
gracious, and a patriotic sing-song in the evening.’
* Holton is especially unfortunate in respect of its rector,’
he tells Hickes, and ‘ the neighbours and I have been at
loggerheads already, about a right of way and some clothes-
props on my land. Suffolk folks are frightfully cantankerous
and crusty with a stranger, but, once they get to know and
like you, they’ll let you do anything you like with them,
short of personal violence. So I bide my time and do my
best to ingratiate myself with the village. I was invited to
their Reading Room dinner the other evening, when, to my
infinite disgust, I was called upon to make a speech, and
was finally elected Vice-President of the Institution. Yes-
terday I saw a fine occasion for furthering a better under-
standing, so got up a sing-song, when I took the chair,
and everyone seemed to enjoy themselves. Afterwards I
let them have a bonfire on my land, where all the village
gathered to warm themselves, and we sang “ God Save the
1 E. M. Forster.


Queen” and cheeredß. P. and Mafekirig, and only wished
we had “ old Krewjer ” for fuel. They did me the honour
to cheer me pretty heartily at last, so I think we are getting
on all right and, by the end of the year, shall have the
clothes-props moved without a murmur and the right of way
settled quite amicably to my satisfaction. You should have
seen them round that bonfire, on a hill-top covered with
whin-bushes, the fir-trees of our garden showing their tops
in one direction just below a great black windmill, and
night all round over a wide horizon. Jimmy Hamilton, a
friend of mine, had a similar fire at Walberswick, about
eight miles off. He evidently waited for the flare of ours,
for no sooner were we fairly blazing than up shot a little
tongue of flame in the far distance. That pleased Holton
more than anything, I think, for naturally we like to take
the lead. They gave three lusty cheers for the folks over
yonder.
‘ From all this, you would scarcely suppose that I have
been hard at work ; but it is so actually.
‘ I have been copying away at Said the Fisherman like mad,
but don’t yet see the end of the first part clearly through the
thicket.
‘ All Fools is described as “ Mr. Pickthall’s very successful
novel ” in our advertisement, but on inquiry I find that
only 130 copies have been sold up to now, which is dis-
appointing—on an edition of 1000 —a small edition. How-
ever, I am told that it is too soon to give an opinion about its
sale and that Mudie’s have re-ordered, which is something.’
By September he had written five short stories, and was at
work on a projected novel, The Canker Poppy, set in Suffolk.
The dispute over the clothes-props simmered in his mind
until, in 1912, it took shape and was published as Lark-
meadow—dedicated c for the sake of the grain of fact from
which it springs, to a Suffolk Village.’ The hero’s escape
from his father’s office also arose from an incident which
occurred when the Pickthalls were visiting the Hickes’ at
Draycot at this time—April 1900. Cyril Baldwin, returned
by Lane, was sent to Hickes, who did not like the use in it
H


of the word e excrement,’ nor punning on the name of
Lucifer, nor a repetition of the love-making in a hansom.
{ ln All Fools the question was treated from the girl’s
point of view : in G.B. it is treated from the respectable or
parents’ standpoint. The episode, too, is subservient and
not the keystone of the book, as it was in All Fools. It is not
a weak point, for George Rashleigh paid me a compliment
on it.’
Marmaduke answers him back, defending his own writing.
The c stickiness of English Life,’ which Marmaduke
dreaded after ‘ Bohemian Geneva,’ seems to have engulfed
him quite at this period. By all accounts he seemed most
ordinary and conventional : a young man, settling down to
write and to play squireen : c a good Churchman, reading
the Lessons on Sunday,’ his half-sister Caroline—now an
Anglican nun at the Gape, reports him at that time.
Muriel, when the garden had been brought into fine
fettle by old Daniel, the gardener, gave a c lilac tea ’ —
everyone must wear lilac, the tea-set, icing, and napkins
were all of the same romantic hue to match the great
bushes in the garden, hanging purple and white. The
Pickthalls got up The Mikado locally : they bathed fre-
quently, and one day, what a joke, Marmaduke had for-
gotten his costume and the machine attendant gave him a
lady’s bathing dress, purple with yellow frills, and loud
were his lamentations.
The Queen died and £ yesterday and this morning we
had memorial services for her late Most Gracious. Yester-
day’s was quite ritualistic. I lent our silver candlesticks for
the altar. I never can quite make out the reason why of
these memorial services : a long acrobatic performance,
ours was, to avoid by skipping over, crawling under, writh-
ing round in paraphrase, a simple prayer for the departed.
At last the rector has given notice of a confirmation to be
held in March (to Marmaduke’s horror there had not been
one for over four years) and without his moving a finger
ten candidates have presented themselves.’
Marmaduke went as often as he could to fairs or circuses


—‘ merry-go-rounds had an irresistible attraction for him :
he rode oh them with great solemnity. 5 He ‘ organized an
agitation to get the new organ finished ere the damps of
another winter ruin it 5 : * Duke and Bob 5 presented Hickes
with a set of Communion silver that was their father’s :
they put up a window in the Say Chapel in Broxbourne
Church in memory of Ann Walmsley and her children.
Marmaduke, as chairman of the Parish Council, was
worried by a bad local case of cow stabbing and incendiarism.
Where in all this dismal clutter of banality is the boy who
walked into Jerusalem ?
Not far off. The commonplace book shows with what
intensity even the daily round is lived. Every detail of his
beloved East coast landscape is etched into his mind,
ironed in ; the dike water crumbling in the wind, flowers
in shade cool as reflections in water : the moon’s great
illuminated clock-face striking midnight, whilst its light lies
along the roofs like a fine dust of snow : a woman in a
crimson cloak, set against the leafless russet trees : the
Broads, with their waters broken by little islands, and
beyond, in the distance, on one side a darkness of trees ;
on the other, the purple sea, high as a hill : the numb
harmony exceeding cold, of blue flowers of wild chicory
about a heap of granite stones on a lowering day : all are
stencilled, all wege nach innen. Errand boy, countryman
in donkey cart, gipsy woman, bearded preacher at an empty
cross-roads, lounging, swaggering bucks on Lowestoft pier,
all are accepted, entered as petty cash might be.
The customs of Skyland, too, both horrified and delighted
him. The native cruelty, that, when a dog had to be killed,
took it to an out-of-the-way place and did it slowly to death,
with ritual, and before a select gathering that gloated over
its agonies : the ceremonies, when the bride leaves her
mother’s house, to the tune of cans and kettle banged and
beaten by the bridegroom’s friends : the drinking from
Jeremiahs —chamber-pots as yet clean from the shop —out
of which, at a cottager’s wedding feast, bride and bride-
groom consumed gin and water, whilst divers smutty but
immemorial jokes are made : the carrying of a corpse over


disputed land to * make it common for ever more * : these
he notes.
He gives, in Larkmeadow, a description of the last of these
three, which was the culmination of his dispute with the
villagers. *Ta dead be free and holy and kind o’ haliers
what they pass acrost and makes that free,’ was the opinion
of the village ; so, ‘ emerging from the fir-wood by the mill,
the procession left the path and went up the boundary
hedge, returned to the verge of the cliff overlooking the
village, then back to the hedge again, drawing line beside
line exactly as one does in ploughing, the intention being
that no parcel of the heath should escape the liberating
virtue of the dead. Despite the eccentricity of the proceed-
ing, the men moved decorously, wearing solemn masks :
the women hid their faces in white handkerchiefs.’
His second winter there was great excitement : fear came
on all the neighbourhood, for rumour had it that a creature
with long hair, matted like a beast’s, and a face darker than
a negro’s, and a mouth larger than that of human kind,
knocked at a cottage door and, when Joe Watling opened
it, pointed to its mouth and to the food. Joe attacked the
brute (which seemed to have a fish’s tail, for the man was
cased in weeds and slime from the waist downwards), but
it pounced upon a quartern loaf and got away. ‘ltdo be
a Rooshian, a desperate bad creature,’ the village said, and
Marmaduke, remembering the Tsarist priests and pilgrims,
was not sorry that in East Anglia the name for any wicked
man was : { a reg’lar Rooshian.’
The terrible creature established itself in Marler’s Grove
—a coppice of old beeches interspersed with modern firs
upon the outskirts of a great expanse of heathland, crossed
by sheep-walks clothed in a thick growth of whins. Here it
built a little hut, and lived on chickens and other food that
it could steal. Several times it approached people and
talked to them in its gibberish, but they took up pitchforks
or brooms against it—whatever was handy—and it fled.
Then they found its hut, and the villagers hid up-
turned scythe-blades, sharp edge upwards, in the heap
of sheep’s wool upon which the creature slept, and


were delighted when, next day, they discovered stains of
blood.
A farmer, coming from Saxmundham market, had seen
the Russian ; ‘it sprang out at him from a group of trees
beside the way, waving its hands about and grinning
horribly. It knelt down in the road. The ghastly appari-
tion in the gloaming caused the mare to shy and nearly
overset the cart. The farmer, scared, laid his whip across
the Russian’s face.’ The local squire went after it, thinking
it some rare ape, with a net. At last it was caught, sleeping,
and, luckily, the police arrived in time to prevent the vil-
lagers from transfixing the wretched Blackamoor, already
half-dead from exposure. He had been shipwrecked on that
bleak, inhospitable shore, and, somehow, had crawled over
the wide, level marshland, intersected by a lot of dikes
choked with dying reeds, towards the smoke rising from
among purple woods. He died some weeks later in the
workhouse infirmary.
Hardly better fared the French balloonists —a man and
woman who landed, on Christmas Eve, about two miles
from Southwold. They walked into the nearest village, and,
going into the post office, asked in broken English for
telegraph forms. The postmistress fled and, summoning
help, drove the strangers to take refuge in a ruined cottage
outside the village, where they were rescued, with difficulty
by the police, from the big crowd which was come with
pitchforks, scythes, and reap-hooks to £ make an end of
sichlike kind of Rooshians.’
Meanwhile, the MS. of Said was travelling ; John Lane
sent it over to America, but returned it with a general
verdict from both his English and American readers that it
was c of insufficient general interest.’ It was then confided
to { a literary agent with whom I have entered into an
agreement. I hope he may place it to advantage. At any
rate I have to bother myself no more about it.’ The agent
was Pinker, and so successful was he that, late in 1902,
Marmaduke wrote to Hickes :
‘ Methuen has accepted Said the Fisherman. The terms are
10 per cent royalty on every copy sold rising at every 1000


to near 20 per cent where it becomes stationary. What
makes me call this favourable is that my interest in the book
is lifelong. In the event of the edition being sold to U.S.A.
I get half the price, and the rights of foreign translation
with any fees arising therefrom are my very own.’
He was proof-correcting all the spring and summer,
working at the same time at The Canker Poppy. In July 1903
Said was published. It was an instant success. A. J.
Dawson gave it a two-column review in the Athemum , then
under the editorship of Vernon Rendall, and ‘James
Douglas in the Star followed suit, and then it was nothing
but a chorus of praise from the whole London and provincial
Press,’ Marmaduke wrote to a friend. J. M. Barrie wrote a
congratulatory letter, asking to meet him. H. G. Wells, in
a first letter, says : ‘ Said reminds me (not a bit to its dis-
advantage) of Morier,’ and adds : ‘ I wish that I could feel
as certain about my own work as I do of yours, that it will
be alive and interesting people fifty years from now. I wish
Henley could have read this good live stuff.’ In a second
note he says : ‘ You were good before but if you are only
twenty-four you are marvellous,’ and asks Marmaduke to
lunch with him in Clement’s Inn.
Marmaduke met both Wells and Barrie in 1904 : and
stayed with the former for a week-end at Easton Glebe. He
also stayed with Dawson in his cottage in the Hardy country,
not only once, but several times. James Douglas, in his
review of Said, , had suspected Dawson himself of having
written it, which, when Dawson heard, caused him to
exclaim : ‘He wished to God he could have written it.’
As Pinker had foreseen, Said had a ‘ literary (id est critical)
rather than a popular success,’ and two months after
publication only eight hundred copies had been sold. But
letters from ‘ many other well-known writers, congratulating
me on having written what they called a masterpiece,’
flowed in, and Muriel was able to fill a fat book with press-
cuttings. ‘ Curiously enough,’ Marmaduke wrote, many
years later to his agent, ‘it is the book of mine which
Orientals like least. Or rather not curiously, for it does them


less than justice.’ It was translated into French, German,
and Danish, did very well in America, and by 1927 had
gone into fourteen editions. Great Orientalists like Professor
Browne and Stanley Lane Poole acclaimed Said , and it was
given to British officials in Egypt to be studied as a textbook
of the manners of the country.
The Canker Poppy was now finished, but was never pub-
lished, nor can I find any record even of Marmaduke’s
having tried to dispose of it. Kelk, on reading it, exclaimed :
“ Here is something really interesting at last,” but Marma-
duke destroyed the MSS, though, from jottings in the
commonplace book, he seems to have used a good deal of the
Suffolk material he had collected in Enid, Brendle , and
Larkmeadow. Enid was published by Methuen’s in 1904,
and is purely a Suffolk story. It is not unlively, but is
overlong, and dates badly. It also suffers from a literary
indigestion. The author confesses as much to Hickes in a
letter :
* Being once more immersed in the shifting sands of
Babylonish gold and human fate, this ego of mine, passive
flotsam, reaches white supplicating digits forth towards
the Land of Biscuits and seeds (not carraway) craving
auscultation and the pale receptive ear ’ (Hickes was curate
in Reading), ‘ my excuse for writing the above is that I
have just been reading Henry James and lately studying
Shakespeare, the two jingle-jangle together in my head to
a tune of which the above is only a note, as it were.’
Enid was written entirely at Holton, as was also Brendle ,
which is completely local in atmosphere. Enid was published
by Constable, but for Brendle Marmaduke returned to
Methuen. He still corresponds regularly with Hickes :
‘ Seeing a sixpenny edition of Aylwin on a Lowestoft
bookstall in Ketells Turn, and remembering your high
opinion of it, I bought a copy. I like it very much, romanti-
cism coming as a refreshment after the realism towards which
I perpetually stray. I also purchased, on your advice, the-
Red Badge of Courage , by Stephen Crane.’
In the spring of 1904 he wrote joyously to Hickes that


there was * every chance of my going Eastward in the
autumn,’ but when autumn came, his mother was found
to be suffering from cancer. His brother had married
recently, and it was Marmaduke who nursed her devotedly
through her last illness, and for her sake gave up all thought
of the projected journey. “ Dominus non dixit, vade in
Orientem et quaere justitiam, abi usque ad Occidentem ut
accipias indulgentiam,” 1 Augustine had said, and from his
mother’s room Marmaduke wrote The House of Islam ,
which reflects the daily anguish of his vigil. *ln death that
which jars most is the voice of the undertaker,’ he confides
to his commonplace book. It was his first loss, and both his
self-control, and the effort which it cost him, are transparent
in this book, which Vernon Rendall thought his best.
‘ Like Kipling’s Kim , it is an appreciation of the mystic
life, and shows anew side of the writer’s character.’ Himself,
he did not rate it so high.
* The House of Islam is not a great book, whatever the
critics may say, don’t heed them. It might have been
made so, but I had not the requisite zest and energy, just
after my mother’s death, when it was written,’ he wrote to
Hickes.
Yet this grave book is entirely free from the somewhat
childish and chirping facetiousness which here and there
blemishes almost all his other works. In this first grief he
came nearer being transfigured by the spirit of the East
then ever before or after. This spirit is more than bazaars,
coffee, minarets, muezzins, yashmaks, fezzed carpet-sellers,
or shiny, smirking Arab boys proffering * feelthee pictures.’
It is the spirit of Islam : barest, sternest, emptiest, most
non-attached of creeds. What his God promised Augustine :
e I am the food of the strong : grow thou, and thou shalt
feed on Me, but verily not I into thee, but thou into Me'
shalt be converted.’ 2 came true for Marmaduke whilst
he wrote The House of Islam.
His story is of two Muslims, brothers, from a town in the
1 ‘ The Lord has not commanded, go seek justice in the East, nor yet
travel west to receive pardon.’
2 ‘ Ego sum cibus grandium : cresce, et manducabis me : sed non vero
Ego in te, sed tu in Me mutaberis.’


Syrian desert. The elder goes to court and seeks temporal
advancement: the younger stays at home to find spiritual
peace. The Sheykh Shems-ud-Din is old when the story
opens, and -of all his children only a daughter remains to
him, and she falls ill. For her sake, whom he loves to the
verge of idolatry, he journeys to Jerusalem, to consult the
Frankish physicians there. His elder brother is now a high
official in the city, but is ashamed of his brother, accom-
panied as he is by the sick girl in her litter and by a horde
of lawless Circassians. The Frankish doctor cannot heal the
girl, and at her death there is a riot, for he is thought by
the Circassians to have killed her, though he had actually
risked dismissal by allowing her to be nursed in the Jewish
hospital.
Shems-ud-Din, who had wearied Allah with vain prayers,
buries her calmly. Now he realizes his sin : ‘ Man prays
for evil as he prays for good, for man is without understand-
ing.’ He goes back to his desert; but the last word is not
with him, but with Camrudin in The Early Hours , Marma-
duke’s last published novel. ‘ The goal of fife can never be
communion with a fellow creature. That search must end
in disappointment always. The soul of every man is solitary
from the cradle to the grave, unless and until it finds, by
service, that communion with Allah for which it was created.
When it has found that, it is at one with all the other
servants of Allah, but not before.’
At the very end of his life, in his last years at Hyderabad,
he repeated in a parable the lesson of The House of Islam.
A fakir, renowned for his asceticism, goes for curiosity to
visit another, not less famous for his sanctity. Both are desert
dwellers, but the fakir travels on foot, miserably clad, and
arrives at the other’s tent to find sumptuous silken hangings,
priceless carpets, gold plate, exquisite food, scented sherbets,
and many beautiful slave-girls. He cries out at such luxury,
will eat only from his wooden platter, drink only water
from his pilgrim’s mug, sleeps in his cloak on the bare
ground. Next day his host asks him to accompany him for
a piece of his way, and the fakir agrees.
When evening comes, the fakir’s platter and mug cannot


be found. He makes a terrible song and dance, keeps up a
hue and cry all night long for the missing utensils, refuses
food or sleep, and next day is still put out, though his weep-
ing and raging have given place to sulks. As the caravan
proceeds, robbers fall upon it and take everything, leaving
host and guest in their shifts : the slaves are all fled or
captured, and the two proceed alone together on foot.
As they reach their journey’s end the host, who has not
shown any sign of annoyance or anger throughout, says :
“ My friend, you marvelled that I eat off gold, had silken
tent hangings, ate the rarest foods ; but is not your soul
more burdened by your wooden mug and plate than mine
by all my riches ? ”
When his next book, Bundle , appeared, in 1905, Marma-
duke had anew ordeal to face. For though he had never
met the bad-tempered and tyrannical old brewer, whose
spineless son he makes his hero, his relations rose solidly
against him. They declared brewer and son speaking like-
nesses, and swore never to speak again to the reprobate
Marmaduke who had made capital —nay, income !—out of
a long-forgotten family scandal.
At the end of 1904 he disposed of Ash Cottage, and after
a few weeks in London he took another at Fordingbridge,
Hampshire. Thence he writes despondently to Hickes :
‘My life at home has narrowed down so much of late, I
mean that I have quarrelled with all my relations except
the O’Briens, and am tied to a beastly little villa with a
garden the size of a pocket-handkerchief.’ He escaped first
to Casterbridge ‘ to an old-fashioned hostelry ’ recommended
him by Dawson—the ‘ Phoenix Inn,’ scene of Jenny’s last
dance in Hardy’s Wessex poems.
There he first realized himself ‘ a childless man who loves
children,’ as he described himself to my mother, and wrote
to Hickes of his landlady’s daughter, aged eleven, ‘ whom I
found crying in a dark room in the evening because, as I
with difficulty elicited from her, her father could not take
her to a show that was on at the Corn Exchange, as he
had promised to do. I took her, having obtained leave, and
we did the thing in style to the envy of little school-fellows,


some of whom partook of our bounty. The child seems
rather lonely in a family of grown-ups and since then has
taken to spending most of her time, after school, in my
sitting-room; This afternoon I went at her especial request
to a service at Trinity Church “ to hear us answer,” and
afterwards was taken for a regular lover’s walk, quite in
the spirit of Peter Pan. To-morrow evening, my last but
one, she is going to show me some scene of the deadliest
interest on some kind of British camp where the children
play.’
In the autumn, when he and Muriel returned to London,
they took a flat in Maida Vale, where he wrote The Myopes,
the gloomiest and worst of all his novels. It was not even ade
profundis, being ill-written, silly, and without depth. He was
very depressed. It seemed as though the success of Said, so
hard-won, so long awaited, was a flare only, lighting up the
prison bars, not a candle showing him the well-tried, now
forgotten way of escape. One evening he came home to
find a letter from Lady Valda Machell, who, never having
met him, wrote praising his books, and inviting him to tea
at St. James’s Palace. He went, and so began one of the
greatest friendships of his life. She was home on leave from
Cairo, where her husband, Captain Machell, was adviser
to the Prime Minister, Mustapha Pasha Fehmy. She bade
Marmaduke come and stay with them there, and write a
book about Egypt. He accepted, joyfully. Muriel went to
stay with her father, and early in 1907 Marmaduke crossed
from Marseilles to Alexandria. This time his journey was
not an escape to an eagerly anticipated unknown, but a
return to a beloved freedom.


CHATTER FOUR
IORD CROMER has stated that * the maximum amount
_j of harm is probably done when an Oriental ruler is for
the first time brought into contact with the European
system of credit. He then finds he can obtain large stuns of
money with the utmost apparent facility. The temptation
to avail himself to the full of the benefits, which a reckless
use of credits seems to offer to him are too strong to be
resisted. He will rush into the gulf which lies open before
him ’ . . . this is what Ismail Pasha, the semi-independent
representative of the Sultan, did as Khedive of Egypt in
the middle of the nineteenth century.
The result of Ismail’s foregone bankruptcy was, to quote
Lord Cromer once again, that: ‘it happened Egypt had
to be Europeanized. The English were its main agents in
this process of Europeanization.’ They did not desire the
mentor’s seat —it was thrust upon them. “We do not want
to have Egypt. We want to trade with Egypt, and to
travel through Egypt, but we do not want the burden of
governing Egypt. What we wish about Egypt is that it
should continue to be attached to the Turkish Empire,
which is a security against its belonging to any European
power.” So said Lord Palmerston, and in the last sentence
lay the crux of the Egyptian problem.
As long ago as 1815 Mehemet Ali confided to Burkhardt,
whom he met in the heart of the Arabian Desert, that
‘ England must some day take Egypt as her share of the
spoil of the Turkish Empire,’ and Kinglake, in his Eothen,
put the same thing, perhaps more poetically: ‘ The English-
man, straining far over to hold his beloved India, will plant
a firm hold on the banks of the Nile and sit in the seat of the
faithful.’
Our difficulties began when Lesseps obtained his conces-


sion from the Khedive, in spite of Palmerston’s opposition.
Thereafter, the Canal became a matter of capital importance
in British policy, and in a dispatch from Lord Derby to
Russia on 6 May 1877 he declared that ‘ England would
regard a blockade of the canal as a menace to India,’ and
Derby prophetically warned Nubar Pasha that by the very
fact of its existence the canal rendered possible, even
probable, a British seizure of Egypt; as later, the creation
of the German Bagdadbahn was to render inevitable British
mandates in the Near East.
Palmerston had brilliantly described our feelings towards
Egypt: “We do not wish it for ourselves any more than
any rational man with an estate in the north of England
and a residence in the south would have wished to possess
the inns on the Great North Road. All he could want
would have been that the inns should be well kept, always
accessible, and furnishing him, when he came, with mutton
chops and post-horses.” Unfortunately, neither the Sultan,
who may, in the terms of the above metaphor, be described
as the landlord, nor the Khedive, the pub-keeper himself,
could keep the inns accessible or provide a sufficiency of chops.
The real reason for the British occupation is to be found
neither in the constitutional movement of 1882, nor in the
wish to re-establish the fallen authority of the Khedive, but
simply in the existence of the Suez Canal. By the occupation
we placed ourselves in the anomalous position of a Liberal
nation, bolstering up an absolute and absolutely autocratic
power, based on the three G’s —the Courbash (a strip of
hippopotamus hide tapering at the end, and used for the
collection of taxes and the extraction of evidence from wit-
nesses), the Corvee (forced labour), and Corruption—against
a genuinely national movement, whose objects were a
constitution, and some form of representative government
on a European model.
In consequence of the revolt of Arabi, Italy suggested an
international police force should be formed to patrol the
Canal, and Turkey was ready to accept the suggestion.
But the deliberations of the International Conference, sum-
moned at Therapia on 23 July 1882, were interrupted by


the roar of the British guns bombarding Alexandria, and the
expeditionary force landed under Sir Garnet Wolseley has
remained there ever since. The constitutional evolution of
Egypt was thus driven underground by the action of Great
Britain, and it was this averted patriotism, these sub-
terranean hankerings after liberty, these nascent but early
stifled aspirations after freedom, which, when he arrived
in Cairo, Marmaduke discovered were most interesting to
his hosts.
“ He was invaluable,” Lady Valda Machell told me, “ he
was a perfect barometer of the state of native feeling—most
useful.” His investigating, and estimating the strength of
discontent, was done merely by watching—for he had a gift
of getting under the skin of Orientals —be they Syrian
peasants, Egyptians, Turks, Arabs, or Indians. This was
the extent of the ‘ secret service work * and ‘ spying * of
which he has so often been accused. He never betrayed
secrets, nor even solicited them, and his widow insists * he
always paid his own expenses, so as to be quite free.’ He
only volunteered to wander about the bazaar and study the
trend of native opinion at that very difficult time, for he
was devoted to the Machells, and tremendously grateful to
them for their splendid hospitality, and, being a witty and
delightful raconteur, he told them the stories he collected,
the amusing things he heard, with no ulterior motive. He
met, at the Residency, many interesting people, some of
whom were to become his lifelong friends —Aubrey Herbert
and George Hornblower, for example ; whilst others, such
as Mark Sykes, Valentine Chirol, George Lloyd (now Lord
Lloyd), and Lord Cromer, were to play important roles in
his life. It was, for him, as if the long years in England had
rolled away.
* I can’t think,’ Lady Duff Gordon had written from
Egypt, ‘ why Mohammedans are always gentlemen. They
have a grave courtesy which contrasts most strikingly with
European vulgarity.’ After the pandemonium of quarrelling
relatives, here was cool friendliness as of a drawing-room,
where people ‘ gave hospitality with their faces,’ though,
compared with his gay, colourful Syrians, Egyptians seemed


sad and still; impassive, monochrome, infinitely tranquil.
To most Europeans, the Egyptians are not real, ‘ only part
of the scenery,’ as Lady Duff Gordon complained : but to
Marmaduke it was the English who were an interruption—
he longed to escape from them and to get on with life. He
saw small harm in the British occupation, so long as it left
the inhabitants in peace : ‘lt matters little,’ he makes one
old man say, ‘ to quiet folk who rules in Masr, so long as he
be less harsh than was Arabi, and gives us rest to five and
die in peace.’ But, on the other hand, he saw no reason
why the fellahin should be grateful to the English for the
material prosperity which benefited them, incidentally,
whilst paying the foreign capitalist a handsome dividend on
the money he had sunk in the country.
Lord Cromer was outraged at their ingratitude : c The
fellah is singularly wanting in the logical faculty. He is
incapable of establishing clearly that . . . good adminis-
tration and the exercise of a paramount influence by
England are inseparably finked together. His sense of
gratitude for past favours, under the influence of ephemeral
passion, would disappear like chaff before the wind. At
such a moment, the same man, who was but yesterday
blessing the English engineer for watering his fields, might
to-morrow, should occasion arise, brain his benefactor with
a nabout in a fit of savage passion.’
Poor Marmaduke, suffering as he did from some strange
complex caused by having been a day-boy and debarred
from playing games at school, could never realize that
we, ‘ whose souls are lighted with wisdom from on high,’
have the right to insist on receiving, from men benighted,
to whom we have never denied the blessings of civilization,
a measure, heaped full and overflowing, of gratitude. For
him, there was something in those quiet villages which
neither topee could bestow nor quarterly dividend buy,
however punctually paid with income-tax subtracted at
source. For him, as for Mabriik in The Children of the Nile ,
‘it was a joy to feel free once more, to ride at ease among
the palm groves in the cool of the morning, to exchange
views with the fellahin and chaff the girls with burdens on


their heads —brown amber beauties, who passed with hips
swaying and insurgent breasts.’
He was still, at this stage, single-mindedly a writer, and
saw all things, good or evil, purely from the story-teller’s
point of view. Would he had remained so ! Indignation
and political consciousness are, for the imagination, and for
every form of art and literature, temptations which all but
a few of the greatest men of genius are well advised to resist
at any cost.
‘ Artists,’ said Karl Marx, ‘ are kittle-kattle,’ and he would
have licensed them to remain the one type of citizen who
has no part or share in politics and whom Aristotle called
‘ Idiotes .’ For the divine folly, that is the stuff poetry and
plays are made of, requires a tranquillity around and about
the emotion which generates it, in which the artist may
recollect and create. If he takes so to heart injustice and
oppression, then he will violate his peace, and with it his
power. How, when the catharsis is incomplete in the poet,
can he induce it in his audience ? The ‘ poetry is in the
pity ’ only when it is denied its proper medium, and the
exceptions—the white-hot works of such giants as Swift,
Rousseau, Galvin, Tolstoi—only prove how much better
Marmaduke Pickthall, as also Zola and Galsworthy, to take
three very obvious examples, wrote when they achieved the
detachment necessary to give their art perspective.
Lord Cromer might quote ‘ a great Conservative states-
man ’ who declared : ‘ The East is languishing for want of
a revolution ’ ; but Marmaduke, shaking Europe off him
as a dog coming out of a pond shakes water, approved
rather Bismarck’s : ‘La politique est l’art de s’accomoder
aux circonstances et de tirer partie de tout, meme de ce qui
deplait.’ He approved Lord Cromer, too, very much
indeed.
After he retired Marmaduke wrote of him : c He never
made the least pretence at understanding the Egyptians or
of consulting them, but he did what he and his advisers
thought needful for the good of Egypt. And he made
Egypt prosperous, and I make bold to add, contented, in
spite of the unrest of 1906-1907, which culminated in the


Denshawai incident. This affair had really nothing to do
with British rule, but was the aftermath of the Akaba
trouble, when Egypt was brought near to war with Turkey,
a position which Muslims found intolerable. The Foreign
Office, to judge what followed, thought that that unrest was
due to something wrong about Lord Cromer’s methods of
government. That was not the case. The outcry over
Denshawai was raised in England.’
Marmaduke had no use at all for Cromer’s successors.
* Diffidence,’ as Mr. E. M. Forster rightly says, ‘ will never
succeed in the East. Unless I have a touch of the regal
about me, a glint of outward armour, my exquisite qualities
will be wasted, my tact and insight ignored. The East is a
bit of a snob, in fact ’ ; or, as Marmaduke put it, ‘ they
dearly love a Man.’ And Cromer was every inch a man.
The Machells’ house was an admirable base. To bathe
there, dine, and talk after, with men and women who knew
the East and cared for it even as he did, who were nearer to
him than ever Wells or Barrie could be, and yet were of the
same intellectual stature, and the next day to go out, dis-
guised as a Syrian, and mooch about, listening, watching,
soaking in the sun, lizard-acute, was a perfect alternation.
At first he remained in Cairo. He mixed with the soldiers,
finding life in barracks tolerable ; the Turks, and still more
the Circassians and the Albanians being odious, but the
Egyptians themselves kindly folk, though unconscionably
different from either Turks or Europeans.
The shape of an Egyptian’s head and body differs enor-
mously from an Englishman’s. Already the former has the
thin African arms and legs, the little, brittle bones : and
neither in Cairo nor Damascus could Marmaduke ever get
a hat big enough to fit him, though he had not a large head,
whereas he had no trouble in Turkish cities. He had a
lovely test question, which he used to ask English and
Orientals alike : ‘ Two ducks in front of a duck, two ducks
behind a duck, and a duck in the middle : how many
ducks ? ’ Europeans at the first guess would invariably
answer five ; Egyptians equally invariably seven ; Syrians
also seven ; Turks, Circassians, and Albanians always five.
i


An educated Egyptian doctor explained to him how it must
be seven. Holding up both hands with fingers closed he
showed 4 Two ducks ’ (raising two fingers) ‘ in front of a
duck ’ (up shot the thumb) — 4 makes three ; two ducks ’
(last two fingers of that hand were raised) c behind a duck ’
(the index of the second hand was raised), ‘ that’s six, and a
duck in the middle, makes seven. The answer can be
nothing else. It is yourself, dear sir, and not the rest of us,
who are in error.’ The perfect Oriental is entirely logical,
as will be seen from this story, and he can count extremely
fast: when perchance his literal reasoning lands' him in
some evident absurdity, he praises God who has set limits
to man’s faculties. The letter and the spirit are, for him,
two separate entities : a noble sentiment is a noble senti-
ment, however negligible may be its effect on the conduct
of the speaker.
Dressed as a sweetmeat-seller, Marmaduke visited all the
taverns with his tray of candies, ‘ and in his slow progress
through the crowded markets he overheard the remarks of
all kinds of men.’ He went, .also, often to 4 a certain coffee
tavern, the resort of quiet folk. Customers sat on stools in
an open place beside the street, whilst the host and his
assistants loitered in and out of a little chamber hollowed in
the outer wall of a great mosque, where glowed the brazier.’
Here he heard the merchants, peaceful citizens, complaining
of the standing army and of the revolutionary party alike.
“O, my dear,” they assured him, 44 all such have a
dangerous affection for bullets. And we have not. Knowest
thou that there be three sorts of bullets ? Nay ? Our
advice is that you avoid them all, and all men who are the
fathers of bullets. The three sorts are named from the
voice of them : 4 Whirr,’ and 4 Whizz,’ and 4 Whinn.’
c Whirr ’is tired and well-nigh harmless; 4 Whizz ’ has still'
some mind for mischief; but 4 Whinn,’ I assure thee, by
Allah ! 4 Whinn ’ is a perfect devil.”
He learnt other things, too, from these merchants. Why,
for example, French priests wear beards when in North
Africa, though it is against the regulations of their Church.
It began as a bad habit: they were slack, and it was a bore


to shave. Then one day a beautifully clean Bishop arrived
at Cairo and was horrified at their beards and said they
must be cut off at once. The priests temporized, and next
day took the Bishop to visit some notable sheykhs in the
vicinity. The Bishop was splendid in full regalia, feeling
stout and important. But the sheykhs talked only to the
priests, to whom they showed great deference. Eventually
the priests made it clear that the sheykhs must pay attention
to the Bishop, whereupon one turned, and, looking at him,
said : “ Ah, I see you have brought one of your wives, and
that she is far gone with child.” Since when the priests
have been allowed to wear their beards as long as they
liked.
There was a little eating-house, too, where, on one
occasion, ‘ which all arose out of a handful of lentils,’ as the
Arab proverb has it, Marmaduke nearly saw murder done.
It was kept by Ahmed the cook, a one-eyed man, in Egypt
styled ‘ professor,’ who was a wicked wag. An habitue of
the little cook-house was another Ahmed, a stupid, good-
natured soldier, ‘ for whom this world was a place of peril
to the soul, whose chance of safety lay in strict adherence
to the divine rules, observing which he felt secure as for
himself.’
One afternoon Ahmed the soldier came in, tired and
irritable after a long spell of fatigues. The usual guests sat
out beneath the awning, upon stools. Across the street
there glowed a stall of fruit and vegetables. Ahmed the
cook embraced his soldier namesake, and made him sit up
in the shop itself, a place of honour. He gave to him a mess
of rice and wheat, winking as he did so to his cronies, who
looked on with secret smiles. When Ahmed the soldier had
made an end of eating, Ahmed the cook paid him the usual
compliments ; and, pouring out a cup of coffee, added :
“ Thou art indeed blessed, O my brother. Thou art
become, indeed, a marvel and a gazing stock, seeing there
is in thy belly that which no one of the sons of Adam ever
ate before thee.”
“ What is thy meaning ? ” asked the soldier, spilling the
coffee handed to him in his great concern.


“ The meat I gave thee was the flesh of jackals.”
“ O Son of a dog ! It is understood thou liest! ”
“By my beard I tell thee ! Ask all these here present ! ”
“ The curse of Allah on thy faith, O atheist, O evil-liver.
May Allah cut short thy life for this foul crime.”
Springing to his feet, Ahmed the soldier spat at the
professor, then fled the place, gesticulating like a madman.
The audience remained, convulsed with laughter. “ Saw
man ever the like for simplicity of understanding ? ” gasped
out Ahmed the cook in the intervals of his amusement.
“ Now he will curse his belly and go vomiting for days, for
the sake of a little mutton mingled nicely with a mess of
rice.”
Meanwhile, the soldier wandered about in the neigh-
bouring streets, bemoaning his disgusting plight, adjuring
Allah and all true believers to behold and succour him.
At his cry of “Ya Muslimin,” men came out of their
doorways. A crowd soon gathered round the wretch and
questioned him. He told his story, weeping, and solemnly
cursing Ahmed the cook, who, by a mean trick, had robbed
him of salvation. Every listener expressed his horror of
such wickedness.
“To the shop, O Muslimin ! to the shop ! We must
teach this pig, this unbeliever, a lesson.” A dense crowd,
whilst the cook and his friends still chuckled, came upon his
shop, using religious war-cries as against the heathen :
the stools, snatched up, were used as weapons, the brazier
upset into the street, cups broken, pitchers, shishehs, all
smashed to atoms. The cook was held down and beaten,
and would very soon have been bashed to death had not
one of his friends, escaping, met two policemen, whom he
summoned to the scene. They rescued Ahmed, but not
before the shop was wholly wrecked.
Another time Marmaduke went to a mosque where, it
was alleged, the preacher made seditious statements. The
man, it was true, abused the Government, and said very
violent things, which had, as Marmaduke explained to an
English clergyman long after, no effect upon the congrega-
tion whatsoever. “It was just what would happen in


England were you to urge your parishioners to sell all they
had and give to the poor. They would come out of church,
saying, e What a splendid sermon.’ But your folk, nor you,
would do anything about it.”
He liked the Cairenes, and got to know them very well,
but disliked the various hangers-on of Turkish and British
government—the Greeks and Armenians, who fleeced the
indigenous folk terribly, and the Levantines in general. He
whole-heartedly agreed with the proverb : ‘ Ermeni Vizir,
devlet dusher ’ — c When an Armenian rules, the State
decays.’ He hated, too, the Europeanized Egyptians,
“ de-moslemized Moslems, and invertebrate Europeans,’
as Lord Cromer called them, whom he mercilessly derides in
his story Karakter, the sad tale of the Egyptian boy whose
father desired above all things that his son should possess
this mysterious quality, and sent him to England to acquire
it, with most disastrous results.
Whilst he was in Cairo there was one of those inter-
religious quick flare-ups, so common in the East, caused by a
Jewess of Damascus, who was come to Cairo after being a
courtesan in Beyrouth, Damascus, and Alexandria. One night,
a Muslim customer insulted her, swearing she was a low,
smiling, Jewish sow, and that he would have her whipped
and cast out of the city. She stabbed him, then flung him
out of her window. Caught and questioned by the quick-
collected crowd, she insisted another of her customers, a
Christian, who had preceded the Muslim, and whom he had
ousted, only some few moments before he died, had done
the deed.
The people believed her, and, whilst she escaped, planned
an assault upon the Christians whilst they were in church,
and a massacre was only averted after several deaths, by the
troops being called out, for the dread cry : “ Din, din
Muhammed,” had already sounded in the streets. So easy
were they to inflame, so easy to pacify, a crowd as fickle
and as mobile as the Paris mob. He learnt much, too, from
the old women, the match-makers and go-betweens, who
frequented the markets. They taught him of the hidden
women’s world, about which he wrote his Veiled Women ,


which is quite uncanny in its knowledge. Can he ever have
penetrated a harem, as rumour has it T. E. Lawrence once
did, with such devastating results ? Marmaduke always
denied it, but there are some scenes in Veiled Women —the
childbirth scene, the witch-scenes, the bath, the funeral
horrors, the sweet singer—that ring convictingly true.
In April he left Cairo and wrote his plans to Machell from
the Ophthalmic Hospital Camp, Benha, on Department of
Public Health notepaper : ‘ I fear you will be thinking me a
scoundrel for not keeping you and Lady Valda posted in
my eccentric movements, and will form an even worse
opinion of me when you see by the heading of this letter
that lam still among the English. However, I have got into
a tarbush and am seeing things. I had lunch to-day with
McCallan’s native assistants on a grand scale —a gramophone
with Arabic songs included —and they believe they can find
me a servant of the Abu Nawwas kind in Cairo, who will
be a treasure to me on my tour through the provinces. If
they can—and I shall know in three days—l shall probably
cancel all my previous arrangements and start at once on a
picaresque voyage through the Delta. The Gerida last night
was stately on the subject of Lord Cromer’s report. There
is one thing, it is better written, better printed, on better
paper, than the majority of those vile rags they call garanil.
I went over the school here yesterday and heard a lesson
on the geography of Egypt in English—too pitiful. I am
glad it is to be done away with. The word seems to have
gone round among the Syrians from Lebanon that Mr.
Biktul (sic) is in Egypt, and I shall have to change my name,
I can see, to Bikattal or some other derivative, unless I want
to be swarmed with them. Apparently I have been recog-
nized by a clerk in the Bank of Egypt where I cash my
cheques and another in the Cairo Post Office. At present I
can’t quite estimate the force of discontent. It is chiefly
pride, the result of peace and prosperity. But there is
something of iron under it all—or so it seemed to me to-day
when probing a good type —and that is the pride of El
Islam, which can only be compared, for exclusiveness, to
that of the Jews of old. Happily I know enough about


the inner things of their religion to interest them and make
them talk—of course, insincerely, but that doesn’t matter,
for one knows the animal under observation.’
Elsewhere he comments on that luncheon, ‘ I have
“ been ” an Arab, and I know that the very words which
Europeans use to carry their ideas in Arabic are calculated
to perplex the native mind. The Arabic word, for example,
for civilization has a flavour rather of “ urbanity,” and is
expressed by such sayings as “ How can he be a civilized
man? He kicked me.” I had a gramophone stuck right under
my ear when lunching with some fellahin, with the glad cry,
“It is the music of your honoured country: deign to hear it.” ’
The tour had for main objective the molid, or fair, held
twice annually at the mosque of the sainted donkey driver,
the Sheykh Sayyid Ahmed, at Tanta. As Christianity, so
also has Islam taken over the native deities and the respect-
able Sheykh el Bedawee is but one form of Osiris, and at his
festivals, in spite of British prudery, the ‘ objectionable ’
symbol of the creator of all things is still displayed. Even
the sacred animals have adopted Muslim masters. ‘ Bubastis
cats are still fed in the Cadi’s court at public expense, and
at Minieh a saint reigns over crocodiles.’ 1
So to the fair Marmaduke rode in the spring sunshine,
across fields of bright green clover, to eat his midday meals
under a clump of trees amid the fields, ‘ where bullocks
trudged round in the shade, turning a sakieh, whose groan
and creak were heard afar across the plain.’ Lazing after,
he would look across the plains, where ‘ in the great sunlight,
quietly active forms of men and cattle appeared like insects
feeding on a wide green leaf.’ The water buffaloes, ridden
by tiny children, the white sails on the canal, the palm-
trees striding bravely into the desert, then falling off, strag-
gling on in ones and twos, to end suddenly, envious, in that
oven-heat, each of his own shadow ; the far hills of Asia, a
smudge of dreary blue—he passed in turn, to sleep at night
in some mud-village, surmounted by its protecting, white-
washed dome of mud, fig-shaped and finely fluted —the
tomb of the village saint.
1 Lady Duff Gordon. — Letters.


At night, too hot to sleep, he would walk out into the
fields, and has thus described one such evening : ‘ Peace
was on all that scene, a peace which seemed the natural garb
of earth, the guerdon of her faithful sons who till the soil.
The chant of the village watchman, musical in the distance,
“ I trust in Him Who sleepeth not nor dieth,” seemed a
cry from the whole world’s heart.’
On all his journey he was delighted with the signs of
hospitality of the people. They were no longer terrorized by
brigands, nor obliged, as they had been in Ismail’s day, to
bury their money and dig it up again as required. Every
evening he attended a gathering in some elder’s house, or,
as the nights grew hotter, upon some threshing floor beneath
the stairs, where the men told jovial tales of Uncle Abu
Nawwas and Hag Gohla. He found the Khedive popular.
“ He is honest, and admires the Franks,” they told him.
Only the dervishes hated him, for he had forbidden the
doseh (or trampling—the devotees lie down close together
in a row, whilst some learned sheykh rides on horseback
over their bodies). Such of the fellahin as were dervishes
furbished up the badges of their order as they talked ;
other men mended their norag —the harrow used for thresh-
ing corn. Others got out the banners of the blessed donkey
driver, inscribed with the Belief and with sacred monograms,
and unfurled and dusted them.
The country was still administrated after the pattern
Mehemet Ali had given it : a Mudir at the head of each
province, a Mamour in each Merkez (or district), and
Omdehs as official headmen of each village. Yet, in the
latter’s position and authority, great alterations had been
made since the arrival of the English. Until the introduction
of the legal code, the Omdeh was responsible, and the late
Sir Mark Sykes, in his condemnation of the British conduct
of the Denshawai punishments, thought that was the
initial error. He said it was all wrong to hang the mur-
derers, for the Omdeh was responsible, and although he was
not present during the rioting, that he alone should have
been hanged : but the British had taken his power from the
Omdeh, with the result that any bad character with guts


could, and did, terrorize his own village or any other, and
no one had . the power to convict him : for the Egyptian
fellahin are, Marmaduke said, “ a cony-like, faint-hearted
people, easily-ruled by any bully.”
Things got so bad that the Anglo-Egyptians liad to make
the Exile Law, which allowed for a notorious bad character
to be kidnapped by the authorities and deported without
trial—a startling admission of the failure of the British jury
system and British justice. Indeed, the whole system of
casting votes is wholly foreign to the Oriental, who dispenses
justice, elects his representatives, and generally conducts
all public business by acclamation, a method only possible
in small communities. But in spite of such innovations the
life itself did not change : old men died noiselessly, children
grew unhindered : village life, with none ambitious enough
to attempt to better themselves, remained continuously the
same.
In Cairo he had watched the ‘ immemorial culture of the
East, slow-moving with the weight of years, dreamy with
centuries of deep meditation, accepting and annihilating,
as in a moment of time, the science, the machinery, the
restless energy and practical activity of the West.’ Here,
in the plains, he was told by a very wise old man just how
profound was the impression the West had made. “O my
dear ! He must be blind who sees not what the English
have wrought in Egypt : the gates ofjustice stand open to the
poor, the hand of the oppressor and briber is struck. Our eyes
see these things and know from whom they came. You will
ask ‘ Are you not thankful, men of Egypt ? Do you not
bless those who have benefited you ? Very many of us—
those who have free minds, and are not ruled by flattery
and guile, are thankful. But thanks lie on the surface of the
heart, and beneath is a deep well. While peace is in the
land, the spirit of Islam sleeps. But if a time come when
Islam is in danger, the Muslim turns from the things of this
world, and thirsts only to serve his Faith, even though you
think him worse than a dog, which forgets not the hand that
fed it.”
As he got within sight of Tantah the long road —a dusty,


straight dike—seemed alive with people, all moving in one
direction, a march of ants across the endless plain. Some
wore red turbans, others beat drums : the women clapped
their hands, and in the midst of each group rode a banner-
bearer on a camel. When, at last, c upon the summit of
what seemed a little cloud, but was in truth the kom of a
populous town, the mosques and houses appeared, eminent
as on a mountain in that prostrate land, the multitude
cried praise to Allah, and a man with a beautiful voice
began to sing
* Tanta, on thee is light
In thee a hero bright
Ya ahl el ’adl. 1
Balm to the soul thou art
Rest to the weary heart
Ya sahib fadl.’ 2
Within the town all was confusion, and Marmaduke
advanced slowly, at the mercy of the crowd which choked
the streets. At last he forced a passage through the full
court of the mosque, and reached the alcove where was the
saint’s tomb. After, he went out to the city of tents in the
fields, held in mortmain by the saint, where canvas booths,
wooden stalls, huts, and screens covered with palm fibre,
made a second town about a mile in length. Pleasure in
every form was offered cheaply to a pleasure-loving people.
At one moment he was deafened by the name of Allah,
bawled in concert by a moving rank of dervishes ; the next,
he was ogled by a row of tinselled dancing-girls, shaking
their breasts, upon the stage outside a shoe-tent, to an
accompaniment of tar and darabukkeh.
“ In the name of the Sayyid,” cried the water-carriers,
giving drink without payment to all who thirsted. “In
the name of the Sayyid,” cried the soldiers keeping order,
when they beat back the crowd for the passage of some
dignitary. “ O Sheykh of the Arabs ! O Father of Con-
solation ! O Lord of Blindness ! ” cried all who yawned, or
found themselves at a loss for a word. The very harlots
called upon the saint to give them custom.
When it was dark, he came to a part of the fair which was
1 O race of justice.
2 O Lord of kindness.


not crowded, a wide open space with a high pole in the
midst, theatre of the great doings of the dervishes. Near
one end of the square two cressets tossed their flames this
way and that, lighting the face of a circle of onlookers.
Within the ring a burly giant flourished a quarter-staff,
calling for a man to match him at that weapon. A cham-
pion presented himself, but was quickly worsted, amid much
laughter. In and out amongst the tent-ropes Marmaduke
wandered, his disguise of sweet-seller making him not an
onlooker only, but a participant of the gay happenings. He
found a second square, where was much concourse before a
large marquee very grandly illuminated.
* From the tent-mouth came noise of lutes and zithers,
cymbals and dulcimers, pipes and drums, blended together
cunningly. In another marquee, hardly less illuminated
than that of the mudiriyeh, a zikr was going forward. Some
forty professed devotees of the saint, holding hands in a ring
round one of the tent-poles, were gasping out the name of
Allah, with sharp nods to left and right and convulsive
jerkings of the whole body. Next day, in honour of the
saint, Marmaduke became a sacca, and through the heat
poured water for all who asked, in the name of the Sayyid.
Bearing his burden, he carried a heavy jar on his back, and
bowed at the request of the poorest, so that a jet of lemon-
flavoured liquid poured over his shoulder into one of the
cups.’
Amongst the crowd he heard some talk still of Denshawai,
for it was hardly a twelvemonth since the five officers had
gone to shoot pigeon and had themselves found death and
violence. He had already heard a good deal about it, for
his host, Machell, had been responsible for the investigation
which followed on the affair, and the outcry which the
public executions had caused in England, both in Parlia-
ment and in the Press, made the subject a sore one for all
directly concerned. What had happened is best told in
Marmaduke’s own words and with his own comments :
‘ It was the custom for the Mounted Infantry stationed in
Cairo, when they moved to summer quarters at Alexandria,


to march down through the country, camping by the
way. In pursuance of this custom, on 13 June 1906 they
were encamped on the right bank of the Bagurieh Canal,
six miles from the pigeon village of Denshawai. It had been
usual in past years for the officers to spend an afternoon
shooting pigeons in the neighbourhood of that village. On
this occasion they did so at the express invitation of a certain
notable (a great friend of the Khedive, at that time the
secret head of the unrest in Egypt), who sent his carriages
to fetch them from the camp. This notable they supposed
to be the landlord of Denshawai. Asa matter of fact, he
had no connection with the place. The drivers, when the
officers regained the carriages, flying from the murderous
attack of the fellahin, would not drive off at once, as they
could easily have done, but let the officers be dragged out
again and beaten. The signal for the attack upon the five
British officers was the firing of the threshing-floors. This
the villagers afterwards declared to have resulted from the
gun-fire of the officers, though these were posted at dis-
tances of from 100 to 150 yards from the'said threshing-
floors. Everyone who examined the actual scene must
know that this contention of the fellahin was far from
plausible.
‘ Before the Mounted Infantry left Cairo the authorities
had reason to suspect that some assault or insult was
intended to the British officers on their march to Alexan-
dria. The Director of Public Security had been sent for
and charged to instruct the mudirs that the officers were
never to be allowed out of sight of a police official. This
order was scrupulously obeyed until the day of Denshawai,
when the mulahiz of police remained behind in camp.
When charged with gross neglect of duty afterwards, his
reply was : “ They were going to shoot. What need was
there of me ? I saw the carriages of the notables.” He
meant that, as guests of a notable of the district, he had
supposed them perfectly safe. That mulahiz was degraded
for his breach of duty (to call it nothing worse), but has
since, I learn, been the recipient of high patronage.
‘ The details of the actual assault are generally known.


All five officers were injured, one was killed to all intents
and purposes, the immediate causes of death being shown
to be heat apoplexy and concussion. But there was an
aspect of the 'case which could not, from the nature of the
evidence and the personalities involved, be emphasized or
published officially. It has thus been allowed to pass for
granted that the Denshawai affair was unpremeditated. I
am certain it was nothing of the kind. The villagers, in
fact, admitted having said, after the pigeon-shooting of the
previous year, that they would stand no more of it. But
that is not what I mean. They alleged that they had told
their Omdeh (headman) to complain to the authorities. No
such complaint was made, and it does not seem likely that
an Omdeh, who is responsible for the good conduct of his
village, confronted with the prospect of so great a scandal,
would have neglected to warn the authorities immediately.
The Omdeh of Denshawai went off to do so (as he said)
upon the very day the officers arrived to shoot the pigeons !
‘ If I remember rightly, Mr. Bernard Shaw, in the intro-
duction to John Bull's other Island, seems to think that people
who keep pigeons must of necessity be mild and amiable ;
the pigeons are brought in to crown a picture of idyllic
innocence. The fact is that the people of a pigeon village
do not plant much corn, and what little they do plant they
guard with loving care, with the result that they are cursed by
their immediate neighbours, to whom they sell the guano
from the towers in season, as it might be, to repair the
damage done to neighbouring crops. They are the most
turbulent among Egyptian villagers, having to protect their
pigeons and themselves from angry farmers. Denshawai
was, therefore, just the place where any outrage, if intended,
could most easily have been arranged. When the news of
the assault reached Cairo, steps were taken instantly to
secure the punishment of the assailants. That punishment,
awarded by a Special Court (the legal remedy provided for
attacks on the Army of Occupation), was extraordinarily
severe, but not excessive, when one considers that the
British officers assaulted were in uniform.
* Now, for a section of the British public, an officer in


uniform is an object of disgust and ridicule : he is prima
facie nothing better than an arrogant, offensive blockhead ;
and all misfortunes which may overtake him are no more
than his deserts. The very sight of him is as irritating
to some people as a red rag to a bull. Their country’s
flag has just the same effect on certain people. It is
natural that it should be so at the peaceful, rotting centre
of an empire, where the flag and uniform seem flaunted
vanities without significance, mere trappings of the cant of
patriotism. Yet cant is but the empty form of words which
once held faith, and still may hold it somewhere, for some
people ; and there are regions outside England where the
Union Jack and the King’s uniform are not the empty show
they seem at home.
‘ When Izzet Pasha, one of the late Sultan’s favourites,
was flying from the anger of the populace, he went on board
a British merchant steamer at Constantinople, which did not
start for several hours. A howling mob was after him.
Soldiers in boats were all around the ship, waiting for the
order for his extradition, which was half-expected. Fehim,
his friend and colleague, had just been literally torn to
pieces in the streets of Broussa. There was absolutely
nothing between him and a most ghastly death except the
little Union Jack the steamer flew. He got away. A
scoundrel’s life was saved in that case, but numberless
innocent persons in those countries have escaped oppression,
thanks to foreign flags. It is the best thing that the Powers
have done in Eastern lands thus to provide a sanctuary. I
myself have seen an Englishman, in a Syrian village, with
no other weapon but a Union Jack held up before him with
both hands, walk coolly in between a crowd of angry, well-
armed men and their intended victims, thus preserving p.
whole family. I knew a man, a French Alsatian, Henri
Baldensperger, in the south of Palestine, who, with a whole
tribe bent on killing him, lived for a week in safety in a cave,
across the mouth of which was stretched the tricolour. His
foes, who would have killed him personally as one kills a
rat, were every one of them afraid to touch the flag.
‘ The Army of Occupation stands for English rule in


Egypt; and English rule in Egypt stood at that time for
things which did not yet exist in neighbouring lands —
things like religious toleration, personal security, and some
attempt at even-handed justice. The uniform of ruling
Powers throughout the East has the same quasi-religious
sanctity as has the flag ; and its prestige is guarded just as
jealously. Thus, though English people here at home may
think an officer in uniform of no account, a murderous
attack on one no more tremendous than a murderous attack
on any other individual, the villagers of Denshawai were
perfectly well aware, when they attacked those pigeon-
shooting officers, that they were committing an unheard-
of crime for which unheard-of punishment might be
exacted.
‘ It has been claimed that the attack upon the officers was
a purely local matter, possessing no more political significance
than has a quarrel between private individuals. Those who
would risk such an assertion can have little knowledge of
the state of Egypt at that time. The instant it was known
that a Liberal Government prevailed in England, Egypt
began to furnish symptoms of unrest to those who held the
reins of government. It is a simple question of demand and
supply. If you are a person in authority, the Oriental
public man only seeks to know what you require in order to
provide it eagerly. It was known in Egypt that English
Liberal Governments demand Nationalist movements ; so a
Nationalist movement was at once inaugurated—or, rather,
in this case, revived —with the Khedive behind it. This
movement was reactionary, as resilient from English rule in
proportion as that rule had been progressive. Opportunity
is a great incentive in the East. It rouses men from lethargy
to lively efforts. The advent of a Liberal Government to
power in England seemed to offer an immediate oppor-
tunity for Egypt to shake loose the English yoke.
‘ The Akaba incident, when Egypt (through the English)
very nearly came to war with Turkey, vexed the public
conscience. That such a juncture could arise seemed rankly
impious. Incendiary sermons were - being preached ;
reactionary doctrines everywhere found favour ; it was


murmured that to kill a Christian was no crime at all, or, if
a crime at all, a very small one. It is not too much to say
that the uniform of the British Army of Occupation stood
at that time for the personal security of every Christian in
Egypt. If that uniform had been violently insulted with
comparative impunity—l mean with punishment as for an
ordinary crime—at that time, the consequence would have
been infinitely more horrible than was the punishment of
Denshawai. The position was not understood in England.
An outcry in the Press alarmed the Foreign Office, causing
it hurriedly to reverse Lord Cromer’s policy.
‘ Sir Eldon Gorst (who only acted on instructions) pro-
pitiated the Khedive in every way, and Egypt fell into so
bad a state that Theodore Roosevelt, three years later, told
the English here in London in his Guildhall speech, to
“ govern Egypt or get out,” and was obeyed. It is to that
period, during which the English ceased to govern Egypt,
handing back official patronage to the Khedive, that most
of the abuses must be ascribed. And the policy of that
period was due entirely to a misunderstanding of the
significance of the Denshawai affair.’
Marmaduke refers again to Denshawai in Children of the
Nile —an old man is talking, telling how c Greeks from the
town, khawagat (unbelievers), had come two days ago
with guns and destroyed several hundreds of pigeons for a
pastime merely. They laughed when we asked them to
stop, and said they had permission from the Omdeh. If
they shot our pigeons on the lands of other villages it would
be well, for there they fly scattered and are counted wild,
but here, where they flock to rest and before our eyes, it is a
shame.’
Many years later, in 1929, Marmaduke published, in
As Others See Us, a story called “ The Kefr Ammeh Incident,”
which is not only one of his best stories, but is extraordinarily
helpful in shedding light on this obscure affair. It is an
allegory, a composite picture, as it were, of all the c incidents ’
with which he had come in contact in Egypt. It illumin-
ates both the servile devotion which the natives feel


towards the English, regarding them as a fetish, baneful and
yet, in a way lovable, and the utter divergence of their minds
from ours —they work at a totally different tempo —almost
in a different dimension, ‘ The Grimes of Clapham Chaste
in Timbuctoo ’ was never better illustrated than by this story.
He has analysed the difficulties of those officials who want
to help and not to hinder, the evolution of young Egyptians,
in Between Ourselves , which serves as an excellent commentary
on these concluding remarks of Lord Cromer’s on the future
of Egypt. ‘No effort should be spared to render the native
Egyptians capable of eventually taking their share in the
government of a really autonomous community. It should
never be forgotten that . . . one of the main bonds of union
between the rulers and the ruled . . . must always be the
exhibition of reasonable and disciplined sympathy for
the Egyptians by every individual Englishman engaged on
the work of Egyptian administration. This sympathy is a
quality, the possession or absence of which is displayed by
Englishmen in very various degrees when they are brought
in contact with Asiastic or African races. Some go to the
extreme of almost brutal antipathy, whilst others display
their ill-regulated sympathy in forms which are exaggerated
and even mischievous.’
Marmaduke’s own conclusions, summarizing all he had
learnt on this visit, were expressed in an article of his
published in Egypt at the time, which I discovered in Lady
Valda Machell’s scrapbook, and which she most kindly
copied out for me.
‘ It is a fact which cannot too often be emphasized,’
he writes, ‘ that what people in Europe are accus-
tomed to regard as high ideals—humanity, philanthropy
patriotism, the thirst for abstract liberty, and so on —have
no growth in the East ; for the Oriental they are pure
illusions. If he seems to betray them in his intercourse with
Europeans, it is for politeness, or because he sees his own
account in it. Religious fanaticism, on occasion of some
insult real or imagined—or worked up, it may be, by a few
interested persons of rank and leading—alone is capable of
fusing for a moment the multitude of callously separate
K


individuals who make up an Eastern “ people,” and pro-
ducing a kind of outbreak, as futile as it is dangerous—in
short, a massacre. In no sense can such an outbreak be
regarded as patriotic, or in the cause of liberty ; it has no
aim beyond the slaughter of the moment.
‘ The Oriental has, it is true, respectable illusions of his
own, but these are quite at variance with the fever-cries of
Western Europe. Fact, our idol, is for him a senseless stone.
He worships fiction, by which we mean, not that he is
necessarily mendacious, but that he only appreciates truth
in story form, authority in the display of power, and justice
in the guise theatrical —as, for example, in the judgment of
Solomon, where the babe in danger of bisection is a comic
point. He dwells contented under cruel tyranny, indifferent
to its cruelty till it touches him personally. Oppression
weighs either upon the mass collectively, when it becomes
the common lot and therefore bearable ; or else upon some
one unlucky individual, who—Allah knows ! —may most
thoroughly have deserved it. A good man looks for nothing
else in life, his hope is beyond the grave ; a bad one stands
to profit by bad government. Life, under such conditions,
abounds in strange adventures. Rapine, murder, and all
wickedness throw up the constant flashes of sound sense,
poetic justice, fervid devotion and true charity. There is
licence for the individual, and no stint of rare material to
furnish forth the song or twilight story.
‘ It is the pure artistic standpoint, held unconsciously, and
the word “ unconsciously ” might be underlined in this
connection, for it is the key to the whole mystery. The
Oriental has hitherto escaped that dire self-consciousness
which obscures the plainest issues for the European ; he
does not blush for himself, is no self-analyst, and is much
amused when brought in touch with the sentimentality
which seems correct to more lymphatic temperaments.
‘ In Egypt to-day much that he regarded as belonging to
the common lot of man has become of the past, romantic.
Reward and punishment, promotion and disgrace, are
reserved, as far as may be, for the men who merit them —
a prosaic state of affairs, which hardly lends itself to song


or story, pleasing only to the upright and industrious, a
small minority.
Eastern Christians —Copts, Syrians, Greeks, and others
of commercial genius—under the zegis of the impartial
Frank, are waxing fat, nay, kicking, before the eyes of the
true believer, who would like to take toll of them, but may
not now. The Muslim tradesman is a merchant and assumes
great airs. He has things to sell, and you may look at them
while you gulp down a cup of his coffee, and buy, if Allah
wills it so. But he is not on tenterhooks to clinch a bargain
like the sharp, avaricious Christian. He has been accus-
tomed to a recognized superiority, with many privileges, and
sees injustice in a fair field where his own house-dog may
win the prize from him.
‘ The fellah is enriched beyond his wildest dreams, and
enjoys a security quite unknown of yore ; but he sees his
neighbour in as happy case, so misses the joy of contrast. He
is ready to sigh with those who have genuine cause to regret
the old regime—grandees and former functionaries who have
lost their influence.
* Then, noisiest of all, there is the small but growing band
of “ intellectuals ” —persons of some education of the Western
textbook kind, who, impressed by the power wielded by the
Press in Europe, are become journalists in the hope to become
great. They control the Arabic Press of the country, and
daily publish libels upon the administration, which in
Europe would be considered infamous past all belief, but
here are mere exuberances of the artistic temperament.
They have not been punished—a sufficient answer to their
charge of tyranny ; but an error, we believe, in government,
for the Oriental, in his soul, admires despotic action.’
After Tanta, Marmaduke made his way back to Cairo.
On his way through the Nile Delta, he heard one Friday in
the mosque the preacher airing the same pro- or pan-Arab
propaganda he had heard in the Syrian desert. He declared
the Khedive to be the true Khalif, and bade his audience
rise and slay the English for his sake. But none of the con-
gregation moved : not one of the hearers seemed particularly
impressed. ‘ Egyptians do not generally seek the meaning


of a sermon preached above the wooden sword. They are
content to revel in the sound of holy words.’
At another place he came to Assiut, a city in upper Egypt,
and found a Greek trying to rob a Copt. The Copt pro-
tested, whereupon the Greek cried “ Ya Muslimin,” and a
crowd of poor Mohammedans ran up, supposing their
faith had been insulted, and the Copt was almost killed
before Marmaduke managed to extract his story from the
poor fellow, and explain to the crowd that the dispute was
not religious, but simply the imposture of a cunning rogue.
In one village, where he walked into the local court to
hear justice being done, nine merchants were the appellants,
and complained that they had been peacefully riding on
their donkeys, carrying their merchandise, along the side
of a dike in the Fayyum. Two robbers bounced out on
them from behind a patch of canes, exclaiming “ Bo.”
At once the merchants got down off their donkeys and pressed
their faces in the dust. The robbers took what they required,
and bade the merchants go their way in peace on foot. The
merchants did so, giving praise to God for their lives, until
they drew near to the city of Fayyum, when they became
indignant for their lost merchandise, so now they were
come before the judge to make complaint. “ But,” said the
judge, when he had heard their story, “ you say that your
assailants were two men and you are nine.” “ But they had
sticks,” replied the merchants. “So had you,” observed
the judge. “ But our sticks are to beat our donkeys with,”
answered the merchants, quite amazed. It had never
occurred to them that those particular sticks could be
applied to any other purpose. “ Say,” insisted the judge,
“ why did you offer no resistance, being nine against two ? ”
“ Effendim,” they answered, with tears in their eyes, “ we
are civilized men before the Children of the Night.’ 5
Marmaduke laughed aloud. But what those men really
said was reasonable, and from the Arab point of view, not
ludicrous. “We are urbane men, persons enervated by the
life of towns, and robbers strike us with a supernatural
terror,” was the true gist of their complaint.
The Machells were delighted with his accounts of all he


had seen and done. He never kept a diary, nor needed to
make notes; for his mind held anecdote and adventure,
landscape and language until it was required, when out it
all came, pat, as crisp and fresh as lettuce from a frigidaire,
although it might have waited unused for years.
He had a long talk with Lord Cromer, and told him his
impressions : that the Khedive was anti-British, dreaming
of an Arab Empire over which he would rule, but that
the people were distinctly pro-British, so long as British
policy respected the suzerainty of Turkey. ‘ I said that if
Britain would but condescend to associate Turkey with them
in the government of Egypt, the Egyptian people would be
pleased and the Khedive made impotent. He replied :
“ I fancy it will come to that.” ’
Marmaduke had found, on his return to Cairo, a letter
from his old ally, J. E. Hanauer, now Chaplain at Damascus,
asking him to stay, and telling him that he had collected
together a whole mass of folklore and legend, which did
Marmaduke think he could put into shape, edit, and perhaps
find someone who would be sufficiently interested to bring
the stories out in book form ? Lady Valda, whom Marma-
duke consulted, thought the scheme sounded a delightful
one, and Marmaduke set off on a short visit to Syria, from
which he returned manuscript in hand. He was already
enthusiastic at the idea of making a book from such original
and amusing material, and on the gentle journey from
Alexandria to Marseilles, both Lady Valda and George
Hornblower, who were fellow-travellers, agreed with him
as to the unique value of the MSS. The result of their
approbation was Folklore of the Holy Land , which Messrs.
Duckworth published in 1907, and of which anew edition
appeared as lately as 1927.


CHATTER FIVE
WHEN the three travellers arrived at Marseilles they
found, unexpectedly, Muriel sitting on the quay.
Marmaduke had no idea she was coming to meet them, but
at once said good-bye to the others and set off with her on a
tour of Corsica, whose practical sequel was a long-short
story —a very good one : The Corsican Agent. The Pickthalls
went on into Italy, and spent some time travelling about
there, but Marmaduke did not care for the country or
the people : the c grandeur that was Rome ’ left him colder
than the stone steps of St. Peter’s ; there was in him nothing
of the Pagan, though much of the primitive.
When he got back to Fordingbridge he wrote to Hickes,
‘ as I dare say you know, I have caught it pretty hot from
reviewers this winter, and deservedly no doubt I —which
has rather hindered my work on the Egyptian book, which,
however, is within sight of completion, praise to Allah.’
This was Children of the Nile , a lively tale founded on his
‘ picaresque voyage,’ for though he lived in the East, yet
never until he was back in England could he describe that
life.
Lord Cromer, to whom he sent a copy, wrote in his own
hand in answer : ‘ Dear Mr. Pickthall, thank you for
sending me your book. I have read it with the greatest
interest. It is a faithful picture of Egyptian custom and
habit of thought. I am glad you caused the wrong man
to be flogged in order to extract a confession of guilt. It
would have been quite contrary to practice to have touched
the right man.’
He also sent his book to its Egeria, Lady Valda, and, in
his answer to her letter commending it, is to be found his
first mention of the Young Turk Revolution : ‘ I am so
1 About The Myopes.


glad you like my “ Children.” No newspaper has yet
reviewed the book, it being outside the ken of the average
journalist (the Daily Telegraph and the Athenaum eventually
both reviewed it and approved), but I hope it is all right.
. . . Not only does Effendina scoff at the Young Turks, but
he has written a horrible, vulgar, jocose, open letter to the
Sultan about them, at least so I judge from a rather hurried
glance at a batch of Egyptian papers received this morning.’
The revolution of 27 July 1908, which was generally
called the Young Turk Revolution, was what he had been
looking for, but could hardly believe possible even when it
became fact, and its consequences dominated his life and
thought until he went to India in 1920. As Sir Mark
Sykes, wise before the event, had said : ‘ The Turk has
something in his nature which may astound the world yet.’
On his brief visit to Syria in 1907 he had met some of the
conspirators, and had been deeply moved by their sincerity,
but had not credited their schemes with more success than
that enjoyed by any other palace revolution. For, until
1908, all upheavals in Turkey were ephemeral : whichever
side lost, the Sultan always won. His spy system, better
even than the Tsar’s, had reduced the splendid Turkish
Army to what appeared to be a state of completely abject
slavery, and gave an aspect of vassalage to the whole empire.
All was silent : it seemed the rule of a secret terror, of a
fearful autocrat slipping in an armoured carriage to a shut-
tered selamlik, had annihilated everything that could have
challenged his absolutism : as though in all his dominions
politics were reduced to a scared Sultan listening-in to the
palpitating heart-beats of his still more terrified subjects.
And yet, in the very heart of his army, first in the Albanian
regiments, then in the third army corps stationed at Salonica,
a liberal and constitutional movement arose that owed
nothing to Europe, nothing to intellectual ideas : a move-
ment that was practical, military, patriot, and nationalist,
which argued : the Padishah had been misled : it was the
duty of his subjects to bring him back into the pure ways of
Islam.
Following on centuries of apathy, anarchy, oppression,


corruption, and manoeuvre, the bloodless revolution, organ-
ized all over the empire by a series of secret societies, none
ever having more than four members, gained at once
universal respect by the liberality of its aims. To Marma-
duke it seemed less a revolution than a reformation, and he
decided, shortly after the date of this letter, to hurry East
again, and see for himself the enthusiastic Committee of
Union and Progress at work.
In September 1908 the Pickthalls set off for Egypt, this
time together. They stayed for six weeks in Cairo with the
Hornblowers. The great pro-consul, Krumer (as in his
stories Marmaduke always spelt him, Arab-fashion), was
gone, and Marmaduke found many changes, of none of
which did he at all approve. “If you walk straight for-
ward,” an Egyptian nationalist told him, “ we are powerless
to stop you, nor should we really wish to, seeing you mean
well. But if the game is dodging, we can dodge much better
than you can, and the mere fact of your dodging makes us
hate you.” When Eldon Gorst succeeded Cromer, the
‘ game ’ rapidly degenerated into dodging. “ Effendina,”
an Egyptian told Marmaduke, “ will be happier now. He
could not dine at Casr-el-dubbareh when the Lord was
there. It was too strange. Now he will be able to dine
there and feel quite at home. He will never feel quite sure
his coffee isn’t poisoned.” In three years the whole seem-
ingly solid structure slowly built up by Cromer had so far
collapsed that it was in a state approaching anarchy.
“ A ruler should have one word, with force behind it,”
Marmaduke said, “ he should not stop to argue or explain.
What the Oriental really admires is the heavy-handed
tyrant of the type of Mehemet Ali’s son, Ibrahim, who was
humorous, and knew how to impart to his decisions that
quaint proverbial savour which dwells in the mind of the
people and makes good stories.” Cromer had this gift and
had been, if not of this type, at least in this tradition ; with
his departure Marmaduke felt the glory (what little there
had ever been of it) was gone from our administration of
Egypt. _
As Sir Mark Sykes wrote in the Saturday Review of 1908 :


‘ Lord Cromer is a big, solid, definite Englishman. That he
spoke no Arabic, and understood neither Arab nor fellah,
were probably the secrets of his success. A strong, dominant
figure, he was dreaded by the inferior race whom he knew
not and who knew not him.’ Marmaduke found national-
ism grown more bitter since the removal of the one really
great man England had sent to Africa : the hundred heads
which sprouted on his departure were each a target for
young Egypt’s grumbles. The Anglo-French agreement of
1904, and the contingent of regularly recruited Anglo-
Egyptian civil servants, who took the best places and
blocked the chances of promotion of every ambitious young
Egyptian, were but two of the dragon-teeth which, by
1908, were already showing promise of the crop which so
effectively matured in 1919.
Marmaduke collected several more stories— ‘ The Mur-
derer ’ —a tale of an assassin hired by one man and bribed
off by his victim —is a good one ; but perhaps the best of all
is { A Study in Pure Nerves,’ where a village feud is settled
by two hired murderers, who are required, one by the
Sheykh Selim, who trusted in banks, the other by the
Sheykh Mahmud, the village Omdeh, to kill the one twenty-
five, the other forty, of the opposing party. Basim and
Casim, instead of doing their work, pocket the cash and tell
the English judge, who arrives to find both sheykhs suddenly
dead, apparently of plague, whilst the two rogues run the
village. The English official is not so green as he is cabbage-
looking, and announces he will attend the funeral, whereupon
the hired assassins flee. ‘ I bequeath my donkey to this
village,’ said Basim : ‘ And I my mule,’ said Casim ; as they
escape on their legs into hiding. The two sheykhs wake in
their tomb to become reconciled and to mystify the puzzled
Englishman still more.
Whilst still in Egypt Marmaduke was staggered, as was
the whole East, by the news of Austria’s annexation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It was a direct and open violation
of the Berlin Treaty, and, surely, thought the Young Turks,
England, herself the author of that Treaty, would chastise
the aggressors ? When it became known that England


acquiesced in the injustice, and had advised the Turkish
Government to be content with an indemnity, then friends
of the old regime turned and said : “I told you so,” point-
ing to this as the only result of the new order.
The Young Turks, who had hoped everything from
England, were forced to admit that her attitude was
cautious, critical, repressive : it seemed their new liberty
embarrassed her. England had appeared so to rejoice at
the revolution, had pressed good advice down the Com-
mittee’s throat until they were as sated as Strasbourg geese,
but, as her condonation of Austria now showed, the Liberal,
anti-Turk policy had not been deflected by one centimetre,
although she had always promised Turkey : ‘ Create but a
Constitution and we shall befriend you.’
England was still in the same mind as in 1895, when Sir
Philip Currie and M. Paul Cambon shared out the Turkish
Empire between the Powers they represented, in a very
secret pact. Only as lately as the summer of 1908, Lord
Salisbury, clambering on board the Kaiser’s yacht, the
Hohenzollern , had offered to carve out the Ottoman world
with him. When the latter refused, indignantly saying that
such a partition would be as unholy, and visited by as great
punishments on its perpetrators as the famous partition of
Poland, England turned to Russia, and the English King
met the Tsar at Reval. That had been the signal for the
Young Turk coup —when the Power that fought beside them
in the Crimea was turned over to their most ancient enemy,
in a plot to destroy them, they needs must act urgently.
The Young Turk Revolution was England’s big chance :
Germany was in the dust after July 1908, and we were ‘ all ’
to the revolutionaries. The Turkish Army, the finest in the
world, was ours for the asking, yet we threw it away, and,
as Lord Fisher declared gloomily to Lord Esher : “ Our
Turkish policy is the laughing-stock of Europe.” England
had turned to Russia, definitely, as soon as she realized war
with Germany was inevitable : certainly not later than the
Kaiser’s telegram to Kruger. This had meant the throwing
overboard of her old pro-Turkish Disraelian policy in the
East, for Russia’s friendship and support in the coming


struggle could only be bought at a price : and that price
was a free hand in the East and help to suppress her own
continually grumbling internal troubles.
We paid to the uttermost farthing : we stood silent whilst
our new ally helped herself to chunks of Persia : and, but
for our aid, the Russian Revolution would have succeeded
ten years earlier. No sooner had our Liberal Government
thrown Turkey, at bay and seemingly almost spent, to the
hungry Slavs, than Germany hastily adopted our Pan-
Islamic policy, the very minute we discarded it. Germany,
at least, had been steadfast and consistent in her dealings
with the Porte : all her bargains were relentless : she
backed her subjects to the utmost in their commercial
inroads, she had been first in the disgraceful scramble for
concessions. But she was represented at the Porte by a man
of rare ability : Marshall von Bieberstein—of whom Marma-
duke wrote : ‘ I have heard it said by English diplomatists
that we have not his equal,’ whilst we placed there a suc-
cession of more or less ineffective lay figures with vague
ideas, worked by wire from London, and escorted them
with one or two intriguing underlings and were content.
Whilst Marshall worked his country up again, the Young
Turks were bewildered and annoyed. They could not
understand England’s continued cherishing of Tsarist aims :
their simple one-track minds thought only : ‘ Now have
the constitution, we have destroyed despotism, given
charters of freedom to all our people : why then does
England not love us as she promised if we did these things ? ’
Slowly they realized that Germany was the only country
whose interest it was to wish them well. For Germany,
building her splendid new desert railway, was to connect
the Baltic with the Persian Gulf, and therefore, self-
evidently, the conservation of the Turkish Empire, or at all
events safeguards of the integrity of those provinces through
which the line already passed, or was planned to go, was of
vital importance to whatever country controlled the railway.
England continued to give the impression that she was
Pvussia’s cat’s-paw, ‘ a fat tail to Russia and nothing else,’
as Talaat Pasha called her. For the railway, which was


one of Britain’s lost opportunities, began as a British con-
ception, financed by British capital, and the first miles of it
were built by us ; but the original scheme fell through for
lack of funds. The Damascus-Basrah section would have
been ours, too, if our Government had supported the
English company which had obtained the concession from
Haifa to Damascus, with an option of extension. Only
twenty miles of rail had been laid when the company failed
and the Turks took it over and finished it roughly.
At the time of the annexation, angry Turkish journalists
asked Pallavicini, Franz-Josef’s ambassador to the Sublime
Porte : “By what right Austria seized the Ottoman Pro-
vinces,” and received the answer : “We have the right
because we have the power.” Similarly, Sir Mark Sykes,
travelling in Syria before the outbreak of the first Balkan
War, wrote to his wife : ‘ I dare say we are destined to be
the masters of Turkey and that is why we are carrying on
like this.’ The narrow theological spirit of Gladstone had
finally routed the wide humanity of Disraeli, and as the
shadow of Tsarism lengthened over England’s Eastern
policy, Marmaduke shared the progress towards disillusion-
ment of the whole Turkish race.
On leaving Egypt, Marmaduke and Muriel went to
Beyrouth, where they arrived in a terrible storm on the day
of the Messina earthquake, 28 December 1908. The whole
bay was churned up, and in the city houses had rocked,
though at the time no one knew of the catastrophic cause.
In Beyrouth, they stayed first with some friends called Jolly,
then for a few weeks in a hotel, where they heard a house
was to let at Araya, on the slopes of Lebanon, and went up
to see it. It was early spring, and from the many windows
(for the Greek who built the house wished to make a show
in the sunlight, and had assigned much space to glass in his
plan of the building) there was a charming prospect of
blossomed heads of fruit trees c afloat like summer cloud
below them in the vast sun-filled hollow of sea and sky.’
A path from the house ran cascading down the terraces,
between flowering orchards and grey olive trees, to the
town, which was easily accessible for shopping and visiting.


The terrace looked over to ‘ the serried growth of flat-topped
dwellings ’ which covered all the narrow plain between hill
and sea, and from which some red-tiled roofs devoid of
chimneys stood out shining, like huge carbuncles. Here
and there among the houses rose a distaff cypress, and these
trees crowded round the principal mosque of the place, so
that a single minaret alone was visible. Behind the house, as
well as in front, the ground fell away in a succession of terraces.
Half-way down the .inland slope, on a projecting knee, a
small Armenian village hung like an eagle’s nest. (It was
about this place Marmaduke wrote An Ordeal by Fire —his
one and only expression of sympathy for Armenians, a
sympathy that even there is clouded by such unpleasing
remarks as ‘ the ceaseless lamentations of the Armenians. .. .
It was but charity to kill such shrieking brutes. . . . Their
presence made the house obscene —he could not enter it.
Would no one silence those mad women there ? ’ etc.)
House and panorama suited the Pickthalls exactly, and they
agreed to take it furnished for some months. It was to be
Muriel’s first taste of Eastern life, and of coping with Eastern
servants. There was already on the premises a gardener
whose wife declared her willingness to sweep the house and
make beds. The difficulty was to find a cook. And, since
the gardener and his wife were both Maronites, Marmaduke
insisted that the cook must be either a Muslim or a Fruze.
The story of his search and of his success must be told in
Marmaduke’s own words, as it is a perfect example of his
profound understanding of the Oriental mind.
‘ There was no lack of applicants for the position, thanks
to the efforts of some friends to whom our need was known,
but all the applicants were Maronites or members of some
Church congenial to the Maronites. After rejecting about
twenty of them I was growing anxious, for our mountain
home was calling to us while this search detained us in the
city, when one morning, as I sat in the hotel, a card was
brought to me with tidings that its owner waited in the hall
to see me. Upon the card, in Arabic, was printed :
“ Sheykh Huseyn Hamdan.”


* The Arabic word sheykh has many meanings, but when
prefixed thus to a living person’s name it generally has a
value nearly equal to the old-fashioned legal use of our
esquire. I hastened to the entrance-hall.
* A handsome, rather rakish-looking man of thirty, who
had been sitting talking to the doorkeeper, rose up at my
approach, deposited his cigarette, straightened his fez, took
three steps forward and confronted me.
‘ “ The Sheykh Huseyn Hamdan ? ” I questioned shyly ;
holding my hand out, but he made no move to take.it.
* “ They told me that you want a cook,” he said
indifferently.
‘ “ They told the truth. If thou canst indicate one who
is not a Christian I shall be obliged.”
‘ “ I indicate myself,” he answered proudly.
‘ The man was well dressed in the fashion of that country
His fez was new ; his shoes were not dilapidated. He had
besides an air of independence, near to truculency, due
partly to a black moustache curled to the eyes and partly
to the weapons which adorned his waistband, which had no
association in my mind with cooking. This made me
stare at him, and he returned my gaze. His eyes were bright
and bold as a cock-sparrow’s.
‘ “ Thou art a sheykh ? ” I said.
‘ “ I am a sheykh,” he answered.
‘ “ And thou canst cook ? ”
* He drew a bunch of testimonials from his breast and
gave them to me. I pretended to examine them, but all the
while I was considering the man himself. There was nothing
insinuating in his manner ; it was almost arrogant, seeming
to say that he did not think much of me ; and for that reason,
oddly, I determined to engage him. When he asked for
wages higher by a pound a month than I had ever dreamt
of paying, I did not demur. I gave him earnest-money, as
the custom is, and settled that he was to meet us on arrival
in our paradise. Even the warnings which came afterwards
from divers quarters of the danger of employing such a
person failed to daunt me. I had heard them every time
that I engaged an Arab servant, and had found them from


my own experience untrustworthy. One thing I learnt for
certain : ; the man was a true sheykh, the poor descendant of
a good Druze family. Owning a house and land in a small
mountain village, he had earned the reputation of a scape-
grace simply, in so far as I could judge, through love of
change.
* When, after a long and agitating drive over rough earth
and boulders and along the verge of precipices, we did at last
attain our mountain home, the sheykh stood ready to receive
us with all due solemnity. He had already imposed awe
upon the Christian gardener, his wife, and children of
whom, and of our city driver, he now took command ;
superintending the conveyance of our luggage up three
flights of wide stone steps, across two terraces, each with an
arrangement for a fountain, around each basin being plants
in kerosene tins —of which the gardener had been for years
a great collector—and so into the house.
‘ He had tea ready for us in five minutes, and gave us for
our supper a most appetizing meal composed of things
which he had found about the place. It was a shock when,
my wife asking me some question with regard to food, the
sheykh replied in English. I had no wish for a domestic
who spoke English ; it would spoil our paradise. Taking
him to task, I was informed that he had learnt a little of
that language in the Isle of Cyprus. He did not seem inclined
to air it further.
c Next morning’s breakfast came as a surprise to both of
us. It was delicious, yet made up of very simple “ native ”
things. It was served and spirited away as if by magic.
All his service in the house was clean and swift and silent.
He was a first-rate servant. I myself asked nothing more,
though he appeared distrustful of me. But my wife, on
whom he deigned to smile, had her own notions of the duties
of a mistress. She must needs go prying into kitchen
purlieus.
‘ Our sheykh, upon arrival, had appropriated to himself
an outhouse, one of many that were in the garden. That
became his home. His kitchen he himself constructed, with
forced labour of the Maronites, by laying stones and kerosene


tins one upon another and superimposing sheets of corru-
gated iron, forming a lean-to shed against the back wall
of the house. His kitchen range was built of stones ; his
oven and his boiler were two kerosene tins, and almost all
his implements were of the like description.
‘ At the time when my wife first intruded on his privacy,
the sheykh was in the act of kneading rissoles for our dinner
with his fingers and (so she told me) spraying water on them
with his mouth. Tied to one of the stones of the kitchen range
by its leg was a live chicken waiting till such time as, in his
culinary operations, he had need of it. To all his mistress’s
upbraiding he replied with grateful smiles, and when she
told him not to touch food with his fingers, he displayed with
pride his home-made oven. When she pointed to the fowl
with horror, he picked it up and simply wrung its neck,
imagining that in so doing he obeyed her will. His know-
ledge of the English tongue was nothing formidable.
‘ The day was his. She fled into the house without con-
veying any hint of her displeasure to his courteous mind.
But for some hours she had no appetite, and when her taste
returned, the kitchen had a horrid fascination for her.
She could not go into the garden without passing by that
place of sin and peeping in, though never entering for fear of
what might be there.
‘ The sheykh and I held council once a week, with an
attempt at geniality on my part, and stiff reserve, which
savoured of distrust, on his. He could not allocate me,
that was the trouble. I did not in the least conform to his
idea of what an Englishman should be. I seemed to him
mysterious, so he was on his guard. He brought me every
week his bill in misspelt Arabic. I looked it over, made
a few remarks, asked a few searching questions, and dis-
charged it. I had but vague ideas about the price of things,
but id my best to hide from him my ignorance. One week
in his account there was a charge against two chickens which
struck me as excessive, and I said so. He replied :
‘ “ That is the price demanded in this village at the
present time. It seems too much, but it is less than they
demand in Cyprus.”


{ I might have asked what Cyprus had to do with it had I
not known already but too well. The sheykh had dwelt in
Cyprus in the service of an Englishman with whose behaviour
mine compared unfavourably. He had confided all things
to the sheykh ; had made him housekeeper. He never asked
for an account in detail.
‘ I paid the bill as usual and he went his way. But my
remark about that chicken, which an English servant would
have quite forgotten once the bill was paid, must have
rankled in his mind, for two days later he came up to me
when I came in from riding, and said :
‘“ I have been thinking. About fowls. As your Honour
truly said, they are extremely dear. The people in this
village almost worship them, and so are loth to sell. They
charge not only for the flesh and skin and feathers, but also
for the love they bear to them. I have been thinking ; we
have ground to spare.” He waved his hand around at the
vast terrace made into a colonnade by trunks of trees and
roofed with foliage, then full of colour from the setting sun.
“ The world is wide and there are other villages where folk
are not so foolish. Why should we not procure a quantity of
chickens from some other village and keep them here alive
until we need them. With iron netting we could make for
them a house.”
‘ He paused, extending both his hands as one who could
say more, but who has said enough to make his meaning
evident. It was the first time he had ever spoken to me
at such length or of his own accord. I welcomed the
occurrence as a step towards intimacy, and replied :
‘“lt is a very good idea. I will consider it.”
‘ Upon the following day a friend rode up to see us from
the city. Remembering that good idea, I asked the visitor
what was the market price of chickens fit to eat. He
answered without hesitating, and having paper and a pencil
handy, I wrote down his answer. It was about a quarter
of the price extorted by our sentimental Maronites. When
next I went into the city I would buy some chickens at that
price, to please the sheykh. But long before I could amass
the courage necessary to go down to that abode of noise
L


and stifling heat and evil odours, the sheykh came in one
morning and announced :
‘ “ The fowls have come.”
‘ He pointed to the back part of the house.
‘ “ How have they come ? ” I asked in great surprise.
‘ “ My brother bore them hither on a donkey.”
‘ My wife, when I told her the amazing news, rushed out
to see. I heard her scream and then denounce some person.
‘ Outside the back door, underneath the olive trees, held
in a quivering filigree of shade and sunlight, stood a smiling
youth in yellow robe and scarlet cap, leaning with one
elbow on the neck of a white donkey. On either side of the
donkey fowls hung swinging by their legs. Tied two and
two, the length of string between each pair of them was
laid upon the donkey’s back so that each couple balanced,
while the young man sitting on the strings prevented slipping
as they jogged along. This spectacle had been the cause of
my wife’s scream. At once I had the fowls released. Each
bird, when set upon its feet, was dazed at first, but, after
sundry shakings, appeared none the worse for the experience.
They were twelve. The sheykh had made a pen for
them already, and there I stood and gazed my fill upon
them.
‘ Never have I seen a more degraded-looking company.
The only bird of sleek appearance was a cockerel. He at
least had proper feathers ; but he, like all the rest, was
very lean. It was their lack of feathers which dismayed me
first, and then their leanness. I harped a little on those
defects, when the sheykh replied, “ We do not need their
feathers. We will make them fat. A fowl already fattened
costs more money.”
‘ The answer seeming just to me, I said no more. But I
looked forward to that week’s account with curiosity. At
length the day came when it was presented. I skipped the
items till I came to the twelve fowls. The sum against
them came to two piastres less than that charged by the
chicken-loving Maronites. It was about three times the
current market price. But having made no stipulation as to
cost beforehand, nor raised the question of expenses when


the fowls arrived, I did not see my way to an objection. So
I paid the bill.
‘ But I was vexed. One does not like to be regarded as
an utter fool, and I had now good reason to believe the
sheykh did so regard me. Unfortunately I do not possess
the gift of anger for material things like fowls and money.
The only anger I have ever known has been for abstract
things, or else a tempest of unreason due to nerves. And
anger which makes some men happy makes me sad. I have
thus no weapon against rogues excepting laughter, a weapon
which they generally cannot face. But how to try the power
of laughter on the sheykh I could not at the time perceive.
‘ Then it happened that the carpenter came up to cut my
hair. There being no regular barber within a radius of ten
miles, this carpenter did all the village hair-cutting. He
worked on me that day religiously, omitting nothing of the
proper compliments and little ceremonies while the sheykh
and the gardener stood by and wished me health repeatedly.
Their business was to sweep up every hair which fell from
me and burn it instantly lest harm should come of it. When
those helpers had departed and the carpenter was on the
point of taking leave, a sudden thought occurred to me.
‘“ O Professor,” 1 I inquired, “ did you ever in your life
behold a chicken worth fifteen piastres ? ”
‘ “ No, by my life,” was the astonished answer, “ nor do I
think that such a fowl exists on earth.”
£ “ Come, I will show you twelve of them,” I said. “ The
cook, you know, is not a common man. He is by birth a
sheykh. He has inherited the secret of a breed of fowls,
each one of which is worth much more than the small sum
I mentioned—the price for which he deigned to sell them to
me as a favour. Would you care to see them ? ”
‘ “ Wallahi,” 2 said the carpenter, scratching his head.
‘ I led him out under the trees to the enclosure in which
those wretched fowls were scratching languidly. The place
was just outside the sheykh’s abode of which the door stood
1 Carpenters, barbers, cooks, and cabmen are always addressed in Arabic
by the tide of professor.
2 (Lit. by Allah) —* Rather ! ’


open. He was at home, for I could hear him moving plates
and things.
‘ “ Well, what is your opinion ? ” I asked eagerly.
‘ He made a wry face and declared them not worth seeing.
“ Fifteen piastres would buy four of them, the cock
included.”
‘ “ That is because you do not know the points of this
peculiar breed,” I argued warmly. “If the sheykh charged
me fifteen piastres for each bird, you may be sure that
every one of them is worth a pound at least.”
* He shrugged his shoulders, muttering, “ The world is
mad.” Then suddenly he caught my eye, and he became
transfigured. With a guffaw he flung up both his hands,
“ Praise be to Allah ! ” he exclaimed. “ Never —never
have I seen such splendid fowls. Each one is as an angel
shedding light.” He rolled his big brown eyes as if in
ecstasy.
‘ Two hundred feet above us, up the terraced slope,
appeared the figure of a labourer against the sky. My
barber made a trumpet of his hands and bellowed : “ Hi,
O poor man ! Come and see a show for nothing—the
grandest sight on earth ! —the greatest rarity ! Fowls at a
pound apiece ! ”
‘ The figure up against the sky let fall its spade and came
careering headlong down the terraces. The same shout
brought upon the scene the gardener and his wife and
children, who, when they knew the matter, ran and shouted,
bringing other people, till by sunset half the village was
assembled round our chicken-run, praising the appearance
of those wretched fowls. My wife was angry, having English
views concerning trespass. I had to tell her that those
people were my own invited guests.
‘ The sheykh did not emerge from his retreat, where I
could hear him banging things about as if enraged.
‘ The people went away in the blue twilight, in merry,
chatting groups beneath the trees, as from a festival. I
went indoors. The sheykh performed his work that evening
with an air of grievance, He sighed occasionally, but I
took no notice.


‘ Next morning, as it chanced, a Turkish soldier strolled
up to the house, bringing a letter. There were no regular
postal arrangements in. that country-side. Our mail from
England was fetched for us twice a week from the post
office in the city by the village carrier, a muleteer. Letters
for us posted in the country went to a railway station several
miles away, where they were likely to remain until we called
for them, unless some person journeying in our direction
was good enough to bring them to us on the chance of a
reward. Such a deserving person was this Turkish soldier.
Having given him a trifle for his trouble, I observed :
‘ “ As a bringer of good tidings, thou deservest favour.
Wouldst care to see the grandest sight on
fowls worth several pounds apiece ? ”
‘ “ Aye, that I would ! ” replied the soldier heartily.
‘ I took him to the place. He looked upon the fowls and
straightway cursed their ancestry and their religion. It
was some time ere I could bring him to perceive their beauty,
but when he did at length perceive it, he became delirious.
* The peasant was again at work against the sky. Hearing
a sound of joy, and seeing people looking at the fowls,
he dropped his spade and rushed down madly as before,
shouting to all the world to come and see. Within a quarter
of an hour there was again a crowd about the chicken-run. A
coffee-seller came up with his brazier and his clinking
cups, and offered men free drinks in honour of the fowls.
Hawkers of salted nuts and fruit and sweetstuff cried their
wares in terms of chicken praise, while a minstrel perched
upon the low branch of a carob chanted a long eulogy of
birds worth golden pounds to the music of a one-stringed
lute.
‘ The sheykh did not appear at all until the coast was
once more clear of everyone except the Turkish soldier, who
lay snoring in the shade. Then he ran after me as I was
strolling off, and kissed my jacket’s hem, beseeching :
‘“O, my master, spare me ! I have borne enough ! I
only wished to make a little money ! ”
‘ He then collapsed upon the ground in tears, spoiling my
triumph utterly by that proceeding.


‘ I had to put my arms about him and support him to his
little house. When he recovered speech, he asked me :
‘ “ How was I to know ? The Englishman I served in
Cyprus never noticed me when things went well. How
could I know Your Honour was so different ? If anything
was wrong in his opinion, he blamed me for it with cold
anger instantly. If he had seen that I defrauded him, he
would have cast me out. When YourJHonour paid the bill
time after time without objection I thought that all was well.
It was machinery. I did not think you saw me as a man, so
had no scruples more than a machine would have. The
blame was yours since you had charge of me.”
‘ Weeping anew, he went and opened a tin box he had,
and took from it a chaplet of fine amber beads with little
sapphires here and there between them.
£ “O, my dear lord,” he pleaded, “do a kindness.
Accept this gift from me. It is the best I have. It is worth
more than all I gained on those accursed fowls. Let me
repay the money or I die of shame. How could I guess that
you were one of us ? How was Ito know you were —with
all respect —a brother ? ”
‘ For all his pleading I would not accept the amber beads.
But from that hour the sheykh and I were friends, and
understanding reigned within our paradise.’
When Marmaduke and Muriel left for England, the
former had to support his sheykh-cook from the steamer
back to shore as he was weeping so copiously.
Marmaduke was very glad to get back to his beloved
Mountain, for, as Gertrude Bell said : { lt is never without
a pang that the traveller leaves the Druze country behind,
and never without registering a vow to return to it as soon
as may be.’ Now Marmaduke had returned he found life,
if possible, more enjoyable than ever before. Every evening
the village schoolmaster came up to talk Arabic. He was
an elderly man, clad in a tattered silken robe and a soiled
tarbush. The skin of his face was almost coffee coloured
and seemed very dry, c as if its vital moisture had all gone
to fertilize the grey moustache, which was bushy, drooping,


and extremely prominent.’ A pair of gold-rimmed spec-
tacles lent to his deep-set eyes mysterious wisdom. He was a
fund of good stories, such as Marmaduke loved.
Wallah, did not Your Honour ever hear the story of
Afifeh, who, though she was a widow and old, won a great
Pasha’s love, and became chief amongst all his wives and
mistress of his harim ? No ? Know then that Afifeh,
when her husband died, was left very poor, with one tiny
calf only, whose mother had died in giving birth to it. This
calf was all her joy. ‘ O calf,’ she would say, { when thou
art grown I will mate thee to a splendid bull, and thou
shalt give me a calf as lovely as thou art, and much milk
also. With the milk I shall make leben, and I will sell my
leben in the market, and an old woman shall come and buy
from me, for the Pasha’s young son, who is fallen deeply in
love, for leben, eaten with bread, is a known specific where
the nerves are shaken. Did not the learned Abu Ktiseh say
in a golden verse :
* A modicum of soured white juice of cow or goat in association
with the produce of the oven
Engenders in him who engulfs it tranquillity of mind and
equilibrium * ?
And Afifeh carried her calf tenderly, lest its feet get cut
with the rough stones, or bullocks or camel frighten it and
it would seek to escape her. It grew, but still she carried it,
for she was become strong : as its weight increased so did
her strength also. At last it was a full-grown cow, and still
she carried it daily to seek pasturage, and in the evening
home to her dwelling. One day, as she walked, the Pasha
came by in his carriage, and, when he saw a woman carry-
ing a cow, he bade his servants question her, why she did
this, and they did so, and came back, saying : c Verily the
old woman is mad, for she is so fond of her cow she will not
let it walk lest it cut its feet or be frightened ’ ; but the Pasha
asked her to come up to his carriage herself, and she told
him : ‘ All my future is that cow, therefore it is no pain to
me to carry it ’ ; and the Pasha was so pleased with her
strength and with her answer that he asked her to marry
him.


When Marmaduke sighed over the difficulties of author-
ship with him, the schoolmaster would comfort him with
reminders of the learned and polite Marctic, the best of
poets, who, having failed to gain preferment by his poetry,
‘ one day made laughable grimaces in the presence of his
lord, with the result that the monarch filled his mouth with
gold, and flung on him a robe of honour.’ ‘ Never despair,
if poetry win not approval, make essay with prose : if that
is not acceptable there are always grimaces.’ But as an
instance of true resourcefulness, Marmaduke found the
story of Camr-ud-din who, from being a destitute little boy
that played knuckle-bones in the dust, became king of a
country among the islands of Hind and Sind, hard to equal.
This talented urchin stole a saucepan from a neighbour’s
house and sold it; then, with the money, which was very
little, in a purse, he repaired to a certain merchant famed
for absent-mindedness, and begged him to take charge of a
purse containing two dinars. The merchant at once con-
sented, flung the purse into a box with other moneys, and
called on the bystanders to witness the deposit.
Later that same day that clever one returned, and
demanded his purse containing two dinars. The merchant
flung it at him. He opened it : it contained but three
dirhems. Then he cried so loudly that he had been robbed,
that the merchant, though he saw through the fraud, made
up the money for the sake of his reputation. With the gold
thus obtained, Camr-ud-din purchased merchandise, which
he sold again to such profit that in a week he had returned
the saucepan to its owner, the gold to the merchant, yet
kept much in hand. This story, so common in the West,
where usury is not forbidden, but encouraged, was awe-
inspiring caviare to the general East.
Marmaduke and his schoolmaster together bewailed the
changes which had come over the people of the Mountain
since last he was there. In those days children mocked at
Frankish trousers, shouting : “ Hi, O my uncle, you have
come in two ” : now they wore ‘cheap German slops to
show their progress ; they doff the fez when entering a
house, an action formerly esteemed the greatest rudeness ;


they wear loud-creaking boots, which are the mode out
there, to advertise the difference from old-fashioned slippers.’
Only in the villages were the people the same, and even
there modern invention was corrupting ‘ the ancient dig-
nity and individuality of the people.’ For example, the
telegraph was universal, and no longer an object of wonder.
Only the posts had to be of hollow iron, painted over, for
the following reason : a new white carriage road had been
made through a certain lonely glen, and beside it ran the
telegraph, a line of poles which ran as far as eye could reach
in both directions. As soon as the workmen had finished
setting them up, and moved on, the people of the village,
which lay concealed in the rocks, fell upon them, and in
one night hewed down a very great many, for men, women,
and children were enlisted in the good work, and every
available donkey : the trees were reckoned to be worth two
Turkish pounds apiece.
From a second village, on the opposite crag, came all its
inhabitants to dispute the right of the first to the trees, and
a great fight took place ; many were killed and their corpses
carried home amidst wailings, carried on the trees they had
won, back to their homes. Both sides expected reprisals
from the Government, but all that happened was that the
workmen came again and put up some more trees, and the
villagers, who could hardly believe their eyes, hugged them-
•selves for joy, and gave thanksgiving to Allah that such
fools should live. When the workmen left for the second
time!, both villages rushed to the scene in all their numbers,
and an even greater battle took place in which, after losing
half their population, the men of the first village won, and
one of their chiefs approached the trees as conqueror :
* Nerving himself with a tremendous effort, he threw up his
axe, swung it above his head, then brought it down upon the
tree. A shock went through his frame from head to foot.
The pole gave forth a dull, metallic sound.’
It was only when he went down to Beyrouth that Marma-
duke realized the tremendous change brought about by the
revolution. There, in the city, he came in contact with the
epidemic of strikes by which the workers demonstrated


their new-found freedom—strikes of railway employees,
tramway functionaries, porters, schoolmasters. There he
learned of the successfully organized nation-wide boycott,
the answer to Austria-Hungary’s annexation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which cost the Dual Monarchy many millions
of pounds. For the first time in the history of Turkey the
army was paid up to date, was well fed and properly
equipped : for the first time in the history of their country
every soldier was provided with a pair of boots. The
leaders of the revolution were, as Aubrey Herbert describes
them in his Ben Kendrim, men of uncompromising honesty ;
all their reforms were puritanical in nature : baksheesh was
abolished, crime declined to a startling extent, and a general
sense of revival was abroad.
The bloodless revolution was a nine days’ wonder :
never before, in the history of political surgery, had there
been so major an operation performed without blood-
letting. Some even doubted the wisdom of such mercy,
holding that to allow tyrants to remain at liberty was to
endanger that liberty without converting the tyrants. But
Marmaduke, remembering Muhammed’s mercy to Mecca,
could not agree with them, and applauded the young,
earnest, pathetically high-minded feda'is 1 of the revolution.
Whilst concentrating on the reorganization of the army, the
Young Turks also undertook social reforms of infinitely
wider scope than had ever been attempted before in Turkey.
‘ I myself,’ Marmaduke wrote, ‘ personally became aware
of these changes during the five months I lived in Constan-
tinople, months of great difficulty and trial for the Turks
whose country had recently become bankrupt. At the end
of this period, the civil services had been working, though
slowly, for about a year, even ministers were content with
half, sometimes with a quarter, of their salary, and every
penny saved was devoted to the army or to public works.
In the cafes, no longer was the talk one good story capped
by another : now all discussed change ; change of govern-
ment, change of policy, even change of Sultan. Turkey,
1 Men bound by a religious vow.


that autumn, was still living in the intoxication of one of
those rare moments of brotherhood and unity when men,
from having long carried hidden the same high hopes,
celebrate in "unison their joyful realization. 5
Such hours, where all the good in man rises suddenly as
in a ferment, occur seldom in national history, but they
would be fruitful even if they were to have no tangible
result, to leave no human trace, for their memory is a
leaven, and from such days do whole peoples date their
resurrection. Nothing can withstand such manifestations of
a communal joy : they are the headlamps which cast a ray
of light across the darkness of the political landscape. The
triumphal car passes, the darkness may close in once more ;
but the light has been, and even the owls and toads inhabit-
ing the darkest depths of despotism have, .if only for an
instant, felt its power. Of these nocturnal animals, the one
whose reaction was the most surprising was the Sultan
himself: for the first time in his life he smiled, and, once
assured of the triumphant Committee’s personal loyalty to
him, he moved freely, during all those first months, among
{he crowds, who had known hitherto as little of their Khalif
as for centuries the Roman crowds of their Pope.
The excitement reached its height when the Constitution
of 1876 was proclaimed. To celebrate the awakening of
this Sleeping Beauty after thirty-two years’ slumber, the
people of Beyrouth ‘ mafficked ’ in the streets. (Marmaduke
explained to as many as he could that ‘ Dastoor ’ did not
mean liberty to annoy or harm other people.) For the most
part, the rejoicings were harmless enough : the prisons
were opened ; the Greeks came down from Thessaly to
congratulate Hilmi Pasha, even the Albanians and the
Arabs promised to live thenceforward in peace with their
neighbours.
The very women unveiled and shouted : “ya shassun
hurriet,” and harangued the startled crowds, for during the
anxious days that preceded the revolution had not high-
born Turkish Hanoums of Salonika worked with courage
and enthusiasm for the Cause ? They, who had acted as


messengers, carrying compromising papers on their persons
and a revolver grasped in their slim fingers, shared in the
victory they had so largely helped to win, for if the Sultan’s
legion of spies had been baffled, it was due in no small
measure to the devotion of the female members of the
Committee. The day of the formal opening of Parliament,
crowds of unveiled women of all classes lined the streets and
filled the balconies, some even standing on the roof of
St. Sophia itself.
The Parliament summoned was a hard-working, anxious
body, ‘ less frivolous than the House of Commons, more
decorous than the French Chamber,’ and meant business.
As it settled down to tackling the job of undoing the evils of
five hundred years of absolutism, the effervescence and
enthusiasm which had greeted it died down, and the various
nationalities within the Empire crumbled back into their
accustomed fragments. The French Revolution came as the
blossoming of the completed unity, already many centuries
old, of the French people : the Turkish Revolution was the
momentary uniting, against an insufferable bondage, of
all the peoples in an Empire founded on the division between
the House of Islam and the House of War —viz. the subject
conquered races.
Over these Turkish domination was only outward, and
did not reach the inner soul : some measure of alleviation
conceded, they were as little interested in the work of the
constitutional Government as they had been in the mind of
the despot. ‘ls fecit cui prodest ’ —the revolution had been
made by Turks for Turks, and, like the philosopher who
proved the reality of movement by walking, they proved the
existence of parliamentary government by constituting the
Ottoman Chamber : but as far as the non-Turkish races
within the Empire were concerned, that was all : and "Syria
and Beyrouth soon crept back into the bad old ways of
rebellions and intrigue.
Marmaduke loved Beyrouth, with its glowing seashore,
nearly the hue that Tyrian purple was —a ruddy splendour
between rust and red. He was fascinated by the smelly
serpentine alley-ways, where a foolish boy, running amok


in the heat of the sun for one of the many religions that
festered;in the crowded town, could shoot one, two, or
sometimes three men dead and suffer nothing worse, if a
Christian, than a penance of three Aves from his priest, or if
a Muslim, of alms given or a slave released.
The suburbs of scattered huts and one-roomed houses
among gardens and mulberry orchards, with high cactus
hedges, and tall reeds feathering the boundary ditches, were
the background for such stories as A Champion of Christendom ,
and An Ordeal by Fire , and so graphically are these described
that, as one reads, one is walking down the sandy roads,
sees there the sentry palm tree or umbrella pine, ‘ its shade
drawn close about it like a mantle,’ there the polished
mulberry trees across the ploughed field, there the branching
trunks of the olive trees which seem black and solid, a part
of earth ; ‘ their foliage the colour of thin moonlit cloud ’ ;
one even feels oneself a tree, intoxicated by a few drops of
water, transfigured by sunset or cloud.
It is hard to imagine a livelier city than the Beyrouth
of those days, but the life was always, somehow, misbegotten,
a trifle macabre ; the humour sinister, of the ‘ Max and
Moritz ’ variety. Like the taste of the golden persimmon,
the stories Marmaduke tells may be sweet, but the aftertaste
is always bitter. If he saw two camel-owners stuck under an
arch, each driver refusing, for his master’s honour, to give
way to the other, along comes a greater than they—perhaps
the harim of his Excellency the Pasha, returning from the
bath, and in the confusion the stall of the sweetmeat holder,
which has been set up in that archway every day for thirty
years, is overturned, the bottles broken, the sweetmeats
scattered far and wide, a prey for the urchins of the quarter,
the owner ruined. Other tales are even more sinister : of
murder and torture.
All Oriental art suffers from a lack of any fear of death,
for it is from terror of death that all our art is born, and it is
very hard for us, and seems an anti-climax, to accept
eternity as a fact, not as a pious aspiration. Death is our
slide-rule, we cannot measure without it; and though
we are attached to all our creations, we are so most of all


to our own bodies, which, puffed with pride of begetting, we
imagine we have created, and we despise Orientals for their
detachment, sneering : “ They haven’t the same feeling
as we.” Yet whoever lives amongst them grows to feel not
contempt, but rather envy. This complex of feelings is
manifest in the stories Marmaduke wrote at this time : he
seems obsessed with the physical facts of death, revolted by
them, and at the same time is constantly aping the Arab’s
lack of emotion. It may be argued whether to live in two
worlds incompetently is a better thing than to live in one
with supreme efficiency, but there can be no doubt that
Asiatics generally do the former and Europeans the latter.
From Araya the Pickthalls paid several visits to Jerusalem,
where the beloved dragoman, Suleyman, grown old and
now almost completely blind, took them around the city
he knew, sightless, yet by smell and feel guiding them better
than Cook’s sharpest cicerones.
Travel is, except only illness, the most expensive of all
luxuries, and Marmaduke, in spite of his modest way of
life, now found himself very broke, The last thing he wanted
was to go back to England at this juncture : here was life
and hope, here one of the world’s most exciting experiments ;
there only fanaticism, misunderstanding, and a very lone
row to hoe. Nothing is so agreeable as watching other
people work : and this is what he could do in Syria : in
England he knew he himself would have to work extremely
hard, both for his bread and for his conscience’ sake. A
writer is, of all people, most dependent on time. If, as
Professor Dirac has proved, time is individual, and varies
from solar system to solar system, and even from atom to
atom, and from child of six to man of sixty, then surely for
writers it reaches its maximum of elasticity.
The time of writing a book is of one quality, that of hawk-
ing it of another, of proof-correcting another, and the frac-
tional time in which there is money to spend and one’s name
is in the papers is of a quite other sort, of another reality.
This last period is rare as a cactus’ blossoming, brief as a
moth’s life, but it is the only carrot that ever varies the
continual monotonous thistle diet of the man asinine enough


to be a writer. Children of the Nile and The House of Islam
were still, ; it is true, doing well, but they had passed that brief
blissful stage, and Marmaduke knew he must write again.
For novels, like crumpets, must be consumed hot, and last
year’s novel is only a little more stale than yesterday’s
news. For the public, an author is like a cook, and must
forever be at the job : as soon as luncheon is over he must
begin to think about dinner. So, after an absence in the Near
East of about eight months, the Pickthalls made their way
to England again, visiting the Rev. E. Hanauer in Damascus,
and passing the ruins of Messina on their way. In their
absence the tenancy of the Fordingbridge house had come
to an end, but after only a short spell of house-hunting they
found exactly what they needed : a glorified cottage called
Five Chimneys, in the village of Hadlow Down, near Buxted,
Sussex.
Marmaduke, installed at Five Chimneys, sat down and
wrote The Valley of the Kings , perhaps the funniest and deftest
of all his books. It is deliciously light, this tragic tale of
poor Iskender, the washerwoman’s son who adored painting,
and, because he kissed the Sitt Hilda when she pressed his
hand at the Mission Bible class, forfeited his right to be made
a clergyman, a grand English Khawajah. Had he not by
twenty years’ attendance at the Mission School earned this
as his right ? And now the son of Constantin the gardener
was to be preferred above him, and he was to be scullion
and a sweeper to c that cold priest, those bloodless women :
Carulin, most ancient virgin, whose stalk is a crane’s, whose
heart is all gall ’ (who was modelled on Marmaduke’s own
half-sister Caroline !) ; Jane, a fruit all husk ; half man, yet
lacking man’s core, half maid, yet lacking woman’s pulp . . .
and poor little Hilda, a ripe fruit that whispers ‘ Pluck me.’
It was not to be borne, and Iskender finds a splendid young
Englishman, surely an Emir, who encourages him in his
passion for painting. The story of his worship for this Frank,
and of the misfortunes to which it leads him through his
rivalry with Elias, a real, grown-up dragoman ; of his love
for Nesibeh, daughter to Mitri, the Orthodox priest, and of
his conversion from the Brutestant faith to that of his bride,


is one of the gayest imaginable, entirely without bitterness,
yet wholly malicious, the last story Marmaduke wrote which
was pure, undiluted fun.
It was written whilst Marmaduke was still soaked through
with the Syrian sun, and reads as a fig eats, that has ripened
on a south-facing brick wall. The glory was still about him
of what he saw as the dawn of a new Jihad —the Young Turk
Revolution, that for him seemed a Holy War waged by
Islam, not against outside foes, but against the despotism,
the ecclesiasticism, the ignorance within itself —and for the
last time in his life he was intensely hopeful, confident of
the future.
Those months in his beloved Syria, watching the revolution
at last safely and sanely arrived, and the summer that
followed at Five Chimneys, with friends such as the Horn-
blowers visiting him, were the crowning of the first period
of his life —the time of travel and books, of experience and
expression, alternating rhythmically, with increasing power :
Said, The House of Islam, Children of the Nile, The Valley of the
Kings, and Veiled Women are a harvest with which any writer
could be content. The period which followed —the war
years and after —was a time of politics and peril, of great
suffering and great service, and removed him, spiritually as
well as physically, far from the Arabian Nights ’ enchantment
of his early years.
The happiness of man, said the Prophet, is a halt for
rest beneath a tree beside the way : in its brevity lies its
virtue. Too long sitting induces cramp, and when he was
cast out from his peace into the maelstrom of politics,
Marmaduke did not regret the past with more than a
sentimental aside, whispered in some corner of his mind.
‘ For verily with effort goeth ease,’ as the Qu’aran has it,
and in the spirit of the Young Turk Revolution he was to
find something he could not merely watch, but must share :
an ideal worthy his whole devotion : a work beside which
his novel-writing seemed a little plain sewing.


CHATTER SIX
ALTHOUGH the Turkish counter-revolution of April 13,
1909, was successful in Constantinople only, and there
but for a short time (it left the provinces unaffected in their
loyalty to the Constitution), it had far-reaching conse-
quences which, on inspection, show it to have been the
material cause of the downfall of the Young Turks, who,
Samson-like, brought down with them all that remained
of the Turkish Empire, in their last heroic effort to save its
fabric. For during their brief return to power, Abdul
Hamid’s friends had hit their hardest, and there had been a
pretty good purge of Young Turks. When the counter-
revolution collapsed, naturally these hit back : the foreigners
who supported the old regime were hated with exceeding
bitterness and the plotters who had arranged the counter-
revolution were, as many as could be tracked down, shot.
Fitzmaurice was politely asked to go, and, as Aubrey Herbert
puts it, ‘ if an end had not been put to all ideals, an end
had come to the spirit of good temper and toleration.’
The leaders of the Young Turks, in their few months’
absence from power, had been through the valley of humilia-
tion, both as men and patriots. Some of them had been in
prison in much peril of their lives : more than one of them
had served unknown in the ranks of the Turkish army.
Their return was marked by no massacres : a few of the
chief conspirators were tried and hanged, and their bodies
were quite unnecessarily exposed swinging upon gibbets
in the streets. That was all. The Sultan was with due
solemnity deposed and the saintly Muhammad Reshad was
girded with the sword of Osman in his stead. As soon as
the Constitutionalists were safely back in the saddle, the
Greeks began their customary tales of massacres. Philip
Graves was greeted on his arrival in Constantinople by a
M


Greek with the remark : “ Would you like to see the famous
correspondent of The Times , Mr. Philip Graves, lying dead ?
He is in a gutter round the corner ! ” On another memor-
able morning full accounts were published in all the Tiflis
papers of a terrible massacre of Armenians by Turks. The
massacre had been fixed for a certain day, and the news-
papers’ Russian owners had not been informed of the
Turks’ successful frustration of their plan !
Following Aristotle’s division of ‘ causes ’ into their four
types —formal, material, efficient, and final —it is possible
to analyse the break-up of the Turkish Empire. The formal
cause was the complex of hopes and fears of the Great
Powers. England was afraid that Russia would descend on
India through the provinces, nominally still under Turkish
suzerainty, but practically independent, which lay athwart
her route ; afraid that, simultaneously, she would realize
her most ancient ambition —to capture Constantinople, and
whilst Orthodox priests sang Mass again in Hagia Sophia,
the Dardanelles would be closed against the British fleet.
She was afraid, too, of the policy of the French financiers
which, as Sir Mark Sykes said, was to produce, eventually,
the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, c which would be
a frightful disaster to us.’ But her Entente with France
hampered her in protesting against, or avowedly countering,
this policy. Germany, on the other hand, hoped, by bring-
ing the Bagdadbahn policy to a triumphal conclusion, to
extend her sphere of influence from Berlin to Basra and
beyond, to the Persian Gulf, without touching British terri-
tory, or making contact with the Suez Canal. France saw
that England, by continual infiltrations, had so penetrated
the countries of the Mediterranean sea-board, that she could
count on Arabia, Syria, the Lebanon, and Mesopotamia
being entirely hers to command, what time they would
shake off the Turkish yoke. The French saw their schools,
the capital they had expended, their careful nurturing of the
Maronites, and all the roots their language and culture had
acquired, threatened by the vast, all-over-laying bulk of
the British Empire, and were in the jitters. Russia was
seriously anxious lest her century-old policy of fomenting


discontent amongst the Balkan Christians be, at a blow,
destroyed by the constitution and the proclamation of the
equality of all the subject races with the Turks. But to those
mercenary peoples the benefits of equality were more than
counterbalanced by their horror at being subjected, for the
first time in their history, to the same obligations of service
—fiscal and military—as the Muslims.
‘ The panorama of Russian aggression,’ as Aubrey
Herbert called it, was disturbed by the Turkish Revolution,
but not checked ; though Russia grumbled, as a kite
would, were the dead horse on which it was glutting itself
suddenly to gallop away. Russia’s programme in the East
was far from peaceful.
c The Russian bureaucracy,’ Marmaduke wrote, ‘ must
have war. War is a necessity of its existence, for an era of
peace would inevitably bring to pass the revolution which
has long been brewing.’ England is deceived because,
although ‘ Turkey is threatened, a great part of Persia is
occupied, and vast territories of China are coming under
Russian influence ’ ; yet ‘ the Russian noble is perhaps the
most charming figure in the world, socially. He has the
best credentials for appealing to our ruling classes.’ Against
the Russian peasant Marmaduke feels no animosity ; ‘he
is assuredly the most pathetic figure to be found in Europe,
the most pathetic people in the world, deserving of all
human pity. It was only England’s friendship and financial
help which enabled the bureaucracy to suppress the revolu-
tion at its last outbreak.’
Of Russia’s ambitions in the East he had no illusions.
“ I have no hesitation,” he declared in 1913, “ in declaring
her to be a most undesirable neighbour. She will throw
stones surreptitiously through your windows and rush in
and claim the house on the strength of the stones —her
stones —which may be found inside. A neighbour who
corrupts your servants and then points to the untidiness of
your abode as proof conclusive that you are not a fit person
to be a householder —is that the kind of neighbour one
would seek ? Such is Russia’s present treatment of Turkey,
her continual treatment both of friend and foe. She cannot


help it —it is Pretty Fanny’s way. But I admire the wisdom
of our ancestors who sought to interpose some independent
buffer state of military power at every point between our
frontier and the frontier of the Russian Empire. An
independent Turkey was regarded by our older, better-
educated statesmen as just as necessary to the structure of
the British Empire in the East as a safety-valve is to a steam
engine : do away with it —the thing explodes.”
Disraeli, in his speech at the Guildhall dinner as Minister
of Foreign Affairs, nearly thirty years before, declared
Turkey to be our essential ally against Russian imperialistic
ambition, the neutral focus of all our Eastern policy. And
his policy was not new. The Russian menace had already
alarmed Palmerston, who declared categorically that the
only chance of fair treatment for all the peoples dwelling in
the Ottoman Empire lay in our support of an enlightened
Turkish Government. Disraeli was a seer ; his successors
mere opportunists. For the seer, even a century seems no
great while to wait: there was only one generation between
Disraeli and the Turkish Revolution which justified his
policy.
But for the revolution to prove successful Turkey needed
ten years of peace. Although the rivers of enterprise, good-
will, and reform had been turned into the Augean stables,
they were powerless unless the Great Powers, who were for
Turkey the dei ex machina, lent life. Life and time and peace
alone were necessary, in order to bring the revolution to its
triumphant objective : the creation of a nation out of the
crumbling ruins of an empire. But life and time and peace
were instantly and absolutely denied. It was as impossible
to draw off the Powers, who, for years, had beset the
beleaguered Turkish Empire like a pack, their tongues
hanging out, as to call off hounds at the kill.
The nations of Europe were terrified lest, by its own
exertions, Turkey might arrest the process of disintegration,
and save body and soul alive : thus escaping them. Every-
thing but life and peace they offered Turkey : advice,
criticism, contempt —even a telegram of congratulations,
from King Edward to the douce Kiamil. Only the essential


breathing-space was denied : ‘ a flock of cosmopolitan
harpies has. swooped down on that wretched country, and
now are preparing, in the most legitimate way, to rob the
inhabitants under the guise of introducing them to the
benefits of civilization. The Turkish Empire has survived
disaster, but it cannot survive exploitation.’ 1
The Young Turks, on their recovery of power, were
obliged to grant enormous concessions to the various Euro-
pean nations, because they had nothing to barter except
the very body of their country. They had to feed the army
and clothe and equip it. They c desired to see the great
province of Armenia reformed,’ but they had no men and
no money : Russia was against their having men or money :
yet they were told to go on with reform. 2 Concessions were
wrung from them as a result of the financial boycott: and
the traders vied with one another in a shameless scramble :
yet there were places Turkey was still too proud to sell:
when, in July 1913, the Turks retook Adrianople, Russia
offered them a loan of seventy million if they would evacuate
the stronghold—a loan to be floated in England and France
—and Turkey refused.
Marmaduke was by no means blind to the Young Turks’
faults. Indeed, until the assassination of Mahmud Shevket,
he did not himself know whether, in Turkish politics, he
was a Unionist (so-called because of their adherence to the
Committee of Union and Progress) or a Liberal. The
Liberals were the Old Turks, c new presbyters but old
priests writ large ’ —reactionaries busy staging come-backs
off stage. Marmaduke enumerates the various mistakes
made by the Unionists after their return to power : in dealing
with the army there were two classes to consider, the Mek-
tebli, who, before getting a commission, had studied in an
army school or Mekteb, and the Alaili, officers whose mili-
tary knowledge was derived from actual service with the
army. The Young Turks preferred the former, and on
several occasions offended the latter by making all officers
below a certain age take an exam, and reducing them to a
1 Sir Mark Sykes in the House of Commons.
3 Aubrey Herbert in the House of Commons.


rank suitable to their age and attainments. This was very
foolish, as they were useful for regimental work and generally
popular with the men.
The removal of the pariah dogs from Constantinople,
although a necessary sanitary measure, shocked many
people, to whom their lingering death on an island on the
Sea of Marmora seemed wanton cruelty. And the two
hundred thousand spies, now out of work, were potential
plotters against the revolution, every one. The Christian
schools were outraged by the attempt to embrace them in
the general scheme of patriotic education, which trespassed
on their ancient privileges. The forcible disarmament of
the Macedonians and Albanians was a ghastly mistake, for
it left the Muslim populations entirely at the mercy of their
Christian neighbours, a policy whose results were the Bul-
garian and Serbian massacres of the first and second Balkan
Wars. Ultimately Marmaduke decided to favour the
Unionists, although he saw the wisdom of many of the older
men in Turkey, who realized what would happen and were
against the revolution, guessing reform would be the signal
for the final onslaught, the coup de grace . Turkey’s only hope
of prolonging her existence, as they saw it, was to feign
decrepitude, to cultivate the symptoms of approaching
dissolution, to trade on her agony as a beggar trades on his
sores.
The material cause of the Turkish collapse was, as
already stated, the unsuccessful counter-revolution of 1909.
This had been backed by Fitzmaurice, the dragoman at the
British Embassy, and was the eleventh attempt at the
destruction of the Young Turks. Liberal England had not
even threatened invading Austria with the war she had
undertaken to wage by the treaty of Berlin. c A good-sized
scrap of paper, this,’ Marmaduke says, c which was torn "in
all directions without disturbing England’s equanimity.’
She had hampered the Young Turks at every step, forcing
on them Kiamil Pasha for premier, an eighty-seven-year-old
encumbrance, timid and senile, ‘ nervously conservative,’
whose doddering inactivity was a clog on all the Committee’s
efforts, whose sons c were very like the sons of Eli.’ The


despotism of the Sultan was followed after his final over-
throw by a military dictatorship which alienated England :
as with every other revolution, so this one also, in order to
defend itself, had recourse to censorship and the sword, to
martial law and heresy-hunting. This new severity,
coupled with the mistaken policy of enforcing the Turkish
language, and proceeding too rapidly with a misunderstood
unification, had a very reverse effect from that which was
intended, and made that same spirit of nascent nationalism,
which had caused the revolution, recoil upon its authors.
This nationalism was a will-o’-the-wisp leading the Young
Turks into the most disastrous marsh bogs.
Modern Muslims, to quote Sir Mark Sykes, c are Western
in culture, but not able to assimilate nationalism. To a
Muslim, be he Syrian, Egyptian or Turk, this is literally
impossible. There is nothing real, conscious or subconscious,
which responds to the call of nationalism. A Turk is a
Muslim whose language is Turkish.’ Muhammed deliber-
ately abolished nationalism, in the aggressive sense, and
patriotism, as the English understand it. But when the
gullible subject races, far more numerous than the Turks
themselves, heard the cry of: £ Turkey for the Turks, Yeni
Turan,’ they took their cue and instantly, everywhere,
handfuls of nationalities sprang up, vociferating their
demands for freedom. As in a diseased body the infection
will burst out suddenly in many places, so, as with a pox,
the face of the Turkish Empire was blotched by every sort
of Balkan and Arab revolt.
An insurrection broke out in Crete, another in Albania.
Albania was, for the Turks, the Arabia of Europe, and it
ought to have been obvious that the Albanians needed, at
last, as careful and deferential handling as would the Irish
by an English Socialist Government. The Sultans had made
no such mistakes as did the Young Turks, who, by their
high-handed pacification of Macedonia and Albania,
caused ill-feeling amongst all the Balkan tributaries. This
led to Serbia, Montenegro, Greece, and Bulgaria entering a
league for the partition of those provinces of the Turkish
Empire which they claimed in virtue of the new principle


of nationalism. They were encouraged by the English
Liberals, whose great idea, since Gladstone’s day, had been
to re-christianize the Balkans (though Gladstone’s oft-
misquoted advice was to turn the Turks, bag and baggage,
out of Bulgaria : not out of Europe as most people suppose).
The whole Liberal Party was solidly and traditionally anti-
Turk : from Fox via Gobden to Gladstone and his suc-
cessors, a heritage of hatred for the ‘ unspeakable ’ was
passed on, and, because Russia pure and undiluted made
a strange bed-fellow for professing Liberals, they welcomed
the Balkan League and blessed it.
The Turks were utterly unprepared for attack. They
thought, in their simplicity, that their revolution had saved
them from the waiting eagles, that the dust thrown up by
Abdul Hamid’s fall had blinded the hovering kites. So
when Serbia, who had ordered new-type Creusot guns, had
been refused transit for them by Austria, and. had thereafter
had the cheek to ask Turkey to let her take them through
Salonica, the latter agreed, only to meet the same guns
pointed at her breast a few months later in Macedonia.
‘ Gegen solche Dummheit kampfen die Gotter selbst
vergebens ! ’
The Great War may be said to have begun for Turkey on
27 September 1911, for on that day Giolitti presented Italy’s
ultimatum to the Sublime Porte. Anxious not to be left
out of the general scramble for African territory, Italy,
without excuse of any kind, raided Tripoli, declaring war on
Turkey, and sent an army to Libya and a fleet to the
Dodecanese. From that moment the Gates of Janus were
not shut in the Near East until after the Treaty of Lausanne.
Tremendous was the wave of indignation. In Macedonia
there were hosts of volunteers, Christian no less than
Muslim, eager to go and fight in Africa. For the moment
all the Young Turks had done or left undone was forgotten ;
the Italians had overpowered the local garrison, but they
would not be able for a minute to face the Turkish army.
The presence of their fleet forbade sea-transport of the
troops, but they could march by land through Turkish
territory. Italy, the Turks knew, must be outside the law


of nations, for had she not broken the Berlin treaty made by
England ?, There was no doubt in anybody’s mind but that
at this juncture England, even if she remained neutral,
would befriend the Turks. "When it was known that
England had forbidden Turkish troops to pass through Egypt,
still a Turkish province, it was seen that she connived at the
Italian crime, and there were cries of ‘ Treachery ’ since
but for that injustice Turkey would have won the war.
Even Sir Mark Sykes, who was in Constantinople at the
time, wrote, ‘ Italy’s war must vex every Muslim. Of
course, I always think of this country (England) first,
because that is my business, but I am terrified at Grey’s
policy. It is getting us into the very devil of a mess. Italy’s
action, unless repudiated, must set the whole of the Muslim
world against us, and if the Muslim world is against us we
are done ! ’ But what Lord Salisbury had encouraged, no
Englishman might gainsay, and Salisbury had said that
Italy was welcome to Tripoli, provided she waited until
her prey was within reach, for it is a foolish hunter who is
far from his prey. For perhaps then he only wounds when
he strikes, and it may escape. So unutterably revolting was
the behaviour of the Italians (readers of the daily Press
during the recent Abyssinian campaign, and of Graziani’s
and young Mussolini’s accounts are familiar with their
methods) that several English newspaper correspondents
left Italian headquarters after making a formal protest
against the indiscriminate three-day massacres by the
Italians of the inhabitants of the Tripoli oases. The mass
executions of Arabs suspected—not proved —of having arms
in their possession, the beauty of long-distance artillery
mowing down the spear-carrying natives, the burning of the
little Arab sailing boats in the Red Sea under the pretext
that they might be used to carry soldiers, are all juicily
described in the Italian and French Press of the day, which
reads strongly like first-hand narratives of the 1935-6
campaign in Eritrea. But in this case Tripoli very nearly
escaped. The war dragged on for nine months without
much advantage gained on either side.
Grey was seriously embarrassed by the Tripoli adventure.


He wrote to Nicholson, c It will be tiresome if the Italians
embark on an aggressive policy and the Turks appeal to us.
If the Turks do this I think we must refer them to Germany
and Austria as being Allies of Italy. It is most important
that neither we nor France should side against Italy now.’
(Important because Grey wished to detach Italy from the
Triple Alliance.) The Italian horror got so bad, as more
news came in, that the Ottoman Government remonstrated
to the European Powers that the Italian atrocities were a
breach of the rules of war, but the Great Powers, replied
they were ‘ unable to take action,’ and Grey, in order to
distract attention from Tripoli, came forward with a state-
ment in explanation of British relations with Germany,
and the newspapers were soon well away after this new
hare. It was an old trick he had played more than once,
for he knew, none better, how to deal with the House of
Commons.
At the time Grey became Foreign Minister there were
four free Mohammedan States : Turkey, Persia, Afghanistan,
and Morocco ; of these four States, only Afghanistan was
able, during the interval that separated Grey’s accession to
the Foreign Office from the European War, to escape
without damage from the consequences, direct or indirect,
of Sir Edward’s policy. Sir Edward Grey was consistently,
as Professor Browne described him, ‘ russophile, germano-
phobe, and anti-islamic.’
It was only in December 1912, when the first Balkan War
had embarrassed Turkey at home, that the Turks finally
left Tripoli, after Italy had expended a vast deal of money
and of her soldiers’ blood, for a result she might after all
have got without going to war, by means analogous to
those by which France obtained her position in Tunis and
England in Egypt. 1
The object of the Committee of Union and Progress had
been to strengthen Turkey by reconstructing it on a Western
model, and to transform it into a unified nation. The
Committee did not succeed, and as their failure became more
1 But then, as recently, Italy preferred to fight for what she easily could have
obtained by negotiation.


emphasized, and the provinces lapsed into anarchy, murders,
abductions, . and rape became daily occurrences. At
Ketchana in August 1912 there was a massacre of Bulgarians
by Macedonians ; in Beyrouth there was open insurrection
and the inhabitants hung cards bearing the name of the
Governor General, Ebn Bekir Hazim, round their dogs’
necks ; and Macedonia was overrun with Greeks and Serbs.
In the early summer the Russian Foreign Minister had
visited France and England and held conversations with the
foreign ministers of both those countries on the subject of
the Balkan alliance, supported by Russia. The Turks, in
view of the increasing disorders in the Balkans, had brought
a somewhat larger force than usual to Thrace, and after the
visit of the Russian Foreign Minister the Great Powers
presented a collective Note to the Porte, pointing out that
this army, manoeuvring now in Thrace, might be regarded
as a menace by Bulgaria, and assuring the Sultan’s Govern-
ment that no attack on Turkey was intended or would be
permitted. The reactionary Turkish Government (for as a
result of the parliamentary elections, the nominees of the
Committee, who were blamed for the Italian war and for
the hostile attitude of England, had fallen from power)
accepted this assurance and at once disbanded the said army,
most of its units being sent to distant provinces. The troops
had hardly time to make their way to their new stations when
the posture of the Balkan States became so threatening that
war was seen to be inevitable. Yet still the Government
delayed, insisting that since England had signed the
assurance given, she would protect the Turks.
Thus began, towards the end of 1912, the first Balkan
War, which was both a struggle between Turkey and four
foreign nations, and a revolution, in that the inhabitants of
European Turkey rose both against the invader and against
the Turkish army, too. The Turks were not ready, as the
Allies had been for weeks before. Their new levies, hastily
called up, were untrained peasants, and the Christian
soldiers, hitherto exempt from military service and now for
the first time, under the new regime, drafted into the army,
deserted in vast numbers. Owing to the change of Govern


ment, some noo officers had been suddenly cashiered, and
the transport and commissariat broke down completely
owing to the Government’s expulsion of these men, who
knew the work and could take responsibility.
The news came from Vienna that the Bulgars were in
Kirk Kilisseh. Servia took Prisend. Then at Monastir,
where they had 90,000 men and 100 guns, the Turks were
completely routed. The Greek army came up and occupied
Veria, and the Turks fell back before the Bulgarians.
Marmaduke was helplessly in England most of this time,
trying frantically to rally such elements in England as were
pro-Turk. Himself a Disraelite Tory, he clung to such men
as Aubrey Herbert, who shared his views, and who, being
in Parliament, could give tongue to them. Marmaduke
plagued all the politicians he could, wrote in whatever
papers would take his stuff, but as he himself said : “ Parti-
tion has been practically inevitable since 1908, and all our
efforts are so pitifully futile, all that I or any other individual
or group of individuals can say or do in the matter, that I
think the people who get angry about it must be deficient
in a sense of humour.” But it was agony to him to see
England insisting that Lazarus must at all costs be destroyed.
She would not interfere to prevent the Balkan States at
their work of destruction ; though Austria and Italy dismem-
ber the still living body of Turkey, England with folded
hands let them tear to pieces what was left of the Treaty of
Berlin. But though she approved destruction from outside,
England had refused to allow reconstruction from within
to go on in peace : constitutional government, Parliament,
the Europeanization of Turkey, the voice of the people in
public affairs ; these unhallowed stirrings must be checked :
Fitzmaurice had seen to that. It was for Marmaduke
as for Hans Andersen’s little mermaid.: each step England
took was a knife turning in his heart. He thought from very
self-interest England must remember she had a Mohamme-
dan existence, and that the Turks loved her.
As Leishman, the American Ambassador in Berlin, told
Lord Fisher : “ Your strength is Muslim, only you are too
damned Christian to know it.” The glory of the British


Empire in the East, as Marmaduke had known and loved it
in former days, had been that England stood for universal
toleration,- for a nationality which was independent of
religious differences, for a humanity and a wideness of
sympathy which are the marks of civilization as modern
man imagines it. The Turks had of their own free will
expressed these same ideals, since when they were plundered
and attacked on all sides, whilst England smiled upon their
persecutors, and sacrificed her signature to a supposed
Concert of the Christian Powers, whose natural inheritance
was to be the Turkish Empire. This Concert of Christian
Powers was the old Dreikaiserbund of 1873, engineered by
Bismarck to prevent France getting allies in the East —
a coalition of the Emperors of Austria, Germany, and
Russia ; augmented by France herself. 1
Outwardly, Marmaduke’s life at Buxted seemed a return
to the conditions under which he had worked in Suffolk :
he was good friends with the Vicar, a man named Griffiths ;
Muriel taught the local hobbledehoys to dance ; they both
country-danced enthusiastically, and schemed to take a
Sussex team to Sweden to show Scandinavia what British
folk dancers could do : they both gardened a good deal.
But the resemblances were illusory, surface-deep only.
Then, his books and his living were his life ; now, the vast
complications of Europe harrowed and horrified him ;
politics possessed him utterly.
Luckily he was near the station : ‘We don’t catch trains,
we wait for them,’ he wrote to a friend, and he was up and
down to and from town continually. Exact dates are hard
to come by for these hurried eventful years : between 1909
and 1913 the only sure dates are those of his books : The
Valley of the Kings , in 1909 ; Pot-au-feu, a collection of short
stories, most of which had appeared before in periodicals,
in 1910 ; Larkmeadow , his last Suffolk story, in 1911 ; in
1913 Veiled Women. It is the story of a governess, Mary
Smith, who marries a rich young Turkish-Egyptian noble,
and ‘ Islamizes.’ It is curiously sinister, a simple statement
1 Already in December 1912 Poincard declared that he regarded Syria as a
French perquisite.


of harim life with no sermon and no moral; but it is more
useful as anti-feminist propaganda than a thousand
pamphlets could be. Since women are so, the reader must
think as he closes the novel, it is best they be kept and treated
thus, and one is left sympathizing with Lawrence’s Arabs,
for whom woman was a machine for muscular exercise.
A few friends provide scattered reminiscences. Mr.
Hornblower remembers staying with Marmaduke at Five
Chimneys in 1909 ; George Raffalovich first met him at
the time of the launching of the New Age by A. R. Orage
and Holbrook Jackson, and saw a good deal of him ; sub-
sequently Marmaduke wrote regularly for this paper : from
1912 until 1920 almost every single week. In it appeared,
serially, the whole of his With the Turk in Wartime , also his
Oriental Encounters , and six lectures on ‘ Islamic Culture,’
which were later delivered again in Madras and published
there as The Cultural Side of Islam. He wrote on all manner
of Near-Eastern problems and politics ; and other contri-
butors to this very remarkable journal were D. H. Law-
rence, Ezra Pound, Michael Arlen, George Lansbury,
G. D. H. Cole, G. K. Chesterton, and Sir John Squire :
amongst the illustrators were Augustus John and Gaudier
Breszka.
Marmaduke and Muriel went abroad every year between
1909 and 1913, even if only for a short time. Sometimes in
winter, as in 1911 when they went to St. Cergues, in the
Jura, and Colonel Machell joined them for ski-ing. Oftener
in the summer, when, after sleepy Sussex rusticity, the
gaieties of mild mountaineering in Switzerland, of bicycling
tours in France, of walking in the Black Forest, or of trips
to Belgium, Holland and Italy were a pleasant change.
In those days Europe was a necessity to all educated people
(with the one exception of Lord Grey. He, sitting next my
mother at dinner, assured her, with pompous emphasis,
when she asked where he was going that summer, that he
never went abroad if he could help it, for ‘ England is
good enough for me.’)
The Pickthalls also paid visits to their O’Brien cousins,
who took a house each year at Seaton, in Devon, where


Marmaduke, in the presence of five unmarried girls,
‘ pigeoned ’ —as he described his conduct, i.e. strutted up
and down'and showed off like a pigeon. “He would even
break off in the middle of story-telling or amusing us in
other ways and say : ‘ Stop me—l’m pigeoning,’ so great
was his consciousness of this fault.” He loved being with
these cousins, and would go gathering wild strawberries
with them, telling them hour-long Eastern tales, or would
rise betimes to gather white violets before the mercenary
tramps grabbed them for the London market.
Whilst they plaisanted, England, Germany, Austria, and
Russia, costers, whose tower-high pile of baskets had begun
already to sway, were forced to walk faster and faster, then
finally to run, in vain effort to prevent their top-heavy
loads landsiiding to that total, complete, utter ruination
and collapse which was the World War. ‘Le jour oh l’on
croira resolue la question d’Orient, l’Europe verra se poser
inevitablement, la question d’Autriche,’ Albert Sorel wrote
in 1878, and Sir Mark Sykes uttered an even graver warning
in the House in 1914 : “ The disappearance of the Ottoman
Empire must be the first step towards the disappearance of
our own.” England still stands where she stood : but
Russia turned turtle directly after her infidel enemy had
fallen.
During those agony-pregnant years that led to 1914
Marmaduke was a horrified spectator of the sultry impetus ;
mazed and distressed, as everyone else, to whom civilization
was the only apology for existence, culture the one excuse
of Empire, his efforts, no more impotent than any other
man’s, were continual, ceaseless, but difficult to follow
because so completely obliterated by the succeeding
avalanche. ‘ One must do something about it,’ he pleaded,
and his whole effort was directed to trying to make England
see that if she would not befriend Turkey—would not accept
her overtures —someone else inevitably would : and that
someone was Germany. In the capitalist emporium there
can be no spare rooms, no empty warehouses, no unguarded
arsenals, no idle money : and Germany made no secret of
her desire for a Turkish alliance. Turkey’s entry into the


war, Mr. Lloyd George has said, prolonged it by two years.
For the whole of the two years before the war Marmaduke,
in a ceaseless passionate struggle with abhorred Liberalism,
had one only aim and ambition : to keep Turkey pro-
British and to make Britain pro-Turk.
The position of Turkey after the Bulgarian advance was
desperate. Macedonia was overrun by Greeks and Serbs,
and during the late autumn of 1912 (Salonica fell on
8 November) 500,000 Muslims were slaughtered. The victors
took ‘ all our splendid roads, new schools, and public works
of all kinds, all built with Turkish money, Turkish thought
and energy within the last four years. We began our work
with Macedonia that the Powers might see, and now they
take it all ’ —so a desperate Young Turk friend wrote to
Marmaduke that bitter Christmas.
He was made most miserable by the atrocities committed
by the Bulgars : the slaying of non-combatants, the habitual
cutting-off of lips, eyelids, ears, and noses, to take home as
trophies, the constant burning and burying alive of prisoners,
which reduced the numbers of Muslims with grim success.
A high official in the British Foreign Office, in answer to
Marmaduke’s agonized query as to whether he regarded
the present Balkan settlement as in any sense a step towards
lasting peace : “ Yes,” he said, “ and I’ll tell you why. It
is not generally known. But the Muslim population has
been practically wiped out —240,000 killed in Western
Thrace alone —that clears the ground.” By August 1913 the
Turkish Empire, in so far as its European possessions were
concerned, was shattered, and Russia assured a scandalized
Europe that the conduct of her protege, Bulgaria, was
‘ only what is customary in all warfare.’
Marmaduke was miserable. That the revolution should
have come had been so incredibly glorious : that it should
have come too late seemed the saddest of anti-climaxes.
The pathetic last-minute efforts the Young Turks had made
to bring themselves into line with what Europe continually
and increasingly required of them were so farcically useless
—efforts as naive and unavailing as those of the Abyssinian
Negus twenty-five years later. The abolition of slavery


throughout the Turkish Empire cut about as much ice as
Abyssinia’s entry into the League of Nations. The Consti-
tution, with its establishment of a free Osmanli Common-
wealth, wherein equal rights were secured to all members of
the Turkish Empire irrespective of nation or race or creed,
was powerless ; after a century of Russian intrigue : it
meant nothing. Already the Christian races were too far
removed from their loyalty to return to it, although they
were to experience, as the Arabs also, the deep wisdom of
the question : ‘ Had Zimri peace who slew his master ? ’
Marmaduke’s hopes rose temporarily again in January
1 9 1 3, when the Young Turks made their second coup d'etat
which he describes most amusingly.
‘ The reactionaries, though discredited and hated by the
people, were still in power, only because the Committee of
Union and Progress, which remained as strong as ever,
wanted a good excuse to cast them out, but they were so
little conscious that their tenure had become precarious
that they still behaved with the extreme of arrogance to
their opponents. One day a number of distinguished
Unionists, who for weeks past had been living under a
vexatious surveillance, were summoned to the Porte in
order to comply with some new rule regarding registration
of suspected persons. They were bidden wait outside the
building until summoned. The place was windy, and the
day was cold. Wrapping their cloaks about them, they
walked up and down, stamping their feet and striking their
hands together to keep warm. At length one, looking at his
watch, exclaimed : “We have been waiting here an hour.
It is too much. Are we then dogs, to be thus disregarded ? ”
‘/They were all men well and honourably known, who
had held power and still could boast of influence. They
looked at one another and observed their goodly number.
‘ “ Suppose we go in and demand an audience ! ” some-
one suggested. “ They can do nothing to so large a
company.”
*No sooner said than done : they all trooped forward.
A sentry challenged them, and when they took no notice
N


lowered his bayonet. One of them bared his breast and
walked straight up to it, daring him to kill a true defender
of Islam. The sentry recognized the speaker as a hero of
the revolution, and brought his rifle up to the “ Present ”
instinctively.
‘ Inside the building the attendants tried to stop them,
but they still advanced, the scandalized ushers. following
them in remonstrance. The Government had sent for them,
they said, and they had come. The clamour of this alter-
cation, near the room in which the Cabinet was sitting,
brought Nazim Pasha out into the passage in a towering
rage. He was a cavalry officer, and had a cavalry officer’s
command of language when infuriated. Fixing his eyes
upon a young man, whom he knew by sight, he called him a
foul name, made an obscene remark about his mother, and
bade him stop his noise or it should be the worse for him.
In the twinkling of an eye the young man, thus insulted,
drew out a pistol from beneath his cloak and fired. The
Minister of War collapsed upon the door-mat.
c That accident, which cut off their retreat, decided them.
A few rushed off to bear the tidings that a revolution was in
progress to the adjacent mosques and to the university,
while the remainder strode into the room and faced the
Ministers, who strove to hide, as best they could, behind the
furniture, except one Armenian, who threatened the
intruders with the vengeance of the Powers of Europe if
they but dared to touch a hair of his Armenian head. There
was an anxious interval, which seemed an age to everybody
in that room, but, in reality, did not exceed a quarter of
an hour, before the noise of popular rejoicing informed
them that the revolution was secure. One of the demon-
strators opened a window in the passage and looked out.
Khojas and theological students were chanting praise to
Allah, and haranguing a delighted crowd which every
minute grew more dense and numerous. He closed the
window and reported to his comrades, who, having locked
up the ex-Ministers for the time being, were gathered round
the corpse of Nazim Pasha with sad faces, for the man,
though a gross liver, had not been disliked. There were


sighs of: “ Allah have mercy on him ! ” One exclaimed :
“ A bad day’s work.” This futile sympathy attacked the
nerves of the young man who had performed the deed in
vengeance for a foul and deadly insult. When someone
said : “ It is not seemly he should be left lying here,” that
young man seized the body roughly, and had dragged it
some way down the corridor before the others realized what
he was doing, and enjoined due reverence. Soon after that,
having appointed certain of their number to keep going the
machinery of government, most of the demonstrators went
to their respective homes. The revolution was accomplished.
The next step, the choosing of a Ministry, concerned not
them, but certain thoughtful men who sought no office, the
Committee of Control.
‘ It was no longer possible for the Young Turks to work
with extinct luminaries of the old regime like Kiamil Pasha,
who had shown themselves opposed to the ideals of the
revolution. For the first time they had to form a Govern-
ment from their own ranks. They had but one great man
whom Europe recognized, and he, as usual, was averse to
taking office. It is said that the Committee had to threaten
him with violence before they could persuade him to accept
the post of Grand Vizier, or even to admit their claim that
he was eminently fitted for it. However that may be, it is
quite certain that he accepted the supreme position most
reluctantly, begging to be allowed to serve in one less
prominent. But accept he did at last; and when the name
of Mahmud Shevket Pasha was published as the head of
the new Ministry, the country breathed once more with
hope and confidence.
‘ The State was bankrupt. The whole Civil Service had
been unpaid for months. Yet somehow public credit was
restored ; nor only that, but something of the first enthusiasm
of the revolution thrilled the people once again. The
change, if gradual, was rapid. In a very few weeks’ time
the chaos and confusion in the army and the public service
disappeared. Rules which had weighed too heavily upon
the people were relaxed judiciously, and edicts were promul-
gated, pending the consent of Parliament, which relieved


the suffering classes of the population of just grievances.
Instead of crowds of ragamuffin conscripts, troops, well-
equipped and drilled, poured steadily into the capital and
on to Chatalja, while large, well-ordered camps were formed
at Scutari, San Stefano, and other points upon the coasts of
Asia and of Europe. Ministers agreed to take but one-third
of their salaries. The Civil Service made no fuss about the
arrears of pay ; the very poor subscribed a portion of their
wages to the cause of national defence ; the people did not
count its sacrifices, now that hope returned. Again there
was the eager thirst for education and improvement, of
public works and purity in the administration which had
marked the birth of the new order. And the Young Turks
were for the first time able to support this movement by
effective legislation. After the revolution of June 1908
reform on certain lines became a popular ideal; after the
revolution of January 1913 it became law. And all these
orderly and hopeful currents emanated from one man, but
seldom seen, a quiet, anxious man, who worked both day and
night, spending his time between his office at the Sublime
Porte and his office at the Ministry of War.
‘ And Turkey looked once more to England, not with
confident devotion, as at first, but with some expectation
of purchasing effective help from that Power by great
concessions. 5
One of Turkey’s , new rulers’ first actions was to sue for
terms of peace : Turkey could not go on fighting, and the
first Balkan War ended with the fall of Adrianople, Janina,
and Scutari, soon after Mahmud Shevket Pasha became
Prime Minister. He had to accept the Enos-Midia line.
The various racial problems were tackled at once. In
answer to the Greek accusations of Turkish massacres of
Armenians, Djemal Pasha suggested to the ambassadors of
England, France, Germany, and Austria that they send
their first dragomen to conduct an inquiry into the Armenian
massacres on the spot; this committee established the true
facts. As far as the Bulgarians were concerned, the problem
was settled by an exchange of Turks and Bulgars, so that


by the beginning of 1914 there was not a single Bulgarian
to be found within the frontiers of the Turkish Empire.
This policy was begun also with the Greeks : the Greek
populations of Iden were bartered for the Mohammedans
of Macedonian villages now in Greek hands.
The army called in German advisers ; for the navy,
British experts were summoned. Both land and sea forces
were in a very bad way. General Liman von Sanders was
sent from Berlin to aid the recovery of the army from the
disasters of the Balkan War. There was already a German
tradition in the army, dating from the time of Von der
Goltz. Russia asked France and England to resist the
appointment. France would have done so, ‘ but Grey
refused to see in the appointment a casus belli. He even
went so far as to give recognition and even encouragement
to German penetration in Asia Minor by agreements in 1913
with Turkey and Germany, the essence of the agreements
being that Britain would not oppose the Bagdad railway
system if Germany did not oppose British control of the
Mouth of the Mespot rivers.’ So Mr. Ivor Thomas describes
the reception in England of von Sanders’ appointment.
The navy was entirely in English hands. Vickers-Armstrong
had been given the contract for the modernizing of the
arsenal at the Golden Horn, and the establishment of an
arsenal and floating docks in the gulf of Ismid. The English
naval mission was under Admiral Limpus, and English
engineers and workmen were employed to fix the torpedo
lines of the Dardanelles and the Red Sea.
Aubrey Herbert was travelling in Turkey at this time, and
George RafFalovich, who had just come back from a trip
there, met him en route in Vienna and Rumania. Marma-
duke, having got an advance on Veiled Women , decided he
must go East also, ‘ for a few months, to escape an atmo-
sphere which revolts and disgusts me. The English Press
and public had, in this twentieth century, responded with
fanaticism to the cry of a crusade against the Turk, raised
by some cunning Balkan rulers, and that fanaticism had
been fostered by British statesmen —not for their country’s
ends, but for the ends and in the interests of Russia, our great


Eastern rival.’ The solidarity of Christendom against a
Muslim Power was reckoned a fine thing, but it broke the
hearts of Englishmen who loved the East.
‘ There was, besides, another aspect of the case,’ he wrote*
‘ The East was waking ; though the bulk of it lay still
unconscious. It had been my lot in early youth to be
immersed in the unconsciousness of the old East, to receive
its spirit for a season and know its charm. Since then I
had observed, with some annoyance, the various attacks of
conscious Europe on unconscious Asia, and the stirring of
the latter towards a consciousness akin to ours. It had been
strange for me to see the men responsible for that awakening
shrink back in horror as did Frankenstein before his Monster,
trying frantically but in vain to wreck their work. To me it
seemed unreason near to madness for the English even to
attempt to stop a movement which owed its inspiration
largely to the work of Englishmen and English governments.
Turkey, a country in close touch with Europe, was the head
of the progressive movement in the East, the natural head,
the sanest head that could be chosen ; for the Turk was
capable of understanding Europe and acting as interpreter
to those behind him. People in a position to be well
informed assured me I was altogether wrong, because the
Turks were hopelessly demoralized, the revolution had
turned out a ghastly failure. They told me to go to Con-
stantinople and see for myself. I had not been there for
some eighteen years, my more recent knowledge of the
Ottoman Empire, intimate though it was, being practically
restricted to the Arab provinces. Accordingly, having been
well supplied with introductions by the kindness of some
friends, I set out to investigate the state of Turkey, as far as
might be, from the Turkish point of view.’
The result of those investigations appeared in book form
early in 1914, when Messrs. Dent published With the Turk
in Wartime. Marmaduke travelled out via Berlin, where
he stayed for a few days with the late Hakki Pasha, the
Turkish Minister. He was horrified to learn there full
details of the atrocities committed by the Balkan Allies


in their attack on Turkey—atrocities of which the
German public was informed, whilst ours was not. The
German newspapers were full of the reports of the atrocities,
and ‘ pamphlets on the subject had a place of honour on the
bookstalls.’ The victims of the Allies numbered more than
half a million non-combatants, but this news was generally
censored by the English Press, one paper only, the Man-
chester Guardian , carrying the ‘ story ’ and some of the figures,
which none of the Russian or Balkan ministers or newspaper
correspondents in England or Germany in any way
attempted to deny or disprove.
In the six years ending with the outbreak of the Great War
Turkey lost over a million men, women, and children, and
‘ it does seem strange that any European State should feel
compassion for a country so afflicted, but Germany does,’
Marmaduke wrote, ‘ and shows her feelings practically, by
sending out help for the unlucky Muslim refugees from all
parts of Germany and Austria Hungary. The ordinary
people here are much incensed by the atrocities, and
Germans have told me they supposed some kind of punitive
measures would be taken against the massacres, and that
Western Europe would unite for such a purpose. It seems
to them —as I confess it does to me—a ghastly farce to treat
people who habitually slay non-combatants, who cut off the
features of living men and mutilate them most foully, who
burn and bury alive the enemy wounded as the usual
thing, with the diplomatic amenities customary towards
civilized nations. But Russia is behind the Balkan States,
and France and England support Russia.’ Whilst in Con-
stantinople, during the first part of his visit, until his wife
joined him, Marmaduke wrote to her constantly, and by
her kindness I am able to quote largely from these letters
written her between March and May 1913. The series
begins on 8 March 1913 and the first letter is written from
the Pera Palace Hotel, Constantinople.’
‘. . . I arrived here this morning instead of yesterday
at noon. The fog was so thick in the Black Sea that the
steamer had to go extremely slowly, more particularly as


one approached the entrance to the Bosphorus and heard
bells ringing and sirens hooting on every side. In spite of
sending boats ashore at intervals to find out where we were
and taking on board a local pilot, we failed to make the
mouth of the Bosphorus before 7 p.m., the last hour at which
ships may enter, so anchored on the spot. This morning,
when I got on deck, the fog was drifting in the early sunlight,
and one had fairy-like glimpses of palaces and mosques and
cypress trees reflected in still water, and we slowly steamed
past the foreign warships to Constantinople. Thanks to
the fog the sea was smooth as ice, and I had not a moment’s
uneasiness all the way from Constanza to here.
‘ This morning I wandered in Stamboul chiefly to gratify
a dragoman attached to this hotel, who, in despair at the
dearth of travellers this season, offered to show me every-
thing there was to see for five francs. I did not quite see
everything, but went into Aya Sophia and another mosque,
also the tomb of Sultan Selim, where I amazed the man in
charge by reading aloud a page of a very fine MS. Koran he
showed me. “ Gyuzel ! Gyuzel ! ” was all that he could
say, and he stared me in the eyes as if he doubted my
Frankishness. I, also as a result of that performance, was
shown some very fine Arabic MSS. in a little shop in the
bazaars. ...
‘ How anyone can go imagining the Turks to be fanatical
I cannot imagine ! There was I this morning, with my
guide, a native Christian, visiting their most holy sanctuaries
and shrines, and crowds of soldiers everywhere also sight-
seeing, everywhere received with smiles and nice remarks.
‘ We saw some volunteers marching through the streets
with flags and music. They begin with nine or ten, but by
the end of the day muster between two and three thousand,
my guide informed me. Some we saw were men well over
sixty. And every day fresh troops arrive from Asia, all
good-natured, not & bit “ fanatical.” There is not, never
has been, any danger here for Europeans : that is the
opinion of everybody I have talked to. The rumours
current in the West are due to the reports of Armenians,
Greeks, and other Levantines—mostly women—who, on the


outbreak of the war, fled from Constantinople in a state of
nerves. To see it now one would not call it a 44 Doomed
City.” The harbour is as busy as can be, the streets are
crowded, and-fanfares ring out gaily in the sunshine from
the various barracks and military depots.
‘ I am lucky to have a fine day for my arrival, as all last
week and the first half of this they had a foot and a half of
snow, which has left its traces in the street in mud. I am
looking at everything with a view to showing it to you later.
You will come in the very best season when the weather is
set fair ; and there will be flowers and fruit galore. I am
certain that you have never seen any city half so beautiful,
or any country so majestic as that on both sides of the
Bosphorus. The minarets and domes are most imposing.
One cannot help hoping that they may long remain.
‘ This evening I am going to the Club to present some
of my introductions —rather nervous work ; but no doubt
I shall survive this ordeal as I have others. . . .’
io March.
4 . . . Rifaat Bey, to whom I had two introductions (from
Pangiris Bey and Aubrey Herbert) has been extremely
kind already, and seems inclined to spare no trouble on
my behalf. He gave me dinner last night at the Club,
where I met two Englishmen, one high up in the diplomatic
world and the other, his nephew, a London newspaper
correspondent. Both very pleasant, but not entirely of my
views, which are here regarded as the Turkish not the English
standpoint. However, I am in good company as quite a
lot of old, experienced, Constantinople Englishmen are of
my way of thinking and even more so !
4 1 begin Turkish lessons to-day with an instructor who
speaks Arabic.
4 Prince Said Halim, the Foreign Minister, a Turco-
Egyptian prince, and nephew of Nazleh Khanum, whom I
met in Cairo, received me very nicely yesterday and hopes
that we may 44 meet often and confer together.” It is probable
that I shall find a home on the Bosphorus and not at Prinkipo
as Pangiris suggested, as Rifaat Bey can manage that for me.’


14 March.
‘. . . For the last three days I have been working away
at Turkish with a teacher. I am happy doing it, but it
makes one rather tired in the long run ; and I feel the lack
of exercise a little, though I do what I can in that line,
walking morning and evening for an hour. Not a very
interesting proceeding, for the streets are beastly this side of
the bridge, and the language which one mostly hears is
Greek. Considering the ideas concerning Turks which
generally prevail in England, it is curious to see the different
Christians here in Pera, having their Lenten processions
with candles and crucifixes in the streets. I am told that
when the Bulgarians first reached Chatalja, when every-
body was afraid that they would take the city, and people
in England, I among them, thought of massacres, the
Bulgarian Prelate in Constantinople died, and was buried
with great pomp, Turkish soldiers lining the streets and
accompanying the funeral !
‘ The day before yesterday, in the morning, I was in
Stamboul, at the Sublime Porte, and had my audience of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Prince Said Halim—who is
like the German-painted Noah’s Ark people to look at —very
blue eyes, very brown cheeks, very white collar, very black
frock coat, very red fez, which looks like a part of his head,
and a cigarette in an amber holder stuck permanently in
one cheek. Very neat, correct, and automatic in his move-
ments—just like a toy. He was very amiable, and Rifaat
tells me that he had described me as a“ charmant homme.”
That seems to be his phrase for everybody. They say he is
a very honest and decent man, but not very brilliant.
(Marmaduke later translated much of Prince Said Halim’s
book on the future of Islam and published it serially in
Islamic Culture.) Mahmud Shevket Pasha, the Grand Vizier,
on the other hand, is said to be extremely clever, but so
eager and excitable that he is in danger of working himself
to death. I have not yet met him. It is not a time to
bother them with my affairs.
‘ Rifaat talks of Erenkeuy in Asia, as a good place for me


to sojourn in. He himself has a country house there, so has
Soubhy Bey, Shefik’s cousin ; so I should be among friends.
At this moment he is spending his Thursday to Saturday
(the Muslim „ week-end) there, and will let me know
to-morrow what he has discovered.
‘ Yesterday, again, I went into Stamboul, and in the
middle of the city traversed a great tract of ruins where
7500 of the old wooden houses, rather like Swiss chalets
only larger, of which the whole of Constantinople once con-
sisted, with about twenty mosques, were destroyed by fire, a
year and a half ago. Under a blue sky, and looking down
upon the Sea of Marmora, the ruins were extremely pictur-
esque, with little family parties camped among them. I
then went on and wandered round outside the walls, among
the cemeteries —then in at the Adrianople gate and so back
through more of the wood Muslim quarter and past the
Mosque of Muhammed the Conqueror, over the old Galata
Bridge and so to this hotel.
‘ All the best of the horses and donkeys have been taken
for the war ; only the aged and infirm do service in the
cabs, but they are not so ill-cared-for-looking as they were
in Syria, nor have I seen them anywhere ill-treated. The
soldiers’ horses look in splendid trim and so do all the
soldiers that one sees about. But they are either men in
garrison here, or Asiatics going to the front. The wounded
and sick are sent straight to Asia Minor from one or other of
the Marmora ports. The best-kept and most comfortable-
looking beasts that I see here are buffaloes—black, white, and
grey —which drag the country carts. They are little
animals, standing not much higher than my hips, but give
one the impression of unwieldy size. They have enormous
up-curved horns like the moon-goddess, and eyes most
curious to watch, like white onyxes. Generally a slab of
blue glass beads adorns their foreheads. The peasant
accompanying them carries a goad and sometimes uses it;
but there is no sign of its application on their hides, than
which you can imagine nothing sleeker. They have enor-
mous dewlaps reaching almost to the ground, and, if I
remember rightly, a slight hump. On the ruined walls,


yesterday, I noticed plenty of small grape-hyacinths, and
a large pink flower rather like a crocus but not so long and
rounder, also lots of that pink dead-nettle which came first
upon the terraces at Araya, you remember.’
17 March .
‘. . . Yesterday (Sunday) Rifaat Bey came and fetched
me, took me to lunch at Tokatlians in the Grande Rue (a
hasty meal), furnished me with a paper written out in
Turkish, which I was to show whenever I got hung up for
want of words, and packed me off to Erenkeuy. I' got into
a cab, went down to the bridges, took a steamer thence to
Haidar Pasha on the Asiatic shore, where there is a splendid
brand-new terminus of the Anatolian Railway, got into a
train that was waiting and was carried through smiling
suburbs, where the fruit trees were in bloom, to Erenkeuy.
There I had to show my paper to the stationmaster, who
pointed out the house I wished to find. The paper (since
translated for me) ran as follows : • “ English Ali Pasha of
kiosque (country house) opposite to the late lamented Hasan
Pasha’s son, Hilmi Bey.”
‘ Which Hilmi is the father-in-law of the .man I wished to
find, who was Shefik’s cousin, Soubhy Bey. I found him at
last and Shefik’s brother, Basri, and some other great ones,
who all seemed very pleased to see me. I was introduced
to two quite charming little girls of eight and six (Shefik’s
nieces) who came in, evidently by their mother’s wish as I
heard whispering outside the door, tripped up to me, made
a graceful little curtsey and then offered their lips to be
kissed. They and their father had the big gentle blue eyes
of Shefik and Rashid Pasha. One of them was the very
image of the latter in features and expression. After coffee
and much conversation Soubhy took me out, as Rifaat had
arranged, to see the house where he thought I could find
comfortable rooms and cheap —belonging to a German lady
of canonical age ! The house was a charming kiosque in a
lovely garden, and the lady herself was irreproachable ;
but alas ! she told me (what Rifaat had not understood
apparently) that she was more or less under contract to a


German family, who were to let her know their decision
about Easter Day. It was a considerable disappointment
to me, as, fiom what Rifaat said, I had regarded the affair
as settled ; and I do so long to get away from this hotel and
Pera generally. Those Asiatic Turkish suburbs are per-
fectly delightful—what one imagines Japanese suburbs
might be like ; and, besides, in the German lady’s house I
could have received you so comfortably later on. However,
there is still some hope, though slight I fear. Soubhy Bey, as
well as Rifaat, is now on the lookout for me. Panjaris has
not yet arrived. They whisper that he is a timid man and
waits for peace. Though anything more peaceful and
indeed more gentle and child-like than the people of
Constantinople, at this moment, one could not imagine.
‘ I have written this between my Turkish lesson and the
dinner-hour. I work away at Turkish all day long.’
21 March.
‘. . . There is not much news since last I wrote. All
Shefik Bey’s introductions have turned up trumps, as also
Aubrey Herbert’s especially to Rifaat Bey who is a host in
himself. He has promised to arrange things for me at
Erenkeuy, if not in the German lady’s house, then in a little
house he has beside his own. At any rate lam to have my
luggage ready to be fetched from here by noon the day
after to-morrow —Easter Day.
* To-day, being Good Friday, I went to the Crimean
Memorial Church and have kept to the “ maigre ” menu
(there were two provided both at lunch and dinner).
‘ Ali Haidar Bey (whom I think I mentioned in a former
letter) is the son of Midhat Pasha, the man who first began
reforms in Turkey, and as a result was exiled and then
murdered, his head being sent to Abdul Hamid by post in
a box labelled : “ Objet d’art Precieux.” Though cer-
tainly eccentric, as Rifaat warned me, he turned out most
amusing and extremely kind. He, this evening, presented
me with a copy of the Biography of his father written by
himself in English, quite a remarkable book as regards its
contents. He is taking me to see the Minister of the Interior


on Monday, about massacres, as the result of a letter for-
warded by Philip Kenway from a man called Wallis, a
Quaker, who is a strong pro-Bulgar. I—or rather we, for
I hope for Government support —will answer it.
‘ I saw a sight last evening in the Grande Rue de Pera
which nearly made me sick. About five hundred sick and
wounded soldiers walking to and fro, holding each other’s
hands like tired children —such simple, pathetic-looking
souls, and all the whores and dressed-up pimps of Pera—
Greeks, Armenians, and all kinds of Levantines looking on
and laughing. I expressed my indignation afterwards to
Ali Haidar, who said that he had complained about the
spectacle a hundred times, asking that the soldiers should be
sent to hospital and to the Pera Barracks by some other
route ; and he would do so again. The army at Chatalja
is, we hear, advancing steadily, entrenching each fresh post
it occupies. At Bula-ir, things are at a standstill, owing to
the plain which divides the two armies being under water.
‘ This hotel is quite a hotbed of conspirators. In the
inner salon there are always groups of fezzes close together,
their owners talking earnestly in low tones. Ali Haidar
tells me who they are and what their probable desires, and
laughs at all their doings rather bitterly. He thinks, as I do,
that the only hope for Turkey is a truce to all these political
lucubrations, and a union of all parties, for the time being,
for national defence.
‘ The assassination of the King of Greece caused a stir
here. The Greeks all cried : “a Bulgar ” immediately
they heard the news. Then we heard that the assassin was
a Greek ; but, after all, he proved to be a Bulgar, one of
the famous band which ravaged all the Muslim villages of
the Salonica district. The Turks grinned rather.
c The Times review of Veiled Women was quite unexpectedly
good, the book being put down as a serious “ study ” rather
than a novel, which ought to attract the serious-minded. I
had already seen the notice as Graves, the Times corre-
spondent, had brought it round to show me.
* I have made good progress with my Turkish, but am
very shy of speaking still. At Erenkeuy (if I get there) I


expect that that will come quite naturally. We are having
lovely weather, rare, in March, they tell me ; but there is
not much .pleasure in walking in these beastly Pera streets
—not that they are anything like those of Beyrouth, but
the people are as bad, or even worse. The low-class Euro-
pean settlers and the Levantines are the bane of Turkey.
‘ There is one very curious aspect of the situation resulting
from this war. The loss of so much European territory
sending Turks to Parliament will give the Arab races a
permanent majority—an impossible state of affairs. The
Government already talks of giving “ Jeziret al Arab,”
i.e. Arabia proper, a separate government after the manner
of our Indian empire. In that way only can they keep the
Turks in a majority.
‘ You are not to be the least bit anxious. Everything is
absolutely peaceful here, and the police are splendid.’
Easter Day.
‘. . . It is now quite settled (at least I hope so, but one
must always say In sh’Allah in these parts, that I go to
Erenkeuy to-morrow, to the house of the German lady—
Fraulein Eckerlein—of whom I wrote before. Rifaat Bey
has managed it for me. It seems that the lady, though no
longer young, felt some concern as to what her neighbours
might say of her having a lone gentleman for lodger. But
Rifaat sounded the neighbours, assuring them that I was
the pearl of honour and of high morality. They all seemed
pleased to think that such an one should come among them.
He promised Miss Eckerlein to assassinate anyone who
gossiped. So I go. I shall tell the lady at once, on my
arrival, that you, in sh’Allah, will be coming later on.
That, I am sure, will lay her fears to rest. Rifaat, when
I spoke to-day for the first time of your coming, assured me
that the Turkish ladies, not of Erenkeuy only, but of
the whole country, would be delighted to make your
acquaintance.
‘ I went to the Crimean Memorial Church (where my
old friend Dowling was once incumbent) this early morning,
then came home, had breakfast in my room as usual, and


walked about till twelve o’clock, when I met Rifaat by
appointment. He took me to lunch at Tokatlians and
afterwards for a drive to see the new monument, or rather
memorial, of Liberty, under which are buried the officers
and men who lost their lives defending the Pera Barracks
during Abdul Hamid’s counter-revolution, which, you will
remember, happened while we were in Syria. It is not a
lovely edifice, but the site is fine, dominating many miles of
hilly country. ... If Turkey accepts the terms offered by
the Allies, people say that there is pretty sure to be another
little revolution, involving the downfall of the present
Cabinet, but what would follow no one seems to know.
Everyone scouts the notion of anything like a serious dis-
turbance. It would be merely an affair between the two
parties in the city, both numerically few, which are not yet
sick of scheming and of politics, and at any rate I shall be
at Eren-keuy—a peaceful spot.’
25 March.
‘. . . At last I have escaped from the Pera Palace Hotel
and am in a quiet country place—or rather suburb —where
the nights are silent except for the chanting of the frogs.
Yesterday morning Ali Haidar Bey took me to see the
Minister of the Interior, who was very nice and who
promised to have a precis made for me of all official
information relative to the atrocities ; then Ali Haidar
took me to his office in Stamboul. I do not quite know
why he had an office, but he has a very sumptuous one
and many male attendants standing around and bowing—
gave me coffee and then helped me in the purchase of a
fez. Then back to the hotel, had my luggage put on a
cab, drove to the bridge and caught the steamer for Haidar
Pasha. The day was glorious and the journey was much
less of an adventure than my previous one, as I know the
way already, and in the interval had learnt the Turkish
words to do with trains and luggage.
‘ Fraulein Eckerlein is very kind indeed and quite
embarrasses me with her anxiety that I should have every-
thing I want. I have heard more Turkish in the thirty-odd


hours I have been here than I did in sixteen days at the Pera
Palace. To-day I have not been outside the garden, which
is large and shady, but to-morrow I intend to take a walk.
The sea, I hear, is only two or three minutes distant, whereas
I had imagined it to be two miles away at least. It is, of
course, the Sea of Marmora, just where it narrows in
towards the Bosphorus. Miss Eckerlein is charmed to know
of your existence and no less pleased to think that you will
come and join me. I shall go into town on Thursday and
get letters, and after that intend to go in regularly thrice a
week. The manners of the people here, both rich and poor,
are something exquisite—a change from the awful Greeks
and Levantines.’
26 March.
*. . . To-day I walked down to the sea, which was dead
calm, with the Prince’s Islands (Prinkipo, etc.) looking like
monsters cooling themselves in a lake. It has been extremely
hot these last few days. On the way back I heard con-
tinuous firing, which lasted all the evening. I thought it
was practice merely, but have since heard that it was the
guns of the Turkish cruisers helping to defend the Chatalja
line, which is again being sharply attacked. May God
give the Turks the victory !
‘I must say that, from the specimens I have seen out
here, the Union and Progress people seem to me more
patriotic than the Liberals, the Kiamil Pasha party, with
the exception of Soubhy Bey and all his people. All the
other Liberals seem to be grousers and seem to think that,
because their party has fallen for the time being, Turkey
may as well fall, too. But it may be that I have been seeing
the worst of them. If only the Young Turks could win one
victory, I believe the country would be saved—a lot of the
divisions one deplores are owing to demoralization conse-
quent upon attacks upon all sides. I am afraid now that
the war has again reached the acute stage, alarmist news
may be circulated in England. But there is no fear of dis-
turbance on the Turkish side, and here, in Asia, none
whatever from the Bulgars.
o


‘ On Friday I am sure to have a lot of visitors, that day
being the Muslim “ Sunday,” when officials come out to
their country houses. Avery charming hojah, or religious
sheykh, who speaks only Turkish and Arabic, has been
appointed to instruct me in the former tongue. He is a
member of the Chamber of Deputies and is a shrewd
observer of his fellow-countrymen.
‘ The Turkish ladies wear no face-veils in the country.
It is strange to see them gliding about with black slaves in
attendance. They so very modern-looking, and the slaves
so ancient.’
29 March.
c . . . The noise of firing which I mentioned in my last
letter proceeded from the attack on the Chatalja lines,
which the Bulgarians undertook to mask the fact that they
had detached a number of their troops to help in the last
great assault on Adrianople. On Thursday, when I went
to town, I heard from two Turkish friends, under bond of
secrecy, that Adrianople had fallen. When I got back
here in the evening I found my hostess greatly agitated.
Shukri Pasha’s wife and daughters had just left her. They
had somehow heard that Shukri Pasha, after setting fire to
Adrianople, had committed suicide. When I told my news,
which contained no such tragedy, she sent a maid after the
ladies, who came back, and I had to tell them (in French, of
course ; my Turkish does not run to long speeches yet) that,
according to what I had heard from two members of the
Committee, Shukri Pasha and the remnant of the garrison
had surrendered. The ladies wept all the time and did not
seem to hear what I was saying, but Miss Eckerlein tells me
that they were rather comforted and no longer talked pf
themselves committing suicide as they had before. Yester-
day the Turkish papers described in full the burning of
Adrianople and Shukri Pasha’s suicide ; but, to-day they
say, as I was told at first, that Shukri Pasha and the survivors
surrendered to the Bulgars. Miss Eckerlein, who gives
lessons to the Turkish ladies, tells me that many of her
friends are in the most dreadful anxiety for sons, husbands


or brothers who were of,the garrison. Eren-keuy is the
aristocratic suburb of Constantinople, and all the neighbours
here are- people of importance in the country. Every day
I am presented to fresh notables, and have the greatest
difficulty in remembering their names and distinguishing
one from another at a second meeting. Miss Eckerlein has
lived here all her life and has no words to express the
kindness she has always met with from the Turks.
£ When you come, one thing I can promise you, you will
see more of Turkish ladies and their home life in a month,
here, than you would were you to live in Pera twenty years.
They all talk French or English. I shall probably postpone
my trip to Broussa till you come. A longer trip in the
interior with Hulusi Bey—ex-Minister of Public Works—
can also take place then. 5
30 March.
. . The Imam at the mosque of the next village (Gyuz-
tepe) is going to give me lessons by Rifaat’s arrangement
and comes for the first time to-morrow morning. He seems
a pleasant man and speaks Arabic correctly, though he
pronounces it, as they all do, abominably, ala Turque.
After a fortnight of quite grilling weather, we are having a
cold spell. I talked a certain amount of Turkish on my
road to-day to perfect strangers and to servants at the
house, and am glad to say that I was perfectly intelligible.
‘ There is something extraordinarily sweet and gentle
about the menservants and labourers here—all the poor
people—the very opposite of the sanguinary character which
English people commonly ascribe to Turks. I am quite
sure that you will fall in love with the whole race. It is,
however, eminently unpractical and has got its affairs in a
mess which seems inextricable. The deeds of heroism which
are here thought nothing of would startle into wild enthusi-
asm any other country. But, as aforesaid, they are utterly
unbusinesslike and cannot speak the language understood
in Europe. . . .*


On the 31st he wrote the following to his friend the
Mustashar :
‘ Address
‘ c/o Thomas Cook,
‘ Constantinople.
‘ Eren-keuy,
c March 31st 1913.
£ My dear Machell,
‘At last I have escaped from Pera, Levantines,
cafe concerts, and all manner of abominations, into really
Turkish surroundings. Rifaat Bey—one of the people to
whom Aubrey Herbert introduced me —found a German
lady “ turned Turk,” and of mature years, willing to let
two rooms in her house and feed me. It is rather luck, as
I am thus in Turkish life much more than would have been
the case had I taken a small house of my own. Turkish
people—men and women —come to see my hostess every
day, and all insist on seeing me. Eren-keuy is the fashion-
able Muslim suburb, and I am the only European living
here —at all events in a house accessible to Turkish ladies,
many of whom have asked me to call on them, with the full
connivance of their lords.
* It is all absurdly different from the Cockney’s griggish
dream of harim life. Indeed the harim side is very tragic at
this moment. Everyone has lost some near relation, and
the anxiety continues. Hasan Riza Pasha’s (the defender of
Scutari) wife and children live next door and are always in
the garden of this house, and (Adrianople) Shukri’s family
are not far off. The sort of life is new to me, and very
interesting.
‘ Soubhy Bey, Rashid Pasha’s nephew, to whom I brought
an introduction, and Rifaat aforesaid, have kiosques in the
place and take me out to see the sights on Fridays.
c Affairs seem in a pretty hopeless mess—party spirit
rampant and unpleasantly vindictive ; Ministers, with one
exception —Mahmud Shevket —either pompous small auto-
mata, or playing their own game : and that with the enemy


so near that we can hear the cannonade like thunder, when
the wind is that way, even here upon the Asiatic coast of
Marmora. The reports of danger run by Europeans are
all rubbish. .The indifference of the Europeans and the
Levantines to the whole tragedy would justify a massacre ;
but the present weakness of the Turks is, they have no
fanaticism, but are trying hard to be like Europeans. One
evening, in the Grande Rue de Pera, I saw 500 wounded
soldiers, walking two and two —poor devils ! —dragging
their feet along and holding hands, one or two of them
trying to keep up a song to cheer the rest. The street was
crowded in the usual way with Greeks and Armenians got
up in their latest modes, and the beasts actually laughed and
stood in rows to jeer the soldiers !
‘ I told Ali Haidar Midhat (whom you may have met in
Egypt, he was there in exile) what a shame I thought it.
He told me he had implored the authorities a hundred times
to send the wounded round some other way.
‘ Another man of whom you must know something is
Prince Said Halim (Fazil), Minister for Foreign Affairs. I
brought him a letter of introduction from Osman Nizami
Pasha. He received me affably. I mentioned Osman
Pasha. He said : “ C’est un charmant homme.” I men-
tioned one or two other people. “ C’est un charmant
homme ”in every case. Had I mentioned King Ferdinand
I am sure he would have said the same —“ Tres honore,
Altesse ” —“ Enchante, monsieur.” The interview was at
an end. I have heard no more from him except that Rifaat,
who ran up against him somewhere and spoke of me, was
told : “ Ah, c’est un charmant homme.” ’
10 April.
‘. . . I went this afternoon in a funny little covered
cart with gay side-curtains —the usual hired carriage on the
coasts of Asia Minor —to see the wounded soldiers in a
temporary hospital at Scutari. It was a lovely day and the
drive —a very inexpensive but jolty one —was interesting,
through Kadikeuy and Haidar Pasha, and the big gay,
shady, Turkish cemeteries. The temporary hospital was


very slipshod, and the wounded looked anything but well-
cared-for. There is an undoubted advantage in having
women in the house of sickness. I did not even see a doctor,
much less a nurse. There were only soldiers looking after
soldiers. The rooms were large and well-lighted and aired,
with lovely views over the Bosphorus,- but the beds were
filthy and the floor likewise. The rooms—l cannot call
them wards—positively stank and the men seemed, most of
them, quite listless and without hope of getting well. My
cigarettes were quite welcome, I imagine, for they all said
“ thank you ” and a few even smiled. I was glad to get
out again and escape from the profuse thanks of the officials
—non-commissioned officers, one of whom spoke Arabic —
and jog back in the country cart through clean fresh air.
On the way home I met many hundreds of new recruits,
trooping up to the camp on the hill above Scutari, singing
patriotic songs and waving ragged flags—or rather rags on
sticks to look like flags ! Poor beggars ! *
12 April.
‘. . . Here we all have colds ! The weather is so change-
able. A day of rain and the temperature is shivery ; next
day the sun shines and one bakes !
‘ The women here have tragic times just now. Madame
Riza Pasha is still in doubt about her husband’s fate, the
reports of his assassination being still unconfirmed. Her sister
came and spoke to me in the garden the other day. You
can imagine my surprise when a tall and very lovely woman
with her veil thrown back came straight towards me, with
a serving-woman ten paces behind. To flee was obviously
the right thing to do and I began to do it, but was called
back in the softest French. She apologized very much for
the liberty that she was taking, but Mademoiselle Eckerlein
had told her that I was an honourable person and a friend
of the Turks and she had come to ask me what I really
thought of the rumours with regard to Hasan Riza Pasha’s
death. Poor thing ! she had tears in her eyes, and was
nervously clasping and unclasping her hands all the time.
Hasan Riza Pasha seems very much beloved by all who


knew him. I could only tell her that I myself very heartily
distrusted all news coming from Vienna—and as the Austrian
Embassy denied all knowledge of it I thought, upon the
face of things,- that she and Madame Riza Pasha might
account it false. I was thanked for that as if I had in truth
made the man alive ! He may be. No one seems to know.
‘ An Albanian.girl, one of our neighbours, heard to-day
that her fiance, an Albanian, had been hanged by Javid
Pasha at Vallona for helping the Albanian volunteers to
retire from Yamina. The poor little creature had never
seen him, but for two years past all her hopes and projects
had been connected with him, and she is much cut up. Poor
tragic women ! ’
21 April .
‘. . . Rifaat Bey has started off for Nice quite.suddenly.
Last week his doctor ordered him three months’ rest from
his work at the Municipality and change of scene. I helped
him to get his tickets and the necessary change of headdress
and he left on Saturday by the Roumanian boat. Before
going, he took me to see a certain Kheyri Bey, who lives
near-by and there introduced me to the chief wire-puller
of the Party of Union and Progress (so-called), notably
Khalil Bey, a very fat and pompous but benignant person.
I complained that I had been waiting for four weeks for an
answer promised me by the Minister of the Interior to my
inquiry concerning authenticity of the Balkan horrors.
Khalil Bey at once appointed a khoja to bring me the very
next day to the Council of State, which was meeting in the
morning. Accordingly at i o o’clock on Monday a gentleman
in dark flowing robes and a white turban came to this house
and led me gently to the railway-station (of course, I wore
a fez, and not a hat), sat with me in the train and on the
steamer, and led me through the streets of Istanbul to the
door of quite an ordinary-looking house. The door was
instantly opened,, though with some appearance of secrecy ;
and we were shown upstairs to an ante-room of the hall, a
little room in which the Council of State was in hiding and
a bit afraid. Khalil Bey came out at once to me. He seemed


annoyed with the Minister of the Interior, whose answer, as
it seemed, had been that he was very busy and he had no
further information to give beyond that contained in the
report of the Committee of Inquiry. He might have said
that at first instead of promising me interesting details, I
said. Khalil Bey agreed. He seemed really put out, and
offered to do anything in his power to help me. I asked
him the exact number of mohajirin (refugees) from Thrace
and Macedonia who have come to Turkey. He went at once
and telephoned to the Sublime Porte. Within five minutes
he was back beside me with the answer : 160,000, more, not
less. Such promptitude is very creditable to so fat a man,
and so immensely, metaphorically speaking, great a
personage. I have not met the like in Turkey hitherto.
He also told me that among the refugees are hundreds of
girls who have been violated by the Bulgars and hundreds
of men who have been mutilated. I asked about the number
killed ; in a very little while he brought me Jevad Bey, the
secretary of the Committee of Inquiry. All the information,
as it reached the Government, was passed along to the
Committee, it appears. Jevad is a very pleasant man to
look at and a very honest person I should judge from face
and conversation. He said that it was quite impossible to
verify (in a strict sense) all the information he has handled.
The Committee had done its best collecting and comparing
the accounts of different witnesses at different times and
unacquainted with each other. As to the number of non-
combatants actually killed he said it was impossible to do
more than guess the total, but of ten thousand they were
absolutely certain and that was under- not over-estimating
the number. He then had to leave me to appear on some
committee. Khalil Bey escorted me to the street, still
vexed with the Minister of the Interior, whom he called
an ass.
‘ I parted from my khoja at the Valide Sultan Mosque,
walked alone across the bridge, and took the boat back home.
‘ It is amusing to find how chance remarks of mine—
criticisms of the state of things here —made to chance
acquaintances or to friends, get into the newspapers. There


was one in the Jeune Turc to-day about the Turkish ignorance
of Arabic,. and how much better it would be were they to
study that and other characteristics of their own Empire
instead of looking to and aping Europe always.
‘ I am at present “ suspect ” of my people here (in
Eren-keuy) because of my supposed “ conversion ” to the
Committee of Union and Progress. A meeting of about
twenty leading Unionists in the garden last Friday surround-
ing me has caused the news to fly abroad. Asa matter of fact
I think the Committee hopeless, but some of the members
worthy of a better cause.
‘ To-morrow I go by invitation to lunch at the Pera
Palace Hotel with Ali Haidar Midhat. He is the best of all
the Unionists, socially speaking, and a most amusing card.
Some of his relations here hate him poisonously, and if they
knew I was a friend of his would cut me dead. It is a funny
world. . . !
; I don’t suppose after your first arrival you’ll want to
wear a hat here in Eren-keuy. I shall have one of those
mantilla kind of things made for you —in white —like the
Turkish ladies wear. It will be much more comfortable and
infinitely more becoming than the smartest hat.’
26 April.
‘ . . . An officer from the front on two days’ leave—
Mohammed Ali Pasha—called on me the day before yester-
day with his wife and three big sons (the sons I had already
met). They had walked from Kadi-keuy close to Haidar
Pasha. He told me that the Bulgarian army is completely
done for (which I had heard before), that it was the Bul-
garians who had asked for the present Armistice, and as
soon as it was granted came and begged for bread. He
described the way they fell upon the bread —like wild
beasts —and seemed to pity their condition. He said that
most of the prisoners the Turks have taken at Chatalja in
the last four weeks have been boys between 15 and 18, which
means that the Bulgarians have finished up their men.
There has been no serious attack upon the lines since the
resumption of hostilities; nor was an attack intended. The


Bulgarians, who won the day at Lula Burgas, got a most
unholy licking at Chatalja last November, and were not
likely to ask for it again. At Kirk Kilissa a most curious
panic seized the Turkish troops one night. They had been
winning up till then. They all ran away ; and the Bul-
garians marched into an empty fortress, to their very great
surprise.’
27 April.
‘. . . All the jaunts and sight-seeings I am putting off
until you arrive ! It has turned very cold again—at night
one really shivers though the sun is hot by day. I wonder
when summer will arrive in earnest. Just across the road
from this house is a tall kiosque in a large garden. Its
windows are all closely latticed, and except for seeing
servants going in and out, and hearing the gate-bell ring,
I should have thought it uninhabited. It belongs to an
old soldier—lshak Pasha. Well, yesterday morning about
ten o’clock a servant came across to ask, with the Pasha’s
friendly compliments, why I had not yet been to see him,
as we were close neighbours, and would I come at once
without ceremony. So I followed the servant through the
jealous gate, up a long avenue to the selamlik, which in
country houses (kiosques) is a kind of summer-house apart
from the main building. The dearest, most benevolent old
Turk came out to meet me, clad in a kaftan and a purple
fur-lined coat and yellow slippers—the first person “ above
the rank of a stockbroker ” whom I had seen thus clad since
I arrived in Turkey. He kept me talking for two hours —my
Turkish is getting fluent—showed me all his garden, which
is really lovely in a formal fashion, and told me much about
the Russian War of 1878. He showed me to all his servants
and told them : “ Take note of this Bey Effendi. He is a
son of mine, and as my son he can come in and out as he
pleases and you will do him service.” He told me also that
his ladies were delighted to hear you were coming and hoped
that you would come and see them often.
‘ That is all my news for the present —except that there
was a glorious row in the Greek Church at Pera on Good


Friday ; four different factions fighting which was to carry
the big Cross, and the Bishop hitting out right and left
upon their craniums with his crozier; many people
wounded, women in fits. The Turkish mounted police had
to come in force to stop further bloodshed. Goodness
knows how it all came about, I don’t.’
27 April.
‘. . . To-day in all the Turkish papers there is a telegram
from Albania via Vienna, stating that “ without the slightest
doubt,” Hasan Riza Pasha, commandant of Scutari, was
assassinated as he was on his way to Essad Pasha’s house,
by three persons unknown, as long ago as the 28th January.
So I suppose that little Safat and her brother have lost their
father, and Turkey, with her usual luck of late, has lost her
best man. Mais, enfin, nous verrons. So long as the
telegrams are dated from Vienna there is always hope.’
Muriel arrived mid-May and c the flutter consequent on
that event, the visits, counter-visits and unbounded kindness
of the Turks, whether Unionists or Liberals, thrust politics
into the background, when all at once came the tidings that
the Grand Vizier had been assassinated. Mahmud Shevket
Pasha had been going from the Ministry of War to the
Sublime Porte, as his custom was at eleven o’clock each
morning, when, in the open space before the Mosque of
Sultan Bayazid his car was forced to draw up to let something
pass. At once, as at a signal, certain men who had alighted
from another motor car sprang on to the steps and fired
on him at close quarters. An aide-de-camp who flung
himself across his chief was killed at once ; the Grand
Vizier expired some twenty minutes later in the lobby of the
Ministry of War. The assassins had made good their
escape.’ Marmaduke’s kindly hostess and he were both
miserable : ‘ the devilish wantonness of killing Mahmud
Shevket, the one man of his party who must, one would have
thought, by all men, be regarded as superior to party hate,
the most hard-working of men and sincere of patriots.’
Thanks to the courage of the members of Mahmud Shevket’s


government, who held firm, there was no sign of fear or
weakness.
Marmaduke described the day of the funeral :
‘ Next morning, with the first sunlight, I was out walking
in the maze of avenues which stretched between the village
and the sea. The trunks of plane and mulberry trees red-
stained in splashes by the sun’s first rays, the mystery of
their enormous shadows joined to the heavy rolling foliage,
made of the suburban thoroughfares a sacred grove, the
haunt of nymph and faun ; while, beyond the twisted
columns and the shade, the sea was visibly the sea which
Jason sailed, the sea whose foam gave birth to Aphrodite.
Strange as it may seem, such classical illusions flourish in
the atmosphere of Turkey rather than in that of modern
Greece. A veiled and shrouded woman flitting under the
trees from one garden gate to another brought this home to
me. She belonged to the unconscious, ancient world. The
Turks preserve the old Greek’s love of beauty for its own
sake ; his delight in seaside vistas, colonnades, white
temples, solemn cypress groves; his clear poetic gaze at
love and death ; whereas the modern Greek’s romance is
simply money.
‘ I walked a mile or two along the Baghdad road to open
country, between the purple mountains and the shore. The
world was well astir, for Turks are early risers. Peasants
with bullock waggons, laden mules or donkeys passed me,
going into one or other of the landing-stages on the Bos-
phorus. Anew white mosque among some trees inland
attracting me, I made for it across the fields. A poetical
inscription stated that it had been erected by a Pasha of
the neighbourhood in memory of his beloved wife whose
name it bore. It was a lovely temple in a lovely spot, biit
for the Anatolian railway running close at hand ; and even
that was more incongruous than ugly. A single line of
metals ran along the middle of a broad rough road, busy
with the morning traffic of the district, which road mean-
dered among wooded gardens occupied by quaint
kiosks. Men in bright coloured clothing, black and white


veiled women, horses, sheep, and oxen moved upon
it. . . . .
‘ All the Turkish papers at the station had been sold
before the gardener, who went each day to buy one for us,
got there. Therefore I heard no further details till I went
to town. . . .
‘ Walking about the streets, I found them just as usual,
except that the patrols were doubled, and that here and
there at points of vantage troops were picketed. The
business of the town proceeded just as usual. It struck me,
I remember, as remarkable, that neither in my going or
my coming, did I meet a single Liberal of my acquaintance.
When I remarked to a man, who came and talked to me,
upon the absence of some notable from his accustomed place,
he laughed and said :
‘ “ They are all in it, from Kiamil Pasha, that high
pattern of respectability beloved of England, to miserable
hangers-on like Topal Tevfik. Well, they have brought it
on themselves ; they had their warning. You remember
what a fuss was made when Kiamil Pasha was forbidden to
remain here. Many people thought it hard on the old man ;
but Jemal Bey had certain information, and he warned
them then.”
‘ He added gravely that the danger was by no means over,
which seemed to be the general opinion. A group of
military cadets with whom I travelled on the homeward
boat, were in a state of wild excitement and anxiety. They
had all been to the funeral of Mahmud Shevket. Most of
them had known the blessed martyr (as they called him)
personally in his capacity as Minister of War ; and their
cry was all for vengeance on his murderers.
‘ “ They have slain the best hope of our country,” cried
one youth, an Arab. “ If they kill Talaat, Jemal, and a
dozen more, as they propose, there will be no one left to
guide and save the nation.”
‘ These young men, drawn from every quarter of the
Turkish Empire, who, after eight or ten years’ study in the
capital, are once again dispersed throughout the different
provinces, are a valuable asset of Young Turkey. Their


rage on this occasion did me good. In Turkey one grows
sometimes weary of resigned philosophy. 5
Yet for all Turkey’s sorrows, and the continuing sore of
his futile compassion, Marmaduke enjoyed in Misket
Hanum’s garden (Miss Kate ala Turque) moments as
exquisite as water splashing from a cool fountain on to
crackling stones on a broiling afternoon.
It delighted him, for example, that on most days, in the
‘ Season of the fires s—June 5 —June and July—the quaint fire
engines rushed into the streets in answer to the cry, “ Yargh
in Var 55 —“ There is a fire.”
Generally, these horse fire-engines, their drivers and
attendants wearing a strange barbaric form of helmet such
as Chinamen once wore, were escorted on their mad career
by crowds of running firemen dressed in coloured vests and
shorts like gymnasts. These all had wild eyes and a stern
look about the mouth, for, maddened by a sense of duty,
they did nothing with tremendous fury. He sentimentalizes
over the pet lambs, which, at this time, appeared in every
family, ‘ the cause of this phenomenon being the Muslim
calendar. We had arrived at just that interval from a great
feast required for the right fattening of lambs. 5 On the
Bosphorus he notes the windchasers or ‘ souls of the damned,
little sea-birds, ever flying up towards Beyros, skimming the
sapphire water in an endless train. Legend would make
these birds the erring souls of all the fair ones who have been
thrown into those waters for their naughtiness. 5
The views he found surpassed all others he had ever seen.
He could find no word to match the blue water around
which lay the city and suburbs ; turquoise, periwinkle,
amethyst, chicory, cornflower, he tried and rejected them
all. Nor stone nor flower ever possessed such colour : the
Sea of Marmora held its secret well. But above all things
he loved the cemetery at Scutari. He visited it at all hours,
for in Turkey cemeteries are well frequented ; here on feast-
days come folk to fete their dead : here, in the early dawn,
‘ when a sudden deepening of the shadows told me the sun
had risen, 5 loose-robed figures flit silently amongst the tall


headstones, each with its carved turban, amongst the roses,
the cypresses, and the white-domed mausoleums, where
sleep small local saints : here, in the evening, women
wait for sunset "that is a release from day’s boredom, a
promise of love’s joys to come.
He left Turkey on the eve of the Second Balkan War.
But his parting words were not political—they were almost
poetry. ‘As we sat out in the clear moonlight, the beauty
of the night possessed us more and more. Four nightingales
were singing in the garden underneath the balcony. The
frogs quacked hoarsely in the lily pond, cocks crowed, afar
off dogs howled. The light imprisoning the trees was like a
milky gem. In clear Osmanli, the bulbul piped, “ Rose,
Rose, Rose, Open ! Open ! Open ! ’ And the frogs, too,
discussed their business in good Turkish, “ Omar Agha ! ”
“ Neh var o? ” “ Burjum var.” “ Ver da kurtul.”
“ Omar Agha ” —Yes, what’s the matter ? I am in debt,
pay and get free ! ’


CHATTER SEVEN
MARMADUKE came home with one object in life :
to prevent by all the means in his power the partition
of Turkey. The partition of Poland had led to a series of
disasters which had visited the sins of the fathers upon
countless generations, and was still to lead by no means
indirectly to the catastrophe of 1914 itself. The partition
of Turkey, Marmaduke felt, would precipitate a chain of
evils culminating in no less inevitable an Armageddon. He
had become infected with the dangerous bacillus of chivalry
towards an oppressed nation or individual which is a peculiar
disease of the English and French peoples.
So Byron felt for Greecd, so David Urquhart for Turkey,
so Professor E. G. Browne (probably the greatest Orientalist
England has yet produced) for Persia, Mr. Noel-Buxton for
Bulgaria. To every one his pet Balkan, and against the
whole might of Europe, Marmaduke felt he, too, must yet
dare to sling his stones. But it is a symptom of injustice that
it begets fanaticism, not in its victims, but in their cham-
pions, and as every tyrant conjures up a hero, so every hero
becomes in his turn a tyrant. He still hesitated in declaring
himself a Muslim : he had always strongly objected to
converts from or to any religion, insisting that faith is
absorbed with mothers’ milk, and that, unlike the physical,
the spiritual diet is best left unchanged. God, he felt,
being the common objective of all mankind and the end of
every faith, can bring whom He will to Him by any one
of as many faiths as there are individual human souls. But
he was to find in England, on his return, that which drove
him to apostatize, and changed his mind for him.
Superficially, after the tension and agony of Turkey,
England seemed soporific, almost disgustingly calm. For
Marmaduke it was the return to a comfortable sty after
ranching among stampeding bullocks. Clean straw, plenty


of rotten apples fallen within snout’s reach from the old
tree, a kindly farmer to scratch the back with the ferrule of
his stick, and ample sun nicely cooled by fat white clouds.
Vapidity of vapidities, all is vacuum, Marmaduke thought
as he measured the depth of his well at Hadlow Down and
gloomed with his two-day-a-week gardener over the
drought. He felt out of place in the sun-cured, mellow
country-side, gauche and awkward as an undertaker at a
picnic, a funereal messenger in his blacks in that Sunday
afternoon atmosphere.
The world where men were mutilated and women raped,
where noses were trophies and ears spoils of war, seemed
aeons away. Between it and him stretched days of tree-lined
avenues, days of stubbled geese-pasturing plains, days of
battle-scarred, tree-furred hills. Here, if people worried, it
was about the vile Irish : the strikes : the ridiculous suffra-
gettes. The talk was all of the difficulty of keeping the
chaffinches from the morello cherries or persuading the
blackcurrant jelly to set in this heat. What’s won at
Goodwood ? How did Britannia do that squally third day
at Cowes ? More people than ever at the Flower Show this
year, don’t you think ? Mrs. ’Uggins ’as got a French bean
full nine inches long.
Turkey was now for him a clutch at the heartstrings, a
nightmare background to thought, no longer the whole
landscape of his mind. Yet he was on edge, restless, found
always something sinister in the news : serious rioting at
Gawnpore, or, nearer home, an overturned motor bus at
Hoddesdon, five killed, eleven injured. The cost of living
rose almost daily and even the country people were grumb-
ling. There was a spate of Peasants Art Industries, artifi-
cially concocted in Bloomsbury by serious women with
straight partings and billowing Liberty-silk skirts, and
the weeklies had constant articles on the Guild system.
Employers were annoyed by the servant-stamp agitation and
by insurance acts —“ Can’t be trusted to look after my own
men ! Why, they’ve always fared as good as we ; and all
this prying into how we conducts their lives ain’t fair,
t’aint decent somehow.”
p


The second Balkan War was an unedifying spectacle for
Christian Europe : that of Christian States falling out over
their division of the Paynim’s spoils. From 1905 to 1909
Russia had been too helplessly embroiled in the Far East
to attend to her pet lambs in the Balkans : in the first
Balkan War she and they had won all, and more than they
had ever hoped ; but now Bulgaria, who had been for so
long Russia’s little darling, turned Goneril and crept out of
her swaddling clothes inspired by her own vision of a greater
Bulgaria, and against her marched Greece, Rumania, and
over-weening Serbia.
The Greater Bulgaria movement destroyed one of Russia’s
best-laid Near-Eastern schemes, and she found herself
obliged to throw the whole weight of those schemes upon
Armenia, which from now onwards became their pivot and
head. Gradually, except for Armenia, all the Powers whom
Russia had called into existence became very jealous of
their existence as separate units, and showed that they
preferred, and greatly preferred, to live, even to exist, or to
vegetate, absolutely independently of their creatrix. Bul-
garia proved by winning that ingratitude paid, and Turkey
took the opportunity of a general upheaval to recover a
part of Thrace, including Adrianople.
Russia tried to bribe, and Grey to bully, Turkey out of
the hardly re-won city : but the first victory of regenerate
Turkey, paid for in blood, was not to be bartered to the
Christian usurers. Then Grey, who had declared, emphatic-
ally, at the. outbreak of the war that whatever might be
the result of the hostilities, no party would be allowed to
profit by its victory, hectored the Turkish delegates in his
eagerness to obtain for the allies their whole demand.
England was solidly pro-Bulgar, and the Bishop of London
encouraged Canon Masterman to hold a service of inter-
cession for the success of the Balkan allies against Turkey.
The English had it fixed in their minds that the Turks
massacred, the Turks were fanatics, the Turks were bar-
barians, the Turks were polygamists : ergo, down with the
Turks. Although the Turkish massacres of 1876 had been
proved to be immensely magnified, the memory of them


remained at the back of British minds : Mentez, mentez,
toujours : il en restera quandmeme quelquechose.
In the' little Sussex church where Marmaduke worshipped
the Bulgarian advance was compared with that of Christian
souls assailing Paradise, the Turks with Satan. Remember-
ing turbans set low to cover scars where ears had been,
remembering the full horror of the Carnegie Commission’s
report on Muslim areas devastated and their populations
destroyed entirely by Christian men, Marmaduke felt
unable to rise when Wesley’s hymn was sung. As the famous
words rang out :
‘ The smoke of the infernal cave
Which half the Christian world o’erspread, .
Disperse, thou heavenly light and save
The souls by that impostor led :
That Arab thief, as Satan bold
Who quite destroyed thine Asian fold.
O, may thy blood once sprinkled cry
For those who spurn Thy sprinkled blood :
Assert thy glorious Deity
Stretch out thine arm thou triune God
The Unitarian fiend expell
And chase his doctrines back to Hell ’
he slipped quietly from the church and from Christianity.
The news got daily worse : Grey refused Chios and
Mitylene to Turkey, though France declared the award of
these islands to Greece to be against the Cyprus Convention,
thus confirming the Turkish suspicion that England was
acting as mouthpiece of Russia. { Germany for the Alliance,
Russia for the Entente ; to deal with any other Power is to
waste time.’ So a statesman of the old regime warned the
Young Turks, and on this man’s advice the latter approached
Russia, who at once asked : c How much will you give us ? ’
For answer the Turks offered to settle several of the most
obvious of the c massayili m’allagh ’ —‘ questions suspendues ’
—in Russia’s favour, and, in return, graciously, and without
further reference to England, Russia allowed the question
of the islands to be reopened. Thus we did toady to Russia.
c< I am ashamed for England,” Talaat Pasha said, and
Marmaduke agreed with him.


The next few months were very bitter for him. He knew
the discomfort of a mother whose beloved child misbehaves
in public, of a son whose mother let him down. His
England, of whom he had boasted, whom he had believed
to be without shadow of fanaticism, without partie prie ,
without petty time-serving, was behaving in a manner that
was not only cruel, but stupid. The former he could find it
in his heart to forgive : the latter never. For there was one
certainty on which even Karl Marx and Benjamin Disraeli
were agreed, that : 4 The maintenance of Turkish indepen-
dence, or, in the case of a possible dissolution of the Ottoman
Empire, the arrest of the Russian scheme of annexation, is a
matter of the greatest moment.’ This sentence of Marx
contains the whole substance of Disraeli’s policy as outlined
in his great speech at the Guildhall when Minister of
Foreign Affairs.
Marmaduke and a few friends together founded, in the
early autumn of 1913, the Anglo-Ottoman Society 4 to
advocate a political and commercial understanding between
Great Britain and Turkey and firmly to oppose encroach-
ment on the Ottoman Empire.’ Marmaduke optimistically
declared that the friends of Turkey in England numbered
4 many thousands and were mostly to be found in the
educated classes,’ and certainly several successful public
meetings were held, manifestoes were issued, the Press
circularized,, and general notice was attracted to the society
owing to the presidency of Lord Lamington and the support
of Lord Mowbray and Stourton, the Hon. Walter Guinness,
M.P. (now Lord Moyne), the Hon. Aubrey Herbert,
Professor E. G. Browne, Mr. R. B. Cunninghame Graham,
Keir Hardie, and C. F. Ryder. The secretary, Arthur
Field, whom Marmaduke once described to me as 4 calling
himself an atheist, but, in reality, a faithful servant of*
Allah,’ was tirelessly devoted and remained, until Marma-
duke’s death, one of his greatest friends. 1
The first meeting of the Anglo-Ottoman, on 13 August,
4 emphasized the strategical importance of the integrity of
the Turkish Empire to the British Empire and of the friend-
1 I am very much indebted to his personal recollections of those days.


ship between the two countries, 5 and pledged itself to
promote a cordial understanding between Britons and
Turks.. 'But it was too late and Turkey was too large. It is
a curious fact that human sympathy works by the unitary
method. Miss Douglas-Pennant, Miss Cavell, even the
scoundrel Wilkes, or young Ralph Fox, are sure targets for
our tears. Our hearts can compass slightly larger units
such as Assyrians, Basque children, White Russians or
refujews , but a whole empire in agony, a mastodon at bay,
is beyond the limit of our imaginations. The massacre of
240,000 Muslims may be news (Reuter has a simple rule
for killings : if it’s hundreds, it’s an incident; if it’s
thousands, it’s news), but our pity is so diluted by the
effort of envisaging such vast numbers that it is pity-and-
water, mostly water, by the time it comes to taking any
action, or even to making a national demonstration. One
woman done for in a Surrey lane and the tongue of every
housewife in England clacks in sympathy ; a thousand
women violated in Western Thrace—turn to the football
news on page nine.
At the first meeting of the Anglo-Ottoman, Marmaduke
said little. He sat biting the end of his pencil, his mind on
the green mosque at Broussa and the hospital for storks
there, where the Turks patched up any stragglers from the
annual migration. How absurd they had looked, some on
stilts, some with their broken wings in splints, and there
was even an old owl, gaga and lame, who kept them com-
pany. He thought of the Islamic doctrine which imposed
knowledge of the Pentateuch, of the Gospels, as well as of
the Qu’aran, on all believing peoples. He thought of Mark
Syke’s appreciation of the good new architecture in Aleppo,
of the new prosperity of Mosul since the Young Turks came
into power. He thought of the absurd battles he had seen
of old between desert Arabs, one of which was still a living
memory where 20,000 people fought for two days and no
one was killed ; lances only were used and coats of mail
worn. . (Who fell from his horse was counted out.) He
thought of all the pathetic ignorance and the pathetic
enthusiasm of the young reformers of Islam : he thought of


Persia whose efforts to obtain a constitution and reforms
had been for ever negatived by the Anglo-Russian Entente
of 1907 ; and on that hot August day, in the city, just a
year before England entered the Great War, he saw Turkey
already a ghost, and took the Red Queen’s advice to Alice,
to weep before one is hurt, as then one has courage saved
with which to face the actual agony.
As the Persians say, enemies are of three sorts ; enemies,
the enemies of friends, and the friends of enemies, and
Turkey was suffering from the attacks of all three. The
English, for instance, because of Russian influence, refused
the help begged of our Foreign Office by our own consuls in
Uskub and Monastir for the Balkan Muslims, and refused
also to publish their reports proving over and over again
all the findings of the Carnegie Report which declared the
hideous cruelty of the Greek advance at Valona to be such
that *in a century of repentance they could not expiate it.’ The
same policy of suffocation prevented any attempt to publish
the account of the proselytizing of the Pomaki by force.
From the moment of his return, Marmaduke sensed all his
efforts foredoomed to failure, yet there was in him enough of
the spirit of those ancestors of his who were out in the ’45,
enough, too, of that heroic acceptance of disaster which lies
like a still lake at the heart of Islam, to make him carry on.
It is better, he thought, to die in the last ditch than to knock
off early, and the plucky little Anglo-Ottoman Society
under his vice-presidency faced ridiculous odds, nor ever
fully realized its own absurdity.
Marmaduke did everything for it except bath the
members; spoke for it, organized concerts, tea fights, wrote
most of its literature, and generally, with his burning energy,
inspired even the most menial tasks. And the Young
Turks were grateful to the founders of the Anglo-Ottoman
Society : three streets in Stamboul were renamed rue
Marmaduke Pickthall, rue Arthur Field, rue Aubrey Herbert.
But of all human emotions, gratitude is the most transitory,
and when the Turkish Government changed, the streets
changed labels, too, and now all memory of their English
names is gone.


During the late autumn of 1913 Marmaduke had started
his House of War , a novel based on what he had seen of the
behaviour of Christian missionaries in villages in European
Turkey, and this, which he declared to be ‘ in its way one of
the best books I ever wrote/ was published by Eveleigh
Nash in 1916. He also put together at this time many of his
short stories, all of which had originally been published in
various magazines, and called the collection Tales from
Five Chimneys. This Dent published in 1915.
He felt strongly that we were throwing away carelessly,
and as a child petulantly pushes away a toy, with our
influence over Turkey, the friendship and trust of all the
Islamic peoples. Their faith in us was already shaken by the
Boer War and the partition of Persia, and Marmaduke knew
that he who rules over Constantinople, whether by the
sword or by the heart, be he English, French, German, or
Russian, holds the key of the continent of Asia. And the
nation which allows that key to slip through its fingers, no
matter how tremendous its Empire, or what vast areas in
Asia it may rule, can never feel safe. He realized that the
clash with Germany was coming, sooner than most people
realized, and when that clash came, he wanted to have the
Mohammedan East solidly on our side, for he was terrified
of any challenge to the route to India. He did not, of
course, know of our secret treaties with Russia, though the
Tsar’s meeting with the King at Reval was Damocles’
sword to him, for he was emphatically an imperialist in that
he believed that it was the mission of the British Empire to
be Asia’s and Africa’s guide in their awakening towards
‘ modern progress.’
Yet his imperialism failed when put to the test of ‘ my
country, right or wrong.’ With the necessity of facing that
issue upon him, he proved, by his fidelity to what he believed
was the higher law, his faithlessness to his own country. His
whole life, his whole outlook, altered under the strain—his
loyalties were hammered and twisted by outside stresses :
by the savage behaviour of country towards country, by the
smooth, unctuous Pilatism of diplomats, by the epidemic of
war fever which ravaged his own countrymen. His whole


mind was torn, wrenched out of its even tenour and forged 1
into a new form. I remember the war only as saccharine
for sugar, margarine for butter, Belgian refugees who
fished our lake and made me toy boats, and men in khaki
coming for a few days’ pheasant shooting, arid cannot
realize how indelibly it marked those who endured it and
survived.
Marmaduke had no use for those who wished to force any
people or collection of peoples into a manner of life : no
political entity, however civilized it may think itself, has
the right to impose on any other its own formula of growth
or spiritual salvation. British democracy had no more right
he thought, to enslave or destroy stretches of Asia in the
name of progress than the Belgian monarchy to torture and
exploit the Congo. Everything, and here Marmaduke
applauded the wise words of Professor Browne, has its own
generic perfection ; as the Persians say, its own paradise,
only obtainable by the realization of its highest potentiali-
ties, and not by any adoption of the attributes of something
else ; the destruction of this distinctive type and distinctive
ideal, either individual or national, Marmaduke thought a
loss to the universe, a shuttering down of one of the windows
by which humanity looks forward. As he wrote bitterly in
1916: .
‘ I have not been writing for the last three years merely
to try and prove to New Age readers that Turkey would
have been a better ally than Russia or Italy. Politics must
have some aim or ideal or they become utterly pernicious.
The goal of Turkey is progress on Muslim lines. Muslims
look to Turkey as the morning star of the long-promised
Renaissance of Islam, three hundred million of them.
“ A great empire and little minds,” as Burke said of the
way we treated young America, “ go ill together.” ’
And of the Anglo-Russian Entente Marmaduke wrote, in
December 1913 :
* The large placid boy at school, who is afraid to fight
and therefore hangs on to the biggest bully, may have the
kindest heart imaginable : he is forced to gloat on tortures


and . abet the torturer : he gains nothing by so doing but
contempt and hatred and in the end he always has to fight.’
Hold the cup crooked, but do not spill the liquor, was, in
other words, England’s Near Eastern policy, and Marmaduke
was righter in his judgment and prophecy than he knew, for
England was to find herself shortly caught up in the
machinery of European disaster.
Indeed, the astonishing thing is not that war came when
it did, but that it had not come sooner. The delay, not the
event, is what needs explaining. How can we account for
the fact that neither the first nor the second Balkan War
degenerated into a general upheaval ? There were two
principal reasons : England was anxious for peace and
Russia not yet ready for her war.
In an unpublished article, from which he kindly allows
me to quote, Mr. Ivor Thomas, Sir John Simon’s brilliant
young opponent in Spen Valley, has put the problem with
great clearness. ‘ Though imperialism bred war, never
once in their policy of colonial expansion did the Great
Powers come to war one with another. The danger of
collision was almost infinite, yet the economic penetration
into China and the partition of Africa was carried on with-
out Britain, France, Russia, Germany, or Italy coming to
blows. The story of the years between 1815 and 1914 is
the story of the rise of nations and the fall of States. The
rival European groupings are responsible for the fact that
the war of 1914 could not be localized in the Balkans, and
the growth of armaments in the preceding twenty years is
responsible for the destructiveness of that war, though up
to the last instant the localization was still thought possible
by some of the belligerents.’ As late as the spring of 1913
Bethmann Hollweg declared : “Je crois a la localization
de ce conflit.” Nothing in the East could sufficiently
involve us, and Marmaduke was still almost hopeful at the
end of the second Balkan War.
‘ Although she has had much to endure,’ he wrote,
‘ Turkey will not keep for long the memory of her defeat.
The wounds of her war will heal, for no poisoned barb has


been left therein, on the contrary, rarely has peace been
concluded on a more honourable basis on both sides.’
He was comforted, too, by the sane outlook of M. Nicholas
Politis, one of the wisest of Greek polemists, who described
thus Greece’s new relationship to Turkey : ‘ Greece becomes
with the ending of this war to a certain extent a Muslim
Power because hereafter the Mohammedans will be at least
eight per cent of the total population of Greece. Greece
cannot have in her relations with Turkey any territorial
ambitions, for although there are two and a half million
Greeks in Asia along the coast from Trevisond to Adalia,
Greece has rightly observed that owing to her geographical
formation, these people are for ever lost to her politically.
At Constantinople the material and moral interests of the
Greeks carry enormous weight. Three hundred thousand
Greeks and fifty thousand Hellenic subjects, not to speak of
the patriarchal chair, a quanitity of churches, and number-
less good works as well as a lion’s share in finance, commerce,
and navigation. Under no single foreign domination would
these Greek interests be as safe or find such protection as is
offered to them by the Turkish regime.’
In November 1913 Marmaduke attended the banquet of
the Islam Society at the Hotel Cecil. Mohamed Ali spoke.
He was then editor of the Comrade at Delhi and already one
of the most active and best-known chiefs of the Young
Mussulman movement in India. This was Marmaduke’s
first meeting with him, and his first glimpse of the problems
of the Indian Muslims.
Marmaduke was now working closely with Aubrey
Herbert. This remarkable man, a son of the 2nd Earl of
Carnarvon, was traveller, writer, linguist, diplomatist,
politician, one of those versatile, gifted amateurs, quarter
crank and perhaps a third genius, who are a peculiar, fairly
numerous, by-product of the English race. At their best
they are a Lawrence or a Burton : often, like Wilfrid Blunt
or Aubrey Herbert, they are meteoric sports of some great
and ancient family, and nearly always they gravitate
Eastwards —for at their heart they carry seeds of that


mysticism and poetic imagination which the Celt and the
Oriental share, and which is unknown to Teuton or Latin.
For it is*without sensuality, having instead a simplicity
that is at best childlike, at worst childish. Herbert was an
enthusiastic worker, and Marmaduke often went down to
the House at question time to hear him making Grey
uncomfortable.
There was a little group of M.P.s —Sykes, Walter Guinness,
and Herbert were its leaders —who constantly returned to the
undermining of the Near East by Tsarist agents, and were
immensely worried by the danger to England of Russia’s
Near Eastern policy. Her subterranean behaviour in Asia
Minor, they declared, was the driving force of the whole
Oriental crisis : on March 8 and July i, 1913, and again on
March 17, 1914, the matter was raised. On the latter
occasion Herbert proposed the motion : “ That, in the
opinion of this House the strategic and political situation
in the Mediterranean calls for increased vigour and inde-
pendence on the part of His Majesty’s Ministers, and
demands the provision of an adequate available naval force
for the protection of the route to India. . . .”
Sir Mark Sykes, seconding, declared : “In an Empire
like ours you have to do sums in sentiment. You have to
be as calculating in your sympathies as you are mathe-
matically with your dreadnoughts. The British Empire,”
he went on, “ has been formed to amuse and employ an
aristocracy, the French to profit a democratic bureaucracy.”
Herbert violently opposed the First Lord’s proposal to
Germany of a shipbuilding holiday : and declared it would
result in nothing but “ a rather melancholy half-holiday all
to ourselves in the Mediterranean,” which he called “ the
marriage ring of the Empire : by which we feed London and
hold India.” The British Empire was the largest Govern-
ment of Muslims in the world, he added, and we had already
antagonized our Muslim subjects in India by the humiliation
of their fellow-countrymen in South Africa. By withdrawing
from the Mediterranean and at the same time pursuing an
anti-Turkish policy we were inflicting upon Turkey a risk
we were repudiating for ourselves.


The debate proved conclusively how wisely well-informed
was the Turkish statesman who had offered England a
protectorate over Turkey, and who, when England refused,
had said to Marmaduke : “ Alas : it is very muddling for
us : in your country it is the Liberals who are the fanatics,
the Conservatives the progressive and enlightened party.”
Marmaduke (in spite of the Curragh) entirely agreed. His
‘ Collins 5 to Herbert is interesting :
‘ Five Chimneys,
‘ Buxted..
t TT March 20 th. 1014.
My dear Herbert, ’ v *
‘ I much enjoyed your speech on Wednesday night.
It went, I thought, remarkably well. The whole discussion
was extremely dignified, and had quite a decent literary
tone. Who was the member on the other side who spoke
for the Armenians and referred to the Cyprus Convention ?
‘ What was borne in on me as I listened, though no
speaker mentioned it, is the fact that, in the nine years
of Grey and the Russian incubus, England has sunk from
the first to the second rank of Powers. She aspires to be
the Chairman of Europe, and is in fact the butt, as the
pacific chairman of a warlike meeting must be. And the
principle, that you may deluge Asia—or Thrace and Mace-
donia with blood—and yet declare that peace has been pre-
served by the blessing of Providence seems to me too cynical!
‘ I should be deeply grateful if you could give a little
attention to the Ottoman Association. It might be made so
useful, but seems in a bad way. I can’t identify myself
with it as I should like to do, having to work down here at
home to keep afloat financially.* But it will be a grievous
pity if it gets to be a one-man show. It ought to have the
most efficient working secretary available in London —
someone of wide experience in the kind of thing, but devoid
of" amour propre.”
‘ Again thanking you for enabling me to hear your speech,
‘ I remain,
‘ Yours always sincerely,
‘ Marmaduke Pickthall.’


On February 20, by a ukase, the Tsar created c le noyau
d’un corps contre Constantinople,’ and Mar-
maduke realized Turkey’s number was up. He did not
know, though it seems he must have had certain information
which led him to suspect, what now is generally admitted
to be the truth : that Russia had transferred the whole of
her Eastern army to her Western front as early as the
spring of 1913. 1 By March Marmaduke was certain
nothing now could save the Sultan’s Empire. The Turks
concurred in their own damnation. They made, for
example, no attempt to woo the English Press.
‘ I happen to know,’ wrote Marmaduke sadly, ‘an
English periodical whose editor was heard to say his paper
would have been pro-Turk had the Turkish Government
subscribed for thirty copies monthly.’
But the Porte was too sublime. Some friends of his, here
on a Turkish mission of inquiry, asked him to find out
whether there was any consideration in Turkey’s power to
offer for which England would forswear the proposed
partition.
‘ I am not,’ he wrote, £ politically in the swim, but I
count among my personal friends two or three men in a
position to be well informed on such matters, men who, if
I put them a plain question, would not lie to me, at any
rate in time of peace. From such I derived the clear
impression that the partition of the Ottoman Empire was
regarded as being quite settled in principle, the question of
when and how being still, however, undecided. This did
not surprise me, for at the time when I first began to cham-
pion Turkey in the New Age (1912) I had been receiving
letters, friendly letters, and hints from those in the know,
that the cause for which I was pleading was prejudged and
therefore hopeless, and that I had better turn my thoughts
1 Lenin, Trotsky, and Dr. Penatus confirmed these facts categorically to
Mr. C. F. Spencer, the chairman of John Brown’s, when the latter, on a secret
mission to Berne on 3 July 1916, met the revolutionaries and had a long talk
with them, whilst they were waiting for the sealed train that was to take
them across Germany and into Russia. Again, in 1935, after they had both
been dining with Herr Hitler, General von Markeson confirmed this fact
in reply to a question from Mr. Spencer.


into some other channel where there might be some reason-
able prospect of success and profit—there was none in this.’
As every Turkish general was aware, England had, some
years past, been giving help, from Aden, to the Arab rebels :
it was the advice of His Majesty’s Government which
caused Kiamil Pasha to disband the 150,000 reservists, thus,
therefore, jeopardizing the result of the first Balkan War
from the outset: and Fitzmaurice’s intrigues had made the
counter-revolution possible : three instances which, isolated,
were but straws in the wind ; but which, together, might be
taken as outlines of a determined policy.
May came to Sussex that year with peculiar glory, or so
it seemed to Marmaduke. Not all the grape-hyacinths and
wistaria of Turkey could compare with the hawthorn-
whitened hedges, the fields, lace-bordered with hemlock and
cuckoo pint, and the bluebell-crowded woods, whose carpet
was here and there initialed by the suggestive, most
supremely phallic lords and ladies. But Marmaduke was
irritated by Nature, annoyed by the spring’s indifference to
his terrors : it seemed to mock him, to ask, since seed-time
had not failed, what need he fear ? The eternal sequences
had not hesitated, would not falter : the great rhythms
would not vary by one note, nor would the crescendo, whose
climax was apple-laden September, be interrupted by what
might happen to England in August. No disaster could
check the corn’s quickening, and Marmaduke felt he must
escape Nature’s aloofness, and flee the spring’s contempt.
He wrote to Aubrey Herbert and told him of a charming
compliment he had just received from Ali Haidar Midhat:
‘ Malheureusement je n’ai pas l’honneur de connaitre
O. Herbert, M.P. (sic). Ses sympathies a la Turquie
m’obligent a rompre les etiquettes et a vous prier si I’occasion
se presente de vouloir bien lui dire mon admiration.’
(‘ Midhat had just been talking to Talaat,’ Marmaduke
explained, ‘ and no doubt had heard some details of your
work for Turkey : I know he would attach importance to
the compliment, so send it on at once.’) Then Marmaduke
asked for himself: whether Herbert could not find him some


job in Turkey, either in local or in British employ —any-
thing to get out of England and right away.
‘ I don’t want you to put yourself out of the way at all,’
he went on, ‘ but when you have occasion to write to Talaat
—or to speak to him—bear my petition in mind.
‘ If I were not so wretchedly impecunious, I would go out
to Constantinople now and try my luck at cadging ; but
I really must sit still and write a book this summer to repair
a little of the damage done by last year’s jaunt.
‘To ask any government to appoint an imaginative
writer to an administrative post seems ridiculous, upon the
face of it, I am aware. But imagination (working on the
ground of understanding) is not perhaps so bad an asset as
is commonly supposed in persons trusted with a little brief
authority. I should like to have a chance, in some lost
country district, and believe that I could get the people
with me, whether in Turkey or in Syria.
‘ What does the rapprochement between the Porte and
Russia mean ? Always before, in Turkish history, it has
meant a definite agreement to postpone all serious reforms !
‘ I can always come to London if you wish to see me, and
have various friends in town from whom I can claim bed
and breakfast.’
Herbert was most successful, for, indeed, the Turks loved
and trusted him as no one else in Europe. 1 Through his
intervention, Marmaduke was offered the post of Inspector-
General of the Eastern Vilayets of Anatolia. The British
had promised to loan the Turkish Government inspectors,
and several really first-rate men (Marmaduke amongst
them) had declared their willingness to take up these
appointments. Then, when Russia objected —she had ear-
marked these vilayets for herself against the time when the
dismemberment of Turkey should take place, and could not
bear that England should lick her prizes into good shape—
several of the originally suggested candidates volunteered
1 Even when he fought against them, later, in Gallipoli, nothing was
altered : he shouted his affection through a megaphone to the Turkish soldiers
on Christmas day, and as soon as the war was ended, started again to work for
the future of Turkey.


to serve under the Turkish Government, and Marmaduke
was one of these. . The post of Inspector-General was a far
bigger one than Marmaduke had expected and a bigger job
than he felt he could tackle, but he delightedly accepted a
provincial governorship, and was to have gone out to take
up his appointment when the war supervened.
On June 29, 1914, Marmaduke was at the House to hear
Acland and Bryce, Under-Secretaries of State, discuss (Grey
also spoke) the Armenian question, and the Foreign Office
experts categorically admitted and openly declared the
danger of Russian intervention to be very great.
In those last weeks before the war, he traced, in his New
Age articles, for the British public the history of the final
stages by which Turkey, it seemed to him, was driven into
the arms of the Central Powers. He showed how Turkey’s
entry into the war could be avoided, should have been
avoided, and how, after it had taken place, Turkey could
still be won from her alliance with Germany and persuaded
to conclude a separate peace. Until the last word of the
Treaty of Sevres was written, he worked to make Turkey
pro-Entente.
He was quite terribly hard up. He did not go abroad
that summer, but sent Muriel, without him, with a well-
married sister, to stay at Neuchatel with the old pastor who
had coached him in his youth.
On August 3, before our declaration of war on Germany,
and months before our declaration of war on Turkey, the
English Foreign Office ordered the seizure of the two
Turkish dreadnoughts in Messrs. Armstrong Whitworth’s
yards, where they were being built. It was the culmination
of the British record as protectors of the German-Turkish
Navy ; whilst Limpus was still in charge of the Turkish
fleet exercises, his Government seized the two ships 'on
which the future of that fleet depended. Of the Sultan
Osman and the Rechadieh, 1 Marmaduke, writing in the
1 Rechadieh had been paid for with seven millions of Turkish money raised
by private and public subscriptions. Even the poorest had contributed :
women had sold their hair for a few paras : the widows of men murdered gave
the fines they had accepted in lieu of vengeance ; schoolchildren throughout
the Empire had eaten dry bread that their savings might be added to buy the
great ships.


New Age, after we had declared war on Germany, but whilst
still hoping Turkey might not come in, said : * Think of the
story of the Turkish dreadnoughts, bought and paid for by
the patriotic -pennies of a bankrupt country, forced to fight
for bare existence, a country whose navy England had
undertaken to improve and strengthen, in whose absolute
power that navy was, seized by our Government in a most
insulting manner, and the money not refunded, while Great
Britain still “ wished ” Turkey to maintain neutrality. As
the Sultan said to the British Ambassador at the Porte :
“ La Grande Bretagne est trop grande puissance maritime
pour avoir besoin des deux seuls navires delaflotteottomane.”
And still hundreds of Englishmen in Asia and North Africa
are talking of the honour and the perfect uprightness of the
Englishman to Mohammedans. Can they not see ? This
Minister is an honourable man : that bureaucrat is an
honourable man : so are they all, all honourable men, but,
in the aggregate, a monstrous rogue.’
The ships, renamed the Agincourt and Erin , were officially
‘ taken over ’ by the British Government. Compensation
was never paid, although the Foreign Secretary promised
it, war with Turkey conveniently breaking out before any
immediate danger arose of his being obliged to keep his
word. The announcement of the seizure was made in
The Times of August 5, 1914, and there was a further refer-
ence to the transaction in The Times of the 13th. But
Winston Churchill, who did the job, does not mention it at
all in his history of the war, neither do Gooch and Temper-
ley. No questions were asked in the House, but there was a
good deal of feeling in the country. I can remember my
mother discussing the affair with the present Lord Russell
in shocked tones. “We needed the ships,” a young
Admiralty official has assured me, “ so took them to fight
Germany.” As on another occasion Lord Grey said :
“ The dreary part of foreign affairs is that nothing can be
dealt with on its merits, things have to be sacrificed to keep
the peace between the Great Powers.”
Already, by June, Marmaduke knew Russia would stop
at nothing. The assassination of the Archduke and his wife,
Q


on June 28, was followed by brutal jubilation throughout
Slavdom, as though the German prince had been a savage
dog, worthy only* of destruction. As Trevelyan puts it:
* The news of the murder was greeted in Belgrade with the
cruel rejoicings of a people race-mad as all Europe was to
become.’ But the general impression was that war still
could be avoided : Austria promised that she would not
send an ‘ impossible ’ ultimatum, and by July 12 the Arch-
duke’s murder had disappeared from the English papers.
In the hot days of mid-July Grey told Francis Pember, then
warden of All Souls’, that the outlook was better than it had
been for years, was clearing, was, in fact, hopeful. But
Marmaduke was a heretic about ‘ Sir Grey,’ as the British
Foreign Minister was called in Turkey.
“ Sir Edward Grey,” he declared, “ knows practically
nothing about foreign affairs save what he hears from his
advisors. He is an old parliamentary hand who represents
the Foreign Office in the House of Commons as a watchdog
might, protecting its secrets from the curiosity of the members
of the dreaded people.” Grey’s own apology for his action
in committing his country to the defence of France, bears
out Marmaduke’s view. ‘ Parliament has an unqualified
right to know of any arrangements that bind the country to
action or restrain its freedom. But it cannot be told of
naval and military measures to meet possible contingencies.’
Yet in the last resort Grey took cover behind the democracy
he despised and had betrayed, declaring he could not speak
the definite word for England that would have stayed
Germany’s hand and kept us neutral or localized the war
on to the Eastern front, saving thereby a million English
lives.
“ I am not free,” he said over and over again, during the
long Cabinet meeting on Home Rule on that last Saturday
in July, “lam not free. If this country remains neutral, I
must resign.” Yet at that same meeting he called the foreign
situation ‘ more hopeful.’ At the very end of July C. F. G.
Masterman, speaking in the north on the Near Eastern
question, emphasized its gravity and the imminence of war.
His words fell on blank, unheeding ears to whom they meant


nothing. Dazzled by the Irish question, the English public
was unaware of the immense looming shape of European, of
universal catastrophe, which crept upon them hidden and
unseen.
On July 23 Lloyd George told the House of Commons
that our relations with Germany were better than they had
been for years. The next day Vienna sent her ultimatum to
Belgrade. ‘ Austria declared war,’ Marmaduke wrote in
the New Age , ‘on the nose-cutting Serbs, and Germany
prepared to back her up exactly in the same spirit with
which we should send a punitive expedition against Thugs
or cannibals, supposing they had succeeded in killing an
English prince.’ The murderers’ joy in their horrid act (their
grateful country has unveiled a splendid memorial to Princip
and his comrades on the site of the outrage) disgusted all
sane-minded people who were horrified to learn that
England had declared war on the side of the Slav.
Anxious as Marmaduke was for the safety of Muriel and
her sister in Geneva, he had only one thought, to prevent
Turkey from coming in on the side of the Central Powers.
There was a strong party in Turkey that was pro-Ally.
Indeed, the whole country and the Grand Vizier were very
anxious to be neutral if not definitely for the Entente, and it
was Enver, according to Grey, who deliberately sent a fleet
out to bombard Odessa and commit acts of war, which made
Turkey’s alignment with the Central Powers inevitable, for
Enver, Minister of War, was confessedly pro-German.
Talaat was gradually won over to the German Party
though Djemal remained resolutely for the British alliance.
The last named wrote, on August 7, ‘ln the present war,
according to all probabilities, England will have the last
word, so if we are not absolutely certain to triumph finally,
it would be a highly venturesome thing for us to rush into an
adventure the consequences of which might be, God forbid,
fatal to our country.’ But it was not for Turkey’s sake only
that Marmaduke wished her to remain either neutral or to
become pro-Ally : though he did not foresee the whole
heroic failure of Salonica and Gallipoli, though in his most
desperate moments he never envisaged our casualties there


being what they were : 25,000 dead, 12,000 missing, 75,000
wounded, and over 20,000 sick in the first three months, yet
he did know how the Turks at bay could and would fight,
and he had no faith in Russia ; feared, almost felt, she would
let us down, having used us as her cat’s-paw only to gain her
ends—the Black Sea ports and Constantinople. How right
he was was patent as early as November 1914, when the
Russian papers blandly declared : ‘ Russia will now pursue
her Eastern policy while leaving the conduct of the European
War to her allies.’
It was not the actual opening of hostilities which made
Marmaduke so miserable at the outbreak of the war. Death,
even on a large scale, he had come to regard with equanimity,
and as not necessarily an evil in itself, though he thought
such waste of young human beings in a purely materialistic
struggle unjustifiable. But the spurt of vile filth that each
country spat out in its fear, horrified and distressed him
more than anything else. The declaration of hostilities was
an arousing of the octopus in every nation, and each
proceeded to vomit sepia bile in competitive profusion.
Arthur Field met Marmaduke in Guildford a few days
after England had entered the war, and was greeted with :
“ Well, they have made a nice mess of things now.” Arthur
Field declared he could not hate the Germans to order, and
could not hope they would be blown to ruins, adding
that as he had sat under the trees in his own garden in
Godaiming, he had said to himself, “ They have got the land
and sea and air patrolled to keep me from sending my love
to the Germans, but I still can send them a thought on those
free clouds that are making for Germany.” Marmaduke
replied : “I feel very much like you, but, Field, Aristo-
phanes said all that two thousand and more years ago—
don’t start claiming it as an original thought.”
For him, too, the clash of loyalties was as great as for any
naturalized German or half-Austrian here. Successively
the seizure of the Turkish dreadnoughts, the protectorate
over Egypt, the sacrifice of Anatolia to the Greeks, the
partition of Syria, these were ineradicable blows from which
his spirit and his patriotism never entirely recovered. Here


called his country and there his faith : here his people and
there hjs life’s work : here his duty to his own, and there his
heart’s most selfless allegiance. His view of the feelings
we should-entertain for our enemies is expressed openly
and forcibly in the following article which appeared in the
New Age :
1 With the outbreak of the German War we at last see,
or think we can see, the cause of all that truckling to the
Russian Government, that eating of dirt which turned our
stomachs. It was in order that we might be sure of having
Russia with us in the day of our great struggle against
Germany. We require the help of France and Russia. I
am ready even to admit that, with the preservation of the
British Empire in view, our Government was justified and
wise in its generation in refusing to publish the consular
reports relating to the Balkan atrocities. By that refusal
it has possibly prevented an outburst of popular indignation
against Russia, which would have hampered England when
she came into the war on Russia’s side. We are at war with
Germany. But we have no part in the original quarrel, as
I understand it, and are not fighting for the Slav against
the Teuton. The Germans are as conscientious, upright,
patriotic and the rest of it as we are ourselves, only more
sentimental in their devotion to the Fatherland, and they
have had a great deal lately to put up with from the Slavs.
For some people the fact that we are at war with them is
cause sufficient why we should revile the Germans. But it
is not a sentimental war on our side. It is purely business-
like. We are at war for the support of our allies the French,
and to maintain our old supremacy at sea. England’s
posture is, or should be, workmanlike, a better word than
businesslike to show my meaning, devoid of passion as of
mawkish sentiment. But one does wish that the British
public, even in this hour of warlike ardour, could be led
by its acknowledged guides to recognize that Germany
is one of the three great civilized Powers the world possesses,
and that to wish for her annihilation is to wish for untold
evil. Our allies may wish to annihilate Germany, or so to
crush and humiliate her that she may become a negligible


Power in Europe for years to come, that is to say, they are
eager to destroy the Balance of Power in Europe which—
again if I understand aright—we are fighting to preserve.’
It seems incredible that this sober, human viewpoint
could have been printed in those hysterical first days of the
war, when English members of the Lyceum Club danced on
the torn photos of their German members ; whilst women
killed their dachshunds with their own hands, and Mr.
Lloyd George declared at Liverpool that the German navy
was to be dug out like ‘ rats from their holes.’ Sir Mark
Sykes never said a truer word than when he wrote, in a
letter to George Sykes of Illinois, early in the war : ‘We
are going to win this war, and it means that Prussian mili-
tarism is going to be crushed, but in crushing it we shall
have to become part of it.’
In the first days of September England and the Allies
offered to guarantee the integrity of the Turkish Empire in
return for continued Turkish neutrality. They offered no
guarantees beyond their word : and there was no doubt in
anyone’s mind as to why they were suddenly so almost
grovellingly anxious to procure Turkish help. They came
as suppliants to the Grand Vizier, soliciting his assistance, for
they hoped a great deal from a diversion on the Eastern
front: Namur had fallen, the retreat from Mons was still
going on : bn the Russian front Tannenberg was a German
victory of no little import; Longwy fell on August 28, and
on September 3 the Germans had reached the Marne.
Why, Marmaduke was often asked, did the Turks not
accept this last-minute offer of a guarantee made by the
Allies ? The answer he gave was that Turkey did not refuse
the offer. But it was made on note of hand alone, and
Turkey wished to test the sincerity of the Allies before
embarking on a war with Germany which would have
placed her immediately in a most terribly grave position, for
her army was still controlled by German experts as her navy
by British. For four hundred years the Capitulations had
protected foreign traders against the Turkish Government
and had given them licence to commit every sort of crime,


secure in the knowledge that they would be tried and
punished' only by their own Consul. These Capitulations
had been one of the gravest stumbling-blocks in every
attempt of Turkey to set her house in order. When the
Allies came cap in hand, Turkey answered them by propos-
ing the following conditions of neutrality : (i) the abolition
of the Capitulations, (2) restoration of the Greek islands,
(3) solution of the Egyptian question, (4) adequate guaran-
tees against Russian interference in internal affairs, and (5)
guarantees by England and France against Russian attack.
On September 9 the abolition of the Capitulations was
announced as from October 1. They were solemn unilateral
acts made under oath and sealed, giving privileges and
favours, exemptions and immunities, and were granted
under the form of deeds of gift by Ottoman sovereigns.
Kemal Hilmy, a distinguished Turkish lawyer, declared that
the Capitulations were really letters patent, and being
unilateral acts, could not be considered as binding treaties,
for a treaty must be bi-lateral. But in England their
abolition was criticized as illegal, for the Capitulations were
declared to be bi-lateral and therefore unable to be abolished
by a mere iradeh of the Porte. The Turks declared that
where a contract in international law is without a time limit
(sans echeance) either party finding it to be no longer
tolerable is at liberty to proclaim the termination of such a
contract, taking all risks. Lawyers have declared that every
State must have a right thus to denounce its obligations if
necessary, or one sovereign State might come to hold another
in pawn and so destroy its independence.
Sir John Fischer Williams, of the Hague Tribunal, to
whom I referred this question, states : ‘ Although these
rights and privileges originally depended on a grant,
perhaps revoked, by the Sultan, they were confirmed by
treaties in our case, notably by the Treaty of the Dardanelles
(1807) an( A the Treaty of Adrianople (1829), and so took rank
as regular treaty engagements. That such engagements
can as a matter of law be repudiated whenever one of the
parties finds them not to its taste, is, I think, a doctrine which
has no support in law, not even if the engagement is inde


finite in time. Modern Turkey took the correct course the
other day when she obtained release from the agreement —
I think the perpetual engagement —not to fortify the
Dardanelles, by negotiating with the Powers with whom she
had contracted.’
Marmaduke hailed the abolition of the Capitulations
with joy as an announcement long overdue. In his opinion
the Young Turks should have abolished them in 1908.
This abolition, he wrote, gave England her chance to destroy
at one move all German machinations and liaisons and to
wipe out even the memory of those poor aborted ships. Let
England accept the imperial iradeh and denounce the
Capitulations in Egypt also. She would then acknowledge
Turkish suzerainty in a public manner and make good
and give effect to her offer of a guarantee of the integrity of
the Turkish Empire. Turkey must, then, come in on our
side.
‘ Had I been the Ambassador in Constantinople entrusted
with the charge to win and conciliate the Turks, I would
have gone to Talaat with a similar scheme for Egypt and
would have telegraphed to London to back the abolition of
the Capitulations with a similar denunciation with regard to
Egypt. This would have aroused enough enthusiasm to
overcome German influence and would have proved our
sincerity to . Eastern eyes. But the English reply to the
abolition was the withdrawal of the British Naval Mission
and the annexation of Egypt. Turkish suzerainty was
declared at an end, the Khedive, who was in Turkey, was
deposed in absence, and ordered to Italy, whilst his brother
was declared Sultan of Egypt, an absurd and empty title,
invented for the occasion only to annoy and irritate the Porte.’
The anomaly of the British position had long
troubled British politicians who are inherently unable to
perceive that an anomalous position may, after all, be a
strong one. There were two ways of simplifying it: by
suppressing the Khedivial throne, or throwing off Turkish
suzerainty. Marmaduke had always hoped for the former,
because the suzerainty was popular and the throne was not,


and because the preservation of the suzerainty appeared
essential Jo the prosecution of Disraeli’s policy of influencing
the whole Muslim world through Turkey. Immediately
after the outbreak of the Balkan War, Aubrey Herbert had
told Marmaduke that a group of members talked of a
movement to annex Egypt.
“ I told them,” he added, “ that if they annex Egypt they
will have a serious nationalist movement on their hands.”
The British forbade the usual prayer for the Khalif through-
out Egypt,, and this foolish step, in a trice, converted a
familiar, scarcely heeded, formula into a heartfelt prayer.
c Now,’ wrote Marmaduke, ‘ when the time comes for the
great omission, there is a solemn silence, the Imam pros-
trates himself, the people with him, and whispers the
petition to the earth.’ The Egyptians were bidden to
rejoice in their new Sultan and, to facilitate rejoicings, the
most rigorous censorship was enforced and martial law was
proclaimed in Egypt. The proclamation of the Sultan was
pointless, because the Khedive, being an appendage of
Turkish suzerainty, fell with it. It would have been much
better, Marmaduke thought, for the future of our Eastern
empire, if, having denied that suzerainty and deposed
Abbas 11, we had taken Egypt brutally, and nothing more.
As it was, we played into the hands of the Arabs and
Egyptians who wished to get rid of us and found an Arab
empire.
‘ We were only able to secure possession of Egypt,’ wrote
Sir Valentine Chirol, ‘ by a measure, hard to reconcile with
the spirit of the reciprocal engagement already undertaken
at our instance by the Entente Powers, that no territorial
changes in favour of any one of them should become effec-
tive till the end of the war, when they should be discussed
and settled by common agreement.’
The proclamation of the Protectorate constituted a
change in the status of Egypt as hitherto established by
international treaties, and a change to our advantage. We
were able to secure the acquiescence of France and Russia
by promising Syria to the former, and Constantinople and
the Straits to the latter, so that the same States which had


guaranteed Egyptian autonomy now hastily recognized the
new regime. What the Egyptians thought about it was
made plain by the riots, by the attempt of Muhammed
Khalil to shoot the new Sultan for having been faithless to
the Khalif, and by the crowd of mourners who, following
the coffins of the men slaughtered in the riots, clamoured in
refrain : “O, God, restore the power of Turkey : down
with tyranny.” 1 The horrors of the conscription for the
Labour Corps and the requisitioning of beasts of burden for
use against the Turks, and the terrible death-rate, of the
Egyptian workers compelled to serve on the Canal front,
led even Lord Lloyd, for once, to doubt the wisdom of
England’s actions.
Still Turkey held her hand and did not declare war.
Then, on 20 October, the Goeben and the Breslau , two
German men-of-war, coal-less, and hotly pursued by Allied
ships, arrived at the Straits. During the previous Balkan
troubles the Goeben had been dominating Turkish sentiment
at. Constantinople and the Breslau had, together with British
and French warships, been taking part in an international
demonstration in support of the conference which was
sitting at Scutari for the settlement of Albania. The
Kaiser informed the Greek Ministers that an alliance had
been concluded between Germany and Turkey whereby
the German cruisers were to join the Turkish fleet and act
in concert. This statement was most premature : indeed,
the Kaiser’s action was to force Turkey’s hand. If she
allowed the capture of the two German ships, she would
find herself at war with Germany. If she allowed them to
enter the Straits, she was violating her neutrality, and her
acceptance of them was equal to a declaration of war on
the side of the Central Powers.
On 7 August a message reached the Goeben that she must
not proceed to the Dardanelles, as the Turks were making
difficulties about allowing her to enter. But Admiral Milne
was close behind her, and the Goeben, hearing of the British
approach by wireless, was obliged to steam straight for the
Dardanelles without knowing what welcome the Turks
1 i.e. England.


would give. She arrived off Cape Hellas on the evening of
August io, and a pilot steered her through the mine-fields,
although J permission to enter had not been ratified. The
British charge* d’affaires at the Porte protested against the
cruiser’s entry of the Straits ; but, in reply, the Turks
stated that they had bought the two German ships and
would hand them over to Admiral Limpus, head of the
British Naval Mission, and the Turkish Press carried stories
of this purchase being a compensation to Turkey for the loss
of the Sultan Osman and the Rechadieh. Limpus asked to be
recalled to active service. The Grand Vizier protested that
he only wanted the ships as a means of bargaining with the
Greeks for the return of the islands they had occupied
during the Balkan wars, and not for use against Russia : he
begged the mission might be allowed to remain, to recall it
was to leave the field to the Germans. It was therefore
thought well to accept the Grand Vizier’s assurance, and
Limpus was ordered to remain, in spite of his urgent request.
But instead of the ships being handed over to him, the
German sailors remained on them, with their German
officers, and Enver, in consultation with Berlin, sent Admiral
Gouchon, without the knowledge of the anti-German
members of the Turkish Government, to take the combined
German-Turkish fleet into the Black Sea. On October 29
the allied Ministers in Constantinople received a message
from Gouchon that his flotilla had been treacherously
attacked by the Russian fleet and that in retaliation he had
bombarded Russian towns. No such attack had occurred,
and the message was designed to force the hands of the
Turkish Government.
Russia now declared war on Turkey, without consulting
her allies, at a time when Gouchon’s trick was revealed, and
had caused a split in the Turkish Government. After this
the French and British ambassadors were instructed to
follow the Russian lead and to withdraw from Constantinople.
On November 1 the allied ambassadors left. On November 3
the Dardanelles forts were bombarded by the English and
French fleets, and Akaba was taken. On November 5
Great Britain declared war on Turkey and annexed Cyprus.


Marmaduke’s article on the entry of Turkey into the war
concluded with the words : c Well, let them try and
conquer Turkey, now the fire of liberty is in the people. 5
Yet he did not despair, and his efforts to get a separate
peace made with Turkey continued throughout the war.
It was for these efforts, loyally undertaken and in consulta-
tion with the War Office at every step, that he was dubbed
pro-German and declared by Lord Lloyd to have behaved
‘ very ill 5 in the war.
In December 1914 he at last became a Mohammedan.
His profession of this faith was a witness, a protest against
the hysterical hate preached in the name of the Christ he
had served and loved so long. In those grim days he
apostrophized Jesus in the words Swinburne addressed to
Him on the occasion of a Russian persecution of the Jews :
‘ Say, was not this thy Passion, to foreknow,
In death’s worst hour the works of Christian men ? ’
December 1914 was the nadir of Marmaduke’s whole life.
Only the word of the Qu’aran and the memory of the
Prophet’s greater anguish sustained him. “ And assuredly
we shall try you with something of fear and hunger and lack
of men and fruits : but give glad tidings to the persevering.
Those who, when calamity befalls them, say : ‘We are
Allah’s and unto Him we are returning,’ these are they on
whom are blessings and mercy, these are the rightly
guided.” These words were spoken to Muhammed in the
darkest hour of his life, when old friends derided him and
even the inspiration Allah sent him was withdrawn, when
he, too, was over forty, and had behind him life and light
which could never return. Neither the Prophet, nor his
disciples, could have foreseen the happiness and glory that
was to come ; nor could Marmaduke realize, in those dark
days, that, as for Muhammed, so also greater happiness and
greater usefulness, than lay behind, awaited him.


CHATTER EIGHT
THERE are two things about England at war which,
when I came to read of the war years, surprised me
very much. One is the extraordinary freedom of the Press
and of speech : the other, the insane vindictiveness of our
feeling towards our enemies. During the whole of the war,
for example, Foreign Affairs, which savagely and • cease-
lessly criticized the Government, was only twice banned,
and in the New Age, 1 week after week, Marmaduke published
attacks on the Allies, on the conduct of the war, and on
current political issues, which would never be tolerated now,
in peace time, in, say, the New Statesman. The immense
liberty of the Englishman up to the war, and, it appears,
during it, at least until 1917, is something those who were
born after, and without it, find difficulty in comprehending.
Marmaduke says, somewhere, that the effect of victory is
always for the victors to assimilate the vices of the van-
quished, and vice versa—conqueror and conquered swap
qualities : in identifying themselves with their opposites
they change personalities —the first step to changing roles,
which is Nature’s way of reasserting herself and readjusting
the balance of powers. Since the coming of D.O.R.A. we
have lost so much liberty that, rationed as we now are, we
can hardly imagine those pre-war freer airs : it had taken
a century of freedom-fixated effort to win for us what every
individual enjoyed in 1914 : it took a very few years for us,
war-weary, to let it go, probably for ever. For the urge is
over : the real passion for liberty that unselfishly drove the
best spirits of the nineteenth century in England, France,
Italy, Austria, and America into a fight whose fruits they
never lived to enjoy, was spent with the century : to-day,
1 Which H. G. Wells described as ‘ literary carbolic acid, with an
occasional substitution of vitriol.’


born without chains, we snivel for them and are content
only when securely fettered.
Talking to such veterans as Mrs. Despard, Mrs. Sidney
Webb, Sir Hugh Bell, or R. B. Cunninghame Graham, I
have been most struck by the distance of their minds from
ours: lonely eagles they in empyrean airs, where we have
not followed, and now cannot, for the war trapped us all
and made their victories vain. Marmaduke, for example,
after Turkey’s entry into the war, sent an article to the Press
defending Turkey’s action : this was signed by the whole
committee of the Anglo-Ottoman Society : Lord Mowbray
and Stourton, Douglas Fox Pitt, and G. F. Ryder, as well
as by Arthur Field and Marmaduke himself, and was also
published in pamphlet form.
The Morning Post inveighed against it—but that hardly
singles it out in any way : dated November io, 1914, its
clear, courageous statement of the Turkish position is as
much a credit to the liberty of the English Press as to its
authors. ‘As telegraphic communication,’ the article states,
‘ with Constantinople is interrupted, and as every state-
ment made by one party to the present misunderstanding
is immediately denied or explained away by another party,
the Anglo-Ottoman Society, established to promote closer
relations between Turks and Britons, calls upon fair-minded
Britons to preserve a calm and unbiased attitude on the
crisis that has arisen. The Society considers that that
crisis was created not by Turkey, but by Russia, nor does it
agree with the qualified explanation that it is the result of
the supposed dominance of a military party in that country.’
Even more surprising are Marmaduke’s remarks in
October 1915 when deprecating the Dardanelles attack :
‘ Even the British soldiers fighting in Gallipoli are aware
that Turkey’s cause is just—you have only to read Ashmead
Bartlett in the Sunday Times to be sure of this—yet Turkey
has no cause save what we gave her.’ As an additional
anti-Gallipoli argument Marmaduke used the Flemish
movement. There was a party of Flemish extreme national-
ists who believed they could establish a Flemish nationalist
State in North Belgium under German protection and free


of Walloon influence, and some of these took part in the
Government which the Germans set up in Brussels (it is to
these that the much discussed 1937 Amnesty Bill was
designed to apply).
‘ Here, close to us,’ Marmaduke wrote, ‘ is Belgium, still
a German province, and in a fair way to become, as far as
the Flemings go, a contented one. 5 How much he over-
emphasized the strength of the pro-German party in
Belgium, and how many Belgians were actually favourable,
or merely neutral, disinterested, or opposed, it is almost
impossible to say. Yet, had the Germans won, such a
solution could have been adopted fairly easily, if sufficient
Flemish autocracy had been granted. At all events the
criminal futility of the Dardanelles scheme has been demon-
strated and emphasized by almost every one of the war
memoirs, whether written by our own generals and Cabinet
Ministers, or by Germans, and the only comment that does
justice to the appalling waste of human life and effort is
Gertrude Bell’s : ‘ When people talk of muddling through
it throws me into a passion. Muddle through ! Why yes,
so we do, wading through blood and tears that need never
have been shed. 5
Not less amazing than the liberty of speech was the dis-
gusting savagery of outlook. I remember, coming down to
the library at Possingworth on a winter’s evening in ’ls,
blue silk frock and sash complete, for the children’s hour.
There, warming his coat-tails at the pine logs, stood my most
superb cousin, one of the handsomest creatures imaginable
(whom later mother tried to bring together with Marmaduke,
but in vain). As I came into the room I heard him say to
my mother : “Yes, Tiny, I’d like —I’d really, enjoy—
burning every German woman and child alive.” I fled :
to be given by gentle aunts clockwork figures of the Kaiser
being hung, and to see, on my daily walk in Hyde Park, boys
savagely splitting sawdust sacks open in bayonet charges,
and nannie, gloatingly, “ Next week they’ll be doing that to
real live Germans, ducky.”
From the balcony of 64 Rutland Gate I remember one
star-crowded night what seemed a splendid outsize cigar


alight in the sky and hearing rejoicing crowds shouting :
only my mother, carrying me back to the nursery, said :
“ There are men burning up there—let us pray for them
now.” (It was that zeppelin of which Sir Mark Sykes wrote
home to his wife, ‘ I had such a piece of good luck —I
glimpsed the burning of the Zepp from home. lam sending
each of the children a piece of Zepp, but they must keep
them.’) And when the Germans, at the end of a day’s
fighting on the French front, sent a message by low-flying
aeroplane proposing a truce while the stretcher-bearers
worked and offering the service of their own men in that
work of mercy, Sir Philip Gibbs explains he was ‘ not
allowed to tell.’ Little wonder that Marmaduke felt out of
it: he was not quite, perhaps, as sensitive as Lord Grey,
who ‘ for some days after the outbreak of war was irritable
to his assistants and secretaries . . . and would go out of his
way to avoid a company of Kitchener’s recruits marching
down the cheering street,’ but he stayed as much as he could
at Five Chimneys, finding in the autumnal melancholy
of the Sussex landscape, healing for his hurt mind.
He applied for an interpretership, was called to town, and
passed a vague examination, after which he was accepted.
He then went to Brighton to polish up his riding at a riding-
school but was soon informed that no more interpreters
were being taken as the French had objected to some of the
men who had already been sent over. George Raffalovich
had also been accepted and even had his uniform, when he,
too, was washed out.
Marmaduke again came forward when a censorship of
Turkish letters was proposed, as he himself describes in a
letter to Herbert.
‘ Personal. Five Chimneys,
‘ Buxted,
‘ Sussex.
‘Jan. 15th 1915.
‘ My dear Herbert,
‘ It is nice of you to write to me, when you ar? so hard
at work. The Turks certainly did not mean to attack


Egypt—though the Germans wished it —before the creation
of the new Sultanate. What may be their views now I have
no means of ascertaining.
‘ I am very disappointed not to be able to get a military
interpretership. ’ The War Office still bids me keep near
home, as there may still be a chance, but from what I hear
the chance is most remote. I was offered a job in the
Postal Censor’s Department—opening private letters—
thousands of them, on the off-chance of finding something
treasonable—and I did three hours at Arabic and Turkish
letters, just to try. But it seemed to me the kind of job
which should be left to others. I am now trying to pull
strings with the French Govt, in the hope of getting an
interpretership in their army.' I know a man who says his
aunt or something is mistress to the Minister of War ! But
I don’t suppose it will succeed. I have no luck.
‘Do you know Lady Evelyn Cobbold ? Hakki, whom I
saw a lot of just before he left, asked me up one day to
meet her, and I lunched with her again last Wednesday. I
didn’t like her much the first time—when she wished me to
declare myself a Muslim then and there at Claridge’s—
before two waiters for witnesses ! —but I did the second,
when we had a chance of private talk. You should hear her
on the subject of the Buxtons ! Machell has raised a battalion
of Cumberland dalesmen, and is awfully sick because they
have brigaded him with three lots of “ Tyneside Irish.”
At his request I found him two decent officers, but unfortun-
ately they both had Irish names, so were rejected.
‘ Eighty-three men have gone from this small village.
Not bad, is it ? But all Sussex has done uncommonly well.
We are giving a dance—an annual event —to the village
in our big kitchen next week, and are inviting N.C.O.s
from Maresfield camp to take the place of our own absent
men. I asked a little girl the other day how her brother,
who had enlisted, liked soldiering. The answer was, “ Oh,
very much indeed, sir. And his master says he’s doing
very well.”
4 My wife has taken up the Belgian army, and spends her
time in making and collecting things for the poor devils.
R


I have the chance of a job as courier—or is it carrier ?
between the committee in London and a field-hospital
working with the Belgians. They give expenses. I shall
take it if they’ll have me.’
They did not. His application, which was well backed,
arrived one post too late.
He still saw a lot of Ryder and the other members of the
Anglo-Ottoman. Ryder thought him a saint and said so,
frequently. In April 1915 he joined the Misericordia Lodge
of Freemasons, at the invitation of Dr. Rosedale, D.D.; and
Rifaat Bey, hearing the news, wrote to another Turkish
friend, * You will be glad to know that your friend
Marmaduck has coronated.’
He was pleased with the success of the House of War , for
although it was entirely alien to British war-time propaganda,
it was highly praised and widely read. The Morning Post
critic, indeed, said that ‘ Mr. Pickthall’s Eastern novels, as
a whole, constitute the most important contribution to our
knowledge of the Muslim East which has been made in any
country in this century.’ He began a new venture —an
historical novel of A 1 Yaman, based on the histories of
Amarah and of Ibn Khaldun. Knights of Arahy is perhaps
the best of all his books, worthy to be ranked beside L. H.
Myers’ The Root and the Flower , Rose Macaulay’s They were
Defeated , and Naomi Mitchison’s Corn King and Spring
Queen , as one of the great historical novels of the century.
The figure of Abu-Dad, the old jester, is an enchanting
portrait, and in the Sheykh Salamah, the vindictive oppor-
tunist, is a wonderful picture of a man who has made the
best of both worlds. The characterization is the best
he ever achieves : Said the Squinter and his brother, the
saintly Jeyyash, are really magnificently drawn, and these
remote men and women are absolutely free from any taint
of artificiality or archaism : the book has no flavour of the
museum, or of resurrection pie. The story is primarily
that of a blood feud between two Royal houses in the Yemen.
Blood feuds were a heritage of pre-Islamic days which had
their roots in racial, tribal, and family pride, and lasted on,


in spite of the prohibition of Muhammed and the protests of
devout and learned Muslims. Here, in the Yemen, the
dynasty of'Najah settled in the lowland city of Zabid and
had been overthrown by that of the Suleyhi, Kings of
Sanaa and rulers of the mountain tribes. The sons of
Najah, who had been slain by his conqueror, at the opening
of the story are living in luxurious exile at a seaport town on
the coast of Africa, and the sequel relates the miraculous
reconquest of his dominions by Said, the elder son, his second
exile and second triumph, his final overthrow, and the suc-
cession of his brother Jeyyash, a wise and tolerant ruler.
The rich imaginative superstructure, the vivid portraiture,
the animated dialogue, and profusion of incident —romantic,
humorous, tender, and sinister —make this book a mirror
of Islam in its strength and weakness. The girl Said
marries, and the child his brother Jeyyash loves, are exqui-
sitely portrayed—dew-besprint —as Chaucer’s Griselde, dawn-
fresh as any trouvere’s lady, yet passionate as Juliet herself.
The way in which Jeyyash comes through misfortune and
tribulation to a philosophy which brings him near to Marcus
Aurelius is in fact the inner theme of the book, and the
novel’s serious aim is to illustrate the saying of Muhammed
that ‘ henceforth the vengeance of blood practised in the
days of the Ignorance is forbidden and every feud of blood
abolished.’
It was balm in Gilead for Marmaduke to go from the
day’s news to his quiet study, to lose himself amongst
century-old sand-dunes, with the echo of camel bell and the
jingle of caravan to deaden the French guns that he could
hear from Five Chimneys. The best escape is inwards, and
he re-explored the country first known to him in Geneva,
this time by juxtaposing the windows opened for him by
fifth-century Arabic history with the mirrors in his own soul.
There were comforting evenings in town, too, when Marma-
duke and Muriel slipped off together to the theatre and saw
Shaw’s new play, Pygmalion, produced by Sir Herbert Tree,
with Mrs. Patrick Campbell, or Maugham’s Land of Promise,
with Godfrey Tearle and Irene Vanbrugh, to make them
feel the life of the mind was still allowed to exist, however


much sub-rosa ; and he could turn from his own work at
Five Chimneys to take up Henry James’s new Notes of a Son
and Brother , or George Moore’s Hail and Farewell , or Maeter-
linck’s Unknown Guest, and know that some day the fact
that these were first published in 1914 would matter more
than that we lost Antwerp and eight hundred thousand
souls.
On January 24, 1915 Grey offered Venizelos large
concessions on the coast of Asia Minor if he would bring
Greece into the war on the Allied side. But Venizelos fell
before he could accept. Gounaris, his successor, was offered
Cyprus if Greece would declare war at once, and the
Bulgarians were offered Macedonia. Marmaduke wrote
bitterly : ‘ Everyone of our Allies, present, or yet to be
bought, has to be paid hereafter, and every one of them thus
paid will feel contempt for us.’ He was furious, as Churchill
was, at the idiocy of driving Turkey to side with the Central
Powers, and miserable also that for a million or two we let
Bulgaria go, and delayed Rumania’s entry into the war.
But more serious, because infinitely more expensive and
more injurious to England’s prestige, was the pro-Arab
scheme that was taking effect subsequent to the declaration
of our protectorate over Egypt It was sponsored by some
Englishmen, of whom Kitchener was chief, who believed
that a rebellion of the Arabs against the Turks would enable
England to recover the ground she had lost in the Dar-
danelles. The first campaign against the Suez Canal was a
brilliant revelation of the fact that the majority of the Arabs
stood by the Khaliphate with heart and soul.
The proclamation of the Sultan of Egypt had raised in that
country the old dream of an Arab Empire, and the British
were very alive to the difficulty of counting on Indian
Mohammedan co-operation and loyalty, for the Muslims in-
India were indeed in a terrible fix. Their whole religious
allegiance was to the Khalif, who was fighting on the side
of the Central Powers, yet the British commanded them in
the name of their loyalty to the King-Emperor to fight
against the leader of their faith. The British thought to
overcome this problem of divided loyalty by setting up an


Arab Khaliphate at Mecca or Cairo with Egypt for its
political centre. This was to be done by persuading the
Arab leaders to revolt against Turkey and by bringing the
Arab provinces under British and French rule.
It was a most reckless and unfortunate intrigue of ours,
for the Arab claim was originally anti-British in its aim and
never received the approval of any of the enlightened
Muslim States or of their subjects. It was confusion worst
confounded to expect the Indian princes and peoples to
turn from the most modern and enlightened of the Islamic
States and look instead for their leadership to a most
uncivilized and fanatical handful of warlike Arabs. For
the Muslims have no reverence for the wild Arabs of the
Hejjaz, and the yearly pilgrimage to Mecca has always
needed the protection of the troops of the Khalif against
their depredations and exactions : consequently they are
not beloved.
Marmaduke was quite aware of the reasoning of those
members of the British Government who evolved the Arab
scheme : it can be summed up as follows. As soon as the
downfall of the Turkish Empire was assumed in principle, a
substitute for the Khalif had to be found. The Arabs made
Islam. Mecca, far away from the storm-centre of European
politics, the point towards which the Muslim turns his face
in prayer, was the natural centre of the Muslim polity.
The Sherif of Mecca was a descendant of the Prophet,
therefore more deserving to be Khalif than the Sultan.
All Arab-speaking peoples were Arabs, and all Arabs would
applaud the restoration of the Arab Khaliphate. The beauty
of the scheme was manifest : it was not evolved in any spirit
of destruction, and from the purely European point of view
there is nothing horrible nor absurd in these ideas whose
only drawback was that they were contrary to Muslim
doctrine, history, and tradition.
‘lt never seems to have occurred to the inventors,’
Marmaduke reflected sadly, ‘ that the majority of Muslims
might resent the removal of their centre from the most
progressive Muslim country in close touch with Europe,
to one of the most backward countries in the world. In


Asia nations have the same rights as individuals, and the
very fact that the powers of Europe deny the right to live
to an Oriental nation was likely to fan an indignation which
European politicians conveniently called fanaticism.’
Arabic is the language of the Muslim East. The inhabi-
tants of Syria speak Arabic with few exceptions, but with
few exceptions they are not Arabians. By race, education,
and custom they have more in common with the settled folk
of Asia Minor than with the nomadic, predatory tribes of
Nejd or the Hejjaz. When the early Muslims, sallying from
El Medinah, subdued a large part of the world, the con-
quered peoples became Arabized exactly in the same way
that a large part of the world was Latinized under the
Roman Empire.
To-day, Arabic is the language of Syria, Mesopotamia,
Egypt, Tripoli, Tunis, Algeria, Morocco, and the coast
towns of East Africa, as well as of Arabia ; but the Arabic
spoken in Syria differs from that spoken in Morocco as
much as Italian does from Spanish,. while classical Arabic
remains the written language in all countries of Islamiyeh
as classical Latin was for centuries the written language of a
once-Christian West. The peoples amongst whom the late
Colonel Lawrence travelled were not Arabs except in this
Arabic-speaking sense of the word. Only in 1917, when he
was travelling along the narrow western coastal fringe,
northward along the Pilgrim Railway, was Colonel Law-
rence in Arabia proper, else all his brilliant exploits of
1918 were outside the Arabian peninsula.
The British intrigues against the authority of the Khalif
were contemporary with our constant reiteration ‘ that the
question of the Khaliphate is a matter for the Muslims them-
selves to decide’ (Lord Crewe, May 6, 1915), and of the
formal denials by the British Government ‘ that it ever had-
the least intention to interfere with the question of the
Khaliphate.’ As Lawrence himself admitted, over and over
again, the Arab revolt began on false pretences. To gain
the Sherif of Mecca’s help, the British Government offered,
through Sir Henry McMahon, ‘ to support the establishment
of native governments in parts of Syria and Mesopotamia,


subject only to the interests of our ally, France.’ This
clause concealed the Sykes-Picot Treaty which was success-
fully kept secret from McMahon, from the Sherif, and from
Lawrence. By it, France was promised Syria, with the
Lebanon in absolute suzerainty, Cilicia, Kurdistan, Damas-
cus, Aleppo, and Mosul, most of which had been previously
promised to the Sherif, whilst England was to have, as her
share, the Arabian part of Mesopotamia, a strip of South
Syria, a protectorate over all Arabia and the India routes
starting from Haifa and Bassurah ; and Russia had to be
content with what was left.
This treaty aroused bitter remorse in Colonel Lawrence,
to whom, thereafter, the war seemed ‘ as great folly as my
sham leadership was a crime.’ He wrote of the ‘ corroding
sense ’ of his ‘ accessory deceitfulness ’ towards the Arabs.
Marmaduke, from the first, saw rather the stupidity of the
scheme than its sinfulness. He thought anyone who really
believed that England had taken ‘lraq from the Turks
solely with the purpose of presenting it to the Arabs must
be smitten with political blindness, and he argued against
the scheme not because England would fail to keep the
magnificent promise made to the Sherif in 1915 —he never
for an instant imagined there was any danger of her keeping
it—but the domination of Islam by the Arabs was a
thing nearly five hundred years past and must not come
again, for it was to put the car into reverse while still going
forward, and could have no effect but to wreck the engine.
It is interesting to remember that in 1916, when Smuts
became a British general, he was offered the Palestine
command because he liked the idea of Lawrence and knew
what guerrilla war could be. ‘ When there were doubts,’
Smuts wrote, ‘ about the two million a month that Law-
rence wanted, to keep the Arabs sweet, two million a month
in gold which was heart’s blood to us at that time, I said :
“ Give him a chance. I believe in experiment.” As it
turned out I was wrong. We had to pay the Arabs those
two million in gold every month for their friendship, and
they let us down. They could have had paper from us by
the million. Everyone else took paper. But they insisted on


gold and, I repeat, it was like giving blood, and then their
expedition failed. 5 For Smuts it failed because in spite of a
few minor successes the Turkish communications were not
destroyed, the Yarmuk bridges were not blown up. Smuts
did not blame Lawrence, for after his Arabs failed, the
latter went back and tried to blow up the bridges himself.
But there can be no doubt that the Arabs did very well out
of the war. They got whole kingdoms for doing extremely
little and they had as much money to play with, every two
and a half months, as the whole Boer nation had during
the whole of their war to maintain themselves against the
greatest Empire in the world. In this connection it may be
interesting to quote Marmaduke’s own opinion of Lawrence,
in a letter dated May 22, 1935 :
‘ I went up to London last Thursday, by invitation, and
spent the day with Lady Evelyn Cobbold. She asked me
to go to the Central Asian Society’s dinner as her guest and
speak after Philby, who was to be the guest of the evening.
I asked to be excused for the present, as I do not feel pre-
pared to “ face the music ” yet. Curiously, we were speak-
ing of Lawrence (Aircraftsman Shaw), and she said how
much she disliked him. The next day the newspapers were
full of the news of the accident which ended in his death.
I never met him, but had a newspaper correspondence with
him once in a paper called the Near East , when his arguments
on behalf of Arab nationalism struck me as feeble and also
insincere. Twice people asked me if I would like to meet
him—supposing that we must be kindred spirits, since we
both were interested in “ The East 55 (!), but I refused with
horror. He was undoubtedly a man of talent in his way,
but it was a way I disliked, and I cannot help regarding the
fame he managed to acquire as a popular aberration which
the future historian will be quite unable to substantiate oh
grounds of fact. 5
It was a pity he was so obdurate, for they were so dis-
similar that from their meeting something more than sparks
might have been struck. No two men, indeed, were ever
more unlike : Lawrence, who, as Sir Ronald Storrs has


said, spoke Arabic * with horrible mispronunciation 5 ; and
Marmaduke, who had such a genius for languages that he
could back .himself against anyone —even a Russian—to
learn any modern language in two months without his
nationality being discovered. Neapolitans took him for a
Tuscan, and Tuscans put him down for a Venetian, for
example.
Lawrence had more iSos perhaps than any man of his
generation : he felt the humanity that had smitten itself
into Norman tower or Babylonian potsherd most sensitively
and keenly : Marmaduke, per contra , was the most evan-
gelical and unmystical of men : for him, the greatest sin
was idolatry, and, like the monotheist Arabs amongst whom
Lawrence was ‘ homesick,’ he felt each morsel of food, and
even water, might, as it passed his lips, become a pleasure
from which he must dissociate his soul. Lawrence was a
Sybarite—his scholarship had a flavour of good Burgundy :
he read Virgil and Catullus, Theocritus and Plotinus : but
the stark poets of the Ignorance—whose thin, reedy music
makes Theocritus seem artificial, ballet music for a Greek
Trianon, were indecipherable to him.
Contrast his translation of Homer and Marmaduke’s
rendering of the Qu’aran, and the sum of the differences
between the two men becomes apparent: ‘of Matthew
Arnold’s three requisites for translating Homer, simplicity,
speed, and nobility,’ Sir Ronald Storr writes, ‘ Lawrence
failed somehow in presenting the third, substituting as often
as not some defiant and most un-Homeric puckishness of his
own ’ : Marmaduke’s language, on the other hand, is all
splendour—but there is a Calvinesque.coldness about it, for
all its grandeur, as though he were afraid of the passion
and the pity, and must chill the sensuality and savagery of
the desert prophet with his own centuries of self-control.
Lawrence was his own best publicist—playing to the
gallery as Nelson played, and Charlie Chaplin : his sense
of copy was the envy of every professional journalist:
Marmaduke could never have been head-line stuff: it
would never have seemed to him ‘ fitting that the two
chiefs should meet for the first time in the heat of their


victory, with myself still acting as the interpreter between
them,’ as Lawrence wrote of his entry into Damascus ; nor
would he have promised Storrs ‘ the Theocritus of your
dreams : but I’ve got two Kings to make first.’ Marma-
duke, all his life, was like Spinoza, God-intoxicated :
Lawrence had none other gods but himself. Introverts both
by nature, Lawrence was always trying to get upsides with
his own inferiority complex : Marmaduke wrote his out, so
sublimating it that, but for personal shyness, nothing of it
remained : he was completely other-regarding, fully sur-
rendered, self-conscious in the true meaning of the word.
His judgment of the Seven Pillars of Wisdom illustrates their
differences :
* The exploits of the late Colonel Lawrence in connection
with the Arab rebellion, together with his conscientious
impersonation as an Arab, appealed so strongly to the
British public, avid for romance, that they have been mag-
nified out of proportion to their human value or political
importance into a glamorous legend which has quite
obscured the facts that first gave rise to it, or, rather, to two
separate legends of the East and of the West. The current
legend in the East made Lawrence a very demon of guile and
treachery, ever active on behalf of British imperialism,
possessed by a bitter hatred of Islam, and always seeking to
foment dissension among the Muslims. The legend current
in the West represents him as a mixture of Sir Richard
Burton and Sir Galahad, a man with an unexampled know-
ledge of the East, the hero from the days of chivalry, a
patriot and perhaps a saint, and certainly the greatest
genius of the age. His dramatic withdrawal at the height
of his unexampled popularity into the drab disguise of
Aircraftsman Shaw—as a penance it would seem for the-
failure of the British Government to fulfil all those obviously
hasty promises to the Arabs of which he had been a mouth-
piece, was regarded in the Eastern legend as sheer guile,
in the Western legend as proof of almost superhuman
modesty. The appearance of The Seven Pillars of Wisdom,
which is a full and original version of the work already


published under the title of the Revolt in the Desert , will
explode both legends.
‘ Muslims ; have no horror of the romantically-minded
youth, brave to a fault, and conscious of commanding
genius, who, as a boy at school, so he tells us when describing
the entry of the Arab horde into Damascus, had dreamed
of just such an opportunity as this, which fate and the
chances of war gave him. He had always thought of him-
self as destined to lead movements, not himself to be the
Prophet, but to conduct the Prophet. I had imagined him
devoted to the Amir Feysal, but here learn, from his own
pen, that he had no high opinion of the man ; almost he
complains that fate had given him such wretchedly poor
human material wherewith to work. He did not like the
men with whom he lived and fought and was prepared to
die. He forced himself against a strong distaste to be as
one with them in all respects, like an actor determined to
make the best of a bad play. He suffered more than would
a man of coarser type from such an association, and took a
certain pride in his suffering. Of his bravery there was
never any doubt, either in his own mind or in the minds of
others. He did what he set out to do completely and the
entry into Damascus was his day of triumph. One feels
that he would have performed any difficult task imposed
on him, regardless of its human worth and future conse-
quences, or perhaps not regardless but misled by his own
vision which, as is evident in his writings, was singularly
keen towards the matter actually in hand, but defective in
the general view. He really thought the Arabs a. more
virile people than the Turks. He really thought them better
qualified to govern. He really believed that the British
Government would fulfil punctually all the promises made
on its behalf, however casual, in however roundabout a way,
to the Hejazi Arabs. He really thought that it was love of
freedom and his personal effort and example rather than the
huge sums paid by the British authorities and the idea of
looting Damascus, which made the Arabs zealous in rebel-
lion : he really thought the Sherif of Mecca, as such, had a
better claim to the allegiance of all Muslims than the Sultan


of Turkey, or so it appears from this book, which proves the
Eastern legend groundless. I do not myself think the
Western legend will long survive.
‘ Instead of the army hero, who had a real existence for a
time, a pathetic figure is revealed by his book —a figure
almost as pathetic as Don Quixote in spite of the acclama-
tions he received, in spite of real achievement. Where are
his bedu of the Hedjaz to-day ? A feeble whining, broken
remnant of them beg their bread beside the Pilgrim’s Way,
of the pilgrims whom they once so arrogantly robbed and
murdered. Where the Arab Empire he imagined ? The
dream has vanished. He saw it vanish and it broke his
heart. But it was bound to vanish. It was untrue to life,
made up of personal ideas and not of noted tendencies.’
Lawrence did ‘ Kejera ’ —atonement —until he died, but
Marmaduke knew in 1915 and before that Feisal and
Huseyn were broken reeds from the beginning, for no
Oriental can forgive a traitor to his overlord. Actually
Huseyn dared not go all the way the British would lead
him, and forbade his subjects to call him Amir-ul-munimun
(Prince of Believers) ‘ because that title is reserved for his
Imperial Majesty the Sultan of Turkey as Khalif of the
Muslims.’ (March 27, 1919.) Even the Shi’ites had pro-
tested their devotion to the Turkish Khalif as is witnessed
by the manifesto of the Persian Ulema.
In 1919 an announcement was made in the British Parlia-
ment that only the Muslims should decide this question of
the Khaliphate, which meant that our whole Arab policy
with all it had involved, the loss of life, the money spent on
it, was a failure in its appeal to the Muslims of the British
realm. *We were forced to acknowledge that the hold on
the Muslims of the Turkish Khalif was what our elder
statesmen had said it was, too strong for us to loose. If it was
necessary for us to make much of a Khalif whom we our-
selves intended to set up, it was,’ Marmaduke urged, * a
thousand times more necessary to make much of the Khalif
who, though beaten in the field, had triumphed in the
loyalty of the whole Muslim world.’


Marmaduke rejoiced with the whole of Islam when Ibn
Sa’ud, the sovereign lord of Nejd, descended into the
Hedjaz and swept the feeble King Huseyn, the puppet of
Europe, into the sea (where he remained on the Island of
Cyprus drawing un immense salary from the British Govern-
ment until his death). Ibn Sa’ud was to Marmaduke what
he is to all good Muslims, the saviour of Islam, who cleansed
the land of Arabia of the many abuses that had grown up,
and made safe the Pilgrim paths to the Holy City. Without
bloodshed, Ibn Sa’ud’s army entered Mecca in 1924 in the
best Muslim tradition, and once more in the Holy City
was true the saying of the Prophet: ‘ The righteous and
the pious are abashed in His presence. Neither the hermit
nor the orthodox has any power in His Kingdom. Neither
the ascetic nor the mystic has a voice in His Court, therefore
count not on a mediator between you and your God.’
Marmaduke never had any illusions about Arabs. No
bolstering up of schemes for a confederacy of Arab States
could be based on realities. Arab countries were always split
by internal dissensions and were without national feeling,
and he knew the English war-weary and tired of sideshows.
The Arab character is eminently unstable. The moment
one chief or clan is raised above another by its own efforts or
by an outside power, the others grow jealous, and jealousy
in the East is no passive feeling. Actually even in the
middle of the war Marmaduke knew that for the eighty-odd
million Mohammedans who were subject to the British
Empire, the fight between England and Germany was a
matter in itself of indifference. They were equally afraid
of German and of English domination over Turkey. But
when the army of the King of the Hejjaz, wild Arab horse-
men, ran riot in Damascus on their first arrival, destroying
tramcars, telephone and telegraph, every mechanical con-
venience that the Turks had left, the civilized inhabitants
and the greater part of the four hundred million Muslims
in the world were terrified. They had been prepared to
welcome the arrival of British troops as a relief from war
conditions, but now they said ‘ the English have let in the
desert.’ They were afraid of those savage tribesmen who


went careering through the streets and firing shots at random.
They had no dislike for the Emir Feisal personally because
they saw in him a Turk and not a desert Arab. They
wanted self-determination, nothing else, and they expected
it from England’s propaganda. When they knew it would
not be granted, their pleadings changed.
In January 1914 Marmaduke delivered a lecture at a
meeting of a group founded by Dr. Rosedale, D.D. , to
discuss international affairs at the Cannon Street Hotel in
the City of London. After the lecture Dr. Felix Valyi came
up, introduced himself, and praised Marmaduke’s speech
which had been a feeling appeal for the new national
movement in Turkey, and for a revival in England of the
old Disraelian policy. Dr. Valyi asked leave to print the
lecture in La Revue Politique Internationale , a quarterly which
then he was editing in Paris. Marmaduke gladly consented,
and his speech appeared in February 1914, together with
Mohammed Ali’s famous speech in favour of the Khaliphate
and Professor Browne’s ‘ England and Islam,’ which had
been specially written for Dr. Valyi’s periodical, the first
international magazine to include the whole East in its
survey.
When the war came Dr. Valyi transferred himself and his
paper to Lausanne in Switzerland. During the Great War
years Marmaduke and Aubrey Herbert continued to be
in close private correspondence with Felix Valyi, and when
in the spring of 1916 Dr. Valyi saw an opportunity to attempt
reconciliation between the British and the Turks, he
naturally turned to Marmaduke Pickthall. The group of
responsible Turks in Switzerland was led by Fouad Selim
Al-Hijari, Minister of Turkey in Berne and one of the most
learned thinkers and statesmen of the Near East. This
group suggested to Dr. Valyi that both for the sake of Europe
and the East an attempt must be made to wean Turkey
from the Central Powers. ‘ Pour deblayer le terrain,’
as the French say, Fouad Selim, whom Dr. Valyi was
seeing daily, suggested that a correspondence should be
opened between himself and Marmaduke Pickthall, Valyi
insisting that the letters must be free from the censor’s


investigations. (The Turks did not trust Lloyd George, but
as Marmaduke was at that time a personal friend of Mark
Sykes, both Marmaduke and Dr. Valyi thought it would be
easy.) In tiis first letter, Dr. Valyi writes :
‘ Tachez de venir ici le plus tot possible. Vous pourriez
etre d’une tres grande utilite pour voire pays et le Foreign
Office vous consentira certainement un passeport, si vous
faites valoir l’utilite de votre voyage par l’enquete que vous
pourriez instituer sur les choses d’Orient. Vous inspirez
une confiance absolute dans le monde islamique et vous
etes le seul homme capable de rendre service a votre pays dans
la question d’Orient. Vous pouvez montrer ma lettre a qui
le doit, le cas
Marmaduke, therefore, approached the Foreign Office, but
the following letter from Sir Mark Sykes was the only
result:
‘ 1673 Victoria.
e g Buckingham Gate,
‘ S.W.
‘ 25/5/16.
‘ My dear Pickthall,
‘ I have discussed your case with George Clerk and the
proposal that a passport should be issued to you to enable
you to proceed to Lausanne.
f He is of opinion and I agree, that in view of your
coming up for military service in a short time, that only
the very gravest reasons would justify the issue of a passport.
The letter which you showed me seems hardly enough
warrant, the writer is apparently an Hungarian with no
authority to speak on behalf of the Ottoman Government,
the Government would certainly want something a little
more suggestive of power and capacity to act on the part of
the people at Lausanne before allowing you to proceed to
Switzerland.
‘ Yours sincerely,
* Mark Sykes.’


Marmaduke’s answer is as follows :
‘ Five Chimneys,
‘ Buxted.
‘ May 26th , 1916.
* Dear Sir Mark Sykes,
‘ I enclose a copy of a letter I had sent to Valyi at
Lausanne just before I had your letter by the second post
to-day. If there is anything definite I think that will
elicit further details.
‘ I am a good deal hurt by the imputation, which seems
to me implicit in your letter, that my motive in applying
for a passport is, or might be, to evade military service. I
offered myself, and was accepted (like so many others) as a
military interpreter at the beginning of the war (Oct. 1914),
but refused a job in the postal censor’s department. I would
much rather serve in the ranks —out of doors. I am no
sort of a conscientious objector, though as a man who has to
earn the best part of his living by his pen, and far from keen
upon one aspect of the present war, I have not enlisted of my
own accord. That does not mean that I would shirk my
legal duty.
‘ I had been assured three weeks before I heard from
Valyi that I was just outside the military age laid down by
the Compulsion Act and so free for the present and my
intention, as I told you, was to go to Switzerland only for
about a fortnight. Twenty pounds would not have lasted
me much longer, and that is all I could afford to spend upon
the expedition.
‘ I still believe I could have brought you useful informa-
tion hardly otherwise obtainable. The Hungarian is a
member of the C.U.P., 1 and has been from the beginning.
I quite thought you knew.
‘ Yours sincerely,
‘ Marmaduke Pickthall.’
1 Committee of Union and Progress.


And Sykes’s reply:
* 1673 Victoria.
* 9 Buckingham Gate,
‘S.W.
‘27/5/16.
‘ My dear Pickthall,
‘ Many thanks for your letter and enclo : First you
have no real reason to be hurt in regard to your military
service being mentioned, if I remember rightly I said they
could not issue passports to persons of military age except
for the very gravest reasons : that is only a statement of
fact, is it likely that I should suggest you were trying to avoid
your duty, the whole question was talked over between
George Clerk and myself and without any hidden thought I
wrote to you. If the Dowla of this country finds that it is
good that oriental specialists and dentists should roll
cricket pitches, because they are too old to go to the trenches,
viz. 40 and liable for too short a time to be worth training
for home defence, it is not ‘ my refair ’ as an ancient Truch-
man of Jerusalem once said to me, reason being he declined
affair thus :
‘ Refair combined word derived from reference or business.
‘ as My reference
‘ You reference
‘ Him reference
‘ Ergo My refair
‘ You refair
‘ Him refair
‘ Excuse this digression I think that your letter to Valyi is
quite correct and that if they are really keen they will do
what is necessary.
‘ Yours sincerely,
‘ Mark Sykes.’
Marmaduke then suggested that as he was not allowed to
go abroad, Dr. Valyi might be permitted to come to him,
and Sykes agreed to this :
s


* House of Commons.
‘ 3i/5/i6.
‘ My dear Pickthall,
‘ I can’t promise but if Valyi gives signs of his coming
here being of value I don’t see why he should find much
difficulty.
‘ Yours sincerely,
‘ Mark Sykes.’
Dr. Valyi was obliged to move to Montreuxin June 1916,
and wrote as follows to Marmaduke :
£ My dear Friend,
c In reply to your letter of the 26th May I must assure
you that the importance of your voyage to Switzerland is
evident from many points of view. You will be able to get
most valuable information on Near Eastern questions and as
a result of your inquiry you could take back to the Govern-
ment a true description of the state of affairs in the East, and
I think myself it is most important that certain things which
are not known in England should be made clear. The
fact that you possess the personal confidence of so many
Muslims ought to encourage those who are in a position to
give you a safe conduct to Switzerland, for it is only your
profound friendship for Islam, friendship which the war has
tried and proved, that inspires me to make you the offer
that I have. It is necessary to go over the whole question of
the future relations between England and Islam, to prepare
a policy “ sans bruit, sans reclame, sans phrase.” Your
personality is specially indicated for this delicate job and
I am very surprised that the Foreign Office will not trust
you. I cannot say more than this by letter but there is no
risk in granting you a passport. If the results of your voyage
are nil you merely return to England. If however things
are as I think you will find them I am sure that you will be
strongly requested to go on with the work. It seems to me
astounding that a man like Maurice de Bunsen who is a
friend of Rosedale should not understand these things. I


expect you soon. Please telegraph 16, Place St. Francois,
Lausanne, when you will be arriving.’
Marmaduke’s letter of 22 June crossed that of Valyi’s.
In it he says : ‘ I am awaiting with some anxiety your
answer to my letter in which I asked you if the project
which you wish me to undertake could ever be thought to
be directed against the solidarity of the Entente. I have
been informed that no enquiry which in any way left out
of account this solidarity and merely concerned England,
would be tolerated for the next ten years. This condition
once accepted, I have been informed that I would be allowed,
to go to Switzerland to talk over the matter to which you
refer.’
From Berne, on 25 July 1916, Valyi wrote assuring him
that the f fears expressed in your letter of the 18th June
have no foundation. The problem of the Entente does not
arise at all. There is no reason therefore to refuse my
project and in making your journey easy your authorities
are risking nothing to gain a great deal. The discussion
will be only on one certain problem of capital interest for
England. It is unnecessary for me to tell you that the greatest
discretion is required. I count on your coming soon after
these assurances. You must come to Berne and please
telegraph to me at the Hotel Bellevue Palace before the
sth or 6th July.*
So far Sykes had been cordial enough, but on the 10th he
wrote sharply as follows to Marmaduke :
* Tel. : Vic. 1673.
‘ 9 Buckingham Gate,
‘S.W.
‘ loth July, Jgi6.
* My dear Pickthall,
* I am sorry that you wrote as you did—you must
wire suspending the reply—and then tell him what to do in
accordance with official instructions.
‘ Frankly I do not quite like the way in which you put


the matter to Valyi. I do not consider that it is proper
that you should assume absolute friendship to an enemy
State, in writing to the subject of another enemy State, and
further speak in a distinctly hostile tone of your own
Government.
‘ Whatever may be the rights or wrongs of this it puts
the whole affair in a rather difficult light should Valyi have
anything to say, as his letter will be influenced by the tone
of yours.
‘ Yours sincerely,
‘ Mark Sykes.’
His answer was :
‘ Five Chimneys,
‘ Buxted,
‘ Sussex.
c July ii th, 1916.
* Dear Sir Mark Sykes,
‘ In reply to your second letter of yesterday’s date,
I have just telegraphed to you, asking you to stop my letter
to Valyi which was posted here yesterday, if possible.
Honestly I had not the least intention to write in a hostile
tone of my own Government, or to influence Valyi’s reply
in any way except that of making him explain himself.
‘ I know that he regards me as a British asset in connection
with the Muslim question, and wonders greatly at your
hesitations with respect to me ; and I thought that a clear
statement of the position was most likely to induce a corre-
sponding frankness on his part. A satirical tone, I fear, is
natural to me. I apologize for its use on this occasion ;
but I do not think that Valyi will attach importance to it,
being quite accustomed to my way of writing. He knows
(none better) that I am a pro-Turk but in no sense anti-
British ; he also knows the nature, purely intellectual and
literary, of my turcophil activities. It would seem less
natural if I wrote to him in any other tone. I only wished
to impress on him the necessity for explanation if he wished
to see me in Switzerland ; without letting him know that


there was no chance of my going there, or at least no longer
any wish on my part.
‘ Already, before I got your second letter, I had tele-
graphed to him. “ Attendez deux lettres de moi avant de
repondre.” I enclose a copy of a letter I shall post to him
to-morrow. Should you succeed in stopping my former
letter, please let me know. At once, on hearing that it has
been stopped, I shall write a second letter to the same
effect as this now enclosed.’
On the nth Sykes wrote again a letter which crossed
with Marmaduke’s :
* Tel. : Vic. 1673.
‘ 9 Buckingham Gate,
‘S.W.
‘ n/Jtt/y/1916.
‘ My dear Pickthall,
‘ Herewith a copy of a letter from the W.O.—so
Valyi can communicate thro’ the British Military
Berne, if he desires to do so, the letter will not be opened by
the Censor or anyone else.
* With regard to your being called up. If you show your
birth certificate you will be put back, named and noted if
you are past your 41st year on the date you are called up.
‘ Yours sincerely,
‘ Mark Sykes.’
The enclosure was as follows :
‘ War Office,
‘S.W.
‘ B th July , 1916.
‘ My dear Sykes,
‘ Herewith PickthalPs letter back. I have written
Military Attache, Berne, saying that Valyi is to write
through him, so you can tell Pickthall to carry on and tell


Valyi to address his letter, British Military Attache, British
Legation, Berne.
‘ I assume that nothing compromising to the M.A. will
be written by Valyi.
‘ Yours &c .’
The letter Marmaduke finally was allowed to send was
this :
‘ Dear Friend,
‘ The assurances you gave me in your last' letter
are still too vague. The Turcophil activities which have
won me your friendship and that of the Muslims are natur-
ally, though wrongly, objects of suspicion in the eyes of the
British Government. This is the reason why only a definite
description of the advantages which would ensue from my
voyage will decide these personages to give me the necessary
permission. A highly-placed individual who is showing me
kindness has granted me this favour, that a letter from you
to me will not be opened by the official censor. If you can
use this exceptional opportunity, please give me some
details or at least a general idea of the reason why you wish
me to go to Switzerland.’
Valyi’s answer of the 16 July was that he could add
nothing by letter to his assurances as it was useless to haver
on either side. The minimum of confidence necessary to
the taking up of such an opportunity was not there. He
could go no further, he said, and without Marmaduke’s
actual presence in Switzerland nothing could be done.
Marmaduke wrote sadly to Sykes:
‘ Dear Sykes,
‘ May I write to Valyi that the means of communi-
cation through Berne will remain open in case he should
change his mind ? I have been waiting to hear from you
before writing to him, remembering my mistake last time.
He has written again saying that he has decided to remain
at Lausanne through the summer, the weather in the


mountains being very bad, and hoping, after all, to see me
in a few days 1
c Yours sincerely,
‘ Marmaduke Pickthall. 5
Sykes replied on the Bth :
‘ Tel. : Vic. 1673.
‘ 9 Buckingham Gate,
‘S.W.
‘ 8/8/16.
‘ My dear Pickthall,
‘ I fixed it up as you see, absent in France else I’d
have written before, probably this extraordinary perfor-
mance in Egypt will help matters. The Unspeakable is
sometimes inscrutable in his ways. To march an impossible
march in July in order to fight an impossible battle is quite
incomprehensible but it is all to the good.
‘ Yours sincerely,
‘ Mark Sykes.’
The correspondence closed on the 10th with the following
letter in Sir Mark Sykes’s own hand :
‘ Tel. : Vic. 1673.
‘ 9 Buckingham Gate,
‘S.W.
‘ 10/8/16.
‘ My dear Pickthall,
‘ Many thanks for your letter. Katia is a rather
weird performance and of no great consequence one way or
another, it will, as a dragoman would say, be “ one plenty
big shame for English gentilman he let it the Turks go back
with she’s big guns over a rubbish road.” Syria seems to be
so unpleasant from all points of view at present that I
suppose the Turks find the Peninsular pleasanter.
‘ Yours very sincerely,
* Mark Sykes.’


Thus, in the end, it all came to nothing : was just another
of those abortive attempts to save life which failed, whilst
elaborate complications to waste it, such as the Gallipoli
adventure and the Syrian expeditions, succeeded even
beyond their authors’ wildest dreams. c Satan the Waster ’
Vernon Lee called the Prince of Darkness in her anti-war
play, making her hero explain : ‘ I am the waster of all
sorts of virtue.’
Meantime, for another reason, Marmaduke’s relations
with Sykes had become strained. Towards the end of
February 1915 the Armenians in the vilayets of Van and
Bitlis, who had heard that the Russians meant to occupy
those provinces, turned upon the Muslim population —the
vast majority, but at the time nearly helpless owing to the
absence of the able men on military service—and attempted
to exterminate them with all the horrors which have been
so widely advertised as characteristic of Turkish treatment
of Armenians. They succeeded in massacring more than
three-quarters of the people round. In the district of
Tavskerd, in the vilayet of Erzeroum, the local Armenians,
and Armenian soldiers in the Russian army, annihilated a
population of 40,000 souls. Iri the district of Trebizond a
similar attempt to exterminate the Muslim population was
made. This was before any Armenians suffered at the hands
of the Muslims. In an appeal addressed to the Allied
Powers by the Turkish Government directly after the
Armistice, it is stated that the Armenians in the eastern
provinces of Anatolia massacred a million Muslims before
the deportation order was promulgated. (The Turks are
not a propagandist people, they are rather stoical.)
These crimes of the Armenians were denounced in the
Russian Duma at the time, but were not published in
any English newspaper (since they reflected on our Tsarist
allies), though The Times' correspondent did let out, in an
unguarded moment, that the Armenians at Van ‘ took
bloody vengeance on their enemies.’ On the continent of
Europe it was generally recognized, even during the war,
that the Armenian trouble had originated in a rebellion or
attempted revolution on a large scale made by the Armenian


minority in the Turkish provinces. The very Armenian
propaganda as dished out in-France and Italy seems to
have been - different from that to which we simple English
have been treated so persistently. The pose of lamb-like,
perfect innocence seems to have been reserved for use in
England and America.
As to the conduct of the Armenians, while the Russian
army was in occupation of the greater part of Eastern
Anatolia, the evidence of Russian officers deplored it.
‘ The Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Army, General
Odichelidze, Lt.-Col. Tredokhleboff, Captain Youlkevitz,
the Commissary Zelatoff, Lieutenants Lipsky and Stravosky,
General Galitine, Lt.-Col. Grianznoff and about a hundred
other Russian officers—whose honour and veracity cannot
be suspected, and who are certainly not less reliable than
missionaries and newspaper correspondents—all these officers,
who were fighting against the Turks, were disgusted and
outraged by Armenian savagery. General Odichelidze
states : “ Near Erzindjan about 800 unarmed and defence-
less Turks were massacred. The Armenians caused an
immense hole to be dug, to which they brought them, and
there butchered them, throwing them into the hole like
wild animals. The Armenian who was at the head of this
savage and bestial operation counted the victims, shouting :
c Have we got seventy ? There is room for ten more. Go on ! 5
and ten other poor Muslims were slaughtered and hurled.”
The General adds that at Ilidja every Turk who could not
escape was massacred, and that he saw numerous dead
bodies of children whose heads had been severed from their
bodies with blunt axes. Lt.-Col. Grianznoff declares that
he himself saw on the roads heaps of dead bodies cruelly
mutilated, on which every Armenian passer-by spat, utter-
ing insulting words. The courtyard of the mosque at
Ilidja was full of Turkish dead bodies heaped two metres
high. On the bodies of the women traces of violation were
to be seen, and cartridges . . . the former evangelical
scholars (i.e. young men and girls who had been pupils of
the Protestant missionaries) were laughing at the spectacle.


An Armenian purveyor to the Russian army store admitted
that Armenians crucified a Turkish woman alive against the
wall, whom they then hanged by her hair after plucking
out her heart. Similar ghastly and hateful crimes were
committed by the Armenians all over the territories occupied
by the Russian army, which, since it had to face the approach-
ing Turkish army, could not pay enough attention to
protect the population from Armenian cruelty. Neverthe-
less justice demands the acknowledgment that if any Turk
or Kurd survived the fiendish savagery of the Armenians, it
was solely due to the protection given by the Russian
military staff and officers.’ 1
These massacres were not long unavenged. On April 8,
1915, the deportation and massacre of Armenians began at
Zeitoun in Cilicia, and continued throughout 1915 from one
Armenian centre to another throughout the Ottoman
Empire. The Armenians had behaved to Turkey, struggling
for her existence, as the Irish Nationalists to England, with
similar results. Soon, as far as murder and massacre went,
Turks and Armenians were pretty well fifty-fifty : the
massacres by Turks of 1915, following on the betrayal of the
Turks to the Russians by the Armenians (although Asiatics,
the Armenians had conspired with the design to let in
Europe), were followed, in November 1916, by the slaughter
of 500,000 Kirghiz Muslims in the presence of their women
and children, and the only English paper to report this was
the Manchester Guardian. By the end of 1915 one and a half
million Circassians, Muslims and Christians both, had been
forced by the Russians to flee to Turkish territory.
It would have been far better if Marmaduke had left the
whole Armenian question to fester in its own blood, as,
later, he wisely refused to have anything to do with post-
war Palestine, because he knew he could not but take
passionate sides. But in 1916 he had not the necessary self-
discipline, though he fully realized the c perils of propa-
ganda,’ recounting the following story to emphasize them.
1 Preface to Turcs et Armeniens deoant VHistoire (Lausanne, 1919) —a book
containing a great body of sworn evidence as to the atrocities committed by
Armenians throughout the war.


Saadi, the Persian poet, dreamed that the Devil stood
beside him, ; not in horrid guise, but as an angel beautiful
and sad and good. “ Why,” cried the poet, “do we abhor
you and think of you as something hideous and by nature
evil ? ” “ Ah,” said the Devil with a shrug, “ the pen is in
the hand of the enemy.” The poet was no atheist, Marma-
duke was careful to explain, he was a believer who per-
ceived, with many Muslims of undoubted piety, that God’s
view even of the Devil must differ from man’s, since man is
placed in active opposition to the Devil, and active opposi-
tion spoils the view. Whereas God is infinitely above both.
The Armenians, always and everywhere a minority,
wished to enslave the Muslim majority, and the pen was in
their hands. To Christian Europe they whined : ‘We
are Christians, you are Christians. We are Europeans, too,
being cunning traders : the ignorant Muslims are by their
fanaticism forbidden to take interest for any capital. Come
and help us.’ Christian Europe had not always approved
them. Ibn Botlan, a Christian physician of the first half of
the eleventh century, wrote : ‘ The Armenian is the worst
of the white as the negro is of the black. Chastity is
unknown and theft rampant among them. Coarse is their
nature and coarse their speech, and they only work under
the threat of the cane or the stress of fear.’ As a race they
owed their limelight to Russian intervention, which had
brought Turkish vengeance down upon them : wisely, they
had traded on their misfortunes, made a corner in them.
• God, as the Arab prophet had it, created of the same stuff
the Armenian and the hare. The Armenian question was
greatly aggravated when the elimination of British resis-
tance to Russia in the East was gradually transformed into
close co-operation with her owing to the necessity to England
of Russia’s co-operation in the West in the coming struggle
with Germany. As the dying body of Turkey was carried
off in mouthfuls in the beaks of the European vultures, this
‘ Armenian question ’ became, as it were, the focus of the
whole of European Near Eastern diplomacy, and Ignatieff
(chief chemist of the destructive policy in the East) ended
by contaminating the whole international situation.


Sir Mark Sykes, whom no one can accuse of an Islamic
bias, writing as late as 1916, said that either because of
centuries of tyranny and maladministration or because of
the difficulties of bilingual education, the present-day
Armenians were very difficult to govern. They were so
avaricious, they would not pay any taxes at all; they were
most treacherous to each other and often became revolu-
tionaries in order to satisfy private vendettas. 4 These
revolutionaries assassinate Muslims and extort from whole
villages big sums of money. If the village refuses certain
individuals are murdered as a warning.’
For some years past Western Europe, and above all
England, had thought of the Armenians as a peaceful and
innocent people, he declared, victims of a half-mad and
wholly barbarous tyranny. This was far from being the
truth. Certainly the Armenians suffered, as equally all
Ottoman subjects have suffered, from the corrupt adminis-
tration. But their sufferings were brought on their own
heads and they were detested by their neighbours with
surprising unanimity. Even in the six provinces which
were supposed to be Armenian, according to their own
calculations they only represented, at most, 30 per cent of
the population (and that only in Erzeroum and Bitlis ; in
the other four their highest figure was 17 per cent) ; they
demanded loudly the domination of all this territory. This
naturally annoyed both the Turks, their then masters, and
the Kurds, who in all of the vilayets formed substantial
minorities, in two of them 46 per cent and in Van 56 per cent.
A bare ten years after the 1896 massacre outcry, Sykes
wrote that there was no difference between Turkish and
Armenian villages. In most the two races lived side by
side, but the situation was becoming more and more
intolerable and the deportation by force of one or the other
race the only remedy he could conceive of. The national
renascence of Armenia, he thought, was a calamity which
had not yet reached its zenith. Mollahs and missionaries
should be put under lock and key before any serious reforms
could be attempted, he advised. It seemed to him inevitable
that the Armenians should remain always unfortunate,


because the greater half of their miseries did not come from
the stupid and capricious despotism by which they were
ruled, but-from their own conduct to each other. The
Armenian anarchists from Constantinople threw bombs in
order to provoke a massacre of their compatriots. The
Armenian villages actually fought between themselves, and
he knew a case of priests conniving at the murder of a
bishop.
His conclusion (and no one remembering his share in the
Sykes-Picot Treaty can accuse him of partiality for the Turks)
was that the subject Christian races in Turkey lived very
much as did their Mohammedan neighbours. When in
The Times Sir Mark attacked Marmaduke’s friend, Captain
Dixon Johnson, Marmaduke defended him in a reply of
great length in the Mew Age. He was undoubtedly in the
right, as anyone reading his correspondence now must
agree, but these are firework ashes, cold as the conferences
of to-day will be when Jew and Arab become peaceful and
remote from each other and from us : remote as Turk and
Armenian are to-day.
Marmaduke now met my mother. Possingworth, where we
lived, was a short four miles from Five Chimneys. I
remember his coming up to the nursery and looking with
her over sixteen miles of Sussex to the sea. The big guns
could be heard night and day, and as they stood by the
window talking of the war I wondered why grown-ups
talked so interminably all the time of the war or of politics.
The war was all-invading : even at night, in the summer
moonlight, mother would walk in the trefoil-gold fields
in her dressing-gown, unable to sleep. In London it was
more fun : in the air-raids (which the servants called
thunderstorms, but I, superior in my six-year-old wisdom,
knew better, for everyone was sent downstairs to the base-
ment during an air-raid —never during a thunderstorm)
mother would sit on my bed and sing the Dies Irae right
through as often as I liked.
Marmaduke came to see us in London, too, but to lunch,
and so many people came to lunch in those days that I hardly
noticed him at first. Bernard Shaw and Bertrand Russell


came, and Clifford Allen —-just out of prison after hunger-
striking, with gruesome stories of stomach-pumps ; Roger
Casement, too, for whom later, on the morning of August 3,
we got up at six to pray whilst he was hanging in London ;
and Ramsay MacDonald, who came once for me specially,
on my seventh birthday.
Marmaduke’s first letter to mother is dated November
1916, and was written when he was just leaving Buxted.
Mother had been trying to find him another house, but he
wrote : { lt seems well not to take another house at this
moment in the world’s history, especially as I am under
menace of conscription when they raise the age-limit.’ He
was never a pacifist, and was perfectly ready to fight when
required, though he admired Arthur Field, who was a
conscientious objector. But he said to him : “I am not so
strong as you. I cannot stand out against the powers of
evil : except that I will never serve against the Turks.”
And he would not volunteer. In April 1918 he wrote to
Aubrey Herbert:
‘ I see that they are going to raise the military age ;
and, as my work is not of national importance, I shall no
doubt be more usefully employed in scrubbing floors or
cleaning motor-lorries. In any case I shall probably be cut
off from any chance of being useful when the moment when
my knowledge might be of some use arrives.
As you may have heard, I have openly professed Islam,
and even before that avowal have been regarded as a friend,
and even something of a leader, by the British Muslims.
Though I have been sickened, as they all have, by the
Government attitude, I have always hoped and worked
towards reconciliation. The hope of reconciliation in their
minds is not yet killed. The Sherif of Mecca business is
most bitterly resented ; and extremely dangerous reports
are current as to the means by which the said Sherif—who is
said to be a pitifully weak man and a wine-bibber—was
“ persuaded ” to rebel.
‘ At first the anger was all against the Sherif, and he was
to be killed at any cost; but he has excused himself appar-
ently, or someone has pleaded on his behalf, and now the


resentment is all against England. The same change of
feeling has taken place with regard to the behaviour of the
Agha Khan. A rooted hatred and mistrust of England,
waiting its opportunity, is what I fear as the result of our
pro-Russian aberration. That does not mean a love of
Germany save in so far as Germany proves loyal and
disinterested towards the Muslim Empire. All Christian
Powers are now alike distrusted. The tendency is towards
a pan-Asiatic ideal; with the Emperor of Japan exalted as
the Great Avenger—and possibly the future Khalif of
Islam. Now England has a chance to stop all that, and
win back the devotion of the Muslim world. If you will
trouble to read through the enclosed you will know the
trend of my ideas upon the subject.
c A pan-Islamic progressive movement inspired and
fostered in England was Disraeli’s notion, and I have been
doing my best to make it once more possible in certain
circumstances. The movement is there in any case, and on
a huge scale. It will be dangerous only if discountenanced.
If I must shoulder arms I shall be unable to keep in touch
with such matters, and I wish I knew of someone who could
carry on ; but it must be a genuine Muslim, not a British
agent, and it ought to be an Englishman. On the other
hand a really friendly Englishman (not a Muslim) could do
quite a lot. Could you and would you take the matter up ?
Please treat these remarks in strict confidence.’
In July 1917 the Union of Democratic Control issued
‘ Suggestions for terms of a peace settlement,’ which was
signed by the whole Executive ; Snowden, MacDonald,
E. D. Morel, Charles Trevelyan, and the rest. To these
suggestions, as far as they regarded Turkey—nationalization
of the Straits, independence of the various nationalities
under guarantee by the League of Nations and the continua-
tion, maintenance, and extension of the policy of inter-
national control —Marmaduke answered with a pamphlet
published in November 1917.
He wrote of ‘ the mildewed odour of Gladstonian preju-
dice ’ against Turkey and firmly opposed the handing over


of ‘ a young democratic nation even if it were full of faults,
to a Concert of Europe in sheep’s clothing.’ From its very
inception he detested the League of Nations. ‘ Luckily
it is not yet formed,’ he wrote in 1917, and his prophetic
words about it are even sadder in their wisdom to-day than
twenty years ago when first they were said : ‘ This inter-
national union of bureaucratic control, if and when estab-
lished, may yet turn out no better for humanity than the
“ Holy Alliance ” of Monarchs, after the Napoleonic wars.
In any case, the democracies of the world will have,
naturally, even less influence over such an artificially
created institution than they at present exercise over their
individual governments. The individual governments are
now run in the interests of capitalist exploitation. How
then will a league of such be anything but a League of
Capitalist Exploitation ? ’
The Russian Revolution saved Turkey, as it saved Persia.
But to Marmaduke, since gratitude for that salvation
necessitated a certain dependence on Moscow, it gave a
slant both to Persian and to Turkish progress which he
mistrusted in the extreme. For him the Russian might
change his shirt, but could not alter his skin ; although he
was relieved and delighted at the Bolshevik renouncement
of territorial aims and at their refusal to accept the proposed
Allied plans for a peace settlement (i.e. Constantinople and
large tracts of Turkish territory). The peace they made
was, he knew, the beginning of the end of war in Europe
and in the world ; yet he never trusted the Revolution,
simply because it was Russian.
But however much he might distrust the new regime in
Russia, the whole East rejoiced in it. As the Persian poet
said, centuries before :
‘ The tyrant falleth aye by self-wrought ill,
The Rook is lost, the Pawn advanceth still,
Bishop and Knight we from the task will bring,
The Premier’s slain, ’tis checkmate to the King.’
Marmaduke’s mistrust of Red Russia did not prevent his
being horrified at the British policy of re-establishing the


Russian Empire as nearly as possible in the state in which it
existed before the War. The British Government’s support
of Denikin, and Koltchak seemed to him a violation of all
the principles of democracy. Nor was there any doubt but
that, as P. D. Ouspensky wrote from Ekaterinadar, in 1919,
‘ We must acknowledge England’s help to Russia has been
very substantial indeed : since without it the volunteer
army would not have been able to do anything against the
Bolsheviks and would have been crushed.’ This * very
substantial help ’ seemed a monstrous breach of the law of
self-determinism to Marmaduke.
His hopes that with the withdrawal of Russia, the share
promised her by the Sykes-Picot Treaty might be left to
Turkey, were quickly dashed. England and France immedi-
ately repartitioned the areas in question.
He was called up in 1918 as a private in the 17th Hamp-
shires and was stationed at Southwold. It was an infantry
battalion guarding the East Coast, and Marmaduke wrote
to my mother : ‘ Now that I am getting over the first trouble
of boots, etc., and am beginning to feel my way, I do not
know that I was ever happier in all my life.’ His wife wrote
in July to a friend that she was busy looking for lodgings in
Southwold in order to give her husband decent food and a
bed for a change. ‘He finds the meals very disgusting
(they are particularly bad in his company) and the army
boots awfully painful, but he likes his comrades very much
and the M.O. is very kind and allows him to go to his house
every day for a bath, which is a real blessing.’ For the first
time in his life Marmaduke. found in England the same
feeling of comradeship as he had found in the East.
On October 30, 1918, after the Turkish army on the
Tigris had surrendered to the British, an Armistice between
Turkey and the Entente was signed at Mudros, and hostili-
ties ceased the following day. Marmaduke remained in
uniform until the end of the year, and ‘ he made everyone,
soldier or surgeon or nurse, love him. Even the authorities,
in spite of his record as an agitator and anti-Briton, raised
him to the rank of corporal.’ * The last two months,’ he
writes to Hickes, ‘ of my military career I was corporal in
T


charge of an isolation hospital for influenza—nursing
influenza-pneumonia patients night and day, looking after
catering, discipline, and medicaments, trying to make death-
beds fairly comfortable, and attending to the dead —a
ghastly job, for we had no appliances, not even a pneumonia
jacket or a screen, and the men were in their army blankets
on the floor, poor fellows. I didn’t catch the plague, nor
did my helpers ; we were much too busy. But after I was
demobilized both Muriel and I got it in a London boarding-
house, and only saved our lives by rushing to Pevensey on
the strength of an advertisement. There the March winds
blew the plague away.’


CHATTER NINE
FROM 1918, when he moved into the Pond House, let
him at a nominal rent by my mother, until 1920, when
he left for Bombay—for two years, that by grace of childhood
seemed infinitely long, a vast expanse co-equal with the
whole rest of life, my existence was concentrated on Marma-
duke Pickthall : I became a microscope focused on to
him. He lived now but a mile from me, and as Sidney
wrote of Stella, so can I claim, that only in him my song
began and ended : counsellor, confessor, father, and grande
passion , he was all these to me and more. My own father
was, as so many English fathers are, a kind man who came
home on Sundays.
At that time Sheriff of London, a director of the Bank
of England, senior partner of Frederick Huth and Company,
chairman of the Institute of Bankers, a member of the
Moratorium board and of several Government commissions,
he had little time to spend with his eight-year-old daughter.
So I went from Possingworth to the Pond House daily.
Subterfuge was often necessary to persuade a reluctant
younger sister, and a still more reluctant governess, of the
necessity. cc Miss Rigby, shall we see how many different
wild flowers we can find ? ” Then “ Why—there’s the Pond
House. As we’re so near, may we just see if Mr. Pickthall is
in ? ” or “Do you know all the edible toadstools ? Mother
is compiling a list of them. ... What a long way we’ve come
—look, here we are at the Pond House already.” Blackberry-
ing, nutting, mushrooming, motoring, riding—(hour-long
the patient groom held horses whilst Marmaduke and I
walked in pinewoods, or punted, seeking water-lilies and
scented rushes on his pond or goose eggs on his island) —
all ways and any excuses led me to one only goal.
He would sit perched up on a high chair at a huge desk


my mother had given, and from outside I could see if he
were there, and slip in without disturbing Muriel or pink-
cheeked Blanche, the cake-maker. In those years I learnt
all his faith : in explaining Islam to me he set his own
mind, buffeted by war and tension of strained loyalties, in
order, and re-won that security he never again lost. As I
watched, understanding, yet not wholly aware, his ship
righted herself, set sail anew to make the course from which
thereafter no sea would move her. My mother was often
away, abroad or in London, and before one of her longer
absences she confided my sister and me to Marmaduke.
She was afraid England was on the verge of a Socialist or
Communist revolution, and if it came, would Marmaduke
please promise to come to Possingworth and meet any body
of insurgents who might attack the mansion ? He had so
much influence with the people, was so clever with them.
Marmaduke told Arthur Field how he assured her there
was no likelihood of such a rising, but might he give her
some advice ? That if and when the revolution came, she
should empower him to go down the drive and meet the
people, offering them the house and grounds as a holiday
home for the children of the workers ? He would then
explain to them that she had left her children there as an
earnest of her goodwill, entrusting them to their kindness.
“ You don’t want the place—you have so many other houses
you can only afford a three-months’ stay in each, and it
would be a kindness to you to take one of the places off
your mind,” he told her. She willingly agreed, and begged
him at the same time to try and remove from my mind my
doubts of the existence of God.
He found, not doubts, but a consuming interest, kindled
by being let loose to browse in an excellent library. We
talked interminably of religion. Conversation was a shuttle
he moved continually between grave and gay. He was
never pompous, priggish, a preacher, or a bore. We would
discuss the Persian approach to Allah, which fascinated me,
but of which he never could approve. I had admired the
Sufi who cried : “I am the Truth,” and, like Christ, was
killed for his blasphemy. But Marmaduke, whilst admitting


that the exclamation broke from him in an uncommon
access to that ecstasy of communion and irradiation which
befalls the seeker after truth at a certain stage of his pil-
grimage, yet insisted the Persian mind there gave way,
where the Arab or Turkish would still have held its own.
Posterity has judged the man a saint, he declared, and happy
in his tragic end, for the rulers of the day were Arabs.
The Persian mind, he explained, seeks ecstasy even though
an illusion : the Arab mind seeks truth even though it
prove a disillusion, for the Arab will never accept ecstasy as
truth, though the Persian claims it so. He tried to explain
Tasawwuf to me ; how language existed before the coming
of the grammarians, and is superior to grammar : and how
the writers of Tasawwuf are the real exponents of a language
—poets, not grammarians. Yet the Persian mystics were
analysts first, he affirmed, almost one might say vivisec-
tionists, and lovers after, and when they reached ecstasy the
over-complicated structure of their minds broke down.
The highest revelation does not come through study nor
through practice of posture, nor through another person, be
he never so wise a teacher, he said : the highest revelation
comes direct from God to whom He chooses, nor ever through
any living person, for He is the only Living personality.
Religion, he continually insisted, is not a matter of belief,
but of actual experience, and whilst personal religious
experience is always worthy our reverence it never is to be
found in multitudes, and mysticism must not be allowed to
degenerate into mystification. Bogey-bogey and mumbo-
jumbo he hated, and all forms of priest-craft, and most
so-called mysticism was little else, he feared, an opiate only,
showing a flowery pathway of escape from duties, obliga-
tions, and pangs of conscience, and from the hundred
mental problems men ought to solve. For one religious
man who took to it, he declared, there were a thousand
loafers. However intense the meditation, there can be no
call to seek to be God, for our scale is too different, the
distance too gigantic. Publicly we must always say : Omy
lord ; though privately we may come to stammer : O my
beloved.


From such talk he would pass to story-telling, asking me
if I knew the story of Abu Nuwwas, Haroun al Rashid, and
the eggs ? How, one day, when the famous jester was late,
the Khalif said they would play that game where all others
must imitate everything he did. The Khalif sent for some
eggs, and when the jester appeared, the Khalif hid his egg
under his cushion and clucked. All the courtiers followed
suit. Abu Nawwas, however, stood up in the middle of
them all, flapped his wings, and crowed.
Or that of the faithful cucumber which saved the prince’s
life and was kept by him in a pot very safely ? Every morn-
ing he would shout to it on his way to bathe, and it would
reply : “ Yes, brother.” Till one day there was no curry,
and the prince’s sister said : “ There is a cucumber in a
pot. Make it into a pickle,” which the cook did. Where-
upon the prince committed suicide, and I ceased to be a
vegetarian.
He would climb trees with us, bathe and fish, and play
by the hour. But the best was his talk, and we would fight
for the honour of walking on his right (the side of honour)
and listening. Once he warned us against white lies, illus-
trating his remarks with the tale of Al-khan-fashar. There
was a man, he said, who always had an answer to every-
thing, even if he made it up. Came a day when his friends
all together concocted the word Al-khan-fashar and asked
him what he made of it. He did not hesitate. “It is a
plant,” he replied, “ which grows in the remote parts of
Yaman and its property is to attract fresh milk. As the
poet says, surely the love of you has attracted my heart
even as the Khan-fashar doth attract fresh milk. As David
of Antioch says ... as So-and-so says . . . and other
authorities so and so. . . .”
Having told them the word’s derivation, quoted dic-
tionaries, and several couplets from old poems bringing in
the word, the Know-all was going to produce a saying of
the Prophet which should contain it, when his friends
stopped him, saying : ‘ Stop, thou has lied in the name of
David of Antioch and in the name of Fulan and Fulan, but
thou shalt not lie in the name of God’s messenger. We


joined together to invent a word, each bringing a consonant
to see.to what lengths thou wouldst go.’ And then they
killed the liar.
Many,other enchanting stories he told us : of the Turkish
khoja who set before the friends of the friends of the friend
of the man who gave him a hare, a bowl of clear water, for
that was soup of the soup of the soup of the hare-soup ; of
Ali Mawk Seyf bin zi Yazur who brought the Nile to Cairo,
and, of course, many of Johha and of Abu Nawwas.
But after enough stories talk would begin again, and he
would speak of Allah in such terms that, try as I would, I
could not feel Islam to be merely c an ethical and practical
ideal and code of conduct.’ His appeal was to something
neither intellectual nor objective, but intensely personal,
and, because I was so very young, he did not encounter the
usual barriers of personality (which is largely an affair of
barriers). His God, I thought, must be lovelier than
Iseult and braver than Prometheus—my two then pet
heroes —for the very talk of Him so to make my heart burn,
and I would press Marmaduke further and ask, if then He
has no body, no comparison, no image or likeness, what
can He be and where ? And he quoted the Qu’aran in
answer : “ Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth.
The similitude of his Light is a niche wherein is a lamp.
The lamp is in a glass. The glass is as it were a shining
star. This lamp is kindled from a blessed tree, an olive
neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil would almost
glow forth of itself though no fire touched it. Light upon
Light. Allah guideth unto His light whom He will.” He
told me the one sin and only was to stand between a creature
and that Light, or for a creature, deliberately, to deny its
own Light.
‘ Creature ailee, soigne tes ailes,’ he wrote me when I was
in France : and when I asked, where is God ? answered :
‘ The Worker is concealed in the workshop : go you and
seek Him there, for the work has woven a net over Him,
and outside of it you cannot see Him.’ He taught me the
Muslim prayers in Arabic, showed me how the prayer-mat
foreshadows the grave, and explained the meaning of the


various postures. He had begun to translate the Qu’aran
for me, giving me, now and then, a chapter on a scrap of
paper or in a letter. When I married he gave me the
manuscript of his whole completed translation ‘ as for you
it was begun.’
At the end of 1917 Marmaduke met Kwaja Kamal ud din,
the founder and Imam of the Woking Muslim Mosque.
Marmaduke lectured for him in the London Muslim prayer-
house, and, later, at the beginning of 1919, when owing to
ill-health Kwaja Kamal ud din had to return to India, he
installed Marmaduke as Imam in his stead. Marmaduke
led the Friday prayer, and delivered the sermons. ‘lf there
is one thing that turns your hair grey, it is preaching in
Arabic,’ he wrote to George Hornblower. He also con-
ducted the Traveeh prayer during Ramadan and led the
Eid-ul-Fitr prayer at the Mosque, Woking. He was respon-
sible for editing the monthly Islamic Review , published, in
English, from the Mosque, and worked for a whole year in
the Islamic Information Bureau, which was started in 1918
in Palace Street, Buckingham Palace Road, where he ran
the weekly paper the bureau published, The Muslim Outlook.
This bureau was financed by Indian Muslims—through
Mr. Yakub Hassan of Madras. It existed to put the
Turkish case, as it affected Mohammedan India, before the
British public.
In Queen Victoria’s Proclamation (on her assumption of
the title of ‘ Empress of India ’) it was made clear that the
loyalty and allegiance of Indians to the British Crown was
to be conditional upon the due recognition and observance
of the principles of religious neutrality and toleration by the
British Government and upon its respecting the religious
obligations of the Indian peoples. The text of the Turkish
Treaty was a deliberate violation of this observance, a
violent departure from the principles laid down in 1858.
Again and again, from 1799 until 1918, Great Britain
admitted the Khalifa to be the acknowledged head of the
Muslim faith, and the conditions laid down by Islamic law
for the Khilafate are not Koreish descent (descent from the
Prophet) ; but only (1) absolute and unequivocal indepen


dence (which the Sherif of Mecca has never, and under the
then circumstances, could never hope to enjoy), and (2)
the possession of adequate temporal power. These both the
Turkish, Treaty would take from the Khalifa : thus the
Turkish treaty destroyed not only the Ottoman Empire and
the Khilafate, but also the only condition which kept the
Indian Muslims loyal to the British Throne and obliged
their allegiance.
The eighty million Indian Mohammedans are, of necessity,
the most solidly pro-British section of India —with a majority
of 260. non-Mussulmans always round about them, they
know that only the power of the British raj saves them from
continual attacks by their fellow-countrymen. But however
anxious for their own security, they are Muslims first and
Indians afterwards, and their loyalty to the Khilafate set
them solidly against the Allied policy in the years 1918-
1924, and the agitation they initiated, in which they were
joined by vast numbers of Hindus, Sikhs, and Parsees, and
by Mahatma Gandhi himself, will never be completely
calmed, for Amritsar sealed the Muslim demands with
blood : and as Denshawai was the beginning of the end of
British rule in Egypt, so Amritsar marks the beginning of
the end of British rule in India. Though it seemed at first
sight a purely Muslim concern, this question for the future
of Turkey and the Islamic Khilafate, it proved itself a
solder which, for the first time in the history of the world,
united Muslims and Hindus—albeit temporarily—under the
leadership of one Hindu—Mahatma Gandhi —whose ablest
lieutenants were two Muslims —Shaukat and Muhammed
Ali, the famous ‘ Ali brothers.’
Mr. Lloyd George’s speech of January 5, 1918, which
declared : “ Nor are we fighting to deprive Turkey of its
capital or of the rich and renowned lands of Asia Minor and
Thrace, which are predominantly Turkish in race,” though
falling short of the wishes of the Muslim communities, was
regarded by the whole of Islam as a solemn and sacred
pledge which enabled the Allies to secure the whole-hearted
and loyal support of the Mohammedan members of the
British Empire in every part of the globe, and served to still


the suspicions which sundry manifestations of British policy
—such as the conduct of the Arabian revolt—had roused
amongst the Muslim peoples.
The armistice with Turkey had been signed on the basis
of President Wilson’s twelfth point, which was as follows :
‘ That the Turkish portions of the present Ottoman Empire
should be assured of secure sovereignty, but the other
nationalities now under Turkish rule should be assured
security of life and autonomous development.’ These
declarations were both palpably violated and betrayed by
the Turkish Treaty, which aimed at the utter dismember-
ment of the Ottoman Empire and the destruction of the
Khilafate. By it the c rich and renowned lands of Asia
Minor and Thrace ’ were consigned to Greece, a non-
combatant throughout the war, whose only function was
to be inheritor of Russia’s abandoned claims. The Holy
Shrines of Mesopotamia—the whole c Island of Arabia ’
which the British Government swore should never pass out
of Muslim control —were placed under Christian man-
datories, and Constantinople itself was made an international
city controlled by the League of Nations after the model of
Dantzig, with the Straits also internationalized.
America, France, and Italy all opposed the Turkish
Treaty, but Mr. Lloyd George added the whole of Thrace
to the new Greek Empire. He did this in despite of the
principle of self-determination which he and the Allies
had preached and promised at Versailles—for in Thrace
625- per cent of the population was Turkish and Muslim.
Adrianople, the second city of Turkey, and Smyrna, the
second port of the Turkish Empire, were handed to Greece
without a by-your-leave, for the Allied Powers refused to
take a plebiscite.
On January 1, 1919, the Muslims of India presented a
memorial to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
signed by the Aga Khan, Ameer Ali, Sheykh Hosein
Kidwai of Gadia, Marmaduke, and several others, pointing
out that Turkey had been conquered largely by the efforts
of Indian troops, who had been assured that at the peace
treaty the independence of Turkey, and the temporal power


of the Khalifate would be guaranteed by the victorious
Allies.
On January io Marmaduke wrote to Herbert:
‘l4 St. James’s Green,
‘ Southwold.
‘ Jan. 10 th 1919.
‘ Dear Herbert,
‘ I was greatly shocked to-day when I opened my
Daily Telegraph to see that England threatens to destroy
the Dardanelles forts if Fakhri Pasha and the Turkish
garrison of El Medinah do not at once evacuate that city in
favour of the forces of the King of the Hejjaz. I suppose
that it was stipulated in the Armistice with Turkey that
Turkish forces should evacuate Arabia.
£ But the Holy Places constitute a separate question,
dependent on the question of the Khalifate which concerns
all Muslims, and Muslims only. It is the feeling among
Muslims that they should not be entrusted unconditionally
to the keeping of a nationalist Arab Kingdom, whose repre-
sentative the other day declared : “ I am an Arab first, a
Muslim afterwards.” It is as if he had said : “ I am a
savage first, a civilized person afterwards ” ; for the Arabs
have no claim to human gratitude, or even consideration,
without Muhammed.
‘ Surely it would be an advantage to our rulers if they
would but see it, to leave the Turkish garrison in Medinah
till the peace settlement, to keep the question of the Holy
Places open so that it may be settled satisfactorily to Muslims
by some scheme of Muslim internationalization of those
places and the way to them, making them politically inde-
pendent of any single Muslim Power, while religiously
dependent on the Khalif and some reconstructed Council of
the Ulema. But Muslims, it would seem, are not to be
allowed a say in a matter of such vast importance to them,
which really concerns Christians not at all.
' I write to you to relieve my mind and in the faint hope
that you may be able to do something. It is horrible to me


to see England, with all the power in her hands, apparently
incapable of generosity.
‘ I was demobilized a fortnight ago, having done my six
months’ hard labour—with success, I think. At any rate, I
have had kind remarks from officers and N.G.O.s and men.
I was a lance-corporal after three months’ service, and should
have been a sergeant but for the Armistice. I had been
sergeant for some weeks when the order came for my
demobilization.’
In April 1917 the massacre of Amritsar had moved all
India profoundly : in December of the same year the All-
India Muslim League met again at Amritsar, attended by
twenty thousand Hindus and Muslims and presided over by
Shaukat Ali, who, with his brother, the head of the Indian
Khalifate Delegation, had been released only three days
before this meeting. 1 This Conference resolved to send,
with the consent and assistance of the Viceroy and his
Government, an Indian Khalifate Delegation to Europe and
America to express the intensity and volume of Muslim and
Indian sentiment on the subject of the Khalifate to the
Allies and to appear before the Peace Conference as the
representatives of the Indian Empire. The Delegation,
which arrived in London in June 1919, brought with them
a message from Mahatma Gandhi, which is as follows :
* The policy of the British Government has been definitely
stated to be that of making India an equal partner. Recent
events have awakened India to a sense of her dignity. In
these circumstances the British Empire, as one consisting of
free nationalities, can only hold together if the just and fair
demands of each component part of the Empire, in regard
to matters which are of concern to a large section of. its
people, are adequately satisfied. It is therefore urged that
the British Ministers are bound not merely to press the
1 When Mr. Montagu visited India in 1917 he received more than a
hundred thousand telegrams a day urging the release of the Ali brothers,
and on the day they were set free, such crowds had assembled to greet them in
Delhi, Lahore, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, Karachi, Lucknow, Cawnpore,
Amritsar, Meerut, Aligarh and Dacca, to mention only a few places, that the
oldest of living Indians cannot remember ever having seen the like.


Muslim, or rather the Indian, claim before the Supreme
Council, but to make it their own. If, however, for any
reason whatsoever, they fail to do so, and the Supreme
Council also fails to perform its elementary duty of giving
effect to the declarations that brought about an Armistice,
it is futile to expect peace in India ; and the Khalifate
Conference will fail in its duty if it hesitates to warn His
Majesty’s Ministers that an affront put upon the seven
crores of Muslims in India, supported by the twenty-three
crores of Hindus and others, will be incompatible with an
expectation of blind loyalty. Beyond that it is impossible
for the Conference to foresee the results.’
Gandhi had written to the Ali brothers when they were in
prison and had studied their views and activities about the
Khalifate. c I had a discussion,’ he writes in his own
autobiographical Life , ‘ with my Muslim friends and felt
that if I would become a true friend of the Muslims I must
render all help possible in securing the release of the brothers
and a just settlement of the Khalifate question. I found that
the Muslim demand about the Khalifate was not only just,
but that the British Prime Minister himself had admitted
the justice of the Muslim demand. I felt bound to render
what help I could in securing a due fulfilment of the Prime
Minister’s pledge. Friends and other critics have criticized
my attitude regarding the Khalifate. In spite of their
criticisms I have found no reason to revise it or to regret my
co-operation with the Muslims. I should adopt the same
attitude should a similar occasion arise.’
With the arrival of the members of the All-India Muslim
League in England, Marmaduke began to realize the
tremendous solidarity of Indian Muslim feeling. He knew
that in 1912 the Indian Red Crescent Society had collected
more money than had ever been subscribed in India for any
purpose, to alleviate the miseries of the victimized Turkish
refugees and wounded, but now the loyalty of India towards
the Khalifa was being demonstrated daily in ever-increas-
ingly remarkable ways. The Indian soldiers who were now


returned from the war, the civilian population of India
which had given of its best as a contribution to the victory
of the Allies, the princes who had placed their resources
at the disposal of their sovereign, all were aghast at the
proposals of the Turkish Treaty, which, if carried into
effect, would involve, they all unhesitatingly declared, a
breach of faith, and would create a situation of the utmost
anxiety.
He tried to explain his new activities to Herbert, not
always with success. He wrote rather sadly to him on
July i :
‘ The Pond House,
‘ Blackboys,
* Sussex.
‘ July ist, 1919.
‘ My dear Herbert,
‘ I always have the feeling when I leave you after a
five minutes’ interview that I have left you with a most
unfavourable impression of my views, activities, and general
character. But on this occasion I have, on my side, the
impression that you have not the least idea of the intensity
of Muslim feeling on the Turkish question, and, if you have
no idea of it, what must be the ignorance of LI. George ?
I am a Muslim—fairly in it, as I told you—and I believe
our Eastern Empire is not worth ten years’ purchase if the
Turkish Empire is divided up as LI. George seems to wish.
We have hammered Asia nearly solid in dislike of us. Our
Empire is in a most unhappy state. Nobody in Europe ever
really loved us, save and except the Turks ; but in Asia
we could till very lately command a good deal of devoted
loyalty. Now that is changed to horror and disgust, fast
crystallizing into bitter and enduring hatred. The Muslims
are only asking us to be ourselves, and not the ghost of
Tsarist Russia. They are more faithful than we are to the
ideals which stood for England in the East till 13 years ago.
And I have been hoping against hope that England would
recover sanity—l have been expressing confidence to
Orientals that she would eventually—trying to keep back


the general rising which I know is imminent, and which
can only be averted by a change of British policy, a return
to sound tradition. When I left your house on Friday morn-
ing I felt ’SO disheartened—thinking of you, as I always do,
as the best friend of Islam in Parliament—that I felt inclined
to tell the Muslims in my Friday sermon that I had lost all
hope of England doing right. I did not do so, needless to
say ; but I was sorely tempted, knowing what the conse-
quences might be, just to let things rip. They are not
taking it, as you do, as a question of political expediency.
In India, and in Egypt also, they are prepared to give up
everything and fight—unarmed. How are you going to
put down an insurrection of that kind without atrocities
as bad as ever happened in the Turkish Empire ? And what
is the League of Nations going to say about it, when the
Indians and Egyptians ask to be set free from England and
placed under international control ?
‘ When we parted you asked me not to tell anyone what
you had told me, and you seemed to imply that something
you had told me during the war had been let out —by me,
presumably. I am quite unconscious of guilt in such a
matter, and am sorry to think I may have done such a
thing inadvertently. But in my peculiar position Ido hear
a lot of things from the Muslim side, and on past occasions
you have told me things I knew already.
‘ Yours always sincerely,
‘ Marmaduke Pigkthall.
‘ PS. The “ secrecy ”of British Government intrigues
is comparable to the ostrich hiding its head in the sand.’
He was very much occupied with the Delegation after it
arrived, and very alarmed by their report of the state of
India. His fear of Bolshevism was acute, and he realized,
as few people did, how grave was the danger of India and
Afghanistan turning Communist. Islam being a complete
system of society as well as a religious belief, it must, he
knew, possess an independent State for its development on
modern lines. The threat to Turkey was not only the threat


to extinguish the last of the great Muslim Powers, but also
the denial of all Muslim hopes of progress under the aegis
of the Allies and of the British Empire. If England and the
Allies would not, there was Russia waiting to provide all
that Europe denied. Had Lenin had Marx’s vision, there
is no question that Afghanistan would have gone Communist
in 1920. Large numbers of Indian Muslims were already
migrating, and larger numbers still were prepared to
migrate into exile rather than remain in India under the
‘ Satanic ’ Government, as Gandhi called English rule.
Jihad (religious opposition), or Hijrat , migration to a
place where they could enjoy freedom of faith and conscience,
were the only alternatives left to Indian Muslims after the
Prime Minister’s treatment of the Khalifate Delegation and
his answer to them. Thirteen hundred had already gone
before the end of 1919, and early in 1920 twenty-five thou-
sand Muslims from the Province of Sind intimated to the
Governor of Bombay their intention of leaving the country
and asked with what formalities-they had to comply. For
in spite of the fact that the Secretary of State for India
sympathetically acknowledged in the House of Commons
that the great victories in Asia which brought about the
collapse of the Central Powers were achieved by the valour
of Indians, including the best of Muslim soldiers, the
Khalifate Delegation had met only with negative answers
from 10 Downing Street, where Mr. Lloyd George refused
their request that an international commission with
adequate Muslim and Indian representation should take a
plebiscite In Turkey and prepare a report.
The Greek landing in Syria, and their ghastly behaviour
in Smyrna, drove Mohammedan Asia almost to exaspera-
tion. Although the Turkish Chief of Staff had insisted on
all Turkish troops being confined to barracks, in order'that
there might be no question of any resistance being offered
to the invading Greeks (orders which were strictly obeyed,
whilst the Allied fleet, with permission from the League of
Nations, stood calmly by in the bay), the Greeks broke in
where the Turkish soldiers were confined and shot down all
who would not shout: ‘ Zeto Venizelos.’


Marmaduke, reporting the story in the New Age , for
which he still wrote weekly, described how the Turkish
Governoj was insulted, his wife wounded. The Turkish
Chief of Staff was bayoneted in the face and thrown into a
Greek cattle ship, amongst the animals ; the senior doctor
of the Turkish Army was murdered and his body mutilated,
the fingers of Turkish men and women who wore rings were
cut off wholesale, and this was an absolutely peaceful
occupation in the interests of law and order. Despite the
League of Nations, nowhere did the Turks show fight. They
had not been at war with the Greeks and were in no con-
dition to commence hostilities. Three hundred and twenty-
five thousand Muslims fled from the pillaging of the villages
which followed.
At the time of the occupation the Muslim population was
more than 80 per cent greater than the Greek, but after
the occupation the Greeks made a determined effort to
change the balance of these figures by bringing in immigrants
from Eastern Thrace, and the Russian coast, and from the
Mediterranean islands, to the tune of forty or fifty thousand.
The inter-Allied mission of inquiry which visited the
peninsula of Samali-dagh, in the wake of the Greek Army
of Occupation, reported to the International Red Cross at
Geneva ‘ that the mission arrived at the conclusion that
elements of the Greek Army of Occupation pursued for two
months the extermination of the Muslim population of the
Peninsula.’ The facts ascertained —the burning of villages,
massacres, terror of the inhabitants —leave no room for
doubt. Naril, Orhan-gazi, Derekany, Kargalivivan, Yalava,
are only a few of the villages where the population was
massacred, the houses destroyed by artillery-fire, and where
the incessant attack of the forces of occupation prevented
even the burial of the dead. Seventy villages were reduced
to ashes with Allied approval.
Yet, in spite of this terrorism, it was not India that was
to save Turkey, but Turkey herself: Marmaduke’s faith in
her was to be justified, and that very shortly. It has taken
Germany more than twenty years to loose the shackles of
Versailles ; it took Mustapha Kemal Pasha a short three
u


years to free his country from the Greek pest and the treaty
which created and countenanced it. In 1919 he declared
himself Inspector-General of the Turkish Nationalist Army.
In 1920 the First National Assembly met in Angora, and
the reconquest of Turkey by the Turks was begun.
In 1922 Mustapha Kemal defeated the Greeks and
reoccupied Smyrna, and the Sultan was forced to abdicate,
whilst Abdul Majid II was made Khalif. Yet still the
Allies, who had refused the legal and pacific demands of the
Khilafate Delegation, contested the political and economic
autonomy of Turkey, even after it became a fact. The
diplomacy which accepted the negroes of Haiti refused to
receive the ambassador of the Emir of Afghanistan or of
Mustapha Kemal, treating them as inferior creatures.
Meanwhile, the Khilafate Delegation succeeded in col-
lecting a very respectable list of signatures for their memorial
to the Prime Minister of November 12, 1919. In
addition to the Aga Khan, and the other Indian dignitaries
named before, such respectable British citizens as Lord
Abingdon, Lord Ampthill, Admiral Fremantle, Lord
Edward Gleichen, Sir Theodore Morison, General Gonyer
Surtees, Lord Lamington, Sir Graham Bower, and others,
signed a strong appeal to Mr. Lloyd George.
By the end of 1919 Marmaduke was trying to get out of
the Islamic Information Bureau. He appealed to Herbert
to help him. ‘ With regard to the Bureau, of which lam
unworthy secretary, I hope you did not think me insensible
to your kind thought of getting me out of it. I would get
out of it like a shot if I could see my way to do so without
damaging the show. But Ido not, at present. The work is
exceedingly distasteful to me, and the atmosphere more so.
And, after all, it does promise me some pecuniary support,
although there has as yet been no performance of the promise.
As I insist upon performance, and shall do so vehemently—
needs must when the devil drives—it is quite possible that
I may be “ self-ejecting ” before very long, the more so
that I have made myself objectionable all round by insisting
on certain little matters which appeal to Englishmen rather
than to Orientals.


4 Thinking over our conversation afterwards, there was
ohe thing which I should have said : Any curtailment of
Turkish territory in Europe will be disastrous from our
point of view, since it will accelerate the pan-Asiatic move-
ment that I spoke of. If we turn the Turks out of Europe,
with the cry of: 44 Europe for the Europeans ” —as we have
been doing with all kinds of horrors for a century —we must
expect the cry of: 44 Asia for the Asiatics.’’ A yard of
territory on the soil of Europe is worth a mile of territory
in Russian Asia to the feelings of the Asiatics at this
moment.
4 A few days ago I heard from Valyi, who wants to get
permission to come to London and publish his Review here.
A Mr. Haldane Porter (so he says) has absolute power over
his destiny in this respect. Do you know the gentleman
and, if so, could you speak a word for my poor friend, at
least to the extent of saying that he is not an undesirable
alien in the opinion of some intelligent folk? I wish he
could come here, as his Review would help me to earn a
livelihood.’
Marmaduke wrote again to Herbert about an Armenian
film which, as propaganda, showed an Armenian girl being
crucified by the Turks, her hair permanently waved, not a
curl out of order. He begged him to stop this 4 disgusting
and obscene performance,’ and Herbert was successful in
s having the film withdrawn from public circulation.
On 2 December 1919 Marmaduke severed his connection
with the Islamic Information Bureau, but quite amicably,
for Mr. Yakub Hassan wrote : 4 The Indian Muslim com-
munity is grateful to you for your disinterested and devoted
work.’ In spite of his political work, Marmaduke had found
time to write a light satiric novel about the perfect English-
man—Sir Limpidus , which was published in 1919. Sir
Limpidus, even as a small boy, had his doubts about 4 the
social status of the Holy Family ’ ; he himself 4 being recog-
nized at once as the right sort,’ and consequently a success at
Harrow. When he got to Cambridge he fared even better.
4 He did not compete, yet he attained pre-eminence. Com-
petition was so foreign to his scheme of life that he spoke of


it with mild approval as a good incentive to the herd. He
put himself in the hands of the best tailor and for the rest
relied upon his native instinct.’ He is an upper-class
version of Mr. Belloc’s Charles Augustus Fortescue (‘ the
nicest boy I ever knew ’) and bears out all that Emerson
has to say of the British aristocracy. ‘ They have the sense
of superiority, the absence of all the ambitions which dis-
gust, and the power to command, amongst their other
luxuries, the presence of the most accomplished men in
their festive meetings.’
Sir Limpidus’ unerring sense of the inevitable rightness of
things brings him, with the help, of a good secretary and
one or two juniors as ‘ ghosts,’ by way of the Foreign Office,
to the Cabinet. He is brilliantly seen, this man, who did
not often go to his country house ‘ from reluctance to disturb
his children, whose abode it was,’ and who was horrified
when his daughter ‘ spoke of men as you or I would talk of
women.’ Sir Limpidus is far removed from the deeps of
Knights of Araby , but in its own way it is good, a pleasant
Moselle after a fine Burgundy.
At the Pond House, Marmaduke also completed The
Early Hours , the Turkish novel he had lived in 1909. He
wrote to me one morning in August 1920 : ‘ The Turkish
book which has been worrying me for ever so long had to
be finished, so I made up my mind that I would finish it or
perish in the attempt. I finished it at 4.30 this morning
after three days’ pretty solid work, and as the dawn was
coming up I went out and washed myself and said my
prayers, and after that went out and looked for mushrooms
in the field, but could not find any, before going to bed.’
He put together, too, a collection of short stories, some old,
some new, which he called As Others See Us, published by
Collins in 1922. His imaginative work shows, curiously,
little of the strain of his political anxiety. He contrived
once more to keep his living and his thinking separate, with
great benefit to both. He must have been quite terribly
hard up, even during these years at the Pond House, but
none of his friends ever guessed it, such was his serene
cheerfulness and his genius for friendship and hospitality.


. He minded, more than he ever showed, living amongst
cranks and second-raters. It was the price he paid in
Europe for becoming a Muslim and defending an enemy.
The supreme penalty of courage is loneliness : and Marma-
duke, in spite of the companionship he found in Islam, was,
in Europe, very much alone. Muriel was always near him,
but no woman, however intimate and however perfect, can
satisfy the gregarious instinct in man. She is, indeed,
another barrier : for mating is itself a separating, a with-
drawal from the herd. And God, like woman, takes man
away from his fellow-men ; Sinai and Tabor are the
loneliest and emptiest of all mountains.
During the war years Marmaduke suffered severely from
spiritual frost-bite, from the cold and void of the high spaces
he had to explore and to inhabit alone. Joining up : the
army : Private Pickthall: scrubbing latrines and washing
dishes : here were the best and most blessed healing and
relief. To be a number again, just a chap, not a pioneer, no
longer queer, marked, singled out, whispered about:
merely an ordinary fellow, was delight : pipes united,
though the absence of beer brought the distinction back
(yet even this won him Methodist and Plymouth Brother-
hood sympathy and the approval of all who, drunk or sober,
had taken the pledge). The army saved him physically—
from under-nourishment and overwork, and mentally from
incipient persecution mania and from the effects of having
to deal mainly with oddities and cranks.
Writing is a desperately single-minded activity, and to
add to writing so many other outcasting qualifications : the
profession of Islam, of pro-Turkishness, and the refusal to
volunteer, had been to court madness or, at best, eccentricity.
Yet Marmaduke never became eccentric, was never a
crank : close-cropped his hair, excellent his tailor, correct
his footwear : Harrow haloed him in the eyes of the British
ruling class, and even to men like Lord Lloyd he was,
though sometimes an enemy, yet always a man —indeed a
gentleman : never wholly an insect or an idiot.
Although he was glad to leave the Islamic Information.
Bureau, he remained friends with Khwaja Kamal ud din to


the end, and when he died wrote that here was a writer
whose death had left a gap not easily to be refilled.
Marmaduke continued his frequent and affectionate
correspondence with Herbert. The following are two of the
most interesting of his letters :
‘ Private.
‘ The Pond House,
‘ Blackboys,
‘ Sussex.
* Jan. lyth 1920.
‘ My dear Herbert,
‘ I see in this morning’s paper that the Turkish
question is temporarily shelved again on account of the
Red peril. God has maddened them. Gan they not see
that the only way to avert the Red peril is to solve the
Turkish question instantly in a- manner to satisfy Asiatics.
For one Muslim who desires the triumph of the Bolsheviks,
there are a million who would be against them if they could
feel once assured that the Turkish Empire and the Khalifate
were safe and protected by England. It is not love of the
Bolsheviks, but hatred and distrust of England (fast becom-
ing general) which constitutes the real danger.
‘ The French have dished us by their public declarations
on behalf of the Khalifate and Turkish independence. I
am sure that these are not disinterested, but in the present
state of feeling they are welcomed by the Muslims with
blind gratitude and, if not belied by subsequent events, have
won a lasting influence for the French Government.
‘ We ought to lead, and lead at once, in generosity towards
the Turkish Empire.
‘ It is not too late, I think and hope, but it soon will be.
‘ Yours ever,
* Marmaduke Pickthall.’


‘ Private .
* The Pond House,
" * Blagkboys,
* Sussex.
c Feb . 20 1920.
‘ My dear Herbert,
c I; see in to-day’s paper that Greece is to have
Gallipoli, also the Sanjak of Smyrna, and part of two other
Sanjaks in the vilayet of Aldin. If the B. Govt, had any
regard at all for Muslim feeling it would have broken the
teeth of Venizelos for demanding such a thing, especially
after the Inter-Allied Commission’s Report upon events in
Smyrna. I am very much ashamed, as well as angry.
Ashamed as an Englishman ; angry as a Muslim. If they
want a jihad against England they are going the right way
to have it.
‘ Of course we are all at cross-purposes, that is evident.
The East is thinking of the Turkish Empire as established by
the treaty of Berlin, and the West is thinking of the little
that was left unconquered in the present war. If you will
think back to the Berlin treaty —a treaty made by England—
you will see that quite enough territory has been taken away
from Turkey by the Christian Powers and quite enough
Muslims have been massacred and driven out with our con-
nivance (due to fear of Russia) to justify most bitter feelings
in the East. You know too as well as Ido that the Turks
have not had anything like fair play. Injustice of so colossal
a kind cannot go on indefinitely. And we have now come
to the breaking-point between Islam and England. If
England cannot or will not at this juncture resist the
pressure put upon her by the Christian fanatics, there is no
longer such a thing as a British Empire except in the geo-
graphical sense. We Muslims have no longer any part in
England. That feeling is almost universal among Muslims,
and it extends far beyond the boundaries of Islam in Asia
and North Africa.
‘ If a malignant madman with a “ down ” on England had.
been put in charge of our “ Mohammedan ” propaganda


during the war, it could not have been more nicely calculated
to offend the East. I imagine it the work of the Tsar’s
Oriental experts working on some English doctrinaire —
those same Oriental experts who are now exploiting the
ill-effects of that propaganda in order to raise a jihad
against England.
‘ I have been very carefully over the Armenian propa-
ganda. It is false in its main lines, and utterly misleading
in its details. The Hejjaz propaganda was equally ill-
grounded and unwise. Both were due to Russian policy in
the first instance. They have been adopted by the “ Chris-
tians ” of this country so loudly that they have acquired for
Muslims the look of fanatical attacks upon Islam. The
Greek propaganda has the same look, and is in nature a
fanatical attack and nothing else. If the Government of the
British Empire is the mouth-piece of the “ Christian ” mob
in London, you cannot blame the Muslims if they look
elsewhere for some protector.
‘ On the other hand if the Imperial Government would but
play the Imperial Government at this juncture, and sternly
and publicly rebuke the enemies of Turkey ; if in principle
it would proclaim a fixed intention to protect the Turkish
Empire and secure it the fair chance which it has never had
in modern times, then you would see a wonderful transforma-
ion. The imminent jihad would be averted, the Armenian
question, and all other cognate questions would be solved, for
they are all contingent on the breaking-up of Turkey, and
our own Eastern troubles would at once disappear. The
mass of opinion in India and in Egypt has been driven to the
ultra-nationalist standpoint solely by the Turkish question.
If that were solved to satisfy the Muslims, it would fall away
again. And you could recognize the independence of Egypt,
the right of India to complete autonomy (in principle)
without weakening the Empire in the least. You could be
the friend and adviser to a friendly people with infinitely
better effect than you can be the tyrant of a bitterly offended
people.
* What I want to see is feux de joie and rejoicings on
account of England’s action from Adrianople to Calcutta


and from Cairo to Samarcand. lam certain it is the last
chance that Providence will give to England. Can’t the
big thing anyhow be done ? You know how reconcilable
my people are, how generously they respond to generosity.
Isn’t there anyone in England Christian enough to do what
Christ—the Oriental—would undoubtedly have done ?
‘ I wish you were less modest, for you have the knowledge
and the mind and, what is infinitely more, the sense of
honour which is needed, and you are our brother, though
you are not of our way of thinking.’
In 1920 Herbert stayed with him at the Pond House and
got a job in the Indian Police Service for a young Indian
member of Marmaduke’s iktida—congregation—at Woking.
Marmaduke was now in correspondence with Rifaat again,
and lunching with Lady Cromer.
Meanwhile, in India the Khilafate agitation continued to
increase. The first Khilafate Day was observed at Lucknow
in October 1919 as a day of mourning : all business was
suspended and the people fasted and prayed. Two months
later, in January 1920, when the Government organized a
peace celebration, Hindus and Mussulmans alike recognized
that for them there could be no peace celebration since for
them no peace was yet in sight, with the result that the
programmes previously published had to be cut short on
account of the abstention of the public : even beggars
refused alms and gifts of clothing.
On March 19, 1920, the second Khilafate Day, a hartal,
or general strike, was observed by the whole of India.
Business was entirely suspended throughout the whole
country. ‘ Men, women, and children went into mourning,
and more than a million telegrams reached the Viceroy,’
Marmaduke reported to the New Age. The Central
Khilafate Committee in India had been very impressed by
Marmaduke’s efforts on behalf of the Khilafate Delegation
in London, and he was invited by the management of the
Bombay Chronicle , whose spokesman was a Mr. Omar Sobhani,
to assume the editorship of that paper, which had become
vacant on the deportation of the Radical pro-Turk editor


Benjamin Guy Horniman. The appointment was for three
years. In the absence of an editor, Dr. Syud Hossain was
carrying on, seconded by Mr. Brelvi, then assistant, now the
present editor.
The Bombay Chronicle was, and is, an Indian journal, not
specifically Muslim ; but all India —Hindu, Parsee, and
Muslim —was united in its indignation on the subject of the
treatment meted out by the Allies to the Turks. Marmaduke
was offered a good salary and as free a hand as the arbitrary
Press laws in India permitted, to explain. the Turkish
problem and to co-operate with the Ali brothers and with
Mahatma Gandhi and the Khilafate Congress. He hesitated
a good deal before making up his mind to accept : it was
not really his idea of congenial work, but needs must when
the devil drives, and with his war-record and Sykes’s
antagonism against him, he knew he could not get any
sort of job in England for some years at least. He finally
came to the decision to accept the editorship only on the
condition of a six-months’ trial and after he had made it clear
that, should Horniman be allowed to return, he would at
once resign. When Horniman did later return he paid
public tribute to this ‘ noble conduct.’ Marmaduke wrote
to Herbert, explaining his step :
c The Pond House,
c Blackboys,
c Sussex.
* July 0.7 th 1920.
‘ My dear Herbert,
‘ This is to tell you (what I fear will shock you very
much) that I have accepted the editorship of the Bombay
Chronicle, an Indian Nationalist newspaper. If you want to
know the primal reason for my taking such a step, it is
simply economic pressure. I cannot afford to live in
England, and the offer of a salary of 1400 rupees a month
came to me as a positive godsend at a moment almost of
despair. I hope that I may do some good, however, and
certainly should not have closed with the offer unless I had


thought that possible. I have insisted on a six months’
probation, after which they are to pay my passage home if I
desire it. By that time I shall know if they are going straight
or not, and shall decide accordingly.
c It will quite possibly end in my cursing the whole crowd
and throwing back their money in their teeth as I have done
before. I have not the money sense, any more than the
diplomatic. If you can say a word for me anywhere, please
do. I am afraid of being boycotted by English people,
which means a one-sided view and therefore a false judg-
ment. Knowing nothing at all of India, I want to rake in
information from all quarters, particularly at first.
‘ Forgive me if you can for going so far from the direction
you would choose for me. But believe that I still preserve
the straight path of Islam and mean to keep it.’
Herbert, as usual, did all he could, and on 26 August
Marmaduke wrote to me :
‘ The Pond House,
c Blackboys.
c August 2 6th 1920.
‘ My dearest Amie
‘ Forgive my very long delay in answering your last
letter. I have been extraordinarily busy—you will say I
always am, but this time it has really been beyond the
ordinary. A fortnight ago my old frield, Col. Aubrey
Herbert, with whom I spent a day, said that, as I had such
difficulty in getting a passage to Bombay, he would say a
word for me to Montagu, the Secretary of State for India,
who was rather friendly, he considered, to my point of
view. I had forgotten all about it and was weeding in my
garden when, this day week, I got a telegram from the
India Office saying that there would be room for us on the
Morea which sails from Tilbury on September 3rd. That
was a week sooner than I wished to start, but when I came
to think it over, I perceived that by starting from London
on September 10th we could catch the steamer at Marseilles ;
and that is what we mean to do. In consequence of this,


we are half mad with packing—at least Muriel is, and I
with writing letters. I finished polishing my Turkish book
to-day, and sent it to the publishers, though I don’t suppose
they’ll bring it out until the spring. It was entirely written
at the Pond House. It is pretty good, I think ; I could
have made it splendid with another six months’ work.
After much reflection I have called it The Early Hours and
given it for motto or text the words you know from the
Goran which I think of as spoken to the suffering Turks.
‘ I think your school sounds rather fun, but I can quite
appreciate your feelings of impatience with the daily round,
and longing to be riding through the desert on an Arab
steed, or drawing a long bow at Bannockburn ! I had the
self-same feelings at your age. But now, having had
adventures of a kind I should prefer to sit and gossip with old
codgers in the ingle nook. Instead of that I am going to
manage a great newspaper (without the most remote of
notions how to do it) and to throw myself into a vortex of
excitement which seems whirling on towards war.
‘ I accept the offer or suggestion which you made in your
last letter. I will endeavour to translate for you the whole
Goran (which is a great deal longer than you think, though
not in bulk ; Arabic being a shorthand in which vowels are
left out) and you, on your hand, will provide me with a
history and complete topography of Banff. But don’t forget
to write me friendly letters all the same, or I will haunt you —
bogey-bogey ! with my hands up to me ears—at night.’
They sailed early in September and from the S.S. Morea
approaching Port Said Marmaduke wrote to me :
* My dearest Amie,
‘ On Thursday last at 4.45 we said good-bye to your
mother on the platform at Victoria, and she presented me
with something you had written, which struck me as very
good if you originated it, and very well chosen if you copied
it out. Of course England was looking its best just to make
us the more reluctant to leave it. The Dover cliffs and
castle were magnificent in the dusk as our steamer left them


behind. The journey was quite comfortable up to Paris ;
but down from Paris to Marseilles it was quite the opposite,
though the lovely country atoned a little for the smuts and
heat which filled the corridor and the compartments. The
Rhone Valley from Valence down to Avignon, with all its
cliffs and queer outstanding rocks, with little shrines and
castles perched upon them, is the land of the troubadours
and Petrarch, and it looks it to this day. We saw it turn from
blue to purple and to amethyst as the sun went down behind
the Alpilles (little Alps) which Tartarin’s imagination made
so very high. And there was a fat and histrionic Provencal
in our compartment just like Tartarin. He declaimed about
the heroism of the Midi in the war ; and, to complete the
illusion, he got out at Tarascon ! He wished us all good
things in our “ voyage lointain.” It was dark night when
we got to Marseilles. The train was full (at least the first-
class part) of people for the More a ; but there were two
parties among them —one which wished to go on board
that night, and one which wished to spend the night in quiet
upon terra firma, after twelve hours in a rocking, dirty
French train. We were of the latter way of thinking. I
found Cook’s man upon the platform and asked him to
recommend a hotel where there was room. He recom-
mended one which rejoiced in the somewhat garish name of
“ Splendid Hotel.” I put Muriel in the omnibus of that
hotel, and walked on ahead myself to secure rooms. I came,
I spoke to the manager. There was no room ; all were
already booked. It was then ten o’clock at night, no cabs
in the street, and no one to carry our baggage to another
place. I waited till the omnibus arrived, and then told
Muriel to try her hand at fascination of the manager. She
had managed to preserve some elegance of appearance by
dint of powdering her nose : I looked like a stoker or a coal-
heaver, for the train, as I have said, was filthy, and all the
washing apparatus on it had gone wrong. Well, her
blandishments were so successful that we did at length
secure a room, and spent a quiet night, after partaking of a
“ chocolat complet ” on the wash-hand stand. In the
morning (Saturday), at eight o’clock, the hotel bus brought


us down to the quay to which this ship was moored, and we
embarked. Imagine a big floating beehive full of stranger
bees all buzzing loudly at us interlopers, and you will have
some idea of our feelings when we got on board. However,
our cabin is a large one and quite comfortable, and the
weather since we started has been fine, the sea friendly, and
the people, though they look ferocious and inhuman in the
English way, are probably, many of them, as much afraid
of us as we are of them. I learn from the passenger list that
we have among us Lord Sinha (the first Indian peer), the
Chief Justice of the Punjab, and several Indian knights, but
should never have guessed it from our appearance —a most
undistinguished-looking crowd. I overheard a conversation
on the deck last night between a gentleman and lady sitting
close behind me, and was pleased to learn that they were
both strong sympathizers with the Turks. To-day, as I was
walking on the lower deck, I saw a co-religionist—a certain
Hajji Abdul Majid from Baghdad—on the deck allotted to
the second class, and went to him and said : Salam
’aleykum. We had a long and earnest conversation. He
has come from London and is on his way to Baghdad, to
act as an interpreter to Sir Percy Cox, who (so he declares)
has orders to withdraw the British troops from Mesopotamia.
Good news, if true, and likely to help me a good deal in my
Indian work. To-morrow, or at latest Wednesday morning,
we are due at Port Said, where I hope to see Ihsan Bey El
Bakri (if he got my letter in time) and hear all the news of
Egypt. After that Suez (Arabic Swas), then Aden, then
Bombay. May Allah have you always in His keeping.’
From Aden I got another letter :
‘ It has been fairly rough but we have, neither of us, been
ill. Muriel is bearing the heat much better than I
expected, and is keenly interested in the sight of flying fish,
like bits of silver paper blown from wave to wave, and of
the various strange birds which come on board to rest on
their long migratory journeys. My prayer-mat has been
changing its direction every night, from S.E. to due E. and
now to N.E., as we passed down the Arabian coast. We


cannot have been more than ninety miles from Mecca at
the nearest point.
‘ Port Said at sunset, and after dinner went
on shore for an hour and bought some things we needed,
and had a cup of coffee at a real Eastern coffee-tavern in
the open street. I bought an Arabic newspaper, to read up
all the news of Egypt, and when the people saw that I
talked Arabic there was soon a friendly crowd in conversa-
tion with us, which crowd escorted us back to the Mina
(harbour), where we took a boat back to the ship, which
looked extremely fine and huge all lighted up and towering
in the middle of the harbour among smaller ships. We left
Port Said at half-past ten at night, and came to Suez at
about half-past two of the following afternoon, having been
all that time going slowly through the Canal and its chain
of lakes, with sandy desert upon either hand. The sea at
Suez was a most wonderful turquoise colour. The desert
mountains swam in heat, and on the edge of that wonderful
blue sea, all white and shimmering, the old town of Suez,
with its domes and minarets, seemed to be knee-deep in the
water. There were a few gardens with green trees and
hedges of hibiscus with its large red flowers, but the prevail-
ing tones were amber, white, and blue. I saw the trees in
the oasis of Ayun Musa (the wells of Moses), on the road to
Sinai, swimming in a haze of heat a long way off. And we
felt really warm for the first time for years, and knew that
we were in the Red Sea.
c This ship is full of strange noises, especially at night,
when one lies and listens to them. It goes along quite
quietly and smoothly ; and then suddenly one hears a
sound of giant steps which draw nearer and nearer, shaking
the whole ship, and then die away again. Silence again,
and then the same noises are repeated all through the night
and all through the day. Then there is another noise which
comes occasionally as if hundreds of young blackbirds were
screaming loudly to be fed. I asked my steward what was
the cause of this strange music, and he said : “ It’s the
expansion, sir ” ; which did not help me much. A gentle-
man on board, who talks to everyone, and is a frightful


bore, assures me that it is because the engines do not work
together, but at different times ; but that also is not
intelligible to my unmechanical mind.
‘ I have to post this letter in the box on board two hours
before we get to Aden if it is to catch the next mail home,
and we are to reach Aden some time to-night, I don’t know
when exactly. The captain, in my hearing, said that there
would be no time for anyone to go ashore. We passed some
rocky islands off the south Arabian coast, known as “ The
Twelve Apostles,” at 6 o’clock this morning,, and I am
told that they are about twenty hours from Aden at the
rate we are going. So we ought to be there soon. Aden —
Eden, the very opposite of what it is, a barren place, but
there is really paradise country in the hills behind it at
Lahej and Sheykh Athman and Zalud (see Knights of Arahy).
From Aden to Bombay will take four days and a half, unless
we get monsoon, when it will take much longer. I am
getting a little tremulous with wondering what kind of fate
awaits me there.’
The fullest flowering of his life, the period of his
greatest activity, lay now before him ; India was to give
him all Arabia promised. Indeed, in his case, the years
before twenty and after forty were the happiest: in spite
of literary success and fame, in spite of the fact that without
exception all his published novels were written before he
was forty-five, the most fruitful part of his life was to be
between forty-five and sixty, and spent in India and for
India. Syria, Egypt, Turkey, he had known and loved and
served them all, and his first love and loyalty were always
to these. But, though he never cared for India as he cared
for the Near East, for the Indian mind was alien to him as
the Greek, yet his best service was given to India and India
most fully rewarded that service.
His next letter to me was from Bombay.


CHATTER TEN
MARMADUKE landed in Bombay early in September
1920. His first letter to me is dated September 15
and is written from the Taj Mahal Hotel, Apollo Bunder, a
week after his arrival. In it he tells me only of the heat
and of the big ugly city. He received a rousing welcome
from the members of the Bombay Khilafate Committee and
from Bombay Muslims, but when he got to his newspaper
office he found the whole staff ‘ on leave,’ i.e. on strike.
With the help of a loyal news-editor and of the printers, he
was able to carry on, but it was a severe strain on a man
who had never edited anything but religious weeklies and
monthlies, with circulations amounting at most to a few
hundreds.
He had only accepted the editorship on condition that he
was given a six-months’ trial; the paper was to pay his
fare back to England if he did not like it, or if Horniman
were allowed to return, and during those six months he
almost daily vowed to leave when his trial was over. For
he knew he could only make good ‘ if, and it is a big if, I
can keep my temper with the people I am working with,’
as he wrote to Lady Valda Machell. ‘ I can generally
manage to keep it with the enemy but intrigues and
jealousies when one is working hard are very irritating. . . .’
The paper, as he complained in a letter to Dr. Granville,
had been c let down in every way : the staff was hostile and
the hardest thing was to get rid of a nasty trick that the paper
had acquired of indulging in petty vulgar personalities.’
After six months he was able to write : ‘We are now
working together amicably and the circulation has gone up
to nearly double what it was when I took over. I have now
put all the staff upon their dignity, making them realize
that the “ national ” paper must not stoop to littleness of.
X


any kind, must even compliment a decent adversary every
now and then.’
His position as editor gave him, he wrote, ‘ a sort of
advisership to Indian nationalism,’ and from the first he
found the utmost difficulty in carrying out his principal aim,
which was ‘ to keep the Khilafate agitation within the bounds
of strict legality.’ Before ever he left London he had written
to Lady Valda to beg her to speak a word to Sir George
(now Lord) Lloyd, the then Governor of Bombay. He did
not expect Lloyd to be friendly, only wished him to realize
he might easily have got someone ‘ worse than I am though
less outspoken, as adviser to the opposition.’ Reconciliation,
he was afraid, ‘ is impossible just now, but I should like to
talk on friendly terms with people in authority as well as
nationalists in order to get my bearings properly. In purely
Indian matters, I have everything to learn.’ Lloyd’s answer
was very chilly. In reply to Lady Valda he typed a note
to say that the ‘ Bombay Chronicle was a vile rag ’ —hardly the
reply courteous.
, Marmaduke, though a Muslim, insisted throughout his
editorship on working with Mahatma Gandhi. He fol-
lowed closely the plan of action first evolved by Gandhi
during his early days in Natal, of ‘ satyagraha ’ or ‘ non-
co-operation.’ In those South African days Gandhi had
realized that to resist brutality actively was not only useless,
but degrading to himself and to the people he wished to
raise, to descend in fact to the level of the brute. The only
purpose in Gandhi’s mind was to secure for all Asiatic
subjects of the British Empire equal status with its white
citizens. For in 1920 Gandhi was still an imperialist :
that is to say, both he and Marmaduke always thought of
India and of Indians as within the British Empire. But
how could Muslims be in favour of non-violence ?
Gandhi himself, ‘whilst the powerful Khilafate agitation
set up by the Ali brothers was in full progress,’ tells how he
had discussions as to the extent ‘ to which Mussulmans need
observe the rule of non-violence, and all agreed Islam did
not forbid non-violence as a policy and the non-co-operation
resolution was moved in the Khilafate Conference and


carried after long deliberations. 9 At Allahabad the com-
mittee sat all night and the All-India Congress had a special
session of the Congress in September 1920, at Calcutta,
under the presidency of Lala Lajpat Rai, just after Marma-
duke’s arrival in India, to deliberate on non-co-operation,
‘ now accepted, 9 Gandhi wrote, ‘by all Muslims. 9 Special
trains ran from Calcutta to Bombay.
Gandhi had asked the same question before he accepted
the leadership of the Khilafate movement, and many who
think of Islam as a militant faith have asked it since. Actually
Islam is so far from sanctioning aggression that Muslims
are only allowed to fight in self-defence. The Sacred Law
debars them from using certain methods of agitation ‘ which
have become common weapons of all malcontents in
Christian lands and which embitter everything and are in
fact dishonourable, 9 as Marmaduke wrote.
‘lt is contendable, 9 he went on to explain, ‘ and it is
contended, that such methods may be used by Muslims
in retaliation after an opponent has already used them, but
as return by the Sacred Law is limited to the exact amount of
force employed by the aggressor and to the actual person or
persons who employ it in the first place, I think it can be
said that such methods are illegal except after an actual
declaration of war between sovereign States, and then only
against actual combatants. 9 The error with regard to the
common view regarding Islam arises from misapprehension
of the meaning of the word ‘Jihad, 9 a word which in the
hands of the C.I.D. reporters has caused much groundless
fear to the British in India.
In English ‘Jihad 9 is commonly translated ‘ holy warfare, 9
with a meaning like crusade. It properly denotes the whole
effort, individual and collective, of the true believer against
evil, beginning with the conquest of a man’s own passions
and ending possibly, but not necessarily, in persecution and
exile or upon the battlefield. Every prophet made Jihad
in his own way. That of Moses took the form of emigration
to escape from evil. That of Jesus was of a non-violent and
passive kind. That of Muhammed shows three stages :
first a non-violent endurance of hostility and persecution


while fulfilling his own mission, like that of Jesus ; second,
when the persecution threatened to exterminate his people,
emigration, the Jihad of Moses ; and third, when he and his
followers formed an independent State, however small and
weak, and when the persecutors still persisted in attacking
them, then and not till then he was enjoined to fight.
The term ‘Jihad’ applies to all those stages, but in the
minds of Europeans it is restricted to the third. That is the
reason for the whole mistake. The sort of Jihad prescribed
for peoples in a subject state differs from that prescribed
for the same people in a state of independence. And the
Jihad for subject peoples who are still not persecuted is the
Jihad of Jesus, which was followed by Muhammed during
thirteen years at Mecca. This is what Mahatma Gandhi,
after consultation with the Ulema, has been able to point
out to the Indian Muslims, who in their rage were ready
to rush unarmed on the English guns, or give up all their
property and cross the frontier to Afghanistan.
An emigration movement had begun, but it had not yet
the sanction of the Muslim leaders. The time for the second
form of Jihad was not ripe, since persecution had not actually
started. There was still hope that by the force of peaceful
agitation the rulers might be moved to change their policy
and keep their pledges given to the Muslims ; the more
so that Hindus and others now stood side by side with
Muslims making a united Indian claim for justice. In his
second letter to me Marmaduke wrote of the first Khilafate
meeting he attended. In London the tree stems in the parks
are black, under April green, October gold, or January
bare boughs. The Bombay avenues of tulip trees have
always white stems setting off the roads gay with painted
bullock carts and their bright-coloured awnings, cloisters
filled with bejewelled dancers instead of sombre friars. *
On his way to the meeting, as it was yet early, he and
Mr. Chotani, his mentor, a munificent and wealthy merchant
of Bombay, the first president of the Central Khilafate
Committee, Mahatma Gandhi’s Muslim counsellor and his
most staunch adherent, sat together under a splendid
baobab with a dome of leaves and hanging roots like tresses.


The giant tree beside the dusty road formed a species of
pavilion in which all sorts of people took their ease. ‘ There
was a barber on a strip of carpet shaving the hair beneath a
peasant’s armpits. A group of merchants, sumptuously
dressed, sat in a ring on stools and gossiped eagerly. Another
group of lower rank was playing cards. Hawkers were selling
betel-nut and pan-leaves, sweets, sherbets, hand-mirrors,
combs, pen-knives. Beyond the hanging tresses of the
tree, upon the road, pedestrians and carts in single file were
moving in two endless streams, blurring the sunlight with
the dust raised by their going.’
After his seven years’ exile, Marmaduke knew himself
once more at home. Ten minutes before the meeting was
due to start, he and his guide pressed their way through the
crowded city streets. Suddenly they were caught up in a
rising tide, which seemed to sweep all the wayfarers off their
feet and bear them all in one direction. ‘ Men, animals, and
carts which still maintained a separate purpose, became as
islands around which it swirled and eddied. They seemed
half afraid. It was the indraught of the public meeting.’
At last, borne on the tide, Marmaduke and Mr. Chotani
came to ‘ the brink of what resembled a huge, shallow
tank of which the ground could not be seen for seated people,
while the edges were all occupied by standing crowds.
Windows and roofs of all the houses within sight were
crowded with spectators. The day’s fierce heat was past.
The light grew mellow. The multitude so full of colour and
restricted movement seemed a huge flower-bed touched
with a light breeze, the murmur from it as the hum of bees.
The steadily in-flowing tide urged us two men on to the
end of the enclosure farthest from them, where there was a
kind of stage with plush upholstered chairs and couches on
it and an awning.
4 Across the body of the meeting, picking their way amongst
the seated throng, we came to some volunteers in khaki
uniforms and fezes who were arranging people, and these
soon showed us to our seats on the platform. We sat
with all that vast assembly patiently for hours, yet no one
came. Presently, when the sun was setting, the leader of the


volunteers stood forth and, flourishing a telegram, an-
nounced : “ Maulana was delayed. He missed the train.
Now he will be here directly.” *
A general murmur of acceptance hailed the tidings.
No one moved. When twilight came, with temple bells
and the muezzin’s cry, many Muslims who were in the
meeting went to prayer, and Marmaduke and his companion
followed them. Whilst they were away the volunteers hung
lighted lanterns on the stage, making the expectant emptiness
the more apparent. And then at last, when night had settled
in, there came from the far outskirts of the throng a wild
shout: ‘ Allahu Akbar ! ’ It rose from point to point
until the welkin rang with it, and then a group of men in
loose, white raiment mounted the platform with the help
of volunteers.
Behind them came Marmaduke and his friend. Two of
the men who stepped forward at once and who received the
loudest cheers of all were the famous Ali brothers. These
brothers, Gandhi’s most devoted Muslim henchmen, were,
like the Hindu leader, men of good family and of English
education. The elder, Shaukat, filled a high position in the
Indian State of Ranpur until he was deprived of everything
and many members of his family were imprisoned by H.H.
the Nawab on account of his and his brother’s political
opinions. The younger by six years, Mohammed Ali was a
Cambridge graduate, who had spent much of his younger
days in England and had many English friends.
Shaukat, though he had never been to England, was
educated at the Muslim college at Aligarh near Agra, where
he gained no little reputation as a cricketer. They both
gave up all private wealth and private occupations in order
to serve the cause of the Khilafate. Both were dressed in
white with high white caps on which a scarlet crescent was
sewn. After the cry “ Allahu Akbar ! ” “ God is greater,”
rent the air, dead silence fell upon the multitude. Then
Mohammed Ali began to speak. He began by making it
clear that he and his brother were enthusiastic friends of
England until the treatment meted out to Turkey, the
representative of Islam, since 1911 by the British Govern


ment, had forced them step by step into their present
position of direct antagonism to British policy. For Hindus
as well as Muslims, the honour of that Empire, of which
they were very members incorporate, had been shamelessly
violated by the actions of the British during and after the
war, in absolute denial of their word.
Hindus and Muslims both had heard the British Govern-
ment promise that the c holy places of Islam should remain
immune from molestation.’ Yet Mecca and Medina were
invaded by British military officers as was related in The
Times of August 7, 1920, and Jeddah, the port of Mecca,
was bombarded by British men-of-war and . captured in
June 1916. Jerusalem, another of the holy places, was
occupied by General Allenby on December 19, 1917, and
Baghdad and the holy Jezirat-ul-arab —the Sacred Island
of Arabia —was even, as he spoke, in British military
occupation.
As Colonel Lawrence had written in the Sunday Times
of August 22, 1920 : ‘ Ten thousand villagers and towns-
people of Mesopotamia have been killed this summer simply
because they object to the form of government imposed on
them by the present British Government.’ With such facts
brought before them it hardly seemed that Mohammed
Ali would be able to quieten the crowd, for should they
with calm acquiesce in the policy of the Empire of which
they were members, they were thus traitors to Islam.
Indians had been used to bring about the downfall of the
last great Muslim Empire and the humiliation of the head of
their religion, and Marmaduke wondered how any orator,
however skilful, could or would restrain the tide of their
indignation.
Mohammed Ali stopped speaking and sat down. Then his
brother Shaukat stood up. He could not be compared to his
junior for learning or cleverness, yet Marmaduke knew he
was the one outstanding character among the Indian
Muslims, the beloved of all India, second only to Gandhi
himself in prestige. A man of fifty with the heart of a boy,
a giant six foot seven who would never hurt a living creature,
‘ a jolly person radiant with goodwill, immovably upright,


honest as the day, utterly sincere, without a trace of pride
or selfishness. He was a survival of the youth of the world,
and probably the most lovable figure in all politics.’
The words he uttered, and by which he managed easily
to calm the vast crowd, now inclined to violence, made
Marmaduke realize both his tremendous force of character
and his popularity. “ Our enemies,” he said, “ prepare to
blame us because they say we bring religion into politics.
With us religion is no mere observance reserved for one
day in the week ; it covers, animates, ennobles all the
avocations of man’s daily life. It is man’s guidance. How
can it, therefore, be apart from politics, on which the welfare
of mankind so much depends ? You all have heard our cry
‘ Allahu Akbar ! ’ but do you know its meaning ? ‘ God is
greater ! ’ —greater than the pride of men, the might of
governments. His law is changeless and His judgment is
for all alike. He has no favourites. We Muslims are His
servants, and we cannot possibly transgress His law at the
behest of any earthly government: They can do their worst
to us in punishment; it will not turn us from our purpose
by the fraction of an inch ; and in the end it is the worse
for them. For God is greater, and everybody who acknow-
ledges the sovereignty of God, no matter what his race or
colour, class or form of worship, is, in fact, our brother.
The goal, the judgment, and the law are one for all. This
is the one essential of true human progress —by which I
mean not the progress of one section of God’s human
creatures at the expense and by the degradation of another
section, but the progress of mankind as a whole—this recogni-
tion of God’s universal sovereignty. When this essential
Unity is recognized, and not till then, will man’s adventure
in this world approach success. How say they that religion-
has no part in politics ? . . .”
He spoke for full three hours, with unabated ardour, and
when Marmaduke, slipping away from the meeting, returned
to his office, there to report it fully, he was not conscious of
fatigue ; for this, he knew, was true Jihad.
His arrival in Bombay had coincided with the arrival of
a new head of the Bombay School of Art, and a few days


after his arrival, Marmaduke and Muriel met Captain
Gladstone Solomon at the house of a missionary at tea, and
shortly after visited the Bombay School of Art. Marma-
duke’s kfcen interest was aroused, and within a day or two of
seeing the school, appeared his first article drawing attention
to the work of the students and pleading for patronage of
their efforts. Lord Lloyd’s policy as Governor of Bombay
was to reorganize the school on wider lines, and Marmaduke
appreciated this and wrote expressing admiration of Lloyd’s
patronage of Oriental art. At the time of the Wembley
Exhibition, owing to Marmaduke’s efforts, students from
the school were commissioned to decorate, the Indian
Pavilion, and Marmaduke sent photographs of their work
to Lady Valda Machell.
Gladstone Solomon became Marmaduke’s greatest friend
in Bombay, and when finally the latter left India in
January 1935, he wrote to him : ‘ If my fourteen years had
been absolutely disappointing and fruitless as regards the
work done (which is not the case) I should still be glad that I
went there because otherwise I should not have made
friends with you. Good luck to you and to the school,
and may you have your heart’s wish in the way of extension
or renewal whether in Bombay or Hyderabad or Mysore.’
Marmaduke’s successor, Brelvi, followed his tradition of
helping the school, and when Marmaduke went to
Hyderabad, Gladstone Solomon, ‘ at Marmaduke’s repeated
and most kind invitation, became a contributor to Islamic
Culture .’ Captain Solomon has kindly described for me
Marmaduke’s life in those days, how he would come in late
from the office to Green’s Hotel, c and after a few turns on
the veranda with a contemplative pipe, would start to
write in pencil anywhere that he could obtain the space to
do so. I remember seeing him so absorbed in his task that
he had dropped on his knees beside the divan in the sitting-
room and wrote oblivious of comfort, until recalled to
himself when an Indian called to see him on some urgent
matter.’ He would work in the office from eleven in the
morning till about six, and then go round again about
10 p.m. and work till two or later. He would always walk


the two miles to the office and back, whatever the weather,
horrified though he daily was by the terrible cruelty to
animals which he saw practised by the poorer Hindus.
The person who really suffered was Muriel. Indeed,
after a year of Bombay, Marmaduke was forced to take her
home as her health broke down and made a change*
imperative. “It isn’t the climate,” he explained to Lady
Valda, “ but the social boycott that has got at last upon
her nerves, though I told her before she left England of
what she had to expect if she would insist upon accompany-
ing such an awful man as me to ‘ British ’ India. She was
in the hills in the hot weather and there people were civil
to her in my absence, but with the exception of the principal
of the School of Art no one of the English here has shown us
ordinary civility. I do not care, as I meet much more
interesting folk, but it has undoubtedly been very dull for
her, though she has stood it nobly.”
In the middle of November the news of the Turkish
nationalist successes began to come in. Marmaduke
admired Mustapha Kemal tremendously and thought that,
‘ in view of their tragic and heroic history, their high sin-
cerity and the bewildering world in which they fight to-day,
the Turks should be forgiven all their sins, at any rate by
Muslims,’ yet he was afraid Kemal, the saviour of the
nation from destruction, would, Samson-like, pull down the
pillars of Islam to save himself and his country from the
invader. ‘ The story of the rebirth of Turkey, is,’ he
declared, ‘ though told in the terms of economics, a romance,
as is everything heroic. The national characteristics of
honesty, sobriety, and love of beauty, remain unimpaired
and the forcing of practical reforms upon a reluctant people
is most necessary as the Muslim world must come to terms
with modern fife and someone must make the necessary
experiments, take the necessary risks and bear the odium.
To ascertain the limits, someone must transgress them.’
He wrote to me on November 24 :
‘We are living in stirring times, are we not ? Yesterday
my paper came out with a great notice in the middle of the
centre page : “ Fall of Erivan. Turks still advancing.” I


don’t know what the Government of India thinks about it,
but all the Muslims are beside themselves with joy. There
are few of the English here who sympathize at all with
Indian aspirations—only a converted missionary,' Mr.
Andrews, and myself. I call Mr. Andrews a converted
missionary because he was once a G.M.S. missionary, but
has now become a follower of Mahatma Gandhi and has
assumed the dress of Gandhi’s followers, a plain white robe
and white cap like a carpenter’s. I have not yet met him,
but I had a very friendly letter from him this morning,
proposing to come and see me when he is next in Bombay.
‘ Two days ago a young Sikh officer, who was a student
in the veterinary college here, came and told me how he
had been turned out of the college, and his career broken,
for having a photograph of Mahatma Gandhi in his bed-
room and for having attended a meeting of the Bombay
students at which Gandhi spoke. He said : “I was not a
follower of Mahatma Gandhi, though I loved his teaching.
I was a soldier and a loyal servant of the Government.
But now I am a follower of Mahatma Gandhi. I have
nothing left to do, so I will beg for money for his funds.”
Just now, in my office, he came bare-headed and bare-
legged, in yellow robe and with his begging bowl —the
proudest figure of a man you ever saw, to ask my blessing
before he set out on his travels through all India. I said :
“You are a Sikh, and I a Muslim.” He said : “It is
because you are a Muslim that I ask your blessing, and a
word of recommendation from you to the Muslim leaders.”
I gave him what he wanted and he said : “ I shall never
forget you. Do not forget me.” Muriel and I put money
in his begging bowl, and off he went. It is little incidents
like that which make me glad to be here, though, at times,
as I have told you, I feel very homesick. The students seem
inclined to adopt me as a kind of leader, and I am pleased
because I like them generally better than the older men.
There is a chance that they will ask me to preside at the
All-India Students’ Congress at Nagpur in Christmas week.
Anyhow I shall have to go to Nagpur for the National
Congress which takes place a few days later. It will be


exciting, as the Moderates intend, I hear, to make a great
attack upon Mahatma Gandhi, who is a saint and an angel
—anything you like in that way—but the most obstinate
little man who ever walked this earth. I love him and
believe that he will revive India, but his autocratic tone
makes enemies. He has discovered “ the Satanic nature of
the British Government ” and denounces it on all occasions
in those very words, and regards all the poor Indians who
have jobs under Government as “ slaves of Satan.” Natur-
ally they dislike it. Have you heard of “ non-co-operation ”?
We are mad about it here.’
At Nagpur, Muriel and Marmaduke were the guests of
the Central Khilafate Committee, and lived in a green
pavilion in a lovely garden three miles out of the dust and
smother of the city. To me he wrote from there :
‘ We have just arrived here for the session of the Indian
National Congress, which begins the day after to-morrow
(Sunday), and is likely to be exciting. We travelled up in
the Khilafate Special Train, bedecked with Muslim flags, and
full of what the ordinary onlooking Englishman would
doubtless have mistaken for a crowd of wild fanatics.
‘We found it an extremely gentle, friendly crowd.
Muriel was the only woman on the train, and in the course
of the twenty-four hours’ journey she fell quite in love with
the whole lot of them. We steamed into Nagpur station at
twenty minutes to twelve to-day. An immense crowd of
Muslims was waiting for us on the platform. Shaukat Ali
straightway pounced on us. He is the handsome Indian
who embraced me on my first arrival in Bombay. We had
taken rooms at the only hotel in Nagpur, but Shaukat
would not hear of our going there. He bore us off to a
delightful pavilion which he had prepared for us in the com-
pound of the house where he is living with his staff. We
left Muriel there, and then, as it is Friday, all we men went
down to prayers at the great mosque, which was packed
with men in the most lovely clothes you ever saw. The
Imam —a famous Mullah from the Punjab, with singularly
keen blue eyes—preached, with his two hands resting on


the handle of the wooden sword, which preachers use in
every country which was conquered by Islam not self-
converted and, though I only understood the Arabic in his
discourse, while most of it was in Urdu, I judge that he
preached well, from the emotion of the congregation. Then
we all stood in ranks for prayer, and there was only just room
for each person to prostrate himself, the ranks of worshippers
filled all the forecourt of the mosque and the long flight of
steps down to the street. When the service was over,
Muhammad Ali, brother of Shaukat Ali, spoke about the
wrongs of Turkey, and, sitting on my heels, I watched the
faces of the crowd. Next to me was a little bright-eyed, nut-
brown boy in a blue robe, who watched my face intently.
There were some magnificent profiles ; and out among the
columns of the portico were men, in every colour of the
rainbow, standing, or leaning, up against the trees and sky.
Muhammad Ali spoke at great length, and I was very glad
when he had done and I was able to get up and stretch
myself. And then what do you think happened ? The
little bright-eyed boy who had been watching me suddenly
flung himself upon me like a little madman, kissing both my
hands, my coat, and anything belonging to me, and cling-
ing to me as hard as he could, till he was dragged away, by
grown-up people who proceeded to do the same thing. I
was rescued shortly by the Muslim volunteers, who wear
a khaki uniform like soldiers, but are unarmed. They
cleared a way for me out into the street, to Shaukat Ali’s
motor, where presently I was joined by Muhammad Ali,
Yakub Hasan from Madras, and the Imam, and borne
away to peace and safety in this pleasant spot.
‘ This evening we have been driven round the Congress
camp, which is like an enormous fair and very dusty. We
saw Mr. Gandhi’s headquarters beset by a crowd of white-
clad Hindus, and the great Congress hall, which holds fifty
thousand people. And we are thoroughly tired —I too tired
to do anything less pleasant than write to Amie.
‘ I haven’t the least idea what is going to happen—or
what I myself may do or say —at the Congress. India is in
a very funny state, but I don’t think a bad one.’


To an old friend, Joseph King, he wrote : ‘ I did order
copies of my newspaper giving my views upon the Nagpur
Congress to be sent to you and I hope you duly received
them. The Labour Party Delegation to the State Congress
was rather a frost. Consequently everyone arrived at Nagpur
with feelings of distrust for the whole Labour Delegation.
It was a situation which no rhetoric could save. Holford
Knight tried rhetoric at the Subjects Committee and only
increased the impression that the Labourites were insincere.
It was not a rhetorical Congress.
‘ Gandhi had given us the keynote of unvarnished truth,
but Ben Spoor was the only member of the trio in tune
with it. He really saved the situation by his brotherly
behaviour and his accent of complete sincerity. In fact we
non-co-operators —Monotheists, Hindus, and Muslims of
India —have passed beyond the sphere of politics into that
of religion. To me it is a great relief to find men boldly
advocating this or that course of action simply because it is
right according to the higher law. I spoke for an hour and
a half to ten thousand Muslims at Nagpur, and never once
had the sense that they thought me a half-mad idealist, as
one has when speaking the whole truth to any English
public audience.
‘ What English people generally fail to grasp is that
Indian feeling is not anti-British except exactly in so far as
British feeling is, or seems to be, anti-Indian. If the
Government of India stood for India resolutely, in the
Councils of Empire, as the Government of Australia stands
for Australia, and the British officials in India behaved as
public servants, not as satraps, the “ Extremists ” would be
altogether satisfied. I am not so sure about the “ Moder-
ates ” (co-operators) who look forward to succeeding to
the high position of the I.C.S. The situation seems to
me extraordinarily hopeful if only people will make due
allowance for the natural Indian point of view.
c Unfortunately the English here are panicky, and seem
bent upon another campaign of repression. That would
not matter if all the followers of Gandhi were Gandhis;
but ordinary people when unjustly treated are apt to lose


their tempers and their heads. Here, in Gujarat, with
Gandhi in our midst, the people will grin and bear it; but
to do Lloyd justice, he is not a tyrant. Bengal is different,
so is Madras, and Sinha in Behar is worst of all, I suppose
from wish to toady the Government which has exalted him.
We are motored into the Congress every day in a car flutter-
ing with Turkish flags, but it is a Gandhi Conference.
One notices no other personality.’
In January 1921 he wrote to me again :
‘ We both returned from Nagpur with a particularly
beastly kind of influenza, which is the reason why I have
not written for more than a fortnight.
‘ I have just received —late at night—a summons to go
and see the Governor to-morrow privately. He is a friend,
so I am not alarmed —a very good fellow, though the
Governor. I, expect he wants to know the truth about
Nagpur. The Government spies make such alarming
stories of everything that Indians do or say at present.
‘ This year will decide the fate of India one way or the
other—tyranny or emancipation—and I am very keen upon
emancipation. 5
Marmaduke hardly ever missed a mail, but all his most
personal and most interesting letters I destroyed soon after
I married, as my husband thought it foolish sentimentality
on my part to keep them, a piece of Peter Pan-ism, childish
and unworthy. I think there is nothing on earth I regret
quite as much as those letters, but this explanation will
serve to show why the letters to me that remain are so
comparatively uninteresting and so incomplete as regards
dates. Still, scattered as they are, they are all I have as
data for this part of his life, as except for an occasional
letter to Lady Valda or Aubrey Herbert, he had no time for
private correspondence.
With his letter on January 27, 1921, he sent me a
photograph of Gandhi with the comment, ‘He is really
a very wonder, though little, shy and shrunken in
appearance. 5 He told me, ‘lt is just possible that I


may be coming back to England about May. It all
depends on the views of the directors of my newspaper,
some of whom are anti-Gandhi. If they decide that the
policy of the newspaper is to be co-operation with the
Government, I shall resign. I do not think they will, but
in any case I shall not engage to stay here for three years.
An additional six months—making a year in all —is the
utmost I feel inclined to undertake. I ought to get the
paper shipshape by that time so expect me home about
September if we are alive.’ So little still was his intention to
stay in India the full three years that he wrote to Herbert
to ask if it would not be possible for him to find him a job
in Turkey.
Already he had learned Urdu. He wrote to my mother :
c Many of the words —no, most of them—are familiar, being
Arabic, Turkish, or Persian. The very word ‘ urdu ’ is
Turkish for a camp. But it is really more confusing than an
absolutely new vocabulary because when one lights on an
Arabic phrase, one’s instinct is to go on talking Arabic, and
the same with Persian or Turkish. I wonder if the Esperan-
tists, with their made-up language, find the same difficulty,
but I fancy they change all their words a little, whereas in
Urdu words are simply borrowed. Classical Arabic will be
my language with my co-religionists until the Urdu spring
really begins to flow.’
His relations with the English higher officials were
friendly. Sir Frederick White asked him to stay, and
Garbett of the I.G.S. was also civil, but, of course, the minor
English were peculiarly aggressive and rude, and at one time
Marmaduke could not go out alone without being insulted
publicly.
In February he wrote to me about the Duke of Con-
naught’s visit.
‘ I am sorry that I missed writing to you by the last mail,
but I quite forgot the day the mail went out. There is not
much news ; except that the Duke of Connaught said at
Delhi that the despotic principle in Indian government


is now abolished, and my friend Mr. Yakub Hasan a!nd three
other Gandhi-ites have been clapped into prison at Calicut
by a mere order of a district magistrate because they wished
to hold-a public meeting. Thus acts belie announcements
here as elsewhere. I am glad to say that Gandhi’s doctrine
of non-violence and patient suffering has so far been
observed by all the people. But one never knows, from day
to day, what will happen, when some of the Government
officials and the toady Indians are doing everything they
can to provoke the people.
‘ We have moved from the Taj Mahal Hotel to Green’s
Hotel, which is close by and under the same management.
Here we have a bedroom looking over the harbour on one
side, and the Yacht Club garden on the other, with two
broad verandas each of which makes a sitting-room, and
a bathroom. It is really just as good as a private flat;
and Muriel likes it much better than the Taj Mahal Hotel,
which was full of “ resident ” English, who began to frown
upon us.
‘ I am invited to Surat and Ahmedabad—in fact, to make
a little tour through Gujerat—but do not quite know when
I shall be free to go there. The conducting of a newspaper
in India in these exciting times is as difficult as walking on a
tight-rope.
‘ I hope you got the verses of the Coran I sent you. More
will follow in due course.’
‘ The Duke of Connaught’s visit,’ he wrote elsewhere,
‘ and later the visit of the Prince of Wales, were used by
the bureaucracy as the occasion for official rejoicing as if
to show the world that all was well with India and that the
Indians were satisfied with the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms.
The Indians gave the lie to this by their boycott of the
Prince’s visit. They say that the King Emperor is ours as
much as theirs, and if he sends a member of his family to
India he ought to be allowed to look into the state of
India in order that the King Emperor may be informed of
our wrongs. Instead of which he is kept the prisoner of the
bureaucracy, who try to make him think that all is well.
Y


Our protest is to refuse to participate in the rejoicings, but
there is no ill-will on our part to the person of the royal
visitor.’
He wrote again to me after the Duke had left for England :
e The Bombay Chronicle ,
‘ Bombay.
‘ March 4-th 1921.
‘ Nothing much has happened since I last wrote, except
that the Duke of Connaught has returned to England after
his visit to India, which concluded in Bombay. The Indian
people took no part in the festivities for his reception, and
the Bombay Chronicle as representing the Indian people was
against the visit, so that its editor was obliged to refuse three
several invitations for Mr. and Mrs. Pickthall “ to have the
honour of meeting H.R.H.” ; which, between ourselves,
he would have liked to accept, Colonel Sir Malcolm Murray,
the Duke’s A.D.C., being a very old friend of his. However,
the Bombay Chronicle being read carefully at Government
House, I think “ we ” managed to bring the real views of the
Indian people to the knowledge of His Royal Highness.
Indeed, in his farewell speech, he nearly said as much.
‘ Yesterday, being the eighth birthday of the paper, I
gave a little treat of sweets and “ pan sipari ” —betel nut
rolled up in leaves and smeared with lime, which Indians
love —mineral waters and tea for the more civilized, to all
the staff—hundreds of dusky individuals, who seemed
quite pleased with the small function, which at least had
the advantage of making them feel that we are all one body,
from the editor and business manager down to the little
dusky mites whose business is to fold the copies as they
come from press. I cannot tell you how I love the poorer
Indians : they are just like children and their worst be-
haviour is only ‘ naughtiness,’ which yields at once to kind-
ness and a little understanding. The funniest deputations
from the workshops come to me, with very simple, often
childish grievances, which vanish when I smile and go
among them. Among the educated and ambitious there


are two great curses—envy and a passion for intrigue—which
make them much more difficult to deal with, and force one
to keep them rather at arm’s length for fear of being
wheedled into partisanship. Of course there are plenty of
Indians who are as disinterested and as honest as English-
men, but the other sort are more common in the office of a
daily newspaper. I have only a very few Muslims on my
staff, the rest being Hindus or Indian Christians.
c When a few real Muslims like Shaukat Ali and Mohammed
Ali come to see me, I feel as if I were at home again.
‘ I am asked to go to Surat, Ahmedabad, Delhi, Lahore,
Amritsar, and Aligarh by the Muslim communities in those
places, but cannot see my way to leave Bombay at present,
because a new company is being floated to run the Bombay
Chronicle , and a slight change of policy has to be made.
Hitherto we have been rather guarded in our views. But
soon we shall be boldly uttering the Gandhi sentiments and
views, insh’'allah.”
‘ With heaps of love,
‘ Yours ever,
* Marmaduke.’
He had now been in India six months and decided to stay
on at any rate till the autumn. The only holiday he had
taken was his Christmas at Nagpur. He wrote to Lady
Valda a general summary of his conclusions :
* Things have quite changed in the last two years. The
word of Gandhi the saint is heard in every village from the
Himalayas to Cape Comorin, whereas the words of former
politician-leaders only reached the English-educated “ intel-
lectuals.” Even Tilak only touched “ the people ” in his
own province of Maharashtra, and Gandhi’s influence is
good. It is only where some tom-fooling district magistrate
prevents his emissaries from preaching to the people and
imprisons them that we get trouble. But the Greek advance
in Turkey with munitions sent from England has agitated
all the Muslims, and Shaukat Ali —really a great man and
a saint, too, in his way, as much as Gandhi—tells me


privately that they are getting out of hand, though as yet no
trouble has appeared. If the Government arrests the Ali
brothers there will be a blaze, I am afraid, as they are the
chief restraining influence. I see the inner working of the
Khilafate Movement and I am dismayed at the false views
held by the Government. The Indian agents and police are
awful liars. There is a strong feeling among Indian gentle-
men —the breed exists—that Englishmen are no longer what
they used to be. In one sense Gandhi may be said to be
defending the honour of England against England’s rulers.
Most English people here, judging by the newspapers,
appear to think that Indians as a race are now disloyal to
the British crown. They are really only “ fed up ” with the
arrogance and petty tyranny of the officials here, and with
the refusal of the home Government to give India a fair
hearing in the Councils of the Empire. George Lloyd is a
good Governor, not at all panicky, but in other provinces
“ repression ” has already begun and the people are being
harassed and irritated needlessly. The “ danger ” is from
the panic of the European, rather than the grievance of the
“ native ” element. It always is, in my experience. Gandhi
has said as much to me in private. My stay in Bombay,
though in many ways infernal, has been illumined for me
by the personality of Gandhi, who is a living inspiration, not
a man. His friendship is a positive acquisition.’
In spite of his work he still found time to write to me
on the subjects we had so often discussed. An example on
February 25 :
c The short creed of Muslims that you want to know is
this : “I testify that there is no God except Allah, and I
testify that Muhammed is the messenger of Allah.”
‘ln other words : “ There is no proper object of man’s
worship except God, and Muhammed is the messenger of
God.” Christians in the East have always been regarded as
believers in the first part of this creed, so that the term Allah
may be taken to include the Christian doctrine of “ the
three in One, and One in three.” ’


He was delighted with Indian music, and wrote of it to
me : •
‘ The pipe of Pan, like Krishna’s flute, gives the notes of a
pastoral age which the East still remembers lovingly while
the West has forgotten it. Eastern music should be heard
in the open air and to write of it is to leave out the soul,
but I must tell you the story of the Bedawi girl in the harem
of Haroun, al Rashid to make you understand a little its
force. Hearing a shepherd boy playing his reed pipe as he
passed by on the road from behind her shutters she was
seized with such an anguish of remembrance that she cast
off all that luxury and wealth and fled in her old cloak back
to the desert life. That is the story of the call of all Eastern
music.’
And to my mother he wrote :
‘ Muriel is at Panchgani, a hill station in the Deccan,
and I alone in hot Bombay. It is Ramadhan, and I think
the fast from sunrise to sunset even from so much as a drop
of water, makes the heat endurable, at least I find that I
sail through the day without distress, while I see other
Englishmen and even Indians suffering upon the verge of
apoplexy. I think the Prophet must have been a sound
psychologist. No abstinence from certain things for a
number of days has the value of this absolute fast ending
in praise to Allah for the blessing of a glass of water and some
common food. They do seem blessings when the sunset
comes. The gul-mohr (rose-peacock) trees are all in flower
along the front and in the Malabar hill gardens. They are
a never-failing source of joy in morning walks. When I go
out at night I have to pick my way among poor people
stretched out on the pavements absolutely naked and gasping.
It is all very well for us with our baths and punkhas, but
the heat must be a terror to the overcrowded poor in this
unwieldy city.’
One excellent result of the Khilafate Movement was to
increase the sale of khaddar a hundred per cent. The


Khadi movement was started by Indian nationalists in
1908 when the handloom was chosen as a panacea for
India’s growing pauperism. Gandhi himself never saw a
spinning-wheel in India until 1915, but after he had taken it
up, the making of home-spun in their homes by Indians of
all classes took on a national importance. All followers of
Gandhi, as their badge, wore clothes of Indian home-spun
of the simplest kind. There was no point on which the
Mahatma dwelt with more insistence. It was an essential
part of his attempt to disperse the inferiority complex which
he found stood in the way of Indian self-government and
Indian advancement in every way.
‘Be proud that you are Asiatics ! Proud that you are
Indians ! Leave your English colleges which are the
training places of slaves ! Throw off your foreign clothes
which are the badge of servitude ! Restore the honour of
our country ! Be yourselves ! Our object is to make the
Government do right. While \ye are servile we can never
do it. To merit freedom we ourselves must first be free,
free from the foreign yoke on our intelligence. Selfish
ambition is a vice and not a virtue. It has been inculcated
for our ruin, just another trick of Europe to keep us slaves.
The way to freedom lies through sacrifice and service.
Discard your foreign clothes ! Go forth as teachers into
our great country ! Dispel the ignorance which is the base
and the excuse of tyranny ! Be proud that you are
Indians ! ’
The white-clad missionaries, with Gandhi as their leader,
went throughout Bombay, Madras, Behar, and Sindh.
Everywhere great bonfires were made of foreign head-
dresses, collars, coats, ties, whatever could be pulled off,
and set on fire, and political ambition was an unseen addition
to the rubbish on each bonfire.
The non-co-operation movement which was inaugur-
ated to obtain redress of the great Muslim, or rather Asiatic,
grievance, with regard to Turkey, had soon the redress of
the Punjab wrongs as an additional object. During their
work to obtain these ends Gandhi and his followers, Muslim


and Hindu alike, realized that the absence of swaraj was
the greatest wrong of all and that non-co-operation should
be directed against this also. Swaraj means full self-
government in the sense that it is enjoyed by our Overseas
Dominions. Thus the victories of Mustapha Kemal and the
triumphant conclusion of Turkey’s sufferings with the Treaty
of Lausanne (when the foreign troops evacuated Turkey,
Angora was made her capital and the Republic declared),
did not bring non-co-operation in India to an end. In the
first year or so of its existence it had already done more in
India than was ever done before.
As Marmaduke wrote in a Bombay Chronicle, leader : ‘lt
has put a new spirit in the people who are no longer content
to mimic Englishmen, no longer content to cringe to the
Government for honours; but now are proud to emphasize
the difference between an Indian and an Englishman. The
work the English failed to do is being begun by Indians; a
national system of education, Muslim and Hindu, has been
started on a large scale. Students who have left their
colleges at the nation’s call are going through the country
giving elementary education to the illiterate, carrying the
torch of Gandhi’s teaching to the villages. “ Put away
evil, for it helps your enemy,” is the cry, and the people of
India are responding with a will. Drink ? They will have
none of it ! Luxury ? They will burn all their foreign
clothes and take to simple robes and caps of Indian home-
spun, which cost the same price for everybody. Give ?
They are giving money by the million. Men who were
the greatest dandies and the greatest gourmets are become
dervishes clad in Khadi, who live on rice and lentils and
pure water. Village governments are being revived.
Courts of arbitration have been formed in order to avoid
the great expense of litigation. And the caste system, in so
far as it was bad or had become so, is being broken down by
the Hindus themselves. Patriotic Indians have for long
been asking : Why are we Indians, once a sovereign people,
now subjected and inferior ? At last they find the answer
to the riddle : “ Because you accept subjection, because
you are content to fawn upon the conqueror and ape his


ways. Mere imitation constitutes inferiority. Intrinsically
you are not inferior, you are only different. Emphasize the
difference with pride, as your opponents do, and you will
not be in subjection very long.” Thus India comes back
into Asia after years of wandering. Great as is the debt of
gratitude which Muslims owe to India for their help and
sympathy at such a crisis, I think it is in good part repaid
by the revival of their pride as Asiatics which has come to
them from their association with the Muslims on the
typically Asiatic question of Khilafate, and not to Hindus
only, but to Parsi, Jewish, Sikh, and Christian sympathizers.’
Hindu-Muslim unity was achieved through the Khilafate
Movement for what, in the history of their antagonism, is a
brief second ; but in Marmaduke’s life comprised his four
most exciting years, from 1919 until 1923. When he was in
the Lebanon in 1908 he had shared in the rebirth of a people:
in T urkey in 19 13 he had experienced the agony of an empire:
now he was caught up in a political movement whose
religious temper was as fervent as that of Covenanter or
Leveller.
Letter after letter came to me from him in the white heat
of the conflict, and I, thousands of miles away, remember
the echo of his enthusiasm, translating me, unaware, from a
world of dictees and stamp-collecting into high theocratic
airs. For the Khilafate agitation was a mustard seed con-
taining the principle which is the bedrock of all Asiatic
thought and culture : the principle of Theocracy, which,
when it was grown, accommodated such diverse birds as
the Khadi Movement, swaraj and Moplah education. The
Muslim feeling of loyalty to the Khalif grew to a passion.
‘ All feelings,’ E. M. Forster says, ‘ gtow to passions in the
East.’ But the heat this passion generated produced a
mirage which has led and shall lead India astray, a mirage of
fictitious unity which, when the flames died down, Marma-
duke was the first to recognize was unreal and unrealizable.
‘ It is no use,’ he wrote later, ‘ the speculative philosophies
of the various religions finding, as they always can, a com-
mon ground for discussion, for the points of their agreement


are only in the realm of thought and can no wise contribute
to f a political understanding. This must be sought in a
political and social modus vivendi : it can never be found in a
compromise involving a mixture of beliefs. All historical
attempts at compromise/ he concluded sadly, 6 have only
added a new religion or a new caste to the Indian pande-
monium, and have left the Hindu-Muslim difficulty as it
was, or even more embittered.’
Marmaduke’s day-to-day adventures are illustrated in the
following letters :
‘ The day before yesterday, in the evening, as I was
sitting correcting “ proofs ” in my editorial sanctum, a
police inspector was announced, who handed me a sum-
mons to appear on the following day (yesterday) at the
Chief Magistrate’s Court in Poona to answer a charge of
defamation of character. I had never even heard his name
before. The charge referred to a letter which was published
in The Chronicle of Dec. 23. We had to search the back files
of the paper to find out what it was about. My staff busied
themselves with these investigations while I went on cor-
recting proofs as before. Somehow the news spread in the
bazaar ; and several people came to sympathize. It was
discovered that the summons stated that I could appear
“ in person or by pleader,” and in a minute four people
were writing telegrams to men of influence in Poona asking
them at once to engage the finest pleader in that city to
defend me. Then somebody suddenly remembered that
Lakhmidas Tairsee, a millionaire Hindu, nationalist leader
and philanthropist (who is a great friend of mine), was
actually at his house in Poona at the moment (he has
houses everywhere). So we decided to send a sepoy up by
the night mail to call on him with all the necessary docu-
ments. Yesterday I had two telegrams and a letter from
the said Lakhmidas informing me, that on the demand of
my pleader, the case has been adjourned until the 12th of
April, which gives us time to find out what it’s all about.
‘ This is the sort of thing a newspaper editor has to be
prepared for.


‘ I don’t know that there is any more news except that I
made a speech to a mass meeting at the Excelsior Theatre
without disgrace. Object of meeting—to protest against the
Press Act.’
‘ March 24-th 1921.
c I am sending you some more verses of the Coran.
‘ I have been more than ever busy since I last wrote.
Besides my usual work I have done quite a lot of speaking
(which is more exhausting), and I have been made extremely
sad by the news of the murder in Berlin of Talaat Pasha,
who was a great friend of mine. I had not seen him since
the war began. A week or two before I left England, a
friend, who had met him by chance in the Unter den Linden,
told me that Talaat had said : “ You are going to England ?
Have I any errand for you there ? I have. Kiss Pickthall
on both cheeks from me.” lam very glad now to have had
that farewell message. There was a memorial meeting for
him in the old cemetery in the Muslim quarter, at which I
presided and had to address more than ten thousand people.
I tried to tell them what a brave man Talaat was, and how
sudden death was what he would have always chosen, and
how such a death, while working for the cause of Islam, and
because he was thus working, was really a most glorious
martyrdom.
‘ Another day I had to address all the Home Rule
Volunteers—an unarmed, gentle army—on the occasion of
their anniversary, and the day after to-morrow I have to go
and speak outside Bombay to an enormous gathering of
Gandhi-ite Hindus. lam also in demand to open schools,
which are springing up on all sides to receive the students
who have voluntarily seceded from the Government institu-
tions. It is interesting, but extremely tiring, as I have to
do my work upon the newspaper as well.
‘ P.S. Muriel sends her love. We went this evening to
see a Begum Somebody—sister to the Begum of Bhopal 1 —
in a most lovely garden by the sea on Malabar Hill. You
would have loved the garden arid, I think, the Beguin too.’
1 This is an error : the Begum was sister to the Dowager Begum of Jangiri.


Muriel, as Marmaduke told my mother, also shared in
the political work. She attended the first Indian Woman’s
Meeting in April, on the anniversary of Jallianwalla Bang.
Mme Naidu presided. There were many hundreds present
whose object was to decide on the ways of carrying out
Gandhi’s plan of swaraj. l The Begum Atiya, sister of the
Dowager Begum of Jangiri, told the women how the spinning
schools were crowded, there were not enough teachers, and
planned extensions. On April i, Marmaduke told me of
the arrival of Lord Reading :
‘ April ist 1921.
‘ I cannot write much, because I have been writing reams
of good advice to the new Viceroy, who arrives to-night but
will not land until to-morrow morning. I hate to let a
mail go without a letter from me to you, not because I
expect you care much for a stupid letter without any news or
verses of the Coran in it but because I like to do unto others
as I would that they should do unto me, and I am always
disappointed if a mail arrives without a letter from you.
c The Governor, who is really a good fellow, has sum-
moned me to go and call on him next Monday—l suppose,
to tell me what Lord Reading means to do, and talk things
over. There is only one way out of the present deadlock,
and I think even the Government officials are beginning to
see it. They must follow Gandhi.
‘ There is to be a huge mass meeting of the Muslims here
on Sunday to protest against the Greek attack upon the
Turks, and call for a boycott of Greek trade.
‘ Muriel and I went out last Saturday to a place called
Santa Cruz to inspect a great Hindu religious college (Arya
Samaj —Monotheists —no idolatry) and I made a hurried
speech to a vast multitude, which I have since heard was
regarded as illuminating. It is Friday and I now must go
to prayers.’
In May he took Muriel out of the heat of the city, and
wrote :
‘ I am writing this from Panchgani, a hill station in the
a See note on previous page.


Western Ghauts, whither we came four days ago, leaving
Bombay at midnight on Friday and arriving here at noon
on Saturday. The last four hours were spent in a motor
car driving through most lovely country up from Poona
station. The peasants here in the Deccan are most lovely
folk to look at, and even their idolatrous religion—they are
most of them Hindus —does not seem so horrid in the open
air as it does in a great sordid, sweltering city like Bombay.
Pink powder seems to play a leading part in it. Every few
hundred yards you see a stone dyed with pink powder : it
is then an idol and you must be careful not to step or sit on
it if there is a Hindu in sight; and in a lonely place we saw
the father of a family, with all his children round him,
standing by a little temple on a mound and scattering pink
powder north, south, east, and west. It made a pretty
picture in the early sunlight; and made one almost forget
that it was only bogey-bogey. The peasant women we kept
meeting on the road were the daintiest little bronzes you
could possibly imagine, and the grey bullocks drag the
carts along an endless avenue, with here and there a great
gul-mohr tree (rose-peacock tree) ablaze with red or yellow
bloom.
* Panchgani is almost, not quite, at the top of a mountain
overlooking the valley of the river Krishna, a sacred river
of the Hindus, for it is there they say that Krishna—their
Prophet —was a shepherd in the world’s golden age. I
think the golden age is still there, whenever there is a
good monsoon and consequently a plenteous harvest.
It is a place frequented by the English as a health resort,
and consequently a place lost to the Orientalist; but there
still remains a pretty Indian village under the gul-mohr
trees already mentioned, and in that Indian village is a
little mosque where I shall go to prayers next Friday, if
I am not recalled to duty and Bombay by telegram ere then.
‘ Last Friday, after prayers, I got an urgent message
from my office, begging me to come at once, as all the
machine-men from the printing works had gone on strike.
Friday is supposed to be my day off, and that day I was
getting ready for the journey hitherward ; but I got a taxi


and went down to the office first, where I took a man whom
I could trust to act as a correct interpreter, and then drove
on to the maidan, a kind of common, where, under a big
tree, I found the strikers, about fifty men, being harangued
by someone whom I didn’t know. I got out of the car and
went right in among them. I told them, through my inter-
preter, that I wanted a week’s holiday and had arranged to
take Mrs. Pickthall up that evening to Panchgani. Would
they put off striking for a week ? I could not promise to
grant all they asked, as that was a matter for the Board of
Directors to decide, but I could promise them a conference,
two of their representatives and two of the employers’
representatives to discuss the whole question of their
complaints and grievances. At first they wanted to accept,
but someone in the background warned them not to do so.
I asked if my suggestion was accepted. They said : No. I
raised my hat to them, they all salaamed to me and I retired
to my motor and drove back to the office, where I found an
emergency meeting of the Directors in full cackle. The
Directors decided to dismiss all the men if they did not
return within an hour and notice was sent down to that
effect. I made that hour a very long one, quite two hours
in fact, and meanwhile repeated my proposal to the men by
proxy. I had given up all hope of settlement, when I heard
the murmur of a crowd outside the building, and found that
they had all come back. No man was missing. I told them
to go back to work according to their usual shifts as if
nothing had happened ; received a smile and a salaam from
every one of them, and then went back to my hotel to dinner
—10.30 p.m. I had started work upon the strike at 5 p.m.
These little things are quite amusing and enlivening, but
very tiring. I have slept a good deal of the time since I
arrived at Panchgani.
‘ Yesterday morning certain of my co-religionists took me
to inspect the Muslim High School here, three miles
away. I was not mightily impressed, for it is only just
beginning in a temporary building and the boys—all rich
men’s children —struck me as uninteresting. In the evening
I took Muriel to call on Lady Baig, but could not have a


talk to her myself because there were some ladies calling
who objected to be seen of men ; so I sat and talked politics
with Sir Abbas Ali, who is a dreadful trimmer, while his
lady is quite one of us. There are said to be poison snakes
in Panchgani, also panthers and hyenas, but I have not yet
seen or heard anything of them. This hotel—or row of
shabby little bungalows with a common dining-room—is
full of mediocre English, who, of course, fight shy of me.
They even make rude remarks in Muriel’s hearing, who
minds the kind of thing a good deal more than I do. It
seems a pity that we neither of us quite get used to it.’
On his return to Bombay he wrote to my father :
‘ Lord Reading has begun rather well, but I doubt
whether he has yet an inkling of the truth, that, in order
to settle the Indian question in so far as it is critical, he has
first to get the Turkish question settled in the way the
Indians wish. To me in the thick of the non-co-operation
movement that truth grows more apparent every day.
Gandhi has met Lord Reading and we all feel much more
hopeful of a speedy and peaceful settlement. But a section
of the English here are wicked. They love violence, and if
they can produce another massacre, will surely do so. They
threaten me and all Khilafate workers with short shrift,
poor creatures. Gandhi is collecting a crore of rupees for
the last of this month. I fancy he will get them. We are all
anxious to know what he will do with the money when he
has got it. On that point he has never said a word, except
that he will get swaraj with it. But he is such a wonderful
man that I for one am quite prepared to trust him blindly.
It is at any rate certain that he will not take a penny for
himself.’
To me, he wrote :
c Still no particular news except that it gets hotter and
hotter, and will go on doing so until the monsoon comes
in June. Gandhi has had three interviews with the new
Viceroy and though no one yet knows what they said to one
another, we are all full of hope of something that will


ease the situation which is rather strained, or was a little
while ago. There is a big mass meeting at Matunga just
outside Bombay on Sunday night when Gandhi will speak
and lam to speak too. I only agreed upon condition that
they would let me come late, after 8 o’clock (the meeting
is for 7 p.m.). I really could not trust myself to talk con-
nectedly at the end of the long day’s fast. So I shall break
my fast before I start for the meeting. Last night there was
a gathering ,of the Parsi community, some wearing metal
hats like coal-scuttles turned upside down, and others,
hats like very tall pork pies. Black-avised men with hawkish
noses and designing eyes. I took the chair. There was a
lecture on the Turkish Question by a funny fat Parsi, by
name Barjorji Framji Bharucha (the last means an inhabi-
tant of Bharuch or Broach, as it is generally written —a
town in Gujerat which I am visiting on Monday), who
writes a great deal in our paper, categorically heading his
paragraphs always, firstly, secondly, and so forth. It was
quite an enthusiastic meeting but it lasted well after dark,
though it began before sunset, and I did so want to get to
my Iftar, the meal directly after sunset during Ramadhan.
‘ A Hindu friend of mine—at least he has become so
lately—one Mr. Takhmidas Rowju Tairsee, alarmed me
the other day by saying, “ I once burnt'seven hundred men.”
What he meant was that he had charitably bought wood —
when wood was frightfully expensive—to burn the Hindus
who had died in the great influenza epidemic of 1919. He
is a great eccentric and renowned philanthropist. A most
amusing—and surprising—man to talk to, because although
he has never been out of India he knows Europe and its
problems and history better than I do, and brings strong
common sense to bear on every subject.’
At the end of May he went to the Broach Congress, and
reported it in special editions of his paper. He was writing
a daily leader as well as editing, besides the public speaking
which he mentions in his letters. He also at this time
wrote two articles for the Harmsworth Encyclopedia , one on
Bombay City, and the other on Gujerat. His two Indian


short stories, ‘ The Quest,’ and c The Student and the
Tower,’ were published in the Cornhill in September 1924
and June 1926. Mr. Edward O’Brien re-published ‘ The
Quest’ in The Best Short Stories of 1924. These two tales
are possibly the best he ever wrote.
‘ The Quest ’ tells of a young Indian, Manilal Gurjar,
8.A., LL.B., who wishes to study politics. He seeks advice
as to how to pursue that science : but the principal of his
old college, his friend Shamdas, the merchant, the Rao
Bahadur (first-class magistrate (retired) ), all fail to help-
him : the principal is thinking about his approaching game
of tennis, Shamdas of his customers, and the magistrate
cares but to enjoy the rewards of his superior egotism. Then
Manilal hears the white-clad Urdu-speaking followers of
Gandhi and his heart is fired. Now he can express the object
of his search. “Full perception of the light has come to me,
and more than ever I would study politics. It is a task of
paramount importance to our country, since it would break
the spell of Western education and restore the glory of
religion. The call, as I have said, has come to me, and
every moment that I spend in idleness is now my shame.”
He leaves his wife and child and journeys throughout
India, northward to the Himalayas and back to the sacred
cities of the Ganges bank, in search of men renowned for
holy wisdom. But in vain. e One whom he consulted, hear-
ing the word “ politics,” would answer nothing but the
word “ illusion,” which he repeated often with a comfortable
smile. Another stated that the light which Manilal was
seeking radiated from his (the Swami’s) very navel, which
was, in fact, the true soul-centre of the Universe. Others
assured him of success, but asked for money. Some spoke
of sacred trees or herbs or stones, and many prescribed
bathing in the Ganges. All praised the life of contempla-
tion, which they claimed to lead, as the sure way to spiritual
progress. Some spoke kindly to him, others were extremely
rude ; and none were of slightest help to him in his pursuit.’
His wife and child and parents die, and he rejects the
comfort of a young widow who would ease him of the burden
of his chastity. At last he comes, still dressed after European


fashion, to the Mahatma. But Gandhi sees Manilal as a
young, man prepared to pester him but not to sacrifice, and
bids him return in six months in Indian garments and with
heart so purified that the very thought of politics disgusts
him. Manilal, for his part, c had so deified that saintly
man that he never dreamt explanations were required. He
thought the saint must know by intuition of his aims and
history and what was passing at that moment in his thoughts. ■
Now by the saint’s words he was rejected, an impostor in the
eyes of men, in his own sight a failure.’ So he kills himself.
The story is pitched in a very low key, but is quite aston-
ishingly effective. It is a translation in epitome of all
Marmaduke had seen and heard and suffered whilst working
in the non-co-operation movement. To his agent, Mr.
Leonard Moore, he wrote : ‘ I have had the proofs of “ The
Quest ” read by a Hindu, Mahratta, whose only criticism
was that I had given the hero a Gujerati first name and a
Mahratti surname, and that he hoped my English readers
would understand the deep meaning of the story. I think
that is rather a triumph as it is the first serious Indian
story I have attempted, and I can claim no special know-
ledge of Hindus at all.’ He was yery glad when it was
accepted by the Editor of the Cornhilly' a. s I should like it to
appear in such a" good old-fashioned magazine.’
Of the ‘ Student and the Tower,’ Marmaduke wrote that
it was ‘ A short story about very modern India which I
think is something altogether new. The state of society
which has been created by the non-co-operation movement
has not, so far as I know, been temperately described, much
less explored for comedy.’ It was accepted by the Cornhill
at the same rate (fifteen guineas) as ‘ The Quest.’ It is set
in Bombay University, where the examination that is
approaching, and that all have worked for, is held to
ridicule by a non-co-operator who is addressing the students,
and the result of that examination is declared to be no more
just than if the written papers were taken by the examiners to
the top of the Rajabhai Tower and thrown to the winds,
those being preferred which fell within a certain radius.
Rangildas, son of the ruler of Kathiawad, who had been
z


sent from the wilds of that state to Bombay to acquire an
English education, was moved by this speech not to work for
this exam. When his failure was announced to his father,
Rangildas distorted the speech he had heard, declaring the
papers were in truth thrown from the tower’s top and each
student must catch his own or miss the mark. “ Are the
English, then, mad ? ” asks the boy’s father. “ Most
evidently mad,” declared his counsellors.
“ Not mad, perhaps, but to our mind eccentric,” Rangildas
amended. “ They rank athletic prowess above learning.”
“So I have heard.” His father nodded gravely, so did
the counsellors ; and. Rangildas perceived that he had
scored a weighty point.
“ But how could you imagine that you had succeeded
when you knew of the strange rule and knew that you had
failed to catch your papers ? ” asked the chieftain shrewdly,
suspicion reappearing in his eyes.
Rangildas assumed an air of child-like candour to reply :
“No student can catch all his papers. Some get lodged
upon the roofs, or fall in distant places, inaccessible
to us. When one catches a good number, it is thought
sufficient.”
The counsellors glancfed at one another, saying : “ That
is reasonable.”
The chieftain then concluded :
“ Well, my son, I suppose I must forgive your failure,
since it seems to be a matter of pure chance, and not of
skill, as I was given to suppose. You have told me something
that I never knew before, nor even guessed, in all my
life on earth. A marvel, nothing less ! Can such things
be?”
“We live and learn! All things are possible ! ”
exclaimed the consellors.
“ If that is English education, it seems less desirable than
I supposed. We can well do without it,” said the chieftain
as his son went out; and Rangildas deemed it only right
to tell his father that it was an absolute necessity for those
who sought position in the service of the Government.
“ That also,” said his father, “we can do without.”


Rangildas is delighted with his success, which his wife,
Her-devi, ascribed to certain superstitious rites she had per-
formed for him, and enjoyed the lazy palace life .until a
certain day when a celebrated pleader from Bombay, tour-
ing in Kathiawad, came to call upon its ruler. His son’s
deception discovered, the disappointed father was about to
punish Rangildas, when he mentions the name of Gandhi.
Seeing the horror the name evokes, the boy says he will give
up all and put on the Khadi “ since my father will not trust
my word and is ashamed of me.” The father is distraught.
“ And I? ” he cries, “ what will become of me ? They will
not punish you, unhappy boy. Me they will punish—me,
your father. I shall be thrown in prison and deprived of
everything for having caused the birth of a seditious person.
Such is the venom of the English rulers against one who is
himself the best of living men, the glory and the pride of
Kathiawad. Breathe not his name within my gates or I am
ruined. If my son joins him, then lam indeed decapitated,
for I have no face with which to meet the General-Agent or
his minions. I thought you had outgrown that nonsense.
Say that you will not go ! Swear it this instant ! Leave all
this foolish talk and come to reason. Are you not happy
here ? Inform me, pray ! Is there anything on earth you
lack which I can give you ? ”
I have dwelt at length on these two stories because they
give, better than any narrative could, the ‘ feel ’ of how the
non-co-operation movement affected all sorts and conditions
of men and women in India at the time. Despite the light-
handedness of these sketches, they are accurately and
economically observed, pieces of caricature as expressive and
as compassionate as a sketch by Daumier. They are patterns
of their sort in workmanship, style, and finish.
At this date, also, he was writing to Leonard Moore of a
story entitled ‘An Indian Reverie ’ : c My own experiences
and views of Gandhi, in, I hope, a palatable form for
English readers,’ and also of another story, ‘ Kahraman,’
which he ‘ hopes to hear soon has been taken by someone,
for it is a better story than “ The Quest,” though its length,
you tell me, is against it.’


He was beginning to enjoy India and the fight as his next
letter, of June 9, shows :
‘ The Bombay Chronicle,
‘ Bombay.
‘ June 9 th 1921.
‘ I missed last mail—the first, I think, since I arrived
here—so I must be doubly careful to send you a letter by
this one. After my return from Broach I developed an
attack of fever, which has not quite left me, though it
nearly has.
‘ The night before last news came to me by special
messenger that the new moon had been seen just after
sunset, and so our month of Ramadan was over. I got
myself quite clean and altogether ready for the morning
visit to the mosque, but when my friends arrived to fetch me
in the small hours of the morning, they saw that I was
feverish and would not take me with them. And all day
long there was a succession of visitors to wish me “ Id
Mubarak ” and the embraces of innumerable bearded men
became bewildering long before night-time brought relief.
A lot of Hindu friends came with the Muslims. Now I am
dashing off to Panchgani to-morrow to rejoin Muriel and
try to get a few days’ rest. The weather has been very
trying these last days—either absolutely still and stifling or a
hot wind full of dust—working up for the monsoon which is
so badly needed. One sunset at Broach I stood upon a
jetty on the sands by the Nerbudda river and preached to a
vast crowd of humble Indians in a real sandstorm. It was
an overflow meeting ; the people could not get into the
congress pandal —an old port at the corner of the city wall,
and they were getting angry ; so Gandhi asked me to go
out and speak to them, providing me with an interpreter
and two good speakers—a Hindu and a Parsi. Our people
were so pleased and keen that I quite forgot that I was
fasting and the big meeting had dispersed quite half an
hour before we broke up. Then I realized that I had con-
siderably passed my breakfast-time —7.10 p.m. —and that
the bungalow where I was staying as the city’s guest was a


long way off, and that I did not know the way. However,
Mr, Patel, one of my companions, offered to take me to his
bungalow which was close by. We were going there along
the sands when some Muslims came running up to me and
asked me if I wished to break my fast. There were National
volunteers among them, so I said good-bye to Patel and
went with them. They led me to a little mosque in a poor
little cemetery by the river-side, in which two oil-lamps were
burning dimly. They poured water for my ablutions, and
then, while I was saying the sunset prayer, went and
fetched the most delicious mixture of curdled milk and
syrup I have ever tasted. They call it Paluda, and I have
had it every evening since. By that time there were quite a
lot of people in the courtyard of the mosque, all very much
concerned about my plight. And presently some genius
brought a tonga —country carriage—and I set off in it,
accompanied by volunteers. They took me quite correctly
to the bungalow where Mr. Abbas Tyaliji, the chief officer
of the Gaekwar of Baroda —who, since he has become a non-
co-operator and put on the Gandhi cap, declares he feels as
if he had been born again—and a merry little Parsi—more
than half a Muslim in opinions—who has been fighting for
Mustafa Kemal in Anatolia —were waiting for me, both like
myself being guests of the city of Broach. We were quite a
pleasant party every evening. I saw much of Gandhi, and
find that I like him more the more I see of him. But oh,
it was tiring, sitting day after day for hours on the carpeted
dais in the pandal. No chairs were provided, and it is not
etiquette to sprawl ! I spoke three times on various subjects,
with applause. But what pleased me most was the charm-
ing old city with trees and fields mixed up among its buildings
piled up beside the sands of the Nerbudda River.
‘ When I stepped out of the train at Broach at dawn, a
Muslim who had been in my compartment slipped out after
me, though he was going farther on. He insisted on kissing
my hand, having just that minute learnt who I was. He
said that I had brought a “ new world ” to Indian Muslims.
Poor dears, I wish I could ! But they must do that for
themselves. With heaps of love.’


He writes airily to Lady Valda : ‘ They expect me to be
a sort of political leader as well as a newspaper editor. I
have grown quite used to haranguing multitudes of any-
thing from 5 to 30,000 people in the open air, although I
hate it still as much as ever and inwardly am just as miser-
ably shy. This, in addition to the newspaper and the super-
vision and correspondence it entails, has left me very little
time for my own.’
He found the climate very trying, too, had malaria often,
and sometimes other ills :
‘ The Bombay Chronicle ,
‘ Bombay.
* June
‘ It is some time since I last wrote, but I have been rather
ill, afflicted with the local fever, and smitten with boils like
the Prophet Job. Also I have been away at Panchgani
where it was uncommonly cold—as cold as English winter
—and I felt disinclined to do anything except wrap myself
in all the rugs that I could find and go and hunt for flowers
between the downfalls. My Muslim servant Gulsheyr was
wrapped up in like manner ; I am told that we resembled
Esquimaux. The monsoon broke a fortnight ago and every-
thing that then was brown and withered is now vivid green.
The Krishna gorge was looking splendid when we motored
down it on our way to Poona and before the temples in the
“ sacred ” town of Wai hundreds of people were bathing in
the river. It is the mango season, and all along the sixty
miles or so of road there was a trail of yellow mango skins,
and mango stones and little heaps of them by the wayside
wherever people had been sitting. I think they are the
nicest fruit I ever tasted. We thought of sending you a
hamperful, but people who have tried it say they do not
travel, and a hamper of bad mangoes would be worse than
none at all.
‘ All sorts and conditions of Muslims in India have
charged me to convey their blessings to the little English
girl who cares for Turkey and Islam. I have never told
your name, but I have told them of your wish that I should


send you verses of the Coran in English, and they know
about our writing to each other.
: In your letter before last you asked me to promise that,
if I came home in September, I would spend all the time,
till my leave expired, at the Pond House. If you will
promise to spend all that time at Possingworth I quite
agree. But I expect before the end of the time you would
be telling me to go away !
‘ There is a heathen (Hindu) dignitary yclept “ His
Holiness the Shankaracharya of Sharada Peth,” who is
giving me some trouble. There seem to be three or four of
him, and one of them has threatened me with legal action
for saying that another was the right one. Of course, I
never said it, but it was said in the course of an article in
the paper of which I am the responsible editor. I think
we’ve settled him all right. My news editor, who is a
Bhattacharya (a Brahmin of the teaching profession), when
asked the other day whether he was a strict vegetarian,
replied : “ I am a fish-eating Brahmin of Bengal.” It
sounded like a kind of water-bird !
* We are both rather glad to be back in Bombay, horrible
city though it is. Our hotel is at any rate beautifully clean,
and the hotel servants all seemed really glad to see us back,
so did my people at the office, which makes one feel
comfortable.’
His next letter gives the result of Gandhi’s campaign to
raise ten million rupees.
‘ The Bombay Chronicle ,
‘ Bombay.
( July ist 1921.
*. We have had a most exciting week. Gandhi’s campaign
to raise a crore (10,000,000) rupees for the National Move-
ment which ended yesterday at midnight kept me very
busy. My paper is the chief nationalist organ, almost the
only one which dare back Gandhi openly, and I should
have felt personally to blame if he had failed to get his
money. Things went very slowly till this week, when the
little wonder man himself came to Bombay. And then at


sight of him the town went mad. I know of some rich men
who gave him all that they possessed on earth ! All day his
house was beset with a great crowd of givers rich and poor,
and at the huge public meetings everyone contributed and
women flung their ornaments at the feet of the little frail
bowed figure in white raiment who is India now for all of
us. Having to supervise the newspaper part of the campaign
—all the vernacular papers take from us—l only went to
meetings which required my presence. The last was a
meeting of the Parsi community, who, until now, have held
aloof from non-co-operation. The largest Bombay theatre
was literally packed from floor to ceiling, all the approaches
to it were so crowded that when we came up in our motor
—which is not ours really, but a loan, we had to wait a
minute while policemen cleared a narrow way. I think we
had the best reception, next, of course, to Gandhi. I know
I blushed at such a storm of cheering when I realized that
it was meant for me, which was not instantly ; and my
confusion and surprise may have made it seem much greater
than it really was. Mrs. Naidu, Shaukat Ali and Muhammad
Ali and V. J. Patel arrived after us and then we heard a
noise like thunder in the distance which gradually swelled
in volume and became articulate as shouts of “ Mahatma
Gandhi ki Jai ” (Success to Mahatma Gandhi). The whole
audience rose to its feet and the same ecstatic measured
shouts filled the theatre. Everybody I could see had tears
in his or her eyes. The note of passionate emotion in the
shouting was something that I had not heard since Stamboul
shouted : “ Long Live Mahmud Shevket Pasha ! ” in
April 1909.
‘ It is only the great figures of self-sacrifice in the cause of
humanity which can draw just that note from multitudes.
I, frankly, wept; and my excuse is that I have identified
myself with Gandhi’s work, and was so thankful and relieved
to know that India was at last responding properly. Mahat-
maji is such a fragile little man that he runs hourly risk of
being killed by the enthusiasms of the crowds who rush to
get a sight of him ; so the giant Shaukat Ali, his chief
Muslim henchman, always walks before him. . We could


not see the hero of the day at all until he got upon a table
on one side of the stage —a gentle, modest-looking man
—and then you should have heard the shout of welcome that
went up. An address from the Parsi Community was
presented to him with a purse containing a large sum of
money. He thanked them in a speech in Gujarati, then
Mrs. Naidu spoke in English, and then the chairman called
out, “ Mr. Pickthall,” and I had to speak. They wouldn’t
let me start for quite two minutes, but what really pleased
me was that Gandhi gave the sign for the applause when
I stood up. It meant that he at any rate appreciated what
I have been trying to do in India ; and that is all I really
care for. There is no one else who counts.
‘ I was at my office all last night, and twice rushed in a
motor to the Nationalist Headquarters waiting to get the
total result of the collection. It was a bitter disappointment
when it came at last —only 8,100,000 rupees —instead of the
10,000,000 India had been asked to give. We knew what
capital the Anglo-Indians would make out of Mahatma
Gandhi’s so-called “ failure.” Gandhi himself sent me a
note saying that he believed the 10,000,000 was “ as good as
completed,” but he would not vouch for more than he was
absolutely certain of. Any other political leader in the
world with the promises which Gandhi had would have
declared the Grore complete. He is most scrupulously
honest and truthful. So, much to my regret, I had to hold
over the triumphant leading article I had prepared for
to-day’s paper, and put in Gandhi’s note of explanation
in its stead. The rest of India had, it seemed last night,
done very badly. Bengal, for instance, had given only
five hundred thousand. But a telegram arrived this morning
from the Bengal leader, C. R. Das, informing Gandhi that
on the last day of collection, June 30th (i.e. yesterday),
Bengal gave 27 lakhs (2,700,000 rupees). So, as a matter
of fact, the sum appointed was complete upon the day
appointed. We had a special noon edition to-day to spread
the news in the bazaars. The next Indian National Congress
will have a budget, and will probably appoint Ministers of
Finance, of Education, and of Local Government.


‘lt is really a great victory. Nothing imposes on our
countrymen (yours and mine) so much as money. That is
where Gandhi has the pull of them. He does not care for
it and will not have it for himself or any of his followers, who
have themselves to earn enough to live in the simplicity
which he enjoins on everyone while India is as poor as she is
now and so many of her people die of starvation every year.
‘lt is getting very late, so I must stop. I did not get into
bed till 4 o’clock this morning. Heaps of love.’
Then he missed a mail, and his next letter is about the
Dharwar shooting, which ultimately led to his resignation
from the paper. He describes the affair to me as follows :
‘ The Bombay Chronicle ,
‘ Bombay.
‘ July 22 nd 1921.
c I do not often miss a mail, but I did miss last mail
because all sorts of things were happening in my office
just at the time I generally set apart for writing English
letters. I had to dismiss my chief sub-editor, and put fear
in all the other members of the staff. In a newspaper like
mine which takes the Indian point of view entirely, and so
is always watched by Government in the hope of catching us
in some illegality, one cannot be too careful about the work
of underlings, and anyone whom one suspects to be a spy
has to be got rid of on the first occasion. I rather like
annihilating people I think wicked, which makes me fear
that, if I were in power, I might develop into a most shocking
tyrant, like the other English over here. A much less palat-
able job was this : I had to threaten all the machine-room
men—the poorest of the poor —with instant and wholesale
dismissal if there was any further wanton breaking of
machinery. A foreman had to be dismissed for gross dis-
honesty some time ago, and some of the machine-men sided
with the dismissed foreman and have tried to discredit his
successor by breaking our machines. Most of the men are
innocent, I know, but because they will not tell who the
saboteurs are, I have to count them all as guilty. You


should have seen their poor brown puckered faces trying
hard to understand when my speech was being translated
to them, and the miserable, hopeless looks with which they
went back to their work. The worst of it is lam afraid they
will really have to be dismissed, for I know the evil temper
of the few malcontents, and foresee another smash in a few
days. Needless to say we have men ready to replace them,
but I am very sorry for these men, and take no pleasure in
annihilating them as I do in the case of more conceited
better-educated individuals.
* Well, the rain it raineth every day ! The monsoon in
all its force has come at last, and Bombay has not seen the
sun for several days. Sometimes the rain comes down in
sheets so that we cannot see the harbour from our veranda,
sometimes it rains more gently as in England, but the rain
goes on. The other night I walked back rashly from my
office, I had to wade across the big square opposite the
Museum. The water there was quite three inches deep, and
more in places.
‘ Things here are going rather badly just at present.
There has been a shocking case of police firing without
warning on an unarmed crowd at Dharwar in the Bombay
Deccan. I sent a man up at once to investigate, directly
we had the news. It makes my blood boil, and I have been
writing strongly appealing to the higher powers to intervene.
The result is, that I was summoned yesterday to see the
Governor. I went, much hoping that he would intervene
at Dharwar, and was merely going to ask me what I knew
of the affair. But nothing of the kind. After talking for
five minutes with a very amiable A.D.G. I was shown in to
His Excellency, who at once began reproaching me with the
attitude I had taken over the Dharwar affair, as if he took
it as a personal insult ! He threatened me—very gingerly
and politely—with prosecution if I dared go on with the
campaign, and wanted to extract a promise from me, which,
of course, I would not give. After wrangling for an hour—
we have known each other for a good many years, and
though he does not choose to show me open friendship in
Bombay, I probably talk more freely to him than anyone


else here is allowed to do—he said : “ I’m sorry ; then,
good-bye. I’ve done what I can for you.” “ I’m sorry too,
for I think you’ve missed an opportunity of doing right in a
way which every Indian would appreciate.” And so we
parted, and I do not know whether I am only threatened
with a prosecution in case I am not careful, or whether a case
is already being laid against me. What he said might have
meant either. I don’t really care, but Muriel is rather
worried because a prosecution might delay our going home.
* I am heartbroken to think of the Greeks advancing into
Turkey with the help of English poison gas' and English
flame-throwers. We got a Reuter’s telegram last night that
they had taken Kutahia—a place I love. Allahu Akbar !
‘ I see the whole of Soviet Russia has mobilized —I hope
to support the Turks in Anatolia.’
To Lady Valda he wrote also :
‘ George Lloyd sent for me not long ago and played the
heavy Governor for about an hour and a half. I stood up
to him with due deference and held my own. He is obviously
out of sorts or he would not have given himself away as he
did on that occasion. If I had been the “ enemy ” of his
Government in my newspaper next day and if he had
retaliated with my deportation or prosecution, the feeling
throughout India would have been with me. He would, in
fact, have made my fortune and destroyed his own. But
Governors, it seems, are an affair of axioms. It was about
the Dharwar shooting affair : regarding which the people’s
version and the police version completely contradict one
another.’
In his next letter to me the news was good. He begins :
‘ The Bombay Chronicle , •
* Bombay.
‘ August s th 1921.
‘ I think, if I remember right, that my last letter was
principally an account of an interview with H.E. the
Governor of Bombay. Well, lam still at liberty ; and, more
than that, the Governor has given way upon the point at


issue, and has sanctioned the appointment of a non-official
Committee of Inquiry to investigate the Dharwar Firing
Incident. The Legislative Council took my side, on that
and other matters, unexpectedly, and this is the result.
We are in the midst of a great Swadeshi (Swa means self,
desh means country, and i shows that the word is an adjec-
tive) i.e. “ home-made ” campaign. Everything a patriotic
Indian wears must now be made in India, and every
follower of Gandhi must be clad in white from head to
foot. Like everything that Gandhi orders, this is symbolical.
The world is dyed with false, factitious, poisonous colours.
We must purify ourselves, must make ourselves pure white,
then Allah Himself will make us blossom forth again in
pure, true colours, when the end is gained, which is the
brotherhood of man throughout all India and all Asia. All
foreign clothes are being burnt or sent to Turkey for the
refugees from Thrace and Smyrna. Another great sym-
bolical display was the bonfire of foreign clothes the other
day outside Bombay. A huge pyre heaped with coloured
clothing surrounded by a heaving sea of people all in white.
A little man in white sets fire to it, and a sigh of relief
goes up from two hundred thousand hearts. It is their
sacrifice. The English papers deal in adverse comments :
“ What a wicked waste.” I am reminded of the words of
certain critics of another day : “ This ointment might have
been sold for much and given to the poor.”
‘On Monday, which was the anniversary of Tilak’s
death, we drove out to Chowpatty sands to see the monster
meeting ; but our car was stopped at the foot of Malabar
Hill (we had been made to go a long way round, quite past
the meeting) and an English superintendent of police
warned us that it was dangerous for Europeans to go
further. Muriel was alarmed, so I left her sitting in the
car, while Dr. Syed Mahmud of Patna and I walked round
the bay into the meeting. We had gone only a few steps
when people recognized me, and for the rest of the way it
was a triumphal progress through a lane of white-clad people
cheering madly. So much for the unpopularity of
Europeans as such ! .


‘ On Tuesday there was another huge mass meeting at the
Excelsior Theatre, where, for the first time, I appeared in
the white Gandhi dress, with the Khilafate badge on my cap
to show the Muslim. The meeting was for a very sad
purpose—to protest against the action of the British Govern-
ment in providing the Greek troops with poison gas to kill
the Turks with, after England’s declaration of neutrality. I
don’t know what will happen when the news spreads. The
only chance that I can see of preventing a big rising is for
the Government of India, which has been insulted and
deceived as much as the people of India, to non-co-operate
with the Government of England till it mends its ways.
‘ I have just had a note from a retired Judge of the High
Court here (who had invited me to dine with him at the
Byculla Club) beseeching me to come dressed as an English
gentleman, as if I came in Oriental dress there might be
trouble ! I have reassured him.
‘ With heaps of love,
‘ Yours ever,
‘ Marmaduke.’
In the next letter the news was better still :
‘ The only great news this week —except that my beloved
Shaukat Ali came to fetch me before daybreak on the
morning of the Feast of Sacrifice, and we both went to the
mosque together clad in Gandhi’s “ khaddar ” (white home-
spun) surmounted by the “ Shaukat Ali Cap ” which has
become the regulation headdress for Muslim non-co-operators
—is that we have booked our passage on the Lloyd Trestino
boat Cracovia , due to leave here on Oct. ist. I hope and
pray that nothing will happen to prevent our going by it,
as I need a rest badly, and Muriel cannot stand the hot
weather ; which is at its worst in October. The last few weeks
are certain to be strenuous, so do not mind if you receive
short letters from me. Do not write to me after Sept, ioth,
as letters written after then would only have to follow us to
England. I am so sorry to hear that your mother was ill
in Austria.’


He had completed his year’s work, his year’s trial, and,
as he wrote to Lady Valda : ‘To my surprise, the Board of
Directors of my newspaper seem to wish me to return on my
own terpis, which are stiff ones, but if I do come back, it
will be alone.’
The next letter contains both bad news and good :
‘ The Bombay Chronicle,
‘ Bombay.
‘ Sept. 2nd 1921.
‘ I am writing this in bed, half sitting up, so excuse bad
writing. I hope it will not be illegible. Five days ago I
was fairly knocked down by malaria, and am just beginning
to be able to think without discomfort, and consecutively.
I suppose some people would say it is a “judgment” on
me for going, as an invited guest, to a meeting of opponents
of Mahatma Gandhi, and sitting on the platform, in a
Gandhi cap. That was what I did the day that I was taken
ill. Mrs. Besant was the principal speaker at that meeting.
She is getting very “ catty ” in her old age, and cannot bear
that anyone should have power or influence with Indians
except herself. She kept on calling Gandhi an “ autocrat,”
whereas, if there is an autocratic old person in the world, it
is herself! She did me the honour to refer to me personally
in the course of her speech, in a tone of reprehension and of
warning. Yet when she talked to me beforehand she was
as nice as pie. Her supporters at the meeting were Indian
co-operators with the Government, members of the new
Legislative Councils and Assembly, magistrates and so
forth. I must say they impressed me far from favourably.
Mr. Whyte, an English M.P. who was sent out to act as
speaker of the Indian Legislative Assembly, and teach the
members “ Parliamentarism ” (a vile phrase) said lately
that his pupils had made such progress that they could
compare with members of the English Parliament. They
have certainly learnt one thing, in which English M.P.s are
proficient, and that is to make manifestly insincere remarks
with fluency. They have also learnt to praise themselves


and their colleagues and confederates up to the skies without
a blush.
‘ After the heart-searching sincerity of the Gandhi school,
and the perfect selflessness of Gandhi, it all sounded horribly
vulgar to me, and I was glad to escape after listening to
about ten speeches. I believe their only audience was me !
All the other people in the theatre —there were not more
than a couple of hundred—were members of the co-operative
gang. I then went to my office, where I was looking forward
to going back to tea at my hotel when some people came
and begged me almost on their knees to come into the
jewellers’ bazaar and speak to the crowd at the auction, for
patriotic purposes, of the jewellery which was thrown at
Gandhi’s feet during his last visit to Bombay. As they had
a motor car waiting I could not very well refuse. The
Jheweri (Arabic Javhari=Jeweller) Bazaar is quite an
interesting corner of Bombay. A narrow, winding street
with little Oriental (i.e. cupboard-like) shops on either side,
each shop with a little turbaned man squatting in it, who
looks like a poor Indian, but really is a millionaire. The
auction was going on in the open street at the point where
it is widest, just behind our Jumal Masjid (Cathedral
Mosque). The auctioneer was seated on the edge of one
of the shops (which are all arranged like shelves a good bit
above the street), and the crowd were out in the sunlight,
most of them, with no protection other than the Gandhi
cap. I climbed up into the shop and was shown some
resplendent jewellery which I duly admired in appearance,
bien que je ne sois pas amateur du genre. I then said “ a few
gracious words ” and was motored back to my hotel,
where I had tea as usual, conscious of no more than a slight
headache ; went to the office as usual after sunset prayer,
worked as usual, walked back in the night-time, only feeling
rather tired ; came into my bedroom, sank into a chair on
the veranda and suddenly became aware that I could not
get up again ! That sort of thing is quite common out here
both for Indians and for Europeans. A very charming
Indian girl—a Muslimah—is going to England to-morrow,
having won a Government of India Scholarship at Girton.


I should very much like your mother to know her, and
would ask her to make overtures of friendship if I could
remember the very charming Indian girl’s name, which I
cannot *at present, being still a little fever-headed. How-
ever, we can arrange that when we get to England. We
have booked our passage by the Cracovia (Lloyd Trestino
Line), which starts on Oct. ist and ought to get to Venice
17 days later. We shall stay a day or two in Venice and
then train to London.’
P.S. (written later) :
‘ Shaukat Ali, whom I have learnt to love as if he were
my own brother, was arrested last night or rather early
this morning. They dare not do these things when people
are about. He was taken straight on board a ship in the
harbour, which left soon after daybreak for Karachi, where
he and others have to stand their trial on a charge of
attempting to tamper with the allegiance of the army. I
was very sad, not for his sake, but my own, and very much
ashamed of English nationality. He was here having tea
with us yesterday afternoon, as jolly as ever, though well
aware that this might happen to him at any minute. And
his last word to his followers was : “Go and tell the
Pickthalls, and give them both my love.” All the Muslims
at the Khilafate Office clamoured to be taken with him, but
the police warrant, it appears, was for him only. He
ordered them to keep quiet and give instructions to all the
Indian Muslims to keep peace and follow Gandhi. Really a
great man, although as simple as a child.
‘ This is not a very cheerful letter, I’m afraid. I really
feel ashamed to leave India at such a time. But if I did
elect to stay, I should very soon be rendered useless by
imprisonment, and Muriel, in her present run-down state of
health, must be considered. Our ship is announced to sail
three days earlier than first advertised—on September 27th
instead of October ist. So I may see you sooner.’
In spite of his sorrow at his friend’s arrest, he had many
comforting letters to prove to him how appreciated his work.
2 A


was. The Central Khilafate Committee of All-India tele-
graphed to him that they highly appreciated and valued
‘ the most remarkable and distinguished services rendered
with utmost sincerity and devotion by Mr. Marmaduke
Pickthall, Editor of The Bombay Chronicle to the cause of
Islam and the Khilafate/ and Gladstone Solomon began a
letter : ‘My dear Pickthall, I cannot let you depart from
India, for however short a period, without again expressing
to you the deep and abiding obligation which, as Principal
of the Bombay School of Art, I feel towards you for your
bold and brilliant championship of the School. It has been
invaluable and has done much to popularize a movement
which cannot be wholly worthless. The poor artists of
India are grateful to you for all you have been able to
achieve in the cause of Indian Art.’
We were at Possingworth when he came home, and it
was the finest autumn I remember. There was a drought
that year and we were all waterless. Children and grown-ups,
ourselves and all our tenants, took soap and towels to the
lake which was in the park, and bathed there. Marmaduke
came to the communal washing parties, too : and we
resumed our walks also. He never spoke to me about his
worries, only of that rebirth of Islam which had swept
Persia and Turkey and now had spread to Egypt and to
India. When the history of the Reformation of the
Mohammedan world comes to be written, Marmaduke
Pickthall will be its Morning Star, for that reformation is as
without barriers of race as the one whose leaders were John
Knox from Scotland, Calvin of Geneva, Huss of Bohemia,
and the German Luther.
In the early days of that December, my sister, Clare, had
her first ‘ double numbers ’ birthday. To celebrate, we
were allowed to give a dinner party, asking whom we
would. Marmaduke sat on Clare’s right, and I the far end
of the table, three silver candlesticks and smilax carpeting
white linen spaces between. A white-tie party, my first;
and Marmaduke was host, organizing absurd games after
singing Arab songs ; a child with us, man with the men.
Next morning we were sent for to Possingworth, arriving


by train, to find all the relations, lawyers, doctors imagin-
able assembled in the big hall, women in tears, and mother
corning downstairs to meet us : “ Your father is dead.”
After-lunch I went alone to the Pond House, and for
three hours Marmaduke walked with me in the bitter
December, until too cold and tired to walk further we sat
under a leafless oak, amongst dead bracken. Noise there
was none but the occasional chute ! of a dead leaf falling
from a bare tree on to icy ground. It seemed the sun itself
had been frozen out of the sky. All our walk we had not
spoken, now too cold to cry I turned to him for comfort,
told him my horror of the huge white figure under the sheet
in the dark room, candles burning at feet and head, heavy
smell of lilies ; and of the knowledge I must go in again,
day after day, morning and evening, and kneeling there,
see mother kiss it, then with same lips kiss me.
Day by day I came so to Marmaduke, and we walked
round the lead-grey lake that had been yellow with laburnum
in spring ; in summer crimson with rhododendron reflec-
tions ; where, so lately, we had bathed in water gold and
red, mirroring birch and maple leaves turning. I told him
of empty coffin on men’s shoulders sneaking up backstairs,
purring black undertakers whispering outside the death-
room, pity registered, click ! each time eyes turned on to
us, white marble face grey now in coffin, dignity collapsing,
smell stronger than lilies. All these he comforted, and
agony of ending, father gone, house gone, most of all,
childhood gone, whine of: “ You must take your father’s
place now.” Listening to lawyers read figures incomprehen-
sible, mother saying poor now, must sell now, must work
now, put by childish things; all these he comforted, o passi
graviora, this, too, shall pass away.
In the inevitable end our only solace, he taught me, and
our one value our impermanence: Rejoice at each
delight’s destruction, at each day’s ending, for so is less to
lose, so more surrendered.
And the while he had trouble enough of his own.
The leader with which he had opened his paper’s cam-
paign against the Dharwar shooting had not been written


by him. He had been in bed with malaria at the time, and
a Mr. Venkatram, a sub-editor, in charge of the paper
during his temporary absence, had written the offending
leader.
Marmaduke, according to Mr. L. Tairsee, the rich Hindu
friend already mentioned who stood by him, ‘ was absolutely
innocent, to my knowledge, 5 and Mr. Tarkamdas, the
solicitor of Messrs. Kanga and Co., who handled the case,
was of the same opinion, though, of course, technically, the
directors of a newspaper, collectively and severally, are
directly responsible for whatever appears in their paper.
He was very anxious not to return to India, nor to go on
with newspaper work, which he did not enjoy and which he
felt was not his line. Also, the refusal of Turkey to shoulder
the burden of the Khilafate had released him from his Jihad.
But with this case hanging over his paper he felt he was in
honour bound obliged to stand by it until judgment had been
given. So he prepared to return (and alone, for he knew
he could not ask Muriel to accompany him again), to face
the High Court certainly, and probably imprisonment.
It was spring when he went back to India. Muriel
remained with her relations at Isleworth, her health being
still far from good.
To me, he wrote :
14. 3. 22.
‘ Nearing Port Said.
‘ I got on board so tired after two sleepless nights spent in
pretty strenuous —i.e. uncomfortable —travelling, that I
have been more or less sleeping ever since. My day in
Paris was, I think, well spent. I saw Yusuf Kemal, the
head of the Angora delegates, and had a satisfactory private
conversation with him, also with some of the Egyptian
people, and the Afghan representative. It was a pity that
I could not get over earlier, as a magnificent dinner had been
given on the Wednesday night entirely in my honour, and
I was not there ! Also I should have got a full night’s rest,
which means something at my time of life.
‘ The news of Mahatma Gandhi’s arrest was posted up on


the ship’s notice board on Saturday. All the Indians on
board are very much upset and the Anglo-Indians seem no
little agitated, wondering what condition of affairs will
prevail in India when we reach Bombay.
*At meals I sit between Mirza Isa Khan, a former
Minister of Finance in Persia, and a Parsi of the name of
Wadia who lives in Paris. There are also on board Lord
Lytton (going to succeed my old schoolfellow Ronaldshay
as governor of Bengal), Lord Milner, Lord and Lady Bute,
and the Rt. Hon. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri, a leading ‘ co-opera-
tor ’ and the last-named only being known to me personally.
Sounds a distinguished company, doesn’t it ? -Yet, to look
at us, you would say there never was a more ordinary-
looking crowd —I might even say common.
‘ We are due to reach Port Said early to-morrow morning.
There I hope, by buying an Arabic paper, to learn a little
more of what is going on in India. It would be a nuisance
if I were to find my newspaper suppressed and myself arrested
on arrival. I should like at any rate “ a run for my money.” ’
His next letter was posted at Aden.
‘ Nothing happens. I keep to the Oriental circle on
board and the very few Europeans (no English) who frequent
it —an American attache on his way to the legation at
Teheran, a Frenchman, and an Australian. We are not
undistinguished in the Oriental sense, since we include the
Maharajahs of Parbander (Gandhi’s lieu d’origine) and
Rajpipla, and the heir apparent to the gadi (throne) of
Limdi, a Persian ex-Minister of State, and the Rt. Honble.
Mr. Sastri, who represented the Government of India at the
Washington Conference, and I am sure our conversation is a
very great deal more interesting than that of the Anglo-
Indian coteries on board. I went ashore at Port Said with
my fellow-non-co-operator, Mr. Mehta, a Gujerati Hindu,
who has been a delegate to Europe from the Indian Chamber
of Commerce, Bombay. As soon as it was found that one
of us knew Arabic we received quite an ovation from the
Egyptians in the town. All Egypt, it appears, is much
excited by the news of the arrest of the Mahatma, and the


people we met seemed glad of the occasion to express their
sympathy to anyone who came from India. I got some
Arabic newspapers, one of which had a leading article
headed “ Gandhi the prophet of patriotism not for India
only but the whole East.” As we were on our way back to
this ship, I saw at the landing-stage an elderly lieutenant
in the uniform of the Suez Canal police and, after staring
at him for a minute, went up and asked whether his name
was not Rashid. He stared at me, then fairly jumped for
joy ! It was my servant of old Syrian days, the same
Rashid who plays so large a part in my Oriental Encounters.
He saw us safe on board the ship with semi-regal honours !
‘ I have been very sleepy ever since I came on board—
much too sleepy to attempt translations from the Coran,
which require deep thought. But perhaps I shall find
energy before I reach Bombay to add to the collection you
have made.
‘ I do not dare to think of the Pond House and Possing-
worth, or I should weep.’
He arrived in Bombay in mid-March : ‘ I arrived in
Bombay a week ago to-day,’ he comforted me, ‘ and this is
to prove to you that I am not arrested or imprisoned yet.
I have the same old room in this hotel (Green’s) and the
same sparrows come to tea with me upon the broad veranda
and hop in and out of the bedroom as if they were the
rightful owners. lam very busy, having a meeting of my
Board of Directors to attend in an hour’s time. I have made
myself a director.’
He was already travelling again in his next letter :
* The Bombay Chronicle,
‘ Bombay.
‘ April 13 th 1922.
‘ To-day is the anniversary of the massacre of Amritsar,
so we are observing it by refusing to do any work ! I came
back only a day or two ago from a lightning rush to Muzaffer-
pur in Northern India, to see a friend in prison, and attend


his trial. There is a strike on one of the railways which
has thrown all the service out of order. At one time it
seemed we could not arrive in time, but by taking two ekkas
from Moghul Serai to Benares we caught a slow train at the
latter city and so reached Muzafferpur at midnight of the
night before the trial which was fixed for 6.30 a.m. An
ekka is a cart like this. 1
‘ I am the person in front, the driver is seen through the
wicker canopy, and Ishfag Ali, who was Shaukat Ali’s
secretary, is behind. There are no springs, and, going
ventre h terre , we rattled and jolted over the bridge of boats
across the Ganges with all the ghats and temples of Benares
ranged before us like spectators and the Mosque of Aurung-
zeb lifting its head above them all to get a peep at us.
‘ Literally thousands of people welcomed me at Govepur,
Hajipur, and other stations, and at Muzafferpur at midnight
I could not see the outskirts of the white-clad crowd of
non-co-operators. I addressed a monster meeting and
received an address from the citizens, was present through
the trial and spent some hours with my friend in jail, and
then, after 36 hours, started back, attended by some people
of Muzafferpur as far as Patna. 1 saw elephants working
at Govepur, and enjoyed a two hours’ journey on a steamer
down the Ganges. But the five solid days of railway
travelling in heat and dust were very trying, and I have
not yet got over the fatigue. Yet now the people of the
Punjab want me to go there, saying they are quite as worthy
of a visit as the people of Bihar, and the people of the
United Provinces are bothering me. The long and short of
the matter is I can’t afford it, either in money or health,
though it would be wildly interesting.’
His whole mind was taken up by his coming trial. He
wrote to his agent: ‘I, or rather my paper, am being sued
just now in the Bombay High Court by three officials with
the Government behind them for alleged defamation of
character in connection with the Dharwar shooting incident
last year. I asked that the inquiry should be taken out of the
1 He had drawn me a picture.


hands of the local officials and said plainly what I thought
about them. They could not get me under the Press Act,
which was then in force, because there was nothing in my
writing which could be called “ sedition ” or “ conspiracy,”
or “ waging war against the King ” (the favourite charges
against writers here). So they devised this method. The
officials claim 2-§• lakhs of rupees damages (about £15,000 !).
We have put up a very strong defence but it may not avail
us because there is no statute to guard the freedom of the
Press in India.’ He wrote to Aubrey Herbert and to-
myself on the same day. The letter to Herbert is as follows :
c The Bombay Chronicle ,
‘ Bombay.
‘ April 21 st 1922.
* My dear Herbert,
‘ I am going to jot down briefly a few things which I
should like you to know. Gandhi, as you know, was
imprisoned before I got back to India. On the day before
I landed at Bombay, one of the best of our Khilafate people,
a man absolutely without racial feeling, and sincerely
averse to violence, Dr. Sayyid Mahmud (of Patna) was
arrested. He is a great friend of mine, and I was not
surprised when a few days after my arrival a telegram came
asking me to go and see him in jail. It was followed by a
second and a third telegram urging me, for God’s sake, to
come before the trial, as he had something of great impor-
tance to tell me. It meant a rush up to the North of India
to a place called Muzafferpur in Bihar and five solid days
in the train in this hot weather is no joke, but I went, and
incidentally beheld Benares and the Ganges, and elephants
at work and other interesting things. What Mahmud
wanted to tell me was this : that the people in the'Punjab,
United Provinces, and Bengal—the regions which have
suffered most from the Govt.’s campaign of repression—are
getting altogether out of hand. He adjured me to tour
those provinces at once (he seemed to think that I could
quiet them better than any Indian speaker), and particularly
the Punjab and U.P. Of course I had to refuse, for I am


not a leader, but a servant —of the Indian Newspaper
Company, but during my short stay in the north I did what
I could to quiet people’s minds, and have been doing the
same-thing in my paper ever since. If a big rising does
come it is not going to be plain sailing for the repressors.
During my short stay in Paris on my way out I met people
(as secret guests of the French Govt.), not from India but
from Central Asia. I won’t say any more—l can’t—but
you can guess at the deduction. The French are making
a bold bid for England’s Asiastic influence, and consequently
aiming at the destruction of the B.E. That I conclude from
my own private observations. It is quite easy to “ dish ”
them, but the Govt, of India’s present policy is merely
playing into their hands and the hands of other enemies.
The discontent in India is beyond description ; and the
Indian police, whether from toadyism or secret patriotism,
are fomenting it as hard as ever they can.
‘ My friend Mahmud at Muzafferpur was sentenced to
six months’ imprisonment on a charge of sedition, which
rested solely on the report of some police reporters to the
effect that he had urged people to “ turn the English out of
India.” It is a stock phrase in the trials of non-co-operators.
Mahmud protested that he was the last man likely to say
such a thing since he had a host of highly valued English
friends. He traversed every statement of the C.I.D. in-
formers and the Magistrate—a very decent Englishman
named Bridge—would certainly have acquitted him had it
rested with him, but he had to ask the authorities for per-
mission in a case labelled “ political,” and apparently there
is an edict against acquitting non-co-operators. So Mahmud
got six months, and we are deprived of another of the peace-
keepers, at the very moment when we most need men of
influence and eloquence who are opposed to violences.
‘ Do you remember your famous remark about it being
impossible for a gentleman to fill a certain high position
in India ? It is impossible for a gentleman to fill any high
position in India and remain a gentleman.
‘ I don’t suppose you ever even heard of the Dharwar
shooting case. Every witness other than police witnesses —


witnesses of the affair—declared that the crowd gave no
provocation whatever ; the police said that the crowd
attacked and tried to burn a drink-shop which they (the
police) were guarding. On the strength of an Associated
Press telegram, we —The Bombay Chronicle —at once sent up
a Special Commissioner to Dharwar, the result of whose
investigations and inquiries were strongly adverse to the
police. We called for an impartial inquiry into the affair,
before legal action on the part of Government. Lloyd
came down from Poona last July on purpose to give me a
wigging. I expected to be arrested and deported or decapi-
tated the next day. But nothing happened. Since then
about 250 people —Non-Cooperators who will offer no
defence —have been sentenced to various long terms of
imprisonment. One is dead. An appeal was made upon
behalf of the accused, but was lost because, not having
offered any defence was tantamount to an admission of
guilt on their part!
‘ Now a suit is being brought against The Bombay
Chronicle by the District Magistrate and Superintendent of
Police (English) and the sub-inspector (Indian) for defama-
tion of character. Damages claimed, in all 2f lakhs of
rupees (about £15,000) and costs which may amount to
twice that sum. The D.M. has been promoted Com-
missioner and the sub-inspector has received the honorific
title “ Ras Bahadur ” (valiant hero) since the “ incident,”
so I rather fail to see the damage in their case. The case
comes on in June. We are fighting it squarely, pleading
absolute justification ; but there is very little hope of
winning for us here. In England we should win outright,
on the first hearing. I am trying to secure that the case
shall be fully reported in some English newspaper, and in
the French Press. It is one which concerns the freedom of
the Press all over the world. lam also writing to America
for correspondents to be sent.
‘ A Commission of the Indian National Congress, presided
over by Abbas Tyabji—ex-Chief Judge of Baroda—sat upon
the Dharwar case simultaneously with the Sessions Judge ;
and came to the conclusion that not more than two of the


accused had been anywhere near the drink-shop on the day
in question. Old Tyabji came to me straight from Dharwar,
and was thoroughly disgusted. He said the whole thing was
a scandal of which all the world ought to hear. I hope
that all the world will hear it through the coming trial, of
which I hope to make a cause celebre.
‘ Lloyd has not noticed my arrival, though I left the usual
card and wrote my name in the arrival book.
‘ Forgive a long scrawl, but I want you to have information
of these things.
‘ That is not all that I should like to say, but if you say a
half of it or any part of it I shall be grateful to you. Gandhi
at any rate will agree with every word of it.
‘ By the way, there has been no improvement in the
prison treatment of Shaukat and Mohamed Ali. It is
damnable —the worst thing I know of G. Lloyd’s Govern-
ment. Indeed I never should have thought it of him.
There is not much news this week except that I have
been speechifying more than I like, and consequently
getting rather tired.
‘ Ramadhan is near at hand, I haven’t even made up my
mind whether to fast or not the whole month. It means a
relaxing of effort which one can hardly afford at such a
time. It will probably end in my fasting the last ten days
of the month, and all my holidays till I make up the proper
tale of days.
‘ Our coming trial is giving me a lot of extra work,
preparing the defence. I am trying to get newspaper
correspondents from England, France, and America, so
that not only may we perish—if we must —with due pub-
licity, but that the horrid scandal of the Dharwar shooting
case may be widely known.’
His next letter to me is about quite different matters :
‘ The Bombay Chronicle ,
* Bombay.
* April 28 th 1922.
‘ There is little to relate. I have been reorganizing my
office, and have at last persuaded the Directors to buy


proper, up-to-date machinery. When I get that, I expect
to be able to increase the circulation threefold. All the
patriotic papers in the North have been suppressed, and the
people there are crying for the Bombay Chronicle , but we have
not been able to supply it up till now because we can only
print a certain number of copies, and we already sell every
copy we can print. But that is not a very interesting
subject to discourse to you about. We have had two showers
of rain—not the monsoon, that does not come till June, but
what the people here call “ Mangoe showers,” because
they come just when the mangoes are upon' the point of
ripening.
‘ It is the eve of Ramadhan, and I am still in doubt
whether to fast or not the whole thirty days. The first day
I shall certainly fast.
c I am not a bit astonished or appalled by your con-
fession that you enjoy the services at Cross-in-Hand. You
know, my dear, I never took you for a real Mohammedan
Muslim, and I always told you that you could become a
Muslim in the way of Jesus. So long as you do become a
real Muslim some day I don’t mind the least which way you
choose. The way is always largely a matter of accident or
individual circumstances. The goal is the thing. You
used to say that you wanted me to preach, but I have been
doing so much preaching lately, trying to keep the Indian
Muslims quiet, that I think, “ when this tyranny is over-
past ” I shall refuse to preach ever again.
‘ With heaps of love,
c Yours ever,
‘ Marmaduke Pickthall.’
He got his way about the office and in his next letter
triumphs : ‘ I have secured new printing machines'and a
much more magnificent office for the paper, so now we can
go ahead.’ He is extraordinarily calm. ‘ Here there is not
much news. It is Ramadhan and we all a little dry and
irritable in the daytime. Lloyd George and other people
have been misquoting the Qu’aran and I have got to go for
them. I have been asked to lecture in September at the


National Muslim University at Aligarh. lam looking for a
bungalow outside Bombay in one of the seaside suburbs
outside Gujerat, but have not heard of anything at all
desirable. There was one belonging to the Nawab of Surat,
who offered it to me, but it was too small, although I was
much tempted by the pretty little formal garden, also the
low rent. 5 It was then his friend Gladstone Solomon came
to his res.cue and lent him his bungalow in the School of
Art compound (where Kipling was born). He had a
pleasant enough time, in spite of the heat and the fast. He
dined with Sarojini Naidu, the poetess : ‘ who is also a
great national leader, and on another night I had a deaf
man to dine with me here, I forget his name, but he was
Special Correspondent for the Manchester Guardian to
investigate Indian unrest. Rather funny to choose a deaf
man for the job. However, I managed to make him hear a
few plain truths about the situation.
‘ Things are livening up a little. There is news of more
arrests, and people tell me my turn will come soon. Well,
let it ! It cannot be helped. My fast of Ramadhan has
quite broken down, I am sorry to say, owing to stress of
work. I can do without food and drink —but not smoking.
A sad confession, isn’t it ? I have got so into the habit of
smoking while I write that it is pain and grief to me to
write without smoking. 5
Though he could not give up smoking, he still fasted, as
his next letter shows :
‘ The Bombay Chronicle,
‘ Bombay.
* May iqth 1922.
‘ My dearest Annie,
‘ I have had a strenuous week, what with the
observance (not strict keeping, I am sorry to say) of Ramad-
han, and various excitements. The Afghan Consul asked
me to breakfast with him at a delightful bungalow in a
garden on Malabar Hill overlooking the sea. Hakim Ajinal
Khan, President of the Indian National Congress, Dr.
Ansari, and a lot of other important people, were present,


including the chief Afghan representative from Simla. I
was much abashed to find myself the guest of honour.
I have had to sit rather heavily upon a fanatical gentleman
(a Hindu) who clothes himself only in a sheet, which he
throws off occasionally. He was preaching violence,
against the Congress Programme, so I called him to my
office and told him what I thought of him, expecting angry
opposition. But he was perfectly charming about it, and
even thanked me for explaining to him my attitude ! which
shows that Indians, even the most outrageous of them, are
quite reasonable if you talk to them on an equality.
‘ I am still at liberty, thank God, and hope to remain so.’
I have no more letters that remain to me after this one,
but his case dragged on and on. He came back and stayed
with us in France in 1923, in the autumn. He remained a
whole perfect week, and for the last time we talked as at
the Pond House. Our intimacy, which had begun under
the pine-trees of Possingworth, ended under the catalpas at
Aix. To my knowledge, we never again talked of God, nor
walked with passion for Him uniting us, thought of Him
determining our every word. I had entered the dark woods
of adolescence and was snared in their tangled undergrowth,
and he could not help me, for I would have none of his, nor
of anyone’s, help who had been with me before. The break
with Possingworth meant a complete reorientation of life
for me, and though I loved Marmaduke always, and met
him often, I had let down the shutters and he could no
longer reach to my mind, nor I escape from it : he realized
this and never reproached me, nor ever audibly regretted
the child he had lost, nor that the woman she became
was so unlike what he imagined she once had the power to
become.
He went back to London and fetched Muriel. They had
never been parted so long before and both of them felt the
strain terribly. She did not again leave him until his death.
They had a short holiday this time, for he was back in India
by the end of October, and to my mother he wrote :


* I hope this letter will not be too late to wish you a
happy New Year before the New Year actually begins ;
but mails seem rather erratic in these days.
‘ I have hardly an hour’s leisure since I landed. Every-
thing was in a mess, in Indian politics and in my office. In
the middle of November I accepted an invitation to preside
at the Karnatik Provincial Khilafate Conference at Bijapur,
not that I care for that kind of racket which is sheer fatigue,
but because I knew that my “ presidential ” address would
go all over India, and I wanted to give a lead to the Muslims,
who were all at sea. Incidentally Muriel and I had a
chance of seeing one of the rfiost wonderful of old Indian
cities, from the Indian point of view. We did not see a
single European during our stay at Bijapur, except the
Collector upon whom I paid a duty call ; and the Indians
were perfectly sweet to us. It was a very much pleasanter
outing than we either of us expected ; and did more than
I had counted on its doing, for the Hindus as well as the
Muslims were pleased with my suggestions. The people
persuaded me to stay over Friday, in order that I might
preach in the great mosque, which for the first time since
the fall of Bijapur was used then by a Muslim congregation.
They thought it of good omen for the resurrection of India,
and I thought it was a good omen, for a peaceful resurrec-
tion, that an Englishman was the chosen preacher on the
occasion !
‘ Sir George Lloyd has left, and we have a new Governor
—Sir Leslie Wilson —who is quite unknown to me. A man
we know —who used to live at Buxted —came out on the same
ship with the Wilsons. He told me he had never had such
a happy voyage on a P. & O. boat, nor known the pas-
sengers so sociable, that it was all owing to the influence of
the Wilsons, who insisted on talking to everybody and made
no distinction between European and Indian or between
first and second class (our friend travelling second). He
also told me that he saw little Marjorie Wilson playing with
an Indian and an English boy. The English boy was
rough to her, and the little Indian went for him and
knocked him down. That all sounds hopeful, but I keep


my hopes to myself, though I have told the story of the
children to my Indian friends.
‘ Now, the new and very sad troubles in Turkey and in
the British Government’s fresh attempt to entrench its
wretched protege in Mecca, where he spoils the pilgrimage,
is giving us much concern. We have traced out a policy
which ought to make for peace. I only hope the Govern-
ment of India will be sensible enough to support it. The
national movement is reviving strongly under Shaukat Ali’s
leadership.
‘My lawsuit is proceeding slowly, piling up the costs. A
commission sat at Dharwar taking evidence, most of which
was strongly in our favour. The police had to get quite a
fresh lot of witnesses. Those used at the original trial of the
“ riot ” case would not again come forward. It is a funny
world.’
While they were waiting the result of their case, Marma-
duke and Muriel lived quietly at a hill station during the
first of the monsoons with only centipedes and scorpions to
annoy them, a pleasant change. Shaukat Ali and Mohammed
Ali, now safely released, were their next-door neighbours,
and excellent neighbours they found them.
The result of the case was, of course, as everyone, includ-
ing Marmaduke, had known it would be, a judgment for
the plaintiffs and against The Bombay Chronicle. The paper
prepared to pay up the whole ten thousand pounds and
Marmaduke resolved to stay in India until the money had
been found. Before this was done the paper had been sold
and its policy changed. Marmaduke resigned the editor-
ship rather than agree to break with Gandhi. He explains
his position in a letter to my mother :
‘ School of Art Bungalow,
‘ Bombay.
c September i§lh, 1924.
‘ Amie will have told you of the judgment of the High
Court of Bombay against me and my newspaper, which,


owing to the search by the Directors for money to pay up
the costs and damages, resulted in a change of policy which
caused my resignation. They practically sold the paper to
the so-called “ Swarajists,” and I have always been a
Gandhi-ite in Indian politics. So now I am out of work,
and have been for some weeks. There have been offers of
employment, but I prefer to wait until I hear from
Hyderabad, where I have applied for permission to enter
the service of the Nizam in some capacity or other. It is a
place where all negotiations drag, however simple. I am
told that objections to me are expected to be raised by the
British Resident, but the Governor of Bombay has promised
me a favourable word which perhaps may counter such
objections. It would be a relief to get into an Indian State
after my recent experience of British India. Muriel, I am
glad to say, is well and feeling more adventurous than before
the operation, so the thought of Hyderabad does not appal
her. It remains, however, to be seen whether we shall
ever get there.
‘ The trial of our famous case re the Dharwar shooting
was an extraordinary experience for me. The fact that the
people we were said to have “ defamed ” were Government
officials —and, what is still more curious, the fact that we
had “ defamed ” them in their official capacity—was put
forward by the Advocate-General as the most important
aspect of the case, demanding heavy damages, and so put
forward in the judgment also. There was no allowance
whatsoever for the public duty of a newspaper. Of course
all India is on our side, but all India does not count. The
effect of the judgments in the three cases as precedent must
be (i) that a District Magistrate is not responsible for any-
thing done in his district by subordinate officials and may
not be criticized as if he were responsible ; (2) that a
District Superintendent of Police must not be held respon-
sible for the acts of his subordinates ; and (3) that a sub-
inspector of police must not be held responsible, and
criticized, for things done on his own responsibility.
‘ I am really distressed for Gandhi. He is still ill, and
everyone combines to worry him when he should be at
2 B


rest. I am afraid my resignation has rather handicapped
him, but there was really nothing else for me to do..
‘ I am occupying my forced leisure with an attempt to
translate the Coran into worthy English—an attempt begun
long ago. Happening to mention the fact one day in the
presence of the manager of the Associated Press of India,
I ought not, I suppose, to have been surprised to see it after-
wards in every newspaper. But I was exceedingly surprised,
and still more so by the excitement the news caused among
the Muslims. It has added greatly to the burden of my
correspondence. They are wonderfully friendly people and,
having in themselves an inexhaustible supply of words, are
constitutionally incapable of understanding how mere words
can be a burden, as they are to me.
‘ I have been sending articles to E. D. Morel for Foreign
Affairs about the British seizure of Bahreyn—a very nasty
case of breach of treaty, which has angered all the Arabs.
I don’t know whether he will publish, but it is to the good
that he should know the facts of the affair. The Arab
population of Bombay come by twos and threes to see us.
Muriel cannot understand them, but they are in awe of her,
and make her lovely presents. I have had very kind letters
from all over India, and official tributes from the Afghan
Consul and the Persian Consul; also an autograph letter
from the Sultan of Nejd, who seems to be upon the point of
taking Mecca at this time of writing, but the letter I most
value is from Swami Shraddhanand, the Hindu reformer,
who is generally regarded as an anti-Muslim force —a
letter breathing real affection. I always liked the wonderful
old man.’
He had served his full three years and, even if it-had not
been for the Dharwar incident, he would not have gone on
with journalism, and was glad to have done with it. As he
said to Leonard Moore : ‘Various schemes are afloat to
keep me here in India, but I shall not take on another news-
paper. The work is too exacting and too ticklish in a country
where every word of criticism can be construed as defama-
tion or sedition. What I should wish would be to be offered


service in a native State, in which case I should have some
leisure .time for writing. But if nothing offers,’ he con-
cluded sadly, c I shall come home some time between now
and Christmas.’
The Khilafate Movement ended with Mustapha Kemal’s
abolition of the Khilafate in this same year. When Kemal
Ataturk renounced his championship of the spiritual head
of Islam, the pro-Turk movement was ipso facto ended.
Marmaduke. was sorry, but without despair. He had done
all he could, and the rest, he knew, must be left to the mercy
of Allah. He had gradually, during his last two years on
the paper, drifted away from Gandhi. Not that there was
ever any split between them, but Gandhi had used the
Khilafate Movement as an axe on which to grind out swaraj,
not as an end or object in itself. Everything that could be
brought in to help in the great battle for liberty, was wel-
come to him, but only as a means of assistance. And
Gandhi’s followers, as Marmaduke had already found out,
were not all Gandhis.
Hindu-Muslim unity was an ideal too big for them, and
they were working against it even before the abolition of
the Khilafate, encouraging, for example, the conversion of
Untouchables to Christianity because thereby they became
casteless and helped to form a block with the Hindus against
the Muslims. But Gandhi and Marmaduke themselves
remained friends, and on Marmaduke’s death Gandhi
wrote to Muriel :
‘ Segaon,
‘ Wardha.
‘ 1937*
‘ Your husband and I met often enough to grow to love
each other and I found Mr. Pickthall a most amiable and
deeply religious man. And although he was a convert he
had nothing of the fanatic in him that most converts, no
matter to what faith they are converted, betray in their
speech and act. Mr. Pickthall seemed to me to live his
faith unobtrusively.’


But in answer to her request that he should write some-
thing to add to this Biography, he said : ‘ I do not know
that I knew him so well as to enable me to give you anything
useful that you can add.’
Marmaduke and Lord Lloyd became friends once more
as soon as their official antagonism was happily euded by
Marmaduke’s resignation, following on Lord Lloyd’s
departure. He bore Lord Lloyd no grudge, and Lord
Lloyd was most kind to him on a subsequent occasion.
As soon as he left The Bombay Chronicle , Marmaduke and
Muriel first went to Captain Solomon’s bungalow and then
to Lonavla in the Western Ghauts, where, during some
quiet weeks, he rested and recovered. It was there that his
mind turned again to the translating of the Qu’aran and
he wrote to Leonard Moore : ‘ All Muslim India seems to
be possessed with the idea that I ought to translate the
Qu’aran into real English, and that I ought to be subsidized
for the purpose.’ Moore was delighted with the idea and
wrote warmly, pressing him to go on with it. Marmaduke
wrote in reply :
‘ With regard to my translation of the Qu’aran (about a
third of which is roughly done), there is one obstacle in the
Way of placing it with any English publisher. It is intended
for Muslims quite as much as for English people and Muslims
insist on the Arabic text being presented side by side with
the translation. Not only this, but the Arabic text must
not be printed in the ordinary sense but hand-written by
some great caligraphist and reproduced from blocks, a
costly process which I imagine no English publisher w’ould
look on as a business proposition. At the present rate of
work it would take me at least a year to finish the transla-
tion only, let alone the notes and introduction. The idea
of some of my friends here is to release me from any other
work until that is completed and to secure the cost of publica-
tion in the form desired. All the previous translations leave
much to be desired from our Muslim point of view. Chris-
tians naturally have tended to translate it just as a book, not
as a sacred book, and the magnificent language of the Arabic


is rendered into hum-drum English whilst care for the literary
meaning of each Arabic word has led the translator to bungle
or .Obscure the meaning. Also certain words are left un-
translated so as to give quite a wrong impression of the
book. Thus the words “Islam” and “Muslim” are left
untranslated, this implying that they had at the time of
revelation the technical meaning which they acquired
afterwards. I translate those words, as any Arab hearing
them understand them, as “surrender” or “submission,”
“ those who surrender ” or “ submit ” (i.e. to Allah). For
example the text which has always been translated “ the
religion with Allah is Islam ” in my translation reads
“ religion with Allah consists in the surrender unto Him,”
which, besides being the accurate rendering, is a statement of
a universal truth instead of a sectarian assertion. The
Qu’aran contains no sectarian assertions, which is as much
as to say that all existing translations are misleading. Even
that by Mahomed Ali of Lahore errs occasionally in this
respect and in the matter of English it is hopeless. Indeed
it was that which led me first to think of making a translation
of my own. When I was acting Imam to the Muslim congre-
gation in London I found that translation in use and saw
that it seemed nonsense to the English people who came to
my services. So I put it on one side and made my own
translation of any passage which I wished to read out in
English, and many people came to me and asked me where
they could get the translation I used. I suggest that you
might approach publishers with this information and ask
whether, if sufficient support were forthcoming from India,
they would meet us half-way with a view to a really notable
production. The Begum of Bhopal and the Nizam are both
interested.’
It' was the Nizam’s interest in Marmaduke’s project of
translating the Qu’aran which had led to the latter applying
for a job in Hyderabad State. For a long time he heard
nothing—only that his application ‘ had been put before His
Exalted Highness and was being considered.’ In November
he was still waiting, and wrote to Leonard Moore : ‘ The


Nizam of Hyderabad is still considering whether I should be
employed in a certain capacity in his State. This is a land
of delay. Anyhow it is impossible for me to leave India
until the damages and costs of our great lawsuit have been
paid.’
Whilst he was at the School of Art bungalow Mr. (now the
Right Honble. Sir Akbar) Hydari called with Sir Nawab
Ross Masood Jung, the Director of Public Instruction,
and offered him the job of Principal of the Osmania
University—the biggest Muslim University in India. But
before he had decided whether to accept or refuse, news
came that owing to some misunderstanding the post had
already been filled. He was finally offered the Headship
of the Ghadarghat High School for Boys, the largest in
Hyderabad State, containing over a thousand pupils. He
accepted with delight, for the work was congenial and the
pay good, and the post also carried a pension with it.
He wrote to Leonard Moore on December 30th, 1924 :
‘ It will interest you to know that H.E.H. the Nizam has
just sanctioned my appointment as principal of one of the
two great High Schools (colleges) in Hyderabad. The thing
is better than it sounds for considering my “ history ” in
British India, it means a sort of rehabilitation. Hyderabad,
under the present Nizam, is quite a literary and artistic
centre, and I am assured I shall have plenty of leisure time
for writing.’
He was very thankful indeed to escape from the ‘ exacting
labour of directing a party organ,’ as Professor Speight
described it, though this work ‘ had provided him with wide
experience of Indian life and character, which was to stand
him in good stead in the last ten years of his life.’ It was
with great feelings of relief that he and Muriel arrived in
Hyderabad on January 1, 1925.


CHATTER ELEVEN
AS their train passed through the jungle, the Pickthalls
could smell the low-growing shrubs, and leaning out
of the carriage window and looking out on the friendly
landscape, they felt it intimate, gay, a glad escape from the
hot streets, the metropolitan ugliness of Bombay that tasted
of hotel chicken, flabby, dusty, white. To Marmaduke it
was the reward of his Jihad. As a boy, he had wanted to go
into the army with all the ardour of his fighting blood :
Irish and Northumbrian, Dane-resisting blood. As man
he had had his share of struggle and now he was glad to
turn again to peace.
For ten years, from 1908 until 1918, he had fought for the
right to freedom of a whole people, fought that Turkey,
whose ancient literature he reverenced, whose young writers
he loved and admired, might win her place in the fellowship
of adult, civilized nations. By power of the sword she had
made herself European. By power of her tolerance, her
capacity to absorb the people she had dominated, she had
remained so.
When Europe turned on her and threatened her with
expulsion, when her liberty, intellectual, moral, and material,
was menaced, Marmaduke, shy, retiring, middle-aged,
came forward to stand beside the people he loved : a
European who believed Turkey, because she had one foot
in Europe and one in Asia, to be the door, the ford, the pass,
between the two continents and gangway to unite them. He
was accused, and by many who had been his best friends and
greatest admirers, of betraying his vocation as a writer by
taking up politics, but he no more betrayed his mission as an
intellectual than did Spinoza when he got up from composing
his Ethics to write on the door where dwelt the murderers of
the de Witts, ‘ Ultimi Barbarorum.’


It would indeed have been a betrayal had he taken up
politics either in the sense of party politics or of any subordin-
ation of his mind or activity to an individual interest. But
Marmaduke from first to last was concerned with morals,
that is, with the advancement of what he believed to be the
highest moral values. These included the right of all nations
to a free existence and the right of every people to develop
along their own lines. It is true he lost immeasurably as a
writer, both in craftsmanship and in prestige, by so following
his faith ; true that he sacrificed the objective vision of the
novelist in descending into the arena, but to have remained
aloof, remote, deliberately to have divorced himself from
what touched him so nearly, would have been to lose his
intellectual integrity and to sin against the light as he had
seen it.
There is no greater temptation for a successful middle-aged
writer than Olympus; it is the House of Lords of the
literary profession. And because Marmaduke rejected it,
all those snugly ensconced there, club members, tailless
foxes, the doctor-knight who never operated unless he knew
the operation would be successful, the Hawthornden winner
who gave up motoring because the garage boy said “ 0.K.,”
the painter who announced his movements on the Court
Page of The Times , all these jeered and derided.
The last part of the journey to the city of Hyderabad lay
through luxuriant fields with sudden cliffs and crags. As in
Italian primitives, palm trees sprang up beside rocks without
discomfort or incongruity, mango groves and vegetable
gardens, nim trees, pipal trees, and tamarinds, fitted as
naturally into the clouded landscape as the many tombs
and the great tanks of water. As they neared Golconda,
Marmaduke felt he was travelling backwards through time
as well as forwards through space ; the pageant of machi-
colated walls, towers, and precipices afloat in a vast cup
with jagged rim filled to the brim with sunlight, the parrots
flying with screams from branch to branch of the jasmine
thickets, the koel clanging his two notes at intervals, all
seemed a decor for a Moghul painting, background for a
Shah’s memoirs, not a setting for twentieth-century life.


Yet the Deccan 1 is the most up-to-date of the Indian
States. It was the last tract of territory to be incorporated in
the, Moghul Empire. The north and west of the State are
racially Maratha and are lands of wheat and cotton ; the
south and east is a country of rice and palms, Telegu-
speaking. The stock over all is a mixture of Aryan and
Dravidian, the Aryans generally Mohammedans or Sikhs,
the Dravidians, Hindu. To north and west the country is
very fertile, but to south and east are bare hills whose dome
shapes and wild fantastic boulders and tors give these regions
a gloomy aspect; the plains beneath are carpeted with
scattered brushwood. Huge tanks, some so large as to seem
lakes, supplement throughout the land the rivers, which
all run dry in the hot season. There are also several
artificial lakes of enormous size, of which the most famous
is the huge Pakhal Lake, around which is an immense jungle
where are to be found bison and elephants, spotted deer,
and horned antelope innumerable, wild hogs, tiger cats,
wolves, bear, and jackal. All over the State are to be found
tigers and leopards. Flamingo, painted partridge, blue
rock and green pigeon, sand grouse and parrots decorate the
trees of which the most intensely cultivated are mango
and tamarind, coco-nut and toddy palms (from the latter
the natives make a most delicious and intoxicating drink).
The Nizam is the most traditionally loyal of all the Indian
rulers : the famous dispatch of the time of the Mutiny :
‘lf the Nizam goes, all goes,’ is equally true to-day. For
His Exalted Highness is not only the richest man in the
whole world, he is also the most enlightened and wise of the
Indian princes, and he is the Muslim ruler of a country
where the majority of the population is Hindu. During the
European War he supported England with men and money
and, though a strong believer in the Khilafate, remained
absolutely loyal to the British Empire throughout the
Khilafate agitation. Yet Marmaduke found his own passion-
ate spiritual loyalty shared by the ruler over fifteen million
souls, for the Nizam still believes the Khilafate to be vested
in the ex-Sultan of Turkey.
1 A country which, together with Berar, now returned to it after being for
many years leased to the Government of India, is as big as France.


Urdu, which Marmaduke had thoroughly mastered, is
the lingua franca of the State, though three other literary
languages are spoken : Telegu, Marathi and Kanarese.
The country is ruled by an Indian Government and staffed
by Indian officials recruited from all over India. It offers,
as Marmaduke wrote, ‘ a field for Indian ambitions and
policy which had till lately little scope elsewhere.’ In an
article published in the second number of the Geographical
Magazine (April 1936), Marmaduke summarized the reign
of the present ruler, His Exalted Highness Sir Mir Osman
Ali Khan, and gave a brief outline of the. State’s history.
He is full of praise for his new master :
‘ No one who last saw Hyderabad city twenty-five years
ago would recognize it now. The pestilential slums and
narrow, foetid lanes have gone, and in their place are well-
planned roads and healthy dwellings. This is the work of
the City Improvement Board under Nawab Sir Nizamat
Jung, a distinguished Hyderabadi. The architectural
jewel of the city, the far-famed Char Minar, can now at last
be seen in all its beauty. A huge and perfectly appointed
General Hospital, new Law Courts, a college, and a new
State Library, have risen on the river banks, which are now
laid out as gardens quite artistically. Eye-sores have been
demolished, vistas have been opened out. The roads,
formerly among the worst, are now the best in,lndia. Fine
new suburbs have sprung up in all directions. Hyderabad
has been given an elected municipality and local govern-
ment has been inaugurated in the districts. The capital
and all its suburbs are now lighted with electric light; so
are the provincial cities of Aurangabad, Raichur, and
Nizamabad, as part of a scheme for giving electric light
and pure-water supply to every town in the Nizam’s
dominions. The railway system has been much extended
and is now supplemented by an excellent service of motor
omnibuses covering practically the whole State.
‘ There has been a vast improvement in the medical
service of the country. An intensive campaign has been
waged against plague and malaria, by Colonel Norman
Walker, 1.M.5., Director of the Medical Department, in


which every modern device, including the cinema, is being
used to warn and instruct the people, even in remote
villages. There are now good hospitals in the provincial
towns, and dispensaries in all towns and larger villages.
Child-welfare centres have been started and are well
attended. The people are fast losing their distrust of such
unheard-of innovations, and also their dislike of undergoing
inoculation against plague or smallpox. Ample provision
has, besides, been made for the requirements of those who
still believe in the old Yunani-Azurvedic school of medicine,
which also has its hospitals and dispensaries throughout the
country.’
For the first year of their stay, the Pickthalls lived in
Saifabad, with Professor Speight. The Professor, himself a
poet and a writer, was, throughout Marmaduke’s years in
Hyderabad, his greatest friend and ally, and for them is my
chief informant.
Saifabad was a purely European settlement, an over-
grown camp without the city walls, and the Speights’
bungalow was in the midst of African Cavalry lines. At
first the Pickthalls found it all very bewildering, the mixture
of tiffin and polo with the buying and selling of slave girls
and the complete purdah of the wives of the nawabs.
Distances were great and there were no carriages or taxis,
only rickety tongas, little hooded one-horse carts. The
Pickthalls shared the Speights’ car, for Marmaduke had to
motor a distance of two miles four or more times a day to
his work. He had charge of a thousand boys whose ages
varied from three and a half to twenty-four, and after lessons
were done, he still had office work and correspondence,
together with the overseeing and organizing of games.
Soon after he took charge of the High School at Chadargat
he dictated the following sentence to the class : ‘ I am sorry
that I came late to school to-day.’ When he came to look
at the papers, he found among them the following efforts :
(i) ‘My heart leaps up when I behold a rainbow * ; (2)
‘ There is no God but God and Muhammed is His Prophet ’ ;
(3) ‘I am sorry that I came to school to-day.’ Marmaduke


was delighted with the Speights’ landlord, who could tie his
moustaches at the back of his head, and who had played
cricket against Lord Harris’s team. He and the Speights, and
Marmaduke, played cricket on the roof and they encouraged
Marmaduke to sit cross-legged on the floor and sing Arabic,
Syrian, and Egyptian folk songs. To me he wrote :
‘ Hyderabad is a glorious place, as a scene indescribably
beautiful, a bit of the Moghul Empire which has survived
the wreck. We have been most kindly received by rich and
poor and the change from the reprobation in which I lived
for long years in British India makes me feel twenty years
younger. My school is a curious institution, consisting of
primary, middle and high school, but I think that I can
say that I like the work and there are heaps of holidays.’
To my mother he wrote begging her to come and stay,
and added :
‘ Quite apart from the pleasure we should have at seeing
you again and showing you the place and the people, it
would be a good thing if you did come just at this time.
Nobody from outside visits Hyderabad and so the British
Official point of view goes unopposed in England. His
Excellency is very shrewd and the people here are happy
compared with the people in the presidencies, for he has
done more for the progress of the State than any other
Indian ruler. He has spent crores on irrigation and is still
spending for the benefit of the agricultural folk, crores on
education, crores on hospitals and dispensaries. He is very
simple in his way of life, discouraging the orgies of display
which were the ruin of so many nobles of the past. In fact
he lives like a dervish and devotes his time to every detail of
the Government. He is by far the most intelligent and able
ruler that Hyderabad has ever had, and the history of his
family and the text of the existing treaties seem to justify
him in the attitude which he adopts towards the Imperial
Government—that of a ruler independent as regards all
internal affairs towards a protecting Power to which his
foreign policy has been entrusted.


‘ Nobody in the State objected to the British Government’s
advice, however urgent, to the Nizam to improve certain
departments of the administration ; but everybody has been
shocked, at the tone of the advice, as everywhere reported,
just as everyone was shocked at Lord Reading’s reply to the
plea for the return of Berar, which made it seem that
treaties and an old alliance had no value, and that the titles
“ Faithful Ally ” and “ Exalted Highness ” were a sarcasm.
‘ If this is a fair sample of the “ new diplomacy,” then
the old diplomacy is better suited to the East, which still
admires good manners. From my old connections in British
India I gather that a storm is brewing ready to burst the
minute it becomes known that the Nizam has been, as the
Indians think, insulted. It will be a bigger storm than the
Khilafate movement, and could so easily be avoided, if people
in England only knew, and cared a bit for, other people’s
feelings.
‘ I should like you to see all this on the spot, and hear
your opinion of the various local personalities.
‘ Our Civil Service Class is now running. We were
frightened of the students when they first arrived until we
found that they were more afraid of us. Now we form quite
a happy little family. There are only five of them, and all
are nice. They have their lectures in the house and I
arrange the time-table so that all the classwork should be
finished by 11 o’clock. A muezzin calls to prayer at five
in the morning, and they come to prayer or not, as they
please. Generally they are at all the five daily prayers.
Chota Hazri is at 6.30, the first lecture begins at 7, and at
11 they have tiffin, a square meal; tea at 4 o’clock and
dinner at a quarter to eight. Dinner is a ceremony, because
they have to learn something of European customs before
they go to train in British India for two years. The shyness
on both sides is now wearing off, and we seem likely to get
on well together. lam away at school most of the day, but
Muriel reports that they are quiet, law-abiding inmates.
‘ I have been appointed editor of a Review which has
long been contemplated here, which will treat of Islamic
history, literature, archeology, art, science, anything but


politics. I hope to get some really first-class writers and
there is heaps of interesting materials here in Hyderabad in
curious customs, ancient buildings and unpublished manu-
scripts. If you know of any people likely to be willing to
subscribe to such a magazine, or able to contribute articles
of interest, please let me have the names. The subscription
(including postage) for England is fixed (not by me) at
one guinea a year ; and we are in a position to pay fairly
well for contributions. It will be about the size of The
Nineteenth Century. I hope to get the first number out next
January.’
The review of which he speaks was a much more impor-
tant venture that even he imagined. A committee of
leaders of thought in Hyderabad had long projected the
publication of such an organ and were on the point of con-
cluding arrangements when Marmaduke arrived in Hyder-
abad. It was at once recognized that he was the man for
the task and in January 1927. appeared the first number of
this quarterly which was destined to become during the
ten years of his life as editor * the foremost survey of intel-
lectual achievements of Islam since its inception.’
The first forty numbers of the new quarterly, which was
called Islamic Culture , underwent his meticulous editing and
‘ it is no exaggeration,’ writes Professor Speight, ‘ to state
that certain issues of Islamic Culture stand in the very fore-
front of the world’s most serious periodicals. They contain
upwards of five hundred articles by a great number of
writers of East and West and form a permanent encyclo-
paedia of wide range.’ He himself did all the translating,
often from ten or twelve languages into English, and more
than sixty universities were regular subscribers to it, and
their members contributors. Marmaduke himself, •in the
preface to the first number, states simply and briefly the
aims of this review. * The aim,’ he writes, ‘of the group of
famous men in His Exalted Highness, the Nizam’s, domin-
ions, was to uplift the standard of Islamic culture at its best
and to provide a rallying point for learned orientalists and
Students of Islam in every land, The review was to be


purely literary and scientific, eschewing current political and
sectarian controversy.’
When Marmaduke and Muriel moved from the Speights’
bungalow, to Civil Service House, they practically gave up
any private life or personal entertaining. Accepted candi-
dates for the Hyderabad Civil Service received an adminis-
trative training for a year whilst boarding with the Pick-
thalls before being drafted into their various departments.
Sir Richard Trench, the Revenue member, for eight years
a contemporary of Marmaduke’s in Hyderabad, had high
praise for Marmaduke’s management of this institution.
‘ Living as they did under the same roof with the Pickthalls,’
he wrote to me, ‘ and messing with them, these young men
in the English atmosphere learned many things which they
would otherwise have had no opportunity of acquiring.
The “jungly” ones were taught how to behave as gentle-
men and all had instilled into them the ideal of service and
of loyalty to their State. The house was, in fact, the nursery
of the Hyderabad Civil Service. Many of the younger
members of the latter, in keenness, integrity and public
spirit, compared not unfavourably with men of their own
standing in the I.C.S. and all have an extraordinarily fine
esprit de corps. Outside British India, that is to say, in the
Indian States, there is no service like it and all this, in my
opinion, is very largely due to Marmaduke Pickthall’s
example and precept. As member of Council, I used to
see the reports he submitted to Government every term on
his proteges. They were always good reading and showed
what an excellent judge of character he was.’
He goes on to describe Marmaduke’s position in Hyder-
abad society : ‘ The large military community in Secunder-
abad probably knew nothing of Pickthall beyond his
reputation as an author, as he did not, so far as I know, mix
with it at all, while the Residency regarded him with a
kindly eye as having lived down his Bombay Chronicle record.
I am not in a position to say what Simla thought of him.
I imagine that the Government of India had long ceased to
worry about him for whatever political views he held or
may once have held.’


Somehow Marmaduke managed to make time to start on
a new novel and wrote to Moore about it :
* It is “ a romance of the time of Aurangzeb,” the scene
to be mainly in the Deccan —Bijapur and Golconda in their
golden days. The Book I really want to write about India
is of modern times, but I cannot do that while I am out
here. Indeed lam not sure that the paper I have signed as
an official of the Nizam’s Government, adjuring politics,
does not preclude even a novel touching Indian nationalism,
while in his service. A pure romance of Moghul India will
be perfectly harmless and will serve to get my hand in and
to finish off my contract with Collins which has been a clog
upon my fancy even since I made it.’
But work done under such tremendously adverse circum-
stances failed to satisfy its author and he writes sadly to
Moore in 1928 :
* As for the novel, I have improved it a lot, but am still
far from satisfied with it. It may be better than I think,
but it needs thorough revision'.’
He sent it off by the next mail corrected under the title
of The Deccan Wind and explained, possibly that Moore
should use his explanation as a blurb, ‘ in order to under-
stand the India of to-day, one must know something of the
India three hundred years ago, when it was the most pros-
perous region on earth and of the civilization of the Moghuls.
‘ The Moghul Empire was destroyed under degenerate
rulers, which gave the British their opportunity to step in
as the protectors of the Emperor, whom they deposed after
the Mutiny. Its destruction by wild hill-men and the sub-
sequent control of foreigners is quite sufficient to account
for the dejection and bewilderment from which the people
are only just beginning to recover. I have chosen the reign
of Alamgir I (Aurangzeb) because it was the climax of
prosperity and near the end, and the character of Alamgir
is noteworthy. Hyderabad is a large fragment of the
Moghul Empire which has survived the ruin. The structure
of the State and of society is still the Moghul structure, and
I can claim to have studied my subject at first hand.’


The book was re-christened Dust and the Peacock Throne ,
and though it is not up to his usual standard, the dialogue
especially being rather stilted and bookish, it carries the
virtue of his style and ease of story-telling. It is a bare out-
line of a' story with much incipient value. The underlying
idea is a philosophic one, the renunciation of lawful and
absolute power by one who could have sustained it because
the power was already in the hands of one also capable of it.
The hero is a prince of Royal Moghul blood, who has, as
a baby, escaped massacre, only to fall into the hands of a
robber sect with whom his early boyhood was spent. The
robber sect was exterminated, the boy aged six again escaped,
to be brought into the household of one of-Aurangzeb’s
most trusted advisers. The boy’s career was phenomenal.
From the first he was given equality with the daughter and
son of the house, marrying the former, and eventually he
becomes confidant to Aurangzeb himself who realizes that
the boy is his lawful heir, but sees the wisdom of avoiding
the bloodshed that would follow the discovery of the now
forgotten prince.
The boy Jaaffar realizes that kingship in itself is a thing
to serve rather than to practise, and he does his duty as a
military commander under the direct authority of the
monarch until at last, when about to go on the Pilgrimage,
he is murdered by one of the sect of malefactors to which his
first saviour belonged. Only by developing the philosophical
idea and making it the crux of the novel and the pivot of the
hero’s existence, could the story be given its full value.
But there is much in it that is very fine.
The siege of Bijapur, the descriptions of Hyderabad, the
great fortress city and the valley girdled with fantastic rocks
in which it rose, and the imprisonment of Jaaffar in the fort
of Bidar are excellently done, with a realism that never fails
to be significant. We look out of the windows of the fort,
where now still, though it is in ruins, the drummers play
five times a day in the navbat 1 hall and hear the hereditary
musicians who claim that they have never missed a perform-
ance since the privilege was granted four hundred years ago.
2 C
1 Navbat : ‘ the privilege of a band of music.


Jaaffar, the novel’s hero, had always taken pleasure in
the flight of birds ; when he was in prison in the fort, looking
up and out, he saw ‘ eagles, many kinds of hawks and
vultures, hovering on the level of his eyes, high up above the
many-coloured plain. He saw flocks of little birds go sailing
by, bound on long voyages, and marked the swifter flight
of parrots with their goal in sight, the wheeling of the crows
and kites at evening, the lumbering flight of fruit bats at the
fall of night. He remembered the Qu’aran, “ and there is
not an animal in the earth nor a flying creature with wings
but are a people like unto yourselves.” And he praised'
Allah for the beauty of those peoples of the sky.’
In 1926 Marmaduke attended the first Moplah Educa-
tional Conference at Tellicherry, and wrote to a Hyderabad
friend, Mr. Hashimi :
‘ I think the Tellicherry congress was a great success.
They gave me a reception far beyond my wishes or my
merits, and their hospitality is a clear proof of their Arabian
descent. The resolutions passed were all of a practical
reforming and reviving nature. The Congress was attended
by people from every part of Malabar. I visited a school at
Cannanore, and two schools at Calicut, also our friend
Maulvi Mohinddin Ahmad Sahib’s orphanage, which
pleased me very much, the little orphans of the Moplah
war looking happy and healthy. The orphanage is in a
fine position on a hill. Altogether the impression I derived
from my first glimpse of the Moplahs is one of hope for
Islam. They are such straightforward, sincere, and active
people.
‘ I attended prayers at Tellicherry. The masjids are all
built like Hindu temples. There are no minarets, and the
azan is called from the ground, as the Wahhabis call it.
When I mentioned this fact, the reforming party were much
amused because the maulvis of Malabar are very far from
being Wahhabis, I stopped the Conference proceedings at
each hour of prayer, and everyone went to the adjacent
mosque. I impressed upon the young leaders in reform the
necessity of being particularly strict in observance of the


essential discipline of Islam while trying to get rid of all
excrescences. I send you herewith a copy of my presidential
address, which I hope you will find time to read before I
return to Hyderabad, so that I may have: the benefit of your
criticisms on it.’
In 1927 he gave the Madras lectures on Islam on his
favourite subject of Islamic Culture, and these were published
in Madras by the committee under Mr. Jemal Mahomed.
In the same year he went to Rome, Paris, and Frankfurt,
where he consulted Professor Horowitz about his translation
of the Qu’aran upon which he was now very actively
engaged.
In 1928 Marmaduke again spent his leave consulting
certain European authorities about his Qu’aran translation.
He first went back to England with Muriel. Whilst in
London he met again Lord Lloyd, now very friendly, who
gave him some very useful introductions to members of the
Ulema at Al-Azhar, the great Muslim University in Cairo.
From London he went via Florence and Rome to Juan-les-
Pins and there worked quietly for a stretch. When at
length he got back to Hyderabad he wrote to my mother :
4 Dear Mrs. Huth Jackson,
‘ We had an easy journey, though a long one, and a
wonderful welcome home again. To me it really does seem
home, but for Muriel it will never be anything but a-very
foreign country, where the friendliness of the vast Indian
population is outweighed by the reprobation of the small
English population for me and all my works ; so that one
cannot enjoy a settled feeling.
‘ It seems to me that the British in India are getting worse
instead of better. Of old they had some sense of duty and
some benevolence of intention towards Indians; now the
mentality is that of the Ku Klux Klan, and the exceptions,
which are to be found even in the services, are nearly as
much “ out of it ” as we are. I wonder what the Simon
Commission will make of it. Probably the fact of the
boycott in some places will, dominate the situation to their


minds, and they will throw themselves into the European
camp regarding the Indians as unreasonably hostile. That
hardly touches us here, what does affect us is the very
unfair pressure that is being brought to bear on the Nizam,
who, as Indian princes go, is quite a paragon. The progress
made in every department of public service since he came
to the throne has been astonishing and he is always thinking
of the welfare of his subjects, and spends the greater part of
every day on public business. Of course, the State is run on
Moghul not on British lines. But why the British should
have let it alone when it was stagnant and the ruler and the
nobles squandered all the revenue, and interfere only now
when there is real progress and proper care for the finances,
which are flourishing, one cannot understand. I am very
sorry for the Nizam, suddenly confronted with extreme
demands which contemplate a standard he has never even
heard of, and never was asked to observe before..
* We have been once to lunch at the Residency since our
return —a new thing in our experience—and were very
cordially received. But there has been no explanation what-
soever and I cannot feel that there is any clearing of the
atmosphere.
‘ The plague has been worse than usual this year, and
everything has been upset by it. My school is ostensibly
closed, but the office has to work two days a week, and
special classes must be held daily for those boys—about
200—-who have to sit for the public examination. 5
Whilst in Europe in 1928 Marmaduke had arranged with
Leonard Moore that Knopf should publish the Qu’aran
translation, and in 1929 the Nizam gave him two years*
leave of absence with full pay in order to finish the work.
He went first to his sister-in-law at Isleworth, whence he
wrote to his friend Hashimi.
‘ It is a long while since I wrote, the reason being that I
am quite absorbed in the work of the Qu’aran translation.
I am reading every word of Ibn Hirham’s (really Ibn
Ishaq’s) fascinating Sirah, of which I was fortunate enough
to procure a copy (Bulag edition) at Frankfurt, and am


also studying Zoldeke’s History of the Qu'aran in German,
but most part of my time is occupied with the actual work of
revision of my own translation. When that is done I shall
get to work on the Notes and Introduction, but can hardly
hope to'get them done before we start for Egypt early in
November. Fuad Selim Bey Al-Higazi is waiting for us
there, and has promised to do all he can to help me ; I have
besides a letter of introduction to the Head Sheykh of
Al-Azhar from Lord Lloyd ; and the friendship of the
premier, Muhammed Pasha Mahmud, to support me.
‘ Do you know Ibn Khaldun’s Sirah (really a chapter in
his great history) ? It is profoundly interesting to us moderns,
like everything he wrote. Dr. Krenkow lent it to me. He
has an excellent Arabic library, and has helped me like a
brother.’
During this visit to London my mother arranged for him
to meet Mr. Ramsay MacDonald, then Prime Minister,
and he writes :
‘He expressed a wish to keep in touch with me. Thank
you very much for arranging the acquaintance, which I really
think may be a factor for good. I have sent him a copy of
the Hyderabad State Budget for the current year which will
at least show him that one Indian State is run on sound
financial and progressive lines. I had seen him before only
at a big public meeting, when, probably to rest his voice, he
spoke in a sort of parson’s sing-song which I hate and which
always rings of insincerity in my ears, as different as can be
imagined from his natural tone. I am glad to have been
able to correct a false impression.’
He was about to go to Cairo, as it was all-important that
the die-hard dons at Al-Azhar University should approve his
translation, for the position was a little difficult.
On the eve of his departure he wrote to my mother from
Cornwall, where he had gone to snatch a brief holiday :
* Muriel tells me that you have expressed a wish to hear
my views about the policy in Egypt. Lord Lloyd is, as. you
know, rather a friend of mine, and he is certainly misjudged


in the present case, for no man is really more sympathetic
to the Arabic-speaking peoples and the Muslims generally.
He is an old pro-Turk like me, and thoroughly out of
sympathy with the whole war-time and post-war policy of
England. He is trying to defend a position which the war
has lost for us. On the other hand he has much more
understanding of the root of the matter than his successor
can possibly have, speaks Arabic well, and reads old Muslim
literature for his own delight.
* For myself, I sympathize much more with the Egyptian
point of view, in the circumstances which have arisen since
the war, and care much less for the prolongation of British
dominion in those regions. But I do not think that British
supremacy is jeopardized by the new treaty, rather the
reverse, if Muhammad Pasha Mahmud can keep his
hold upon the Government, in face of the bitter (purely
personal) opposition of the Wafd party, till the treaty is
made firm. He cannot do it if the new Parliament is elected
on the old franchise —a very narrow property franchise—
but if, as I imagine, he will make the King ordain an
extension of the franchise to the much more numerous victims
of the late parliamentary regime, it ought to be all right.
c Palestine is a much more serious snag for the present
Government, the injustice done to Egypt being trifling as
compared with the tremendous wrong done to the people
of Syria by cutting olf one corner of the country (which had
been promised independence and of which every acre is
owned) and forcibly giving it to aggressive alien immigrants
in a privileged position. The Sionist movement can only
exist in Palestine so long as the British bayonets are there.
There can be no good will towards us in Egypt or Iraq or
Syria so long as that wrong remains, for the partition of
the Turkish Empire was purely arbitrary, and those, people
all regard themselves as citizens of one great country which
has been martyred. This Lloyd knows, but I doubt if the
Labour Party suspect it. 5
In his next letter he corrects himself:


‘ Trevaunance Point,
* St. Agnes.
‘ 4 th October , 1929.
‘ My dear Tiny,
‘ I made a bad “ howler ” in. my remarks on Egypt
in my last letter through ignorance of what has happened
since my time there. I imagined the old property franchise
to be still going, whereas I hear that they have had universal
franchise since 1923 ! My enlightener, however, tells me
that nothing is changed but that the notables still maintain
their parliamentary position by exercising influence at
election times. It is a fact that Mahmud was tremendously
feted by the fellahin after he had suppressed the Parliament,
they, poor souls, imagining that Parliament was abolished
for good. I have never seen parliamentary government
prove other than a curse in Eastern , lands, where the old
system of representation was quite different —by interests
and not by numbers —like the Soviet method.
‘ Yours ever,
* Marmaduke Pickthall. 5
To Hashimi he wrote at the same time :
‘ Lord Lloyd is in some respects hidebound and ultra-
conservative, but on Islamic questions he is sound. Like
me, he was a furious opponent of the Russian policy, and a
strong pro-Turk. He is opposed to the Jewish National
Home, and loved Ibn Sa’ud. He defended the latter from
the Mushrik leanings of King Fuad, who wanted to make
war on him !
c We have made the acquaintance of a lot of very nice
people, but Cairo has changed so much since I was here last
and has lost so much of its Eastern character and charm that
I am disappointed. I suppose the same destruction of
romance and installation of Jazz is going on all over the
world except in dear old Hyderabad I I have left cards at
the Residency as in duty bound and written in the book,
but the only English person we have talked to here is one


Gordon Canning, the man who worked so hard for the poor
Riffis in Morocco. He heard I was here and took a lot of
trouble to rout us out. He has just been all through Pales-
tine, and wants me to go there. But I have memories of it
as the Holy Land, and would fain preserve those memories.
Jazz has been installed there also. And if I saw Jews
shooting Arabs I should certainly want to shoot Jews ; so
it seems best that I should stick to the quiet Pension Vien-
noise and my Qur’an translation.’
His own account of the difficulties of revising his trans-
lation ‘ with the help of Arabic and English knowing men
and under the guidance of more learned men who know no
English,’ is so much the best, that I give it in full : it was
written in Cairo when he was still seething from all the
vexations he had undergone :
‘ On the ioth of November 1929 I landed in Egypt,
carrying with me in my luggage the typescript of a complete
translation of the Qur’an upon which I had been at work at
intervals for several years, and which His Exalted Highness
the Nizam had generously granted me the leisure and the
means to finish. It was my object to submit it to the
’Ulama of Egypt and revise the whole work under their
direction, that there might be no avoidable mistakes and no
unorthodoxy. I had with me a letter of introduction to the
Sheykh Mustafa Al-Maraghi, who had been the Rector of
Al-Azhar when the letter was written, but had just resigned
that highly remunerative post. I had written months before
to an old acquaintance in Egypt who had risen to be Prime
Minister, asking him to help me in my errand, but had had
no answer ; so that my whole dependence was upon the
said letter of introduction and the reassuring fact that my
good friend Fuad Bey Selim al-Higazi was in Alexandria
and had promised, when we met some months before in
Paris, to help me to the utmost of his power. I had heard
that a former English translation by a Muslim had been
publicly burnt in the courtyard of the Mosque Al-Azhar,
and was forbidden entry into Egypt; but had supposed
that it was because it was considered to have some flavour


of heresy. It was from Fuad Bey, who, as soon as he heard
of our arrival, came and bore us out to Ramleh to spend a
week in a delightful garden by the sea, that I learnt that
all translation of the Qur’an, however faithful, was held to
be unlawful by a powerful section of the ’Ulama. Our
friend, however, had been sounding people, in anticipation
of my coming, and had found that an equally—possibly
more —powerful section of the ’Ulama held an opposite
opinion, among these being the Sheykh Mustafa Al-
Maraghi to whom he was glad to hear that I carried an
introduction from Lord Lloyd.
£ We all went up together to Cairo, where Fuad Bey had
found for us a quiet pension in the neighbourhood of Qasr-en-
Nil; and two days after our arrival, I was driven out to
Helwan through the long avenue beside the Nile, to visit
the Sheykh Al-Maraghi. The clean, white, modern town,
close to the lion-coloured desert hills, consists entirely of
hotels and villas. To one of the latter the Sheykh Al-
Maraghi had retired when he resigned, for conscience’
sake, the enormously rich post of Rector of Al-Azhar
University.
‘ The Sheykh, a tall and very upright man, still in the
prime of life, was dressed in the neat turban and long billow-
ing robe of the Egyptian ’Ulama. He wore a scarf round
his neck, raised higher on one side than on the other. This,
I learnt afterwards, was to hide a sad disfigurement. At
the time when he was Judge of the Cairo Muslim Court, he
upheld the right of some orphans to a certain property.
In revenge, vitriol was thrown at him. Happily it missed
his face, but one side of his neck and chest was terribly
disfigured. As Fuad Bey said afterwards : “I do not
usually kiss the hands of ’Ulama, but I kiss that man’s
hand.”
* The Sheykh received us very kindly, gave us tea, and
took us out on his veranda looking towards the desert hills.
Fuad Bey and Isma’il Bey Shirin, Deputy-Governor of
Cairo, who had come with me, discussed my future pro-
gramme with our host, who told us that, while he had been
Rector of Al-Azhar, the then Prime Minister had spoken to


him about my translation, and he had been willing to appoint
a committee of the university to revise it with me, but the
step had been forbidden by the King, who had somehow
been impressed with the idea that translation of the Qur’an
was sinful. It was, therefore, useless to approach Al-Azhar
officially as all the patronage in that institution was the
King’s, but he thought that we could easily find three or
four Azharis employed in the secular university—he gave
some names to Fuad Bey—willing to do the revision under
his guidance. He regretted that he himself knew no
English, and so could not appreciate the work. If there
were any words or passages which baffled me I was to write
them out for him and state the nature of my difficulty,
when he would write his explanation or opinion for me.
We drove back to Cairo, thinking all was settled. But
when we met three of the gentlemen whom the Sheykh had
named to us at the house of Lutfi Bey As-Sayyid, head of
the secular university, the whole plan suddenly collapsed.
Lutfi Bey had invited the head of the Arabic faculty in the
university, the blind professor Ta Ha Huseyn, to be present
at our conference, and he happened to remark that the
three gentlemen ran the risk of losing their posts through
helping me, since they belonged to the Al-Azhar and His
Majesty was opposed to all translation of the Qur’an.
Everyone agreed that he was right. I felt bitterly dis-
appointed and, when Ta Ha Huseyn suggested that I
should approach the King in person, who, he believed,
might be induced to change his standpoint, I said that I
had not come to Egypt to seek royal sanction for my work,
I had already got the sanction of His Exalted Highness ;
nor had I come to seek a fetwa from the ’Ulama of Egypt,
we had perfectly competent ’Ulama in India ; I had come
to seek the help of Arab learned men on points of Arabic.
I talked of leaving Egypt then, and going to Damascus, but
Fuad Bey assured me he would find a way out of the
impasse ; and in fact, soon afterwards, I was introduced to
Muhammad Bey Ahmad Al-Ghamrawi, Lecturer in
Chemistry at the Cairo College of Medicine, a graduate of
London University and a close student of the Qur’an, with


whom I worked at the revision happily for some three
months, with an occasional visit from Fuad Bey, and an
occasional reference to the Sheykh Al-Maraghi at Helwan.
‘We led a very quiet life ; only once in the month of
December did I go out to a dinner party ; and then, as
luck would have it, I sat next to the most enterprising of
Egyptian Muslim journalists. Next day, in Al-Ahram ,
appeared a notice of me and my work under the heading :
“ A Translation of the Qur’an.” Two days later in the
same newspaper and under the same heading appeared two
columns of denunciation of translation and the translation
of the sacred Book from the pen of Sheykh Muhammad
Shakir, a retired Professor of Al-Azhar, who (as I learnt)
had been leader of the hue-and-cry against Muhammad
’All’s translation. The translator and all who read his
translation, or abetted it, or showed approval of it, were
condemned to everlasting perdition according to the learned
writer ; and I was solemnly advised to give up my nefarious
work and translate instead (of all imaginable substitutes)
the commentary of Tabari ! Now the commentary of
Tabari is of enormous bulk (the commentary of Beydawi is
but a digest of it) and would besides require another com-
mentary of equal length to make its methods and mentality
intelligible to English people who had never studied a
Qur’an commentary.
‘ Having read that diatribe, I at once sat down and
drafted a reply in Arabic. This I took to an Egyptian friend
who put in the customary journalistic compliments which
I did not know. I then made a fair copy of the letter and
took it to the office of Al-Ahram. In that letter, after com-
pliments, I humbly asked : “ Is it lawful for an Englishman,
who is a Muslim, who has studied the commentaries of the
men of old and has some reputation as a man of letters with
his countrymen, to try to expound the glorious Qur’an to
his people in their own language at the present day ? ”
‘lt was some time before my letter was published. In
the interval appeared other letters on the subject, all on my
side. One sheykh of Al-Azhar wrote declaring translation
to be not only lawful but meritorious, and offering to prove


hi& case against the Sheykh Muhammad Shakir in a public
disputation. The Sheykh Shakir had claimed that there
was a fetwa (general agreement) on the subject. This corre-
spondents flatly denied. It was evident that there were two
opinions in Al-Azhar itself. I heard also some private dis-
cussions which showed me that many Egyptian Muslims
were as surprised as I was at the extraordinary ignorance
of present world conditions of men who claimed to be the
thinking heads of the Islamic world —men who think that
the Arabs are still “ the patrons,” and the non-Arabs their
“ freedmen ” ; who cannot see that the positions have
become reversed, that the Arabs are no longer the fighters
and the non-Arabs the stay-at-homes but it is the non-
Arabs who at present bear the brunt of the Jihad ; that the
problems of the non-Arabs are not identical with those of
the Arabs ; that translation of the Qur’an is for the non-
Arabs a necessity, which, of course, it is not for the Arabs ;
men who cannot conceive that there are Muslims in India
as learned and devout, as capable of judgment and as careful
for the safety of Islam, as any to be found in Egypt.
‘ I have already mentioned how a former translation of
the Qur’an by a Muslim was publicly burnt and further
copies of it were forbidden to be brought into Egypt.
Walking in one of the most crowded streets of Cairo, I saw
two English translations by non-Muslims very prominently
displayed in the window of a European bookshop, one of
them having on its paper jacket a picture representing our
Prophet and the angel Gabriel ! Where, I asked myself,
can be the sense in burning and banning a well-intentioned
reverent work while these irreverent translations can, under
the Capitulations, enter freely ?
‘ At length, the answer to my letter from the Sheykh
Muhammad Shakir appeared in Al-Ahram. This time it
was no diatribe but a frank and generous admission that
such a work as I had mentioned might be not only lawful
but meritorious. He was a little dubious over one expression
in my letter, when I spoke of explaining the Qur’an in a
way that my countrymen would understand. He seemed
to fear that this might mean some alteration to suit modern


views. But I had been thinking only of his suggestion that
I should translate Tabari—whose explanations are not given
in a ,way my countrymen would understand.
‘ Fuad Bey came up from Alexandria, having followed all
the correspondence in the Press. He said that he had been
alarmed when he saw the Sheykh Shakir’s attack, but had
felt quite reassured on reading my reply to it. He was now
glad that the whole question had been raised because there
was a chance of settling it once and for all. It had become
a scandal and disgrace to Egypt. He gave me a copy of the
leading comic paper, in which was an article making gentle
fun of the Sheykh Shakir. Public opinion was undoubtedly
against that gentleman.
‘ It was just then that my friend and, for the time, col-
laborator, Ghamrawi Bey brought me an invitation from
the Young Men’s Muslim Association to a tea party, with
the request that I should make a speech afterwards. He
himself went to the headquarters of the Association, a large
house with tennis-courts adjoining it near Qasr-ul-’Aini,
every day from his flat at Heliopolis, after he had returned
home from his day’s work at the College of Medicine. He
told me that he held a regular reception there of young men
who had conceived any doubts about religion owing to
their modern education, telling them, as a scientist, what he
thought upon the matter ; and that he had been able to
convince a number of them. He was so good a man, and
had been of such great help to me, that I was unwilling to
refuse his first request.
.‘ At the same time, the function, especially the speech,
meant disturbance of my peaceful existence given up to
work. lat length agreed only on condition that I might be
allowed to speak ex tempore and in English to the students,
as to prepare a speech, especially a speech in Arabic, would
take more time than I could spare from the revision work.
To this my friend at last consented, undertaking himself to
interpret my remarks for the benefit of those present who
might not know English.
‘ Accordingly he called for me one evening before sunset,
and we walked together to the place in time for Maghrib


prayer. Then there was a rather long reception of all the
notables who had been asked to meet me, and then we went
to tea. By that time I knew something of the composition
of my audience, and could see that the sort of speech which
I had meant to make would be unsuitable.
‘ From the number of turbans and long flowing robes I
judged that all Al-Azhar was present, where I had expected
to see only modern students. With trepidation I realized
that I must make some kind of a speech in Arabic if I wished
to make a good impression on these people, and must also
change the purport of my English speech.. But the English
was for later on. At the moment I had to concentrate my
thoughts intently on the preliminary remarks that I might
make in Arabic, and leave the rest to Providence. The
minute tea was over we went into the lecture hall, already
crowded. I ,was put up in a sort of pulpit, Ghamrawi
Bey took stand beside me ; Sheykh Rashid Rida was some-
where near me on the right, and from the middle of the
hall I saw the face of Muhammad All Bey Kamil and beside
him that of Fuad Bey’s son, staring at me, as it seemed, with
horror. They were the only persons known to me in all that
crowd.
‘ Somebody spoke in introduction —I suppose it was
Ghamrawi. Then my turn came. Feeling infinitely small,
I said : “ As-salamu ’aleykum wa rahmatu'Uahi wa barakatuh ”
—“ Peace be with you and the mercy of Allah ” —and the
immediate response from the whole audience brought some
courage to my heart.
* I spoke in Arabic for five minutes, merely apologizing
for the fact that I was going afterwards to speak in English,
explaining why I had asked leave to do so, and telling one
short anecdote. It was nothing much, but it sufficed to
win the turbaned section of the audience. Then £ame the
speech in English, Ghamrawi Bey translating every para-
graph. I had meant to tell the students about Hyderabad
and the work of education that is being done there ; and I
began with something of that. I told them of the foundation
of Osmania University. I described the Friday congregation
at the Mecca Masjid, I told them how His Exalted Highness


goes every Friday to the Mosque (at that there was applause
and one old man exclaimed : “ Ah, would that it were so in
Egypt!’”), and then, thinking I had said enough to show
them that I came from no benighted land, I talked to them
about the future of Islam.
‘ Muslims felt despair because they were defeated. It was
only natural. But was there any reason for despair ? Was
there not a clear analogy between our present condition
and that of the Prophet and his comrades at Al-Hudeybiyah,
when the Muslims asked “ Where is now the victory that we
were promised ? ” and even Omar made remarks of which
he ever afterwards repented. Yet the Truce of Al-Hudey-
biyah, though it seemed so ignominious for the early Muslims,
was in fact the greatest victory that Islam had until then
achieved. Until then war had set a rigid barrier between
the Muslims and their opponents, but with the truce the
barrier fell down, the two parties mingled and conversed
together, with the result that in the two years that elapsed
between the truce of Al-Hudeybiyah and the conquest of
Mecca —years of peace with the idolators —the number
of converts to Islam was far greater than the total number of
all previous converts.
For centuries war had set a rigid barrier between the
Muslim world and Christendom, and now that barrier is
down, no matter that the terms of settlement seem igno-
minious to the Muslims. That settlement may yet prove to
be the greatest victory that Al-Islam has yet achieved, on
one condition —a hard one—that all Muslims show again
in their conduct the faith and virtue of the early Muslims.
“ Or do you think,” I asked them, “ that Al-Islam was
propagated by the sword ? ” (When the question was
translated by Ghamrawi Bey there were anguished cries of
“No ! ” and “ God forbid !”) I told them how the Arabic-
speaking peoples are respected by non-Arabs, more especi-
ally in India ; how we look to them for example ; and I
asked them to furnish that example. My speech ended, the
Sheykh Rashid Rida spoke supporting all I had said.
‘ When he visited India, the people had flocked to pay
him honour only because he was an Arab and came from the


land of Nabi Yusuf. He quoted the words of the late Sheykh
Muhammad ’ Abduh : “We (Arabs) by our conduct are
the hindrance to the spread of Al-Islam to the West. They
see our religion through us as through a dirty window, and
misjudge it consequently.”
‘ Then a sheykh in Azhari dress got up and with deep
emotion thanked me in the name of Al-Azhar for all that I
had said. The whole incident had nothing to do with
translation of the Qur’an, but after it there was no further
public cavilling at my translation.
‘ We moved out to Heliopolis for Ramadan, in order that
I might be nearer to Ghamrawi Bey, whose home was there ;
and our work of revision was completed in the blessed
month.
‘ Fuad Bey came up to Cairo for the A’id. The time for
our departure was drawing near. Fuad Bey, Ghamrawi
Bey and I drove to Helwan to see the Sheykh Al-Maraghi,
and in the course of the visit Ghamrawi made his general
report of my work. On the strength of that report the good
Sheykh wrote some words of warm approval which I
treasure as coming from an altogether upright man, incapable
of writing anything that he does not think true.
‘ On a former visit he had read out to me all the passages
in the writing of the immediate disciples of the Imam Abh
Hanifah which made him, a Hanafi teacher, hold translation
of the Qur’an lawful. He had been anxious that I should
know his authority, and should not suppose that he, any
more than the opponent party, scorned Tradition. On this
last visit I felt it my duty to tell him that my translation
would fall short of the condition laid down by Abu Hanifah
in one respect: it would not show the Arabic text side by
side with the translation. He asked “ Why not ? ” and I
explained that there were several reasons. For one thing,
it would cost a great deal more ; for another, it would repel
non-Muslim readers who, glancing at the book and finding
it half-full of Arabic, would lay it down unread as something
quite outside their sphere of interest; for yet another,
Islam had been attacked and prejudiced by means of
translations of the Qur’an, without the Arabic, circulated


among non-Muslims. Even if translation had been quite
unlawful, as our opponents claimed, it would have been
sanctioned, in the circmstances, by the verse of the Qur’an :
“ The sacred month for the sacred month, and forbidden
things (are lawful) in retaliation. So whosoever hath
attacked you, attack him with the like of that wherewith he
hath attacked you. And keep your duty to Allah and know
that Allah is with those who keep their duty.”
* If things forbidden by Allah, like warfare in a sacred
month, become lawful in retaliation, so evidently must
things forbidden only by the ’Ulama. I must have spoken
with some heat for when I paused for breath,- the Sheykh
said : “ If you feel so strongly convinced that you are right,
go on in God’s name in the way that is clear to you, and pay
no heed to what any of us say.” As he uttered the words he
smiled at me, and we both emerged from the cell erected by
the schoolmen of the middle ages of Islam, in which we had
been talking until then.
‘ “ Quindi uscimmo a riveder le stelle .” ’
* On the day before that on which my wife and I were to
leave Cairo, a Bedawi chief, who was a member of the new
Parliament, at Fuad Bey’s instigation, asked us to a luncheon
party ; and to that luncheon party came the present Grand
Sheykh of Al-Azhar, official leader of those ’Ulama who
hold translation of the Qur’an unlawful—a very handsome
and benignant-looking old man in a beautiful dove-coloured
robe and snowy turban. At table, I was placed at his right
hand. Except Hilma Pasha A’isa, an ex-minister, the
remainder of the party consisted of men who had proved
their devotion to Islam in the opinion of the ’Ulama ;
they were all Mujahidin , including Fuad Bey, who had been
with Mustafa Kemal in the Suez Canal campaign before he
became Turkish Minister at Berne, The Sheykh could
hardly fail to be surprised to see an Englishman in such a
gathering, and when I told him that I was the man who had
translated the Qur’an into English he seemed rather
shocked.
2 D


‘ After luncheon, when Fuad Bey praised my translation,
and all the others called it meritorious, he was evidently
much embarrassed, until Fuad Bey remarked : “He will
not call it Al-Qur’an ; he will call it Ma'aniu'l-Qur'anVl-
Majid (The meaning of the Glorious Qur’an).” Then the
Rector of Al-Azhar smiled. “If he does that,” he said,
“ then there can be no objection ; we shall all be pleased
with it.” I was back again in the medieval cell, but we had
reached a peaceable conclusion, as I thought, and I was
glad of it.
‘ That was in March 1930. My translation was published
in December of the same year. In April 1931 I received a
letter from Ghamrawi Bey informing me that the Rector of
Al-Azhar had sent for him (Ghamrawi) and asked him many
questions about my translation. It seemed that he was
inclining to condemn it, after all. The latest rumour was
that Al-Azhar had decided that the work must be translated
word for word back into Arabic and submitted to their
judgment in that distorted form, as none of the professors
could read English. It was certainly a great advance beyond
the method of condemning without trial pursued in the case
of Maulvi Muhammad ’Ali’s English version, showing that,
even within Al-Azhar, there is now a party of enlightenment
strong enough to force withdrawal from the old position.
I replied with every argument that I could reach, of which
Ghamrawi might make use of in conversation with the
’Ulama.
‘ The approval or the condemnation of Al-Azhar, or
indeed of all the ’Ulama of Egypt, could not help or injure
my translation much ; but from what I had so lately seen in
Egypt I could judge that condemnation, after all that had
already happened, was very likely to bring a degree of
ridicule upon Al-Azhar, which I should be the first to deplore.
Al-Azhar is a great historic institution which one would
wish to see reformed and not demolished. I asked Ghamrawi
to implore them not to treat allies as enemies.
‘ Subsequently I have learnt from a newspaper report
that, after examining my work in the distorted form already
mentioned, the Rector of Al-Azhar pronounced it, “ though


the best of all translations,” unfit to be authorized in Egypt.
The reason given for the ban is that I have translated
idiomatic and metaphorical Arabic phrases literally into
English, thus showing that I have not understood their
real meaning. Happily, he gave an instance which was
quoted in the newspaper, so that I can understand the
meaning of the accusation. I have translated Surah XVII,
v. 29, thus : “ And let not thy hand be chained to thy
neck nor open it with a complete opening lest thou sit down
rebuked, denuded.” He considers that, by thus translating
the Arabic words literally, I have turned a commandment
relating to miserliness and generosity into a commandment
concerning the position of a man’s hands ! How should he
know that we speak of “ open-handedness ” and “ tight-
fistedness ” in English and that every English reader will
understand my literal translation in precisely the same
sense in which the Arabic reader understands the Arabic
text. The ban is therefore based upon an altogether false
assumption.
‘ From the opening of the question, as I gather from a
report in Al-Ahram, there had been strong difference of
opinion between the Ministry of the Interior and Al-Azhar
as to the merits of the work, the former championing its
merits with surprising vigour. But Al-Azhar, with the King
behind it, is supreme in all such matters.
‘ There is something hopeful in the actual condemnation,
the terms of which are wonderfully mild, one might almost
say favourable, to the translator as compared with former
pronouncement of the same authority. It makes the close
of a long chapter in the history of the relations of Arabs and
non-Arabs—a chapter of whose tenour the Prophet would
assuredly have disapproved—since the position that all
translation of the Qur’an is sinful has been quite abandoned.
A translation of the Qur’an by a Muslim has been examined
and a literary reason has been given for its condemnation.
That is a great step forward.’
All this goes to show that ecclesiastical quibbles are not
confined to Christianity, and it shows too how a good temper


and a sense of humour, coupled with willingness to submit to
authority, can triumph, for at last, on March 26, 1930,
Marmaduke could write to Leonard Moore from Juan les
Pins to which he had just returned :
‘ I received the blessing of the University of Al-Azhar
on my work and got a letter in the nature of a testimonial
from Sheykh al Maraghi on the understanding that it would
not be called a translation of the Qur’an, but something like
“ The Meaning of the Qur’an.” You cannot imagine the
labour the revision has been owing entirely to the hair-
splitting mentality of the Arab experts. But it is done.’
They were very tired of the whole business, for Muriel
had worked almost as hard as Marmaduke, and herself
compiled the index of the great work. He wrote delightedly
to Lady Valda of the approval Russell Pasha, her husband’s
cousin, had won on all sides by his splendid attack on the
French dealers in narcotic drugs.
The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an: An Explanatory
Translation , by Marmaduke Pickthall, with a dedication to
His Exalted Highness the Nizam, and published by Messrs.
Alfred A. Knopf, appeared in 1930. It is unquestionably,
as The Times Literary Supplement said of it, ‘ a great literary
achievement.’ Professor Krenkow wrote to Marmaduke, a
letter which must indeed have been a comfort and may
indeed prove to have been prophetic :
‘ I met Margoliouth the other day. He quite agrees with
me that yours is the finest translation in the language. We
feel that you have never had due recognition : it may be
that the glory you have fairly earned will come to you only
after death. But it may be of some comfort to you to know
how much those best qualified to judge its merits appreciate
and admire your work.’
Lord Lloyd admired the magnificent English ; Sir Denison
Ross wrote to congratulate on a ‘ really great achievement ’ ;
and Mohammed Ali, a few days before his death, after
reading the translation at one sitting, declared : “At last,
thank God, we have a real translation ” ; to which Fuad


Bey Salim added : “Itis an inspired translation.” There
is no. doubt that Marmaduke will always be regarded and
remembered by the whole Muslim East as c the 5 translator
of their Sacred Book into English. It is an extraordinary
achievement for one man and is one of the greatest trans-
lations from any classic ever made by a single individual.
He was preparing to go back to India when the trans-
lation was finished, but instead was asked by the Nizam to
be secretary to the Hyderabad Delegation to the Round
Table Conference which took place in London in the autumn
of 1930. He went back to England for a short rest in order
to prepare himself for this new work, and asked my mother
to help him with the social side of the entertaining of the
Delegation. One of the main questions brought up at this
Conference was that of the then * all but lost province of
Berar.’
“If some change,” he told my mother, “in the status
of Berar not interfering with the method of, or personnel of
administration, but tending to increase the outward signs of
recognition of the Nizam’s sovereignty (which is still recog-
nized) could be made —something like a separate prin-
cipality under the Nizam with all the present structure of
administration maintained and representative institutions
fostered, it would please the Nizam and all the people of
the State immensely and would not, I think, displease the
Beraris, who get but a small share of representation now
they are bound up for administrative purposes with C.P.
(the Central Provinces). Since Lord Reading’s awfully
slighting letter to the Nizam upon this subject, it has
rankled in the mind of every Hyderabadi, and especially of
course of H.E.H. It is that insult which the ruler and the
people expect this delegation to wipe out for them, but the
Delegation seems to me to be thinking only of the problems
of a federated India. If they go back without anything to
show, the Constitution and the men who made it will be
hated, whereas if they could achieve any measure of success
it, and they, would be forgiven.
“ I hope I have made my meaning clear. It is a thing
very hard to claim since the late Nizam did sign the lease of


Berar in perpetuity though with extreme reluctance. But
if it be given as a reward of loyalty and an act of grace, the
effect would be exceedingly beneficial to Hyderabad. The
Nizam would be quite prepared to employ always a certain
number of British officials in the administration of Berar ;
indeed he would be glad to do so, and make his own Berar
the training-ground for Hyderabad Civil Servants, who now
go for their training to British India.”
He was worked very hard as secretary to the Delegation
and wrote bitterly to Hashimi :
‘ I have not enjoyed the work at all; too many masters
and am absolutely sick of the speech, mentality and physical
appearance of “ moderates.” 5
His great friend, Mohammed Ali, had come over with his
brother, Shaukat, but neither were in specially good health,
and very shortly after Mohammed Ali died in London in his
hotel, which cast a gloom over the whole Conference.
‘ Yet though I feel personally despondent, 5 Marmaduke
wrote, * I think the Delegation has done very well and the
credit is all Sir Akbar Hydari’s. He has managed very
cleverly to steer his own course while seeming to obey the
injunctions (various) of his “ advisers.” There has been
more courting of India Office officials than I personally
have liked, and I was discouraged at the outset from the
appeal which I had planned to public feeling. But all is
well that ends well, and if the India Office gives us all we
want without a pistol at its head there is nothing to be said,
though I should have preferred to use the pistol, as a “ safe-
guard ” —a word in daily use at the Conference. I have
done all I could for the delegation in the circumstances, as
a mere khaksar secretary, of whom the mighty Delegates
have only just begun to think that he may possess political
experience. Socially, I did them well, but they prefer the
company of Anglo-Indian ex-officials to that of the best
society in England. This grumbling is, of course, between
ourselves; but Ido not wish you to attribute their success
to me. I gave them a good start, but it was not followed up
as I had hoped ; and latterly I have been content to be


merely the Secretary, only bursting out from my shell when
something quite impolitic had to be stopped.’
He returned to Hyderabad at the end of the year and
settled'down to his work. An information bureau to act as
a liaison institution between the Government, the Press,
and the public had been inaugurated, and Marmaduke was
chosen as the first director of this important branch of the
administration.
It was not an ideal job for him, nor was he at heart a
bureaucrat, and neither in this post nor as Director of
Publicity (another office he subsequently held), was he at
ease. On the other hand, his speech at the Educational
Conference, which was held at Hyderabad in 1931, could
not - have been better, nor better received. But when the
Round Table Conference met a second time in 1931 he was
not a member of the Hyderabad Delegation. As he
explained to Lady Valda : * I was too opinionated to make
an acceptable secretary.’
He more and more enjoyed the work of Civil Service
House, though it meant he had to cut out all private hos-
pitality as he shared a common dining-room and a common
stipend with the students. He wrote at this time quite an
amusing skit called ‘ The Great Hyderabad Revolution,’
which is, however, incomprehensible to anyone not
conversant with Hyderabad gossip.
In 1931 the Nizam entrusted him with the negotiations
leading up to the marriage of his two sons to the daughter
and niece of the ex-Sultan of Turkey—still in Marmaduke’s
mind, and in his master’s, the Khalif of all Islam.


CHATTER TWELVE
NEVER was the completeness with which Marmaduke
had made his c Salute to the Orient 5 more patent than
in his whole conduct of the negotiations prior to the marriage
of H.E.H. the Nizam’s eldest son, now Prince of Berar, and
the Princess Durru Shewar. She is unquestionably one of
the most beautiful women in the world and had been brought
up, unveiled, in Europe, living with her parents on the
Riviera in a big villa, paid for by the few faithful adherents
of her father, of whom H.E.H. the Nizam was chief. In
fact, since his deposition, her father, Abdul Majid 11, has
been a pensioner of H.E.H. the Nizam. Yet in spite of his
poverty and his exile, it would still, Marmaduke knew, be
an honour for the son of any Indian prince, however excel-
lent a parti , to marry the daughter of the Khalifa, a direct
descendant of Mohamed the Conqueror, of Suleyman the
Magnificent. Excepting only the tribe of the Koreish, hers
is the purest Muslim blood, and she the greatest lady in all
Islam. Her position in. Oriental eyes is at least equal to
that of the proudest Habsburg.
Marmaduke, seeing these things with Eastern eyes,
wanted the match quite desperately. It had been suggested
to the Nizam by Marmaduke’s friend, Mohamed Ali, after
the collapse of the Khalifate Movement. Marmaduke
valued the idea from the first, for behind the marriage his
imagination saw the following facts and, assembling them,
held them transfigured : the Nizam is the richest, ablest,
and most independent of all Muslim rulers. Full liberty and
sovereignty are essential to the Khalifa, for the Khalifate,
however lawfully the holder is elected, is in abeyance when-
ever the possessor of the title is unable, through poverty, or
lack of power, to exercise his functions. Should the marriage
of the Khalifa’s daughter and the Nizam’s son have male


issue, not only would the boy be heir to the Nizam’s millions
and to the relics of the Turkish Empire, but if he should
grow up a fit person, and were he to be so elected, he would
be heir also to the Protectorate of all the faithful, for he
would have the position, and the means, to make his Pro-
tection a real rock on which the whole of Islamiyeh could
rest, a central Power round which the Muslim peoples could
rally. He would, in fact, bred on the aristocratic, and
elected on the democratic, principle, be Commander of the
Faithful indeed.
So Marmaduke dreamed in the Moghul capital, seeing
afar off Islam reunited in a child who would be the inheritor
of Aurangzeb’s wealth and of the Khalifa’s sanctity : ‘ Tu
puer.’ He knew he could never live to see his dream ful-
filled, but at least he determined he would do his utmost to
further the marriage that was its first essential condition.
He never thought what it might mean to a girl brought up
in freedom to know the jewelled slavery of the purdah, nor
wondered how a gifted poetess, a charming writer, a fluent
linguist, would beguile the long hot days of the Deccan.
Never a thought did he give now to the Bedawi girl who fled
Haroun al Raschid’s harim. Bon sang ne sait mentir , and his
fairy-tale princess would, he knew, do her duty in that state
of life to which it should please Allah, with Marmaduke for
messenger, to call her. And whilst the two fathers discussed
settlements, the loveliest girl in Europe or Asia prepared to
accept the fate that offered her a throne, as simply as she
had accepted that which brought her into exile.
Marmaduke met the Nizam’s two sons in Nice, for he
had been appointed ‘ Special Officer ’ to negotiate the mar-
riage of the elder son and to accompany them both on the
‘ Omurah,’ the lesser pilgrimage to the holy places (lesser,
because not performed at the prescribed time), after their
marriage. His instructions were sent him directly by the
Nizam. The ex-Khalifa was to perform the religious cere-
mony of ‘ nika ’ in person.
From that date onwards a trust was to be formed of two
members, one of whom was to be Sir Akbar Hydari, in his
capacity of finance member, and the other was to be


appointed by the ex-Khalifa himself in his capacity of
father and uncle of the two brides, for the investment of the
mujjal (dowries) of these two brides respectively. Also the
Nizam, * as a concession,’ allowed a large sum for the
ex-Khalifa’s daughter in shape of trousseau, and another sum
for the ex-Khalifa’s niece in shape of trousseau. He also
allowed the brides’ parents to provide necessary things for
these princesses in shape of jewellery, dresses, etc.
The nika ceremony was to take place on November 18,
the first ‘ Rajjab ’ day, which is H.E.H. the Nizam’s birth-
day. After the ceremony the princes were to be allowed to
stay at Nice for a week or ten days prior to their departure
either for the Hedjaz or Hyderabad, as the case might be,
but on no account to be allowed to return to London as the
season there was over. When the nika was completed,
Marmaduke issued a communique for the information of the
general public of Nice, through Reuter’s service, according
to the draft which the Nizam sent.
Marmaduke received special instructions to find out from
the Khalifa the Turkish customs and etiquette regarding the
observance of purdah, not in Europe, but in India ; the
personal opinion of the Nizam, in view of the position and
Muslim families of the parties concerned, being to suggest
‘ a certain amount of it,’ and he was delighted when he
heard that the ex-Khalifa agreed with him. Marmaduke
obeyed all the Nizam’s orders implicitly, and remained at
Nice whilst the young couple honeymooned, but the pil-
grimage had to be abandoned owing to an outbreak of
plague in the Yemen, and Their Highnesses, Azan Jar
Bahadur and his brother Prince Walashan Muazzam Jar
Bahadur, their wives, the Princess Durru Shewar and
Princess Nilou Fer, granddaughter of the late Sultan Murad,
the Hyderabad Delegation, and the Pickthalls, all in fact,
travelled home to Hyderabad together.
On his return to India he was delighted to hear from
Leonard Moore that Collins had agreed to publish his novels
in a cheap edition. “ I hanker for a uniform edition,” he
said, and bade Collins know that at the price of 2s. or 2s. 6d.
“ there should be a sale for my books in India worth con


sidering, not Anglo-Indian, but English-educated India, a
much, larger and more intelligent public that no English
publisher I know of has yet even begun to recognize. If
you will let me know when the books are likely to be out,
and which they are, I can do something to work up interest
beforehand.”
Marmaduke was now become sufficiently reactionary to
stand beside the princes against such leaders as Jawaharlal
Nehru who, as Muriel says, he once met at a party and
thought a pleasant young man, ‘ but did not approve his
political opinions nor activities as he did not consider that
they were for the ultimate good of India.’ His only objec-
tion to the projected Constitution was that it would be
suicidal for the Nizam to enter a confederation of princes,
‘ a loose confederation possibly, but not the kind of close-
knit thing they contemplate. I would do anything I could
to give the East free air and a chance to develop on its own
lines without the European strait-waistcoat of ideas and
fashions. Yet we can do nothing, it seems, but pray for
relief and help. The help will come no doubt, but it will
not be in our time. Man is always in a hurry for his time is
short.’ He was mightily delighted by the agreement of
1936 which reasserted the Nizam’s sovereignty over Berar,
and emphasized it by the reading of the ‘ Khutba ’ —the
Friday prayer, in the Nizam’s name, throughout the
province.
Though Marmaduke did not specially enjoy the role of
lord-in-waiting, he made such a success of it that after a
year’s quiet work in Hyderabad, he found himself appointed
controller to Prince Basalath Jarh the younger brother of the
Nizam. This appointment necessitated his retirement from
Chadarghat High School. He kept a diary of his controller-
ship which is very interesting, recalling many things in
Mr. Forster’s A Passage to India. He delighted in riding
with his pupils in Civil Service House and kept marvellously
fit, excepting for a few bouts of malaria, throughout his life
in India by this simple expedient of daily riding. His
duties with Basalath Jah were to accompany him to private
entertainments, to do crossword puzzles with him, to read


with him. For examples: ‘ Went with B.J. to an At Home
which was a meeting of the Hyderabad branch of the Poetry
Society. More than a hundred people present including
Resident and Mrs. Keyes with whom B.J. sat during a
lecture by Mrs. Rosenthal on Goethe. It was Goethe’s
hundredth anniversary.’
‘To an At Home in the gardens of the High Court to
celebrate the granting of the High Court Charter by H.E.H.
Wrote to H.E.H. submitting invitation to attend First
Hyderabad Lancers Sports. Sanction received the same
day. Princess Nilufar 1 presented the prizes.’-
‘ With B.J. from 10.30 till 12. I encourage his liking for
crossword puzzles as they improve his spelling. We have
solved a great number of them and have read a great number
of stories by Edgar Alan Poe, Bret Harte, and Dickens, which
have greatly interested him.’
‘ Submitted an estimate of the cost of the Ooty expedition
which was approved the same day.’
‘ Wrote to H.E.H. the Nizam asking permission for B.J.
to take with him the Amira car and driver at present placed
at his disposal. The hire of cars at Ooty is expensive and the
car can go by road at comparatively little cost.’
Marmaduke kept this diary, not for himself, but to submit
to the Nizam, and there are some entries quite curiously
unlike any a European tutor might have made, such as :
* Tuesday. Met B.J. at Secunderabad station before
6 a.m. The Station Superintendent showed us great
politeness. Train left at 6.30. We ate the food we had
brought with us, buying only tea until 7 p.m. when we went
to the dining-car which had joined our train at Gunthkal.
Only one other diner besides ourselves. No ice.
‘ Wednesday. Breakfasted in the train at Bangalore,
luncheon at the Hotel Metropole, Mysore. Directly after
luncheon left in three motor cars, one for ourselves, one for
the servants, and a lorry for the luggage. After a glorious
drive through bamboo jungle and the jungle of the
mountain-side we reached the edge plateau of the Milhoris,
1 The variations in the spelling are Marmadukc’s own.


and an hour later Ooty. At a bend near the summit of the
slope, we left the servants and their car to look out for the
lorry which had fallen out of sight and hearing. They came
to the hotel two hours behind us, the lorry having broken an
axle of a wheel which had somehow been repaired upon the
open road. Rooms comfortable. Hotel well manned and
scrupulously clean.
‘ Friday. Had the car again and went with B.J. to leave
cards at Government House, on the Maharajah of Mysore,
and on the Resident. The Maharajah had not yet arrived,
but the Yuvraj returned B.J.’s call the following day.
‘ In the afternoon went to the Blue Mountain Cinema and
saw a film called Paramount on Parade , a sort of wild “ Revue ”
with thrilling moments.
‘ Tuesday. The usual routine. Sular Juny came to see
us in the morning. He invited us to “ a boy and girl party.”
‘ Wednesday. Drove out in the morning. In the evening
went to the Blue Mountain Theatre to see the talkie film
of Charleys Aunt. Extraordinarily good though Americanized.
‘ Thursday. Went to the Yuvraj of Mysore’s Garden
Party. Saw the gardens, watched the tennis for a time, saw
the Yaks from Tibet which the Maharajah hopes to acclima-
tize. Afterwards went into the house again where there was
dancing. B.J. took the floor twice.
‘ Saturday. In the evening went to “ Woodside ”to the
boy and girl dance, as members of Salar Jung’s party, a gay
one. Salabat Jah and Gough were also there. Got back to
the hotel at 2 a.m.
* A full account of the stay at Ootacamund was submitted
to H.E.H. on our return to Hyderabad.
‘ Tuesday. With B.J. from 10-12.15. His foot alas !
has swollen up again, which he ascribes to the fact that there
is now a moon again as there was at the first swelling. He
says that all the people here believe that such swellings
happen at the time of moonlit nights.
* Wednesday. With B.J. from 10-12. The swelling some-
what reduced. The doctor came to dress the foot as I was
leaving. He said it is quite true that such .swellings are
affected by the moon. They are called in Urdu Chaudui -


Andhera and the inflammation is called Atesh-i-Fars (Fire of
Persia) and Faringhi Dana.
‘ Went to Malakpat to the wedding of a daughter of
Nawab Kazim Yar Jung. Watched the flower-clad bride-
groom in his flower-clad car bargaining with all the children
of the bride’s family for the price of admission. The Nawab
Sahib said it was a Hindu custom. The bridegroom had to
pay some hundreds of rupees. Sat in the tent during the
Nikah ceremony and then left. It was already after
sunset.
* Went to General Osman’s funeral, settled, down among
the crowd of mourners. There we sat for two whole hours.
Asif Ali Bey, the eldest son of the deceased, came and sat
with me. He said that they had fixed the time of the
funeral for 8 o’clock by the Nizam’s order and now were
telephoning every few minutes for leave to start. The reply
was always “ Theyro ! ” Wait. Major Mumtaz, brother-
in-law to Osman, told me that the Nizam himself was com-
ing and until he came they were not allowed even to wash
the body. His Exalted Highness was bringing special water,
from sacred springs, and special earth from holy places to be
thrown into the grave. I was getting anxious, believing
that B.J. would not be present, and mindful of my duty to
be with him by 10.30 at latest. At 9.30 the Nizam arrived
in the house. In the room where I sat with some elderly
Nawabs we heard his voice giving orders.
‘ At-10 we all went out. There was a great crowd on the
drive and in the roadway. Nawab Zulgudar Jung, who was
with me, said that there was no hope for us to get into the
mosque, so, having seen the bier go by with its green pall,
we found our cars as best we could and returned home.
‘ When the pall was taken off the bier in the grave it was
found that the dead man’s face had turned toward the
qiblah of its own accord.
‘ In the evening, as we were getting up from dinner with
the students, a plate, wrapped in a napkin, was brought in,
with it a slip of paper with some pencil writing : “For
Mr. and Mrs. Pickthall ” being plainly legible. I thought
it might be some sweets, but when I untied the napkin I


found two cooked snipe on two squares of toast. From the
Nizam sent straight from the royal dinner-table.
‘Thursday. On arrival at the mosque found Azam Jah,
the heir apparent, standing with B.J. awaiting the Nizam.
A.J. looked to see what I was wearing under my abaya, and
asked me why I wore it. I said : For decency, and in order
to look like the faqir I really am ! Told Basalat Jah that I
had documents to read to him and arranged to follow him to
Shadi Khand after prayers.
‘ Saturday. Arrived at Railway Station for the great
rehearsal of the Viceroy’s visit. Approaches to the station
lined with cavalry. As I went through to the platform
Najaf Ali Khan, Asst. Sec. Political Dept., stopped me and
pinned on my coat a printed slip : “ Sahibzada Basalat
Jah.” Gough was similarly labelled “ Sahibzada Salabat
Jah,” while Nawab Hamid Yar Jing (the late Gen. Osman’s
brother, who has succeeded him as Military Secretary and
A.D.G. to the Nizam) was labelled “ His Exalted Highness
the Nizam.” Binney 1.G.5., represented the Heir Apparent
and Capt. Bashruddin Moazzam Jah. The Resident was
there himself and his young men seemed to be in command
of us all, very grave and officious. Mafflin, Agent of the
Nizam’s State Railways, and Mrs. Mafflin played Lord and
Lady Willingdon, some loutish-looking men from the
Railway impersonating members of their staff.
‘ The train came in, the Indian passengers gaping in
amazement, at the guard of honour and important people
on the platform. From a saloon coach Mr. Mafflin first
alighted and then Mrs. Mafflin. The first bars of God Save
the King, and the Resident stepped forward and introduced
the Nizam to the Viceroy and the Viceroy passed him on
to the Vice-Reine. The Resident then led the Viceroy to the
Heir Apparent whom he introduced to Moazzam Jah, then
Salabat Jah, then me, and after me to the four principal
British officers of the Gantonmat (Secunderabad). The
Nizam followed with Lady Willingdon, they both shook
hands with all of us. Then they began the round of the
half circle of the State and the officials present and British
officers, beginning with the Residency staff. Objection was


raised, as I thought reasonably, to this precedence given to
the Residency, but it was quashed. The Resident then led
the Viceroy towards the Guard of Honour, introduced him
to the Commander of the Nizam’s Regular Forces who
passed him on to the Commander of the Guard of Honour
which he then inspected ; the Nizam and Lady Willingdon
and all the rest of us standing still meanwhile.
‘ When the whole thing had been gone through it was
repeated, Azam Jah being placed this time at one end of the
line to save the Viceroy and Lady W. from having to double
back in their progress. Then the Viceroy was led out by
the Nizam to his car. Six bars of “ God Save the King ”
and the procession to Falaknama Palace began. When it
had gone I found my car and went to Shadi Knana, and
showed myself to B.J. with my label still on me. He said :
“ Keep it on ! ” but I unpinned it.’
When the Willingdons actually arrived Marmaduke was
summoned to the durbar and describes the brief ceremony :
‘ The Resident arrived. Then we heard police whistles
and the officer of the guard crying “ Shun.” Presently came
“ Present arms ! ” and the band played the first six bars of
“ God Save the King.” Lord Willingdon came in with
members of his staff, the Nizam stepped forward to welcome
him. They both sat down in the high place, and then we all
sat down. The Political Sec. of Government of India,
Chancy, sat beside the Resident on the right of the Viceroy.
We controllers sat on the left of the Nizam and in a line
with him against the wall, outside the magic circle of the
durbar. It was over in five minutes. A procession of yellow-
robed palace-servants entered, bringing pan and ’itr,
which were offered to the Viceroy and the other guests
according to a fixed convention. Then the Viceroy and
his staff took leave, there was the same presenting of arms,
and short burst of music as at his coming. I noticed that
the band played softly throughout the visit. The Nizam
called Sir A. Hydari into an inner room for a few minutes’
private conversation, the Nizam’s part in which was plainly
audible as usual, and then we were dismissed, and drove
back to our homes. The bridge was clear again.’


In the evening he went to another reception which he
describes : ‘ The city beautifully illuminated, streets lined
with silent crowds. The Chowmallah Palace was a fairy-
land. The Nizam arrived and we all waited patiently on
the broad terrace before the big pavilion till the Viceroy
and Lady Willingdon arrived. Soon after that a start was
made for dinner, which proved to be a long way off —at
least a quarter of a mile, I should think —right through
the big pavilion, across another wide terrace overlooking
a much larger garden courtyard containing many basins
of water and fountains and surrounded by illuminated
masses of building—down a long flight of steps and then
along a path lined with. Caprican Cavalry troops, each with
sword drawn, standing absolutely still like statues, and then
along another pathway similarly lined, up more steps and
along an arcade to the vast gallery in which the dinner-
tables were set out. I found Mrs. Prendergast without and
supported her on this fairly long walk. Found someone to
show her to her place and then with difficulty found my own.
Gold plate for 240 guests, gold ornaments down the middle
of each table. A dinner costing 80 rupees (more than six
pounds) a head. A speech by the Nizam in which he
praised Sir Akbar Hydari and a reply by the Viceroy in
which he made no mention of Sir Akbar, but praised “ My
old friend Maharajah Sir Kishen Parshad.” Afterwards
conversation till the English guests departed. I remained,
the only Englishman, to attend on 8.J., and presently wit-
nessed a strange sight. I was standing under the porch of
the pavilion. The terrace in front was partly in a coloured
light and part in moonlight, making it look more than ever
like a stage. And the actors stood grouped exactly like the
chorus on a stage. On the left was a dark mass of nobles
and officials standing at attention. In front of them, in a
straight line, stood Princess Nilufer in crimson sari and three
daughters of the Nizam in silvery dress. At the back stood
one or two members of the suite, and on my left the four
princes with their attendants all dead still. In the middle of
the stage left absolutely free walked the Nizam, stopping
before this man and that, and making fun of him. In the
2 E


midst of his peculiar prowl he spotted me and drew
near.
‘ “ Is your wife here ? ” he asked.
‘ “ No, sir, she has gone back with Mrs. Prendergast.”
‘ “ Oh, I see, and you are wanting to go back with—
er
‘ “ Yes, sir, to go back with Basalat Jah.”
* “ Yes, to be sure. Of course,” and he resumed his
prowl. Soon after that he gave us leave to go. I stepped
down from the arcade and stood behind B.J. The Nizam
and his daughters lined up on the steps on the other side
from those by which the guests go out. First Azam Jah took
leave, then Moazzam, then Salabat.
‘ “ Now Basalat Jah can go,” said the Nizam. “ And Mr.
Pickthall. Where’s Mr. Pickthall ? » I think that “ Mr.”
was the greatest compliment that I have ever received.
‘ I stood before him on the steps and bowed, then rushed
down to Basalat Jah, who took my arm. He was dead
tired.
‘ Thursday. Saw Prendergast at io. He was charged by
the Nizam to tell me that B.J’s wedding will take place in
April and that certain estimates must be prepared in view
of it.
‘With B.J. from 10.15 to 12. At 1 p.m. received the
order to meet Princess Durru Shewar and her baby at
Nampalli Station at 4 p.m. Was with B.J. at 3.30 and
3.50 drove with him to the station. The Nizam said good
evening to me. The Heir Apparent kissed the Nizam’s
right foot as he stood on the red carpet on the platform and
afterwards held the baby to kiss the said foot. A European
nurse. The Princess in a crimson sari looking radiant.’
He accompanied his charge to Bidar, which was not a
great success as Basalat Jah fell ill, but they saw. some
interesting sights, a wonderful night procession and excited
and exciting drumming.
On January 1, 1935, Marmaduke’s ten years expired, and
the Nizam sent him a letter greatly appreciating his loyal
service rendered to the ruler and State in various capacities
and wishing him and Mrs. Pickthall a well-earned rest in


their future home. Sir Richard Trench tells me how Sir
Akbar Hydari waived all the rules of his own department
(Finance) and acceded to the Government’s request to give
Marmaduke a much larger pension than he was entitled to,
also advancing it by one year. £ lt was, of course, a ramp,
but the whole Council was involved in it as we all liked and
respected Pickthall. To avoid an awkward precedent, we
based the grant on Pickthall’s eminence as a man of letters,
and not on his services to the State, meritorious as they
were.’ Before he left he was invited by the Nizam to a
family luncheon party which they attended on their last
day, and was presented by H.E.H. with a gold watch, and
Muriel with a gold necklace.
On January io, 1935, they left India. On their arrival at
Naples they found snow, and in Rome Marmaduke had bad
influenza, with a long convalescence in Florence. It was
not until they crossed the Alps that they really felt better.
Italy was under snow until mid-February, with bitter winds
blowing ‘ which seem to have been designed on purpose to
make us still more sorry to have left India,’ as he wrote from
Montreux.
My mother, hearing of his plight, offered to lend him
La Maison du Diable, her house in Savoy, and he went
there for some weeks and wrote happily to her : ‘ The
magnolias are in big bud, but no bud has yet begun to open.
Primroses and wood anemones are a gay pattern beside the
road fences beyond the fruit trees. The almond trees are in
full blossom. The lawns are dotted with crocuses and snow-
drops and daffodils.’ My mother wished him to accept it
permanently as a residence, but he felt he could not afford
to undertake it on his slender pension, nor to live in a place
where the postage costs were so heavy.
In May he spent the King’s Jubilee in Pevensey and had
a pleasant month there, going back to London in July and
meeting many old friends and making some new ones, for
example the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia who, he wrote :
‘ strikes me as a very upright, intelligent, and dignified
young man who has seen the cinema show of Europe with
clear eyes and honesty of mind. He went out of his way to


be nice to us, comparatively unimportant people, and I had
three interviews. I think he made a good impression on
everyone here.’
Marmaduke was still a little bitter about Turkey and when
it was suggested that he should now at last go back there
and get a job under Mustapha Kemal, he wrote sadly :
‘ With regard to the President of the Turkish Republic,
there is one thing which would prevent me from any place
under him, and that is the fact that I am a Khalifatist and
a close personal friend, I think I may say, of the last Khalifa,
and at least one member of his family, though I recognize
Mustapha Kemal’s great service to his country.’
He was depressed by the fact that Dent had ‘ remaindered ’
The Valley of the Kings and also he was having trouble with
the edition of the Qu’aran. He longed for a printed and
authorized version interleaved with his translation, which
hung fire. It was suggested at the same time that he should
elaborate his introduction a little and publish it separately
as a short life of the Prophet as ‘ people are kind enough to
say it is the best biography in existence.’ Nothing came of
this, however, before his death, nor of the interleaved
translation.
He still kept in touch with India, hearing from his beloved
Princess and from his friends the Speights and Hashimi.
The Indian papers would have it that he was going to live
in Spain, and this amused him as yet another example of
the Oriental inaccuracy he loved. The real truth was he
wanted to write a novel about Saracen Spain.
In the winter he went down to Cornwall, to escape the
cold, and wrote resignedly from there to Hashimi: ‘lt is
evident you imagine my condition to be unhappy which in
a general way it is not. Indeed when I look back over my
life and consider what I have deserved I am overwhelmed
by a sense of Allah’s mercy. It is only the English winter
that, makes for occasional gloom in one’s outlook and I have
not yet learned to think of myself as a man grown old. I
still look forward like a youth and fret to think that I am
not advancing.’
His age was apparent less when he turned his thoughts to


India than when he reviewed the European situation. To
my mother —a contemporary —he wrote : ‘ What you say
about culture and collectivism is absolutely true. I am
afraid that I am reactionary at heart though I am always
treated and have even been welcomed (!) as a revolutionary.
I am probably the last man on earth left who is absolutely
a convinced monarchist. I mean an enthusiast for the
principle of monarchy, which is altogether a different matter
from dictatorships. I have no abstract objection to despot-
ism rightly exercised by a superior individual. All other
forms of government are apt to run (at best) to slush.’
On 18 March of that year he was invited to speak to the
Royal Central Asian Society, Sir Charles Innes being in the
chair. He took as his theme the Muslims in the modern
world. It was a delightful lecture as well as a serious one,
and he emphasized the fact that Saudi Arabia was still the
danger spot in Islam, but on the whole he was extraordinarily
sanguine about the future and illustrated his point with two
little stories of ancient Hyderabad.
“ A man denounced his neighbour to the judge as a
Wahhabi—a puritan who bothered quiet people with his
puritanism—and the judge asked the accused to describe his
daily life.
“He said : ‘ I get up in the morning and I have a good
drink of toddy, then I go to the Saint’s tomb which is near
my house and wish the Saint good day, then I go and sit at
the shop of a friend of mine and gossip till I hear the noon-
day call to prayer, when I go back to my house and eat the
food my wives have prepared for me. I rest awhile and
then I have a drink of toddy and go to visit a mistress whom
I keep where my wives cannot get at her. I stay with her
till I hear the “ Asr call to prayer.” ’ The judge here inter-
rupted, saying to the accuser indignantly: ‘ Wahhabi,
indeed ! The man’s a pukka Muslim.’
“My other story is of an event that really happened. A
whole quarter of the city was commoved and there was
rioting one night in Muharram because some drunken
Shi’as declared that the frogs in the pools were saying :
‘ Hasan ! Huseyn ! ’ and shouted that it was a miracle, and


their Sunni neighbours were indignant and swore that if the
frogs were saying anything articulate it was obviously :
‘ Abu Bakr ! Umar ! ’Usman ! ’ ”
He added : “ Neither of those stories would be credible if
told of Hyderabad to-day. There has been a vast improve-
ment in religion and in conduct. And in honesty I must
add that this improvement has nothing to do with any
modernizing movement, but is the work of quite old-
fashioned Muslims assisted by a time of law and order.”
His conclusion was that he saw Islam in a state of full
revival, freed at last from the blind imitation of Europe.
He mentioned Abyssinia, but without bitterness: “Orientals,”
he said, “ expected barefaced aggression from European
Powers, the only thing about the situation which amused
them was the outcry made in England when the victim was
a Christian, whereas when the victim, as in the case of
Tripoli, Persia, Turkey, Tunis or Morocco, was a Muslim,
there was a chorus of approval for the aggressor.”
I saw him the morning after his lecture, for he lunched
with my mother. I thought he looked very ill, his skin a
curious ghostly colour. He returned that evening to Corn-
wall, and none of his friends saw him alive again. His
twelve months in retirement had been for him a time of
refreshment and peace, troubled only by such trivial
worries as where to live.
He had many plans, of which the most urgent was to
perform the pilgrimage which is incumbent on all Muslims.
The austerity and abnegation required of the Hajjis stirred
his imagination, always avid of renunciation, and flattered
his need to strip himself of all earthly ties. Only a few days
after his death a letter came from Nawab Sir Nijamat Jung
Bahadur (formerly political member of the Hyderabad
Legislative Council) inviting him to go, an invitation he
would certainly have accepted with delight had he lived.
As he grew older his adopted faith meant more and more
to him. “ I call myself a Sunni Muslim of the Hanafi
school,” he explained to Arthur Field at their last meeting,
adding : “ Yet none knows better than me that there is no
such spirit of sectarianism in Islam as in that in which I was


born. Man to-day is rebellious. ‘ For he thinketh himself
independent * and thence comes all evil : only Islam can
save mankind from the consequences of its own selfishness,
for Islam is the surrender of the rebel viceroy to his sovereign
lord : the surrender of man’s selfish ever-changing will and
purpose to the selfless, never-changing will and purpose of
Almighty God. This alone is religion. Nothing else
deserves the name. There is no liberty of evil, for the devil
is subservient to Allah’s purpose for mankind and evil also
plays its part for man’s salvation. Say : ‘ I seek refuge in
the Lord of the Daybreak, from the evil of his creating.
The power of the devil is only that which man’s deeds give
to him, just as hell is a presentiment of the consequence of
man’s ill deeds.’ ”
Until May 18 he was perfectly well and working hard
down in Cornwall at the revision of his lectures on the
cultural side of Islam, which were to be re-published in
India in book form. On May 18 he complained of pain
after luncheon, but Muriel declared, and both agreed, it
was only indigestion. Next morning at breakfast he seemed
perfectly well, but whilst reading the newspapers felt ill
and went upstairs to lie down. Muriel followed him to their
bedroom and as she entered the room he took two steps
to meet her and fell dead in her arms of coronary thrombosis.
From the many letters Muriel received I will quote only
two. Lord Lloyd wrote :
‘ 30, Portman Square, W.i.
{ 20 th May 1936.
c I think you know that I always had a very real regard
for him, and although political matters necessarily inter-
rupted our old friendship during the Indian years, yet even
during that time I hope he realized that I never suffered my
remembrance of our old friendship to be upset by those
transitory affairs. Your husband belonged to that part of
my life which in retrospect always seems the happiest to
me —the early days in Turkey in the Middle East, the days
of Said the Fisherman , of Aubrey Herbert, of Mark Sykes, of
Adventure and travel. I remember, too, our first meeting


at the Mustashar’s, when Colonel Machell held that office,
and I know Lady Valda will be very grieved to hear the
news. Please forgive so ill expressed and halting an expres-
sion of my sympathy, but I would ask you to believe that it is
very sincere.’
And Professor Speight:
‘ He saw through things to their cause, through deeds to
character, and went through life as a teacher of the rarest
and most memorable type. Yet despite all his sunny range
of sympathy, his quick and unfailing readiness of under-
standing, no one could be as strict a conserver of his own
will and of the ultimate secrets of his personality. Though
his heart was warm, no one was freer from sentimentality.
Brevity restrained, and wit made of his mind, a world of
well-ordered resolution. To India he gave himself with the
liberality of which there is but one word, sacrifice ; sacrifice
of the liberty of the artist which called him as alluringly as
to others, of the freedom of travel and the choice of work and
friends. But he put such longing away from him to serve
Islam, to conduct a large high school and to devote his
personal service to the ruler whose recognition and apprecia-
tion and friendship he valued beyond words.’
Two portraits exist of Marmaduke Pickthall, one painted
by Charlotte Lawrenson at the Towers, Worthing, in 1928,
and one by Gladstone Solomon. There is also a drawing by
Gwen Evans done in Hyderabad in 1933.
His was a unique life, full and yet lonely, lived dangerously
yet always enjoyed : a life in which thought and action
rhythmically alternated, in which outward ambition was
continually held in check by the secret inner vision of that
‘ other goal ’ which was the end of his faith. A curiously
blameless life, pure and self-controlled, without any of the
venial mundane faults that mar the holiness of a character.
Sweet-tempered, selfless, without pride and without jealousy,
he kept as nearly to the pattern of the saints as it is possible
for a writer, a journalist and a schoolmaster actively engaged
in his task. Had he changed from evangelical or even from


high church Anglicanism to the Roman faith, doubtless the
machinery of sanctification would have by now been set to
work. As it was, his sense of humour saved him from
priggishness or pomposity, from the ebullient and soporific,
somnolent beatitude which spreads like a corporation round
the middle years of so many of the blessed, and the continual
flow and movement of his mind saved him from fossilization.
How highly his admirers thought of him is well illustrated
by the fact that he constantly had to deny that he was the
schoolmaster in Mr. E. M. Forster’s A Passage to India ,
and by the following quotation from Mr. H. G. Wells’s
Boon :
‘ Fie hated to see a good work neglected and was for ever
ramming The Crystal Age and Said the Fisherman down the
throats of his visitors —such reputations as Pickthall’s,
W. H. Hudson’s, and the late Stephen Crane’s, reputations
ridiculously less than they ought to be, so that these writers,
who are certainly as securely classic as Beckford or Herrick,
are still unknown to half the educated English-reading
public.’
But of all the tributes ever made him I prefer, and think
he would have preferred, that of a cousin. Lamenting in a
letter to me that in his later years Marmaduke only came
home for funerals (home was a mausoleum, though, she
admitted cheerfully) she added, ‘ he was such good company
we all wanted to be in the same car to and from the grave.’




INDEX
A
Abingdon, Lord, 306
Acland, 240
Aga Khan, the, 287, 298, 306
Ali, Ameer, 298
Ali, Mehemet, 47
Ali, Mohammed, 234, 270, 297,
326, 333, 339, 360, 379) 384)
420, 422
Ali, Shaukat, 297, 300, 301,
314, 322, 326, 332, 333, 336,
339) 340) 360, 369, 375, 379,
384, 422
Allen, Lord of Hurtwood,
286
Allenby, Lord, 58, 327
Ampthill, Lord, 306
Andrews, C. F., 331
Arlen, Michael, 190
Armstrong, Vickers, 197
Armstrong, Whitworth, 240
Auden, W. H., 93
B
Baldenspergers, 57, 58, 64, 65,
66, 142
Barrie, J. M., 118, 129
Bartlett, Ashmead, 254
Bell, Gertrude, 35, 36, 55, 84,
166, 255
Bell, Sir Hugh, 254
Bennett, William, 69
Berar, Prince of, 424
Besant, Annie, 367
Bieberstein, Marshall von, 155
Blunt, Wilfred, 56, 234
Blythe, Bishop, 27, 58
Bower, Sir Graham, 306
Brelvi, Mr., 314, 329
Breszka, Gaudier, 190
Brooke, Rupert, 100
Browne, Professor E. G., 119,
186, 224, 228, 232, 270
Bryce, Lord, 240
Bunsen, Sir Maurice de, 274
Burton, Mrs., 46
Burton, Richard, 61
Bute, Lord, 373
G
Cambon, Paul, 154
Campbell, Mrs. Patrick, 259
Carnarvon, 2nd Earl of, 234
Casement, Sir Roger, 286
Cavell, Edith, 229
Chaplin, Charles, 265
Chesterton, G. K., 190
Chirol, Sir Valentine, 126,
249
Chotani, Mr., 324
Christian, Edward, 13
Christian, Fletcher, of the
Bounty , 13
Christie, Ellen Louisa, 9
Christie, Peter Charles, 11
Churchill, Winston, 20, 241
Clerk, Sir George, 271, 273
Cobbold, Lady Evelyn, 7, 257,
264
Colbert’s Schools, 37
Cole, G. D. H., 190
Constable, Publishers, 119
Cox, Sir Percy, 318


Crane, Stephen, 119
Crewe, Lord, 262
Cromer, Lady, 313
Cromer, Lord, 48, 124, 126,
127, 129, 133, 134, 144, 145,
149) 150, 152, 153
Currie, Sir Philip, 154
D
Dalcroze, Jacques, 93
Dawson, A. J., 118, 122
Denikin, General, 289
Dent, Publishers, 198, 231,
436
Despard, Mrs., 254
Dirac, Professor, 174
Djemal, Pasha, 196, 221,
243
Douglas, James, 118
Douglas Pennant, Hon. E.,
229
Dowling, Rev., 27, 28, 29, 33,
207
Drummond-Hay, 82
Duckworth, Publishers, 149
Dufferin, Lord, 73
E
Edward VII, King, 180
Eliot, T. S., 14
Enver, Pasha, 243, 251
Esher, Lord, 154
F
Farmer, John, 22
Fehmy, Mustapha Pasha, 123
Feisal, Emir, 268, 270
Field, Arthur, 171, 228, 230,
244, 257, 286, 292, 438
Fisher, Lord, 154, 188
Fibber Williams, Sir John,
247
Fitzmaurice, 182, 188, 238
Forster, E. M., 53, 54, 56, 68,
112, 129, 344, 441
Fox, Ralph, 229
Fremantle, Admiral, 366
Fuad, King, 407, 410
G
Galsworthy, John, 128
Gandhi, Mahatma, 297, 300,
3 OI > 3i4» 322, 324, 326, 331,
332, 333) 334) 335) 33 6 > 339)
340, 342, 350, 351, 353, 356,
357> 359) 360, 361, 366,
367) 372, 373) 374) 3®s)
387 .
Gauvain, Pasteur, 23
George, Lloyd, 192, 243, 246,
270) 297, 298, 302, 304, 306,
380
Gibbs, Sir Philip, 256
Gibson, 82
Giolitti, Signor, 184
Gleichen, Lord Edward, 306
Gobineau, Comte de, 86
Goltz, von der, 197
Gooch, G. P., 241
Gordon, Lady Duff, 126, 127,
135 note.
Gorst, Sir Eldon, 144, 152
Gouchon, Admiral, 251
Gounaris, M., 260
Graham, Cunninghame, 228,
• 254
Graves, Philip, 177, 178, 206
Graziani, General, 185
Grey, Sir Edward (later Earl
Grey), 185, 186, 190, 197,
226, 227, 236, 240, 241, 242,
256, 260
Griffiths, 189


Guinness, Hon. Walter (now
Lord Moyne), 228, 235
H
Haggard, Rider, 16
Hakki, Pasha, 198
Hale, Caroline, 27
Halim, Prince Said, 201, 202,
213
Hamid, Abdul, 177, 184, 205
Hanauer, Rev., 37, 39, 149,
*75
Hardie, Keir, 228
Hashimi, M., 402, 404, 422,
436
Hassan, Yakub, 307, 337
Hazim, Ebn Bekir, 187
Herbert, Aubrey, 7, 35, 126,
170, 177, 181 note, 188, 197,
201, 205, 212, 228, 230, 234,
235, 236, 238, 239, 249, 256,
286, 297, 302, 306, 310, 311,
3i3, 314, 3 X 5> 335, 376, 439
Hichens, Robert, 55
Hickes, T. W., 92, 94, 104, 105,
106, no, 113, 115, 117, 122,
150, 289
Hilmi, Pasha, 171, 204
Hollweg, Bethmann, 233
Holmboe, Knud, 56
Hornblower, George, 126, 149,
152, 176, 190, 296
Horniman, B* G., 314
Hossain, Dr. Syud, 314
Hrozny, 75
Huseyn, Emir, 268
Huth, Frederick & Co., 291
Hydari, the Rt. Hon. Sir
Akbar, 390, 422, 425, 432,
433
Hyderabad, H.E.H. Nizam of,
389, 390, 393, 394, 396, 397,
398, 408, 415, 420, 421, 424,
425, 427, 43L 432, 434, 435
I
Innes, Sir Charles, 437
Isherwood, 93
Izzet, Pasha, 142
J
Jackson, Holbrook, 190
James, Henry, 260
Jar Bahadur, Prince Azan, 426
Jar Bahadur, Prince Walashan
Muazzam, 426
Jar, Basalath, 427 et sequitur
John, Augustus, 190
Jung, Sir Nawab Ross Masood,
39°
Jung Bahadur, Nawab Sir
Nijamat, 438
K
Kaiser, the, 154
Kamal-ud-din, Kwaja, 296,
309
Karakash, 31, 32
Kelk, W. H., 28, 68, 69, 72, 82,
84, 105, 119
Kemal, Mustapha, 305, 306,
33°, 343, 357, 3®7, 4*7* 43 6
Kenway, Philip, 206
Kiamil, Pasha, 180, 182, 195,
221, 238
Kidwai, Sheykh Hosein, 298
King, Joseph, 334
Kitchener,.Field-Marshal Earl,
256,260
Koltchak, 289
Kruger, 154
L -
Lamington, Lord, 228, 306
Lane, John, Publishers, 106,
108, 113, 117


Lansbury, George, 190
Lawrence, D. H., 190
Lawrence, Colonel T. E., 35,
36, 37> 39> 47> 53, 55> 61,
134, 234, 262, 263, 264, 265,
266, 327
Lee, Vernon, 280
Leishman, 188
Lenin, Nicolai, 304
Lestrange, 82
Limpus, Admiral, 197, 240,
251
Lloyd, Lord, 126, 252, 309,
322, 329, 335, 340, 364, 379,
383, 388, 403, 405, 406, 407,
409, 420, 439
Lytton, Lord, 373
M
Macaulay, Rose, 258
MacDonald, Ramsay, 286, 287,
405
Machell, Captain, 257
Machell, Lady Valda, 58, 123,
126, 129, 134, 145, 148, 149,
150, 190, 211, 321, 322, 335,
339> 35 8 > 3 6 4> 3 6 7> 420, 423*
440
Maeterlinck, Maurice, 260
Marx, Karl, 101, 128, 228
Masterman, Canon, 226
Masterman, C. F., 242
Maugham, Somerset, 259
McMahon, Sir Henry, 262, 263
Methuen, Publishers, 117, 119
Midhat, Pasha, 205
Milne, Admiral, 250
Milner, Lord, 373
Mitchison, Naomi, 258
Montagu, M., 300 note, 315
Moore, George, 260
Moore, Leonard, 355, 386,389,
390, 400, 404, 420, 426
Morel, E. D., 287, 386
Morgan, Charles, 6
Morier, 118
Morison, Sir Theodore, 306
Mowbray & Stourton, Lord,
228, 254
Murray, Colonel Sir Malcolm,
338
Myers, L. H., 258
N
Naidu, M. de, 347, 360, 361
Nazaleh, Khanum, 201
Nazim, Pasha, 194
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 427
Nicholson, 186
Nilou Fer, Princess, 426
Noel-Buxton, Lord, 224
O
O’Brien, Admiral, 10
O’Brien, Hannah, 11, 190
O’Brien, Mary, 11
Orage, A. R., 190
Orsi, Donat, 23, 122
Ouspensky, P. W., 289
P
Pallavicini, 156
Pangiris, Bey, 201
Patel, V. J., 357, 360
Patrick, Rev. E., 17
Pember, Francis, 242
Philby, 264
Pickthall, Ann, 8
Pickthall, Charles Grayson, 8,
9, 10, 14
Pickthall, Rudolph George, 13,
14, 16, 19, 112, 113
Pickthall, Thomas, 8
Pickthall, Wallace, 8, 26


Pickthall, William, 8
Pinker, James 8., 117, 118
Poincare, 189 note.
Politis, Nicholas, 234
Poole, Stanley Lane, 119
Pound, Ezra, igo
R
Raffalovich, George, 190, 197,
256
Rai, Lala Lajput, 323
Rashleigh, George, 114
Raven, Dr. J. J., 14
Reading, Lord, 347, 350, 397,
421
Rendall, Vernon, 118, 120
Reshad, Muhammad, 177
Rifaat, Bey, 201, 202, 204, 207,
208, 211, 212, 215, 258
Robinson, F. 8., 24
Roosevelt, Theodore, 144
Rosedale, Dr., 258, 270, 274
Rotti, Dr., 66
Russell, Earl, 241, 285
Ryder, C. F., 228, 254, 258
S
Salisbury, Lord, 154, 185
Sanders, General Liman von,
197
Sa’ud, Ibn, 269, 407
Schreiner, Olive, 103
Shaw, Bernard, 141, 259, 285
Shevkat, Mahmud, 181, 195,
196, 202, 212, 219, 360
Shewar, Princess Durru, 424,
434
Simon, Sir John, 233
Sinha, Lord, 318
Smith, Fatty, 25
Smith, Muriel, 25, 28, 92
Smuts, General, 263, 264
Snowden, Philip, 287
Sobhani, Omar, 313
Solomon, Captain Gladstone,
329, 37°> 3 8 8, 440
Sorel, Albert, 191
Speight, Professor, 390, 395,
398
Spencer, C. F., 237 note.
Spoor, Ben, 334
Squire, Sir John, 190
Storrs, Sir Ronald, 39, 265,
266
Suleyman, 39, 40, 58, 69, 82,
86
Surtees, General Conyer, 306
Swan, Sonnenschein, no
Sykes, George, 246
Sykes, Sir Mark, 58, 126, 151,
152, 191, 229, 235, 246, 256,
271, 272, 273, 274, 276, 277,
278, 284, 285, 439
T
Tairsee, Lakhmidas, 345, 351,
372
Talaat, Pasha, 155, 221, 227,
238, 346
Tearle, Godfrey, 259
Temperley, 241
Thomas, Ivor, 197, 233
Tree, Sir Herbert, 259
Trench, Sir Richard, 399,
435
Trevelyan, Charles, 287
Trevelyan, G. M., 242
Tsar, the late, 154
V
Valyi, 270, 272, 273, 274, 275,
276, 277, 278
Vanbrugh, Irene, 259
Venizelos, 260, 304


W
Walker, 82
Walker, Colonel Norman, 394
Waller, H. P., 25
Wallis, 206
Webb, Sidney, 254
Welldon, Bishop, 105
Wells, H. G., 118, 129, 253
note, 441
Whyte, Sir F., 336, 367
Willingdon, Lady, 431, 432,
433
Willingdon, Lord, 431, 432,
433
Wilmore, J. S., 62
Wilson, Sir Leslie, 383
Wilson, President, 298
Winckler, 75
Winstanley, Gerrard, 77
Worsley, Catherine, 68, 69, 75
Wiistli, Fraulein, 16


Hutchinson ' s
IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
BIOGRAPHY & MEMOIRS
The Tragedy of Errors
J r n these entertaining reminiscences of an Austrian diplomat a vivid
picture is presented of the country from the downfall of Imperial
Austria to its disappearance. Demy B vo. Illustrated, i ss.
b COUNT HANS HUYN
In the Chair
rhe “Daily Telegraph” said of “My Melodious Memories”: “There
are 296 pages in this hook. At a conservative estimate one would
say there were 300 good stories , not to mention the ‘ mots 9 in which
Mr. Herman Finch , that irrepressible punster , indulges himself at all
times and in all places.”
The “irrepressible” punster has written another volume of attractive
and entertaining reminiscences which will undoubtedly please all those
readers of “My Melodious Memories” and gain the author many new
admirers. Targe Demy. Illustrated. iBj.
b HERMAN FINCK
Author of My Melodious Memories
Reminiscences
Archie de Bear has many amusing stories to tell of his ups and
in the variety show world of which he naturally has a very
wide experience. Associated with such well-known productions
as “The Co-ops ”, “R.S.V'.P.”, and “The Punch Bowl”, he has given
the most intriguing pen-pictures of the men and ivomeji connected with his
productions. Demy. Illustrated. 15« r.
* ARCHIE DE BEAR
Loyal Enemy
“T oyalEnemy” is the life of Marmaduke Pickthall (1875-1936), a
L-Jpicaresque Paladin who lived and travelled in Turkey , Syria,
Egypt, and India, a hero and saint of Islam.
The hero of this stirring life-story was a great personal friend of the
author’s , and she was requested to write this book by his widow.
Demy 8 vo. Frontispiece, ioj. 6d.
b ANNE FREMANTLE
Author of Wynne Diaries , George Eliot
All prices In this catalogue are provisional and subject to alteration „


A Magistrate’s Memories
rbe author of this intensely human and fascinating book, whose death
occurred recently, was famous as a magistrate of the widest and most
varied experience.
His book is full of stories, grave and gay, of the hundreds of cases with
which he has had to deal. Demy. About io s. 6d.
h J. G. HAY HALKETT
A Pioneer Looks Back
]\/fr. Taylor’s interesting reminiscences reflect a fine and engaging
1 impersonality. Blessed with a great capacity for enjoyment, he was
one of the few to be able to cast the lure of money-making behind
him. His book is liberally sprinkled with anecdotes and experiences of
pioneer days in South Africa and sporting days in England.
Targe Demy. 26 Illustrations. 18 s.
b J. B. TAYLOR
TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE
Happy Countries
]\/fr. Buckley claims, among his various accomplishments, to have
IVL been round the world five times, visiting practically every country,
and to have written three widely read travel books.
In these new travel experiences of Denmark, Sweden, Finland, and
Norway, Mr. Buckley does not aspire to cover all aspects of these countries.
His book is simply a fascinating and racily written record of a 5 ,000-mile
motor tour through Scandinavia.
Beautifully illustrated. Demy B vo. 1 is. 6d.
h V. C. BUCKLEY
Author of Stop and Go, With a Passport and Two Eyes
Brass Hats and Bell-Bottomed Trousers
rhis is an exciting, painstakingaccount of the dangerous work done by
the Harwich Patrol during the war. From official despatches and
stories from the men concerned the author has built up an important
and thrilling document. Demy B vo. Illustrated. 10 s. (sd.
h WILLIAM GUY CARR
Author of By Guess and By God (5 5 th tbous.), High and Dry
All prices in this catalogue are provisional and subject to alteration


Shadows on the Baltic
Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, //7/y agricultural republics of little
economic importance, are nevertheless the new powder-kegs of
Europe. It is more than likely that these countries will shortly
be in the news and in this story of a journey it is possible to get a very clear
picture of the Baltic countries and their people and customs.
Demy B vo. Illustrated, i is. 6d.
b REX HARDINGE
Author of Three Rounds Rapid, etc.
Pahang
The Saga of a Rubber Planter in the Malay Jungle
“ ]\/fad Yank” is what the Englishmen in Singapore called the young
d-' American who landed there in search of adventure with $1.40 in
his pockets, and, thanks to his good marksmanship and some
experience in handling men, within a week found a job as manager of a
rubber plantation in Pahang, on the Malay Peninsula.
His experiences on this plantation and, later, as manager of two others
in northern Jahore and on the Straits of Sumatra, make a powerful and
exciting story. He makes one feel the %est, the thrill—often the shiver—
of his hairbreadth escapes from tigers, elephants, pythons, cobras, and
other denizens of the jungle. Demy B vo. ios. 6d.
b W. C. BUSH
Germany Invites
Christopher Sidgwick has been widely praised for his two excel-
lent books on European travel. He has an eye for the picturesque
and the unusual, and it is this quality which will raise this book
far above the common order of guide books. It will be a source of
delight and invaluable help to the discerning traveller. 6 3 Illustrations. ss.
b CHRISTOPHER SIDGWICK
Author of German Journey, Whirlpools on the Danube
MISCELLANEOUS
The Russian Trials
JJ/falter Duranty, famous correspondent of “The New York Times”
vV and the most experienced of all Moscow correspondents, is writing a
vivid, colourful, and personal account of the Moscow Trials from
1921 to 1938. It would be impossible for the author of that entrancing
and widely read book, “I Write as I Please”, to write a dull line, and in this
important book past dramas of Soviet law live again. Demy 8 vo. \os. 6d.
b WALTER DURANTY
Author of I Write as I Please
All prices in this catalogue are provisional and subject to alteration .


The Things They Didn’t Tell Me
A humorous collection of subjects which the author suggests were
l-omitted from her education. Illustrated. About 6s.
b MARY MILLER
South of the Water
rhis is one of the most remarkable books ever written by a parson , and
willy we thinky become a “best-sellerlt is the true and frank
account of the author's life and work among the poor, not only in the
Waterloo Road , but at Woolwich. There has been no book like it since
Hugh Redwood’s famous “God in the Slums". Crown ivo. About 6s.
b THE REV. C. W. HUTCHINSON
(Vicar of Si. John’s, Waterloo Road )
Can You Write Magazine Stories?
l\/fr. Williamson is "Editor of “The Writer ” and has written many
JLVx books on the art of the short story and the writing of English in
general. In this new volume he deals clearly and succinctly with
the question of writing magazine stories and the problem of marketing
them. It is a book invaluable to every aspiring author.
Crown 8 vo. 4 s. 6d.
b KENNEDY WILLIAMSON, M.A.
Prefact by CLARENCE WINCHESTER, Editor of the Argosy Magazine, etc.
Young England
T'his is a book about Youth in Politics. It has been written by a
young Tory , who prefers the word Tory to Conservative because it
reminds him that Toryism is rebellious as well as tranquil. He
appeals to young people, particularly young Tories, to study the basis of
their Toryism, to remember that Toryism is not the politics of the
“status quo ”, but the restoration of progress through tradition, which
tradition is being destroyed by Eeft educators. Demy B vo. 8/. 6d.
b H. W. J. EDWARDS
All prices In this catalogue are provisional and subject to alteration




