

Lubrication between the Piston
Rings and Cylinder Wall of a
Running Engine
COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
BULLETIN NO. 179
J. S. COURTNEY-B.E., AND G. K. TUDOR B.E.
(Section of Lubricants and Bearings)
MELBOURNE, 1944
Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission by post as a Periodical,
C. 1760/44.
H. E. Daw, Government Printer, Melbourne.


War time economy requires
reduction in the Council's expenditure
on publication. It is hoped that the
adoption of the photo-lithographic pro-
cess will be for a brief period only.


CONTENTS.
Page
Summary
I. INTRODUCTION .. .. .. 5
11. GENERAL DISCUSSION OP THEORY .. .. 6
111. MEASUREMENT OP CONTACT RESISTANCE -
1. Electrical Arrangement .. .. 8
2. The Engine .. . „ .. n
3. Lubricating System .. .. 12
IV. RESULTS -
1. Reproducibility (4 12
2. The Effect of Running the Engine .. 13
3. The Effect of Compression .. 1h
4. The Effect of Variation of Speed 14
5. The Effect of Variation of the Quantity
Oil .. .. ./ 15
6. The Effect of Oil Viscosity .. 15
7. The Effect of Oil Temperature 16
V. DISCUSSION -
1. Reproducibility ... ~ 17
2. The Effect of Running the Engine .. 18
3. The Effect of Compression .. 18
4. The Effect of Variation of Speed .. 19
5. The Effect of Variation of the Quantity
of Oil .. .. .. 20
6. The Effect of Oil Viscosity .. 20
7. The Effect of Oil Temperature .. 21
VI. CONCLUSION .. .. .. 22
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .. .. .. 24
VIII. REFERENCES .. .. 24


SUMMARY.
A method is described for the visual study of the
conditions of lubrication which exist between a piston
ring and the cylinder wall of a running engine. The
observations give definite information on problems of
lubrication and abrasive wear of the surfaces, and indicate
the primary importance of the boundary properties of the
lubricant.
In this method the variation of electrical conduct-
ivity between the moving surfaces is examined with a cathode
ray oscillograph, and the analyses interpreted in terms of
the quality of the lubrication. Results indicate that,
with the oils used, the surfaces of the piston ring and the
cylinder wall are not separated by a continuous oil film
throughout the entire cycle. Intermittent breakdown of
the oil film occurs to a varying degree under all circum-
stances, even using oils much heavier than are common in
automobile practice. The method confirms the improvement
in lubrication expected with increase of engine speed, or
with increase of viscosity. The effects of gas pressure
behind the rings are shown to be small, at least with the
low brake mean effective pressure in the particular engine
studied. A marked deterioration in the quality of the
lubrication accompanies any increase in the temperature of
the oil film on the cylinder wall, greater deterioration
than can be accounted for simply by the decrease of viscosity
due to the temperature rise. The chief value of the whole
method of analysis lies in the rapidity with which results
may be obtained as compared with conventional wear tests.


Lubrication between the Piston
Rings and Cylinder Wall of a
Running Engine *
I. INTRODUCTION.
Comparatively little is known of the detailed conditions
of lubrication which pxist between the piston rings and
cylinder wall of a running engine. in general the aim is to
establish fluid lubrication, i.e., to maintain a liquid oil
film of sensible thickness between the moving surfaces. If
this is achieved the resistance to motion is determined by
the viscous resistance of the lubricant, and the abrasive
wear on the surfaces will be negligibly small. Under many
practical conditions it is unfortunately not possible to
maintain this state of fluid lubrication, and the wearing
surfaces are separated only by a thin "boundary layer" (Hardy,
193°)» It has been shown that even under good conditions
of boundary lubrication the film does not afford complete
protection to the surfaces (Bowden & Tabor, 1939). Local
breakdown of the film occurs at the summits of the surface
irregularities and metallic contact takes place through the
film. It is over these small areas of contact that abrasive
wear occurs. As Bowden and Tabor have shown, the extent of
the breakdown and the actual area of contact between the
metallic surfaces can be estimated from a measurement of the
electrical conductivity between them.
Prom the work of C.G. Williams (1940) it is apparent
that cylinder wear may be conveniently considered under two
main headings:
1• Abrasive wear, i.e., the wear due almost exclusively
to the relative motion of parts concerned.
2. Corrosive wear, i.e. , the wear caused primarily by
the chemicalaction of the products of combustion on the
surfaces' subject to mechanical scouring.
The great importance of corrosive wear has been clearly
established by the extensive work of Williams, who has put
forward suggestions for combating the conditions leading to
this type of wsar. However, in many instances abrasive wear
is the predominant factor, particularly in engines which are
not frequently stopped and started. Williams states that
the’ distribution of wear along the cylinder bore is now
usually assumed to indicate that the bulk of cylinder wear
is caused by the piston rings and that it occurs in the
absence of adequate lubrication. The wear of the cylinder
bore is almost entirely confined to the ring track with
maximum wear occurring at the top of the track. It is
proposed here to discuss abrasive wear; work has been
undertaken in an endeavour to show the effect produced by
varying such factors as rubbing speed, amount of oil,
viscosity, and temperature, which influence the breakdown
of the lubricant film.
* Typescript received December 7, 1943.


It is manifestly impossible to produce abrasive wear
between two moving surfaces if they are at all times com-
pletely separated by a film of oil; conversely wear will
take place if there is metallic contact either occasional
or continuous. It was therefore considered that more in-
sight could be gained concerning the fundamental nature of
abrasive wear by studying the instantaneous variation of
metallic contact, rather than by making direct measurements
of average rates of wear. The usual method of Investigating
the breakdown of the lubricant film is to run a test engine
for a considerable period of time, the wear of piston rings
being measured by the loss of weight, that of the cylinder
liner by increase of diameter or estimates made by ascertain-
ing the extent of the contamination of the lubricant. This
means of measuring wear is troublesome and, because of the
large number of factors which influence wear, frequently
gives an indefinite answer.
The experimental method used here consists essentially
of an analysis of the electrical conductivity across the
oil film between the moving piston ring and the cylinder
wall. If the conditions are those of fluid lubrication,
the electrical resistance will be very high, if, however,
the film breaks down and metallic contact occurs between
the moving surfaces, the resistance will fall to a low value.
The resistance is measured on a cathode ray oscillograph
which may be synchronized with the stroke of the engine and
which is capable of recording very rapid changes of resist-
ance (changes occurring in 100 microseconds), so that the
lubricating conditions can be analysed in considerabl > detail
at all stages of the cycle. The use of this method gives
more detailed and, in many cases, more definite information
on lubrication problems. The experiments should, where
possible, be backed up by the more standard wear tests on
running engines. There is good correlation between the
results obtained by this method and those from the more
laborious processes of measuring actual cylinder wear.
So far the experiments have been carried out on a small
single-cylinder engine of low horse-power, but the method
could without serious difficulty be applied to most engines.
II. GENERAL DISCUSSION OF THEORY.
The area of contact between stationary and between moving
surfaces, and the information that can be gained by a measure-
ment of the electrical conductivity between them, have been
studied in some detail by Bowden and Tabor (1939;.
When two "plane" surfaces are placed together, the area
of intimate contact must be very much less than the apparent
area. Even if the surfaces are carefully polished and are
made as flat as possible, slight irregularities will still be
present on the surface and large areas will be separated by
distances which are large compared with the dimensions of a
molecule. If two large metallic conductors make contact
over a small area of their surface, a current flowing between
them is concentrated into this region. This constriction of
the current stream introduces a "spreading resistance", the
value of which depends only upon the area of contact and the
specific conductivities. This case has been considered by
Maxwell (1873) and later by Holm (1929). If two similar
conductors make contact over a circular region of radius a,


the electrical conductance Aof the junction may be written
to a first approximation:- . 0 .
j\. « c.OiK t
where \ is the specific conductivity of the material.
The conductivity between the surfaces, therefore,
depends primarily on the number of points of contact and
their areas. With a large amount of metallic contact the
conductivity is high and the electrical resistance between
the moving parts will be small. Again, with little or nc
metallic contact the electrical resistance will be high.
In Part 111, the method of measuring the resistance
is described. The potential drop across the gap between
the piston rings and cylinder wall is used as the means of
studying the variation in resistance. With this arrangement,
it is obviously necessary to know if the form of the current-
voltage relationship for the metallic junction between moving
parts is linear, as would be the case if Ohm’s Law were
strictly applicable. A typical current—voltage curve for
the contact between the moving piston ring and the cylinder
wall is shown in Pig.l. Prom the shape of this curve it is
evident that, up to some point, the ohmic relation between
the current and voltage holds good, but with the application
of a higher voltage across the film, the resistance falls off,
with the result that the slope of the curve increases and
finally becomes negative.
The general form of the curve is very similar to the
current-voltage curve for the electrical breakdown of certain
solid dielectrics for which Wagner (1922) has advanced a
theory depending on the negative resistance-temperature
coefficient of, the dielectric. Other theories have been put
forward, but for the purpose of studying the variation in
contact resistance from the potential drop across the oil
film, it is only necessary to work with voltages within the
limits of the linear relationship.
In general, for the various oils and the piston rings
used in the test, engine, the upper limit of the linear range
is in the region of 0.4 volt, even under the most unfavourable
conditions of temperature, engine speed, etc. Using voltages
up to 0.2 volt, satisfactory operation ie obtained, and the
rather obscure effect of electrical breakdown of the oil film
is not encountered.
Fig. 1.


III. MEASUREMENT OF CONTACT BESISTANCE.
1. Electrical Arrangement.
It was proposed to study the nature of the lubricatioi
between a piston ring and the cylinder wall by measuring
the amount of metallic contact that occurs when running
under different operating conditions. The amount of
metallic contact, as pointed out in the introduction, can
be estimated from the value of the electrical contact
resistance, which varies between very wide limits.
Of the several methods that are available for measuring
resistance the most suitable appeared to be a modification
of the 'potential drop' method, i.e., a voltage is applied
across a resistance Rq placed in series with the unknown
contact resistance R x . R x fluctuates very rapidly, and it
was found best to use a constant value of Rq for any
particular measurements, and obtain a calibration of the
voltage drop by substitution of standard resistances, Rq.
As has been shown in Part 11, the value of the
voltage drop across the oil film must be such that there is
no possibility of electrical breakdown of the oil film (a
value of 0.2 volt has been found satisfactory). The voltage
drop across the oil film may be kept within this limit either
by using a total applied voltage of 0.2 volt, obtained from
a 2 volt accumulator and a low resistance potential divider;
or, where the ratio of series resistance to contact resistance
is sufficiently high, the value of the voltage drop is
naturally limited and the full 2 volts may be used for the
applied voltage.
Fig. 2.
RB = Series resistance in leads to piston ring including
internal resistance of battery.
RA = Series resistance in leads to resistance box and
including internal resistance of battery.
RX = Unknown contact resistance.
R S = Standard resistance.
V = Applied voltage.
V1 = Potential drop across resistance R X.
V2 = Potential drop across resistance R S.


Prom Pig. 2 it is obvious -
U) When current is flowing through fig and By
current m y
+ %X
potential drop 7 1 * Rx
Rb +Rx V
( i;l ) When current is flowing through R A and Rq
current = V
A + B S
potential drop V 2 Rs
r A +R S
For equal readings of the voltage measuring device.
V-\ » V>>
i « R X B S
• %+ % « !SJTT£
i 6 Rx B s
a• o# | ' m v"
Rb
Two single—pole multi—throw switches were used so that
3 A .and R B could each take a number of values so arranged that
Rb/Ra was some simple power of 10 (say 10®“^).
The resistance scale could then be calibrated directly in
ohms from Rq and any value of R x sirrply read off as fig X 10®“^.
As rapid fluctuations of the resistance had to be measured,
it was decided to use cathode ray apparatus. The potential
drops ,V 2 were amplified in a 3-stage push-pull direct-
coupled amplifier of high impedance input. The output of thiß
amplifier was fed directly to the 'vertical* deflecting plates
of a DuMont cathode ray tube type 54-XH (2511C5) mounted in
the DuMont assembly type 168*.
With this arrangement a given standard resistance fig
produced a deflexion on the screen governed by the gain
control of the amplifier. A resistance, fi x , which produced
the same deflexion on the screen with the same gain control
setting, had therefore a value a fig X 10 s ***. Pig. 3 shows
the switching arrangements for varying R&, fig etc., and
connecting the potential leads to the amplifier.
In practice, the value of r a was usually 500 ohms and
the lengths of all leads in the calibrating circuit were small
and fixed in value as the circuit was wired up permanently;
fi£, on the other hand, was varied from 5 X 10* ohms to 0.5
ohm, and particularly at the two lowest settings the resist-
ance of the leads to the engine was comparable with fig* An
internal checking switch was included to feed to the input of
the amplifier the potential drop through the resistance box,
or through the leads and the resistances which together make
up Rb* provided the current leads were shorted together at
the engine end.
To study the variation of R x with time, the horizontally
7 More recent work has been undertaken using the improved DuMont Cathode
Ray Oscillograph Type 208 and an amplifier of higher frequency response
than that used in the original experiments. There was, however, no
significant difference in the results obtained.


S1 = s.p.d.t. Battery Switch
S2 = p.d.t. Calibration Switch
S 3 = s.p.d.t. Checking Leads Res.
S4 = s.p.6.t. Varying RA
S5 = s.p.8.t. Varying RB
R1 = R7 = 5. 10⁶ ohms
R2 = R8 = 5. 10⁵ ohms
R3 = R9 = 5. 10⁴ ohms
R4 = R1 0= 5. 10³ ohms
R5 = R11 = 5. 10² ohms
R6 = R12 = 50 ohms
R13 = 2.5 ohms
R14 = Zero
P1 = 0-4 ohms
Fig. 3 - Switching Arrangements for Measuring
Contact Resistance.
deflecting plates of the cathode ray tube were fed with a
’saw-tooth’ voltage wave arranged to run either at any desired
speed or synchronized with the engine speed. For unsynchro-
nized running, the triggering of the time base wave was by
means of the usual thynatron or trlode gas discharge tube;
and for synchronized running, a slowly filling condenser was
discharged by a mechanical contact breaker. The amplitude of
the base was controlled by the value of either the condenser
or the filling resistance. Linearity of sweep was maintained
by amplifying the voltage across the condenser sufficiently to
produce full screen deflexion for only a few volts. The
current in the filling resistance was then almost constant
for any horizontal deflexion. The circuit of the synchronized
time base is shown in Fig.h.
C1 = 2.5 microfarads
C2 = 0.5 microfarads
C3 = 0.1 microfarads
C4 = 0.02 microfarads
C5 = 0.004 microfarads
S1 = Single-pole Single-throw Switch for Battery
S 2 = Single-pole Five-throw Switch for Coarse Timing
P1 = 0-10⁶ ohms for Fine Timing
R1 = 10⁵ ohms
R2 = 10² ohms
Pig. 4 - Synchronized Time Base Circuit.


Occasionally it was required to investigate the reeiRt-
St S ? m ® partlcular Portion of the cycle. The
mechanical interruptor, which starts the time sweep as it
thS 11 ?! could be rotated to any desired angular setting. Thus
fl«oa t i me + 8Weep ? ould be arranged to start say 10° before top
+h! ntre ; Approximately 300° later the contacts closed
and the spot would be rapidly returned to the starting
en tioned before, the sweep speed could then
be adjusted until the trace had a convenient horizontal
amplitude.
.. A ™o ee £ ?P oe £ 10 times as fast would extend the
first 30 of the trace after starting to a full screen
A method was desired for accurate
time marking with these fast time bases.
A disc, with slots in the circumference every 2°. was
a tached to the shaft of the engine, a knife-edged permanent
maghet was placed near the periphery of this disc, and the
m ?S net i c due to the air gaps produced weak
electrical impulses in a coil wound round the magnet. These
+u eS -, were and fed to a time marking circuit,
t nal out Put of which was applied to the grid of the
cathode ray tube. The sharp negative impulse (of about 150
volts), occurring every 2° of rotation of the shaft, produces
a non-luminous break in the cathode ray trace.
With each combination of operating conditions, a number
of photographs of the trace were taken on 35 mm. film. The
camera was a General Radio Model (f.2.5) fitted with an '
external shutter. The speed of shutter was adjusted manually
to equal, the time of sweep of the spot across the cathode ray
screen. Mostly, of course, the picture is really the latter
part of one cycle and the early part of the next but this is
of no real consequence.
In Plate 8 is shown the general arrangement of the
set-up. Figs. A1, B1, F30, Fh4, of Plates 1A, 1B, 4C, 4E,
respectively are typical examples of resistance calibrations.
Figs. F45, F2+6 of Plate l+E start 10° before top dead centre
and continue for 300°. Figs. E28, E29 of Plate 3D show the
broken trace mentioned above.
2. The Engine.
To facilitate accurate control of the operating conditions,
a single-cylinder water-cooled engine (2% in. bore and 3£ in.
stroke) was directly coupled to a direct-current generator
mounted as a dynamometer. The generator could also be used to
motor the engine, power being supplied from a Ward-Leonard
controlled motor-generator set. Both inlet and exhaust valves
were operated by cams and push rods. For releasing compression
a spring-loaded poppet valve, located in the cylinder head,
could be depressed by a hand lever. Plate 9 is a view of
the engine and dynamometer.
Coolant for the cylinder head and for the jacket was fed
through separate supply pipes from a tank fitted with both
electric heating elements and water coolers. The temperature
of the coolant was controlled by a photo-electric thermostat
actuated from a thermocouple. The latter was embedded in the
cylinder wall about £ in. from the top of the liner and 1/32 in.
below the surface; thus the temperature of the metal very
near the working surface was maintained constant with a differ-
ential of about 1°C., irrespective of temperature gradients in
the metal or between jacket and coolant.


Standard commercial piston rings were used. Two
compression rings 1/8 in. wide and an oil scraper ring
were all located above the gudgeon pin. The piston was
specially designed with the sectfbn immediately around the
groove for the lower compression ring insulated from the
rest of the piston. Two insulated leads, passing through
holes in the piston ring groove, were fastened to the
inner surface of the compression ring in this groove. The
leads were strapped to the connecting rod, and led away
from its lower end along a scissors link motion to the bottom
of the crankcase.
The materials for the leads from the piston needed to
be flexible and to have-a high fatigue limit. Satisfactory
results were obtained by using a commercial insulated wire
consisting of 10 strands of 34 S.W.G. tinned hard-drawn
copper covered with a lacquered woven fabric*. The overall
diameter was only 0.080 in.
3. Lubricating System,
To minimize external contamination of the oil supplied
to the cylinder, the oiling systems for the cylinder and
connecting rod, and for the rest of the engine, were kept
separate.
In the early experiments it was decided to work with as
nearly ideal lubrication as possible with regard to the
quantity of oil supplied to the rubbing surfaces. A copious
stream of oil was directed on to the lower parts of the
cylinder* wall from four 1/16 in. diameter holes drilled at
right angles to the sloping faces of a four sided pyramid.
Oil was delivered to the jets by a Vauxhall-14 gear
pump driven by a £ H.P. motor at 1450 r.p.m. The pressure
in the pipe at a point just before the jets was normally
higher than 50 lb. per square inch - considerably so with
thicker oils.
Ab with this set-up there wa3 always ample oil present,
the exact quantity was relatively unimportant.
The main supply tank was mounted at a lower level than
the crankcase of the epgine. immersion heaters and a water
cooling tube provided for the control of the oil temperature
in the tank.
Sight feed lubricators were used for the two main crank-
shaft bearings and for all timing and valve gear. From these
parts the oil was drained to a separate sump, oil seals
preventing it from entering the crankcase.
IV. RESULTS.
1. Reproducibility,
The first thing of importance to consider was the re-
producibility of results. The cathode ray trace for successive
cycles usually is almost identical - see Pigs. A2-Al2. A2-A5
are taken all within about 15 seconds, A 6 and A 7 are of the
same experiment but one minute later - slightly different but
* Manufactured by Lenz Electric Manufacturing Co,, Chicago, Illinois.
Trade Name - "Lenzac".


roughly indicating the same degree of contact. AB-Al 2 are
from a similar run the next day - showing a slightly greater
degree of divergence. Al-Al2 are examples of steady g running
where the picture on the screen remains fairly stable in
general shape, having only a slow and small drift with time
®J-B8 are for different conditions (different oil at
tem P eratur6 311(1 speed) where the trace is less re-
producible oyer periods of a few minutes. 86-B8 are a return
thfaLf«na?flonB 1 °°° r - P -“- f ° r flVe mlnutes > to
This last set of pictures is typical of those cases where
even approximately exact reproducibility is extremely difficult
to obtain. Howeyer, by always considering a series of pictures
S h^ e^ lB ?i at^ traCe , 8 » 6Ven With thlB de S ree of divergence,
the trend of alteration, when operating factors are varied, can
easily be seen. *
.. Sometimes, especially with slow engine speeds and when
tne time base is not synchronized with the movement of the
crankshaft, the trace on the screen is most unstable, being at
the top, bottom, or violently oscillating, all within a very
short time. However, the instability of this type of trace
is reproducible, just as was the stability of the others.
Figs. C2-C9 and CIO-CII4. are examples of this instability. For
good predictions a large number of photographs must be examined
for each combination of operating conditions. It is also
obvious that control traces sandwiched between test runs are
of great value.
2. The Effect of Running the Engine.
Although several pictures were taken for each combination
of conditions, only one is shown in this and most succeeding
sections. The one chosen was as nearly typical of the set
as could be selected. In order to demonstrate the applic-
ability of the results obtained when motoring the engine, to
the case of an engine running under its own power, runs were
made with the engine firing on petrol. Two methods were used
to obtain control pictures under similar circumstances except
for the explosions. The first was merely to switch off the
ignition and the second to open the poppet relief valve in
the cylinder head. In either case, when the driving power
was removed, the speed dropped so quickly that the deteriora-
tion in lubrication from speed change masked any effect due
to alteration of gas pressure. It was easier to get comparable
speeds by motoring the engine electrically at the desired r.p.m.
and then switching the ignition on, or closing the compression
relief valve. The motor would then pick up speed sufficiently
slowly.
D 2 is a typical trace taken with compression but without
explosion, and it is almost identical with D 3, for which
there was an explosion. D 5 at 500 r.p.m, was taken without
compression, and for d 6 an explosion occurred. D 8 at 1000
r.p.m. (calibration Dh) similarly had no compression, and
D 7 and D 9, taken before and after, were for explosion strokes.
Dl-D9 sho?/ quite clearly that there is a slight deterioration
in lubrication when the engine runs under its own power. This
is, however, no more than would be accounted for by the increase
in gas pressure, as discussed in the following section.
In these tests the top compression ring had been
so that the ring under examination was subjected to the same
order of pressure as the normal top ring of an engine. If
the top ring was replaced the small effect due to gas pressure
behind the ring was even less noticeable. On the other hand,


many modern engines have higher brake mean effective pressures
and higher explosion pressures than the test engine, and the
effect would, in all probability, be more marked.
3. The Effect of Compression.
As it is generally assumed that compression gives rise
to pressure behind the rings, expanding them against the
cylinder wall and increasing the wear, it was decided to
investigate the electrical contact resistance when motoring
the engine with and without compression. The first run
was done with both compression rings in the piston, and
resistance variations measured for the lower ring. E2-E4
are with compression and E6-E8 are at corresponding speeds
without. There is at each speed a slight but definite
deterioration in the lubrication with compression. In the
next run the top piston ring was removed to reduce the
pressure drop between the top of the piston and the ring on
which measurements were being made. ElO-El2 and El4-El7 are
with compression, and El 9-2 1, E23-E26 are without. Here
again there is a similar deterioration with increased
pressure. Two factors tend to decrease the magnitude of
the shift of the trace on the cathode ray screen. One is
that there is considerable pressure leakage from behind the
ring along the holes through which the current and potential
leads are taken. Secondly, compression occurs only for a
small part of every alternate cycle. More information could
be obtained by examining the of the revolution about top
dead centre. This was attempted in a later experiment after
a new ring had been fitted, see Pigs, E27-E29. E2B is the
trace from 10° before T.D.C. to 10 tt after, for two successive
revolutions, one of which will therefore include a compression
stroke. E 29 is a typical example when the compression was
relieved by means of the hand-operated poppet valve in the
cylinder head. The breaks in the lines are at intervals of
2 . The lower trace of E2B is thus due to the effects of
whatever extra pressure there was behind the ring.
4. The Effect of Variation of Speed.
An examination of the four seta of pictures (Fl-F6,
F7-Fll, Fl2-FlB, Fl9-F23) shows very clearly that, at this
temperature and with this oil, the lubrication improves with
increase of speed. The electrical contact resistance is
considerably higher for higher speeds, whatever calibration
range is used. In Fl-F6, for example, the resistance remains
for a progressively longer time above 10 ohms as the speed
rises. The same thing is observed in Pigs. Fl9-F23, where
the conditions are slightly different in that the oil pump
pressure is higher, so that more oil is,supplied to the
cylinder. Figs. F7-Fll show that there is a similar rise for
those parts of the cycle where the resistance is between 0.2
and 3 ohms, and Pl2-FlB also show a rise in the low resistance
parts of the cycle.
This shift with speed is more easily comprehended when
we consider that the forces extending the ring against the
cylinder wall are almost independent of engine speed (they
do not at all increase as the square of the speed, as do, for
example, the piston inertia forces). With a given viscosity
of oil, the fluid film is more easily maintained at higher
relative speeds for the same load. F24-F29 show a veri-
similar rise with speed for a different oil (G 926) of about
the same viscosity (462 centistokes at 25° c »)» and so do
F3O-Fjs3, which, however, are for a much thinner oil (G 913
at 20 b C. viscosity « 35 cs.).


Qc°r> Pi ? S * record the behaviour of the oil G 926 at
■cm C# ** haB a viscosity comparable to the last (17 cs 1
Pigs. P4O-P43 show the behaviour of oil G 913 at 70V when
the viscosity is only 5.15 cs. All these fibres shSw a
f«SJ r S^ e f era ? lanCe + J° ° ne another and ail illustrate the
same effect, i.e., the improvement of lubrication with speed
tVhen the oils are hot the improvement is not so
great. The lubrication is also much worse for thin and hot
d S f e 8e f J fclons 6 and 7 for the effects of tempera-
ture and viscosity on the lubrication).
out tETcyflF" ° n Lubrlcatlop of the Speed Variation through-
A different illustration of the same effect with variation
of speed can be seen in F44-F46 which show the variation of
contact resistance during one revolution with particular
t 0 th ® J; nc * dence of top and bottom dead centres.
Arounu these points the speed is low and, here too, the con-
tact resistance is at its lowest for the cycle. This type of
cydical variation is borne out at almost all times and can be
seen wherever the trace includes top or bottom dead centres.
However, because the oil is sprayed directly on to the lower
+ of * he cylinoer, its abundance there tends to mask the
enects of slowness, and so quite frequently the resistance
decrease at B.D.C. is not so evident as at T.D.C. (a good
many of the other traces reproduced are for about three-
quarters of a revolution and do not anywhere include T.D.C.).
These results clearly illuminate the reasons for excessive
wear when an engine is idled for any length of time. The
breakdown of the lubricating film is, of course, not the only
cause. Generally the amount of oil supplied with the engine
running slowly is less than normal, and this too has some
effect, as will be seen in the following section.
5. The Effect of Variation of the Quantity of Oil.
A number of experiments were made at various speeds and
resistance calibration ranges, (a) with copious oil supply to
the piston ring, both by jets from the bottom end of the
cylinder and by ample intermittent additions to the top of
the bore, (b) oil supply as in (a) from the bottom of the
cylinder but with the top of the bore wiped clean at frequent
intervals. Thus there is a difference in the amount of oil
supplied, though with both cases there was probably a good
deal more oil present than under normal running conditions
for a petrol engine. Case (a) is almost the ideal of abundant
lubrication, and (b) simulates a little more closely the con-
ditions in practice where the oil that escapes the scraper
rings is, at least partially, burnt off the cylinder walls.
Pigs. G2-G4, G 6, and G 8 are of type (a) and should be
compared with the corresponding Pigs. H2-H4, H 6, H 8 of type
(b) at the speeds and resistance calibrations shown.
At one stage of the experiments the oil-filter clogged
and the oil was almost completely cut off. GlO was taken just
before the stoppage, Gii about 30 seconds later, and, as would
be expected, it shows markedly worse lubrication, G 9 is the
resistance calibration for these last two.
6. The Effect of Oil Viscosity
A series of oils was selected which, were all straight
mineral oils, distilled from the same crude petroleum at


different temperatures. The type of oil was ’’Californian
Pale” and the viscosities at the temperatures at which the
runs were made were:-
G 926 at 17°C. 968 centistokes
G 917 M 18°C. 264 «
G 915 ** 20°C. 108 *»
G 913 w 20°C. 35.4 "
i.e. , a range of more than 27:1 in viscosity.
An examination of pictures 11-130 shows clearly that the
contact resistance is increased, i.e., the lubrication is
improved, by increase in the viscosity.
II- 16-110 are all at 1000 r.p.m. - the latter set at
a resistance calibration 100 times as sensitive.
111- 116-120 are two similar sets at 600 r.p.m., and
121-125, 126-130 are taken at 200 r.p.m. In all six sets
there is a progressive rise of contact resistance with in-
crease of viscosity.
The same set of pictures, 11-130, also provides a
striking confirmation of the results of section 4. As
the speed is increased from 200 to 1000 r.p.m. with any of
the four oils in either of the resistance calibration ranges,
the lubrication can be seen to improve (see for example, the
two sets 130, 120, 110 and 123, 113, 13).
7. The Effect of Oil Temperature.
The first experiment on the effect of temperature
variation was carried out with a mineral oil (CY2) of viscosity
650 centistokes at 20°C.
77.6 * " 50°C.
29.1 H " 70°C.
Water was kept running through the cylinder jacket at room
temperature (15°C.). The oil was sprayed hy the usual method
directly on to the lower parts of the cylinder bore at a
series of different temperatures from 20°C. up to 70°C. The
same oil was allowed to cool ddwn and at a number of intervals
further pictures were taken to check the reproducibility. The
speed was kept constant at 600 r.p.m, and the resistance
calibration was the same throughout (see Fig. J 1). From J 2
to J 8 the oil was being warmed and from J 9 to Jl3 cooled.
The lubrication can be seen to be good at 22°C., to grow
steadily worse with rise of temperature until it is extremely
poor at 70°C., and to improve again as it cooled back to 20 C.
The set of results Jl-Jl3 shows the good reproducibility which
is obtained by this method of analysis. The second experi-
ment was rather similar to the first, except that the cylinder
wall temperature was kept equal to the oil temperature by use
of the photo-electric thermostat. The oil used was Californian
Pale, G 926, a straight mineral oil of viscosity
968 centistokes at 17°C.
83 " " 50°C.
17.3 w M 85 °C.
Jl4-J22 are at 50 r.p.m. , J23-J3l are at 600 r.p.m., and
J32-J4O are at 1000 r.p.m. Here too, in each case the
lubrication deteriorates with rise of temperature and improves
again on cooling.


In section 6 it was found that the lubricetjon
deteriorated considerably with decrease in viscosity. it
might appear therefore, that this deterioration with temper-
ature was merely another example of the same thing. Obviously
the decrease in viscosity is contributory, but there is a
much greater deterioration in lubrication than could be
accounted for by this alone.
, the , foll i owin g three pairs of pictures, all taken
at 1000 r, p.m, 13, 14, and 15 are of three thin oils at low
temperature. J 33, J 34, and J 35 are of oil G 926 (fairly
viscous) wanned up a few degrees centigrade - the viscosity
kept dust greater than for the particular thin oil. In each
case the lubrication is worse with the hot oil even though
+ Lj S +w° re This is raore evidQ ut when it is realised
that the calibration range for oil G 926 is ten times as
sensitive as for the thin oils (see 11 and Jl4).
, £*uplicates of the above pictures are paired together on
Plate 7F for easier reference. Also, on Plate 7G are other
series shewing the same phenomenon. At 600 r.p.m. 113 114
115 are for the same three light oils (calibration 111). and’
J 24, J2s s and J 26 (calibration J 23) are for the heavier oil
warmed up. J 3, J 5, J 7 (calibration J 1) may similarly be
compared with 113, 114, 115 as they are of a different heavy
oil (CY2) warmed up to temperatures to give comparable
viscosities.
V. DISCUSSION.
1. Reproducibility.
The procedure of the investigation has been to produce,
on a cathode ray screen, a trace of the variation with time
of the electrical contact resistance between the piston ring
and the cylinder wall. With good conditions of lubrication
the electrical resistance is high, while low resistance values
indicate breakdown of the lubricant film and consequent
abrasive wear of the metal surfaces,
The method is extremely sensitive, and small changes in
the operating conditions produce quite appreciable changes in
the general form of the trace on the screen. This eensitivity
is obviously an advantage in analysing results but necessitates
very close control of the operating conditions. When particular
care was taken to maintain all variables such as speed and
temperature within very close limite, pictures of the trace
remained reasonably constant over considerable periods of
time. Further, very similar pictures could be obtained at a
later date if the operating conditions were accurately repro-
duced.
The slight variations which did exist could be accounted
for by factors such as the variation of the moisture content
of the oil, and the oxidation of the oil upon heating. Thus,
for the purpose of comparison, ••control" or "blank" runs aw
interspersed between all experimental runs.
Under some severe conditions, however, the trace on the
screen is very unstable, i.e., for successive cvcles there is
a violent fluctuation of the contact resistance. This
instability itself is quite reproducible and does not disprove
the general statement that the results of the analysis of elee-
c.irso-z .


trical conductivity between the piston ring and cylinder
wall show reasonably good reproducibility.
In general, because of slight variations in the
traces, it was always advisable to record a number of
traces for the same conditions and then to select one
photograph as typical of the set. This was, of course,
particularly necessary for the unstable type of trace just
mentioned.
2. The Effect of Running the Engine,
In order to facilitate close control of the operating
conditions, the test engine was driven by a direct current
generator, mounted as a dynamometer, and directly coupled
to the engine. It was thus necessary to examine the
applicability of results, obtained under these conditions,
to the case of the engine running under its own power.
The lubrication was slightly worse with the engine
running under its own power at full throttle, than when
motored at the same speed. This assumes, of course, that
all other operating conditions were identical. Obviously,
it was not sufficient to supply the oil at the same temper-
ature in both circumstances, since, when running under power,
the oil on the cylinder wall was warmed by the heat of
combustion, and deterioration in lubrication accompanied
this temperature rise of the oil film.
The deterioration in lubrication, caused by running
the engine under its own power, was of the same order as
the difference in the lubrication of the engine when motored
with and without compression. The deterioration was, how-
ever, not greater than could be accounted for by the increase
in gas pressure due to combustion of the compressed charge.
Actually the applicability of the results obtained when
motoring the engine, to the case of the engine running under
power was admirably demonstrated and did, in fact, give a
further commendation to the whole method of analysis.
3. The Effect of Compression.
Prom direct measurements of wear it has been established
that maximum wear of the cylinder bore occurs at the top of
the piston ring track. Among the factors put forward as
contributing to this distribution of wear are high temperatures,
insufficient oil, low relative sliding velocity of the surfaces,
dilution of the oil with petrol and water, particularly when
starting from cold, and the effect of high gas pressure due to
compression and explosion.
Any pressure in the cylinder is transmitted to the back
of the piston ring through the clearance spaces between the
piston and cylinder wall and between the upper side of the
ring and the piston ring groove. This extra pressure behind
the ring tends to extend it against the cylinder wall and
contributes to the breakdown of the lubricant film. Experi-
ments were carried out to determine the extent of the effect
of compression pressure on the lubrication.
Consideration of typical cathode ray traces suggested
that there was a slight deterioration in lubrication when the
mean gas pressure in the cylinder was increased, i.e., when
there was compression, the lubrication over the whole cycle
became slightly worse.


Other experiments to investigate the effect around top
dead centre, where the compression pressure is highest, again
showed a slight deterioration in lubrication. It must be
noted here that the tests were carried out using the piston
ring in the second ring groove of the piston with the top
piston ring removed. Thus, the drop in pressure between
the combustion space and the back of the ring would be greater
than if measurements were made on the top piston ring. Also
t uf r u ? are two small leakage paths along the holes through '
which the current and potential leads were passed to the
piston ring. Thus, in the experiments the increase of
pressure applied to the back of the ring was small. However,
it would appear that under normal conditions (with adequate
clearance between the rings and the bottom of their grooves
to permit circumferential flow of the oil under the ringed
the deterioration in lubrication due to gas pressure ia
slight, and the high wear at the top of the cylinder bore is
due to one or several of the other factors already mentioned.
4. The Effect of Variation of Speed.
As the speed of a modern internal combusion engine varies
over such wide limits, it is obviously desirable to investigate
any variation in lubrication with speed change. Ordinary wear
measurements on the test bench or under actual service con—
are k® misleading, owing to the number of con-
tributing variables.
By motoring the engine, close control could be exercised
on the temperature and quantity of oil sprayed on to the
cylinder walls, jacket temperature, etc., while comparative
results at different speeds were taken all within a few minutes.
Prom a study of the variation of contact resistance with speed
change for a variety of operating conditions, a number of
conclusions may be drawn.
At low speeds the lubrication was far worse than for high
speeds under the same conditions. This was verified over wide
viscosity and temperature ranges: 968 centistokes to 5.15
centistokes, 85°C. to 10°C.
Occasionally at low speeds, the state of lubrication
appeared unstable, especially with the more viscous oils. At
higher speeds (greater than 200 r.p.m.), the trace was quite
constant, indicating a stable state of lubrication.
The improvement in the quality of lubrication with speed
was not so noticeable with hot oils. It might have been
expected from the foregoing that, by increasing the speed of
an engine running under its own power, the lubrication would
be considerably improved. Owing, however, to the increase
in temperature, which almost certainly would accompany any
increase in speed, the improvement in lubrication would not
be as great as anticipated. This heating of the oil has
other serious disadvantages as will be seen in the sections
on temperature and viscosity.
Study of lubrication, with regard to the speed change of
the piston during its travel, confirmed the trends observed
with varying engine speed. At top and bottom dead centres,
the relative sliding velocities of the surfaces are at their
lowest and at these points the lubrication was at its worst
for the cycle. Thus the more rapid rate of wear at the
ends of the piston ring travel is at least partly explicable
as a velocity effect.


5. The Effect of Variation of the Quantity of Oil.
The quantity of oil supplied to the cylinder walls
exerts an important influence both on the quality of the
lubrication of the piston rings and on the oil consumption
of the engine.
Results of experiments indicated that the lubrication
improved as the quantity of oil was increased. This
improvement in lubrication has been observed to occur up
to a certain point, beyond which any further increase in
the quantity of oil supplied has no appreciable effect on
the lubrication.
It is generally accepted that, with the normal rates
of oil feed to the cylinder walls and under steady running
conditions, deficiency of oil is unlikely to be of practical
importance. However, as expected,inadequate feed pumps or
blocked supply lines had a most deleterious effect on the
lubrication.
Scanty lubrication is most serious at starting, when
considerable delay may occur in the supply of oil to the
cylinder walls. Coupled with the low temperature, rapid
corrosive wear of the surfaces takes place. The low speed
at starting does not aid in the establishment of the oil
fi3.m - it has been seen in the previous section that even
with a copious supply of oil directed on to the cylinder
walls, the lubrication is extremely poor at low speeds.
If, on starting, a prompt supply of oil to the cylinder walls
could be ensured, followed by a rapid warming up period at
a comparatively high engine speed, wear of the surfaces would
be minimised.
Williams (1940) classifies the methods of ensuring an
early supply of lubricant to the cylinder walls under
(a) Adequate big-end clearances.
(b) A metering hole in the connecting rod big-end.
(c) A trough tray under the big-end.
(d; A device for introducing oil with fuel when
starting up.
Adoption of one or several of these methods would greatly
prolong the life of cylinder liners in many engines.
Another means of reducing the delay period to a minimum
would be to use an auxiliary oil supply pump separately
driven, which could be used to supply oil to the cylinder
walls oust before the start of the engine. The incorporation
of such a pump would, however, entail considerable initial
cost; but this would be amply repaid by the reduction in
wear.
6. The Effect of Oil Viscosity.
The study of cylinder lubrication in relation to oil
viscosity is particularly interesting, and the method of
analysis proved most suitable as a means of recording any
breakdown of the oil film due to changes in the viscosity of
the oil supplied to the cylinder wall#
The clearest feature of the series of experiments was
the demonstration of the generally accepted principle that
the lubrication of the piston rings, during continuous
running, is improved as the viscosity of the lubricant is


increased. The generality or this result is unlikely to be
impaired by the fact that the oils tested were all M stj*aight n
mineral oils, i.e., not blended with fatty acids.
A variation in viscosity, attained by using the same oil
at different temperatures, introduced errors due to the effect
of temperature itself. The viscosity variation was obtained
by using a number of oils distilled at different temperatures
from the same crude petroleum.
The results also indicated that, with the oils used, the
surfaces of the piston ring and cylinder wall were never
separated throughout the entire cyc.le by a continuous oil film.
There was intermittent breakdown of the oil film to a varying
degree, under all circumstances, although the heaviest oil
used v/as more viscous than commonly used in automobile practice.
The problem of oil viscosity is more involved than if, by
making use of a thicker oil, a reduction in the rate of wear
could be assured. With the common type of gear pump, fitted
with a spring-loaded valve to by-pass the output from the
pump at a predetermined pressure, the more viscous the oil
used the less is the quantity of oil supplied hy the pump.
Also a grave disadvantage of heavy oils is the considerable
delay which may occur at starting, before the oil reaches
the cylinder walls.
Provided precautions are taken to reduce this initial
delay in the supply of oil to the cylinder walls, it seems
that considerable improvement in lubrication may be expected
by the use of more viscous oils. Further, by use of a
higher viscosity, oil consumption may be considerably reduced.
In such a case, consideration must be given to the extra
frictional drag due to the higher oil viscosity.
7. The Effect of Oil Temperature.
The thermal efficiency of an internal combustion engine
may be improved by increasing the maximum temperature of the
working fluid. High temperatures of the working fluid
result in higher temperatures for the component parts of the
engine in the region of the combustion chamber and for the
oil lubricating the piston, piston rings, and cylinder wall.
It is important to determine the effect of temperature change
on the lubrication of the engine.
Prom the tests carried out with commercial mineral oils,
it was obvious that there was a marked decrease in the degree
of lubrication as the temperature increased. This effect,
at first, appeared to be another instance of the deterioration
of lubrication with decrease In viscosity. Obviously the
decrease in viscosity contributed appreciably to the degenera-
tion in the quality of lubrication. However, a comparison
of results taken v?ith oils of different viscosities, showed
that the lubrication of the thicker oils, when raised in
temperature to give viscosities equal to those of thinner
oils, was worse. Thus, apart from consideration of
viscosities, there was a very marked temperature effect.
The practical implication of such a result, from the
point of view of lubrication only, is to design and run
engines as cool as possible. Conflicting with this, however,
are the findings of Williams (1940) who demonstrated that
corrosive wear increased greatly if the cylinder wall temper-
ature was near or below the dewpoint of the products of
combustion, at any stage of the cycle. The desirable


compromise, from considerations of lubrication, is to run
the engine as cool as possible but with a lower limit of
temperature, defined by the onset of corrosive troubles.
As mentioned in the discussion on the effect of viscosity,
the high rate of wear at starting is due, not only to delay
in the oil reaching the cylinder walls, but also to the low
temperature leading to corrosive wear of the surfaces. It
is thus advantageous to shorten the warming up period, as much
as possible, to reduce this corrosive wear.
Recent work on the influence of temperature on the
stability of a mineral-oil (Bowden, Leben, and Tabor, 1939)
indicates that when a mineral oil is heated in the presence
of air, compounds are fbrmed in it which have a profound
effect on its lubricating properties. These compounds
change the frictional behaviour from ”stick-slip” to contin-
uous sliding and reduce the wear. The rate of formation of
these compounds is much more rapid when the oil is present
as a thin film on a steel surface than when it is in bulk.
The rate of formation is dependent on temperature. At room
temperature or at 100°C. the rate is slow even in a thin
film, but it increases rapidly as the temperature rises and
at 200°C. it may be fast. At temperatures near 300°C. other
compounds are formed which decrease the lubricating properties
of the oil.
A very different type of change which may occur at much
lower temperatures (such as have been used in the present
tests) has been observed (Tabor 1940)* Frequently, when a
commercial oil, which gives smooth sliding at room temperature,
is warmed to a certain temperature (usually between 50° and
80°C.), the motion changes from continuous sliding to stick-
slips; on raising the temperature further, the stick-slips
increase in size and a corresponding increase in wear takes
place. Frovided the heating has not been sufficient to
cause appreciable oxidation of the lubricant, these changes
are completely reversible on cooling and are probably due to
a desorption or disorientation of the lubricant film as a
result of the increased temperature. This latter effect may
account, at least partly, for the observed deterioration of
lubrication with temperature; the reasons, however, are
probably more complex and the explanation is incomplete.
VI. CONCLUSION.
A method is described of studying visually the quality
of the lubrication existing between a piston ring and the
cylinder wall of a running engine. The method consists
essentially of an analysis of the electrical conductivity
between the moving surfaces.
Under conditions of fluid lubrication, i.e., with an oil
film of sensible thickness between the moving surfaces,
abrasive wear on the surfaces will be negligibly small and
the electrical resistance of the oil film will be high. With
boundary lubrication, however, the surfaces are separated
only by films of molecular dimensions adsorbed on each
surface, and the oil does not afford complete protection to
the surfaces: local breakdown of the film occurs and some
metallic contact takes place through the film. Thus, under
conditions of boundary lubrication, abrasive wear occurs and
the electrical resistance between the wearing surfaces is
very much lower.


A study of this resistance variation was made by means
of a cathode ray oscillograph with the time base synchronized
with the stroke of the engine. To facilitate comparison of
the lubrication under different conditions of operation,
photographs were taken of the resistance trace.
Prom the results it was clear that, with the oils used,
the surfaces of the piston ring and cylinder wall were never
separated by a continuous oil film throughout the entire
cycle. Intermittent breakdown of the oil film occurred to
a varying degree, under all circumstances, although the
heaviest oil was more viscous than commonly used in automobile
practice.
Experiments carried out to investigate the effect of
speed variation on the quality of lubrication, indicated
that the lubrication improved very considerably with increase
in speed. The improvement in the lubrication with increase
of speed was not so noticeable with hot oils. Thus, attempts
to improve the lubrication of an engine, operating under its
own power, by increasing the speed of the engine, may be
rendered less effective owing to the accompanying rise in
temperature of the oil. Tho heating of the oil has other
detrimental effects also, and the combined effect of these
may outweigh the improvement of lubrication attendant on the
increase of speed.
Study of the lubrication, with reference to the speed
change of the piston during its travel, confirmed the trends
observed with varying engine speed. The lubrication was
worst near the ends of t;he stroke, where the relative sliding
velocity of the surfaces was lowest for the cycle. Thus,
low sliding velocity accounts, at least in part, for the more
rapid rate of wear towards top and bottom dead centres.
A marked improvement in lubrication was observed with
increased viscosity. The problem of oil viscosity 3s linked
with the initial delay which may occur at starting before
the oil reaches the cylinder walls. The delay period will
be rendered longer by use of a more viscous oil.
Tests carried out with a series of commercial mineral
oils indicated a great deterioration in the lubrication as
the temperature increased. Although the accompanying
decrease in viscosity contributed appreciably to this
deterioration, there was, apart from this, a very marked
temperature effect. It would thus appear advisable, from
the point of view of wear prevention, to run the engine as
cool as possible. In such a case, the lower limit of
temperature would be determined by the onset of corrosion
troubles. To reduce this corrosive wear on starting up,
the warming up period should be shortened as much as possible.
A slight deterioration in lubrication was observed when
the mean gas pressure in the cylinder was increased, i.e.,
when there was compression, the lubrication over the whole
cycle became slightly worse. This deterioration is presumably
due to the communication of any pressure in the cylinder to
the back of the piston ring through the clearance spaces;
the extra pressure behind the ring extends it against the
cylinder wall, thus contributing to the breakdown of the oil
film. However, it would appear that, under normal conditions,
the deterioration in lubrication due to gas pressure is slight.
The high rate of wear at the top of the cylinder bore is more
likely due to high temperatures, insufficient oil, low relative
sliding velocity, dilution of the oil with petrol, or several
of these factors in combination.


From a general survey of the results obtained it may be
said that, provided precautions are taken to reduce the
initial delay in the supply of oil to the cylinder walls, it
seems that considerable improvement in lubrication may be
effected by the use of more viscous oils. Further, by use
of a higher viscosity, oil consumption may be considerably
reduced. In such a case, however, consideration must be
given to any additional capital expense required to ensure
the shortening of the delay period between starting up and
the effective supply of oil.
Finally, the results indicate the excellent applicability
of the method of analysis to problems of cylinder lubrication
and abrasive wear. The method is sensitive, and the con-
ditions of lubrication may be analysed in considerable detail
at all stages of the cycle, resulting in many cases in more
definite information on lubrication problems, Results
obtained in a few minutes indicate whether a change in
operating conditions is likely to decrease the rate of wear,
and the method thus saves much of the time that would be
taken by the more conventional approach. The experiments
should, where possible, be backed up by the more standard
wear tests on running engines.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
We wish to express our thanks to Dr. F. p. Bowden for
suggesting the problem, to Mr. A. A. Townsend for his assist-
ance with the design of the electrical circuits, and to Mr.
W. B. Kennedy for his work designing and supervising the
construction of the test engine. We also wish to thank
Professor E. J. Hartung for the facilities provided in the
Chemistry Department,
VIII. REFERENCES.
Bowden, F.P., Leben, L. , and Tabor, D. (1939). - Trane . Farad,.
Soo. 35 (8): 900-904.
Bowden, F.P., and Tabor, D. (1939). - Proo. Roy- So c. (Lond.)
A, 169: 391-413.
Hardy, W.B. (1936). - Collected Works, Camb. Univ. Press.
Holm, R. (1929). - Wies. Veroff. Siemens-Kons. 7 (2): 217-271.
Maxwell, C, (1873). - “Electricity and Magnetism", Vol.l,
art. 308.
Tabor, D. (1940). - Nature , 145: 308.
Wagner, K.W. (1922). - J • Amer. Inst. Elec. Engrs. 41: 1034-44.
Williams, C.G, (1940). - "Collected Researches on Cylinder
Wear". Inst. Auto. Engineers, Auto. Res. Committee.


PLATE IA.
REPRODUCIBILITY.
A 1
A 2
A 3
A 4
A 5
A 6
A 7
500 Copious Lubrication, Oil CY2, Temperature 40⁰C.
Both Compression Rings in, No Compression.
Same as for A2-A5, but taken
one minute later.
A 8
A 9
A 10
A 11
A l 2
Same as for A2-A5, but taken one day later.
C.1750/44.


PLATE 1B
REPRODUCIBILITY.
B1
B 2
B 3
B 4
B 5
B 6
B 7
B 8
600 R.P.M., Copious Lubrication, Oil G 926, Temperature 50°C.
Top Compression Ring Removed, No Compression.
Same as for 82-85, but taken a few minutes later
C1
C 2
C 3
C 4
C 5
C 6
C 7
C 8
C 9
50 RP.M., Copious Lubrication, Oil CY2, Temperature 40⁰C., Both Compression Rings in, No Compression.
C10
C11
C12
C13
C14
Same as for C2-C5, but taken 14 days later.


PLATE 2.
POWER.
D1
D2
Compression
No explosion
D3
Explosion
Copious Lubrication with Oil CY2 delivered at
40°C., Jacket temperature = 20°C., Top Com-
pression Ring Removed, Speed = 1200 R.P.M.
D4
D5
D6
No Compression
No explosion Explosion
Speed = 500 R.P.M. Speed = 500 R.P.M.
D7
Explosion
1000 R.P.M.
D8
No Compression
No explosion
1000 R.P.M.
D9
Explosion
1000 R.P.M.
Copious Lubrication with Oil CY2 delivered at
40⁰C., Jacket temperature = 38°C., Top Com-
pression Ring Removed.


PLATE 3A.
COMPRESSION.
E1
R.P.M.
E 2
700
E 3
500
E 4
300
E5
R.P.M.
E 6
700
E7
500
E 8
300
With Compression
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oil CY2
delivered at 40⁰C.,
Jacket tempera-
ture = 20°C., Both
Compression Rings
in.
Without
Compression


PLATE 3B.
COMPRESSION.
E9
R.P.M.
E10
700
E11
500
E12
300
E18
R.P.M.
E19
700
E20
500
E21
300
With Compression
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oil CY2
delivered at 40°C.,
Jacket tempera-
ture = 14°C., Top
Compression Ring
Removed.
Without
Compression


PLATE 3C.
COMPRESSION.
E13
R.P.M.
E14
700
E15
500
E16
300
E17
100
With Compression
E22
R.P.M.
E23
700
E24
500
E25
300
E26
100
Without
Compression
Copious Lubrication with Oil CY2 delivered at 40°C., Jacket temperature = 20°C. Top
Compression Ring Removed. Alternately with and without Compression.


PLATE 3D.
COMPRESSION.
E27
E28
E29
Copious Lubrication with Oil G913 delivered at 20°C., Jacket tempera-
ture 20⁰C. Top Compression Ring Removed. Trace starts 10° before
T.D .C. and finishes 10° after. Lower line inE28 is for a Compression
stroke. Speed 600 R.P.M.. Camera exposure 1/5 seconds (i.e., 2 revo-
lutions). Breaks in line occur at intervals of 2⁰.


PLATE 4A.
SPEED.
F1
R.P.M.
F 2
100
F 3
300
F 4
500
F 5
600
F 6
700
F 7
R.P.M.
F 8
100
F 9
300
F10
500
F11
700
Copious Lubrication, Oil CY2 at 40°C. Jacket
temperature 17°C. Both Compression Rings in.
No Compression.


PLATE 48.
SPEED.
F 12
R.P.M.
F 13
0
F 14
1
F 15
50
F 16
300
F 17
500
F18
700
F19
R.P.M.
F20
0
F21
1
F22
50
F23
100
At higher
oil pressure.
Copious Lubrication, Oil CY2 at 40°C. Jacket
temperature 17°C. Both Compression Rings in.
No Compression
C. 1750/44.—2


PLATE 4C.
SPEED.
F24
R.P.M.
F25
50
F26
100
F27
200
F28
600
F29
1000
Copious Lubrication, Oil
G926 delivered at 25°C.,
Jacket temperature 25°C.,
Top Compression Ring
Removed, No Compress-
sion.
F30
R.P.M.
F31
200
F32
600
F33
1000
Copious Lubrication, Oil
G913 delivered at 20°C.,
Jacket temperature 20°C.,
Top Compression Ring
Removed, No Compress-
sion.


PLATE 4D.
SPEED.
F34
R.P.M.
F35
50
F36
300
F37
600
F38
1000
F39
1200
Copious Lubrica-
tion, Oil G926 deli-
vered at 85°C., Jac-
ket temperature
85°C., Top Com-
pression Ring Re-
moved, No Com-
pression.
F40
R.P.M.
F41
200
F42
600
F43
1000
Copious Lubrica-
tion, Oil G 913 deli-
vered at 70⁰C., Jac-
ket temperature
70°C., Top Com-
pression Ring Re-
moved, No Com-
pression.


PLATE 4E
SPEED.
F44
300 R.P.M.
F45
600 R.P.M.
F46
Copious Lubrication, Oil G913 delivered at 20°C., Jacket Temperature
20°C., Top Compression Ring Removed, No Compression. Spot on
Cathode Ray Screen starts moving to the left 10° before Top Dead
centre; finishes travel approximately 300° later. Note that Contact
Resistance is low at Top and Bottom Dead Centres.


PLATE SA.
QUANTITY OF OIL.
G1
R.P.M.
G 2
700
G3
500
G 4
300
Copious Lubrica-
tion Top and Bot-
tom of piston.
Oil CY2 delivered
at 40°C.
H1
R.P.M.
H 2
700
H 3
500
H 4
300
Lubrication of pis-
ton from bottom
only.
Jacket temperature 17°C., Both Compression Rings in, No Compression.


PLATE 5B.
QUANTITY OF OIL.
G5&H5
G 6
Copious Lubrica-
tion Top and Bot-
tom of piston.
H 6
Lubrication of pis-
ton from bottom
only.
Oil CY2 delivered at 40°C.,
Jacket temperature = l7°C,
Both Compression Rings in,
No Compression.
Speed = 500 R.P.M.
G7&H7
G 8
Copious Lubrica-
tion Top and Bot-
tom of piston.
H 8
Lubrication of pis-
ton from bottom
only.
Oil CY2 delivered at 40°C.,
Jacket temperature = 17°C.,
Both Compression Rings in,
No Compression.
Speed = 700 R.P.M.


PLATE SC.
QUANTITY OF OIL.
G 9
Full Oil Pressure
G10
G11
Taken only a few seconds
later. Oil filter clogged and
pressure reduced almost to
zero.
Lubrication with Oil CY2 delivered at 40°C., Jacket temperature 17°C.,
Both Compression Rings in, No Compression.


PLATE 6A.
VISCOSITY.
OIL G926
Viscosity 968
cs. at 17°C
12
OIL G917
Viscosity 264
cs. at 18°C
13
OIL G915
Viscosity 108
cs. at 20°C
14
OIL G913
Viscosity 35.4
cs. at 20°C
15
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oils as
shown. Jacket and
Oil temperatures
both equal to tem-
perature at which
Viscosity is given.
Top Compression
Ring Removed, No
Compression.
16
17
18
19
I10
Speed 1000R.P.M.


PLATE 68.
VISCOSITY.
C. 1750/44.—3
I11
OIL G926
Viscosity 968
cs. at 17° C
I12
OIL G917
Viscosity 264
cs. at18° C
I13
OIL G915
Viscosity 108
cs. at 20° C
I14
OIL G913
Viscosity 35.4
cs. at 20° C
I15
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oils as
shown. Jacket and
Oil temperatures
both equal to tem-
perature at which
Viscosity is given.
Top Compression
Ring Removed, No
Compression.
I16
I17
I18
I19
I20
Speed 600 R.P.M.


PLATE 6C.
VISCOSITY.
I21
OIL G926
Viscosity 968
cs. at 17°C
I22
OIL G917
Viscosity 264
cs. at 18°C
I23
OIL G915
Viscosity 108
cs. at 20°C
I24
OIL G913
Viscosity 35.4
cs. at 20° C
I25
I26
I27
I28
I29
I30
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oils as
shown. Jacket and
Oil temperatures
both equal to tem-
perature at which
Viscosity is given.
Top Compression
Ring Removed, No
Compression.
Speed 200 R.P.M.


PLATE 7A.
TEMPERATURE.
J1
Temperature of Oil
J2
22°C.
J3
28⁰ C.
J4
34⁰ C.
J 5
39⁰ C.
J6
45⁰C.
J7
54⁰ C.
J8
70⁰C.
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oil CY2
delivered at the
various tempera-
tures shown (Ris-
ing steadily). Jac-
ket temperature
15⁰C., Speed = 600
R.P.M., Top Com-
pression Ring Re-
moved, No Com-
pression.


PLATE 7B.
TEMPERATURE.
J1
Temperature of Oil
J 9
69⁰ C.
J10
55⁰ C.
J11
42⁰ C.
Jl2
34⁰ C.
Jl3
20⁰ C.
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oil CY2
delivered at the
various tempera-
tures shown (de-
creasing). Jacket
temperature 15⁰C.
Speed 600 R.P.M.,
Top Compression
Ring Removed, No
Compression.
Compare
Plate 7A.


PLATE 7C.
TEMPERATURE.
J14
Temperature
J15
25°C.
J16
40⁰ C.
J17
50°C.
J18
70°C.
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oil G 926.
Temperature of Oil
and Jacket both
equal to that
shown.
J19
Temperature 85°C.
J20
70⁰ C.
J21
40°C.
J22
25°C.
J15-J 19 temperature
increasing
J 20 -J22 Te m p e rture
decreasing
Speed 50 R.P.M.
Top Compression
Ring Removed, No
Compression.


PLATE 7D.
TEMPERATURE.
J23
Temperature
J24
25°C.
J25
40⁰C.
J26
50°C.
J27
70°C.
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oil G926.
Temperature of Oil
and Jacket both
equal to that
shown.
J24-J28 Temperature
increasing
J28
85°C.
J29
70°C.
J30
40°C.
J31
25°C.
J29-J31 Te mperature
decreasing
Speed 600 R.P.M.
Top Compression
Ring Removed, No
Compression.


PLATE 7E.
TEMPERATURE.
J32
Temperature
J33
25⁰ C.
J34
40°C.
J35
50°C.
J36
70°C.
Copious Lubrica-
tion with Oil G926.
Temperature of Oil
and Jacket both
equal to that
shown .
J37
85°C.
J38
70°C.
J39
40°C.
J40
25°C.
J33-J37 Temperature
increasing
J38-J40
decreasing
Speed 1000R.P.M.
Top Compression
Ring Removed, No
Compression.


PLATE 7F.
TEMPERATURE.
I1
Oil
Temperature
Viscosity
I3
G917
18°C.
264cs.
I4
G915
20°C.
108cs.
I5
G913
20°C.
35.4cs.
Jl4
Oil
Temperature
Viscosity
J33
G926
25°C.
462cs.
J34
G926
40°C.
154 cs.
J35
G926
50°C.
83cs.
Copious Lubrication, Oil and Jacket tempera-
tures both equal to those shown above. Top
Compression Ring Removed. No Compression.
Speed = 1000 R.P.M.


PLATE 7G.
TEMPERATURE.
I11
Oil
Temperature
Viscosity
I13
G917
18°C.
264cs.
i14
G915
20°C.
108cs.
I15
G913
20°C.
35.4cs.
J23
Oil
Temperature
Viscosity
J24
G926
25°C.
462cs.
J25
G926
40°C.
154cs.
J26
G926
50°C.
83cs.
J1
Oil
Temperature
Viscosity
J3
CY2
28°C.
330cs.
J5
CY2
39°C.
151cs.
J7
CY2
54°C.
64cs.
Copious Lubrication, Oil and Jacket tempera-
tures both equal to those shown above. Top
Compression Ring Removed. No Compression.
Speed 600 R.P.M.
C.l 750/44.—4


PLATE 8.
GENERAL ELECTRICAL ARRANGEMENT.


PLATE 9.
THE ENGINE AND DYNAMOMETER LAYOUT.


