

% V A s\
| % V *X jm M#\
y Rte, ' / vi V^?k
NkS’ HELEN A L D p
' y^il^
yj&Litte&nu, £y PEGGY OLDFIELD








/ . _ oj JbH. |hL \ I# IgL
'VyS' ' % iSg
HgS. , s||||il .__ j0^^®2^* l «B \-_
/ -vlf f \ \ fiS
u "V ■. / JK \
i V yf f f/
c |if itjA « yx fv
JWfcgL ~.■ ■■■ W .. viU r--. ■ ’\: WJjjjjpKP . •’
*' 1 "y^. -
K N ' •■" ~ v/y^g\
llinm , — Hlkj0 r )
■:■ ; t 1 ■ .j MB^gpp^
SjLte&adff
& '•
The expression on Squeaky’s face was far from pleasant


I


(My
HELEN ALDERSO N
PEGGY OLDFIELD
/
Published by
FRANK JOHNSON
350 GEORGE STREET :: SYDNEY
Tel.: BW 6463


Dedicated to our Nephew
ERIC OLDFIELD
COPYRIGHT.
Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney,
for transmission through the post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
SIMMONS LIMITED,
31-33 Parramatta Road, Glebe, Sydney.


* 9 Ft£ 1^44
CHAPTER ONE
Lucky Rolling Stone
UCKY ROLLING STONE gathered speed as he rolled merrily down the
steep hill. It wasn't that he liked rolling all the time, he just couldn't
help it, poor little Rolling Stone, he did so want to sit and sit in a nice
warm place in the sun, wearing a smart green coat of moss, it was so cold not
having one to cover his shiny little body. But what was the use of wishing,
he just couldn't help rolling. He was quite a happy little fellow really, and
made the best of everything.
Bump, bump he went and just missed crushing a pretty Ladybird who was
swinging on a blade of grass; he didn't have time to say he was sorry for at
that very moment he fell with a dull plop into a dark hole.
''At last," he sighed, "I'll have a rest."
Anyone who tells you that stones cannot feel are quite wrong, they
don't mind being trodden upon, because they have the nice soft ground to
sink into which is very warm and cosy, but to be thrown into the air, and
kicked by little girls and boys makes them quite sick and dizzy.
Lucky Rolling Stone chuckled with glee as he closed his eyes for a nap,
but he only had them closed for a second when he was startled by a squeaky
voice saying:
"Get out this instance."
Poor Lucky rolled onto his back in surprise.
"Get out, get out." The voice sounded very angry.
Lucky rolled hastily back and forth trying desperately to find a way out,
but try as he might it was hopeless.
Page One


Lucky fell with a dull thud into the shoe.
Page Two


"Well," he said at last, "you tell me how to get out."
"How dared you roll into me. Ricky will get rid of you."
"Make the ugly thing get out," said another squeaky voice.
"It isn't any use arguing about me," said Lucky, in a stony little tone. "I'm
not hurting you anyhow, a lot you've got to grumble about."
"Oh! oh!" squeaked and creaked the shoes, "you don't know half our
troubles. How would you like to squeak and creak at every step? Ricky is
so ashamed of us in company."
"Sounds very unpleasant," said Lucky, blinking his eyes thoughtfully in
the dark, he felt rather drowsy, the toe of the shoe was cosy. "I only wish
I had a snug coat to wear, I can't think of anything worse than having to
go about like a beggar."
"He worries about a coat," exclaimed the shoes.
Creaky breathed in and tried to squeeze him to death, but it had not the
slightest effect on Lucky, at last their arguing grew fast and furious. Good-
ness knows how it would have ended if Ricky, their little master, having lost
his sailing boat, hadn't waded out of the water sobbing bitterly, and
flinging himself down on a patch of wild violets, he sobbed himself to sleep,
tired out from looking for it.
"What ever is the matter with Ricky?" asked Squeaky and Creaky in
hushed voices.
"It is very hard to tell from here," said Lucky, "he did sound very un-
happy.”
"I can tell you," said a gentle voice from above. Looking up they saw a
Beech Tree with her arms stretched towards the sun.
"Please do, Lady Beechtree," called Squeaky.
The Beech Tree moved her head gracefully, making her pale green hair
rustle softly.
Little Ricky has lost his sailing boat, the naughty water sprites have
stolen it to play with, they didn't know I could see them from here," she
replied, then lifted her beautiful head she gazed into the distance, far, far
over the other tree tops.
I have seen many strange happenings in my time," she sighed dream-
ily, then smiled as a cheeky Robin pecked her cheek.
Page Three


The Violet Elves stood grinning and pointing.
Page Four


"We might be able to help," cried some tiny voices. Looking down the
Beech Tree saw tiny wild violet elves running backwards and forwards in
a great hurry.
"Of course you can," she said, nodding wisely.
"Let me out, let me out," cried Lucky. "I want to see what is happening,
it's awful being cooped up in this silly shoe."
"How dare you call me names," squeaked the shoe in an outraged voice,
"you can't get out so that's that."
Lucky rolled about savagely, mumbling to himself.
In the meantime the tiny elves were very busy carrying cups of violet juice,
and climbing in single file over Ricky's face they emptied it into his eyelids.
As they worked they chanted a song,
"Plop, plop, each precious drop,
Bring magic or a minute pops,
Wake and see we fairies free
And we will dance and shout with glee,
Ha ha ha, he he he."
Suddenly Ricky began to grow smaller and smaller, until he was no
bigger than the tiniest elf, so tiny that the violets nodding and swaying
their purple heads were far, far up above him, casting deep shadows on
the warm ground, and almost hiding him from the golden rays of the sun.
"Wake up, wake up," the violet elves called in excitement.
Page Five


CHAPTER TWO
No Time Like the Present
RICKY awoke with a start and imagine his surprise on finding himself
surrounded by queer looking people dressed in suits made out of
violet petals.
They stood grinning and pointing at him. Ricky nervously thrust his hands
into his pockets and tried to whistle, but he couldn't make a sound.
"Would you please tell me where I am?" he asked an elf timidly.
"Ha ha ; he he/' laughed the elf.
"In Wild Violet Glade," answered a fat elf, walking importantly up in
front of him and leaning against a large snail firmly chained to a strong
spider web.
"Why have you chained that snail up?" asked Ricky curiously.
"Because they are our worst enemies. Last year we were homeless be-
cause of them."
"How?" asked Ricky.
"They ate our homes, so now we hunt them and capture them to ride. Have
you ever ridden one?"
"No," answered Ricky, "they look much too uncomfortable."
The snail moved its head angrily, and thrust out its horns, it didn't seem
to like being talked about.
"Don't go too close to its head, it might throw you with its horn," said the
elf.
Page Six


"Keep back, keep back," warned the elves.
Ricky jumped back just as the snail's head shot forward.
"My," he gasped, "fancy a slow old snail being so fierce."
As he looked around him he saw quaint cobbled streets winding in and
out the tall violet stalks, the houses had thatched roofs, and dear little
green shutters. To his surprise he saw some houses that looked as if a ter-
rible storm had blown them down, smashing them to pieces.
"Whatever happened to those houses?" asked Kicky.
"That was your doing," answered the elf, "you put your big clumsy head
on top of them; fortunately no one was injured."
Ricky's face went quite pale, "I am sorry," he stammered, "how was I to
know you lived here."
"Well, now you know, don't ever do it again or you will have to be
punished."
Ricky looked down at his feet, and for the first time noticed they were
bare.
"Wherever are my shoes?" he asked.
The shoes answered him excitedly.
"We are here Ricky, but alas, we are much too big for you to wear.'
Ricky ran to the edge of the glade and saw two strange looking moun-
tains, for you see Ricky had become the size of an elf, and his shoes hadn't
shrunk at all.
"Oh! oh!" they wailed, "whatever are we going to do, you mustn't desert
us Ricky, without us your feet will get quite cold."
Ricky stared in wonder while Squeaky and Creaky looked at him plead-
ingly, their big brown button eyes blinking rapidly at every word they
uttered, it was amazing the way their leathery faces were screwed up.
"But you are much too big for me to wear," he said, at last.
The Fat Elf walked up to Ricky, and pointing to the shoes said
"You can leave them to us,
And without any fuss,
We'll set to work, and become smaller they must."
Page Seven


He then gave an order to the other elves, who had gathered around the
shoes, they ran off obediently into the glade returning quickly laden
with cups of magic violet juice, and laughing and shouting they climbed
over the shoes, making Squeaky and Creaky cry for mercy as the magic
juice was splashed all over them.
Lucky expecting a splash, closed his eyes tightly, and feeling stone cold
lay hoping that they wouldn't see him.
"Don't be such cowardly custards," laughed Ricky, as he watched the
shoes creak and squeak with horror at every splash, then before he could
wink an eye, they shrank until they looked just the right size for his little
feet.
But a strange thing had happened, a big black ball appeared in Squeaky's
mouth. Why! It was Lucky, popping right out of the shoe, not one splash of
the magic juice had fallen upon him. There he sat looking curiously
around with his funny short legs inside the shoe.
"Now, will you get out?" cried Squeaky.
"With the greatest of pleasure," replied Lucky. He did not lose any time,
for the expression on Squeaky's face was far from pleasant.
"Plop, plop," he chuckled, as he rolled out of the shoe, and onto the
ground, only to find himself staring into Ricky's eyes.
"Don't throw me," he gasped hurriedly.
Ricky started to laugh and couldn't stop.
"What are you laughing at?" asked Lucky, gazing at him stonily.
"Because you are as big as I am, however could I throw you."
"He, he," giggled Lucky, "how very funny. How would you like me to
roll on you?"
Ricky stepped back hurriedly—"Please don't do that," he said, "can't we
be friends? Please tell me your name?"
"Lucky Rolling Stone. I would like to be friends, I cannot think of anything
better than to be able to roll with you. I might be able to help you find your
boat, and you might be able to show me how to stop rolling, I would so like
to wear a coat of moss."
"Oh! you must be the rolling stone that gathers no moss. What a shame,
you must be cold," said Ricky.
Page Eight


"Won't you try and help me?" begged Lucky.
"Well," answered Ricky, "I'll try, but you must help me find my boat."
"Yes, Lucky will help you," cried the violet elves.
"We want to help," said Creaky and Squeaky excitedly. "Put us on quickly
and we will start at once."
"We may find a way to lose our squeak and creak," they cried excitedly.
Ricky didn't hear them, he was much too busy.
"When do we start looking for my boat?" he asked the elves.
The Fat Elf replied, "Well, there is no time like the present." Then, looking
at Ricky thoughtfully, he asked, "Have you done your good deed for
to-day?"
"I don't think so," answered Ricky doubtfully, "you see I haven't had very
much time."
"Ha, ha," laughed the elves, "hasn't had very much time. Now isn't that
fine, no time, no time."
Ricky's face went very red.
"There is always time to do a good deed," said the Fat Elf sternly.
"No time, no time, let's think of a rhyme." And the elves in a chorus,
began this song.
"No matter how you wish to play,
You must do a good deed a day.
If each day a good deed's done
You will find it's lots of fun,
Somehow you will find a way,
To combine it with your play,
So keep on trying it will pay
A dozen happy golden ways."
When the elves finished their song, the Fat Elf said to Ricky, "Unless you
do a good deed, I am afraid you will never find your boat, it may be diffi-
cult, but you must try."
"And I will never get my moss coat," said Lucky miserably.
"And we won't lose our squeak and creak," cried the shoes.
And every one cried in one voice, 'We must do a good deed, we must,
we must."
Page Nine


"Be off at once," cried the elves.
"Where do we start?" asked Ricky and his friends helplessly.
"The rocket is waiting," said a voice at Ricky's elbow, "it's the only way
for you to take."
Turning around Ricky saw an elf holding open a door in the side of a
violet bud.
"Hurry, hurry," cried the other elves, pushing Ricky forward.
"Do your good deed and return with speed," they cried as they pushed
him into the rocket.
Puffing and blowing, Lucky rolled in after him, "Here I am, here I am," he
puffed excitedly.
"Hurray, we're off," cried Ricky, as the door slammed.
Page Ten


CHAPTER THREE
The Beginning of a Journey
THE Rocket shot off at a terrific speed, it was going so fast that Lucky
spun round and round in circles, until he got quite dizzy, just when he
began to feel sick Ricky sat on him.
"Thank you," he gasped weakly, "I feel terrible."
"You were making me giddy, too," said Ricky.
"He must get very tired of rolling," said the shoes.
Indeed I do," said Lucky, pathetically, putting his short arms on his upset
little stomach.
"But you have never had to squeak and creak," said the shoes, "it is much
worse."
"Rolling is much worse," replied Ricky firmly.
"It is not," shouted the shoes.
I IT, . //
it IS.
#/ Tx * I j. "
it isn t.
11J i • //
it IS.
How long the argument would have gone on no one knows, but just when
the shoes were snapping at Lucky like two furious brown dogs, the rocket
gave a frightful bump and stopped. Their quarrel forgotten, they sat in
frightened silence.
Then very timidily Ricky crept forward and opened the door, Lucky
rolled after him and peeped over his shoulder.
Page Seven


Lucky and Ricky gazed at the strange city.
Page Twelve


"A very strange place," remarked Ricky. As far as one could see stretched
a City the color of silver, its high queer buildings rising way up into the air.
Ricky couldn't imagine why they didn't fall down, because the buildings
were resting on misty clouds with more stars than he could ever hope to
count, gleaming and twinkling up through them, it was all very puzzling, he
had always looked up to see stars, not down.
"I've travelled a lot," whispered Lucky, "but I have never seen a place
like this before, do you think it would be safe to explore?"
"Yes, let's," squeaked and creaked the shoes.
"Don't you like Nodland?" asked a voice. Ricky jumped with fright, for
standing a short distance away was a strange little man. Ricky's hair
started to prickle, he felt quite queer, for the person's tiny body was head-
less, and to Ricky's amazement the missing object was quite comfortably
balanced on his right arm. It was the size of a large pumpkin, and as Ricky
gazed at the strange sight the head smiled at him and the arm very cleverly
replaced it back on its shoulders. Ricky was quite relieved.
"Why did you take your head off?" he asked.
"It's only common politeness," said the Little Man haughtily. "In Nodland,
we always remove our heads when we meet a person."
"Oh!" gasped the little party in astonishment.
"Please descend from that queer looking thing and follow me," said the
Little Man.
"Why it's a rocket, and I don't think it is queer looking," said Ricky indig-
nantly.
Please yourself, but I think it's queer, everyone has a right to their own
opinion."
Don't get annoyed," said Ricky hastily stepping down. Lucky rolled too
quickly after him, and fell on top of him with a bang. Squeaky and
Creaky cried out with terror making sure they were going to be crushed.
"Save us, save us. Get off you clumsy thing," they squeaked and creaked.
Keep calm and keep your heads, cried the Little Man and rushing into
help them he bumped his head against Lucky's hard body and before he
could save it, it fell off and swiftly floated away; every now and then looking
back and grinning at him wickedly.
Page Thirteen


"Come back, come back," cried the headless Little Man wringing his
hands as he started off in pursuit.
To the others' surprise they found they were also floating, as they glided
along they bumped into some misty mountains that shone softly like silver,
and felt like silky feathers, they tickled Ricky's face making him giggle,
Lucky spun around madly.
When they floated past the misty mountain they saw away, away in the
distance, the runaway head bouncing merrily along. So off they went half
floating, half running, to try and catch it, with the headless little figure in the
lead.
Fourteen


CHAPTER FOUR
In the Land of Nod
IT was a most exciting chase, but it ended with a shout of triumph from
Lucky, who had rolled down a cloud bank, and grabbed the naughty
head by the ear.
"Ha, I've got you," roared Lucky. The head shook itself stubbornly, and
tried to get away, it was developing into a tug of war, just as the others
arrived.
"Thank you very much. I am indeed grateful to have it back, it would have
been a frightful disgrace, if I had not been able to hold up my head again,"
said the Little Man placing it carefully on his shoulders, taking care that it
was quite straight. Satisfied at last, he said, "Allow me to introduce myself."
"We wouldn't think of stopping you," said Ricky.
"Don't be rude," hissed Lucky.
"Oh!" he cried, the shoes had given his toes a nasty pinch.
"What was that?" inquired the Little Man.
"We're waiting to hear your name," answered Ricky uncomfortably.
'Noodle Nod, I come of a very good family of Nodders," he said proudly.
'Do you want to know our names?" asked Ricky.
"There is no need," answered Noodle Nod. "They are recorded in the
dream book. But hurry, His Majesty will be getting impatient."
"Does he expect us?" asked Ricky excitedly.
Page Fifteen


"Certainly, now less talk and more speed," said Noodle Nod hurrying
ahead.
"I feel quite nervous," said Lucky, "what do Kings look like?"
"A King always wears a crown with jewels on it," answered Ricky.
"Do they keep it on when they go to bed?" asked Lucky curiously.
Ricky was saved from replying, for they had already reached the castle.
Leading up to the door was a stairway of stars, they shone so brightly, that
everyone shut their eyes. When they reached the top, the door opened and
Noodle Nod led them into a huge banquet hall lit up by hundreds of stars.
"I have often wondered where the stars go, when there are none in the
sky, I will tell Daddy he 11 be pleased to know, 'cause he didn't know when
I asked him," whispered Ricky.
Ssh, hissed Lucky, for right in front of them was a moon-shaped table,
surrounded by many Nodland People. They had risen and having removed
their heads, they stood waiting with a smile of welcome.
Guiding them to the far side of the table, Noodle Nod stopped in front of
a very large nodder, Ricky noticed he had not removed his head, and right
on top of it was a very small crown, much too small for such a big head.
"His crown is too small," whispered Ricky, it was such a loud whisper
Lucky rolled uncomfortably.
"King Nodum Nutum, your guests have arrived," announced Noodle Nod.
"Pray be seated, this is a pleasure," as he spoke he waved his hand to
two chairs beside him. Ricky bowed and Lucky rolled nicely, the King
nodded graciously at them.
When they were comfortably seated, the King turned to Ricky and said:
"My subjects have been eager to meet you, you are always asleep when
they see you on earth."
"Indeed, indeed," cried the nodders in a chorus.
It was the strangest feast Ricky had ever been to. They ate green cheese
and drank Milkywhey, it had a strange taste, making Ricky feel quite light-
headed, some of the nodders drank too much, making them lightheaded, too,
Ricky couldn't help staring. He watched their heads float up into the air only
to be captured by their owners.
Page Sixteen


A nodder near Ricky began asking him many questions about the earth,
Ricky could not answer all of them. Lucky seemed to know much more than
he did, and the nodders thought he was very clever, Ricky felt a little bit
ashamed. "When I go back to school I'll try hard to learn and remember
lots and lots," he thought.
Suddenly a trumpet blew and a herald entered the hall.
"Your Majesty," he cried, "Nod-A-While has sent tidings from Earthland."
"Come before me," said King Nodum Nutum.
The herald doffed his head, then unrolled a sheet of mist, written in star
dust, and from it began to read, while a hushed silence reigned.
"To His Majesty, King Nodum Nutum, I, Nod-A-While send you sad tidings
of the earth child named Jann. I, Nod-A-While, who was elected by Your
Majesty to guide her to sleep, have sadly failed. Through fear of the Jailing
Rulings she has fallen ill, and been captured and imprisoned in Shadow-
land, and I was unable to save her."
When the herald finished reading, Ricky saw two big tears roll down
King Nodum Nutum's face, "Poor Nod-A-While, and poor Jann," he sighed
heavily.
"Who is Jann?" asked Ricky.
"A little earth child," answered the King, "we have been having a great
deal of trouble with her, for she is afraid of Jailing Rulings, they frighten her
at night, at first we managed to put her to sleep, but she became so fright-
ened of them, that we couldn't even make her nod at bedtime, she would
stay awake and make an awful noise."
"What are Jailing Rulings?" asked Ricky curiously.
"They are the people that hide in the shadows at night, and frighten little
boys and girls, no one ever sees them, they are only there in the dark when
children think about them."
"I have never been frightened of them," said Ricky.
"And therefore they will never bother you," said the King patting him on
the shoulder. "There must be some way of freeing that little earth child," he
said thoughtfully. Then his eyes brightened, "Arise," he cried to Ricky.
Wonderingly, Ricky obeyed.
Page Seventeen


The naughty heads sped away from the Nodums in high glee.
Page Eighteen


Looking very important the King bade his subjects be silent while he
addressed them.
"I am going to give Ricky the chance to do a good deed," he said.
Ricky waited expectantly.
King Nodum Nutum leant forward. "I think you can save the earth child.
You have never given us any trouble at bedtime, and Jailing Rulings do not
frighten you, would you like to rescue her?"
"I could try," answered Ricky.
"I would like to help, I am not afraid of anything," said Lucky.
"And we can help you run faster if you are in danger," cried the shoes.
"Then it is all settled," said the King, and standing up he cried, "three
nods for Ricky and his friends."
Greatly pleased his subjects nodded violently, quite forgetting their heads
would fall off, and with one accord they did.
Then there began a terrible uproar, as little headless figures scrambled
and bumped into each other.
One nodder unable to find his own head picked up someone else's, saying,
"One head is as good as another."
Another little figure running madly past Ricky, found two and putting
them on his shoulders cried, "Two heads are better than one."
It was so very funny Ricky couldn't help laughing, he was rather sur-
prised when a nodder ran up to him and catching hold of his curls tried to
pull his head off.
"It doesn't come off, let go, let go," shouted Ricky. It was hurting very
much before the nodder understood.
"I am so sorry," said the headless little person as he ran off to find his own.
"So you should be," said Ricky, rubbing his head gingerly. Turning round to
speak to Lucky, he was surprised to see that he had disappeared, and
hearing a cry he looked up to see the poor little stone in a fix. King Nodum
Nutum was holding him firmly on his shoulders, ignoring Lucky's frantic ef-
forts to roll off, and taking not the slightest notice of the kicks Lucky was
giving him, with his flat little feet.
"Let me down, let me down," he wailed.
Page Nineteen


"If anyone touches His Majesty's head, the penalty will be, that the culprit
shall have his head stitched on for ever," cried a nodder of high rank.
"Oh! oh!" everyone cried in horror, and dropping heads that did not be-
long to them, they became very polite, and helped each other, until everyone
had his own head and order was restored.
The King's head was handed to him by one of his Ministers on a golden
platter, and Lucky was helped down to his chair, he was very put out, but
after being given a drink of Milkywhey he became quite happy, and
toasted the King in the very best manner.
Beware of the Valley of Sleep," whispered Noodle Nod, "the stream run-
ning through will whisper to you."
"What will it do to us?" asked Ricky,
"If you have but one sip it's the end of your trip," said King Nodum Nutum.
"We'll be very careful," said Ricky.
It would give me great pleasure to show you our City," said the King,
‘‘but I think it would be wiser for you to hurry on your journey."
The people of Nodland were very sorry to see them go, and begged them
to return very soon.
Don t forget," shouted the King as he waved goodbye,
"Follow the star to the right
And when you're in flight,
Watch out for the Valley of Sleep.
The Star will not stop there,
But down you must drop there."
Page Twenty


CHAPTER FIVE
A Welcome Mission
ACER to be off the rescuers hurried down the stairway of stars, on
reaching the bottom they waved a last goodbye, and set off in search
of the star to the right.
As they floated and bounced along Ricky turned to Lucky saying, 'Tve
forgotten which is my right and left side."
"Oh, dear!" said Lucky, "I roll over so often I never know which is which.”
Then Creaky said excitedly, "I'm your right shoe, so this must be your right
side."
"Hurray," they cried, and hurrying over a cloud they found a star twink-
ling up at them.
"I'm ready to take off," it said, "are you coming with me?" And away it
shot leaving a trail of starlight behind it.
Catching Lucky by the hand Ricky floated down after it, he found it very
difficult keeping the star in sight for Lucky was very heavy and made him
go very slowly, at last far far below them he saw a valley with a stream
running through it like a silver ribbon.
"There's Sleepy Valley," he shouted.
"How can you tell?" asked the shoes.
"Don't ask silly questions," Ricky said sharply.
Are we going to make a pancake landing?" asked Lucky.
Page Twenty-one


Lucky stared up at the Packa Pooh in surprise.
Page Twenty-two


"I don't know," answered Ricky, who felt rather worried, it looked such a
long way down.
"Goodbye Star," called Ricky, "we're landing here," but the star was out
of sight.
On the way down Lucky began slipping away, unable to hold him any
longer, Ricky let go and he hurtled through space at a terrific speed, rapidly
disappearing from sight.
A huge tree appeared in front of Ricky and he floated into it. He could
not see a single thing, it was so thickly covered in leaves. As he climbed
through the branches he heard Lucky calling, "Ricky! Ricky, where are
you?"
"Here we are," cried the shoes, "hurry, Ricky, he might be in danger."
As they reached an opening in the branches they saw Lucky down at the
bottom of the tree looking up at a strange bird.
Ricky jumped to the ground.
"What kind of a bird are you?" he asked.
The bird cleared his throat and answered hoarsely.
I am the Packa Pooh, guardian of Sleepy Valley, what are you doing
here, little boy?"
We are on our way to do a good deed," answered Ricky. "Will you
please let us through into Sleepy Valley?"
Do you think the deed is worth doing?" asked the Packa Pooh
"Oh! yes, indeed," answered Ricky, "if I do a good deed I can have my
boat back."
"And I will get a coat of moss to wear," said Lucky.
"We will lose our squeak and creak," cried the shoes.
Then that settles it, I can't let you through," croaked the Packa Pooh.
"You must! you must!" they begged in a chorus.
I cannot," said the Packa Pooh shaking his large strangely shaped head.
"Please tell us why," begged Ricky.
You are thinking only of your reward. Return when you wish to reap
only the happiness a good deed can bring," and, as if tired out after this
long speech, he yawned loudly and closed his eyes.
Page Twenty-three


"My goodness, he says a lot of things I don't understand, what are we
going to do?" asked Ricky helplessly.
"I don't really know," answered Lucky, glaring at the Packa Pooh perched
high above him.
"You might try the Sleepless One, who lives on the crown of Thoughtful
Hill's head," said the Packa Pooh in a bored tone, as he opened one large
eye and pointed with his beak to the left.
"Thank you," said Ricky, and not risking any more questions they hurried
off in search of the Sleepless One.
Ricky felt like crying, but he bit his lip instead, and said in a choked
voice, "Silly old bird."
"He's the meanest ever," said the shoes, creaking and squeaking shrilly.
"Yes," said Lucky, "he looked as if he would have liked to peck me. I
remember once when I was rolling along a fierce bird swooped down think-
ing I was a field mouse, when he discovered I was only a rolling stone, he
gave me an awful whack with his beak, the spiteful thing. I have never
had much time for birds since."
I don t blame you," said Squeaky."Creaky and I have been suspicious
of them ever since we heard two wagtails discussing us. One had the im-
pertinence to say we would make a cosy nesting place."
"I didn't find you very cosy," said Lucky rudely.
Nobody asked you to," cried the shoes angrily,
"Stop quarrelling," said Ricky excitedly, "this must be Thoughtful Hill."
As they gazed up, the hill seemed to become steeper.
Page Twenty-four


CHAPTER SIX
A Hasty Retreat
THE hill sat with his head resting thoughtfully on his chest, gazing down
at them, with a deep frown on his brow.
"He looks very forbidding," said Lucky in a flat voice, "I don't think I
can roll up."
"I'll have to push you," sighed Ricky, "I hope you won't be too heavy."
Well help to make you walk with ease," said the shoes cheerfully.
So with much pushing and blowing, they started up the hill. They had
only gone a short distance when Ricky complained that he was tired.
"Well, sit down and think for a while," said the hill kindly.
Thank you, Mr. Thoughtful Hill," said Ricky, so down he sat with Lucky
leaning against him for comfort.
Down below them stretched Sleepy Valley. "It's a very pretty place," re-
marked Ricky.
Very beautiful," said the hill. "But take my advice, do not tarry there and
beware of the stream of everlasting sleep."
It sounds a bit frightening," said Ricky in a scared voice.
No, not frightening, very comforting for some, but not for you little boy, so
remember should you go through Sleepy Valley, hasten guickly."
I wonder how the little girl fann is," said Ricky, "it must be awful to be
frightened."
"Yes," answered Lucky, uncomfortably, for he knew he hadn't really
thought about her at all, but only of his moss coat.
Page Twenty-five


Thoughtful Hill sot gazing down at them.
Page Twenty-six


Squeaky and Creaky looked down at their toes in silence.
"I am afraid you have been thinking only of yourselves," said the hill
reprovingly.
The little party looked very ashamed.
"We had better hurry," said Ricky, "or we will never reach the top of your
head."
So off they started again, Thoughtful Hill became steeper than ever, and
Lucky began to get heavier and heavier.
"Puff, puff," went Ricky. "Squeak and Creak" went the shoes. On reach-
ing the bridge of Thoughtful Hill's nose they sat down again, and thought
for a while.
Ricky, sitting with his little head propped on his hand, thought of Jann, it
didn't seem to matter any more if he didn't get his boat back, saving her
seemed much more important, and with a warm feeling in his little heart he
felt very happy.
Turning to Lucky he said, "I don't care if I never see my old boat any
more, as long as we find Jann."
"Me, too," said Lucky stoutly, "who wants to wear a coat of moss?"
"What does it matter if we squeak and creak forever, Jann is much more
important," cried the shoes.
"I am very glad to hear it," said the hill, "I don't think it will be necessary
for you to visit the Sleepless One now."
"Oh! I think we had better do as we were told, you see the Packa Pooh
told us to see her," said Ricky seriously.
"Very well," said the hill, "you can please yourself."
The rest of the way was quite easy, for their hearts were light, and they
reached the crown of Thoughtful Hill's head before they knew it.
They were very surprised to see down below them a huge griller with
hundreds and hundreds of queer little creatures sizzling on it, and their
cries and weeping filled the air as they begged to be taken off.
Lucky and Ricky nearly jumped into the griller with fright, when a voice
cried,
"Have you a conscience to grill."
They looked around and saw a lady with a crown of jet black hair which
fell to the ground. Gazing at them with large dark eyes, she said,
Page Twenty-seven


The Sleepless One picked up a Conscience with her pronged fork.
Page Twenty-eight


"Come over here, boy, and let me look at you."
Ricky obeyed, and walked timidly over to her, with Lucky rolling beside
him.
For a long time she stared in silence at Ricky, and then she smiled.
I am going to let you keep your conscience, it's quite clear," and turning
her head, she forgot them altogether, as she gazed down into a large mirror.
Feeling very curious Ricky lent forward and tried to see what she was
doing, then he saw way, way down below through the mirror, little boys and
girls playing games, running and laughing, looking happy, some weeping,
some sleeping, so many that Ricky's head began to swim.
"Why are you watching them?" he questioned at last.
"Because lam the Sleepless One," answered the strange lady. "I have
been sitting here ever since the world began, watching for bad consciences
and grilling them whenever I think they need doing."
"I had to singe yours once."
"When?" asked Ricky.
"You copied in school, I let you off the first time, but not the second.'
"Oh! "said Ricky, "it was wicked, I don't do it now."
"No, I don't think you will again," said the Sleepless One, "your con-
science is quite clear, although it wasn't a short time ago, Thoughtful Hill
has been a great help."
"What did he do?" asked Ricky wonderingly.
"He made you think of others, he has a great head for right thinking, very
few little boys and girls ever have the good fortune to reach him."
She was interrupted by a cry from the griller, and a little creature burnt
quite black jumped high into the air, with the flames greedily leaping up
after it.
"I'll be good, I will be good, I will, I will."
Done to a turn, said the Sleepless One, picking up a pronged fork and
lifting it off the griller. She then dropped it into a huge cauldron of water.
Ricky clutched his hands together, he felt quite upset, but he was over-
joyed when after a few seconds the little creature was picked out, not
Page Twenty-nine


drowned as Ricky had thought it would be, but black no longer and shin-
ing and as clear as crystal.
"Now, go home," said the Sleepless One, and giving it a little slap, she
told it to be good. With a cry of joy it ran off and disappeared from sight.
"That was a very difficult conscience, it had to be burnt black before it
would turn over a new leaf," said the Sleepless One, turning back to her
mirror.
"Do you want us to wait?" asked Ricky, he did hope she wouldn't, he
didn't like her very much, she was very strange.
"I didn't want you in the first place," she answered impatiently.
Ricky stood there helplessly, not knowing what to do next.
"Well, what are you waiting for," she asked, "if you stay here any longer
I will be forced to singe your conscience, do you want me to?"
"Oh! no," gasped Ricky, and crying out, "hurry Lucky," he gave him a
push, and ran off as fast as his shoes would carry him.
"Run, run, Ricky," squeaked and creaked the shoes.
Lucky rolled down Thoughtful Hill at a terrific speed, with Ricky trying to
catch up with him, only to lose his balance and fall head over heels, down,
down, never stopping until he reached the bottom.
"Don't be in such a hurry, stop and think for a while," Thoughtful Hill cried.
"We can't stop," cried Lucky, "we're in a hurry," and he rolled faster than
ever. He met Ricky at the bottom and they lay in silence getting back their
breath.
"You kicked us about as you fell," complained the shoes.
"You make me tired, making a fuss over nothing," said Lucky crossly.
"It is something to make a fuss about, how would you like to have bruises
all over you, unfeeling stone that's what you are?" cried the shoes angrily.
"Oh! stop fighting," said Ricky, "it's so silly."
The shoes became sulky and silent. After they were quite rested, they
said goodbye to Thoughtful Hill, not forgetting to thank him for the help he
had given them.
"Don't mention it," he said, "come and visit me again sometime."
They promised not to forget as they hurried off to find the Packa Pooh
bird.
Page Thirty


CHAPTER SEVEN
Lucky Becomes Curious
HE looked as if he had been expecting them and nodded his head wisely
when they told him all that had happened on Thoughtful Hill. As he
listened he walked up and down tapping the tree with his long beak.
At last he said, "On putting two and two together, I find as I expected
they make four. No don't start asking foolish guestions."
Ricky had opened his mouth to say something, but he quickly shut it
again.
"Hmm!" said the Packa Pooh, "there is nothing like a little arithmetic. I
work out all my problems that way."
"What has that got to do with us?" asked Ricky hurriedly, for he was
afraid the Packa Pooh would stop him speaking again.
"Quite a lot," answered the Packa Pooh. "Everything works out correctly
in time, and what better example could one have than arithmetic."
Ricky had no answer to give, the Packa Pooh spoke in too great a riddle
for him to understand.
Then the strange bird flew down and thrusting aside some thick green
foliage, with his beak, told them they were free to pass through into Sleepy
Valley. They needed no further encouragement and were quite relieved to
see the last of the Packa Pooh.
The Valley was the most beautiful place Ricky had ever seen, and cas-
cading down gentle slopes were masses of vividly colored flowers, their
yellow, orange and reds blazed in the sun, as they flamed hotly against the
soothing green of their leaves. The air was hot and heavy with the scent
of blossoms, bees droned lazily by, and crickets beat out a shrill tattoo in
accompaniment.
Page Thirty-one


Everything seemed wrapped in peaceful dreaminess, a stream flowed
lazily by, dreaming its way past slender poplars, their heads crowned with
silver leaves.
Lucky had often seen their brothers and sisters in his travels
Birds of many colours were perched in their branches, but seemed too
sleepy to wonder at the intrusion of the little party.
"I feel very thirsty and sleepy," yawned Ricky, looking longingly at the
smooth, green grass that grew beside the clear stream. He was surprised
to hear a silvery voice say, "Come closer, come closer."
"Who is speaking?" asked Ricky.
Come and drink me, sang the voice, you have never tasted anything
like me, I'm so refreshing, so cool."
Don t do any such thing, remember Thoughtful Hill's warning, and King
Nodum Nutum," cried Squeaky.
"Do you really believe I would go to sleep forever? It is only a stream. I
think it s very silly, said Ricky, surely it wouldn t hurt to have just one little
sip."
"Drink me, drink me," begged the stream.
But this is the stream of everlasting sleep, so you had better do as you
were told," warned Squeaky.
"Oh! I suppose so," said Ricky crossly, stamping on ahead and feeling
drowsier at every step.
Lucky had been rolling along, not saying a word, his little round eyes
taking everything in, he was filled with a burning curiosity to see the owner
of the voice, he thought it would be quite clever if he rolled down softly
and had a very quick peep. So without telling Ricky he rolled off, he was
very careful not to roll too fast, but his curiosity got the better of him and
throwing all caution to the wind, he rolled faster.
"Drink me, drink me," murmured the stream.
Lucky did not intend to drink the stream, and feeling very cunning he
rolled closer, and closer.
Too late to turn back as Ricky shouted a warning. The stream with a
chuckle of glee lapped up the bank and splashed Lucky from top to bot-
tom, with a little gasp of fright he rolled into a hole in the bank and stuck
Page Thirty-two


there with the stream washing over him. For a moment he struggled game-
ly to roll away, but suddenly he felt too tired to bother and his bright little
eyes dulled, and with a tired sigh his eyelids fluttered then closed and he
was sound asleep.
"Lucky, Lucky, what are we going to do?" cried Ricky, when he reached
his little friend, but there was no reply from Lucky except a faint snore.
"Oh! help, help, can't somebody do something to help me?" begged Ricky.
"Stop making such a hideous noise," said a large dragonfly, as he flew
lazily past, and the yellow daffodils swayed their heads and kept smiling
indifferently as they gazed at their reflections in the stream, "We are so
beautiful," they whispered to the bees.
"They don't care," said Squeaky and Creaky, "we must pull him out, it's
our only chance to wake him."
"But I can't pull him out, without getting you both wet," answered Ricky
miserably.
"But you can't do without us, Ricky, you can't do without our help, we'll
be all right, don't worry."
"Well, hold your breath and don't taste a single drop," he still hesitated,
feeling at a loss. Then brushing a tear from his cheek, he looked down at
his faithful little leather shoes, with their tough leathery faces, looking
pathetically eager to help while their brown button eyes gazed up at him,
waiting. "I'd miss Lucky terribly if we had to leave him behind," thought
Ricky.
"Hurry, hurry, let's pull him out, don't worry about us!" cried the shoes,
tugging at his feet.
All this time the stream kept whispering, "Drink me, drink me."
Without wasting another second Ricky ran down the bank and splashed
through the shallow water, the stream sucked eagerly at his legs and tried
to pull him down into its arms. Ricky caught a glimpse of an elfin face gaz-
ing up at him smiling wickedly, he pretended that he had not seen it, and strug-
gled towards Lucky, at last catching hold of a limp little arm, he manfully
pulled and dragged him out of the hole, and with the shoes guiding his feet
away from treacherous holes under the water, he reached the bank, and pulled
Lucky up onto the soft green grass. He had hurried as much as possible
hoping that Squeaky and Creaky would be all right, hastily making sure
Page Thirty-three


Lucky could not roll back into the stream that was muttering angrily, he
looked down at his shoes, and they, too, were fast asleep.
As Ricky gazed at them and then at Lucky, he felt a sense of terrifying
fear, the drone of bees and chirruping of the crickets seemed very loud in
the hot heavy silence. As he looked around at the silent beautiful flowers,
he thought they smiled at him as if at some secret that amused them. It
didn't seem a beautiful valley any longer, it was as if in that heavily
scented valley something unseen watched him and waited.
He felt like calling out aloud for his mother, but she! where was she? He
shook his head in a frightened way.
"If I were you I would hurry out of this valley," whispered a voice.
Ricky jumped a little to one side, and saw a Flamingo standing beside
him.
Ricky had seen them in a picture a long time ago, but he remembered,
and his fear left him; the bird looked very friendly.
"What are you doing here?" he asked.
"Oh! just passing through," said the Flamingo rather sadly, Ricky
thought, he noticed that its wing hung down at its side and just at the top of
it Ricky saw a dark red stain.
"Poor bird, someone has hurt you," said Ricky, "are you in pain?"
"Don't ask questions," replied the Flamingo, "you must hurry away.'
And it moved off rather awkwardly with its wing hanging down by its
side.
"Hurry, hurry," it seemed as if the word echoed from one end of the Val-
ley to the other. Running hastily to Lucky he caught hold of him and began
to push. As he pushed him he kept saying, "Wake up, wake up, Lucky." It
didn't do any good, but it was comforting to hear the sound of his own voice
echoing hollowly back to him. He had nearly reached the end of the Val-
ley when he looked back to see where the Flamingo had gone. He couldn't
see him on the ground, and then something made him look at the stream, and
floating swiftly down it was the beautiful bird, its head resting on the water
and its wings spread out. "It's going with the stream of everlasting sleep,
perhaps it will make it better," thought Ricky, and not knowing why he began
to cry. He was still crying as he rolled Lucky out of Sleepy Valley, and down
into Mushroom Plain.
Page Thirty-four


CHAPTER EIGHT
A Timely Meeting
“TTERE, here, why all those tears?" asked a voice, and brushing his wet
face, Ricky saw a little old man sitting on a mushroom.
"My friends have gone to sleep and they won't wake up," answered
Ricky.
"How did it happen?" asked the Little Man. While Ricky was explaining,
the stranger sat crosslegged on top of the mushroom weaving yards and
yards of cobwebby material of many colors and patterns.
When Ricky had finished his story, the Little Man said, "All so unneces-
sary, when will people stop being curious, it is the cause of so much trouble?"
"I'm sure I don't know," answered Ricky trying to look very wise. After
a short silence, he asked the Little Man his name.
"I'm the Dream Weaver, I weave all day and I weave all night, weave
and weave forever and ever," he answered with a sigh.
"Do you think you could do something to wake Lucky and my shoes?"
Ricky asked pleadingly.
In a very unconcerned manner the Dream Weaver kept on weaving, and
just when Ricky was giving up hope, he called:
"Wide Awake, Wide Awake, where are you hiding?"
Ricky heard a soft giggle, and peering at him from behind a large pink
and white mushroom was a dainty little fairy, her gossamer-like wings flut-
tered back and forth as she stood there.
Wide Awake, Wide Awake," called the Dream Weaver crossly.
Page Thirty-five


Ricky meets the Dream Weaver.
Page Thirty-six


"Here I am," called the Fairy, "what ever is bothering you now?"
"Come here at once," said the Dream Weaver, "and don't be so imper-
tinent."
Wide Awake alighted on a mushroom in front of him.
"I want you to release that tiresome stone from the sleeping spell," said
the Dream Weaver.
"Why should I?" asked Wide Awake, naughtily, and she flew down and
tripped lightly over Lucky's face, peering at it and giggling.
"You had better do as you're told," said the Dream Weaver. "Remember
how upset you were, when I wove you into a dream the last time you dis-
obeyed me."
"Very well," said Wide Awake meekly, "I'll wake the silly thing up."
Ricky thought she was very rude, but had sense enough not to remark, so
he stood and watched in silence. Wide Awake did not appear to notice him.
Hopping off Lucky she fluttered her wings and disappeared.
"Where did she go?" asked Ricky.
"Have patience," replied the Dream Weaver weaving busily
"There seems to be an awful lot of dreams woven," said Ricky, for as far as
he could see was the cobwebby material, it billowed and flowed far into the
distance.
"I have to keep it encircling the world for without dreams it would be a
sorry place," answered the Dream Weaver.
Just then Wide Awake returned with her arms full of bright green leaves,
and alighting on the same pink and white mushroom she began to plait
them together. When she had woven them into a circle, she flew down and
placed the wreath on top of Lucky's head.
Then flying back to the mushroom she said:
"Little Myrtle leaves,
Tickle him lightly, and wake him please,
Lift from him the spell that you know of full well,
Don't let it beat you
This I beseech you
In you I trust for wake he must."
Page Thirty-seven


Wide Awake breaks the magic spelL
Page Thirty-eight


As soon as Wide Awake finished speaking the leaves started to rustle and
flutter up and down, in a second Lucky began to roll madly back and for-
wards, and spin around and around. It was such a funny sight, Ricky couldn't
help laughing. The leaves clung to Lucky in a most amazing fashion, then
with a cry of alarm he opened his eyes, calling, "Save me, save me. Some-
one is tickling me to dust."
Darting forward Wide Awake plucked the leaves off Lucky, and telling
Ricky to keep his feet together she dropped them on the shoes, and once
again she chanted, and the leaves began to rustle and flutter, and with cries
of "Ah's" and "Oh's", the shoes began to blink their eyes, and at last awoke.
"My work is done," cried Wide Awake, and flying down she picked up the
leaves and disappeared.
Ricky ran over to Lucky, "Oh! Lucky, Lucky," he said, "I am so glad you
are awake."
"Ricky, Ricky," cried the shoes, excitedly, "we have lost our squeak and
creak."
"Why, it's wonderful," said Ricky, running back and forth to make per-
fectly sure, but they ran smoothly without one squeak or creak. At last out
of breath he stopped.
"We are so happy we feel like crying," said the shoes, beaming up at
him with their brown button eyes.
"It's only what you deserve," said the Dream Weaver, "you were most
unselfish going in to save Lucky."
"Yes, they were very brave," agreed Ricky.
Just then Lucky gave a frightful sneeze, it was so loud and strong, that the
force of it blew Ricky up into the air over a hill and down into a dark tun-
nel. Lucky rolling madly after him plopped right behind him.
"Oh! oh!" he cried, "where am I?"
Thirty-nine


CHAPTER NINE
The Defeat of Fear
"T UCKY!" called Ricky, "where are you?"
"It's so dark," whispered the shoes.
As they crept along they could hear, rustle, rustle, whisper, whisper, all
around them.
They must be the Jailing Rulings, thought Ricky.
"If I see a Jailing Ruling I am going to roll on it," said Lucky boldly.
They had been stumbling along through the shadows for a long time when
they heard the sound of crying, breathlessly, they listened.
"It must be Jann," they cried, "let's hurry."
And they ran forward; on turning a corner the shadows parted with
startling suddenness and they were stopped by a wall of bars, and there
behind them stood a little girl huddled in a corner.
Ricky ran to the bars and shook them.
"Are you Jann?" he asked excitedly.
The little girl stared at him in silence, then began to cry softly.
Please answer me," cried Ricky, "we have come to save you."
We all have," cried Lucky and the shoes together.
It s no use," wept the little girl, "I will never be able to get away from
here."
Page Forty


"We'll get you out," answered Ricky stoutly. While he was speaking the
shadows began to gather around them again, they made weird shapes,
creeping and flitting about them.
"Oh! oh!" cried Jann, "I'm so frightened, so frightened."
As if enjoying her terror the shadows crowded around her faster than
ever, and all the time soft whispering could be heard behind them.
"We must do something to save her," said Ricky desperately.
"I know what we'll do," said Lucky. "Let's catch a Jailing Ruling. lam
sure when she sees one she won't be frightened any more."
"That's a good idea," cried Ricky excitedly. "It's only because she can't
see them that she is afraid."
So the chase began, Lucky rolling back and forth trying to catch one.
Ricky and the shoes shouting with disappointment as the shadows slipped
away from them. They tried running, then creeping, but the Jailing Rulings
must have been very cunning, for they escaped just in time. The chase grew
so exciting and noisy Jann became curious and peeped through her thin
little fingers at them.
At last Lucky gave a cry of triumph as he rolled on top of a shadow, at
the same time pinning a Jailing Ruling underneath it. Ricky ran up breath-
lessly to help him, and was just in time to grab hold of it as Lucky rolled off.
Pulling it out from behind the shadow he held up the most frightened little
creature he had ever seen, its drab dark clothes hung on its thin bony little
body, and it squeaked for mercy like a frightened mouse.
"Why," laughed Ricky, "fancy anybody being frightened of you."
"Please put me down," quavered the Jailing Ruling.
"Why do you go about frightening people?" asked Ricky giving it a shake.
"We don't," whispered voices, looking around Ricky saw dozens of Jail-
ing Rulings creeping from out of the shadows, such pale thin ugly little creat-
ures, when Ricky looked at them they jumped nervously.
"It's her fault," they whispered, pointing at Jann, "she made us."
"How silly, how could she make you?" asked Lucky glaring at them
stonily. "We were born when she made us up in her mind," they replied.
Page Forty-one


The Jailing Bulings whispered in the shadows.
Page Forty-two


"Oh!" said Ricky, "well let her out from behind those bars."
"We can't; she is the only one that can do that," they answered cluster-
ing together.
"Don't be silly," said Ricky crossly, giving the Jailing Ruling another
shake.
"I'll roll on you," growled Lucky.
"We'll stamp on you," cried the shoes.
"It's true, it's true," cried Ricky's captive. "She made her prison, they are
bars of fear, she put them there herself.
"Now I'm sure I'm going to roll on you," said Lucky, moving grimly to-
wards the shivering Jailing Ruling.
"Stop, stop, it's true, it's true," cried a joyful voice, "I did make them, look
I m free." Jann stood with her little hands clasped together with a look of joy
on her face, as one by one the prison bars disappeared. "I'll never be afraid
again," she said, and as the last bar disappeared she ran joyfully towards
Ricky and Lucky.
Ricky forgot all about the Jailing Ruling in the excitement and seeing his
chance, the little creature wriggled out of his hand and scuttled away, and
with it went the others.
"You let him go," cried Lucky. "What a shame."
It doesn t matter now, they can't hurt Jann any more," said Ricky.
And with the disappearance of the Jailing Ruling the shadows gradu-
ally followed them, and it grew quite light, and floating towards them was
their violet rocket, as it alighted at their feet the little door opened and swung
gently to and fro.
Why it s our rocket," said Ricky in surprise.
Well, lets get in, now that it has found us," said Lucky.
Safely inside it they shut the door and away they sped.
Paqe Forty-three


CHAPTER TEN
Happy Landing
I WONDER where it's taking us now?" said the shoes, "we're getting tired
of travelling."
"I'd like to go home," said Jann.
The rocket gave a shake then stopped and Ricky pushed open the door,
and discovered that they had made a perfect landing on a large window
ledge.
Jann, peeping over his shoulder, gave a squeal of surprise, "Why, it's
my bedroom," she said, "please help me to get back into it."
Manfully Ricky held on to her as she scrambled over the edge.
Looking small and far away she waved goodbye as the rocket sailed into
space.
"Come back again some day," they heard her call.
"We promise," they answered. No sooner had they spoken, than the
rocket gave a violent lurch, and with a click the door flew open, and before
they knew what had happened they fell out.
When Ricky opened his eyes he was delighted to find that he was lying
under the friendly Beech Tree. As he lifted himself from the ground his foot
kicked something hard, and looking down he saw a shiny little black stone.
"Why, it's Lucky," he cried, and bending down he picked him up. Poor
little Lucky would never roll again, for in his fall he had broken a piece off
his side. Very carefully Ricky took him down to the edge of Sunnybank
Stream and making a cosy shelter in the ground he set him down.
Page Forty-four


"Goodbye, Lucky," he said, "111 come and see you, I hope you get your
coat of moss."
Then he turned to go home, but stopped with a shout of joy, for just a
short way down the stream was his boat caught in some reeds. He care-
fully took off his shoes before he waded out for it.
With his boat tucked under his arm, he put his shoes back on again, giv-
ing them an affectionate pat. They were as silent as could be and Ricky
understood.
If any little girl or boy cares to take a walk down Sunnybank Stream they
may see, if they look very, very hard, dear little Lucky sitting proudly in the
sun, wearing the smartest coat of moss that one could ever wish to see.
Page Forty-five


Page Forty-six




' •
/ ■_
s ••




N
~
_■
A : ■ '
kA ■- »
