

''ftv
■,
~TOj si Bourke-st. urke ~ Rt * East
« |Bj
DRUGS, CHEMICALS, PATENT MEDICINES, ?
v |||l and Water Beds, and Cushions —Elastic Stockings, Belts, &c., &c.
»
J<s


THE NATIONAL insurance company OF AUSTRALASIA
f i M t
(LIMITED.)
HEAD OFFICE IN MELBOURNE — AM3 MWAMMSTMM* BRANCH ° M ’’ IC ' E -
No. 1 Market Buildings, Collins-st. West. | Bourke-st. E. —R. G. JOHNSON, Agent.
With Branch Offices at Nos. 34 d 36 LYDIARD STREET. BALLARAT, in VIEW PLACE. SANDHURST, and in MALOP STREET, GEELONG,
BOARD OP DIRECTORS, MELBOURNE.—Thos. Moubray, Esq., J.P.,.Chairman ; Thos. Alston, Esq., J.P., Vice-Chairman ; Hon. Caleb J. Jenner, M.L.0.; Henry
Stevenson, Esq.; Matthew Lang, Esq.; G. D. Carter Esq.,M.L.A. Secretary-Wm, Macredie, Esq., JP. Solicitors—Malleson, England and Stewart.
Risks Accepted at Lowest Rates of Premiums. Bush Fires and Gas Explosions Covered by the without extra charge.
In the Guarantee Department.a Periodical Distribution of Profits is made to the Assured
ADELAIDE. —W. D. Reed. Ballarat Directors—lhos. Clevg, Esq.; Robert Lewis, Ee
Esq. Geelong Directors—Charles Andrews, Esq. ; Hon. G. F Belcher, M.L C.; H. F
Esq., J.P. ;R. Burrows, Esq., M.P. ;W. C. Yahland, Esq., J.P. Secretary—H. Yon, di
Esq., UP ; James Coghlan, Esq., J.P.; George Millson, Esq. Secretary—John W.Rail,
F. Cameron, Esq. J. M. Anderson, Esq., Agent. Sandhurst Directors—G. .Aspinall,
der. Heyde, Esq
SWALLOW & ARIELL,
JOHN LANG,
IIBSWS1 1 MAIOTAOIUSIIS*,
TREACLE AND GOLDEN SYRUP REFINERS,
Factory — SANDRIDGE, Melbourne Office & Depot—4 QUEEN STREET.
7840TX04& iHSIS M4EBS,
List of Maufactures—
BISCUITS.-A .8.0., Abernethy, Albert. Arrowroot, Balmoral, Beaconsfield,
Biscuit Comfits, Butter, Cabin Bread, Charms, Coffee, Cocoanut, Crimped Edged
Victoria, Prince of Wales, Crackne.ls, Currant Luncheon, Dessert, Dominoes,
Exhibition, Fancy Mixed, Funny Folks, Gem, Ginger Nut, International, Leaflet.
Lemon Drops, Lime, highly recommended for Invalids, Luncheon, Macaroons, Milk
Digestive, Milk, Nic Nacs, Nursery, Oatmeal, Pencil, Pearl, Picnic, Plain Rusks,
Queen’s Drops, B atafias, Rice, Savoys, Shortbread, Small Cabin, Soda, Sultana 3, Sutton
Rusks, Tea Cakes, Thin Captains’ Tom Thumb, Wafer, Water, Wine, Zoological. '
CAKES. —Canterbury, Salisbury Iced, Christmas and Family, Wedding, Tea-
Meeting, Bowen Gingerbread, PLiUM PUDDINGS, Mince-Meat, Farinaceous
Food, Coursing Biscuits for Dogs,
OUTFITTER & HOSIER,
8 BOURKE STREET WEST,
MELB
OURNE.
6GGG BEBEEBE MMMM MMMM
GGGGGQ- EEBEEEB MM MM MM MM
GG GGG BE MM MM MM MM
GG GG EB MM MM MM MM
GG BE MM MMMMM MM
GG EB wwww MM MMMM MM
GG MM MM MM
GG BB liE MM M MM
GG EB MM MM
GG GGGG EE MM MM
GG GGGG EB MM MM
GGGGGG EBBEBBE MM MM
GGGG BBBBEEB MM MM
Photographs,
25 for 2s- 6d.
D. EDELSTEN,
55 & 57 COLLINS STREET E. (Opposite Age office.)
THREE FIRST PRIZES,
Two in Melbourne, One Dunedin
French Stay Warehouse,
WILLIAM RADFORD,
Wholesale & Retail Tinsmith,
Importer of Galvanised Iron, Tin Plates, &c.,
19 LITTLE BOURKE-ST. E.
Melbourne.
Awarded Silver Medal at Exhibition of 1872-73.
B ITHS, TANKS, CHEESE TUBS, YATS, and all kinds
Domestic and Dairy Utensils on hand and made to order.
All kinds of Passengers’ Tinware always on hand.
92 RUSSELL STREET.
UN
H
O CO
o »
cC
$ -
co
DC -j u iHliMiNi U
u s usmmM
w -i ■ 1
_
i
□C K ESTABLISHED 1852.
J
-a HUXLEY PARKER CO
Russell Street Melbourne.
"'CO
K. co
HD MARBLE AND ENAMELLED SLATE
_ _ CC ft/lAMTtri oir-/-»,-o
2 MANTELPIECES.
JO POLISHED GRANITE AND MARBLE
os HEADSTONES,
g MONUMENTS AND CROSSES,
g CEMETERY RAILINGS
o
o
VO
S
w
vo
o
| -n
VO
a
CO
CO
tn
t- 1
t- 1
12°
£
h!
•H
t- 1
w
n
o
t- 1
r"
3
CO
CO
VO
CO
w
H
CO
X
c
X
r
m
<
VM
TJ
>
VO
X
M
VO
e?
o
o
M
v*
REPAIRS NEATLY DONE.
Melbourne International Exhibition.
VISITORS
Will find
Comfort, Civility, and Centrality
Combined at
THE CLARENCE.
Ales, Wines, and Spirits of the Choicest Quality.
Tea, Coffee, Billiards, and Oysters.
JOHN WHITEMAN,
PROPRIETOR,
Designs and Prices Supplied.
CORNER OF COLLINS & ELIZABETH STS.


ROBERT CARTER,
6 IITTIE COLIIIS STKEET EAST, IELBOUEBE,
MANUFACTURER
OF WARRANTED
AND
COLONIAL GOLD JEWELLERY
OF GUARANTEED QUALITY.
Repairs of Every Description
RECEIVE PERSONAL ATTENTION AND ARE FINISHED THE SAME DAY
ANY SINGLE ARTICLE AT THE WHOLESALE PRICE. ELECTRO-PLATING AND GILDING,
PRICE LISTS FREE.
A certain and safe Brown or Black Dy
The Great Remedy for Neryous Debility and Special Weakness.
lIIIIS MAIM 1
ao®»"S mis.
81&TaB-OOATSD .AHTIBILIOVB HIM,
®g„ sroi&s’E litis & iffiijji fiaiii.
a@®»*S O®lM BOSYIHS,
Established 20 Years as a Certain Cure for Corni
OASStlSlll §HIIF“®SPf ll® SriOlSlO.
100 lbs. is sufficient to Cure 6,000 Sheep affected with Tick only, or 3,000 if the Scab. Price,
only Is. per lb. Testimonials from the leading flock owners in the Western District
may be seen.


EVERYB
THE NATIONA
HEAD OFFICE IN MBLBOURE
No. 1 Market Buildings
With Branch Offices at Nos. 34 & c
BOARD OF DIRECTORS, MELBOURNE.—
Stevenson, Esq.; Matthew Lang, Esq.; G. D. Gi
Risks Accepted at Lowest Rates of
In the Guarantee Department a Periodical Dii
ADELAIDE. —W. D. Reed. Ballarat Directo:
Esq. Geelong Directors—Charles Andrews, Esq
Esq., J.P. ; R. Burrows, Esq., M.P.; W. C. Yah
SWALLOW &
BUOVIT maid:
TREACLE AND GOLDEN S'
Factory—SANDRIDGE. Melbourne Offict
List of Maufactu
BISCUITS.—A.B.C., Abernethy, Albert,
Biscuit Comfits, Butter, Cabin Bread, Charms
Victoria, Prince of Wales. Cracknels, Curn
Exhibition, Fancy Mixed, Funny Folks, Gem,
Lemon Drops, Lime, highly recommended for I
Digestive, Milk, Nic Nacs, Nursery, Oatmeal,
Queen’s Drops, B atafias, Rice, Savoys, Shortbread _____
Rusks, Tea Cakes, Thin Captains’ Tom Thumb, Wafer, Water, Wine, Zoological. '
CAKES. —Canterbury, Salisbury Iced, Christmas and Family, Wedding, Tea-
Meeting, Bowen Gingerbtead, PJjUM PUDDINGS, Mince-Meat, Farinaceous
Pood, Coursing Biscuits for Dogs.
GGGG EEEEEBB MMMM MMMM
GGGGGG BBBBBEB MM MM MM MM
GG GGG EE MM MM MM MM
GG GG EE MM MM MM MM
GG EE MM MMMMMMM
GG EE-pTjTji-r, MM MMMM MM
-mTT' -C J T J ih.C J -VfTVT HTTVT MU
GG MM MM MM
OG MM M MM
GG EE MM MM
GG GGGG EE MM MM
GG GGGG BE MM MM
GGGGGG BEEBBEB MM MM
GGGG EBEBBEB MM MM
Photographs, g
25 for 2s- 6d.
D. EDELSTEN,
55 & 57 COLLINS STREET E. (Opposite Age office.)
H
O CO
o «
CC
<3 -
CO
s
DC
UJ s
S> w
>Xi j
DC £
< -
Cu d
w
*> co
k CO
>" g
U -
_J °
> °5
x I
D s
DC
ESTABLISHED 1852.
[ g c
V S X
1 - r-
o
z n
s -<
CO VM
P TJ
1 -I >
co
V/V " / t- 1
w A
ie - e m
■ ATE c DO
S 3
CO
,BLE J§ gp
SES. m _
3 o
co /-s
HUXLEY PARKER CO
Russell Street Melbourne.
MARBLE AND ENAMELLED SLATE
MANTELPIECES.
POLISHED GRANITE AND MARBLE
HEADSTONES,
MONUMENTS AND CROSSES.
CEMETERY RAILINGS
Designs and Prices Supplied.
x
c
9?
O
o
H
VH
vIST FIRE.
THREE FIRST PRIZES,
Two in Melbourne, One Dunedin
French Stay Warehouse,
92 EUSSELL STREET.
ME L B
Will find
Combined at
F AUSTRALASIA
BRANCH OFF.ICE —
-R. G. JOHNSON, Agent.
IST, and in MALOP STREET, GEELONG.
e-Chairman ; Hon. Caleb J. Jenner, M.L.C.; Henry
—Malleson, England and Stewart.
r ered by the Policy without extra charge.
WM. MA.CRBDIB, Esq., J.P., Secretary.
J.P.; George Millson, Esq. Secretary—John W. Rail,
son, Esq., Agent. Sandhurst Directors—G. Aspinall,
IN LANG,
ITER & HOSIER,
STREET WEST,
OUENE.
WILLIAM RADFORD,
Wholesale & Retail Tinsmith,
Importer of Galvanised Iron, Tin Plates, &c.,
19 LITTLE BOURKE-ST. E.
Melbourne.
Awarded Silver Medal at Exhibition of 1872-73.
B VTHS, TANKS, CHEESE TUBS, VATS, and all kinds
Domestic and Dairy Utensils on hand and made to order.
All kinds of Passengers’ Tinware always on hand.
REPAIRS NEATLY DONE.
Melbourne International Exhibition.
VISITORS
Comfort, Civility, and Centrality
THE CLARENCE.
Ales, Wines, and Spirits of the Choicest Quality.
Tea, Coffee, Billiards, and Oysters.
JOHN AVI LITEM AX,
proprietor,
CORNER OF COLLINS & ELIZABETH STS.


ROBERT CARTER,
5 LITTLE GOLLIIS STREET EAST, IELBOIME,
MANUFACTURER
OF WARRANTED
AND
COLONIAL GOLD JEWELLERY
OF GUARANTEED QUALITY.
Repairs of Every Description
RECEIVE PERSONAL ATTENTION AND ARE FINISHED THE SAME DAY
ANY SINGLE ARTICLE AT THE WHOLESALE PRICE. ELECTROPLATING AND GILDING,
PRICE LISTS FREE
A certain and safe Brown or Black Dy
The Great Remedy for Nervous Debility and Special Weakness.
BOOB’S TIIHVS MMM Dll
boob’s siais.
8 SSS?lM®l,fl® ABffXBI&IOBB IXI&S
Ho®® ? i IS. MASAI'S SITUS & STOBAOB SIIIS.
H®o® ? S SOU
Established 20 Years as a Certain Cure for Corn;
HOOD'S S4Sl®iiai» SBIIF-BSFBISIS Sflilim
100 lbs. is sufficient to Cure 6,000 Sheep affected with Tick only, or 3,000 if the Scab. Price,
only Is. per lb. Testimonials from the leading flock owners in the Western District
may be seen.


MR. A. M. TOWNSEND, DENTIST,
FROM GEORGE STREET, HANOVER SQUARE, LONDON,
124 COLLINS STREET EAST-
IMPORTER OP PAPEE AND 8TATIONEET,
ACCOUNT BOOK MANUFACTURE!
Practical Bookbinder and Paper Euler,
44 COLLINS STREET EAST-
CHARLES 1AES0I, I.R.C.Y.S.,
Veterinary Surgeon
(By Appointment to His Excellency the Marquis of Normanby),
KIRK’S BAZAAR, BOURKE STREET WEST.
Private Residence ; 49 LATROBB STREET WEST.
M. BRAS
80 Elizal
(Opposite J. M'Ewa
Pianos, Organs
C H & $
oeth Street, IN
a and Co., Ironmongers).
& Harmoniums,
AND CREDIT BAN
OF AUSTRALASIA (Limited),
COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOUR
DIRECTORS :
ex. Kennedy Smith, C.B., J.P., M.P., Chairma
H. Davies, Esq. 1 Chas. R. Martin, B
TEREST ALLOWED ON DEPOSE
Twelve Months, 6 per cent.
Six Months, 5 per cent.
Three Months, 4 per cent.
Daily Balance, 4 per cent.
uthorised by Govemor-in-Council to guarar
linistration of estates,
G. N. TAYLOR, Manager
'IE,
5q * 90 Collins-st. East
rS ' Teeth
GUARANTEED INSTRUMENTS,
At the
LOWEST POSSIBLE CASH PRICES; a dn
Or on the
MOST LIBERAL TERMS FOR TIME PAYMENT.
HENRY M'KINLEY/ SOLICITOR,
tee HAS
Removed to Colonial Chambers,
86 COLLINS STREET WEST.
s\\\\\<\ wssw w\wwwwww WWW
P I A N
THE
IMPORTERS
0 F (
OF
D 1
t T K S.
SOLE AGENTS
yew FOB THE
1 “WOODS” ORGAN,
TIME P
SYS
ON
AYMENT g
SmalSi
Ul«l|f
T E M ill
1
■
wf
n
3
ALl
N E W E S r
HALT
AH 33
—
THE
MUSIC I
'-PRICE.
H
n
ml
I FINEST INSTRUMENT
IMPORTED.
i7 COLLINS STREET BAST, MELBOURNE,
AND 317 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.




r IK
T b
- NOVJ992
</, X 6,
Calendar for year 1881
The Natural History of Australia - - 5-28
Last of the Flock ..... 7
An Incident in Kangaroo Hunting - - 8
Emu Stalking - - - - - .14
The Bushman’s Yarn .... 20
Notable Australian Events, 1879-1880 ■ 29-30-31
The Black Swan ..... 32
NTS.
Obituary
- 35-36
Places Worth Visiting .... 36
The Great International Exhibition - - 37
Hints on Keeping Poultry .... 33
A Snake Adventure - - - - - 41
Gardeners’ Calendar .... 42-43
The Haunt op the Platypus - - - - 44
Table Talk - - - - - .47.43
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Last of the Flock - . . . - 4 The Black Swan - - - - - - 34
An Incident in Kangaroo Hunting - - 9 A Snake Adventure - 40
Emu Stalking - - - . . - 15 The Haunt of the Platypus
The Bushman’s Yarn
22-23
Prefatory Note.
knowledge of familiar and common objects in nature is muck less general, even amongst educated
Ifflf people, than is supposed. To many of our Australian-born youth their knowledge of Australian objects is
simply unattainable by ordinary means. The cities and towns they dwell in, the social habits and customs
of the people they live amongst, the books they read at school—all, in fact, that makes up the round of daily life,
are essentially European in character. For aught that he can perceive or observe a boy born and brought up in Mel-
bourne, or Ballarat, or Sandhurst, might just as well live in London or Manchester. Hardly a trace of the distinc-
tively Australian character of the locality is visible to his eye or audible to his ear. Even when he goes for an
excursion into the country, he meets with little or nothing that impresses on him the conviction that he is “at
the antipodes,” as the phrase is. He does not find the black-skinned aborigines encamped in the forest; he does
not encounter herds of kangaroo and flocks of emus bounding or stalking over the plains ; the woods around him are
not vocal with the notes of Australian birds ; he does not catch sight of the lyre-bird, the bower bird, and other rare
species of the feathered tribe in their native haunts; hardly can he discover a stray opossum, wombat, or a native cat.
All these indigenous living products of the soil are fast disappearing before the advance of settlement : in a few
years they will be virtually extinct to the dwellers in the settled districts. These considerations have induced
the proprietors of the Australian Pictorial Almanac to devote the present issue of their publication to a record of
the more familiar facts connected with the aboriginal, human and animal, life of the continent; and they earnestly
hope that the information supplied may be found both instructive and amusing by numerous householders in
these colonies.
DEX
TO ADVERTISEMENTS
ON COVER.
Andrews, W., Importer - - 1
Huxley, Parker, & Co., - - 2
Bridgland, G., Watchmaker - 1
Buchan & Co., Auctioneers - - 1
Lang, John, Outfitter and Hosier - 2
National Insurance Co. - - 2
Radford, Wm., Tinsmith - - 2
Australian Mutual Provident Society - 4
Beckwith, A. &. F., Hat Manufacturers 4
Colonial Mutual Insurance Company - 4
Chambers and Clutten, Marble Workers 4
Cafe Gunsler - - .4
Francis & Co., Chemists - - 1
M‘Gregor, Mr. D., Dentist - - 1
Swallow and Ariell, Biscuit Manufac-
turers .... 2
Decourtet, Madame, French Stay Ware-
house .... 2
Holloway, H. W., Optician - 4
Whiteman, John, Clarence Hotel - 2
Ford & Co., Chemists - . 3
Little, Bichard, Merchant Tailor - 4
Edelsten, D., Photographer - - 2
Paterson & Co., Coal Merchants - 4
ON COLOURED PAGES
Alston and Brown, Drapers
1 M‘Kinley, H., Solicitor
2 Danks, John, Brassfounder - 3
Hood & Co., Chemists - - 1 Marson, C., Veterinary Surgeon - 2 Kennedy & Co., Milliners and Drapers - 3
Brasch & Co., Importers Pianos, etc. - 2 Nicholson & Co., Music Publishers 2 Azzoppardi, Angelo, Stereotyper"*- 4
Detmold, W., Importer Paper, Station- Stevens, H., Dentist - - 2 Jennings, James, Optician - .4
ery, etc. .... 2 Townsend, Mr. M. A., Dentist - 2 Jenny, E., Engraver - - 4
Land Credit Bank - - -2 Cornell, Edward, Draper, etc. ■ 3 Sleap, F. A., Engraver - . 4




“THE LAST OP HIS FLOCK!”
“ All save one pet lamb.” —(See page 7.)


The Natural
History
ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.— The aboriginal inha-
MMt bitants of Australia belong to the Ethiopic, which is the
lowest family of the human race. They are ranked by eth-
nologists in the Papuan or Austral-Negro scale; but as
forming a special type, distinguishable both from the Papuans and
the Malays, and are decidedly inferior to the African negro in phy-
sical and mental attributes. Many writers, with great ingenuity,
have attempted to trace the original colonisation of Australia to a
horde of Malays passing over in canoes from the Indian Archi-
pelago, across Torres Straits to the unknown Southern Land. The
unknown Southern Land. The
colour of the skin, however, the formation of the skull and the
limbs, with the genius, the habits, and the general character of the
Australians, most nearly identify them with the negro race of
New Guinea. The weapons they employ are similar, and their
LANGUAGES OF THE ABORIGINES.
The languages of the native Australians
are very numerous, which is readily ex-
plained by the existence of so many
isolated tribes, some consisting of only a
few families. But notwithstanding their
great variety all these idioms seem to be
fundamentally connected. But beyond
this mutual relationship to each other
they have no clear affinity with any other
linguistic families of the Old and New
World, occupying, like the race itself, an
absolutely independent position. They
are of polysyllabic formation, and as the
accent generally falls on the penultimate
they are by no means inharmonious.
Besides this happy outward feature they
are also well developed in their inner
structure, and are especially rich in ex-
pression for such sensuous phenomena as
are most attractive to the savage. On
the other hand, they are incapable of
expressing abstract conceptions of any
sort. Yet they are fully adequate to the
limited intellectual requirements of the
native, whose world of thought is entirely
restricted to the material wants and
impulses of his daily existence. It is
also remarkable that the Australian, as is
evident from his speech, has no sense of
number —that is of abstract thought—
most of the tribes being able to count
only up to three, and some few to five,
which then becomes an indefinite expres-
sion of multitude. As might be expected
from their low mental culture, their
national poetry is of a very humble order,
their songs consisting of short, discon-
nected snatches of thought, without any
deeper associations than such as are
prompted by momentary excitement.
There are but scanty traces of fables,
legends, and epigrammatic or proverbial
poetry, such as are found in abundance,
and often happily expressed, amongst the
Hottentots and many other African races.
J/eN UAF^Y,
PHA.SBS OB THE MOON,"
First Quarter 7d. sh.
Full Moon 15d. 9h.
2£
3 M
I Tb
5 W
6 Th
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ABORIGINES.
The native man of Australia is of a dark, sooty-brown complexion,
the colour of the skin varying in particular localities from a colour
like that of chocolate to a deep earthy-black; with long black hair,
and a stature rather below that of the European. The height
of the males generally ranges between four and a-half and five and
a-half feet; the head is small, the trunk slender, the breast com-
monly arched and well-developed, the arms and legs of a rounded
and muscular form, the foot flat, and the heel somewhat protruding.
The hair is generally black, rough, lank, and coarse, though with
some tribes it is soft and curling, and with others approaches to a
woolly texture, like that of the negro. The facial angle is ordinarily
between 75° and 85°; the forehead low; the eyes large, far apart,
and half-covered by the upper lid, the iris being invariably of a deep
brown, the pupil large and of a jet black; the nose broad and flat,
of Australasia.
progress in the industrial arts, as well as their mental qualities
and conditions of existence, being infinitely lower than those of the
Malay, and closely similar to those of the Papuans, destroy the
theory of their Malay origin. Throughout the Continent the natives
exhibit a general conformity to one pattern, as regards features,
colour, and mental character. A man from the South would be recog-
nised as an Australian by the natives on the North coast. The
race, however, is not pure. There is an intermixture of blood by in-
ter-marriages with the islanders of Torres Straits and New Guinea.
The true theory seems to be that the Australian is a separate
branch of the Papuan race, with a large infusion of Papuan blood.
Traditions they have few, and these but faint and incoherent.
Wallace, however, holds them to be distinct from the Papuans,
and, like the animal and vegetable productions of the Continent, to
be the remnant of an ancient and peculiar race.
NATIVE WEAPONS.
Ik many places a log of wood, or a wide
slip of bark tied at either end, and
stuffed with clay, is the only mode in-
First Quarter ....7d. sh. 49m. p.m, | stuffed with clay, is the only mode in-
i’ 111 ! Moon Isd. 9h. 14m. p.m. . ven ted for crossing a river or arm of the
Last Quarter 23d. Gh. 27m p.m. &
Kew Moon 30d. lOh. 28m. a.m. | sea ; while in other parts, a large tree,
Perigee, id. ih. a.m.; Apogee, ltd. Ih. p.m. i roughly hollowed by fire, forms the canoe.
Peiigee, 29d. 2h. p.m. The nearest approximation to ingenuity
is the fishing net, prepared by the women
Bass discovered Wilson’s Promontory 1798 from fibres of grassy filaments. Their
First newspaper published in Melb. 1838 only cutting implements are made of
Grand cricket match, Eng, v. Aus., 1862 I stone, sometimes of jasper, fastened be-
A/r u -, u „„„ -iQK/j tween a cleft stick with a hard gum.
Melbourne first lighted with gas ... 1806 arms of offence or defence consist
Bass discovered Westernport ... 1804 of the gpear> boomerang) sever al kinds of
■ t i waddies or nullah-nullah, a small stone
Murray disc. Port Phillip in Lady j tomahawk> and bark sbieUl . no bo ws
V, r 1 vl" "i and arrows have ever been seen among
(8) First newspaper published in Van tbem . The spear is about ten feet long!
Diemen s Land 1810 ag thick ag 1 >8 fingel . tapering to a
Discovery of Bass Straits ... ... 1798 point, sometimes jagged, or barbed, and
Ed. Wilson, prop, of the Argus, died 1878 hardened in the fire ; this they can throw
The London foundered in the Bay of from fifty to sixty yards with great pre-
Biscay, 200 lives lost 1866 1 cision, the impetus being greatly iw-
Railway to Sunbury opened 1859 , creased by the use of the womera or
(15) First constitutional Government ! throwing-stick, which is a piece of wood
inaugurated 1857 from two to three feet in length, about
First play performed at Sydney ... 1796 ree inches broad at one end, and going
* J 1 off to a point at the other, to which a
sort of hook is fastened; the hook is
(20) Sch. Cumberland with surveying inserted into a small hole at the extremity
party from Sydney, enters P.P. lids. 1803 °* s P°, ar > anc \ tic womera being
T> i uwn)„ t i iqcq grasped at the broad part, acts somewhat
2° Burke and Wills s funeral 1863 « £ principle of the sling, enabling a
Wellington, New Zealand, founded... 1840 j po J m J to send the gear abovi a
hundred yards. The boomerang is a still
La Perouse anchored in Botany Bay ... 1788 more curious instrument. The waddie
Colony of New South Wales founded 1788 and nullah-nullah are clubs of different
sizes and solidity ; the tomahawk is a
piece of sharpened stone, frequently
quartz, fixed in a cleft stick with gum ;
First Governor of New Zealand arrived 1840 with this they cut notches in the trees,
The Ocean with the last of Collins’s and ascend them to the height of sixty
party, left Port Phillip 1804 feet, though without a branch, and far
L )[ too thick to be grasped.
with wide-spread nostrils; the cheeks hollow; the mouth wide
with thick lips, and white teeth, the lower jaw being unusually
short and widely expanded anteriorly. Measured by a European
standard of taste, the aborigines of Australia constitute, on the whole,
a very ugly race, perhaps more unprepossessing in appearance than
almost any other branch of the human family. Yet there are not a
few exceptions to be taken to this judgment, in so far as some of the
tribes are concerned, and especially in relation to those who have
remained most free from the deteriorative influence of intercourse
with the whites. The limbs of a well-formed Australian exhibit
considerable symmetry, and well-defined muscular development;
his agility and flexibility of body, when running or otherwise actively
engaged, are advantageously displayed; and when beheld in the
posture of striking, or throwing his spear, his attitude leaves
nothing to be desired in point of manly grace. He dislikes labour,
and his muscles and hands are those of a hunter. He can endure
fatigue, but will not bear burdens, dig laboriously, or suffer
restraint.


The Natural
BOCTAL8 OCTAL CUSTOMS OF THE ABORIGINES.—Their form
of government is patriarchal; each tribe consists of thirty
to fifty men, women, and children (sometimes more), and
has its own territory of about twenty or thirty square miles,
on which no other tribe is permitted to encroach. It is probable
that trespassing on each other’s grounds is one of the main causes of
their frequent quarrels, war being the occupation in which they
seem to delight most. Polygamy is practised. Women are treated
in the most inhuman manner, wives being procured from adjacent
tribes by stealing on the encampment during the night, beating a
young girl on the head till she falls senseless, when her future spouse
drags her off through the bushes, as a tiger would his prey. When
going to war, or grieving for a deceased friend, or occasionally even
for ornament, white and yellow pigments are applied in streaks over
the whole body, according to the taste of the decorator—such as a
is named Kumbo. So the sons of a
woman named Ippatha are all Kubbi,
and her daughters are all Kubbotha. In
some parts four names of men and four
names of women comprehend a whole
community, every one of the tribe having
one of these names ; in some parts there
are more names, some less. The names
belong to them from birth. They do not
take the same names as their parents ;
but the mother’s name fixes those of her
children. The whole tribe being thus
named by an inflexible rule, a law of
marriage is founded upon the names.
Thus Kumbo is to take his wife, or wives,
from among women bearing the name of
Matha; Kubbi has his choice of the
Ippatha; and Ippai (brother of Ippatha)
is free to take any Kubbotha (sister of
Kubbi). The rule prevents a man from
taking to wife a sister, half-sister, niece,
or aunt, and also prevents the inter-
marriage of first cousins, when they are
the children of two brothers or of two
sisters. It is possible under this rule
for a man to marry the daughter of his
father’s sister or the daughter of his
mother’s brother; but not lawful for a
man to marry the daughter of his father’s
brother or of his mother’s sister.
Brough Smyth’s Work on the
Aborigines.
The best account of the aborigines ever
published is the work compiled by Mr.
Brough Smyth, late Secretary to the
Mining Department of Victoria, and pub-
lished at the expense of the Government.
(Melbourne: 2 vols., impl. Bvo. 1876.)
There is also a good ethnological account
of them in the essay “On the Philology
and Ethnology of the Inter-Oceanic
Races,” appended to Wallace’s Australasia
(1879).
FEB
1 Tu
2 W
3 Th
4 F
5 S
7 M
BTu
9 W
purpose of revenge. In some cases, the direction which the worms
that first issue from the corrupting and putrifying corpse are observed
to take, is held to be that in which the guilty person will be found,
and the first native who is met with in the search has his life sacri-
ficed by the relatives of the deceased. This, again, engenders a desire
for retaliation, and thus a perpetual condition of warfare is maintained
between the individuals of different tribes : the tendency is, of course,
to keep down the numbers of each. The cruel treatment to which
the women are subjected—they being regarded merely as the slaves
of the stronger sex, to be used for the purpose of carrying burdens
and performing all requisite labours of whatever kind, and to be
rewarded only with blows, often consummated by having their brains
beaten out with the native clubs, or n-addies —together with the
not uncommon practice of infanticide, also assist in preventing the
increase of the native population. Some of the tribes show a rude
hospitality to strangers. They have also a crude notion of property.
Murders are rare amongst them, and when they occur are punished.
The native man is courageous in the presence of a mortal foe, but
History
PHASES OP THE MOON
First Quarter 6d. lOh
Australasia
First Quarter 6d. 10h. 34m. a.m.
Pull Moon 14d. 4h. 4m. p.m.
Last Quarter 22d. sh. 10m. a.m.
New Moon 28d. 9h. 12m. p.m.
Apogee, lOd. lOh. p.m.; Perigee, 26d. 8h p.m.
Bowen, mate of Lady Nelson, entered
Port Phillip (the first European) ... 1802
Governor Bourke arrived in Melbourne 1837
5 First judge appointed in Melbourne... 1841
6 Black Thursday ... ... ... 1851
Railway opened to Sanbury 1859
Melbourne Public Library opened ... 1856
(11) Burkeand Wills crossed continent 1861
Hargreaves discovered gold in N. S. W. 1857
(15) Lieutenant Murray in brig Lady
Nelson entered Port Phillip ... 1802
Collins founded settlement in Y.D.L. 1804
First mail to Macedon 1844
Sir George Gipps arrived at Sydney 1838
Sir Chas. Fitzroy ap. Gov, of N.S. W. 1846
Eyre started overland to K. G. Sound 1841
(25) Acclimatisation Society founded
in Melbourne 1861
(27) Sc. Cumberland left Port Phillip 1803
large white circle round each eye, waving lines down and across the
thighs and legs. In general, it may be said that the whole of the
aborigines are of the same stock, though it is not a little singular that
their languages differ so much that tribes within short distances of
each other, unless inhabiting the bank of the same river, are quite
strangers to each other, whilst almost every large community, or
family as they may be termed, has its own peculiar dialect. Three
ranks of society prevail —the young men, the warriors, and the
aged. Many of the tribes, perhaps all, have strict rules as to
marriage, founded on a system of giving certain distinctive names to
all children according to their parentage. The rules are numerous,
but a few words may give a general idea of them. The mother’s
name determines that of her children. Thus all the sons of Kubbotha
are Kumbo, and all the daughters are Butha. A Kumbo may have
one or two other names ; but every son of a woman called Kubbotha
Moral Condition of the Aborigines.
The natives of the Continent are almost
universally sunk in the lowest and most
degraded condition of barbarism; and
though by no means devoid of intelligence,
they have never made any effort to raise
themselves above the rudest condition of
natural life. In a few cases they are
found clothed with opossum skins, or
with coarse matting, and construct tem-
porary huts of the branches and leaves of
trees (mia-mias); but in general they are
entirely destitute of clothing, They have
nowhere any fixed habitations, but wan-
der along the coasts, or, in the interior,
along the creeks and rivers in search of
food; each tribe, however, confining its
range within certain limits, and never
transgressing—unless compelled by un-
usual circumstances—the bounds between
itself and the neighbouring tribes. As a
race, the Aborigine is a savage in the
strongest sense of that term. Alike cruel
and treacherous, he loses no occasion of
wreaking his vengeance on an enemy,
and indulges in the most bloodthirsty
propensities. The practice of cannibalism
is general among the natives ; for a long
time this was doubted, but it has been
proved, beyond the reach of question, and
the practice is often found accompanied
by the most revolting ferocity, as the
sacrifice of an infant by its own mother
for the mere pleasure of eating its flesh !
The different tribes are always on hostile
terms with one another, and any wan-
derer from his fellows is sure of meeting
death if he falls in with any party of
natives. Their superstitions aid in the
maintenance of this condition of hostility,
since they believe that death never pro-
ceeds from natural causes, but always has
its origin in some practice of witchcraft
or sorcery on the part of an enemy,
whose discovery they eagerly seek for the
timid in the darkness ; cruel to his enemies, but kind to his friends;
affectionate to relatives, and dutiful in his behaviour to the aged ;
although reckless of infanticide, he will treat the children preserved
affectionately ; and whilst he half murders his wife to obtain her, he
will love and protect her afterwards. His character, in a word’, is
strangely mixed, and marked by both very bad and some good qualities.
Strangeness of Australian Vegetation.
So curious and unknown were the plants that Sir Joseph Banks and
Dr. Solander (a learned Swiss naturalist who accompanied Captain
Cook in his expedition) discovered in Australia, that, being scienti-
fically described by them in Europe, they so upset the previous
classifications of theoretical botanists that their jealous spirit cast
doubt upon the reports of the discoverers. So disgusted were Banks
and his assistant, Robert Brown, at the reception of their views, that
they refrained from completing the accounts they had prepared of the
Australian vegetation.


The Last of the Flock.
Tis the last of the flock! The poor free-selector, who has just begun to cheer
fee I himself up with the idea that he will be able to eke out the produce of the
ffija patch of cultivation on his selection, by keeping a small flock of sheep in the
grass paddock which he has fenced in with so much toil, has risen in the misty
autumn morning to take a survey of his modest possessions. He enters the
paddock, and to his dismay beholds his little flock lying dead upon the parched
sward, all save one pet lamb which comes up to him bleating, and looking wistfully up into
his face. It is the last of his flock ! The humble and homely scene has in it all the pathos of
the much admired picture of “Anguish” in the National Gallery—even more, indeed, since
there is a touch of human feeling in it which the larger picture lacks. Our artist has
depicted both human and animal tenderness with a few touches of his pencil, with a power
that strikes the eye of the spectator at once. The figure of the free-selector is plainly
a study from the life. He is unkempt, half-dressed, and despondent; whilst his faithful dog
stands by his side, intently eyeing the dead dingo which has done all the mischief. How
clearly marked, in the illustration, are the characteristics between the domesticated dog of
the bush and the wild, treacherous, ravenous dog of the wilderness, more than half a
wolf in the form of his body and his disposition ! The one evidently framed by nature to
be the friend and companion of man, and gifted almost with the intelligence of a human
being in respect of his special duty as guardian of the flock; the other gaunt, cunning,
and bloodthirsty, bent only and always on securing his prey. His dark night’s work, m
the present case, has been the death of the dingo. Gorged with blood, and unable to
make good his flight from the scene of his devastation, a shot from the gun in the free-
selector’s hand has finished his predatory career. Never again will he make an inroad upon
the peaceful flock grazing quietly in the paddock. The worst characteristic of the dingo is
that he delights to kill as many sheep as possible before he begins to raven on the flesh of
his victims. Murder, rather than prey, is his prime object. If he were content to kill a single
sheep, carry it off to his lair in the scrub, and there feast upon it for days, his ravages
would be comparatively trifling compared with what they are. Even the gaunt wolf of
the Pyrenees and the Appenines will only kill a single victim at a time. The fox of
the English covert, when he makes his nightly descent on the farmyard, is quite satisfied
if he can manage to garry off a fine fat pullet to make a meal for the clamorous brood
in his den. But the brutal and sanguinary dingo kills the harmless sheep for the mere
pleasure of killing. He is alike remorseless and insatiable. His disposition is like that
of Death and the Grave, which can never have enough ; or like that of the daughters of the
horse-leech, which, according to the proverb, ever cry “More, more!” A single dingo—for
the “vermin,” as befits his character, is not gregarious—is sufficient of himself to de-
vastate the flocks of a whole country-side. War to the knife must be proclaimed against
the entire dingo race. They must be exterminated from the country, as wolves have been
from England, or venomous snakes from Ireland. The dingo is the natural enemy of man,
and, as such, a price ought to be set on his head, as is done in the case of outlaws of
the Kelly stamp. He is, in fact, the Kelly of the bush, and there is an equal necessity for
stamping him out—him and his fellows ! Our artist has added many minute but appropriate
touches to his picture to heighten the effect of the main incident. The carrion crows are
gathering overhead to hold a banquet on the murdered flock. iho scene is a grey cold
morning, with a rising sun veiled in mist; the woods are quiet, and as if still sleeping;
a mournful feeling broods through all Nature around, as if the mute things shared the silent
pathetic lament of the free-selector, who is left alone with the last ©2 his flock!


An Incident in Kangaroo Hunting.
UR illustration depicts an adventure which happened a few years since on a station
in the Western district. A stockman, whose horse had escaped from him, was making
his way home, when he encountered a large kangaroo that seemed almost indifferent to his
[I presence, and lazily hopped from before his path. The man gave chase, and after fol-
lowing it for two or three hundred yards, the kangaroo suddenly bailed up, with its back to
a tree, and awaited the attack of the man, who assailed it with a piece of fallen timber. The
stick struck the tree instead of the kangaroo, and broke in the stockman’s hand; the gigantic animal, in a
shorter time than it takes to describe the incident, grasped him round the waist and proceeded in the
most business-like way towards an adjacent water-hole, with the evident intention of drowning its
enemy. The man was at first almost paralysed with fear by the suddenness of the attack and the painful
and powerful grip of the kangaroo, but recovering his presence of mind in sufficient time, he drew a
large knife from his belt and finished the struggle which otherwise would probably have terminated
fatally for him. Although we believe no records exist of actual loss of human life, similar incidents
have not been infrequent in the Australian bush, and sometimes severe wounds and narrow escapes
have occurred in such encounters, and that dogs have thus come to a watery end many a time and
oft through the vengeful disposition of the kangaroo is a well-attested fact. It therefore behoves
all young sportsmen in the bush to be upon their guard whenever the “ view-halloo!” is raised in
the chase of a mob of marsupials. The bushman ought also to have a good sharp knife slung
at his girdle, and the sport of solitary stalking ought not to be too much indulged in. A couple
or more sportsmen there always ought to be in company, and the most ardent hunter should be
careful not to follow the mob too closely in advance of his companions, especially if there should
happen to be a water-hole visible in the distance. In proof of how little is known on this particular
point in natural history, it may be mentioned that in Good Words for October last (1880), there is a
scientific paper on the kangaroo, from the pen of Dr. Andrew Wilson, in which there is no mention
made of the characteristic in question. This trait, of forming a premeditated intent to drown bis
pursuer, is peculiar to the kangaroo amongst all the animal creation; and it bespeaks a remarkable
degree of reasoning instinct in a creature which is usually held to be at the very lowest level of
the scale of animal intelligence. Dr. Andrew Wilson, for example, states in the paper
mentioned above that the marsupial and neighbouring tribes were, in fact, the first quadrupeds
to appear on the earth’s surface; the higher animals being the children of a later growth and of
succeeding ages. If this be so, it may be asked, how it comes that this special form of the self-
protective instinct has never been developed in the higher animals ? The stag of the Scottish
highlands, the beautiful creatures of the same species that roam in myriads over the broad savannahs
of Central and Southern Africa, the chamois of the Alps, or the “wild gazelle on Judah’s hills,”
do not, any of them, turn on their pursuers and try to drown them in an adjacent water-hole, or
river that flows close by. Whence did the kangaroo learn this homicidal trick? From what remote
ancestor did the impulse to self-preservation, which takes in him the form of reasoned logic, descend
to the Australian Boomer ? For a process of reasoned logic it certainly is, as thus : Major, water
drowns; minor, water drowns dogs and human beings; ergo, this water will drown this particular
dog or human being, as the case may be; corollary, this dog (or human being) when drowned
will not be able to hunt and annoy kangaroos any longer. Why, it is almost in express terms the line of
argument taken by the first grave-digger in Hamlet, when he and his mate are moralizing on the
death of the fair Ophelia!


AN ENCOUNTER WITH A KANGAROO.
“The gigantic animal grasped him round the waist.”—(See page 8.)




First Quarter
Full Moon
Last Quarter
Now Moon
Apogee, lOd. 4h. p.m.
Perigee, 26d. 9h. p.m.
1
Tu
2
W
Sir Hi chard Bourke ari’ived 1837
3
Th
4
F
5
S
6
&
(7) Sch. Cumberland arrived at Sydney
7
M
from surveying trip to Port Phillip 1803
8
Tb
Melbourne named
1837
9
W
Murray took possession of Port Phillip
10
Th
in the King’s name ... ... ... 1802
11
F
(9) The Orders-in-Council authorising
12
S
Squatters’ Licenses proclaimed ... 1847
13
£
(11) First Telegraph line opened in
14
M
Victoria
1855
15
Tu
16
W
17
Th
(20) The Foundation Stones of the
18
F
Prince’s Bridge and Melbourne
19
S
Hospital laid...
1846
20
&
2J
M
Acquital of the first of the Ballarat
22
Tu
Rioters
1855
23
W
24
Th
Governor Collins died at Hobart Town 1810
26
F
Murder of John Price by convicts at
26
S
W illiamstown
1857
27
£
28
M
La Trobe proclaimed Governor of
29
Tu
Victoria
1851
30
W
31
Th
First Colonial Steamer launched ... 1831
c*
pinging thereon, lifts th
the oblique bars in a wii
curved form, made of a
of the contrivance is ver
length, two and a-half
lowest race of mankind.
d
exdns awav at each
have failed as vet to soh
The Natural
Superstitions of the aborigines.—the natives
recognise a benignant Supreme Spirit, and a variety of evil
spirits, especially one in the form of a gigantic serpent, in-
visible to mortal eyes, but resident in high and rocky mount-
ains, with the worship of which mysterious rites are connected.
When the winds groan over the hills and woods, they imagine it to
be the voice of this monster, and illuminate the plain with tires, re-
peating magic spells to scare the evil one away. Notwithstanding
this timidity, they are brave in battle, though trembling in the pre-
sence of death. A grave placed before the door of a hut is a per-
petual safeguard against thieves. The dwelling of a lonely settler
was once attacked by natives, two of whom were slain. Their bodies
were buried in front of the house, and the two low mounds, haunted
with the idea of death, were more formidable than the loftiest walls.
Some of the tribes enclose their dead in wrappings of leaves and
The fashion of their mourning is to
plaster their heads and faces with white
clay, and wound themselves with toma-
hawks till the blood pours forth,
keeping up a great wailing during
the while. In Northern Australia they
cut off the joint of one of their fingers as
an expression of grief for the death of
their children. The rite of circumcision
is commonly practised, particularly
around the Gulf of Carpentaria. The
knocking out of the front tooth is most
extensively practised. It appears to be
performed on their entering into man-
hood, though often when they are twelve
or fourteen years of age, and consists in
extracting the front tooth from the upper
jaw. The patient has often to undergo
the greatest agony, and to eat the most
vile and disgusting food for several days.
Sturt relates that he met with a tribe in
Central Australia, who had an intimate
knowledge of fremasonry, and gave signs
only known to the mystic brotherhood.
Tasmanian Aboriginals.
The natives of Tasmania differed slightly
in appearance from those of the continent,
and there were similar tribal differences
amongst them. Captain Cook saw them,
in 1777, quite naked, without ornaments,
of common stature, rather slender, black
skin, black woolly hair, with features
far from disagreeable, pretty good eyes,
dirty-white teeth, and with hair, beard,
and face smeared with red ointment.
They are described by Collins, Peron,
Lieut. Breton, and R. H. Davies, in the
Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science for
1846, In habits, manners, and general
characteristics, they differed slightly
from the continental natives ; but they
were nevertheless, of the same race.
They were certainly less savage and less
warlike at first; but when the white
THE BOOMERANG,
This well-known native instrument is of a curved form, made of a
piece of hard wood, thirty to forty inches in length, two and a-half
to three inches wide at the broadest part, and tapering away at each
end nearly to a point; the concave part is from one-eighth to one-
fourth of an inch thick, and the convex quite sharp. A native
can throw this simple instrument forty or fifty yards, horizontally
skimming along the surface not more than three or four feet from the
ground, when it will suddenly rise into the air to the height of fifty
or sixty yards, describing a considerable curve, and finally fall at his
feet. During the whole of this evolution, (he boomerang keeps turn-
ing with great rapidity, like a piece of wood revolving on a pivot,
and with a whizzing noise. It is not easy to, comprehend by what
law of projection the boomerang is made to take the singular direc-
tion it does. In the hands of a European it is a ticklish instrument,
as it may return and strike himself; but the aborigine can inflict
with it the most deadly wounds on others. The surprising motion
is evidently produced by the bulged side of the missile. The air, im-
History
JMARCJH.
of Australasia.
PHASES OP THE MOON.
bark, placing them amongst the branches of solitary trees, near which
the vulture sits immovable, with drooping wings, waiting for the last
covering to drop from the corpse. Others bury them ; and of those
who do so, some dig the grave so deep as to place the deceased stand-
ing up ; others place them sitting with the head above the surface,
but covered with earth. They carefully protect their graves with
boughs from the depredations of wild animals ; sometimes there are
as many as a hundred graves in their cemeteries. Amongst the Wail-
wun tribe, a chief, or person regarded with much respect, is buried
in a hollow tree, the body being enclosed in a sheet of bark. Affec-
tion sometimes induces their relatives to carry about the bones (after
the flesh is gone) for a long time ; it is no uncommon thing in a
mother thus to carry the bones of her child for years. Sometimes
a tribe devour the heart and liver of a chief, that they may
inherit the virtues and courage for which he was distinguished.
settlers began to exterminate them with-
out mercy, they became noted for their
the first, their destruc-
xve been determined on.
Their numbers were never great—never,
perhaps, 2000 in all; in 1824, there were
340 ; in 1844, the number was reduced to
60 ; in 1847, there were only 45. King
Billy, or William Lanne, the last male
Tasmanian aboriginal, died 3rd March,
1869; Queen Trucannimai, or Lalla
Rookh, the last of the Tasmanian female
died at Hobart Town, aged
Sth May, 1876.
Australian Vegetation.
Baron von Mueller believes that,
omitting the minute fungi, there will
not be found above 10,000 species of
Australian plants. The standard autho-
rity upon this subject, so far as it could
be known sixty years ago, but now re-
quiring to be completed and extended,
was the Prodromus Fierce Novce Hol-
landice, published in 1810 by Robert
Brown of the British Museum. Besides
making personal observations from 1802
to 1805, he had classified the collections
procured by Sir Joseph Banks when
Captain Cook’s ship visited the eastern
shore. Upon that occasion, in 1769, the
name of Botany Bay was given to the
inlet near Port Jackson, from the variety
of new specimens found there. Baron
von Mueller’s Report of 1857 on the
researches made by him alone in the
North Australian exploring expedition
under Mr. Gregory, exhibits 2000 new
species, representing more than 800
genera, which belong to 160 different
orders. He could discover no new
natural order, or fundamental form of the
vegetable kingdom, in a minute examina-
tion of the flora of Arnhem Land, the
country around the Gulf of Carpentaria.
pinging thereon, lifts the boomerang in the air, exactly as by hitting
the oblique bars in a windmill it forces it to go round The ingenuity
of the contrivance is very extraordinary as coming from almost the
lowest race of mankind. Men of the highest scientific attainments
scientific attainments
have failed as yet to solve the problem in the dynamics of projec-
tiles involved in it.
Acclimatisation Society,
This society was founded in Melbourne in 1857, by Mr. Edward
Wilson, proprietor of the Argus. Its first president was Dr. Thomas
Black. The society has been successful in acclimatising the Angora
goat, and introducing some ostriches, and several other foreign ani-
mals. Sir Samuel Wilson has been very liberal and unwearied in
his efforts to introduce the salmon into Australian waters. It is to
the efforts of this society that the Victorians owe the existence of
their fine Zoological Gardens, in the Royal Park at Melbourne.
Similar societies have been established in New South Wales, Queens-
land, and Tasmania, the latter giving special attention to the accli-
matisation of the salmon.


First Quarter.......
Ih.
84m.
a.m.
Full Moon
9h.
30m.
p.m.
Last Quarter.
7h.
18m.
p.m.
New Moon
8h.
4m.
p.m.
Apogee, 7d. noon
Perigee, 20d. lOh. p
m.
Railway opened to Kyneton ...
1862
(27) Ships Calcutta and Ocean left
England to found a colony at Port
Phillip...
1803
Flinders entered Port Phillip...
1802
Great fire at Ballarat ...
1862
fNIMAL LIFE AT THE ANTIPODES. —When the earliest
accounts of Australia were published in Europe, the learned
world there was very much struck with the difference
between the- natural productions of this part of the globe,
and those of other countries. In reference to this circumstance,
Sydney Smith, the celebrated wit and brilliant writer, gave a most
amusing description of New South Wales —then the only colony on
the continent—in an article which he wrote in the Edinburgh
Review. He stated that ; “In this remote part of the earth, Nature
—having made horses, oxen, ducks, geese, oaks, elms, and all
regular and useful productions for the rest of the world—seems
determined to have a bit of play, and to amuse herself as she pleases.
Accordingly, she makes cherries with the stones on the outside ; and
a monstrous animal as tall as a grenadier, with the head of a rabbit,
a tail as big as a bed-post, hopping along at the rate of five hops
and peculiarities, perhaps even more re-
markable than are exhibited by the plants ;
but, owing to the great difference in the
powers of dispersal of the various animal
groups, there is less uniformity in the
phenomena they present. Judged by its
highest group—the mammalia, Australia
is by far the poorest and the most ex-
tremely isolated of all the continents, and
this class affords us the most certain
proofs that no part of the country has
been united to the Asiatic continent
since the latter part of the Mesozoic
period of geology. Every one of the
most characteristic and wide-spread
groups of the entire Northern Hemis-
phere are here wanting. There are no
apes or monkeys ; no oxen, antelopes, or
deer; no elephants, rhinoceroses, or pigs;
no cats, wolves or bears; none even of
the smaller civets or weasels ; no hedge-
hogs or shrews; no hares, squirrels,
porcupines, or dormice. The only repre-
sentatives of all these familiar groups, or
of the orders to which they belong, are
a number of peculiar species of rats and
mice—all small, and the “ dingo,” a half-
wild dog, which, although found in a
semi-fossil state in some of the caves,
was almost certainly introduced by, or
with the earliest human inhabitants.
Yet there are a considerable variety of
mammals indigenous to the country, but
these are all so peculiarly Australian as
to belong to distinct sub-classes—the
Marsupials and the Monotremes, of which
the only representatives in any other
parts of the world are the opossums of
America.
These marsupials, or pouched animals,
offer many peculiarities of organisation
and habits ; and the strange forms and
motion of the kangaroos and wallabies,
their erect attitudes, short fore legs, and
enormous powers of leaping, give perhaps
its most special character to the animal
jfit P R I L.
PHASES OF THE MOON.
3£
1M
5Tu
6 W
7 Th
8 F
9 S
The Native Bear,
The Native Bear of Australia, like the Kangaroo, is a marsupial, or
pouched animal. From its sluggish habits it is sometimes called
the Australian Sloth, It is about the size of a large poodle dog, of
a light gray colour, with a white throat, and no tail. Avery comical-
looking fellow he is, with his round bald face, small black eyes, and
square fringed ears. The skin is very thick, and tans to an excellent
leather. The fur is short and close. The legs are very powerful, and
the claws long and sharp. It is lazy and sluggish, but an inoffensive
animal; subsisting principally upon green leaves, and is purely
herbivorous. It lives in hollow trees, but is not strictly nocturnal
in its habits, for they are often killed by day. They are generally
found most common about the end of autumn, and seen chiefly in the
evening crawling about the top branches of the large gum-trees,
often with a young one perched upon the back. The habits of very
few of the animals here are diurnal, and none are met in the Australian
forests by day (except it has been disturbed from its lair), with the
The Natural History of Australasia.
Volunteer Review at the Werribee ... 1861
Robbery of Nelson in Hobson’s Bay ... 1852
Date of Leichhardt’s last letter ... 1848
Opening of Geelong and Ballarat Rail-
way
Opening of Melbourne University ... 1855
First settlement at Port Phillip ... 1835
Governor King arrived ... ... 1800
Lady Barkly died through an accident 1857
(19) Cook first sighted coast Australia 1770
Great Britain ar. with 600 passengers 1857
Price’s murderers tried and condemned 1857
Burke returned to Cooper’s Creek ... 1861
A severe shock of earthquake felt in
Melbourne 1840
Cook anchored in Botany Bay ... 1777
First marriage in Port Phillip ... 1837
The Bunyip.
to a mile, with three or four young kangaroos looking out of its
pouch to see what is passing. Then comes a quadruped as big as a
large cat, with the eyes, colour, and skin of a mole, and the bill and
web-feet of a duck : puzzling Doctor Shaw, and rendering the latter
half of liis life miserable, from his utter inability to determine
whether it is a bird or a beast. Add to this a parrot, with the legs
of a seagull; a skate with the head of a shark ; and a bird of such
monstrous dimensions, that a side-bone of it will dine three real
carnivorous Englishmen, together with many other productions that
agitate Sir Joseph Banks, and fill him with mingled emotions of
distress and delight.”
A more accurate but less lively account of the animal life of this
continent, is given by Mr. Alfred it. Wallace, the celebrated
naturalist, in his recently published volume on Australia. He says :
“ The kingdom as developed in Australia, presents us with anomalies
life of this continent. None of the other
classes of animals afford such a peculiar
and isolated set of types.
The majority of the birds, which are
abundant and varied, do not materially
differ from those of the other continents,
although there are a number of interesting
and some exceptional forms, such as the
mound-builders, which do not incubate
their eggs, and are perhaps as low a type
as the marsupials. Reptiles, fishes, and
insects, offer a still smaller number of
peculiarities, though each afford some
isolated and remarkable forms.”
The Laughing Jackass.
This wrongly-named bird is familiar to
all Australians who have ever lived in
the bush. But it is not so generally
known that its popular name is a mis-
nomer. There is nothing at all of the
Jackass in the bird; as how could a
donkey and a feathered songster have
anything in common ? The true name is
the Laughing Jacasse —the latter being a
pure French word, commonly applied to
magpies and other chattering birds.
The French verb jacasser means “to
chatter, prate, jabber,” Henceforth the
Australian chatterer ought to have its
name properly spelt and pronounced. It
is a bird of the King-fisher family, and
is sometimes described in works on
natural history as the Great Brown King-
fisher, but it differs from the King-fishers
in its habits, not frequenting waters, nor
feeding on fish, but preying on beetles,
reptiles, and the smaller mammalia. It
is about eighteen inches long, and mostly
of a brown colour. The natives call it
Gogobera, apparently in imitation of its
cry. It is one of nature’s scavengers,
and a deadly foe to snakes and reptiles,
its bill being powerful enough to crush
the head of the creeping things it
captures.
exception of the kangaroo, or an old bear. The Native Bear must be
considered as representing the monkey, of which animal we have
none here; a remarkable circumstance considering the wooded
nature of the country and fine climate. This animal makes a poor
figure on the ground, but will soon get up to the top of the highest
tree They are extremely difficult to shoot, on account of the thick
hide ; and it is cruelty to shoot at them with shot if they are any
height up a tree ; but a bullet brings them down “by the run.” The
flesh is eatable, being not unlike that of the northern bear in taste.
It is considered a delicacy by the blacks. It is always found singly.
It has a loud hoarse groan or cry, which it utters when frightened
or wounded.
Old hands, in the early days, used to affirm that they had fre-
quently stood face to face with the bunyip in the ti-tree scrub ; and
that it was a large animal, like a polled cow, with carnivorous teeth.


First Quarter
Full Moon
Last Quarter
New Moon
Apogee, 5d. 7h. a.m
Perigee, 17d. 4h. a.m.
SirR. Nickle, Com. of the Forces, died 1855
Mitchell arrived at Mt. Dispersion ... 1836
Floods in Melbourne 1848
Batman, in the Relecca, entered Port
Phillip Heads 1835
The Natural
«HE OPOSSUM.—This well-known animal is one of the tribe
of Phalangers, and is so named from the hind feet having
a large opposable thumb, enabling them to spring from
branch to branch and tree to tree, while many have pre-
hensile tails by which they swing to and fro on the branches. Others,
such as the flying squirrel have the skin between the fore and hind
paws so pliable and thin, that they can stretch it out like the mem-
brane of a bat’s wing, and leap from one tree to another at the dis-
tance of from twentyto thirty yards. Its food consists of the tender
buds of trees and flowers, honey and insects. Like all the other
members of the tribe, it is nocturnal in its habits. All day long it
sleeps in the hollow of a tree, or lies hid among the foliage, drowsy
and almost unable to open its eyes. No sooner, however, does the
sun go down than it rouses itself up to forage for provender. If it
is a moonlight night, these pretty little creatures gambol among the
The only drawback is their nocturnal
habits ; they disturb the slumbers of the
inmates by screaming and leaping about
the rooms. To keep them in cages is
cruel, for they soon pine away and die.
HUNTING THE OPOSSUM.
As the opossum is one of the principal
articles of food of the aboriginal natives,
it is interesting to note their mode of
hunting these creatures among the trees.
Not being visible during the day, the
savage strains his powers of observation
to the utmost, in order to detect the
smallest indication of their presence.
The slightest scratch of an opossum’s
claws on the bark is sufficient to guide
his keen eyesight to the hiding-place of
his prey. A decayed trunk, with a hol-
low where some limb has dropped off, is
a favourite haunt; and the native strikes
the tree with his hatchet or club to ascer-
tain the fact, by rousing any lurkers
from their sleep. Having satisfied him-
self that there is game at hand, he
prepares to ascend the smooth trunk of
the highest and thickest tree, by cutting
notches in the soft thick bark, wherein
to place his fingers and toes while
ascending. Before the country was
settled, this operation was tediously ef-
fected by means of a rude stone imple-
ment, shaped like an adze ; but these
were soon discarded for the steel hatchet
of the white man. The first notch is
cut on a level with the thigh, on the
left side, and the second opposite the
right shoulder. These notches are
formed by two cuts, one slanting, the
other horizontal, and about an inch deep,
when the bark is sufficiently thick. Into
these, the big toe of each foot is inserted,
where the native supports himself with
sufficient firmness to cut two similar
notches higher, and so ascending until
he climbs to the requisite height, which
2 M
3 Tb
4 W
5 Tii
THE WOMBAT.
The Wombat ( Phascolomys ) is a very singular animal, there being
no other animal of the same species known to exist in any part of the
world. It is found in great numbers in the mountainous districts of
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania, and in the
islands of Bass Straits. It is of a very clumsy form, having stout
limbs and a blunt muzzle. It is two or three feet in length, plump,
with a thick coat of long, grayish brown, coarse woolly hair. The
head is large, flat, and broad, with small eyes and ears, and the upper
lip cleft. The feet are five toed, the claws long, except those of the
inner toe of the hind feet; and the tail is very short. It is flat-
footed, and the soles of the feet are broad and naked. It is nocturnal
in its habits, being very rarely seen by day. It is slow in its mo-
tions, feeding on vegetable substances, and digging up roots with its
claws. It makes its abode in holes among rocks, or in burrows dug
by itself. In its general habits, the wombat bears some resemblance
to the English badger. It is a creature of little intelligence, but
History
of Australasia.
PHASES OP THE
MOON.
First Message through Bass Sts. Cable 1869
N Z. declared independent of N.S.W, 1841
(5) New Constitution Proclaimed ... 1853
Governor Latrobe took his departure
from tho colony ... ... ... 1854
Gold first discovered in Australia ... 1851
Sir Charles Darling took his departure
from Melbourne .. 1865
Eight Hours Movement inaugurated... 1856
St. Kilda Railway opened ... ... 1857
Sydney Mint opened .. 1855
Melbourne founded 1837
Sir R. Barry elected first Chancellor
of the University ... 1853
Burra Burra Mines discovered in S. A. 1844
N. Z. proclaimed a British Colony ... 1840
The Spring Ant-Eater.
trees in the most lively manner, filling the air with their noise, which
is more like the grunt of a pig than any other sound. The smallest
of this tribe of animals is the opossum mouse not more than three
inches long in the body, and two and a half in the tail; yet, like
all its cogeners, it is marsupial, the female having a pouch to nurture
its tiny offspring before leaping into independent life. Nothing can
exceed the perfect form of this interesting pigmy of an animal, as it
is seen leaping among the trees perfectly fearless of danger. Pro-
bably, from its diminutive size, it is not sought after by the abori-
gines, and therefore does not require to protect itself. At all events,
it is not scared by the presence of man ; and if found asleep in its
hiding-place during the day, it will quietly fold itself up and resume
its slumbers in the hand of its captors. If taken when young, these
phalangers are so easily domesticated as to remain about the huts
without running away, and in time they become pets of the settlers.
may be sixty or eighty feet before he
reaches the branches. Sometimes when
he ascends a tree, he finds it hollow at
the top, with his game so far down that
he cannot reach it. In that case he cuts
one or more holes into the trunk, inserts
some burning sticks or dry bark, to
smoke out his prey, and lying in wait
at the top, he captures him without any
difficulty. Frequently these hollow trees,
when thus set on fire, will blaze away
for a whole day and night, sending forth
sparks and flames which often kindles the
surrounding grass and trees, and thus
cause those bush conflagrations so much
dreaded by the settlers.
The Little Sugar Squirrel.
This animal is common amongst the
honeysuckles and small gums of the
forest ; but is difficult to shoot on ac-
count of its small size, and the thickness
of the trees it generally frequents. It is
a pretty little animal, about six inches
long in the body, and the tail which is
flat and brushy, nearly the length of the
body. The colour is light gray, and the
fur is beautifully soft and valuable, being
a real chinchilla. They live by day in
the holes of trees, and at night come out
to feed.
The Cuscus or Tiger Cat.
This animal is rather rarely found, and
frequents the banks of creeks and
swamps. It is usually found singly.
The colour is deep chocolate brown, ir-
regularly spotted with white, and the
tail, which is long and thin, is also
spotted, li is strictly carnivorous ; but
the hind foot has a thumb, like the
opossum. It is a shy, solitary animal,
and rarely seen in the day light, and is
very destructive to the small game in the
bush.
gentle and easily domesticated to a certain extent; not seeming to
care much for any change of circumstances, so long as its wants are
supplied. It show's considerable snappishness, however, if provoked.
Its flesh is eatable, and is a good deal like pork in flavour. Wombats
have frequently been conveyed alive from Australia to Europe,
This animal used to be very common on all the dry sandy rises in
the Western Port district. It is about three times as large as the
common European hedgehog, with sharp quills, about two inches long,
a long tapering snout, similar to the beak of the platypus, but round
and thin. It has the tongue of the true ant-eater, and large burrow-
ing feet like the mole. It lives under ground, very near the surface,
and the dogs very quickly find and grub it out. When perceived, it
very speedily burrows itself out of sight, and once down it requires
the force of a man with a spade to prize it up. It is the very lowest
of all the Mammalia.


ELOW the horizon hounding a broad grassy plain, the red sun is fast sinking. Two
hunters, accompanied by their dogs, have come upon a flock of emus, and forthwith
give them chase. The emus are flying with that peculiar ostrich stride of theirs, before
their pursuers. A brush turkey in the foreground joins the flight, whilst the last of a
mob of kangaroos are bounding off in a different direction. The scene presented must be a
far-away spot in the bush, for the emu is a very shy bird, and retreats before the advance of
the settler. This bird is the true Australian ostrich, being of the same species, although it is smaller
than the African ostrich, and wants the fine tail and wing feathers peculiar to that bird. The
general colour is brownish black ; the feathers are long, and clothed with fibres like hair. It is unable
to fly, and is generally run down with the aid of kangaroo dogs. It is a very fat bird, and when
boiled down, emu oil, like the shark’s oil among fishermen, is the bushman’s universal remedy for
rheumatism and other bush complaints. The skin, when dressed, as is well-known, makes a capital
rug, which is very warm, and is moreover a bit of a “ curio.” A full grown emu stands above six
feet high, and it requires the united strength of two men to lift one on a horse. The breeding
habits of the emu differ from those of the ostrich ; the eggs are left exposed, generally in a little hole
in the ground, scraped among a heap of moss and rubbish in the forest. They are rather larger than
a swan’s egg, of a greenish-black colour, and of a perfect oval shape. They are therefore very suitable
for working up into ornaments, mounted in gold or silver by the cunning fingers of the goldsmith. It
is certain that with the progress of settlement the emu will become a rarer bird than it is at present,
and in time it may even become totally extinct, like the New Zealand moa : care should therefore be
taken to preserve and perpetuate living specimens in our zoological collections, for, after all, the study
of the living animal or bird is by far the best means of acquiring a knowledge of the special fauna
of any country. The manner of hunting the emu by the black fellows is a very striking illustration
of savage life in the woods. Constructing a covering of bushes from the scrub and forest around, he
hides himself behind it, and cautiously advances on the flock, until he is within a sufficiently near dis-
tance to let fly his spear or waddie at an unsuspecting bird. It is not quite certain that the emu is
as stupid as the ostrich is said, or fabled, to be. Certainly, he does not, when pursued, stick his head
into a bush and think—for there must be some process of thought even in so silly a movement that
he is invisible to his pursuers. No instance of any such feint on the part of one of these birds is on
printed record. Like the ostrich, however, he is omnivorous. Nothing comes amiss to him in the
way of food, from a bit of rusty iron to a hard apple. It may be added, as a fact not generally
known, that the name of this bird is the native name of the cassowary of New Guinea and the
Moluccas. It is taller than the cassowary, but of essentially the same species. The ostrich, casso-
wary and emu are visibly birds of the same general character. The only note the emu emits is a
drumming sound, which it frequently gives forth.


EMU HUNTING.- {See page 14.)




The Natural History
«HE WATER MOLE. —The strange creature which Sydney
Smith humorously described as a “ quadruped as big as a
large cat, with the eyes, colour, and skin of a mole, and the
bill and web feet of a duck,” is the Water Mole, or Duck-
billed Platypus, known to naturalists as the Ornithorhynchus Para -
doxus. The first complete description of it printed in English was
written by Dr. George Bennett of Sydney, an eminent naturalist,
and contributed to an annual publication in 1828. Dr. Bennett
writes :
“ It was on a beautiful evening in the month of October, the com-
mencement of summer in Southern latitudes, that, arrived in a
district lying about two hundred miles to the south-west of Sydney,
I approached the banks of the Yass River, in the interior of Aus-
tralia. The scenery here is of the most picturesque description;
the open forest country and wooded hills ; the neat cottages and
bidgee and Tumut countries, it is desig-
nated by the two names, Mallangong and
Tambreet, the latter being more in use
with them than the former.
PHASES OP THE MOON,
“ The illustration may assist the reader
in forming a correct notion of the peculiar
shape and character of the animal. Ihe
body is depressed like the otter, mole,
and beaver. It is covered by long and
thick dark brown hair, underneath which
is a short and very soft fur, resembling
the two distinct kinds found on the seal
and otter; on the abdomen, breast, and
throat, the fur and hair is of much finer
quality, and more silky in its nature.
In young specimens the under surface of
the tail is covered by hair of a beautiful
silvery white; this is lost, however, in
the adult; the under surface of the tail
in such having merely a few coarse hairs
scattered over it. 1 his circumstance in-
duced many to suppose that the animal
uses its tail as a trowel, in a manner
similar to the beaver; but from an ex-
amination of their burrows, I have no
doubt that the hair is rubbed off by the
attrition of the tail on the surface of the
ground. The tail is flat, broad, and
inclining on each side abruptly off at the
termination, beyond which the long hairs
project. The hair on the upper part of
the tail is of a dark colour, long, and
coarse, and destitute of the peculiar
glossy appearance of the other parts of
the body. There was no variation in the
colour of the fur in all the specimens I
have seen; the under short fur is of a
greyish hue. The whole of the under
surface of the body is of a ferruginous
colour, varying in intensity accord-
ing to age. The legs are short, feet
five toes webbed, and in the fore feet the
web extends a short distance beyond the
claws, is loose, and falls back when the
animal burrows. The head is flat; and
from the mouth two lips, or mandibles,
First Quarter sd. 121 i. 59m. p.m.
Full Moon 12d. 4h. 36m. p.m.
Last Quarter 19d. 6h. 58m. a.m.
New Moon 26d. llh.. 44m. p.m.
Apogee, Id. llh. p.m.; Perigee, 14d. 4h. a.m
Apogee, 29d. Ih. p.m.
3 F
4 S
5 &
GM
7Tu
8 W
9Th
10 F
11 S
all their muscular power is exerted to the utmost to
of the current.”
stem the force
and lagoons of the
iia. It makes bur-
The Platt pus abounds in the rivers, creeks, am
south and east of the continent as well as Tasmania,
rows in the banks sometimes forty or fifty feet long
of which it forms a nest. It is by excellence a In.
one unclassable anomaly of the animal kingdom.
long, in the extremity
a lusus natural, —the
THE DINGO.
Dampxer is the first who makes mention of the Dingo, or Australian
which he saw in the company of the natives. He describes
their track as the “footstep of some beast as large as a mastiff dog
subsequently he saw three beasts resembling wolves, but nothing
but skin and bone.” In his rough mode of expression the latter
account is graphic ; for they are wretched looking animals, especially
among the natives, to whom they are much attached. Their general
of Australasia.
gardens, with the grain of a vivid green just bursting into ear, —the
tranquillity around being only occasionally disturbed by the lowing
of cattle, bleating of sheep, or the gay and blithesome notes of the
feathered tribe. The silver stream of the Yass continued its silent
course, its banks adorned by the beautiful pendulous Acacias, which,
at that season, were profusely covered by their rich golden and fra-
grant blossoms ; while the lofty and majestic gum-trees, the graceful
manna, or the dark swamp-oak, added to the variety and beauty of
the landscape.
“ The sun was near its setting, when up a more quiet part of the
river, I sought the burrows of those shy animals, the water moles,
known also to naturalists as the platypus or duck-billed animal.
“Among the colonists it is known by the name of water-mole
from some, resemblance it bears to the common European mole. By
the aboriginal tribes at Bathurst, Goulboum Plains, Yass, Murrum-
project, resembling the beak of a Shovel-
ler-duck ; the lower mandible is shorter
and narrower than the upper, and its
internal edges are channelled, with
numerous strics, resembling in some
degree those seen in the bill of
the duck. Ihe colour of the superior
mandible above, when seen in an animal
recently taken out of the water, is of a
dull, dirty, greyish black, covered with
innumerable minute dots, and the car-
tilaginous continuation around the man-
dible is uniformly smooth and soft. Ihe
eyes are very small, but brilliant, and of
a light brown colour; they are situated
rather high up the head. The ears are
not visible, but are perfectly formed
within. Ihe size of the animals varies ;
but the males are usually found to be, in
a small degree, larger than the females.
Ihe average length is from eighteen to
twenty inches. When the fur is wet the
animal has a soiled and far from attractive
appearance, resembling more a lump of
dirty weeds which are often seen floating
about the rivers, than any production of
the animal kingdom ; it would therefore
often escape observation, but for its
paddling motion in the water ; such was
its appearance when lying dead on the
surface, or when drifted by the stream
against the stump of a tree, or among the
First Gov. land sale in Port Phillip... 1837
Sir George Gipps published his squat-
regulations .. 1844
Trial trip on Hobson’s Bay Railway 1854
Public Meeting termed the “Squatters’
Meeting” held in Melbourne ... 1844
“ Welcome” nugget found 1858
First gold escort ... 1852
reeds and bulrushes growing profusely
Sir C. Hotham arrived ... ... 1854 near and upon the banks of the river.
“ The animals are seen in the Australian
rivers at all seasons of the year, but are
most abundant during the spring and
summer months. The best time for
seeing them is very early in the morn-
Oonference of delegates from all the ing or late in the evening. During floods
Aus. Colonies held in Melbourne ... 1870 and freshes they are frequently perceived
Three Bishops for Australia conse- travelling up and down the rivers ; when
crated... ... ... 1847 going down they appear to allow them-
selves to be carried by the force of the
stream without making any exertion,
but when swimming against the stream,
appearance, however, is more like the fox than either the dog or
wolf, and they have a bushy tail like reynard, with even a stronger
offensive odour. They have also a great taste for fowl and mutton,
and are the dread of the farm-yard and sheep-pen; while the howl
or rather yell, which they set up at night during their depredations
is of the most unearthly kind ; hence the dingo is hunted and shot
down by the settlers wherever he is found.
The Flying Mouse.
This little animal is certainly the most beautiful of its kind in
Victoria. It is not so long as the smallest British shrew-mouse,
and is of a rich light-brown colour above, but white underneath.
It is a perfect flying squirrel in miniature, but the tail is flat and
feathered. It is rare, and very local, and is seldom seen. Some-
times a nest of them may be found in a hollow-tree.


The Natural
«HE DUGONG.—A specimen of this very remarkable animal
is shown in the Queensland court of the International Ex-
hibition, and is well worthy of inspection by the curious
~ l Ss7 in natural history. In the narratives of the old navigators
of the days of Drake, and Raleigh, and Dampier, the reader fre-
quently meets with mention of the manatee and sea-cow , a strange
monster of the deep seen by the mariners. These two animals are
of the same species, which abounds in the Indian seas, and the Dugong
is an allied species but supposed to be distinct and unique. It is
oidy found in the waters off the north-east coast of the Australian
continent, and within certain well-defined parallels of latitude. Its
scientific name is the Halicore Australis, and it is a genus of mam-
malia of the family Manatidcc, or herbivorous Cetacea, distinguished
membrane. The skin is smooth and
thick, but yields no oil. The anatomy
of the Dugong has been very carefully
examined. It exhibits a very remarkable
peculiarity, in the ventricles of the heart
being completely detached from one
another. Its osteology has been found
to exhibit interesting points of corres-
pondence with that of the Pachydermata,
as in the numerous ribs, &c. ; its denti-
tion resembles in some particulars that of
the Elephant; its digestive apparatus is
adapted to vegetable food, differing very
much from that of the whales, dolphins,
and other ordinary Cetaceans. It feeds
on the Algae which grow on submarine
rocks in shallow seas. Its lips are of
much use in gathering together its food.
It often comes to the surface to breathe,
and is said to utter a peculiar cry. It is
gregarious. The female produces one
young one at a birth, and shows an af-
fection for it which is proverbial amongst
the Malays. When the young one is
taken, the mother is easily secured. The
Dugong is generally pursued in boats,
and killed by spearing. The flesh is
highly esteemed, even by Europeans, and
is described as resembling young beef.
That of full-grown animals is, however,
comparatively coarse ; on which account,
and the greater facility of capture, the
younger ones are more frequently killed.
The Kingfisher.
Gohld is of opinion that the Kingfisher
appears to be endowed with the power
of sustaining and enjoying life without
the least supply of water, and that water
is not essential to their existence. Sturt
remarks on the pigeons he met with in
the Stony Desert, that they quench their
thirst with merely a mouthful of water
at the muddy pool, and are off again to
their parching haunts.
2 S
3 S
iJm
5Tu
6 W
7|Th
8 F
9. S
The Australian
Bustard
1770 his companions shota large
di on being cooked proved as
igh weighing 1741 b. They all
they had tasted since leaving
irance the harbour was named
At one place where Cook landed in 1770 1
bird of the bustard species, which on
excellent eating as a turkey, though w
agreed that it was the best bird they
England; and in grateful remembrance
Bustard Bay.
Discovery of the Australian Eagle.
Another splendid addition to the feathered tribe was made in
January 1800, when the Australian eagle was first seen, and a
specimen captured. This occured at Broken Bay, a short distance
north of Port Jackson, where he pounced down upon a convict (who
was lying in the bottom of a boat with his legs tied together)
and struck his talons through the man’s foot. The bird stood
three feet high, and during the ten days that it was a prisoner, was
remarkable for refusing to be fed by any but one particular person.
History
of Australasia.
PHASES OP THE MOON.
First Quarter sd. 2h. 56m. a.m.
Full Moon lid. llh. 53m. p.m.
Last Quarter 18d. 3h. 13m. p.m.
New Moon 26d. 2h. 13m. p.m.
Perigee, 12d. noon; Apogee, 26d. 7h. p.m.
Separation Day 1851
(1) First Writ issued for Legislative
Council .. 1851
(1) Burke died 1861
(1) Foundation Stones of Melbourne
Public Library and University laid 1861
(8) The Australian Colonies Governm’t
Bill passed the House of Commons 1850
(8) Railway opened to Woodend ... 1861
Melbourne University founded ... 1854
(14) The Argo arrived with Foster
and Sir R. Nickle on board ... 1853
(15) Melbourne Hospital opened ... 1847
(16) La Trobe installed first Governor 1851
Melbourne Theatre Royal opened .. 1855
First Petty Sessions held in P’t Phillip 1838
Col. Niel died through a fall from horse 1859
Fortieth Regiment left for N. Z. ... 1860
(19) Flinders died 1841
(20) Robbery of MTvor Gold Escort 1853
The Clmsan, first steamer from Eng-
land, arrived in Hobson’s Bay ... 1852
First Bendigo Escort, with 20,9370 z.
of gold, despatched 1852
First P. and 0. steamer arrived ... 1852
by molar teeth with flat summits and composed of two cones later-
ally united, the incisors of the upper jaw elongated almost into tusks;
the tail forked, or crescent shaped, and the swimming paws des-
itute of any vestige of nails. One species alone, has been tho-
roughly ascertained and accurately described. The Dugong is said
to attain a length of twenty feet when full grown, although it is
more frequently seen of only eight to ten feet long. In general
form it much resembles the Manatee. The skull is remarkable
for the sudden bending downwards of the upper jaw almost at a
right angle. The upper lip is large, thick and fleshy, covering
the prominent incisors, and forming a kind of snout, something
like the trunk of the elephant cut short across. The eyes are
very small, and are furnished with a third eyelid, or nictitating
THE TREE LOCUST.
The tree-locust is an insect well known
in this part of the world. It is common
in tropical and warm temperate countries,
but is never found where the climate is
very cold. It is somewhat like a grass-
hopper in shape and size, but it has no
power of leaping, and it lives entirely on
shrubs and trees, the juices of which
it sucks. The most remarkable thing
about the tree-locust is the loud shrilling
noise it makes. This noise does not come
from the mouth or throat, but from a
curious kind of musical instrument made
of membranes, fibres, and muscles, placed
underneath the body of the insect. The
sound can be produced even after the insect
has been long dead, by pulling the fibres
and then letting them go. So loud is the
noise made by the tree-locust that it can
sometimes be heard at the distance of a
mile, and it has been likened to the sound
of a razor-grinder at work. It is kept up
through the whole of the long sultry
summer day, and does not cease alto-
gether even at night. On this account
the insect bears in some countries a name
expressing that sleep is banished by its
din. The true name of the tree locust is
the cicada. One of the ancient Greek
poets celebrates the cicada as a very
sweet musician, whose notes he loved to
hear as he roamed in solitude through
the summer woods. He says
“Cicada ! drunk with drops of dew,
What musician equals you.
In the rural solitude ?
On a perch amidst the wood,
Scraping to your heart’s desire,
Dusky sides, with notchy feet.
Shrilling, thrilling, fast and sweet,
Like the mus e of a lyre.”
The cicada is frequently mentioned by
the old Greek and Latin poets ; and the
English translators of their writings, not
knowing the real insect, erroneously
suppose that it is the grasshopper that is
meant.
Among the natives it was an object of wonder and fear, and they
could never be prevailed upon to go near it. They asserted that
it would carry off a middling-sized kangaroo. It had been intended
to be sent to England; but one morning it was found to have
divided the strands of a rope with which it was fastened, and escaped
it was fastened, and escaped
The Wonga Wonga Pigeon.
The Wonga Wonga is a large bird, with white flesh, excellent eating,
with handsome black-patched plumage, which spends most of its
time upon the ground, feeding upon the seeds and stones of the fallen
fruits of the towering trees under whose shade it dwells, seldom
exposing itself to the rays of the sun, or seeking the open parts
of the forest, whence, when disturbed, it rises with a loud flutter-
ing, like a pheasant. Its flight is not of long duration, being merely
employed to remove it to a sufficient distance to avoid detection
by again descending to the ground or mounting the branch of
a tree. It is a species which bears confinement well.


“ Blanche Barkly” Nugget found ...
1857
Collision between Lady Bird and
Champion off Cape Otway; 32
persons drowned ...
1857
Biot at Parliament Houses
1860
The
Natural
f"||#?HE LYRE BlRD.—This beautiful bird abounds in the
scrub of the Gippsland highlands, and also in some parts
of New South Wales. It is exceedingly shy and difficult
to approach, and therefore not easily caught. It is a song-
bird of the “mocking-bird” character. In the year 1844, the
government of New South Wales sent Mr. Hawdon with a party of
twelve men, including black native police, to open up a practicable
route for cattle from Western Port to Gippsland. During the course
of his explorations, Mr. Hawdon had good opportunities of observing
and studying the habits of this bird. “ I was awakened,” he writes,
“at sunrise by the singing of numerous pheasants. These are the
mocking birds of Australia, imitating all sounds that are heard in
the bush in great perfection ; they are about the size of a small fowl,
of a dirty brown colour, approaching to black in some parts ; their
greatest attraction consists in the graceful tail of the cock bird,
within six feet of me ; it was one of the
black police who had blown the bird’s
head off that had been amusing me for
more than an hour. ” These birds when
disturbed never rise high, but run off
into the densest scrub, scarcely allowing
a sportsman time to raise his piece before
they are out of his reach. Even the
aborigines, who ai’e so skilful in creeping
up to game of all kinds, seldom kill
more than three brace in a day. Their
song is not often heard during rain, or
when the sun is obscured. The nest is
about three feet in circumference, and
one foot deep, having an orifice on one
side : they lay but one egg, of slate
colour with black spots. The female is
a very unattractive bird, having but a
poor tail, nothing like the male. The
scientific name of this bird is Menura
Superb a
Discovery of the Lyre Bird.
In February 1798 three prisoners ab-
sconded from Sydney, and made their
way through the bush in a westerly
direction for a distance of about 400
miles. They returned exhausted with hun-
ger and fatigue, and reported that in their
weary travels they had heard a bird sing
delightfully in the morning for an hour
or more, imitating the notes of other
birds; and on following up the sound,
discovered the songster standing on a
small hillock. It was about the size of a
pheasant, but had a beautiful spreading
tail like a peacock. These men brought
some of the skins with them, which were
much admired. This induced others to
capture or shoot specimens, so as to ob-
serve the true characteristics of this
newly-discovered bird. It was the Lyre-
tail, as it was first named, but is now
well-known as the Lyre Bird.
1 M
2 Tu
3 W
4 Tu
5 F
6 S
9 'll:
10 W
11 Tu
ft U (a
THE PILLARS OF THE AUSTRALIAN DESERT.
Neaely in the centre of the continent stands Chambers’s Pillar, so
named by John Macdowal Stuart, in honor of a friend of his in
Adelaide. It is 150 high, and stands on a low hill about 100 feet
above the plain. The pillar itself, which is about 10 feet by 20 feet
in cross section, and of nearly equal width from top to bottom, is of
a soft white sandstone, as is the hill on which it stands. The upper
part is red, and it may owe its preservation to the somewhat greater
hardness and durability of this upper layer. In the same neighbour-
hood are many other remarkable rocky hills, resembling old castles
in ruins, standing on and among sandhills. The manner in which
these pillars were probably formed is well illustrated by the obser-
vations of Grey, the explorer, on a group found by him on an elevated
table-land in the northern part of West Australia. Several acres
were here covered with lofty isolated sandstone pillars of the most
grotesque and fantastic shapes. In one place was a regular unroofed
aisle, with a row of massive pillars on each side; and in another,
History
Australasia.
U ST
PHASES OP THE MOON.
First Quarter Bd. 2h. 22m. p m.
Pull Moon lOd. 6h. 47m. a.m.
Last Quarter 17d. 2b,. 37m. a.m.
New Moon 25d. 6h. 25m. p.m.
Perigee, 9d. 9h. p.m. ; Apogee, 22d. lOh. a.m.
Gold discovered at Buninyong ... 1851
Admella wrecked ... ... ... 1859
Dr. Lang died 1878
Randolph convict ship approached P. P.
Heads, but was sent on to Sydney... 1849
Melbourne first lighted by gas ... 1857
(12) Melbourne Post Office opened ... 1841
Governor Sir J. H. Manners-Sutton
(Viscount Canterbury) arrived ... 1865
Colony of South Australia founded ... 1834
Burke and Wills exploring expedition
started 1860
(20) Fawkner in the Enterprise en-
tered Port Phillip Heads ... ... 1835
(20) Dunbar wrecked at Sydney Heads 1851
Fawkner encamped at Melbourne ... 1835
which is something like a lyre. But little is known of their habits,
for it is seldom they are found near the dwellings of civilised man.
Hearing one scratching in the scrub close to the dray, I crawled out,
gun in hand, intending to provide a fresh meal for breakfast. The
sun having just risen, inclined it to commence its morning song ; but
the natural note (bleu bleu) was almost lost among the multitude of
imitative sounds through which it ran—croaking like a crow, then
screaming like a cockatoo, chattering like a parrot, and howling like
the native dog—until a stranger might have fancied that he was in
the midst of them all. Creeping cautiously round a point of scrub, I
came in view of a large cock bird, strutting round in a circle,
scratching up the leaves and mould with his formidable claws,
while feeding upon a small leech which is the torment of travellers,
and spreading open his beauteous tail to catch the rays of the sun
as it broke through the dense forest. As I raised my gun a piece went off
The Black Swan.
This well-known bird was first seen by
the people of Cook’s expedition in 1770,
They described it as “ much larger than a
swan, in shape resembling a pelican, with
black feathers, except under the wings,
and having a red bill. ” Like many other
anomalous objects in the flora and fauna
of Australia, this bird falsifies the old
Roman proverb, that “ It is as impossible
as to find a black swan,” Ihe habits of
the bird are peculiarly interesting. The
male watches the floating nest, while the
female sits on it during the time of incu-
bation ; and he seldom relinquishes his
charge until the cygnets are afloat on the
water, and able to screen themselves
from the swoop of the eagle or hawk.
The Emu,
The Australian Ostrich has been erro-
neously called the Emu, after the
cassowary of the Eastern archipelago,
to which it bears resemblance, only it
has not the helmet on its head by which
that bird is distinguished. These birds
are, however, all closely allied to each
other, having only the rudiments of
wings, without the power to raise their
heavy bodies from the ground; but by
their aid they can run as fast as a swift
horse. The emu differs from the ostrich
in having only three toes. Its eggs are
about the size of a cocoa-nut, indented
like orange-peel, and of a dark green
colour. They are simply laid on the
grass ; and as many as eleven are hatched
without any nest to protect them. The
feathers are small considering the size of
the bird, and are joined together in pairs;
those round the neck are more like hair
than feathers.
there stood upon a pedestal what appeared to be the legs of an
ancient statue, from which the body had disappeared. The height
of some of these columns which were measured, were found to be
upwards of forty feet; and as the tops of most of them were nearly
at the same level, that of the surrounding country must at one
period have been as high as their present summits, probably indeed,
much higher. From the top of one of these pillars an extensive
view was obtained showing everywhere signs of similar degradation,
on so large a scale that it was at first difficult to account for ; but the
sound of gurgling water soon offered a clue to the mystery. On
descending into a fissure between some rocks, Gray discovered
beneath the surface a cavern much resembling the remains that
existed above-ground. Through it ran a small stream which, in the
rainy season, would become a torrent; and it was evident that
before many years elapsed the roof would give way, and what were
now the buttresses and supports of a gloomy cavern would emerge
into day, and become columns draped with creepers, surrounded by
vegetation, and resplendent in the bright sunshine.


The Bushman’s Yarn,
IFE in the hush is not so much appreciated now as it used to he in the days before
the deluge—to wit, the gold discoveries. Year by year the hush goes farther off;
and the free-selector, with his primitive farming, appears on the scene. Far hack
in the country where Burke and Wills perished, or where Leichardt’s last traces
were found, or in the great forest highways for travelling stock between the Murray and
the Queensland rivers, parties of drovers still spend their day in following a mob of cattle
cr a flock of sheep, and their night in smoking, “ yarning,” and sleeping round the camp fire.
Such a group has our artist presented. The mob of cattle are secured for the night; the camp
is pitched on the banks of a shady, winding river ; sapper is over ; every man stretched lazily
on the sward, having his pipe in his mouth j one veteran bushman of the company undertakes to
narrate a strange adventure that befel him, once upon a time, in the bush ; to give the better
effect to his narrative he rises to his feet, and takes his stand at the other side of the fire, at
the foot of a gigantic gum-tree; the very dogs catch the spirit of the hour, and lend their ears
to the story of Australian forest romance. His tall, rather gaunt, figure, his weather-beaten face,
and his grizzled beard, tell of years of the wild life in the wilderness, remote from the “sophisticating”
influences of large towns and great cities. The scene must surely be at least five hundred miles
from Bourke-street. Warming with his theme, the story-teller grows voluble, even eloquent; he
gesticulates with his hands; he talks like an orator on the stump at a general election. His auditors
(dogs included) take in every word he utters, with unquestioning belief ; although it is not unlikely
that, when the story is ended, Jack or Bill (as the case may be) will be subjected to an ironical
cross-examination. He, meantime, has it all his own way, he has thoroughly aroused the
curiosity of the hearers ; he is “ piling on the agony” at a critical point of the story. The look of
intense interest on the faces of the two men lying stretched in the foreground is extremely well
indicated by a few touches of the artist’s pencil. Was the incident a fight with the blackfellows 1
Did the old bushman contrive to make good his escape from the horde of dusky savages, amidst
a shower of spears and waddies, and only by the aid of his fleet, trusty old horse, Stockman 1 Or
is the story one of chasing and “ rounding in” the wild cattle on some immense run in the back
country 1 Or was it an encounter with a gang of bushrangers of the Kelly species 1 Did the
old bushman “ tackle” the fellows right spiritedly, and by handling his good revolver deftly,
putting the whole gang to flight, albeit a shower of bullets fell around him just as the beaten
gang were making away 1 Any one of these moving accidents by bush or forest would, if neatly
and cleverly garnished, serve to fill up the evening hour between supper and turning-in for the
night. No matter that the narrator drew a little—just a little—on his imagination for some
of the embellishments of his story. Travellers tales are proverbially of a highly romantic cast;
and then, of what use is the imagination considered as an intellectual function, .if it does not come
into play on great occasions % A man might just as well have no imagination at all, and be as
matter-of-fact as a Dutch planter of Java, or a Chinese shopkeeper of Little Bourke-street !
Therefore we shall allow this weather-beaten old veteran a good deal of latitude in his narration.
His liveliest flights of fancy, his most elaborate verbal embellishments will not do any harm to
his hearers, but will rather enhance the pleasure they have in listening to him. They will all
admit, when the story is told, that it “ was a jolly good yarn,” and they will stretch themselves to
sleep on the sward, with the starry heavens for their canopy, all the more pleasantly for having
their hour of rest so agreeably beguiled. All success, then, may be cordially wished for the bush
story-teller of the party. He is a character that is becoming every day less and less frequently
met with ; and the day is probably not far distant when he, too, will be the last surviving
specimen of an all but extinct type of Australian character !


•




Hir
||y
| 111 :lH
11l
'll
gaJtl! I:
ililiii
w i;
Q
X
D
O
CC




The
Natural
History
||p|XTINCT AUSTRALIAN ANIMALS.—The extinct species
an i ma l s > found in a fossilized state in the clay deposits
of Australia, all resemble, in general character, those now
living, but, as in most other countries, many of these re-
cently extinct animals were of an enormous size. One of the kan-
garoos was fully a third larger than any living species ; while the
Diprotodon, a huge, thick-limbed animal allied to the kangaroos,
was nearly as large as an elephant. An extinct wombat was as
large as a tapir; while the Nototherium, a creature intermediate
between the wombat and Kangaroo, equalled in size the living
rhinoceros. Besides these, forms of kangaroo have been found
allied to the tree-kangaroos now confined to New Guinea ; while the
Thycaloleo was a huge phalanger as large as a lion, and supposed by
Professor Owen to have been, like it, a beast of prey. The Thy-
lacinus and Dasyurus, which now live only in Tasmania, were
Animals of New Zealand.
SEPTEMBER.
The zoology of New Zealand is no less
peculiar and interesting than its botany,
perhaps even more so. In common with all
oceanic islands there appear to be no
truly indigenous mammalia, with one or
two doubtful exceptions. When first
discovered by Europeans, there were two
species of mammals—a dog and a small
rat. Both are now nearly or quite
extinct, but the dog was almost certainly
introduced by man, as it is a favourite
article of food with both Melanesians and
Maoris and would therefore be constantly
carried in their canoes. Besides, it was
never wild in New Zealand. The native
rat, called Kiore, has been destroyed by
the imported European rat, and no speci-
men of it is known to exist. It is there,
fore uncertain whether it was a true rat
or some allied animal; but it was most
likely introduced originally through man’s
agency, and the tradition of the natives
that they brought it with them in their
canoes is probably true. More interesting
is the otter-like animal, reported still to
exist in the mountains of the South
Island, and which has a native name,
Waitokeke. Ur. Haast has seen its
tracks, resembling those of the European
otter, at a height of about 3500 feet above
the sea, in a region never before trodden
by man ; and the animal itself is said to
have been seen by two gentlemen near
Lake Heron, but they failed to capture
it. It was said to be dark brown, and
the size of a large rabbit. On being
struck at with a whip, it uttered a shrill
yelping sound and disappeared in the
water. This evidence seems to render it
certain that such an animal exists.
3 S
4 S;
5 M
6 S
7 W
BTh
29 Th
| 30 F
PHASES OF THE MOON,
First Quarter Id. lib. 42m. p m.
Full Moon Bd. 2h. 19m. p.m.
Last Quarter 15d. sh. 41m. p.m.
New Moon 23d. 9h. 34m. p.m.
Perigee, 7d. 6h. a.m.; Apogee, 19d. lOh. a.m.
QUARTZ REEFS,
The quartz reefs being the source of all the gold found in the drifts,
it was natural to suppose that where the latter were most produc-
tive the former would be the richest. This, however, is not found
to be the case, because the richness of the gold drifts and leads will
depend chiefly on the amount of denudation of quartz they repre-
sent, Of the denuded rock a large proportion will have been carried
away by streams and rivers to the sea, so that accumulations of drift,
large as they are, only represent a portion—perhaps only a small
portion —of the rock ground down to produce them. Owing, how-
ever, to the great specific gravity of gold, by far the larger portion
of it sinks at once to the bottom and remains not far from the parent
rock; and even successive floods will not carry it away, but only
cause additional deposits in the lower beds. Where the quartz
reefs are numerous and have been subject to great denudation, a
very rich deposit of drift may be formed, even though the quartz
itself is very poor in gold.
of Australasia.
formerly inhabitants of Australia also. Remains have been dis-
covered in several localities of a huge bird larger than an ostrich,
but allied to the emus and cassowaries still inhabiting the country.
It has been named by Professor Owen, Dromornis.
Australian Fossils.
It is an interesting fact that no marine Tertiary deposits have been
discovered in the whole of New South Wales and Queensland, while
many such occur in the south and wmst, reaching in Victoria a height
of 600 feet above the sea. Numerous plant-beds have, however,
been found in the deepest sinkings for gold. Thus, at Haddon, in
the Ballarat district, numerous fossil fruits were found at 150 feet
deep in the lowest auriferous deposit. These fruits all belong to extinct
genera, but are allied to Australian plants of a sub-tropical character.
The Bower Bird’s Nest.
The writer of a series of papers on Bush
Life in Queensland, in Blackwood's Mag-
azine, for 1880, gives the following de-
i scription of the beatiful nest constructed
i by the Bower Bird:—“As the diggers
i i prepared to cross the creek, their atten-
i tion is attracted by a neat little structure
I under a few bushes, close to them. John
recognises it at once, but Ned has never
seen one before. It is the bower of the
Bower Bird. It is a most interesting
Savings' Bank established atMelb. ... 1841 seen one before, it is tne bower oi tne
(1) Collision be tween Constance Tubal r P.TT ± f °
Otway, lives lost IM2 |
Fawkner died 1869 i s open a t either end. The walls are
I composed of small twigs, beautifully and
Cold discovered at Ballarat ... ... 1851 / carefully interlaced, and are three or
| four inches thick; rising, and becoming
gradually thinner as they do, until they al-
Gold discovered in South Australia .., 1846 [j mos t meet where they arch overhead. The
Great floods at Melbourne ... ... 1870 j| width of the little summer-house is about
La Trobe sworn in as superintendent I j a f oo t. It is not a nest for breeding
of Port Phillip 1839 purposes, but simply a play-ground,—a
1 bower for social intercourse; and here
Hobson’s Bay Railway opened ... 1854 | numbers of the skilful little architects
First election for Melbourne—West- | meet together to amuse themselves. V\ itb
garth, O’Shanassy, and J. S. John- i the view of beautifying their retreat,
son returned 1851 11 the Bower birds have collected a large
Port Curtis rush 1858 quantity of white pebbles, snail shells,
King, the explorer, found by Howitt’s |j pieces of quartz crystal, &c., which they
p ar ty 1861 ( have arranged in neat plots at either
Earthquake in Melbourne ... ... 1855 1! entrance, and also on the floor in the
Rev. R. Knopwood died at Hobart I middle.” The quartz fragments in the
Town, aged 77 1838 {j nest, it may be added, were found to be
Geelong & Melbourne Ry. commenced 1853 specked with gold, and this led to the
Howitt found Burke’s remains ... 1861 j discovery of a rich diggings.
Kennedy, the explorer, left Sydney -
for N. E. Australia 1848;
(23) Chinese Joss-house on Emerald . ,
Hill opened 1856 I ; This anomalous bird was first seen by
(28) Public meet, held petition Queen 1 Cook’s expedition in 1/70. It does not
against proposed pledging Crwn. Ind. 1845 quack, but makes a whistling noise. It
(29) Capt. Hobson anch. Hobson’s By. 1837 , is less aquatic in its habits than the do-
(30) La Trobe arrived at Port Phillip 1839 ; mestic duck > and is frequently found
' ' _ II ™ riAin n 1 1 1 c*t" o no. tt’Am In lr pci
(,wl ija rroue arrived au iuii x xu.ij.ip xooa , . > t , „ - , .
Mitchell reached Mt. Macedon ... 1836 roosting on trees some distance from lakes
First telegram passed bet. Vic. & Tas. 1859 or ponds.
GOLD LEADS.
Gold is sometimes found in the few inches of surface soil and rubble
overlying the Silurian rock on the slopes and spurs of the hills,
especially in the vicinity of quartz veins. In other places a few
scattered pebbles of quartz show that the drift which once was there
has been removed by denudation, but the accompanying gold, from
its superior weight, often remains in the crevices of the rock, or
entangled among the roots of grass or trees. The thicker deposits
at the foot of the hills and in the gullies intersected by auriferous
quartz reefs, are often gold-bearing from surface to bottom. On
mapping the leads which have been worked, it becomes evident that
they represent a system of ancient watercourses. These correspond
generally to existing valleys, but in many cases no indication of
their position is to be detected by the contour of the surface.


The Natural
'* USTRALIAN TREES.—The great characteristic of Austra-
Sl lian trees and shrubs is that they are all evergreen.
> Hence, although the leaves decay and fall off continuously,
there is no general stripping of the foliage in winter, as
in Europe, where the trees are deciduous. Hence, also, there is
no budding in Spring, so that the forests present a leafy aspect
all the year round. This gives a monotonous appearance to the
landscape, compared with northern regions, where the fresh verdure
clothes the woods every Spring, and in the Autumn exhibit
their charming varied tints. In this southern land “the fall of
the year,” which is a household expression in America, is
unknown. In like manner the term “umbrageous” is inapplicable.
The eucalyptus or gum-tree forms nine-tenths of the forest
THE GUM TREE.
The largest trees in the Australian
forest, both in size and number, are the
gum trees or eucalypti. T hey frequently
attain the height of 150 feet, with a girth
of 24 feet at about a yard from the
ground. One in Tasmania was found to
measure 260 feet in length, and 16 feet
in diameter at the base. However, the
butts of such enormous trees are seldom
or never solid; the core becomes de-
cayed, and the trunk supported by the
external wood ; so that a dozen people,
or three or four on horseback, can stand
inside. The gum exuding from these
trees is not soluble in water, and is,
properly speaking, a gum resin. From
the colour of the wood caused by this
resinous matter, the principal species are
named blue, red, and white gum. The
timber is hard, and sinks in water. It
is very durable for shipbuilding and
ordinary purposes. The appearance of a
white gum-tree forest has no counterpart
in Europe From the base of the trunk
up to the minutest branches, the bark of
the tree is white, as if it had been
brushed with white paint. The leaves
are of a leek-green hue. What is re-
markable, also, with this and other
species of eucalyptus, is their annually
undergoing a natural process of decor-
tication ; as if nature made this provision
for its renovation instead of the denuda-
tion of the leaves. The stripping of the
outer lamina of the bark takes place in
autumn. It peels off the tree in long
flakes, which hang from the trunk and
branches until they drop off. The ex-
traordinary ragged appearance of the
trees at this period, as these ribbon-like
streamers with a rustling noise are wav-
ing in the wind, is something unique in
forest scenery.
3 M
4 Tu
5 W
6 Th
The Australian continent, extending over 28° of latitude, might be
expected to show a considerable diversity of climate. In reality,
however, it experiences fewer climatic variations than the other
great continents, owing to its distance (28°) from the Antarctic
circle and (11°) from the equator. There is, besides, a powerful
determining cause in the uniform character and undivided ex-
tent of its dry interior plain. On this subject Mr. Ranken, in his
Dominion of Australia , remarks—“ A basin having its northern
portion in the tropics, it acts like an oven under the daily sun.
It becomes daily heated ; then its atmosphere expands ; but such
is its immensity that no sufficient supply of moist sea air from the
neighbouring oceans can reach it, to supply the vacancy caused by
this expansion. Of an almost perfectly flat surface there is no play
for currents of air upon it; only the heat is daily absorbed and
History
OCTOBER
of Australasia.
PHASES OP THE MOON,
Eirst Quarter Id. 7h. 28m. a.m.
Pull Moon 7d. llh. 39m. p.m.
Last Quarter 15d. 12h. 6m. p.m.
New Moon 23d. 12h. 11m. p.m.
First Quarter 30d. 21i. 27m. p.m.
Perigee, sd. Bh. a.m.; Apogee, 17d. 31i. a m.
Second Victorian Exhibition opened... 1861
Gold discovered ... 1851
(9) Collins’ship, The Calcutta, anchored
in Port Phillip 1803
John Skilhorne, free settler, died in
Collins’ settlement, first death in
Port Phillip ... ... ... ... 1803
Burning of Bentley’s Hotel at Ballarat 1854
(13) Melbourne illuminated, and great
rejoicings in honor of separation, ex-
tending over four days 1851
Railway to Castlemaine opened ... 1862
(15) Sir Trevor Chute left Victoria 1870
(16) The Great Britain arrived from
her first voyage in 65 days 1853
(17) First Victorian Exhibition opened 1854
Railway to Sandhurst opened .. 1862
Bishop Moorhouse consecrated ... 1876
Royal Charter wrecked, 459 lives lost 1857
Sir G. Gipps held levee in Port Phillip 1841
First telegraph bet. Melb. and Sydney 1858
Fawkner born ... ~ ... ... 1792
Great Fire in Collins-street ... ... 1853
(28) Catherine Hayes made her first
appearance in Melbourne ... ... 1854
(30) First Telegram from Syd. to Melb. 1858
THE CLIMATE OF AUSTRALIA.
trees. It has a leaf like the mistletoe, having no distinct upper
and under surface, and hangs from the leaf-stalk with its edge
upwards. Thus it does not intercept the light, or the sun’s rays
consequently, the grass and other small plants grow as luxur-
iantly in the forest as in the open plain. It is true that there
are dense “ scrubs ” or thickets, where the underwood spreads
gloom around, but such are exceptional and occur in patches.
Australian forests generally are less thickly timbered than
English open parks, and the sunlight and breeze can always
penetrate them. To see the gum tree in all its native grandeur, a
visit ought to be made to the Black Spur, at Fernshawe, a
distance of 53 miles east of Melbourne. The scenery of that region
is enchanting.
THE NATIVE PEAR & NATIVE CHERRY.
Amongst the curiosities of Australian
vegetation these two wild fruits stand
conspicuous—the native pear-tree having
the fruit springing from its stalk at the
thick end, and the cherry-tree having
the stones outside the pulp. The former
is of the size, shape, and colour of the
ordinary pear ; but it is as deceitful as
those apples of the Dead Sea, which,
when a man bites them, fill his mouth
with ashes. The native pear-tree is as
distinct from the pear-tree of Europe as
a pine-tree, with its hard resinous cones,
is distinct from the juicy fruit of the
jargonel. They have no affinity what-
ever to each other. This is a woody
seed vessel that splits up and discloses
two beautifully formed black-winged
seeds, like the wings of a butterfly, which
are protected by their strong shell until
they attain maturity. The tree received
its name from the first settlers, on
account of the shape of this seed-vessel
resembling a pear inverted. The native
cherry-tree grows to the height of ten or
twelve feet, forming an elegant shrub,
and a scarlet or yellow fruit, rather
larger than a big pea and of a dry and
acrid flavour. The singularity of this
fruit is, that instead of having its stone,
or seed, in the core, like the fruits of the
old world, it has turned it out of doors,
and carries it on the outer and inferior
side, opposite the stalk. There is just
as great a difference between this tree
and the cherry-tree of Europe, as in the
case of the so-called pear-tree ; and it
received its name from the early settlers
for want of a better.
Australian Land Shells.
There are about 300 distinct kinds of
Land Shells found on the Australian
continent, many of them being curiously
shaped, or elegantly coloured.
nightly radiated. Such is the heat, that in the summer the soil is
more like a fire than an oven ; the air, if it moves, is like a furnace-
blast ; and such its extent and sameness, that as great heat may
prevail hundreds of miles south as north of the tropics.” This con-
tinual radiation of heat is sometimes relieved—though not with
the regularity of an annual season, indeed rather at uncertain inter-
vals of several years —by the admission of masses of vapour, drawn
in from the Pacific or the Indian Ocean. Great masses of clouds,
after labouring many months to reach the interior from the sea,
succeed in passing over the seabound mountains, and spread them-
selves in floods of rain upon the inland country. The north-west
shore, and that of Carpentaria, are favoured with an annual visita-
tion of the monsoons, from December to March, penetrating as far
as 500 miles into the continent, where the sands of the desert are
driven in wavy heaps by the force of this wind.


The Natural
SHE VIRGIN BOWER.—This beautiful climbing plant of
the Australian forests is called Clematis Mossmana by
naturalists, and was first discovered amongst the scrub
forests on the Australian Alps by the botanist after whom
it is named. It has a four-leafed, white, waxy calyx, from two
to three inches in diameter, inclosing a profusion of yellow stamens
and styles, which give forth a delicious orange perfume. The
flowers blossom from October until January. Towards March and
April its beauty is scarcely diminished, although the flowers are
gone; for these are succeeded by fascicule of long feathery awns,
depending from the pericarp, like bundles of floss-silk. In the
locality named, it climbs up the trunks and between the branches
of casuarina and auracaria trees, hanging in festoons from tree to
tree. Its climbing stem is sometimes fifty feet long, with trifoliate
THE SEASONS IN AUSTRALIA.
The continent of Australia, being situated
in the opposite hemisphe re to Britain, its
seasons are exactly reversed. July is the
middle of winter, and January of summer.
The festivities of Christmas and of the
new year are celebrated here, not, as in
the old country, with doors and windows
shut, and a cheerful fire to dispel the
winter cold, but amid the heat of sum-
mer, with doors and windows thrown
open to invite the refreshing breeze. We
no longer hear, in this Australian climate,
of the gentle south wind, nor of “ Rude
Boreas, blustering railer.” The north is
here the region of heat, as the south is of
cold. The summer extends from the first
of December to the end of February.
In the old country all this is exactly
the opposite. While the extremes of heat
and cold oceur in the opposite months of
the year, the division of the seasons into
spring, summer, autum, and winter, is by
no means so clearly defined as in the old
country. In Tasmania, where the climate
approaches more to that of England than
the mainland of Australia, when the snow
falls on the mountains it remains for weeks
and there is a decided winter. The
Spring and Autumn are short and inde-
finite ; while the summer begins in Oc-
tober, and lasts from five to six months.
In Victoria, the winter prevails in a
milder degree. Northwards, within the
temperate zone, the Spring and Autumn
become less marked towards the Tropic of
Capricorn at Queensland. There the cold
season is so mild that it cannot be called
winter in the sense known in Europe ;
and as vegetation is luxuriant all the year
round, the seasons may be divided into six
months summer, and six months autumn.
] lb
2 W
3 Th
4 F
5 S
JM O V E
The Queensland Pine,
The native name of this pine-tree, the largest in height, and in size
of leaf and cone, of any of the Australian pines is the Bvnya Bunya.
The scientific name is A uracaria Bidmellii, or Bidwell’s Auracaria. It
is found in Queensland only, within a circumscribed limit of a few
degrees in area, between 26° and 28° S. lat., and 152° and 153° E.
longitude. This magnificent pine reaches 200 feet in height, branching
only within a third of the top, on which grow the cones as large as a
man’s head. These cones contain from fifty to a hundred seeds,
which are edible and very nutritious. In taste and size they resemble
the chestnut. The aborigines are very fond of them, and grow sleek
and fat upon this diet. It is remarkable that the trees bear these
cones only once in four years, then lasting a period of six months.
At this season the natives assemble from far and near, frequently
coming from a distance of 200 miles, to hold what they term the great
“ bunya-bunya ” festival, when a larger number congregate than at
any other place or occasion known on the continent.
History
of Australasia.
M B E F(
PHASES OP THE MOON.
Full moon 6d. llh. 43m. a.m.
Last Quarter.... 14d. Bh. 41m. a.m.
New moon 22d. '2h. Im. a. m.
First Quarter 28d. 9b. 41m. p.m.
Perigee, Id. 4h. a.m. ; Apogee, 13d. llh. p.m.
Perigee. 26d. Hi. a.m.
Second Land Sale in Melbourne ... 1837
Sir Thos. Brisbane arrived in Sydney 1821
Heales Ministry resigned ... ... 1861
News of the passing of the Act grant-
ing a Free Constitution arrived ... 1850
(10) Viet. Legislative Council met ... 1851
First Sermon preached in Port Phillip
by Rev. R. Knopwood 1803
Prince’s Bridge opened 1850
Hume and Hovel! crossed the Murray 1824
First Constitutional Parliament as-
sembled 1826
White Butterflies.
Schooner Cumberland despatched from
Sydney to survey Port Phillip ... 1802
King arrived in Melbourne ... 1861
(25) First Child (W. J. H. Thorne) born
at Port Phillip Heads 1803
Great Flood in Melbourne 1849
The She-oak Tree.
leaves and serrated leaflets. Nothing can exceed the delicacy of
contrast between the form and colour of this climber and that of the
foliage of the darkest of the dark-hued Australian trees. Even
the aborigines are not insensible to the beauty of its silky hair
at seed-time. The dusky children of the forest at that time adorn
themselves with these vines, by entwining them several times
round their heads. This silvery wreath upon the jet-black hair of
the young women has a most pleasing effect.
Flights of white butterflies have been seen on the east coast of
the Continent, estimated at half a mile wide which continued to fly
southward for ten hours, like a thick shower of snow ; and in the
following season the land they passed over was denuded of its
vegetation.
The Morepoke.
As soon as the shades of evening close in
over the Australian forest, the ear is
startled by the cry of morepoke, clearly
and loudly repeated ; and a bird as large
as an owl flits by a noiseless wing, like
the English goat-sucker. This is the
Morepoke, a species of large Night-jar,
all head and mouth, about the size of an
owl. It is a singular looking, but rather
handsome bird, of a deep slate-gray
colour, ticked all over with black; the
feathers long and pointed, an eye of most
brilliant yellow, and a long-pointed tail.
The beak and feet resemble those of the
European Night-jar, and the gape is
tremendous.
The Grey-Headed Vampire.
When Cook was at the Endeavour River
on the 18th April 1870, one of his crew,
who had been ashore, came running to
the boat declaring that he had seen the
devil, “as large as a one-gallon keg,
with horns and wings, yet he crept so
slowly 1 might have touched him if 1
had not been afeared.” This “devil”
was the grey-headed vampyre —a large-
sized bat frequently seen in the forest on
the eastern coast of this continent.
Duck Shooting in Melbourne.
In the winter of 1853 the duck-shooters
on the West Melbourne swamp, cleared
£lOOO by their game. The gold-diggers
were ready to give enormous prices for
the luxury, A Drace of seagull brought
55., and a couple of old shags, with their
beaks trimmed up sold for 15s. as “ rock
duck.”
The name She-oak is a corruption of the American word sheak, ap
plied to a tree in that country. It has no leaves proper, the pendu-
lous articulations which serve for that purpose are formed in the
same manner as the whorls of the common mare’s tail. They are
long, green and wiry, and hang droopingly from the branches. The
average height is about twenty feet, the trunks disproportionately
thick compared to their height, and spreading out at the butt with
firmly embedded roots. The colour of its scanty foliage is of the
darkest green, which, together with the dark hue of its rough bark,
renders a clump of those trees like a black patch in the landscape.
Its frequent habitat is by the borders of running streams, and hence
it is looked out for especially by the pioneers of this arid country.
But its most characteristic location is by the seaside, where it
flourishes in dense groves. Here, upon the poorest soil, and at the
utmost verge of the land, these hardy trees brave the salt spray
which showers upon them from the surf.


The Natural
BORA.—This is the name of a strange native custom,
fyfl.,d derived from Bor ”or “ Boora,” the belt of manhood, and is
K conferred on the neophyte of life entering that stage. This
is supposed to be endowed with magical power, so that by
throwing it at an enemy sickness can be ejected from the body of
the thrower. It is the great national institution of the Australian
Aboriginal, the rite of initiation into the duties and privileges of
manhood. The sacredness of this immemorial rite, and the indis-
pensable obligation to submit to it, are deeply impressed on the
minds of the young. Even when they enter the service of settlers,
and in great measure break off from associating with their own
people, they seem to be bound by an irresistible spell to submit, at
the represented time, in spite of all obstacles and dissuasions, to their
national rites. The Bora is held whenever there is a considerable
number of youths of an age to be admitted to the rank of manhood.
regarded as consecrated to Baiame, and |
his will is obeyed in carrying out the j
service. Notice is given three weeks i
at a least, sometimes three months be- I
fore the ceremony begins; during the
interval the trees on the chosen ground
are ornamented with figures of snakes ,
and birds cut with the tomahawk. ]
When the appointed time is come, the
men leave their camps, where the women
and children and youths remain. 1 lie
men assemble at the selected spot, clear
away all the bushes, and make a semi- ]
circular embankment or fence ; this being |
done, some of the men go to the camps, j
pretending to make a hostile attack, on j
which the women run away with the
children,—the young men and boys over
thirteen go back with the men to the
Bora. Very few Europeans have been j
allowed to witness the ceremony, but a I
Mr. Honey, when a boy, was present at
one held between the Barwon and Castle-
reagh Rivers, and has given a description
of it; but the proceedings and ceremonies
appear to differ widely in the different
tribes, the discipline the candidates for j
manhood have to go through in some
tribes being far more severe than in
others, so much so that the young men,
after undergoing the severity of the
ordeal, are quite exhausted, and some-
times half-dead. Previous to undergoing
the ordeal, the candidates have to be for ;
seven or eight months under a strict rule,
eating only prescribed food, and keeping |
themselves partialy secluded from social
intercourse. The day of the ceremony
having been decided on, and the tribes
assembled, a place is cleared and prepared
generally on the top of a low hill; here
the youths are kept for a week under the
surveillance of two or three old men; at
the end of this time one of the front teeth
is knocked out and the youths receive a
severe flogging, during which tortures
ITh
2 F
3 S
4 &
5 M
6Tu
7 W
8 Tn
9 F
10 S
28 W
13 E 6
The “George Robins” of Melbourne in 1839.
George Robins was the name of a famous London auctioneer of
fifty years ago, whose glowingly picturesque description of the
estates he had for sale were read and laughed at by everybody.
His Melbourne disciple was the late Mr. Thomas Stubbs. An adver-
tisement in the Port Phillip Patriot of 31st of December 1839, from
the pen of Mr. Stubbs runs thus :
“ Is Melbourne likely to become a place of great importance? was
a question put the other day by a gentleman recently arrived from
India, to an intelligent townsman. The answer was, ‘My friend,
three years ago, the allotments on which we now stand were purchased
for forty pounds each ; three months since, they were sold by public
auction for Ten Thousand Pounds. Six months ago, the first
merchant ship from Britain dropped anchor in Hobson’s Bay; at this
moment twenty square-rigged vessels, besides smaller craft, are riding
History
of Australasia.
BEF^.
PHASES OE THE MOON,
Full Moon 6d 2h. 5 4m. a.m.
Last Quarter 14d. sh. 45m. a.m.
New Moon 21d. 2h. 47m. p m.
First Quarter 28d. 6h. 21m. a.m.
Apogee, lid. Bh. p m.; Perigee, 23d. 3h. a.m
Melbourne made a corporation; Henry
Oondell elected first mayor .. 1842
(2) Gov. Bourke arrived at Sydney ... 1831
(3) Storm of Eureka Stockade, Ballarat 1854
Telegraph op. bet. Melb. and Geelong 1854
Foster’s resignation announced ... 1854
First Australian gold ar. in England 1851
Haines sworn in as Chief Secretary in
room of Foster
Hume and Hovell first saw Port Phillip 1824
Burke left Cooper’s Creek for interior 1861
Collins abandoned Port Phillip ... 1803
(22) Captain Wise, of the 40th, died of
his wound reed, at Eureka Stockade 1854
St. Kilda and Brighton railway opened 1861
Sir Henry Barkly arrived ... ... 1856
Buckley (the “wild white man’) de-
serted from Collins’s settlement ... 1803
(25) First baptism (W. J. H. Thorne)
in Port Phillip ... 1803
Gov. Macquarie arrived in Sydney ... 1809
Top stone pi. on tower Melb. Town Hall 1869
Public meeting at Hinds’ store, Melb.,
to take steps for separation of P. P. 1840
Sir Charles Hotham died ... ... 1855
... 1855
(31) Yan Yean reservoir opened ... 1857
The Rev. William Ridley says : —Old Billy Murri Bundar, at
Burturgate, stated that the Creator Baiame long ago commanded
the people to keep the Bora, and gave them the Dhurum hvlum. or
sacred wand for this purpose. He said any one of the men might
demand that a Bora be held. Then they consult as to the place and
choose one of their number to be the dictator or manager of the
solemnity. This dictator sends a man round to all the tribes who
are expected to join in it. This herald bears in his hand a boomer-
ang and a spear with a murura (pady-melon) skin hanging upon it.
Sometimes all the men within twenty miles are summoned, sometimes
a much larger circuit is included and Billy stated that every one
summoned mvst attend the Bora, even if he have to travel a hundred
miles to it. It is so done, he said, all over the country and always
will be. The dictator chooses a suitable spot for the purpose, and
fixes the day for the opening of the ceremony. The ground is
they are not expected to groan or display
any signs of pain. For the next four
days (in some tribes) their food is of the
most revolting description that can be
imagined. After the last ceremony the
young men were allowed to go away.
For three or four months they are
not allowed to come within three
hundred yards of a woman, but once
in the course of the time a great
smoke is made with burning boughs, and
the young men are brought up to one
side of it, whilst women appear at a
distance on the other side. Then the
young men go away for another month or
so; at the end of that time they again
assemble and take part in a sham fight;
this completes the long process of initi-
ation. From this time they are free to
exercise all the privileges of manhood,
amongst which are the eating of the flesh
of kangaroo and emus, and the taking of
wives. During the intervals between the
ceremonies of the Bora the candidates
are carefully instructed by the old men
in the unwritten laws or traditions of
their tribe and the laws of consanguinity
and marriage, a breach of which latter
moral law subjects the offender to the
risk of death. The ceremonial of the
Bora is the great educational system by
which this exact observance of their law
is inculcated.”
The Native Currant.
This plant is a large dense shrub grow-
ing by the sea, and attaining to a height
of from four to eight feet. The berries
are white, small, and of a herby flavour.
In D’Entrecasteaux’s voyage in search
of La Perouse, a French naturalist
named Richie was lost for three days on
the south coast of the continent, and
supported himself principally upon the
berries of this plant. It is, in conse-
quence, botanically named after him.
in the bay. Two years since, the population of Melbourne did not
exceed 300, and now it numbers more than 3000. Looking to the
surrounding country, who can speak in sober praise ? Behold the
beautiful banks of the Yarra, the Salt-water River, the country
by the Moonee Moonee Ponds, possessing virgin soil of the best
quality, capable of producing food for a numerous population, of
which Melbourne must be the emporium.’ For the benefit of newly
arrived emigrants, and for the consideration of the inhabitants of
Melbourne generally. Mr. Stubbs has deemed it advisable to make
these remarks, having been directed to submit ‘ Suburban Allotment
No 24 ’ to public competition by auction. Its commanding views,
its gentle undulating fertile grounds, ornamental trees, and delightful
south-easterly exposure, all—all combine to make it such that oft ‘we
cannot hope to look upon its like again.’ Gentlemen who prefer
riding to walking, shall be accommodated with seats in carriages,
which will start from Mr. Stubbs’s auction rooms at eleven o’clock
precisely, and upon arrival at the ground can refresh themselves with
the choicest wine and a splendid dejeuner .”


OCTOBEE—
19. Three girls drowned, whilst bathing in Finchie Bay, Cooktown
Queensland.
20. Council of Melbourne University passed resolution to admit
ladies to the competitions for all the University Scholarships
and Exhibitions.
25. South Australian Parliament prorogued to January 30th, 1880.
26. News received of the massacre of some of the crew of the
Spitfire, by natives at Cloudy Bay, New Guinea.
27. Massacre of Mr. English and four assistants, by natives of Eaine
Island.
28. Formation of new Tasmanian Ministry under premiership of Mr.
Gibbin,
28. New South Wales Parliament opened by His Excellency Lord
Augustus Loftus.
29, Spring Exhibition of the Victorian Horticultural Society opened
in the Town Hall, Melbourne, by His Excellency the Marquis
of Normanby,
November—
1. Victorian Derby was won by Mr. R. Howie’s g.c. Suwarrow,
Mr. W. Yeoman’s Belladrum second. Time, 2 min. 43 sec,
3. Farewell Demonstration to Mr. Matthew Burnett in the Town
Hall, Melbourne.
3. Mr. Berry resumed Treasurership of the Victorian Government,
Major Smith resigning,
4. Melbourne Cup won by Mr. W. Eawlinson’s br.h. Darriwell ;
Mr. Ivory’s Sweetmeat second. Time, 3 min. 30f sec. The
fastest ever made for this event.
5. Abortive attempt, by the brothers Robert and Jas. Shanks, to
stick up the Bank of Australasia at Moe, Gallant conduct of
the Manager, Mr. Munro.
6. Opening of the National Agricultural Society’s Ninth Spring'Show
at Melbourne.
7. Governor’s Ball, Melbourne.
8. Mr. W. S. Lyster’s Opera Company re-commenced performing at
Melbourne after a very successful season in Adelaide.
10. Prince of Wales’ Birthday observed throughout the colonies.
10. Mayor’s Ball, Melbourne.
10. The Allcomers’ Sculling Race at Sydney won easily by Trickett,
11. Supreme Court Bill (Victoria) passed by Legislative Council and
sent to Assembly.
14. Laying of Foundation Stone of Ormond (Presbyterian) College,
by His Excellency the Marquis of Normanby. Mr, Ormond
gave £lO,OOO towards the building.
16. Wantabadgery Station (N. S. W.) stuck up by six bushrangers,
under the command of Scott, alias “ Captain Moonlite.”
17. A fight with the police at Gundagai, and after the shooting of
two of their number, the bushrangers surrendered. Constable
Bowen was mortally w'ounded,
22. Value of Wool exported from Melbourne during the week ending
this date, £527,726. Largest amount ever exported in any one
week from Victoria,
23. Death of Constable Bowen from effect of wounds received in the
encounter with the Wantabadgery bushrangers at Gundagai.
21, 22, 24. Intercolonial Cricket Match. Victoria v. New South
Wales, played at Sydney, Won by New South Wales by 32
runs, 317—285,
24, Funeral of the late Chief Justice Bart, Perth, Western Australia.
25, Mr, McAndrew’s motion of no-confidence in Mr. Hall’s
Ministry, New Zealand, defeated by 17 —6.
28. The war-schooner, “ Conflict,” reported at Sydney the murder of
some of the seamen of the schooner ‘‘Agnes Donald,” at
Pentecost Island.
December—
2. Sixth Clause of Mr. Berry’s Reform Bill carried! in the Legislative
Assembly, Melbourne, by a majority of one, 36—35,
3. The principle of the pleiiscitum carried in the Legislative
Assembly, Melbourne, by a majority of eleven, 38—27.
4. Second reading of Sir Henry Parkes’ Education Bill carried in
the Assembly, Sydney, by 49—9.
5. After a protracted debate on the motion for the third reading,
Mr. Berry’s Reform Bill failed to secure a Statutory majority
of votes, but secured a majority of five on division, 43—38.
9, Mr. Berry announced that he had advised the dissolution of the
Legislative Assembly, and that the Governor had accepted
such advice.
10. The Treasurer of the New South Wales Government made his
financial statement. Revenue realised during the year,
£4,524,841, being £571,314 under the estimates. Estimated
expenditure for current year, £4,724,888, leaving estimated
deficiency of £200,047, Public Debt, £14,937,520.
January—
Notable Australasian Events, 1879-80-
10. Anniversary of Separation of Queen si and from New South Wales,
observed at Brisbane.
10, Arrival of S. S. “ Rotomahana” at Melbourne from New Zealand,
making quickest passage on record. Time between Bluff and
Melbourne, including call at Hobart Town, and detention there
4J hours—about 4J days.
11. After a trial lasting four days, the Wantabadgery bushrangers,
Scott, Eogan, Bennett and Williams, were convicted and con-
demned to death.
16. Memo from His Excellency the Governor of Victoria respecting
the dissolution of the House, read by Mr. Berry in the Legisla-
tive Assembly.
16. Arrival of S.S. “ Orient,” in Port Phillip, on her maiden trip.
Steaming-time from Plymouth to Adelaide, 35 days 20 hours.
17. Legislative Assembly of Victoria adjourned until Tuesday,
January 20.
17. First competition for the bonus of £4,000 offered by the South
Australian Government for the best wheat reaping and cleaning
machine held at Osmaston Farm, S. A,, in the presence of His
Excellency the Governor.
18. Opening of the Geelong Industrial and Juvenile Exhibition, by
His Excellency the Marquis of Normanby.
19. 22, 23. The fourth inter-university Cricket Match, Melbourne
University v. Sydney University, played at Melbourne. Won
by Sydney by ten runs, 498—488,
22. The Rev. Pastor Chiniquy held his farewell meeting at Sydney.
22, New Eastern Market, Melbourne, opened. Celebrated by the
Mayor entertaining 1000 guests to luncheon in the building.
Extent of ground covered by the Market : 2 acres 16 roods,
23. Opening of Sydney Juvenile Industrial Exhibition by Sir Henry
Parkes,
23, Opening of the Melbourne Juvenile Exhibition in the new
Eastern Market, by His Excellency the Marquis of Normanby,
23. Opening of the New South Wales Wool Exhibition at Sydney.
Finest ever held. Over 400 competitors.
24. Capital sentence upon two of the Wantabadgery bushrangers
(Williams and Bennett) commuted by the N. S. W. Execu-
tive to imprisonment for life.
24. The judges appointed to preside over the competition of harvesters
at Gawler, S.A., decided that no Machine filled the conditions
sufficiently for the bonus of £4,000, but made several awards,
Mr. G. Marshall standing first for £lOO.
26, Serious riots between Orangemen and Catholics at Timaru and
Christchurch, N. Z.
26, 27. Intercolonial Cricket Match, Victoria v. New South
Wales, played at Melbourne, won by Victoria by one innings
and 96 runs, 338 —242.
27. Victoria Imports for year £11,677,565, against £12,986,777, in
1878. Exports £10,964,509, against £12,751,579. Total
decrease of trade £3,096,282,
27. Formation of Liberal Association, Melbourne, by the Corner Party,
29. Wreck of steamer “ Agnes Irving,” on South Spit, Macleay
River. No lives lost.
31. Revenue returns for quarter show following result: —New South
Wales, £1,249,839, a decrease of £291,475 on previous year.
South Australia, £387,817, decrease £16,294. Queensland,
£310,919, decrease nearly £37,000,
1,2,3, New Australian Eleven selected to visit England, began their
colonial tour, with a Match v. 15 of Victoria. Won by latter
by 82 runs, 337 —255.
1. Champion Stakes at Flemington, Melbourne, won by Mr. J.
Wilson’s b.h,, First King. Time 5 min. 40f sec.
1. Two mile race at Alice Springs, Adelaide, for £6OO aside, between
Mr. Harding’s Exile and Mr. Byrne’s Sunbeam, won by the
former.
2. Collision between Special Race train and ordinary passenger
train, at Parramatta, N. S.W. Several passengers injured.
6, 50,000 tons of stuff removed at one blast on Granite Island, S. A.,
by Mr. Robbs, Contractor for the Victoria Harbour Breakwater.
7, 8. Match between new Australian Eleven v. Bendigo, played at
Sandhurst. Won by former in one innings and 92 runs—279
—lB7.
11. Wreck of the barque “Scottish Knight,” laden with wool, off
Bustard Head, Queensland.
13. Mr. Giblin, Treasurer of Tasmania, made his financial state-
ment—deficiency last year, £132,735.
14. Arrival at Adelaide of the P. and O. steamer “ Indus,” sent
out to initiate the new fortnightly mail service,
15. Large fire at Wagga Wagga : Pastoral Hotel and three shops
destroyed,


15. Performance of the Australian version of the “ Happy Land,” at
Melbourne. Prohibited by the Government.
18. Queensland National Bank, at Cunnamalla, stuck up by Joseph
Wells, who was captured.
20. Execution of Scott, alias “Captain Moonlite,” and Rogan,
Wantabadgery Bushrangers.
20. Wreck of the barque “ Lady Kinnaird,” bound for Great Britain
with 8,400 bags of wheat, off Cape Burr, S. A.
20. Re-assembling of the Victorian Parliament.
20. Hottest day of the season. Thermometer at the Observatory,
Melbourne, 106.5 degrees in the shade, 148.5 in the sun. At
Adelaide : 113 degrees, and 172 degrees respectively.
20. Annual meeting of the Victorian Agricultural Society held at
Heidelberg.
22. Capsizing of the steamer “ Vesta,” 16 miles from Casino, N. S. W.
Five lives loss.
22. Disgraceful scenes in the House of Assembly, Melbourne.
Fracas between Mr. Mclntyre and Mr, Fergusson.
24. Production of the English version of the “Happy Land,” by
permission of the Government.
24. Destructive cyclone in New Caledonia ; 16 persons drowned, 14
vessels driven ashore or foundered.
24, 26, 27, 28. Match between new Australian Eleven v. 15 of New
South Wales, played at Sydney. Won by former by 76 runs.
423—347.
26. Fire in Eastern Arcade, Melbourne.
26, National Regatta, Sydney.
31. Number of voters in Victoria ascertained to be 199,578, as com-
pared with 183,454 in June last.
February—
3. S. s. “Hankow” lost her screw off Oporto. After much peril
got back to Plymouth for repairs, 9th February.
4. Reduction of rate of interest on deposits by 1 per cent, by the
Associated Banks, Melbourne.
4, Successful floating of the South Australian 4 per cent. Loan of
3J millions in London, at average of £93 18s, per cent. 15
millions applied for,
4. Shipment of meat per “ Strathleven,” opened in London, and
declared a success.
4. Cricket Match, Australian Eleven v. 15 of Bathurst, played at
Bathurst, Won by former by one innings and 60 runs. 243
—lB3.
5. Victorian Parliament prorogued,
6. Departure from Hobson’s Bay of the “ Indus ” with first fort-
nightly mail.
7. Exports of wheat from Melbourne for week ending this date
valued at £59,587. The largest amount ever exported from
Victoria in like period.
9. Dissolution of Victorian Parliament.
9. S.s. “ Chimborazo ” damaged during a terrific gale in the Bay of
Biscay. Three lives lost. Returned to Plymouth for repairs.
10. Laying of the Foundation-stone of the new Metropolitan Meat
Market, Hotham, Melbourne.
10, 11. Competition at Orange, (N. S. W.) of six of the Threshing
Machines exhibited at the Sydney Exhibition.
14. Re-production of “H.M.S. Pinafore” at Melbourne, by Mr.
Williamson.
14. Issue of writs for new Victorian Parliament.
16. Fire at Deniliquin (N. S. W.) destroyed four shops. Loss about
£4OOO.
18, 19, 20. Hobart Town Races. Cup won by the Hon, W, J.
Clarke’s 3 year old colt Avernus ; Mr. John Field’s British
Workman second.
21. Melbourne Annual Regatta held on Saltwater River, Footscray,
21. Railway accident between Glenelg and Brighton, S. A. One
man killed.
22. Heavy rain and floods in New South Wales and South Australia.
24. Total loss in the Bay of Biscay of the barque “ Strathnairn,”
from London to Adelaide, by collision with s.s, “ Edith
Hough.” No lives lost.
24. South Australian Register reports, as result of the S. A. harvest
361,572 tons of wheat for export.
26. Third reading of the Education Bill passed in the New South
Wales Assembly by 36 votes ; 42—6.
27. After a trial extending over many days the Directors and Manager
of the Provincial and Suburban Bank, Melbourne, were found
guilty. The directors were fined £5O each, and the manager
£250.
27. Heavy rains and floods in Victoria.
28. Award of prizes, to the value of £l5OO, to exhibitors at the
Melbourne Juvenile Industrial Exhibition. 83 gold medals ;
386 silver medals ; 246 other, and special prizes.
6 sec.
Notable Australasian Events, 1879-80.
28. Newmarket Summer Races held at Morphetville, S. A. Atten-
dance poor.
28. General Election in Victoria. Result of polling: —For Mr. Berry’s
Ministry, 37 ; for the Opposition, 49,
29. Death of Sir James Wilson, Hobart Town,
March—
2. Meeting of Victorian Parliament deferred until May 11.
2. Autumn Meeting of the Victoria Racing Club opened at Fleming-
ton. St. Leger Stakes won by Mr. A. K. Finlay’s b.c. Caspian.
Mr. R. Howie’s g.c. Suwarrow second. Time 3 min. 23£ sec,
3. Mr. Service entrusted with formation of new Ministry.
4. Australian Cup, won by Mr. E. A. Johnson-Boe’sch. h, Columbus.
The Hon. W. J. Clarke’s b. f. Petrea second. Time 4 min.
4. Formation of new Ministry by Mr. Service.
5. 6, 8. Cricket Match, Australian Eleven v. Fifteen of Victoria,
won by latter by one run, 269 —268.
6. Victoria Newmarket Handicap, won by Mr. J. Whittingham’s
b. m. Aspen, Mr. J. J. Miller’s Japan second. Time 1 min.
Igl g 0(
10, The Sydney slander case, Shepherd, v. Bibbs, after a trial lasting
ten days, resulted in verdict for plaintiff, damages £2OOO.
11. Farewell meeting to the Rev. Thos. Jones, at the Oollins-street
Congregational Church, on his departure for England.
13. Reappearance of Mr. Creswick, as “Virginius,” on the Mel-
bourne Stage.
13, 15, 16. Cricket Match, Australian Eleven v. Sixteen of South
Australia, placed at Adelaide, won by latter by 69 runs,
304—235.
14. Horrible murder of the Dewar family in Oumberland-street,
Dunedin, N.Z.
20. Great storm in Melbourne and surrounding country. Two men
lost in Corio Bay, Geelong.
29. Easter Monday observed by the usual sports.
29. Opening of the Australian Jockey Club Autumn Meeting at
Sydney, under the patronage of His Excellency Lord A.
Loftus. Champagne Stakes won by Mr. E. De Mestre’s b. c.
Grand Prix. Time 1 min. 5 sec. St. Leger Stakes, won by
Mr, W. A. Long’s b. f. Petrea. Time 3 min. 21 T % sec.
30. Suspension of Lieut. Colonel St. Hill from the office of Private
Secretary to the Governor of Tasmania, and dismissal as com-
mandant of volunteers.
30. Resignation by Mr. Ebenezer Ward of his seat in the Legislative
Assembly of South Australia,
31. The Sydney Cup, won by Mr. W. A. Long’s b. f. Petrea, Time
3 min. 371 sec.
3. Closing of the Juvenile Exhibition, Melbourne. 170,000 visits,
receipts about £B,OOO.
5, Re-instatement of Mr. Thos. Higinbotham in his former post of
Engineer-in-chief of Victorian railways.
7. New South Wales Government Bill declaring that the Council
has no power under the Constitution to amend or alter Money
Bills, carried in the Legislative Assembly by 28—19.
10. Third Intercolonial Eight-oared Race, between New South Wales
and Victoria, on the Lower Yarra, won by the latter by about
four boats’ lengths. . ...
11. Telegraph wires between Melbourne and Fort Darwin put into
direct communication.
17. Closing of the Sydney International Exhibition.
21. Eight Hours’ Anniversary observed by the trades at Melbourne.
22. Strike of miners at Newcastle Collieries, New South Wales.
3o'. Loss of the Lady Emma off the coast of N. S. W.
1 Eastern Market, Melbourne, opened for business,
5. Libel case at Adelaide, Ward v. Berrington, brought to a con-
clusion ; jury disagreed and were discharged.
6. Extensive fire at Sydney,
7 8 Meeting of the South Australian Jockey Club at Adelaide.
’ ' Adelaide Cup, won by “First Water.”
11. Meeting of Victorian Parliament for the election of Speaker.
Sir Chas. McMahon elected by 44—39.
12. Opening of the Victorian Parliament.
13 li. First Match in England of Australian Eleven v. Eighteen
’ 'Gentlemen of the county of Hampshire.
19, Strike of 400—500 navvies on the first section of theNairne Rail-
-20. Introduction of the Service Reform Bill into the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria.


20. Total yield of wheat in Victoria in the year ending March 31,
returned by the Government Statist at 9,407,503 bushels, of
which nearly, 3,000,000 bushels were available for export.
22, Intercolonial Chess Match, Victoria v. New South Wales (seven
games played), won by former by the odd game.
June —
1. Opening of the Railway extension to Wellington, 247 miles from
Sydney.
1. Railway accident at Ararat, Victoria. The guard of the train
killed.
2. Robbery of the Commercial Bank at Quirindi, N. S. W., by three
armed men, £4BB stolen.
3, The professional Sculling Championship, contested by six com-
petitors on the South Yarra. Won by E. Laycock; R.
Edwards, second.
5. Stranding of the ship “ Batoe Bassie,” laden with sugar, from
Java to Melbourne, 100 miles westward of Esperance Bay,
Western Australia.
8. Payment of Member’s Bill passed in the Victorian Legislative
Assembly, by a majority of 14 votes ; 38 —24.
12. First appearance in Melbourne of Mr. Henry Ketten, the great
Hungarian pianist and musical virtuoso.
12. Dissolution of the N. S. W. Council of Education, after an exist-
ance of 13 years.
12. Mr. A. T. Clark, M.L. A., caned at Williamstown, for his disloyal
remarks on the Queen which lately appeared in his paper, by
Mr. D. C. F, Moodie, of Adelaide.
14. Resumption of work by miners at the New South Wales collieries.
Termination of the strike.
17. New South Wales Budget statement. Deficiency £290,000.
26. Capture of Wills and Campbell, horsestealers, after being tracked
by an Adelaide trooper for 1200 miles,
27. The Robert Raikes’ Centenary celebrated by Sunday Schools
throughout the colonies.
27. Drowning of the Rev. R. Bicknell Baynes, with his two sons and
the driver, by the upsetting of a buggy, while crossing the
Ovens River.
27. Murder of Sheritt, in his hut near Beechworth, by Joe Byrne,
one of the Kelly gang.
28. Destruction of the Kelly gang atGlenrowan. Ned Kelly captured.
Byrne, Dan Kelly, and Steve Hart shot in Jones’ Hotel, in
which they had taken np their position. The hotel fired.
During conflict between the police and the bushrangers, two
innocent persons were mortally and several others slightly
wounded.
30. The motion for the second reading of the Service Reform Bill
defeated by 43—41.
July—
3. Dissolution of the Victorian Parliament; Mr. Service appealing
to the country.
13. Prorogation of New South Wales Parliament, with a view to
dissolution.
14. General Election in Victoria, resulting in the return of 35
members to the Legislative Assembly in support of Mr. Service’s
Ministry ; 44 Oppositionists, and 7 Independents.
12,13, 15. Match played between the Australian Eleven against
Eleven of the County of Leicester. Drawn greatly in favour
of the former.
19, 24. The Waterloo Coursing Meeting. Cup won by Mr. J. T.
Skismore’s b.d.w.d. Springwater.
19. Loss of the ship “ Hydaspes,” in collision with s.s, “ Centurion,”
off Dungeness.
21, Mr. George Higinbotham sworn in as Judge of the Supreme Court.
21, Great Snowstorm in New South Wales.
22. Meeting of new Victorian Assembly for the election of a Speaker.
Mr. Peter Lalor elected without opposition.
23. Burning rf the Victoria Theatre, Sydney.
24. Tragedy at the Opera House. Mr. J. J. Macgregor Greer shooting
his wife and her paramour, Mons. Soudry, one of the members
of the French Exhibition Commissioners, and then shooting
himself.
27. Formal opening of the Victorian Legislative Assembly by His
Excellency the Governor.
29. Cricket Match in England. Australians v Eleven of Yorkshire ;
won by former by five wickets. Scores, 166—165.
29. £5OOO Bonus offered by the Brisbane Parliament upon the pro-
duction of 500 tons of marketable iron from Queensland ores.
16. Extraordinary deadlock in House of Representatives, Wellington,
New Zealand. Sir George Gray retaining his hearing in the
House, without speaking, for nearly two hours, in consequence
of the Premier, Mr. Hall, not giving him his direct attention.
August—
September—
October—
Notable Australasian Events, 1879-80.
14. First conversazione held at the Exhibition.
2. Mr. Justice Higinbotham took his seat on the bench for the first
time.
4. A wild man, a Swede giving the name of Heinricke Nelson
captured at Tallarook.
6. Railway collision at Lara on Geelong line, resulting in serious
injury to Miss Edith Caldwell.
7. Match between Australian Eleven and Eighteen of Hunslet,
resulted in a victory for the Australians by eight wickets.
7. Launch of Hon. W. J. Clarkes yacht “Janet” in presence of
7,000 spectators.
8. A meteor of unusual size and brilliancy fell near Coburg.
9. Seventy six horses accepted for the Melbourne Cup.
11. Edward Kelly the bushranger committed for trial at Beechworth
Police Court.
12. Bar Dinner given at Scott’s Hotel to Mr. Justice Higinbotham,
on the occasion of his elevation to the Supreme Court Bench.
14. Intercolonial Football Match at Adelaide, won by Victoria 5 goals
13 behinds to S. Australia’s 2 goals 7 behinds.
17. The Melbourne Philharmonic Society, held their 179th concert
at the Town Hall.
20. R. M. S, S. Kaisar-i-Hind, sailed for London, having on board
160,000 sovereigns.
21. Discovery of sovereigns at an old battery on the Emerald Hill
Beach supposed to have been secreted by a sailor since 1852.
23. Royal Society of Victoria’s annual conversazione held, and address
delivered by the president Mr. Ellery.
25. First day of Hawkesbury Spring Racing Meeting, The Guineas
were won by Mr. W. A. Long’s Geraldine.
27. Second day of Hawkesbury Race Meeting. Grand Handicap
was won by Mr. J. Burton’s Hesperian.
31. Parliament met and the members of the Berry Ministry took the
oath and their seats.
3. Orient steamer “ Sorata ” wrecked off Cape Jervis S. A.
4. First day of A.J.C. Spring Meeting at Sydney, Derby won by Mr.
Long’s Grand Flaneur.
4. The American ship “ Eric the Red,” wrecked on a reef off Cape
Otway. Four lives lost,
8. Great Metropolitan Stakes at Sydney, won by the Hon, Jas.
White’s horse Pontiff.
13, Heavy floods in Melbourne and various parts of the colony.
15. Race for St. Leger, won at Doncaster, England, by Mr. Brewer’s
Robert the Devil.
17. Audacious robbery of jewellery at Government House.
18. Presentation to Captain and crew of the steamer “ Dawn,” for
saving the lives of twenty three castaways from the wreck of
the “ Eric the Red.”
18. Extensive forgery of bank notes discovered.
22. Shocking accident at the Burra Burra mine Ballarat. A man
named Walters had|his head severed from his bcdy by the cage
going down the shaft.
22. Mr, G. F. Grace, the well-known English cricketer, died after a
short illness.
27. Arrival of three British men of war in Hobson’s Bay, viz : —The
“Cormorant,” “ Wolverene,” and “Emerald.”
29, Australians v. Players on the Crystal Palace ground. The
Australians won by two wickets.
30. Dismissal of seventy-six officers from the Lands Department.
1. Opening of the Victorian Grand International Exhibition.
4, Grand banquet given to the Australian cricketers at the Mansion-
house by the Lord Mayor of London.
5. Foundation stone laid of new Congregational Church, Hawthorn
5. Australian cricketers left London for Australia.
8. Dinner given by Sir Samuel Wilson, in the Town-hall. Five
hundred gentlemen present, representing various nations and
interests.
12. Cesarewitch Stakes run at Newmarket, England, and won by
Mr. O. Brewer’s horse Robert the Devil.
15. Extensive fire at Wagga Wagga, N. S, Wales, and great loss of
property.
16. First performance of M. Leon Caron’s Australian Band at the
Exhibition.
20. A juvenile highwayman and burglar, named Albert Ward, aged
fourteen years, arrested.
27• Visit of Exhibition commissioners to Sandhurst.
30. Edward Kelly found guilty of murder and sentenced to death.
30. First day of V.R.C. Spring Meeting. Derby won by Mr. W. A
Long’s colt Grand Flaneur.


Black Swan Shooting.
HE wild sports of the Australian bush have not, it must be granted, the same flavour of
romantic adventure that belongs to the hunter’s life on the boundless prairies of the
Ear West of the American continent. Still they have a charm of their own, and an
ardent sportsman will find his love of adventure fully gratified even in the wilderness
where the kangaroo bounds over the grassy glades, and where, on the dreary swamps and
endless lagoons, the wild duck and the black swan flock together in innumerable multitudes,
and haunt and breed in almost undisturbed repose, A scene of this description is depicted by the
pencil of our artist. The inland lake extends far into the distance ;on its banks the reed and bul-
rush vegetate in wild luxuriance.
“ The plain is grassy, wild and bare ;” a ragged gum tree throws out its spectral arms in the fore-
ground ; and the black swans are taking their evening amusement, and. giving their young ones
lessons in the art of swimming. The sportsmen are lying perdu in their punt amongst the reeds,
taking aim at their predestined feathered victims. Their account of the evening sport ought to be a
good one, for the black swan is by no means a shy bird in his native haunts, he is very heavy on the
wing, and he will not betake himself to flying so long as there is a chance of saving himself by
swimming. A good shot from a punt gun is generally sufficient to bring one of them down. The
black swan is a graceful, elegant bird, not quite so large as the English swan ; he has the same shaped
beak, but the cere is red, and the windpipe is not folded within the breastbone. Although the color
is deep black, the pinion feathers are white, and they make a pretty contrast with the black plumage
of the body when the bird is in the air. The bastard wing feathers are prettily curled. They have
a very musical call notewhenpassing overhead on a still night; and they call to one another with a soft
low note when floating on the lagoon. At night they always fly low. Australia is the land of con-
trarieties. A black swan was considered by the ancient Romans as an impossible contradiction in
Nature, and the phrase passed into a proverb. But the range of Nature’s possibilities is now known
to be unlimited, and includes even the production of a swan with night-black plumage. Whether
our indigenous bird resembles its congener of the old world, and (to quote Skakspeare) makes a
“ swanlike end fading in music,” the naturalists do not inform in. But it is possible that some future
Australian Tennyson may be moved to sing his version of the “ dying swan,” as, wandering through
the bush, by the margin of a lagoon, at twilight he may find himself assisting at the obsequies of a
dying bird of the wilderness, and may hear the desert waste around, “ flooded o’er with dying song.”
The scene depicted by our artist is full of fine touches, showing true artistic feeling. The evening
sunset view fast falling into night, the broad lagoon covered with its feathered tenants ; the flights
of homeward bound birds on the wing, and the charm of “pastoral melancholy,” surrounding the
whole scene, render the picture a very striking presentation of one episode of sporting life in the
bush.




c 4
IQ
s>>
X
a
A
B
O
O
02
(
A
<
CQ
M
o
-»!
1-1
(A


HIS HONOR SIR REDMOND BARRY.
Died 23rd November, 1880.
Sir Redmond Barry, who was born at Glanworth, County of
Cork, in the year 1813, was the third son of Major General Barry.
He arrived in Sydney during 1889, and a few weeks after came to
Melbourne. In the year 1850 Sir Redmond was appointed Solicitor-
General, with a seat in the Legislative Council and in the Executive
Council, and in the following year he was created a judge of the
Supreme Court. During the first year of his judgeship he opened,
with telling addresses, the circuit courts at Portland and Castle-
maine, and some time afterwards the court at Ararat. During the
absence of Sir William A’Beckett he very efficiently filled the posi-
tion of Acting-Chief Justice. In 1860 he was knighted, and in
1862 he acted as a most able representative of Victoria at the great
International Exhibition in London, having obtained twelve months’
leave of absence. Sir Redmond obtained from the English, and
some of the Continental Governments, no less than 6000 volumes
(some of them very valuable) for our Public and Supreme Court
Libraries. He may be looked upon as the father of the Melbourne
University, of which he was appointed the first chancellor in 1855,
when he opened it with a most eloquent address ; and the Melbourne
Public Library is almost peculiarly his own. He was appointed
president of the trustees in 1856, and ever since that time he has
evinced the deepest interest in the institution. As has already been
intimated, his indefatigable labours were rewarded by an unusually
large measure of success. To Sir Redmond are the people of
Victoria mainly indebted for the works of art that have been got
together in our National Gallery, as well as many of our parks and
gardens. In the latter portion of 1876 and in the commencement
of 1877, when the Governor and the Chief Justice were
simultaneously from the colony, Sir Redmond was sworn in as
Administrator of the Government of Victoria. Sir Redmond was a
capital speaker, being rigidly exact without being pedantic, and a
most painstaking judge. During the last three months of his
judicial career Judge Barry had occasion to pass two death sentences.
In the one case, the prisoner was a Swede, charged with a capital
offence, and His Honor, during the course of the trial, seeing that
the prisoner was a foreigner, took great pains to see that he was
afforded, even to the most minute particular, every facility for con-
ducting his defence. His Honor’s notes were forwarded to the
Executive Council, and, by the kindly advice of Sir Redmond, the
prisoner’s sentence was commuted to one of imprisonment for life.
The last dread sentence of death which His Honor passed was on
the notorious bushranger, Edward Kelly. A more impressive
speech than the one made at that trial has seldom been heard from
the bench of a court of justice. Amongst the members of the bar
he was regarded with a feeling more akin to devotion than mere
respect. All valued his high scholarly attainments, and appreciated
his extensive legal knowledge. At the time of his death he was the
senior judge in the British colonies.
Victoria has lost in him an upright and impartial judge, of uniform
courtesy, and exceptional ability, who, during his eight and twenty
years service never failed to uphold the dignity of the honourable
profession of which he was so particular and bright an orna-
ment ,
WILLIAM SAURIN LYSTER.
Died 27th Nov., 1880.
Mr. Lyster was born at Dublin in the year 1828. When a boy of
thirteen, after a severe illness, he was sent on a voyage to Sydney and
Melbourne for the purpose of recruiting his health, and at this early
period of his life he appears to have manifested a keen love for travel
and adventure. On his return home in 1844 he left for India, where
his father proposed to make him an Indigo planter. In 1846, dissatis-
fied with this life, he repaired to the Cape of Good Hope and saw
active service among the Kaffirs under Sir Harry Smith. In 1848,
when the young men of the time were flocking to the United States,
he made one of the number, and here, at twenty-eight years of age;
a model Hercules in appearance, and one of the handsomest men to
be found, he took to the stage, and remained for a few years. Rest-
less, ever-longing for change of scene and adventure, and somewhat
disappointed, for his histrionic fame had not been proclaimed,
trumpet-tongued, from east to west, his imagination was fired by the
glowing schemes of conquest propounded by General Walker, in
connection with Nicaragua, and in 1855 he resolved upon joining in
Walker’s wild enterprises. He was welcomed by that bold leader,
and received a brevet, as Captain in the Nicaraguan Army of Occu-
pation. In plainer English, he became one of Walker's filibusters,
and as such he was present at the battles of Grenada, St. Leon, and
Rivas, In 1857 he formed the acquaintance of some of the members
OBITUARY
ME. H. M. C. GEMMELL.
Died Ist January, 1880.
REV. JOSEPH DARE.
Died March 28th, 1880.
THE HON. NEIL BLACK, M.L.O.
Died 15th May, 1880.
of his first opera company, and with these he organised a tour
through the United States and California, which lasted three years,
and which eventuated in a determination to try a season in
Australia. He landed in Melbourne on the Ist March, 1861, with
the Escott-Squires company, which included his wife, Miss Georgia
Hodson, and shortly afterwards the company appeared at the
Theatre Royal, the opening work being “Lucia di Lammermoor.”
The dehut of Mr. Armes Beaumont under his auspices, and the sub-
sequent misfortune which led to the latter's adoption by Mr. Lyster
as one of his own family, only requires a reference here in order to
render this brief biography complete.
His remarkable faculty of organization, and the success that at-
tended his efforts in introducing operatic and other artists to
Australian audiences, are matters of history well known to almost
every resident in these colonies. Quick and passionate, but generous
and forgiving, with a ready wit and winning manners, he made many
friends. By lovers of opera Mr. Lyster will be remembered as the
father of the Lyric Drama in the Southern Hemisphere.
Mr. H. M. C. Gemmell, who died January 1, 1880, arrived at Mel-
bournein November 1856. Mr. Gemmell commenced the business of
an auctioneer during 1860, and his business career since that period
was most successful. His physical, mental and constitutional
qualifications were so eminently suitable to his occupation that he
soon outstripped in popularity all competitors. Notwithstanding
many pressing invitations Mr. Gemmell steadily refused 1o accept
any Legislative or Municipal honors. He was an enthusiastic lover
and a hearty supporter of music and fine arts, and was President of
the Metropolitan Liedertafel. Of a generous and unostentatious
disposition he distributed charity with great liberality and without
display.
Few men in our community have left a larger or more sorrowful
circle of friends than the subject of this notice who “ did good by
stealth, and blushed to find it fame.”
The deceased gentleman, was a prominent member of the Wes-
leyan body at Adelaide in 1849. The first appointment to the
ministry in Victoria was at Sandhurst, and he subsequently filled
Wesleyan pulpits successively in Geelong, East Melbourne, St. Kilda,
Ballarat and Melbourne. Some years since Mr Dare suffered from
failing health, and visited America, with a view of regaining strength,
but received little benefit therefrom. His pulpit oratory was vigor-
ous, earnest and effective. He died at the comparatively early age
of forty-nine, universally regretted by all those who knew him and
appreciated his manly worth and honesty.
The Hon, Neil Black, M.L.C., died at his residence, Mount Noo-
rat. at the ripe age of 76. He held a seat in the Legislative Council
from 1859, or for upwards of 21 years. It was as a highly-skilled
breeder of stock, and as an enterprising and successful colonist that
he was best known in Victoria, rather than as a politician. Mr. Black
arrived in Adelaide by the ship Ariadne in 1839. He had a look at
the country there, then visited Port Phillip, and finished up with
an inspection of New South Wales. Port Phillip pleased him best
so he took up a run of 43,700 acres in what was then known as the
Portland Bay district, close to the present road from Geelong to
Warrnambool, and within a few miles of Lake Terang. To the
original run of Glenormiston he afterwards added the Sisters. From
the earliest days Mr. Black was an enterprising importer of the best
breeds of stock. In 1841 he introduced Cotswolds and pure
merinos, but the former he did not keep long, preferring to retain
only the merinos. Experience ere long convinced him that the runs
were better adapted for cattle than sheep, and he next took to import-
ing stud cattle, sparing no money to obtain high-class animals. Mr.
Black was a first-class judge of cattle, and by his enterprise as an
importer, and his carefulness as a breeder, did as much as any man
could do to improve the quality of colonial stock. Mr. Black was
content to act a quiet and unobtrusive part in the Upper House and
only joined in the debates when he had something practical to say.


In 1867 he had the honor of entertaining His Royal Highness the
Duke of Edinburgh, when he made a short tour through the Western
district. Stock breeding was his especial hobby and occupation in
which pursuit he exercised great skill and sound judgment.
MR. THOMAS HIGINBOTHAM.
Died sth September, 1880.
Mr. Thomas Higinbotham arrived in this colony more than twenty
three years ago, and took up his residence, at Brighton, with his
brother, the present Mr. Jirstice Higinbotham. He lived with his
brother’s family, a bachelor, from that time to his death, at the age
of sixty years. When he first arrived out here his talents as an
engineer soon made for him a name, and he was appointed Inspector
of Roads and Bridges. After a time as the colony progressed, and
our railway system was developed, he was appointed Engineer-in-
Chief of Victorian railways, an office which he filled with credit to
himself, and great benefit to the colony. In 1878, he was dismissed
the service for political reasons, and not from any failure on his part
to perform his official duties in a satisfactory manner.
Mr. Higinbotham left Victoria, and for a time he was engaged in
South Australia reporting on the public works system of the Govern-
ment of that colony. In 1879 he received a very pressing offer from
the New Zealand Government to make one of a commission of three
members to report on the public works in the North and Middle
Islands. The commission was kept open for a long time, in the hope
that Mr. Higinbotham would allow himself to be nominated as one
of its members, but he was compelled by pressure of other engage-
ments to decline the appointment. When the Service Ministry
came into office in February, 1880, Mr. Higinbotham was reinstated
Engineer-in-Chief of Victorian Railways, and he held that office up
to the time of his death. We are unable in the present brief notice
to enter fully into the public career of the deceased gentleman, but
it is not too much to say that his public life was without a single
blemish, and his death caused feelings of deep regret to all -who came
within the range of his influence. In the department over which he
presided he was dearly loved, his unassuming manner endearing him
to all.
THE HON. WILLIAM HIGHETT.
Died November 29, 1880.
Mr- William Highett was born at Weymouth, England, in December
1807, so that at the time of his death he was in his seventy-third
year. He arrived in Tasmania in 1830, thus making him a colonial
of fifty years’ standing. Two years after his arrival, a branch of the
Bank of Van Diemen’s Land was established at Launceston, and in
this institution Mr. Highett secured the appointment of accountant, j
shortly afterwards he obtained the position of cashier in the Tamar j
Bank, and he held that post until 1838. In October of that year
the Union Bank of Australia commenced business in Melbourne, and [
Mr. Highett was appointed the first manager. After holding the 1
appointment four years, he obtained leave of absence and visited j
Europe, and whilst there he resigned the managership. He returned j
to the colony in 1845, and became one of the local directors of the
bank, and held the office for many years. In 1852 he took a
prominent part in establishing the Bank of Victoria, and he was
elected one of the first directors on the board of that institution.
Mr. Highett was one of the originators of the Victorian Fire and
Mai-ine Insurance Company, which started business in 1849. He
sat for some time as a non-official nominee in the old Legislative
Council. When responsible government was first introduced in
Victoria under the present Constitution, in 1856, he came forward
as a candidate for a seat in the Legislative Council for the Eastern
Province, but he was unsuccessful. One of the members elected
on that occasion was the Hon. William Kaye, but he was shortly
afterwards unseated on petition. This caused a fresh election,
when Mr. Highett again came forward, and was eventually returned,
after a close contest. In 1860 he retired from the Council by
rotation, but he was re-elected without a contest. Ten years later
on he again retired by rotation, and in 1870 he was again returned
unopposed, and held his seat till within a few weeks of his death,
when he retired by effluxion of time.
REV. MOSES RINTEL.
Died Bth May, 1880,
The Rev. Moses Rintel, senior minister of the Hebrew community
in Victoria, was born in Edinburgh in 1824, and arrived at Sydney
in 1844, and was the first authorised Jewish clergyman who came
to the colonies. He accepted the office of minister to the Jewish
congregation of Melbourne in 1849, and was particularly active in
supporting and organising the charitable institutions in connection
with the Hebrew faith.
Places Worth Visiting.
jVI E.
The Public Library, National Gallery, and Technological
Museum.
The Public Library, which is open daily (Sundays excepted) from
10 a.m, to 10 p. m., contains a magnificent assortment of valuable
works, numbering over 105,000 volumes.
The advancement of this valuable institution has been greatly
promoted by the late Sir Redmond Barry and the other trustees, who,
by their untiring energy and zeal, have contributed largely to the
mental and educational advancement of Victorian colonists.
The National Gallery contains a comparatively small but well
selected collection of paintings by distinguished European and Aus-
tralian artists, also some beautiful specimens of statuary by modern
sculptors, and models of the most renowned works of mediaeval
times.
In the Museum will be found models of mining and other machi-
nery, together with numerous specimens of the raw and manufactured
products of Victoria.
The National Museum of Natural History.
Open daily (Sundays excepted) from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
This valuable institution which is situated in the University
Reserve, has a prettily decorated hall, well lighted and ventilated ;
it contains a splendid collection of the products of the animal world,
from the elephant to the butterfly, labelled, classified, and syste-
matically arranged, showing the regions of the globe to which they
belong.
One of the greatest curiosities in this Museum is a group of old
and young gorillas, superior, it is believed, to any similar collection
in Europe.
The Royal Park and Acclimatisation Society's Gardens.
The Royal Park has an historical interest from its being the start-
ing point of the Burke and Wills Exploring Expedition, which had
such a sad and tragic termination.
The Acclimatisation Society’s Gardens contains an excellent live
collection of the carnivora of foreign countries, together with speci-
mens of Australian animals, birds, and reptiles, which would alone
amply repay the trouble of a visit.
The Society has been instrumental in introducing a number of
English and foreign animals and birds which have now become
thoroughly established and acclimatised, increasing the stores in our
larders, and filling our forests with melodious songsters.
The Melbourne General Cemetery,
which was opened about 24 years ago, contains about 100 acres, a large
portion of which is tastefully laid out with walks, flower beds, and
shrubberies. The different religious denominations are allotted dis-
tinct portions of the enclosure, in quantities proportionate to the
census returns of the population.
Many beautiful monuments have been erected here by wealthy
survivors, as a token of the love and respect they entertained for
their departed relatives and friends.
The Town Hall and Organ.
The Town Hall is a magnificent room, which vies in size with
many of the great halls of Europe.
It is capable of seating over 2,000 persons.
At the north end of this hall is built a splendid organ, containing
79 stops, and 4,373 pipes, and measuring 46 feet in height, 52 feet 6
inches in breadth, and 24 feet in depth.
It was built by Hill and Sons, London, and is admitted to be sur-
passed in size and beauty of tone by few organs in the world.
The Parliament Houses
when completed will, in addition to the chambers devoted to Legis-
lature, contain a hall and vestibule 120 feet long, 45 feet wide, and 52
feet high, together with a library and other offices, the whole crowned
by a cupola and dome, forming a pile of buildings devoted to legis-
lative purposes, superior to any in the southern hemisphere.
The Botanical Gardens
occupy an area of 120 acres.
Under the curatorship of Mr. Guilfoyle these metropolitan plea-
sure grounds have assumed a very pleasant appearance.
The lawns, which during the heat of summer bore a brown and
unhealthy appearance, arfe now clothed with a beautiful green sward,
smooth and elastic as a velvet pile carpet.
The lake has been much increased in size, the aquatic weeds with
which it was overgrown removed, and the whole has been trans-
formed into a sheet of water dotted with rocky islets, worthy
the name of a lake.


The Great
The opening of the great International Exhibition is the special
historical event for Victoria in 1880. This magnificent undertaking
fully realizes the loftiest design of the first projectors of these grand
world shows. “To seize the living scroll of human progress,”
wrote a brilliant essayist thirty years ago, “inscribed with every
successive conquest of man’s intellect, filled with each discovery in
the constructive art, embellished with each plastic grace of figured
surface or of moulded form, and unrol this before the eyes of men,
the whole stream of History furnishing its contingent—placing
Archimedes, Arkwright, Davy, Jacquard, Watt, and Stephenson
side by side—leaving the instructive lesson to be learned that always
lies in the knowledge and example of great things done—this is,
indeed, no mean design, no infelicitous ’conception. It is only by
such a cosmical comparison of the known agencies of science and
art that we can gradually rise to a knowledge of the varied gifts
and powers of nature, or our own control over them. Hereby alone
can we hope with Faust, to
“ See the Secret rings
Whose grasp the universe engirds ;
To know the force that works in things—
Not the mere sound that breathes in words.”
All this, and more than this, the Melbourne International Exhibi-
tion of 1880 embodies. Such a collection of the treasures of art and
industry, both separately and in conjunction, as is here exposed to
view, would have been counted a miracle achieved, in the early days
of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria. The fact that less
than the period intervening since those days has seen the city of
Melbourne, and the colony of which it is the capital, spring into
existence, enhances, the marvellous character of the enterprise.
It is as a splendid fiction of the Arabian Nights' Entertainments
reduced to simple fact. It is a visible and tangible illustration of
the magical power of industry directed by intelligence. It is a
practical demonstration of the invincible might of the concentrated
energy of many peoples, and of the limitless progress of which
Humanity is capable. It strikes the mind as being the ultimate
point of human progress ; and yet who can say how much further
that progress may go.
The following statistics relating to previous Exhibitions will be
found of interest The London Exhibition, 1851, numbered 13,917
exhibitors, and was visited during 142 days by 6,099,194 persons.
The Paris Exhibition of 1855 had 24,954 exhibitors, was open 200
days, and visited by 5,121,330 persons. The London Exhibition of
1862, 28,650 exhibitors, 176 days, 6,211,103 visitors. The Paris
Exhibition of 1867, 50,226 exhibitors, 210 days, 10,200,000 visitors.
The Vienna Exhibition of 1873, 42,584 exhibitors, 186 days,
7,254,687 visitors. The Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876, 159 days,
9,857,625 visitors. The Paris Exhibition of 1878 was open 196 days,
and the total of admissions was 16,032,725, or an average of about
82,000 per day. The awards accorded at Paris to each nation have
been thus summarised The silver and bronze medals and honour-
able mentions argued quantity rather than quality. The best
criterion of the latter, assuming that the judges had been fairly
accurate, or that, internationally, their mistakes neutralised each
other, was the number of grand prizes and gold medals. Of these,
France carried off 1984; England and her colonies, 369 ; Austria-
Hungary, 252 ; Belgium, 184; Spain, 167 ; Italy, 157; United
States, 145; Russia, 123; Switzerland, 86; Holland, 70; Sweden
and Norway, 70; the French colonies, 57 ; Denmark, 27 ; Greece,
12. As to the distinctions of all kinds, France, of course, stood first,
with 13,569 ; Spain and her colonies coming next, with 2,500 ;
England and her colonies third, with 2,455; and Austria fourth,
with 1,770. The Spanish aggregate exceeded the English by reason
of a larger number of minor awards—viz., 829 bronze medals and
964 honourable mentions, as compared with 779 and 647,
The value of these great World Exhibitions as aids to civilisation,
and the spread of the feeling of brotherhood amongst mankind, can-
not be better expressed than in the concluding words of the address
of the President of the British Association in 1876 Whatever be
the result of our efforts to advance science and industry, it requires
no gift of prophecy to declare that the boundless resources which
the supreme Author and Upholder of the Universe has provided for
the use of man will, as time rolls on, be more and more fully applied
to the improvement of the physical, and through the improvement
of the physical, to the elevation of the moral condition of the human
family. Unless, however, the history of the future of our race be
wholly at variance with the history of the past, the progress of
mankind will be marked by alternate periods of activity and repose ;
nor will it be the work of any one nation or of any one race. To
the erection of the edifice of civilised life, as it now exists, all the
higher races of the world have contributed ; and, if the balance were
accurately struck, the claims of Asia for her portion of the work
would be immense, and those of Northern Africa not insignificant.
International
Exhibition.
Victoria’s Advantages.
Steam power has of late years produced greater changes than pro-
bably ever occurred before in so short a time. But the resources of
nature are not confined to steam, nor to the combustion of coal.
The steady water-wheel and the rapid turbine are more perfect
machines than the stationary steam-engine ; and glacier-fed rivers
with natural reservoirs, if fully turned to account, would supply an
unlimited and nearly constant source of power depending solely for
its continuance upon solar heat. But no immediate dislocation of
industry is to be feared, although the turbine is already at work on
the Rhine and the Rhone. In the struggle to maintain their high
position in science and its applications, the countrymen of Newton
and Watt will have no ground for alarm so long as they hold fast
to their old traditions, and remember that the greatest nations have
fallen when they relaxed in those habits of intelligent and steady in-
dustry upon which all permanent success depends.
At a conversazione of the Social Science Congress a paper en-
titled “Comparative Geography, or Victoria’s Advantages,” was
read by Mr. James Kingston, being a condensed narrative of the
observations made by him during the course of a tour round the
world as “ An Australian Abroad.’’
We believe that the following extracts, culled from remarks made
by this intelligent and observant traveller, will be of great interest
to our readers.
“ I don’t want to descend to small matters when introducing the
great one of the advantages of Victoria as a European’s best home,
but really life is so much made up of small matters that they will
not be denied notice. It is curious to the British-born traveller to
notice how the eastern world, how three-fourths of the human race
on the face of our globe, live and thrive entirely destitute of what
we look upon as necessaries of life. The great eastern world has no
beef or mutton, no potatoes, no butter, no milk. I might say never
mind the why or wherefore of all that, but the reason is that it is all
a matter of climate that forces one to take rice and poultry or rice
and fish in place of meat and potatoes. The butter would, of course,
all melt and the milk turn sour in a short time were such things
even procurable in countries where no grass grows to feed the cows.”
“No question can be made that no city is so much London-like
as is Melbourne I It is a veritable little London, and what it lacks
in size and age are in its favour. What it wants in one way is more
than made up in another. None of the other cities of Great
Britain, not Manchester, Liverpool, Glasgow, Edinburgh, or Dublin,
are so London-like as is Melbourne ! New York, Philadelphia,
Chicago, Detroit, St. Louis, and San Francisco are nothing like it.
About that matter I found no question. If we are troubled with
the dust in Melbourne, it is only to half the extent that they suffer
from it in San E’raacisco, Our theatres are very like those of Lon-
don, and it is probable that we have quite as many of them as that
bigger city. Of the 40 that London and its suburbs have to show,
most of them run a piece for many months, and some of them for
years. All such theatres are virtually ‘ shut up ’to one after the
special attraction there has been once seen. A few nights I found
quite exhausted all that was worth seeing at the theatres,
and such good pieces as I had seen would not be changed for months.
At our five theatres here, no piece can run for such long periods
owing to our smaller population. Frequent change of pieces bring
fresh visits so that our smaller number of theatres actually replace
the larger number of London ones. We have, I found, a racecourse
second to none in the world, and far superior to that of Longchamp
at Paris. Our Exhibition building is quite as attractive now, and
perhaps more so, than the Crystal Palace, We are behind-hand a
little, perhaps, in showing the latest fashions, but they come quickly
enough, and it were better perhaps that we had to wait longer for
some of them. Our public gardens and parks are equal to those of
any other city. Our Fitzroy and Botanical Gardens are not seen
equalled in many places. In indoor matters of interest, and especially
to those with whom the hey-dey of youth is over and less exercise is
needed, the greatest is to be found in the excellent literature with
which the daily and weekly press of Victoria supplies its people.
With experience of the newspapers of all the world, I may be
allowed to say that more readable newspapers than those of Victoria
are not to be anywhere found. There are none better printed or
better supplied withnews of the world and of the day, and none that
take such care to provide for the different tastes of all readers. In
one Melbourne paper is now combined all that one had to look for
in several of those published in London, The broad well-paved
streets and asphalted roads of Melbourne and its suburbs are second
to none seen anywhere. Having seen how tramways turn cities into
mere railway stations we may hope to see London’s example followed
and the tram-cars restricted to the suburbs. ”


MEDICAL NOTES.
It is, as a rule, undesirable that people should go in indiscriminately
for amateur surgery and medicine, yet it is very necessary to know
what to do in cases of emergency that are very apt to arise, and when
the delay that takes place before a medical man arrives may be at-
tended with serious consequences. To meet such contingencies we
append a few useful instructions which we have culled from a
handy book by Dr. Hope, aptly entitled, “ Till the Doctor Comes.”
Bleeding from, cut or mound on head , face, Sfc, —Wash clean with
cold water at once, and if the blood still continues to flow, cover the
wound with pipe clay or ordinary whiting ; press firmly on for a> few
minutes, and leave what adheres to the cut remain, then cover with
a piece of plaster. This will be found a very efficacious remedy.
Common clay will answer if away from any house.
Bleeding from the nose.— This frequently harmless, but always
annoying accident, may be stopped by bathing the neck and face in
cold water, and syringing the nostrils with a little alum water—the
patient should sit upright all the time.
Bleeding from mound in leg or arm. —lf near any of the 1 arge
veins, particularly near the wrist or thumb, it is frequently a matter
for the surgeon. The bleeding should be stopped by folding a piece
of rag to a good thicknesss, placing on the part and binding as
tightly as possible. If the wound is in the leg, the patient should lie
down and support the leg on a stool or chair ; if in the arm or wrist,
it should be held over the head. If the person meeting with the
accident be alone, let him get a handful of dry earth, clap it on the
wound and grasp it tightly, till he can obtain assistance.
Blood , vomiting of. —Two teaspoonsful of vinegar or lemon juice',
and one teaspoonful of Epsom salts in a wine-glassful of cold waterl
Repeat every half-hour till blood stops. The patient should take no-
thing else, except a little cold water or a small quantity of crushed ice-
Boils, though not dangerous, are generally painful and always
troublesome. A plaster of soap and sugar, or of resin ointment, will
be found sufficient unless the skin is exceedingly tough, when lancing
must sometimes be resorted to.
Burns or sea Ids.— Treatment—first: wet, warm, but not sour ap-
plications to the part; then apply a piece of rag well wet with linseed
oil and lime water, cover with a piece of dry flannel and bind it. If
you have not a mixture of oil and lime water, get a pint of hot water
and milk, of equal parts, with a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda in
it, or warm water with plenty of common soap in it. Keep the parts
thoroughly wet, well covered, aud as little exposed to the air as
possible. After the inflammation has subsided, dress the sores with
some of Turners’ Cerate, applied to the woolly side of the lint. The
following ointment will be found relieving and cooling : Whiting
and lard mixed, but take care there is no salt in the lard. Another,
Whiting or chalk mixed with linseed oil to the consistency of honey;
then reduced with vinegar to the consistency of treacle. Apply with
brush or feather from time to time.
Chilbains. — When not brohen, rub well thrice a day with campho-
rated spirit and lead lotion mixed in equal parts, or with an ointment
made by mixing an ounce of lard and a teaspoonful of dry mustard.
If brohen, a little mutton suet should be melted and mixed with
whiting, to the consistency of an ointment, spread on lint, and applied
to the parts affected. To prevent chibains, wear warm coverings to
hands and feet; do not subject them to sudden changes from heat to
cold, or vice versa, and keep up the circulation of the blood by
moderate exercise.
Choking from a piece of meat, fishbone, fyc. —Give a smart smank
with the open hand between the shoulders. In nine cases out of ten
this will shoot the substance out; but if not, look into the throat,
and see if there be anything you can reach with your finger and
thumb, or a large blunt scissors, and pull it out. If this fail, take a
silver or pewter tablespoon, bend it a little, and push it down the
throat, keeping well to the back of the throat, and you will then do no
harm. If there be a doctor near send for him. If it be only a small
substance in the throat, and the person can swallow, give plenty of
bread and potato, and a drink of water after it. If this is not suffi-
cient give a teaspoonsful of mustard and warm water, or any other
emetic you have at hand ; and after the person has vomited, you
will generally find it all right. If you do not succeed send for a doc-
tor.
Ear-ache and pain in the face, —Pour laudanum, which has been
first warmed, into the ear on the side affected, and stop up with wool
or lint. Note.—There is no danger in laudanum thus applied.
Eye, things in the, as specks of dirt, stone, &c. Draw the lid
away from the eye, place a piece of writing paper underneath the lid,
press on it and draw the paper away, when it will be found that the
obnoxious thing has clung to the paper.
Sprains.— Wrap up the part in several folds of flannel, dipped in
water as hot as it can be borne with comfort, and cover it with a dry
bandage : if possible, with a piece of oiled silk or sheet of gutta
percha. If it be very painful, wet a piece of rag with laudanum,
place this next the skin, then cover with the wet flannel.
All sorts of poultices are used in the country for sprains. So long
as they are wet, soft, and warm, they do good ; but there is nothing
so cleanly, so easily applied and soothing, as laudanum and hot water
The part must be kept quiet, not only while painful, but even after
the pain is gone ; for if you exercise the joint too soon, you may do
great mischief. Keep the warm applications on constantly till all pain
and imflanimation are gone, then, twice a day, hold the joint under a
tap or stream of cold water for a few minutes, till it begins to feel
painful; then bind it up with a common bandage, and bring it back
to its work very gradually. A great deal of pain and swelling can be
avoided by keeping the limb in a proper position.
Tooth-ache, Ear-ache, Pain in the face— Fill the ear on the pain-
ful side with laudanum, and plug it with a little wool or lint. To do
this properly the person should lay the head on a table with the bad
side upwards ; you need not fear putting too much in, it will do no
harm. First warm the laudanum, by letting the bottle stand for a
few minutes in warm water. Laudanum will not cure tooth-ache
when the tooth is decayed, but it will frequently give relief and a
good night’s rest, till you can have it properly attended to.
Whitlow— Though in itself a small affair, there are few things
which cause such suffering, and which are so neglected and allowed
to have their own way. Surgeons are constantly meeting with people
who have lost bones of the finger or thumb, and have stiff joints from
this cause. At the commencement great relief is sometimes obtained
by soaking the part in the following mixture : take half a gill of
strong vinegar, and dissolve it in a tablespoonful of saleratus (car-
bonate of potash). Let it be used as hot as can be borne, and repeat
as often as the pain returns, but if matter be formed there are two
ways of treating it; one by allowing the matter to destroy the parts
and find its own way out, generally around the nail : this takes from
two to six weeks of severe suffering ; the other is by making a small
opening down to the bone to allow the matter to escape, which takes
one moment to do, gives relief in an hour, and can be done without
giving any pain. It is a great pity for any one so to fear the very
slight operation as to lose the use of a thumb for life, and if near a
surgeon or a public institution there is in the present day no excuse.
In either case a poultice must be constantly applied.
Toe-nails growing in. —Scrape the arch of the toe-nail with a piece
of broken window-glass till it is so thin and weak that it cannot
resist the pressure of the flesh and it will flatten out and grow pro-
perly.
HINTS ON KEEPING POULTRY.
A great diversity of opinion exists as to what varieties of poultry
are most profitable to the Australian breeder. We may, however,
safely allege that the Bramah-pootra is one of the most hardy and
useful of all the known kinds. The flesh is white, juicy, and of good
flavour ; while the eggs are abundant and above the average size.
They are almost equal to the Dorking if well fed, and are in a fit con-
dition for the table when from five to seven months old. Of the two
colours dark and light, we have a decided preference for the former,
experience teaching us that the dark breed is the most hardy and
prolific. The poultry yard should be stocked in the proportion of
one cock to every eight or ten hens. A cock is in his prime when
from two to three years old, and from that period gradually declines.
Care should be taken to introduce new blood occasionally, as by that
means only can the best results be obtained
Although fowls are kept by most persons having sufficient space for
their accomodation yet the greatest ignorance prevails as to their
proper treatment. Half a dozen fowls well attended to will furnish
a thousand eggs a year. Although classed as frugivorous birds they
might with more truth be termed omnivorous, as few kinds of food
are refused by them. In addition to grain of all sorts they readily
devour peas, beans, potatoes, cabbage, lettuce, and other vegetables;
fruit, insects, meat, &c., and it should be remembered as an unques-
tionable fact that the more frequently a change of food is made and
the greater the variety thereof the better the results will be. During
the winter, meat sprinkled plentifully with cayenne pepper should
be given once or twice a week. Many a farmer keeps a hundred or
more ill-conditioned, badly bred , half-starved fowls, and then
wonders that they fail to pay him, while he, whose stock consists of
a dozen or two well-bred fowls and who provides them with an ample
supply of food, old plaster, oyster shells, lime, secret nests, and chalk
eggs, reaps a rich reward for his labor. Fowl droppings will be found
in fertilizing properties almost ecpial to the best Maldon Island guano
if mixed in proper proportions with stable manure.
The fowl house should be placed in a position sheltered from cold
wind, the floor kept dry and swept daily. _ Few breeders know how
invaluable kerosene is in destroying vermin. By applying it with a
brush to the roosts occasionally, and round the edges of the boxes
used for sitting hens, your fowls will be kept free from these pests
with far less trouble than by any other means. In addition to this
treatment the house should be lime-washed three or four times a




“ Qlxncing upwards h ! s eyes enmuntereo these of a venemous snake.”—(See page 41.)
A SNAKE ADVENTURE.


A Snake
Adventure.
HE illustration depicts a real incident of bush life. A gentleman out shooting with a friend
in Gipps Land came upon the banks of a river densely covered with ferns and thick under-
growth. Unable to reach the water in any other manner he crept along the trunk of a
large tree with the intention of filling a tin vessel (better known as a billy) with water, when
his foot slipped and he narrowly escaped a bath, but found himself confronted with still greater
danger. From a rotten branch above him proceeded a hissing sound, and glancing upwards his
eyes encountered those of a venomous snake preparing to make a spring at his hand or face, A cry of
terror drew the attention of his companion, who promptly sent a charge of shot through the head of the
reptile. It was a narrow escape ! The incident shows how careful people in the bush ought to be of
lurking danger in rotten branches and decaying logs. The snake most usually found besetting the bush-
man’s path is the black species ; in the summer it is everywhere—in the depths of the forest, in the thick
heather, in the open swamps and plains, by the edges of creeks or water-holes. It will enter the bush-
man’s hut, and coil itself up in his blankets j in fact nowhere is he safe, and the wonder is, not that so
many, but that so few accidents occur from snake-bites. At any moment the bush man is liable to tread
on a deadly reptile, coiled up in his very path, which does not always get out of the way, but lies watching
him with his basilisk eyes, ready in a moment to make the fatal spring if touched, and very often the
snake is not seen until the danger is past. A bushman has been known to throw himself down on his
blankets for a rest on a hot day, and to find a large carpet snake curled up within a few inches of his head.
The vicious little whip snake is frequently taken up by the hand in a bundle of dry grass. A bird fas-
cinated by the deadly gleam of a snake’s eyes will fall dead at the feet of a traveller through the dry scrub.
It is a safe precaution for the bushman always to have his lower limbs encased in leggings, or gaiters, or tall
boots, as the teeth of the snake fortunately cannot penetrate leather. Of the various Australian species
of these reptiles the black snake is the handsomest, but also the most spiteful and venomous. It is of a
rich black colour, above the belly plates light. One variety has the belly plates copper red, and is thence
called the Copper Snake. It is smaller and thinner than the black snakes, and may, in fact, be the
young of that species. The black snake is commonly found amongst thick timber and scrub, and in the dry
season near to water. The months during which they infest the bush are from September to March. They
retire into their holes when the sun goes down. When they first come out of their holes in September,
they are in a torpid state, and therefore the more dangerous, as they don’t care to get out of the traveller’s
way, but will risk being trodden on. Usually, however, they glide off swiftly at the approach of any
living thing. They don’t usually spring, although in the picture one is so represented. They will spring
at a dog sooner than at a man. The remedies for snake-bite are numerous, but none of them are infallible.
Underwood’s antidote was once in great vogue, and is still in demand. It is said that Underwood dis-
covered it by watching a battle between a lizard and a snake. After the lizard had killed the snake, it ran
and eat the leaves of a plant which is common everywhere. The Indian remedy is ipecacitanha, and there
is no doubt of its being efficacious in many instances. The method of applying it is to score the bitten
part with a knife until it bleeds freely, and then to make a paste of the ipecacuanha and spittle and bind
it round the wound. This is a temporary remedy until medical aid can be obtained. Professor Halford’s
remedy, injecting morphia under the skin, is almost infallible in severe cases.


JANUARY
BLOWER GARDEN.
This is, as a rule, the driest and hottest month in
the year, therefore, care must be taken to provide
a plentiful supply of water; also mulch well
round all plants and shrubs likely to suffer from
drought.
Cut back Verbenas, Petunias, &c., when making
straggling growth.
Continue to plant Dahlias, and tie, thin, and
water previous plantings; also apply liquid
manure if fine blooms are desired.
As losses are sure to occur through prolonged
dry weather, propagate evergreen shrubs by
layering, for the purpose of filling up vacancies as
soon as the Autumn rains set in.
Make cuttings of Pelargoniums, Fuchsias,
Petunias, and similar plants.
Early flowering hardy annuals may be sown.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
During this month it is useless to sow small
seeds unless they can be watered and sheltered
from the scorching rays of the sun.
Sowings of French Beans and Peas should be
made after having well soaked the drills.
Vegetable Marrows, Melons, and Cucumbers
should be thinned and well watered.
Plant out Cauliflowers and Cabbages in drills
three or four inches deep.
This month is the most favorable for the
extermination of weeds, therefore the ground
amongst growing crops should be well stirred
with the hoe.
Remove decaying crops, and well work the
ground for the reception of others.
Late crops of Potatoes should be planted with-
out loss of time if not done previously.
FEBRUARY.
BLOWER GARDEN.
Roses should have all suckers removed, and
rampant shoots regulated; also dust sulphur over
them if they show signs of mildew.
Tie and stake Chrysanthemums, and remove
some buds if fine flowers are desired; also supply
them liberally with liquid manure.
Pansy seed may be sown and good varieties
propagated by cuttings.
Sow seeds of Campanulas, Dianthus, Lobelias.
Stocks, Wallflowers, Sweet Williams, &c., in
boxes or pots for planting out in the autumn.
Make further cuttings of Heliotropes, Pelar-
goniums, Salvias, and similar plants to fill
vacancies in borders. Should the weather during
this month prove dry the advantages of previous
heavy mulchings will be very apparent.
Stir the surface soil well.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
Evert effort should be made to water and
mulch between young crops.
Attention should he given to the earthing up
and watering of advancing crops of Celery, also
sow seed for succession.
French Beans, Broad Beans, and Peas, should
be sown, the seed having been soaked previously,
and the drills well watered.
Quick growing Kidney Potatoes should be
planted, and old crops lifted to prevent a second
growth.
Sow Lettuces, and Radishes fortnightly for
succession.
Dress Asparagus beds with salt.
Sow plentifully seeds of Cauliflower, Cabbage,
Brussels Sprouts, and Savoys.
Remove Vegetable Marrows as they ripen.
MARCH.
BLOWER GARDEN,
Prepare ground for laying down new lawns.
Grass seed, if sown now, will get a good start
before the winter. Top dress old lawns, filling up
all inequalities of the surface with rich soil,
having previously scattered a little grass and
white clover seed over them.
Sow hardy annuals for early blooming, a selec-
GARDENERS’
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
APRIL.
BLOWER GARDEN.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
Sow Lettuce and other salad plants.
Divide and transplant culinary herbs.
MAY.
BLOWER GARDEN.
tion of which can he obtained from any respectable
seedsman.
Prepare ground for spring flowering bulbs, such
as Anemones, Crocuses, Hyacinths, Ranunculus,
Tulips, Ixias, &c., by mixing a plentiful,
supply of well rotted cow manure with the soil
and make the first planting.
Divide and plant out Columbines, Campanulas,
Primroses, and Violets.
Layer Picotees, Carnations, and Rinks.
Prepare ground for cropping, work deeply, and
bury the manure well, especially for root crops.
Carrots, Parsnips, and Red Beet may now be
sown. At this season of the year stirring the
surface greatly promotes growth.
Continue to water Vegetable Marrows, Cucum-
bers, &c., with diluted cow manure or guano.
Plant out Celery largely, and supply liquid
manure, and earth up early crops for blanching.
Main crops of Onions may now be got in.
Plant out when ready February sowings of the
Cabbage family, and sow again for succession.
Peas should be sown in quantity, also a few
Broad Beans. Turnip seed should be sown
if not done last month.
Take advantage of moist weather to plant out
Lettuce and sow for future requirements.
The planting of Evergreen Trees and Shrubs
may now be commenced, choosing moist or dull
days, and avoid as much as possible exposing the
roots to the action of wind or sun. Gamelias,
Daphnes, Rhododendrons, Sfc., should now also be
propagated by layers.
This is a good month for planting Roses, and
cuttings now made will be found to strike freely.
Another batch of Spring Flowering Bulbs
should now be planted.
Stake and tie Chrysanthemums, and remove old
flowers from Dahlias, to prolong the blooming
season.
Main sowings of all hardy annuals should be
made this month ; also plant Box, Thrift, Rose-
mary, and other edgings. Continue laying down
lawns, and renovating old ones.
As soon as one crop of Vegetables is exhausted
another should be ready to take its place; by
adopting this course a comparatively small plot
of ground will be found sufficient to supply the
wants of a family.
Work deeply land intendedfor root crops.
Plantout largely Cabbages, Cauliflowers, Savoys,
&c., and also sow seed for succession.
Earth up advancing crops, and dust soot or
lime round them if slugs are troublesome.
Plant Onions largely and sow Turnips to keep
up the supply.
Sow Carrots, Parsnips, Red Beet, &c Peas
and Broad Beans should also be sown in ground
not liable to be saturated with moisture.
Plant out Evergreen shrubs, and thin out
branches where necessary.
Finish planting Roses as early as possible, so
that they may be well established before the
winter commences. Sow Hollyhock seed; cut-
tings will also strike freely.
Plant another batch of spring flowering bulbs,
also a few Liliums and Gladioli for early blooming.
Seeds of hardy perennials, biennials, and annuals
should be sown without delay.
Sow Pansy seed, and strike cuttings of good
varieties, as these plants are liable to die off
suddenly.
Propagate Fuchsias from young shoots placed
under glass.
Fork manure into all beds and borders requir-
ing it.
CALENDAR.
JUNE,
JULY.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
The seasons are so variable in Australia that it
is difficult to calculate with any certainty when
vegetable crops will arrive at maturity, therefore
it is well to sow seeds of the most approved kinds
for succession throughout the year. Plant out
the Cabbage family, and sow for future crops.
Sow seeds of Carrots, Red and White Beet,
Parsnips, Spinach, and Turnips. Peas may also
be sown in mild localities, but not in the districts
liable to frost.
Plant out Rhubarb in dry situations.
Asparagus beds should receive their winter
dressings and fresh beds may also be planted,
but care must he taken not to raise them above
the surrounding surface.
Stir the surface soil well, and keep weeds
down.
BLOWER GARDEN.
Evergreen trees and shrubs should not he
moved, and if not planted last mouth it will be
better to allow them to remain until the early
spring, as they suffer much from frost and cold
winds, if shifted during the winter months.
Finish the formation of lawns, walks, &c., and
fill up gaps in old edgings as nothing presents a
more unsightly appearance.
Take up Dahlias, and stow away in some place
protected from frosts.
Ixias Sparaxis, and other Cape bulbs may be
planted, also, a few Gladioli.
The shabby stems of Chrysanthemums should
be cut away , and plants divided if necessary.
Annuals should be thinned out so as to leave
sufficient room for those that remain to attain
their full development.
VEGETABLE GARDEN,
It will be necessary to sow very few small seeds
this month except where any particular crop has
failed.
Peas may be sown in well-drained and rather
dry ground; advancing crops should be earthed
up, and staked when six inches high, and even
dwarf kinds will be the better for some support.
Sow Broad Beans freely. Plant out Cabbages
and Cauliflowers.
Plant Garlic and Potato Onions in dry situa-
tions.
Rhubarb should be planted out and forced if
required early.
If early Cucumbers are desired it will be neces-
sary to sow the seed in a hot-bed.
If root crops are growing in very wet soil remove
them and store away.
BLOWER GARDEN.
During fine weather advantage should be taken
to finish the digging of beds and borders, using
the fork when practicable, as it is not so likely to
injure the delicate roots of plants and shrubs.
The general pruning of summer blooming Roses
may be commenced, treating each kind according
to its requirements. Shorten the shoots of moder-
ate growers to two or three buds, but leave rampant
ones much longer.
Hardy annuals may still be sown if required.
Cut back Clematises, Jasmines and other climbers
which have grown beyond bounds. Finish plant-
ing Carnations, Pinks, Perennial, Phloxes, and
other hardy herbaceous plants.
Sow Campanulas, Dianthus. Lobelias, Mignon-
ette, Sweet Williams, Stocks, Wallflowers, &c.
Plant Liliums and the Amaryllis family.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
No time should be lost during favorable weather
in preparing ground for future crops.
Cabbage seed should now be sown, selecting,
for choice St John's Day and Woodmasons.
which stand the sun well.
Peas should be sown at regular intervals, also
salad plants according to requirements.
Sow Onions, also thin and transplant early crops.


Make small sowings of Cauliflower, such as
Carter’s Dwarf, Mammoth, and Walcheren.
Cucumbers, Tomatoes, Vegetable Marrows,
should be sown in hot beds.
Sow Spinach and White j ßeet for summer use;
Broad Beans also if required.
Make a plantation of Horseradish in some
isolated portion of the garden, as it is very difficult
to eradicate when once planted.
AUGUST,
FLOWER GARDEN.
Camellias that have done blooming should
receive any pruning they may require before
active growth commences.
Evergreens may be safely transplanted during
this and the following month, choosing dull or
moist days if possible.
Fill up vacancies in borders, and plant out
Verbenas, Fuchsias, Heliotropes, &c.
Sow hardy annuals and thin out early plantings;
among desirable kinds are Candytufts, Clarlcia,
German Asters, Sweet Peas, Ten-week Stocks,
Larkspurs, Mignonette, and Viscaria. Sow
these where they are to remain, thinning out
when two or three inches high.
Prune Camellias that have done blooming,
Renovate old lawns by top dressing, as the
grasses will soon be making vigorous growth.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
To obtain a good supply of vegetables during the
summer, active cropping should be carried on this
month.
Sow Carrots largely, choosing well worked
trenched ground, and burying well rotted
manure nine inches below the surface.
Sow Onions without loss of time, and thin out
advancing crops.
Peas should be sown for succession, choosing
Veitch’s, Perfection, and Yorkshire Hero.
A few French Beans may be sown towards the
end of this month in warm districts. Cabbages
and Cauliflowers should be planted out and sown
for succession.
Lettuces &e. should he sown fortnightly.
A few Vegetable Marrows and Tomato seeds
may be sown in warm situations.
SEPTEMBER.
FLOWER GARDEN.
Regulate the growth of Boses, and keep them
free from aphis. As soon as Aphides appear,
syringe the plants frequently at evening with
tobacco water, and the following morning wash off
with clean water. Remove suckers and cut
back rank shoots.
Make successional sowings of hardy annuals,
and thin out early sown plants ; tender annuals
should also be sown in mild districts.
Remove flower stems from Bulbs which have
ceased blooming, but do not cut the leaves.
Supply Pansies with water if the season should
prove dry, and take cuttings of the best varieties,
as these plants are liable to die during the hot
season.
Shelter Fvergreens from bleak winds until they
are thoroughly established.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
In early districts Potatoes should be planted of
both early and late kinds.
Continue to sow Onions and thin out previous
crops.
Plant out varieties of the Cabbage family which
stand the heat of summer, and sow seed for suc-
cession.
Sow Lettuce fortnightly, and plant out as soon
as fit to handle.
Summer Spinach should also be sown, choosing
a moist situation.
Sow French Beans, selecting for choice the
Canadian Wonder.
Main crops of Turnips, Carrots, and Parsnips
should now be sown, taking care to work the soil
deeply.
Loosen the surface of Asparagus beds.
GARDENERS 5
OCTOBER.
FLOWER GARDEN.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
NOVEMBER.
FLOWER GARDEN.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
DECEMBER.
FLOWER GARDEN.
Use the hoe freely to keep down the rapid
growth of weeds.
Lawns should be mown frequently to obtain a
good, thick, even sward.
Primroses and Polyanthuses, when they have
finished flowering, should be removed to a shady
position, where they can be supplied with water,
during the heat of summer.
Finish planting Fuchsias, Heliotropes, Pelar-
goniums, petunias, Verbenas, &c.
Tie Carnations, Picotees, &c., and reduce the
number of buds if good blooms are desired.
Support teas, Convolvuluses, and other climbers
as soon as they are six inches high.
Thin out annuals and sow Portulaccas, Zin-
nias, Globe Amaranthus and all other tender
varieties.
Keep all crops free from weeds and stir the soil
frequently between the plants.
Sow freely in the open ground Cucumbers,
Melons, Pumpkins, Tomatoes, Vegetable Mar-
rows, &c.
Finish the planting of Potatoes without delay,
and earth up advancing crops.
New Zealand Spinach will be found a useful
vegetable in dry, hot districts.
Plant out summer varieties of Cabbage and
make further sowings for succession.
Get in main crops of Bed Beet, Carrots, and
Parsnips without delay, if not done previously.
Sow Peas and stick advancing crops before they
are six inches high.
Plant out Celery in Trenches when six inches
high and sow for succession.
Prune Evergreen shrubs which have done bloom-
ing.
Plant out Dahlias, but reserve some for autumn
flowering.
Support the stems of Herbaceous Phloxes; also
Picotees, Carnations, &c.
Sow Balsams, Cockscombs, Lupins, Antirrhi-
nums, Ten-week Stocks, Zinnias, Portulaccas,
and Wallflowers, &c.,
Prune back Verbenas, Heliotrope, Petunias
and other plants of straggling growth.
Plant out Fuchsias, Salvias, &c.
Support the stems of Liliums and Gladioli.
Pansies should be well supplied with water
during dry weather.
Fill up vacancies in borders from reserve stock;
also stir the surface soil to prevent caking.
Stir the surface soil between crops and keep
down weeds.
Make further sowings of Cucumbers, Melons,
Pumpkins, Tomatoes, and Vegetable Marrows,
Sow Badishes, Lettuces, and other salads.
The St. John’s Day and Woodmason Cabbages
should be sown ; also a few Cauliflowers.
Sow large quantities of Peas and French Beans
fortnightly.
Stake and tie Tomatoes, and pinch back to pro-
mote compact growth, also make another sowing
if necessary.
Earth up advancing crops of Potatoes and plant
for succession, if required.
Frequent sowings of seasonable vegetables
should be frequently made throughout the year,
to guard against failures.
During this and the following month a most
important question arises, how to best counter-
act the ill-effects of drought and hot winds. An
artificial supply of moisture is in most localities
an absolute necessity; but it should be borne in
mind that a thorough soaking given every week
or ten days is far more beneficial than daily
surface waterings, which are positively injurious.
CALENDAR.
The foregoing remarks apply equally to Fruit
and Vegetable gardens.
The main crop of Dahlias should be planted for
autumn blooming towards the end of this month
in good soil, enriched with well-rotted manure.
Prune a portion of the shoots of China, Tea,
and Noisette Boses ; layer Picotees, Carnations,
and Pinlcs. Take up all Bulbs when their leaves
have turned yellow, and place them in a dry
shady place for a few days before packing away.
VEGETABLE GARDEN.
Plant out previous sowings of Cabbages, Cauli-
flowers, and Lettuces. Well manure and water
the ground previously, as the quicker these plants
are grown the better , also sow for succession.
Sow moderately French Beans and Peas; water
the drills previous to sowing. Also soak the seed
for twenty-four hours to accelerate germination.
A small sowing of Turnips may be made for
succession in a moist situation.
Discontinue cutting Asparagus, and give the
beds a slight dressing of soil.
Stop Cucumbers, and sow a few Vegetable
Marrow seeds for late crops.
Take up crops of Onions as leaves turn yellow.
Sow Celery moderately in a shady situation. Cut
culinary Herbs for drying, and hang them in the
shade, as exposure to the sun impairs their
flavour.
Hints on Rose Pruning.
It is somewhat difficult to lay down precise rules
for pruning roses, as much will depend upon the
habit of the variety and the object in view.
Vigorous rampant growing kinds will require
different treatment from those that make only a
moderate growth. Again, a plant intended for a
pillar rose, must be treated in a different manner
to a standard, even supposing them both to be of
the same variety. Much will also depend upon
whether the cultivator requires quantity or
quality as regards the flowers. If particularly
fine blooms are required for exhibition or other
purposes, the shoots should be cut back more than
if the object is to have a large number of medium-
sized flowers for general effect. As a general
rule, pruning as applied to roses may be divided
into three sections, viz., Long pruning, which is
the proper method for any vigorous growing
varieties, those that make shoots several feet in
length. These shoots must not be cut back close
the same as with the moderate growers, because
if this is done they will scarcely produce any
bloom, all the energies of the plants being
expended in making fresh wood. With these
kinds the branches should only be shortened from
ten to fifteen inches long, according to their
strength. Close or short pruning is applicable to
those kinds that make but little growth, and
these may be cut back to one or two buds.
Medium pruning is an intermediate method
between the others, and is suitable for kinds of
moderate growth, such as most of the hybrid
perpetuals. This method consists in shortening
the shoots to within four or five inches of the old
wood. The best time for pruning roses will
depend in a great measure upon the kind and the
object in view. Those plants that bloom only in
the summer, such as the Provence and French
sections, may be pruned at any time during the
winter or early spring, cutting back all the shoots
at the same time. It will be better, however, not
to cut them before July or the beginning of
August, as when pruned early, growth is apt to
commence too soon, and the shoots are liable to
suffer from sharp frosts or cold winds. The
hybrid perpetuals produce a succession of blooms,
and by judicious pruning at various times, flowers
may be obtained during the greater part of the
year. In pruning any class of roses, the shoots
must be cut a little above a well-developed bud,
which should point outward from the plant. The
cut should be clean and made from the opposite
side to that upon which the bud is situated,
slanting upwards. Besides the ordinary pruning,
any rank shoots that are taking more than their
fair share of the strength of the plant, should be
stopped from time to time.


The Haunt of the Platypus.
MINUTE description of the appearance and habits of this strange production of nature
is given in the text of the present publication; to which little requires to be added here.
The old idea of the European naturalists, that the creature was a lusus nature, a para-
dox in the animal creation, a true wonder of the world, is now quite abandoned; and
even the Platypus takes its place in the regulated scale of created beings. True, it is at the
very bottom of the scale in point of development, being one of the most primitive animal
forms to be found anywhere. It came into existence with the earlier geological formations, and is
therefore a remnant of the primeval world. But its grotesque shape is, after all, but the adjustment
of the animal to its environment, as the disciples of Darwin speak. Its duck-bill fits it peculiarly for
shovelling up shells, &c., from the bottom of the streams and rivers it frequents. This organ is not
more wonderful than the trunk of the elephant, or the horn of the rhinoceros, or the snout of the tapir.
The powerful webbed foot is scarcely more singular than that of the English mole, and is used by the
animal as a propeller, in the same manner as the flat shovel-foot is used by the mole for a spade. The
shape of the body is well adapted for the habits of an animal that lives, for the most part, under
water. Por the same reason its eyes are very small indeed, scarcely perceptible, and it has no teeth,
but two horny projections at the root of the tongue, which are needful to crush the shell-fish on which
it feeds. It is essentially a denizen of the rivers and streams, the feet being wholly unadapted for
walking on land. It is very shy, and therefore not easily observe! in its native haunts. Once it was
common enough in the Yarra; but it is not likely that any stroller along the path by the river
between Prince’s Bridge and the Botanical Gardens would catch sight of it plunging into the
river as he approached, or floating like a bottle-shaped bundle of dirty weeds on the surface. A
naturalist must now go far inland if he wishes to capture the platypus in situ.


ao
8
<s
%
I
m
P
eu
X
§
p*
a
w
H


1508
00246651


FIRST PRIZE FOR GRAND PIANOS, SYDNEY, 1819-80, FIRST PRIZE FOR UPRIGHT PIANOS, SYDNEY, 1879-80.
THE SPECIAL MENTION FOR IMPROVEMENTS, 1879-80,
THE HIGHEST HONOURS,
The CROSS of the LEGION of HONOUR;
And also tiie GOLD MEDAL (I’Academie Nationale);
ACCORDED TO
OHN RINSMEAD & ONS
18-20, WIGMORE STREET, LONDON, W.,
TELE SUPERIORITY OF THEIR El^-ISTOS
EXHIBITED AT THE
Paris International Exhibition of ists.
“There is but one class of Gold Medals fol’ the Exhibition, and the
DECORATION OF THE CROSS OF THE LEGION OF HONOUR
CONSTITUTES A SUPERIOR RECOMPENSE.”
M.A. 3TETIS, Official Reporter.
The value of this Award is still further enhanced by the fact that the Decoration was
CONFERRED ON NO OTHER British Pianoforte Manufacturer.
The principal of the previous Honours gained by the Brinsmead Pianos are:—
THE DIPLOMA OF HONOUR AND GOLD MEDAL, South Africa, 1877.
THE GRAND MEDAL OF HONOUR AND DIPLOMA OF MERIT, Philadelphia, 1876.
THE DIPLOMA OF HONOUR, PARIS, 1874, AND THE HONORARY MEMBERSHIP
OP THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF FRANCE
THE GOLD MEDAL. Paris, 1870.
THE DIPLOMA OF EXTRAORDINARY MERIT, NETHERLANDS
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION, 1869.
THE MEDAL OP HONOUR, Paris, 1867.
THE PRIZE MEDAL, London, 1862, &c., &c.
S. Straker & Sons, Printers &‘ - c "Avenue” Works, Bishopsgate Avenue, E.C,


Extracts from Opinions of the Musical Profession and
London Press , &c.
Paris, November 4dh, 1878.
I have attentively examined the beautiful Pianos of Messrs. John Brinsmead & Sons that are exhibited at the
Paris International Exhibition of 1878. I consider them to be exceptional in the ease with which gradations of sound
can be produced, from the softest to the most powerful tones. These excellent Pianos merit the approbation of all artists,
as the toners full as well as sustained, and the touch is of perfect evenness throughout its entire range, answering to
every requirement of the pianist.
CH. GOUNOD.
Paris, the B th September, 1878.
We, the undersigned, certify that, after having seen and most conscientiously examined the English Pianos at the
Universal Exhibtion of 1878, we find that the palm belongs to the Grand Pianos of the house of Brinsmead.
NICOLAS RUBINSTEIN,
D. MAGNUS.
CHEVALIER ANTOINE DE KONTSKI.
(Court Pianist to the Emperor of Germany).
The highest praise is certainly due to Messrs. John Brinsmead & Sons for the complete success which has
crowned, their efforts to produce, on the most simple principles, a perfectly even, smooth and sensitive repetition touch.
The purity of the tone and the excellent mechanism of the Pianos exhibited by them in the Paris Exhibition, called
forth warm eulogies from all competent critics.
JOHN STAINER, M.A., Mus. Doc.
(Member of the International Jury of the Paris Exhibition, 1878).
I have pleasure in expressing my opinion that the Paris Exhibition Model Grand Pianofortes of Messrs. John
Brinsmead & Sons are unsurpassed. The tone is deliciously sweet, sustained, and extraordinarily powerful; the touc h
responds to the faintest and to the most trying strains on it, and the workmanship is simply perfect.
W. KUHE.
I have much pleasure in testifying to the great excellence of Messrs. John Brinsmead & Sons’ Pianofortes.
Their “ Perfect Check Repeater ” produces a touch that is absolute perfection, and whicn is unsurpassed by any ot her
maker, native or foreign.
SYDNEY SMITH.
I feel great pleasure in bearing testimony to the excellence of the Pianofortes made by Messrs.
John Brinsmead & Sons. Their tone is rich, powerful, and equal, and their check repeater action most ingenious,
successful, and valuable.
EDWARD J. HOPKINS
(Organist and Director of the Choir, Temple Church, London J.
. have examined Messrs. Brinsmead and Sons’ New Check Action, as applied to their Pianos, and consider it a most in-
genious and valuable invention, which cannot fail to meet with success.
SIR JULIUS BENEDICT.
Gentlemen,
I am delighted with the charming, elastic touch and immense volume of pure tone produced by your instruments.
To Messrs. John Brinsmead & Sons.
EMILE BERGER.
I have much pleasure in bearing testimony to the perfection of Messrs. J. Brinsmead & Sons’ new Pianoforte Action, which,
for promptness in repitition and general excellence in touch, surpasses anything of the kind I have yet seen, whilst the extreme
simplicity of the mechanism by which such important results are attained as an additional recommendation.
BOYTON SMITH.
I consider that for brilliancy, body of tone, and especially equality of touch, they are not to be equalled anywhere, and there
can be no question about the durability of the same, for whoever takes the trouble, as I have done, to examine thoroughly the
materials with which they are made, can readly understand the great demand for these instruments, and the great popularity
of them.
Tours faithfully,
Messrs. John Brinsmead & Sons,
JOS. RUMMEL.


Oegan Manufactory, Newton, Sydney, 1880
Messrs. John Bhinsmead & Sons, ’ ’ ’
Gentlemen,—l have great pleas ire in being able to vouch to the degree of perfection to which you have
brought the Art of Pianoforte Manufacturing I must say the improvements invented and patented by your firm
are of such value, that the musical judges, after carefully examining the instruments, competing with about 70 or 80
other manufacturers’, unanimously award your Pianos the first prize above them all. lam also”of opinion that your
Pianos with such simple action, simplicity of mechanism, strength of construction, combined with the remarkable
purity and sweetness of tone, are unrivalled, whilst your patent action produces a touch absolutely perfect.
I am, Gentlemen, yours truly,
0. J. JACKSON,
Judge on Musical Instruments, Sydney Exhibition, 1879-80.
Sydney, March 30 th, 18 80,
I have great pleasure in testifying my extreme satisfaction with, and approval of the Brins mb ad Pianos both of
the Grand and Cottage kinds. They have great power and remarkable sweetness of tone, while the touch is aU/that the
most exigent artist could wish for; if such figure of speech be allowed, one can talk with them and to them. In fact
they are in every respect faultless and reflect the greatest credit upon the firm. ’ *
(Signed) CHARLES PACKER.
{Judge on Musical Instruments, Sydney International Exhibition, 1880),
Conservatory of Music, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, Bth April, 1880.
I have much pleasure in bearing testimony to the excellence of your Pianos, exhibited in the Garden Palace. The
tone is rich, full and clear, the touch delicate, yet firm, and the repetition action exquisite.
Altogether, the care bestowed and the improved and simple action used in the manufacture make them very
desirable instruments. J
MONTAGUE YOUNGER,
To Messrs. John BrinSMEAD & Sons, London, (Organist St. Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney;
Judge on Musical Instruments, Sydney, 1880),
The following Eminent Musical Authorities (the most celebrated throughout Europe
and America) have unanimously certified to the superiority of JOHN’ BRIN'S ME AD &
SONS’ Pianofortes by awarding them the Highest Honours.
Sir WILLIAM STERNDALE BENNE TT, Mus. D., late Professor University of Cambridge.
The Rev. Sir EREDk. GORE OUSELY, Professor of Music, University of Oxford.
Right Hon. Sir GEORGE CLERK, E.R.S., Chairman Edinburgh University; Chairman RAM
Dr. J.R. BLACK, U.S.A.
Hon. SEPMOUR EGERTON.
M. FETIS, late Director of the Royal Conservatory of Music, Belgium.
Professor M. LISAJOUS, of the Lyceum of St. Louis.
Herr ERNST PAUER, Professor R.A.M.
WM. POLE, Mus. 8., F.R.S., Professor University of London,
Dr. HENRY WYLDE, Director of London Academy of Music.
M. AMBROSE THOMAS, Membre de Flnstitut, Professeur du Conservatoire Imperial de Musique.
Herr E. HANSLTCK, Docteur Professeur del’Histoire de la Musique a I’Universite de Vienne
FREDERICK CLAY, Esq., Mus. Reporter to H.M. Government.
Baron DONALD MACKAY, the Hague.
Herr C. N. DAVID, Copenhagen.
Marquis d’ANDELARRE, President of the National Academy, Paris,
Professor J. Henry, LL.D., U.S.A.
General H. K. OLIVER, U.S.A., Chairman Musical Jury, Philadelphia.
GEORGE F. BRISTOE, Esq., New York, U.S.A.
Sir WILLIAM THOMSON, LL.D., D.C.L., F.R.S.
Herr P. F. KUPKA, Vienna.
M. EDWARD FAVRE PERROT, Zurich.
M. G. AYMAR BRESSION, Director-General of the National Academy, Paris.
&c., &c., &c., &c.
ECHO.
The nearest approach to perfection with which we are acquainted, and, unless the whole plan is radically changed,
it would seem impossible to make any further advances.


THE GLOBE.
Improvement in Pianos. —Messrs. Brinsmead, of Wigmo re-street, have introduced one or two novelties calculated
to enhance the capabilities of their instruments. In the first place, they have utilized what may he called the waste por-
tions of the wires of an ordinary Piano. Any one who will examine the interior of an instrument of the common kind
will notice that strips of cloth are woven in and out those portions of the wires lying outside the bridges, so as to
prevent their vibration. One of the improvements referred to consists in the adjustments of these extremities of the
wires so as to admit of their being very accurately tuned to the same note as the central portion, hut in different octaves.
Thus, any note in the treble register is produced not only by the actual blow of the hammer upon the wire between the
bridges, hut also by the faint but very unmistakably sympathetic vibrations of these supplementary wires outside
the bridges, which impart a brilliancy and power just when most required. The third pedal, by the use of which notes
that have been struck may be sustained as though the fingers were on the keys. A “ perfect check repeater action ” a
new and peculiarly constructed sounding-board, and an iron frame, are also features which claim attention. The iron
frame is designed to assist the very severe strain consequent on the use of strings of increased weight and length. In a
Grand Piano now exhibiting it is calculated that this tension amounts to no less than thirty tons.
GRAPHIC.
This splendid instrument is of new and improved make. It possesses the unusual compass of seven and a half
octaves, and has a greatly increased length and weight of string between the bridges, while the sostenante sounding-
board is so constructed as to respond to the vibration of the strings with extreme readiness.
THE DAILY CHRONICLE.
In tone the instrument is exceedingly rich and sweet, and in touch the very perfection of lightness. Messrs.
Brinsmead may certainly be congratulated upon their success.
MUSICAL REVIEW.
... It would be unfair to the patentees of this invention not to recognise their “Perfect Check Eepeater Action”
as the greatest boon pianists of every school have had accorded them in this generation, , . .
MORNING POST,
This splendid instrument has the greatest compass yet attained by the leading English and Foreign Makers, It is
a seven-and-a-half octave instrument, from Gto C. The tone is remarkably full and even, exquisite purity, and
capable of the nicest gradation in the hands of a competent player. This Piano differs in some important points from
the average instrument, and in certain peculiarities of construction represents an advance in a very delicate kind of
manufacture. One of the greatest effects in Pianoforte playing is what is called the sostenante, that is to say, the
sustained tone as obtainable in the human voice. The improvements effected by Messrs. John Brinsmead & Sons
include a contrivance by means of which the vibration of any particular note may be continued much longer than was
possible under the old system. This device takes the form of a third pedal, placed between what are commonly known
as the soft and loud pedals. The action of this piece of mechanism is beautifully simple and cannot fail. Pianists have
here important facilities afforded them of playing cantahile passages with the effect intended. The touch of this
specimen Piano is particularly elastic. This property is secured by the check-repeater, an invention of Messrs. Brinsmead
which they have successfully applied to their Pianofortes for ten years past.
THE DAILY NEWS.
A new Pianoforte, recently manufactured by Messrs. John Brinsmead & Sons, claims notice, not only on
account of its beauty and richness of tone, but specially for some ingenious mechanical novelties; the most important
being the addition of a third pedal, by means of which the sound of any note or notes may be almost indefinitely
prolonged at the will of the player. Thus, bass notes may be sustained after being struck by the left hand, which may
then be taken away, and, with the right hand, may execute the most brilliant staccato passages, thus giving almost the
effect of four hands. The patent “ check-repeater action,” a speciality of Messrs. Brinsmead, enables the performer to
command with ease the most rapid reiteration of the same note ; the facility of the key movement in general being such
that glissando passages can be executed with such perfect ease as to render them practicable with the lightest touch.
The volume of tone is intensified by a peculiar construction of the sounding-board, another improvement being the
system of bridging, by which the vibrations are increased and rendered sympathetic. The Pianoforte is capable of all
degrees of delicacy and power, its massive structure rendering it less liable to get out of tune than usual; and the
instrument is altogether calculated to extend the reputation of its makers.
THE CHICAGO TRIBUNE (AMERICA).
The instruments exhibited at the Centennial, and patented throughout the whole of Europe by John
Brinsmead & Sons, of London, in simplicity and certainty of action, general durability, clearness, fulness, and
richness of tone, and elegance of casings, are models for the piano makers of any land. Thefeatures of instantaneous
repetition, elasticity of touch, and thorough reliability of action, are perceptible in these pianos to an extraordinary
degree.


TABLE
The learned Meursius conjectures that Spartan broth was composed of
pork, of vinegar, and salt; it is extremely probable that he may be
correct.
Aechbsteatus, the author of a poem entitled “ Gastronomia,” was
the friend of one of the sons of Pericles. He traversed land and sea
in quest of the choicest productions for the gratification of the palate.
He did not direct his attention to the manners of the people he
visited, which is a hopeless study, since it is next to impossible to
change them ; but his investigations were extended to those labor-
atories whence the pleasures of the table derive their existence. He
deemed it useless to hold any communication with men who could
give no elucidation on this subject. His poem contained a treasure
of information, and every line a precept. It is in his school that so
many skilful cooks have imbibed the first elements of an art, which
has rendered them immortal.
Plutarch vouches for the antiquity of the custom observed of
creating a chief or legislator of the table. This king actually made
laws, and prescribed, under certain penalties, what each person was
to do ; how and when to eat, drink, sing, make a speech, or endeav-
our to enliven the company by the display of any talent he might
possess. Cicero says that Yerres was scrupulously obedient to the
laws of the table, at the time that he broke through all the statutes
of the republic.
Histoey informs us that Lucullus had a variety of apartments,
each of which bore the name of some particular deity ; this name
was sufficient to signify to his maitre d’hotel the degree of splendour
he proposed to display in any entertainment he gave. Cicero and
Pompey one day paying him an unexpected visit, with the intention
of seeing how he lived in private, he had only to mention that he
would sup in the saloon of Apollo, and a repast was served up which
cost a sum exceeding a thousand pounds of our money.
Apicius, who lived in the time of Trajan, first discovered the art of
preserving shell-fish. He used to send them from Italy to this Prince’s
camp, when engaged in the Parthian expedition, and his oysters
reached the Imperial table in perfect preservation.
The name of Apicius, long used to designate different dishes, was
adopted to distinguish a sect among the Eoman epicures. He spent
in the composition of various sauces a fortune amounting to more
than one million five hundred thousand pounds sterling ! and finding
by a revision of his accounts that his property was reduced to about
a tenth part of this sum, he poisoned himself for fear of being
starved.
The Emperor Claudius had an extraordinary predilection for
mushrooms : it was in a plate of these that Agrippina, his niece,
and likewise his fourth wife, contrived to poison him.
Need used to call mushrooms a feast for the gods, because of the
apotheosis of bis predecessor.
Domitian one day caused the Senate to be assembled in haste, to
decide respecting a vessel in which to dress a monstrous turbot that
had just been presented to him. The senators gravely discussed the
point; and after ascertaining there was no kettle to be found large
enough to boil the fish whole, it was proposed to cut it in pieces.
This expedient however was over-ruled, and it was finally determined
that a pan should be made on purpose. It was likewise further
enacted, that whenever the Emperor went on a campaign he should
be always attended by a sufficient number of artificers in tin.
The most ludicrous actor in the affair was a purblind senator, who
appeared in raptures at the sight of the fish, and loudly sang its
praises, turning his eyes all the while on the side where the fish
was not 1
The profusion displayed in the famed Banquets of Ahasuerus
surpasses almost everything of which we have any account in this
way. He entertained for six months together all the princes and
governors of his kingdom ; and kept, for seven days at a time, open
table for all the inhabitants of the great city of Susa.
Similar excesses have been witnessed in times less distant than
these. According to Pius 111., Sindrigeles, Duke of Lithuania, never
sat down to a service of less than ten different courses, and generally
spent six hours at table.
Cardinal S. Sixtus entertained the daughter of Ferdinand, King of
Naples, with almost incredible prodigality. The most costly perfumes
were distributed to the guests at every change of dishes. In the first
course the eatables were often made to present the history of the
labours of Hercules, and in the succeeding ones, went through most
of the metamorphoses which are to be found in Ovid, &c., &c.
A WAG, on being told that it was the fashion to dine later and
later every day, said he supposed it would end at last in not dining till
to-morrow.
It is by no means so easy to excel in these trifling things as is
generally imagined : even the preparation of an omelet is attended
with some difficulty. This is illustrated by an anecdote in the life of
the Prince De Oonde. “In one of his military expeditions,” says
TALK.
Gou.rvi.lle in his Memoirs, “ it chanced one night that our whole supper
consisted of a basket of bread, a bottle of wine, a few walnuts, and
some cheese. About dusk we entered a village, where there was a
miserable alehouse, and being able to procure no refreshments but a
few new-laid eggs, the Prince undertook to make us an omelet. The
kind hostess informed him it would be good for nothing if not tossed
in the pan, and instructed him in the method of performing the
operation. His execution of this manoeuvre was not the most brilliant
of his exploits that campaign ; for aiming at too great an elevation,
the unfortunate omelet fell flat into the fire. I entreated the land-
lady to make the next herself, and not to suffer our last resource to
fall into the hands of so unskilful a practitioner.”
“ Theke was some excuse,” says Plutarch, “for eating flesh meat in
the beginning, when the earth brought no fruit ripe and pleasant;
neither were there any tooles and instruments belonging to any arte ;
nor so much as an invention of a witty head. Hunger never gave us
ease or time of repose ; neither was there any expectation or waiting
for the yearly seasonsof seedness, for there was no sowing at all. No
marvel, therefore, if we did eat the flesh of beasts and living creatures
even contrary to nature, considering that then the very moss and
bark of treee served for food ; but whensoever men could meet with
acorns and mast to taste and feed upon, they would dance and hop
for joy about an oak or beach tree ; and in their rusticall songs call
the earth their bountiful mother, and their kind nourse ; all their life
besides was.fnll -of vexation, sorrow, and heavinesse. But now what
rage, what furie, and madnesse, exciteth you to commit such murders
and carnage, &c."
Among the moderns may be mentioned Montmaur,the most famous
parasite of his day„ He was born in 1570, and died at Paris in 1648.
Although rich, he was penurious. He used to say to his friends,
“ Furnish you the meet and wine, and I will provide the salt.”
At table one day, with a large party who were talking, singing,
and laughing all at once—--“ Silence, gentlemen, if you please,” he
cried ; “you make so much noise I cannot hear myself eat,”
We heap suppers upon dinners, and dinners upon suppers, without
intermission ; it costs us morie to be miserable, than would make us
perfectly happy.
Vita nostra est instar comoadice, —Our life is like a comedy ; the
breakfast is the prologue, a dinner the interlude, a supper the
epilogue.
Tiberius’s aphorism is good, that every man is his own best
physician, and his life sets a gprohatum est to it.
Happy is the man that eats for hunger and drinks for thirst, that
lives according to nature and by season, not by example, and pro-
vides for use and necessity, and not for ostentation and superfluities.
If mankind would only attend to human nature, without gaping
after superfluities, a cook would be found as needless as a soldier in
time of peace ; we may have necessaries upon very easy terms,
whereas we put ourselves to great pains for excess.
A few such instances as the following may astonish your auditory.
Maximinus used to eat sixty pounds of meat in a day. It will be
recollected he was eight feet six inches high, and that his wife’s
bracelet served him for a ring. Albinus absorbed, in the course of
one morning, five hundred figs, one hundred peaches, ten melons,
twenty pounds of grapes, one hundred woodpeckers, and forty dozen
of oysters. Pfcagon dispatched in the presence of Aurelian, a wild
boar, a pig, a sheep, and one hundred loaves. Domitius the African,
and Audebontes, an English king, expired at table from excess in
eating;
Muleasse, king of Tunis, did not scruple to give one hundred crowns
for sauce to a pheasant ; a golden one it may be presumed.
The anecdote of Marshal Yillars’ Swiss porter, whose appetite
appears almost incredible, should not be omitted here, and which
being translated runs thus : —The Marshal one day said to him;
“ How many sirloins of beef do you think you can eat ?” “ Ah, my
lord, me need not many, five or six de utmost,” “ And how many
legs of mutton?” “Legs of mutton; not many, seven or eight.”
“ How many pullets think you ?” “Oh ! very few of de pullet,
perhaps about a dozen.” “ Well, and pigeons ?” “Oh ! as far de
matter of pigeons, very few, forty, perhaps fifty, according as they
are dressed.” “ And larks ?” “ Oh, larks !my lord—larks for ever.’ ’
Roman history supplies us with many extraordinary feats in
drinking, which may be all introduced with great propriety.
Pisonius was made praetor by Tiberius, for having drunk incessantly
for three nights. Flaccus received the province of Syria for a like
exploit. Novellus drank at a draught three large measures of wine
before the same emperor. The women of those days did not refuse
to take their glass, and would empty a bumper for every letter in the
name of each toast that was given.
When the bailiff of Suffren was at Achem, one day, a deputation of
the magistrates of the town came to demand an audience, just as he
had sat down to dinner. Being a great epicure, and having no small


dread of interruption at his meals, with an admirable readiness of
wit, he hit upon an expedient to preserve himself from the intrusion
without affronting the deputies. He ordered them to be acquainted,
that an article of his religion expressly prohibited his entertaining
thoughts irrelevant to eating,. while at dinner, this being a function
of primary and vital importance. The citizens retired very respect-
fully, much edified by this convincing proof of the extreme devotion
of the French general.
Caligula's horse, called Incitatus, was treated with the same
honours that were bestowed on the greatest men in the time of the Re-
public. This capricious Emperor appointed him Chief Pontiff, and
wanted to have conferred on him the Consular dignity. The animal
was magnificently lodged in a marble stable, provided with an ivory
manger, and fed out of a silver rack.
Mignot, a celebrated cook who lived in the time of Despreaux,
was rather roughly handled in that author s Satire of the Repast, in
which the epithet of poisoner was pretty liberally bestowed. The
confectioner, highly incensed, made an application to the Magistrate,
who dismissed the complaint, telling him it was only a harmless jest,
at which he ought to have been the first to laugh. This
mode of reasoning, so far from appeasing, increased his rage;
he resolved to do himself that justice which was denied him by the
law; his ingenuity suggested a novel expedient. He had already ac-
quired some reputation in Paris by his biscuits, and they began to be
rather in request. It occurred to his recollection that the Abbe
Cottin had written a Satire against Boileau. Mignot ordered a
number of copies of this work to be struck off at his own expense,
and whenever his customers came to buy his cakes, he wrapped them
up in the printed Philippic ; by this means uniting his talent
to that of the Abbe, to make a joint attack on their common enemy.
When Boileau had a mind to divert himself with his friends, he
used to send to Mignot’s shop for the biscuits with their envelope.
The competition brought the pastry-cook’s compositions, so much into
vogue, that their sale soon became a lucrative concern to him. As
his wealth increased, his wrath abated, and even when he had re-
alized a large fortune he took a pride in acknowledging
that he owed his elevation in life in a great measure to
Boileau.
Everybody knows that Alexander the Great owed his death not
to his thirst for glory but his thirst for wine : being pledged by
Proteas in a cup, which, as the learned calculate, held something
less than our gallon, his politeness would not allow him to refuse.
The bowl fell from his hands as he finished the draught, which shortly
after finished him. iELIAN [Yar. Hist. lib. ii. c. 41,] informs us, that
at the funeral of Calanus, an Indian philosopher, one Promachus drank
four times the above quantity. Thirty of the guests died of suffocation
on the spot, and a great many more of indigestion the following day.
The vine beareth three grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of
drunkenness, and the third of repentance: and though vinum
may be styled, lac senum sapientia in sicco residit. The
Jewish rabbis relate, that when Noah planted the vine he
watered it with the blood of an owl, an ape, and a lion. Hence
the sleepless nights, the antic tricks, or savage ferocity of
those addicted to the immoderate use of its juices. Sometimes
the entertainment finished by a present to each guest. Lysi-
machus having entertained Himerus the prince of Babylon and
300 of the nobility, gave a silver cup to each ; and Alexander, at his
feast at Susa, paid all the debts of his company, and distributed 9000
vases of solid gold.
The Symposiacs of the modern inhabitants of the same country are
very different from their ancestors, as will appear from the following
passages respecting the Turkish manner of eating, from an old English
traveller: —
“ Their diet is but coarse and rarely varied, consisting generally
of boiled hens, or mutton, and a sort of buttered rice, of late much
used in Britain, where it is called, according to the Turkish name,
Pilowe. Another sort of diet used among the Turks, are certain pies
indifferently baked, and filled with meat of various kinds, but so
excessively, and past all relish, mixed with garlic, that the
strongest appetite of France itself, could scarce digest them.
They seldom roast, and when they do, observe a very different
manner from the European practice, placing the fire in holes
in the earth and suspending the meat over it on small gibbets.
One dish they have in frequent use, of relish not unsavory, which
may be named a sort of forced meat. It consists of many kinds of
flesh, all minced and chopped together, with rind of lemons, nutmegs,
pepper, cloves, and cinnamon ; all this they roll, when seasoned, into
balls of reasonable sizes, wrapping them about with doubled bay
leaves newly gathered, and proceeding so to roast them with a gentle
fire ; this, I think, they call kabobb and is, if my skilled country
cooks will take my word, a sort of palatable preparation worth the
imitating. As for bread they use no other than a sort of flat
and dough-baked cake they call Ecmeck; they make it of a coarse
and ill-ground flour, rendered moist by milk and water.
When they eat, they use no plates, knives, forks, or any thing
but wooden spoons, not much unlike the fashion of our ladles, these
cakes of bread supply the place of plates, and sometimes of meat also.
They sit at meals crossed-legged, about a table scarce so much
as half a foot high, made hollow, and the inside plated over with tin or
silver. In their laps there lies a long coarse towel, very narrow, reach-
ing round the whole table, whose uncovered surface contains their
several dishes, still removed as soon as tasted, to make room for others.
“ As for drinking they rarely use at dinner any other than the
fountain water , commonly at hand in all their dining rooms, and
taken up in silver, gold, or earthen cups that moment it is called for,
by the servants who attend them. It is seldom known that all the
family sit down together to their meal; one smokes, another sings, a
third perhaps is playing on his fiddle, one is eating, and a fifth is
employed at chess, with some companion of no greater stomach than
himself. They commonly delight in sprightly exercises after
dinner, believing they conduce to their health and reputation.
They seldom eat above one meal a day, and that a dinner. They
are rarely known to be luxurious in their appetite, and are yet ex-
tremely covetous of heaping vast and numerous sums of money from
the offices they hold.”
The luxurious Capuans paid a considerable tribute to the Neapoli-
tans, for an earth called Leucogaeum which they considered neces-
sary for the preparation of a favorite dish, called Alica. The Tunguses,
according to Laxmann, eat a fine clay with rein-deer’s milk.
Chandler saw the women and children in Samos chewing pieces of
steatite as a luxury. La Billardiere saw the same practised in New
Caledonia, and found edible earth sold in the market in several
villages in Java. Throughout all India lime is used along with the
betel leaf. Kepler partook of the butter earth which is eaten with
great relish, spread upon bread, by the mill-stone quarriers of
Thuringia ; and lastly Humboldt has made us acquainted with the ex-
istence of a whole nation of earth eaters, the Ottomacs on the Orinoco.
Sea-salt is more obviously necessary than earth. Even in insular
and maritime situations it is voluntarily used as a condiment by all,
but it is only in inland countries at a distance from the sea that its
necessity is duly appreciated.
Dr, Franklin, when a journeyman printer, lived a fortnight on
bread and water, at the rate of 1015. of bread a week. Dr. Stark,
whose weight was 171 pound avoirdupois, found that 38 ounces of bread
daily, were not more than sufficient to satisfy his appetite, 48 ounces
were the utmost he could consume in one day ; and the greatest
quantity he could take at one meal, without uneasiness, was 30 ounces.
Baron Percy has recorded an extraordinary instance of voracity,
in a soldier of the name of Farare, who at the age of 17, of moderate
size, rather thin, and weighing only 170 pounds, could devour in the
course of 24 hours, a leg of beef 241 b. weight, and thought
nothing of swallowing the dinner prepared for fifteen German boors.
Domery in one year eat 174 cats dead and alive, and Farare was
strongly suspected of having devoured an infant which disappeared
mysteriously.
The best Tea in Japan is grown at Udsi, near Meaco. Imperial
tea—a purveyor from the Court attends to the growth, management,
and transportation of this precious article, sees that the rows in
which it is planted are regularly swept twice a day, that the gatherers
are fed upon no offensive food that might contaminate their breath,
that they perform regular ablutions in hot and cold baths, and above
all, that their hands are covered with the finest kid gloves before they
break the leaves, which they select one by one from the first buds of
spring. This Tea is curled on irons, not like our curling irons,
but large plates on which the leaves are rolled by the hand, they are
then pounded and drank in hot water. Tea loses so much by the
voyage, that above writer says, he could never get any fit to drink out
of Japan. The Emperor of China is no less choicepn his Tea than his
neighbour. Giavanni Botero is the first European who speaks of this
plant; his work was published in 1590, He does not however mention
the word Tea, and only describes the use made of it in China, Tea was
first brought to Europe by the Dutch in 1610, to England by Lord
Arlington in 1666, a year in which the metropolis suffered from three
fatal scourges, fire, pestilence, and poison. The effects of the two
former are almost forgot, those of the latter seem more lasting.
Green Tea was first used in 1715, when it was as high as 60s. a
pound.
Chinese Proverbs.
Brothers in the morning, enemies at night.
A man known well is a treasure.
A prodigal, when he repents, becomes a priceless treasure.
Every man loves his ow 7 n skin and flesh.
If you honour your own parents at home why go afar to burn in-
cense ?
Out of the broken kiln come very good tiles.
Stoop not in the melon field to draw up your boots. Stay not
under the plum-tree to adjust your hat.


T H E
National Mi
ife Ibsomtion of %
O
T . T TV/r TTTR'.'n
TUA
of Australasia:
LIMITED. 'H
-2 qq m '
ESTABLISHED AUGU St', 186 9.
<5 dST ss
Offices :
VICTORIA—No. 1 Market Buildings, Collins St, West, Melbourne.
No. 169 Bourke Stfeet East, Melbourne.
Nos. 34 and 30 Lydiard Street, Ballarat.
NEW SOUTH WALES ... Sa 71 Pitt Street, Sydney.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA ... Way mouth Street, Adelaide.
TASMANIA (f) No. 1 Davey Street, Hobart Town.
With Agencies the principal Towns.
-■I--3 OO
the Association:
Pq TWENTYMAN, Esq., J.P.| Chairman.
MATTHEW LAlsfe, Esq., Vice-Chairman.
Hon. EDWARD RICHARD JACK, Esq.
JAMES FERGUSSON, Esq., M.P. G. CARTER, Esq., M.P.
Lg THOMAS -MOWBRAY, J.P.
Actuary and Secretary;
(JOHN M. TEMPLETON, F.feA., J.P.
« «=>
L- H™ 3 * <3
The following important features, in the practice of Mutual Life Assurance were
. adopted and first introduced into by the-iNATiONAL Mutual:—
Ist.— That no Afember’s Policy shall he allowo@o lapse on account of the
Non-payment of any ß -Premium, so long as it has a Surrender
Value to pay the Premium overdue.
2nd,—That no BPBmber shall he compelled to pay a higher Premium on his
Policy [than that set opposite to his agse- in the Table of Rates.
3rd.— That the Age of Members shall he taken as at nearest Birthday.
4th.—Profits aiOftavided everf* Three Years.
sth.—Settlement Policies, which relieve from the expenses attending the
preparation of a Deed of from the necessity of
troubling friends to become Trustees.
Up to the end 0“ Tenth Year (|oth 6953 Policies had
been issued, assuring nearly One and Three-Quarters Sterling’,
the Annual Revenue was upwarcg of jFifty-two Pounds, and
the Accumulated Funds amounted to £95,201 IQSrt 10d., which is safely and
D profitably invested. CM S. jg


Premiums payable during the Whole Term of Life, for the Assurance of £100,
payable after death.
With Full Participation in Profits.
Age.
-
Or by Instalments.
Age.
V
Or by Instalments.
Half-Yearly.
Quarterly.
Half-Yearly.
Quarterly.
£
or.
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
jC
.T.
d.
£ x.
rf.
£
s.
d.
16
I !3
7
O
17
2
0 8
8
39
2
19
9
I IO
6
O
15
5
,17
i 14
4
O
17
6
0 8
IO
40
3
I
6
I II
5
0
15
II
18
i i5
I
O
17
II
0 9
I
41
3
3
6
I 12
5
0
16
S
19
i i5
II
O
18
4
0 9
3
42
3
5
6
1 13
5
0
16
II
20
i 16
9
O
18
9
0 9
6
43
3
7
8
1 14
6
0
17
6
21
I 17
7
O
!9
2
0 9
8
44
3
9
II
1 15
8
0
i8
I
22
i 18
5
O
*9
7
0 9
II
45
3
12
4
1 16
II
0
18
8
23
i 19
4
I
O
I
O IO
2
46
3
14
II
1 18
3
0
19
4
24
2 O
3
I
O
7
0 10
5
47
3
17
8
1 19
9
1
O
I
25
2 I
3
I
1
I
0 IO
8
48
4
O
7
2 I
3
1
O
IO
26
2 2
3
I
I
7
O IO
II
49
4
3
9
2 2
IO
1
I
8
27
2 3
4
I
2
I
0 It
2
50
4
7
2
2 4
5
1
2
6
28
2 4
5
I
2
8
0 II
5
51
4
IO
IO
2 6
4
1
3
4
29
2 5
6
I
3
3
0 II
9
53
4
14
IO
2 8
4
1
4
6
30
2 6
8
I
3
IO
0 12
I
53
4
19
2
2 IO
7
1
5
7
31
2 7
II
I
4
s
O 12
4
54
5
3
II
2 T3
O
1
6
IO
32
2 9
2
I
5
I
0 12
8
55
5
9
I
2 15
7
I
8
2
33
2 IO
6
I
5
9
O 13
O
56
5
14
6
2 l8
5
1
9
7
34
2 II
IO
I
6
s
0 13
4
57
6
O
I
3 1
3
1
II
O
35
2 13
3
I
7
2
O 13
9
58
6
6
O
3 4
3
1
12
6
36
2 14
9
1
7
II
O 14
2
69
6
12
3
3 7
6
1
14
2
37
2 16
4
I
8
9
O 14
7
60
6
18
IO
3 10
IO
1
15
II
38
2 l8
O
I
9
7
0 *S
O
61
7
5
II
3 T 4
5
1
17
8
Example.'—A man aged 2g
can Assure his Life for £200 by the payment of £4
//s. O'/, every year
during his life.
This
Premium may be paid by Half-yearly instalments of £2 6s. bd.,
or by
Quarterly instalments of £1 js, 6d.
The Amount divided amongst the Members at the two Divisions of Profits in 1874
and 1877 amounted to d 613,098 13s. 4d., representing Reversionary Bonuses
of upwards of Twenty-eight Thousand Pounds. The Third Investiga-
tion will be made as at 30U1 September, 1880,
EXAMPLES OF BONUS ADDITIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
MADE TO POLICIES
A Policy for £6OO which had been 8 years in force, received Bonus additions
amounting to £95 3s. Id.
A Policy for £2OO which had been 5 years in force, received Bonus additions
amounting to £23 Bs. 6d.
A Policy for £lOOO which-had been 3 years in force, received Bonus additions
amounting to £33 17s. 3d.
The following Tables of Rates of Premium are those most commonly taken
advantage of, but all kinds of Assurance, Endowment, and Annuity Business are
transacted by the Association, full information as to which is given in the large
Prospectus,
ASSTJEAHOE PAYABLE AT DEATH.
TABLE I.


An Assurance under this Table combines a provision for young
Children in case the parent should die early, with provision for
the parent’s old age when his or her children are settled in life.
TABLE IV.
ENDOWMENT ASSURANCES.
Annual Premiums for the Assurance of £100, payable at the Age
50, 55, 60, 65, and 70, or sooner in the event of Deatl
With Full Participation in Profits.
A CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO tO tO tO tO to to to to IO tO rt zlt
O CD 03 0) Cl CO IO o 0 CD -Ni Q Cl-^COtO- L O CO 05
Age.
VO oo 00-0 ON ONOT Cn (JI
Un CbO\ 0 0 On-U M
35
or
Death.
VO vO C0->1 On ocn CnOi
40
or
Death.
h M W On CO O'J VOON W
0 VO 0OVJ vj on 0»Cn On 4*- 4“ -£■ OJ OJ WW W W (0
45
oi-
Death.
HNONfOO O h vJbi'O OJ 00 00 VO Ca h w VO ?
Owwonva U) to td On CO-£- (0 h Oi OO 0 h
O VO CO*vJ ‘nJ On ONCn CnCn -MO W W WWW K> to to to to
00 00-£ tO 10 W U 00 m (In Obi h vj W O OnOJ h OO On CO h v£)
ODO On ON -f*- H CO o ON oooo OJ OnOOOh OV h O VO vq
50
or
Death.
A CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO co to to to to to to to to to to -* -*
O CD CO "*1 05 cn CO to — 1 O CD CD 05 CJi CO to - L O^DCD^OO
Age.
r 02
o
Hb
•9JII jo japimnioa oqj joj
cn
ub jo esBqoand eqj nt patiddu eq jCnm ‘pappn sjgojj qjiav
‘ioiioj eqj jo junorcB eqj ‘pajejs aSe oqj Suiuibjjb uosaed v uq ®
ria.
QJ\
ASSURANCE PAYABLE DURING LIFE.
65
or
Death.
£ s. d.
2 II II
2 13 II
2 l6 I
60
i8 S
5 O IO
3 3 5
362
or
Death.
3 9
£ s. d.
3 12 S
3 iS ii
3 ig 8
4 3 8
4 8 2
4 12 II
4 i8 3
5 4 2
5 10 7
5 J 7 io
6 5 11
6 is o
5 9
7 4
2 9°
2 io 8
12 6
2 14 6
2 i5 7
2 i8 9
3 i 1
3 3^
3 6 2
3 9°
3 12 o
3 i5 3
3 i8 9
4 2 7
4 68
65
or
Death.
£ s. d.
2 I 8
23©
4 4
2 5 9
2 7 2
2 8 9
2 IO 5
2 12 I
2 13 II
2 15 IO
2 17 lO
2 19 II
3 2
3 4 7
70
or
Death.
£ *■ d.
1 IQ I
2 0 3
i 5
7
4 ii I
3 i°
5 z
267
8 o
2 g 6
3 7 I
2 II I
2 12 9
2 14 6
Age.
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
2 i6 3
49
50
55 60
or or
Death. Death.
£ s. d.
7 5 4
7 17 2
4 i6
8 io 10
969
10 5 8
3 9io
3 12 9
£ s. d.
5 7 3
5 *3 9
6 i o
6 9 2
2 i8 3
6 i8 4
789
8 o 8
3 o 3
8 14 5
65
3 2 5
or
Death.
51
52
53
£ s. d.
469
3 IS ii
S 19 o
4iio
4 i5 7
3 4 8
5 o 8
5 i 4
562
54
55
3 i9 3
9 io 6
S 12 3
4 2 IO
6 6 7
6 is o
3 7 i
IO 9 7
7 4 7
3 9 8
7 15 6
8 8 o
56
3 12 5
926
67
58
9 19 7
59
io 19 10
60
Death.
£ s. d.
3 IS 4
3 l 8 5
4 i io
4 5 5
4 9 4
4 13 7
4 i 8 3
5 3 3
s 8 io
5 i 4 ii
6 i 8
6 17 8
7 7 2
7 i 8 o
8 xo o
9 3 5
9 i 8 g
io 16 4
ii i 5 xo
Example.—A man aged 23 may take out a Policy for £3OO payable to himself at the age of 50, or to
his heirs if he die before attaining that age, by paying £ll os. 6d. every year until the Policy
is paid.


In the event of Death under the specified ages.
Returnable
Scale,
WITH PARTICIPATION IN
PROFITS.
,d
o
d
(3
W
£
* >>
<U rt
oJ
pq
bn
d
<u r;
At Age 14.
At Age 18.
At Age 31.
<V f*
b/).£
pi
a
<m
cS
a
m
£ s. d.
£
d.
£ £. if.
£
5-1
cS
CD
1
6 1 10
4 6
O
383
1
o
8
6 14 8
4 13
5
3 13 7
3
OT
3
798
5 1
9
3 19 6
3
w
©
5-i
4
879
5 11
2
460
4
U
-S
5
998
6 2
2
4 13 4
6
,s3
rd
o
6
IO 17 I
6 14
IO
S 1 7
6
A
7
12 12 3
7 9
IO
5 11 1
7
«+-»
5h
tk
8
14 19 1
8 7
9
620
8
>
o
9
x8 4 7
9 9
8
6 14 8
9
CD
o
10
10 17
I
798
10
cd
Ph
11
12 12
2
877
11
13
14 19
O
996
13
P<
o
•H
• H
d
CD
a
&
o
13
14
18 4
6
10 i6 10
12 12 0
13
14
.£3
H
CD
5h
cd
15
16
14 18 IO
18 4 4
15
16
AT n—The above Annual Premiums may be paid by Half-yearly or Quarterly
the same relative proportions as shown in Table I,
\ Father may secure for his Son, now aged 4, a
Business Capital of £kc
EKDCWMEISTTS FOE CHILDREN.
TABLE B.
ANNUAL PREMIUMS TO SECURE AN ENDOWMENT OF £lOO
ON THE LIFE OF A CHILD,
PAYABLE ON HIS
Attaining the Ages of 14, 18, and 21,
WITH THE RETURN OF ALL PREMIUMS PAID
Example. —A Father may secure for his Son, now aged 4, a Business Capital of £joo, payable on his
attaining the Age of 21. by seventeen annual payments of £21 /os. Should the son die before
attaining that age, all the Premiums paid would be returned.
attaining that age,
p
B H
0 5
p £f
y ®
rt- t-rf
►p s
& “
p
o »-j
n *
£ U
® sr
5 **•
;r *-*•
§ »
i-**
S* 0
<J> o
pj ►*
fa so
CK3 »
® 0
cm
cf-
(3*
Instalments, of
LOAN DEPABTMENT.
Loans on Mortgage of Real Property granted at Current Rates.
Loans on Policies with Personal Security—These are granted to the extent of half
the amount assured, on security of the Policy and Three Sureties, for any term
not exceeding three years, and repayable by Quarterly Instalments.
Loans on Policies from upwards granted to Members of the Association to
the extent of nine-tenths of the Surrender Value,
Forms of Proposal and all necessary Information may he obtained at the
Head Office, Branches, or any of the Agencies of the Association.
Mason, Firth <fe M‘Cutcheon, Printers, 51 & 63 Flinders Lane West.


KENNEDY AND CO.,
mmum 00STUM1B&S, 6 §llll4l DBAPBBB,
Specialities — FlßST-CLASS MILLINERY AND DRESSMAKING at Moderate Prices.
97 AND 99 BOURKE STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
[Established 1854.]
A PERMANENT EXHIBITION,
CLASSIFICATION OF EX- .
HIBITS, arranged as §
follows :—
( SILKS—Plain and Fancy °
g. j dress Fabrics. Hosiery, 'A
| § I Gloves and Haberdashery, -c
"S "-g <( Ribbons, F/inges and §
Trimmings. >,
I ECONOMIC FAMILY S
MOURNING. °
' i a
("Mantles, Shawls & Fichus. S
g . I COSTUMES—Ready-made
K|l or made to order—by first- 9,
t? '■§ <( class Dressmakers. Under- >,
I clothing and Baby Linen. |
| Trousseux and Travelling
I. Outfits furnished, -g
— A
("Gents’, Boys’, and Youths’ ®
Clothing, mainly our own "§
g _ make, well cut, and of dur- 2
s | able material. Woollens, g
Ss<! Coatings,Yestings,Trouser- M
§ M 1 ings, comprising manufac- ~ a
turea from the principal O
1 Woollen Mills in Victoria
t and Great Britain.
NEAR CARLTON GARDENS.
S HOUSE FURNISHING
p Of every description (including C&r-
-g: pets, floorcloths, &c.)
9 MANCHESTER GOODS. >
§ These include Flannels and Blan-
•“* kets from Castlemaine, Ballarat
£) and Tasmania,
P
| LACES, FANCY
ST STAYS, &c.
q MILLINERY in all its
p branches,
g (For style and good taste the )*
01 [.Trimmed Bonnets and Hats
K cannot be surpassed.)
p, A large variety of Umbrellas of 1
g- Victorian manufacture. J
B
S TAILORING BRANCH
tended to with special care, j
E? First-class Order Cutter. \
I SHIRTS, HATS, & GENERAL
OUTFITTING.
MADELINE HOUSE,
EDWARD CORNELL, PROPRIETOR.
The following are amongst the most striking features of this Exhibition; —ADMISSION IS FREE. HOURS, 8 A.M. TO 8 P.M. There is a constant supply of Fresh
Novelties, and every article may be purchased at the Lowest Market Rates, and delivered the same day. Any article not in stock can be procured, or, if preferred, made to
order on the premises. A large and attentive Staff of Assistants constantly employed, from whom interesting information may be obtained gratis, as to the various
textures and manufactures exhibited. Strangers and Visitors from a distance may rely on receiving special attention.
Orders may be addressed to EDWARD CORNELL, Queensberry and Madeline Streets, CARLTON, MELBOURNE.
JOHN DANKS,
ENGINEER & BEASSFOUNDEH,
42 BOURKE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
MANUFACTORY-
MORAY STREET NORTH, EMERALD HILL,
Manufacturer of Every Description of Pumps and Brassware.
PATENTEE OF UNIVERSAL HYDRANT for Street Watering and other Purposes,
FIRE BRIGADE MATERIAL supplied at Cheapest Kates and Best Quality.
IMPORTER OF CAST AND WROUGHT IRON PIPES, SHEET BRASS, AND COPPER.
141.11 4S® ¥4121® 4SS®limil l ®f ttABriTTUiaB.
INSPECTION INVITED.
GARDEN HOSE REELS AND LAWN SPRINKLERS.
JVI/cJSIUFACTORED OF SbUieE V/tbVES, STEAJA V/tbVES, & HISJH-PRESSURE SOeKS.


4niiis® jr 8 M
WOOD ENGRAVER,
ELECTROTYPER & STEREOTYPER,
Corner Latrobe and Queen Streets,
MELBOURNE.
WOOD ENGRAVING, &c.
R. JENNY,
85 Collins-st. East, Melbourne.
fLATE TABILK.)
Where the Wines can be Sampled. The Chateau Tahbilk Wines only sold.
THE LARGE EXPERIENCE OF THE FIRM IN EVERY KIND QF
Enables them to execute orders in an efficient manner.
ALL DESCRIPTIONS OP
/ fU jJ
mu
Neatly Printed in Plain or Fancy Types.
y &
A& V O/r
Observe the Address —
CHATEAU TAHBILK WINES.
PRIZE MEDALS, PHILADELPHIA, 1876, AND PARIS, 1878,
The Matured Natural Wines of this Celebrated Vineyard are now in Great Demand.
The extensive Cellars at the Vineyard, equal to two Hundred Thousand Gallons, enables the Proprietors to keep
Five Vintages on hano, and to place only their Matured Wines on the Market.
Town Cellars, Melbourne —85 Little Collins Street East.
ALEX. M‘KINLEY & CO.,
61 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.
Having made extensive additions to their stock of types are prepared to execute orders in every description of
}■ General Printing, j
Book, Newspaper, and Pamphlet Work,
The following Publications are printed at this office: "PUNCH,” "BULLETIN,” "SATURDAY NIGHT,” 11 LAW
TIMES,” "AUSTRALASIAN SCHOOLMASTER /’ "JEWISH HERALD,” and "MONTHLY MESSENGER.”
P ARDS, jBILLHEADS, j 3 ROSPECTUSES, Bf j^OSTERS
Being the printers of several illustrated periodicals, special attention is given to the careful printing of
Wood Engravings and Other Picture-Blocks.
ALL WORK DONE AT REASONABLE PRICES.
James Jennings’s
BRAZILIAN PEBBLES.
CAUTION.— The only Medals given for Colonial Manufactured SPECTACLES
were Silver from Victoria, Bronze from Sydney, Gold from London, 1872-3, and
Medal and Certificate fromfSydney Exhibition. 1889, awarded to JAMES JENNINGS,
99 Queen-street. GOLD, SILVER & STEEL SPECTACLES MADE TO ORDER.
A Large Stock on hand. The Trade Supplied.
99 Queen Street, Melbourne.
CHARLES FAUSSET, FRED. A. BLEAR,
SOLICITOR and CONVEYANCER, DRAUGHTSMAN & ENGRAVER ON WOOD,
HAS
Removed from No. 100 to No. 78Elizabeths/. 46 COLLINS ST. EAST, MELBOURNE.


FAMILY & DISPENSING CHEMISTS,
Wholesale and Retail Druggists,
AND IMPORTERS OF
SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS,
114ifS0 8&OOS1H&S,
Sill'S, IAH®4©IS, TBVBBIB,
And Appliances generally for Invalid Use.
67 SWANSTON STREET 67
OPPOSITE THE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE.
PROPRIETORS
Ford’s Portuguese Stimulating
Ford’s Pectoral Balsamic Elixir,
Hair Mixture, for promoting the growth
For Coughs, Colds, &c.
of the Hair, preventing it from falling off, or
turning grey.
Ford’s Quinine Wine.
Ford’s Quinine and Iron Wine.
Captain Walter’s Specific for
Ford’s Quinine Tooth Powder,
Ford’s Tincture of Myrrh and
Dysentery.
Borax, prepared with Eau de Cologne an ex-
cellent Tonic and Astringent to the Gums.
Ford’s Ophthalmic Lotion.
Ford’s Corn Solvent.
DTeyre’s Seltzogenes and Charges, for the
production
of Sodawater, Lemonade, Effervescing Wines &c.
GEO. SWIFT,
Has succeeded to the above business, and it is now conducted under bis system of management
and personal supervision.
N.B.—The Title of the Firm will remain the same, and all communications so addressed will receive
the Personal attention of the new Proprietor.


