

MABEL ESCOTT:
A GIRL'S STORY OF SYDNEY.
FROM
A CONFESSION.
TO WHICH IS ADDED,
Cifc Sketch of |Ulli| iljoqan.
REVISED,
OUE LIVES. BY ONE OF THEM.
A CHAPTER IN A LIFE, AND THE WIDOW.
(Stoitcfc ant) llcbisct) bn “ Clje .
SYDNEY:
Printed and Pubushed hy H. J. Fkanki.ix, 40 Hunter Street.
i 8 80.




PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.
This story of a young girl’s misfortunes in Sydney was eagerly read, with
great interest, by the many thousand readers of The Prodigal, in which work it
first appeared, in weekly parts. Two subsequent editions of the story were equally
fortunate i* meeting with the public favour, and in going off the Publisher’s hands
with considerable rapidity. It is this success which calls out another edition of
this admirable little book.
They are the words of an erring girl, ’tis true, but for that reason the more
heartfelt and realistic, and written in a simple style of diction that must stamp it as
a genuine local story of an iH-starred career. A voice from the fallen has hardly
yet been heard.
Of the deepest interest in character, it is a moral lesson from beginning to
end. To it is added, “ Our Lives,” by “ One of Them,” Life Sketches, &c.




MABEL ESCOTT.
A GIRL’S STORY OF SYDNEY,
FROM
A CONFESSION.
CHAPTER I.
“ In her soft heart consenting passions move,
And the warm maid confessed a mutual love. "—Pope.
“ And Julia’s voice was lost, except in sighs,
Until too late for useful conversation ;
The tears were gushing from her gentle eyes—
I wish indeed they had not had occasion ;
But who, alas ! can love and then be wise ?
Not that remorse did not oppose temptation :
A little still she strove, and much repented,
And whisp’ring * I will ne’er consent ’ —consented.”— Don Juan.
“ For life’s severest contrasts meet
For ever in the city streets.” —Mary Hcnvitt.
You might have seen her, a laughing schoolgirl in Essex. Her rosy lips reflected
their tints in her cheeks ; and as she passed, waywardly yet happily to school, you
might have marked the warm flashes of the black eye and the confident tread of her
small foot. At school, her animation imparted contentment to others, and at play,
by her skill and courage, she gave life to her romping companions. Home from
school, she found as much happiness as in the playground ; her painstaking mother
and proud father catching the spirit of her youthful ardour as she deftly described
the events of the day. She was an only child, and you may imagine how much she
was loved.
Again you might have seen her, grown almost to womanhood. Her form is
more rounded now, and fairly tall; but her well-proportioned shape is as lithe
and spirited as ever, though at times her thoughts seem more settled, her air a shade
more pensive. The cause is not far to seek.
Hubert Gray would invite a second thought in the mind of any young girl with
no previous attachment, and Mabel (as she was called) had gradually learned to regard
this interesting neighbour of hers with deepening affection. And in good truth it was
doubly reciprocated by Hubert, who had soon found an opportunity of avowing his
honest love.
But Hubert’s nearest friends were in Australia, and arrangements had been
already made for him to join them when this early love of the young people had
wrapped itself about their hearts almost beyond estrangement. He would come back
in a year or two, however, to make her his wife; or she should come out to an
Australian home.
They parted ! Such partings are frequent enough : and, touched as Hubert was
at the prospect of being absent from her—and of the possibility of never beholding
again those gentle eyes which looked so fondly, so trustingly into his —yet the con-
fidence she had given to his hopes made the good-bye, though sad in itself, seem but
the forerunner of future and lasting happiness.
Three years passed away—three years of expectancy to both.
He has prospered, and sends fondly for his dear and faithful Mabel. She, now


in her twentieth year, is a girl at once amiable and lovely, her dark eyes 100 mg,
perhaps, more fire than in her earlier years. The one thought which saddens her
now is leaving her father and mother, who have ever been considerate and loving
Grieved as they are, too, at losing her, they, nerve themselves for the sake of
the life-happiness of theit child-which is so entertwined with that other life-to
make the sacrifice. They purpose to follow should their intended son-in-law L not
return to England. . , , . ,
It is a touching parting—that of the fond father, and the loving mother, and
<he grateful daughter. Such little groups of parting friends are not uncommon about
he docks at Blackwall, whence Australian-bound vessels are constantly sailing.
As the father earnestly regards his darling child, it may be for the last time, the
he tear starts, without power of suppression, to his eye ; he kisses her fervently, but
quickly, as though his emotion must be of short duration or its intensity would unman
him, and so hurries away, leading the weeping mother.
Before poor Mabel’s own tears are dry, almost, she finds herself, rocking and
giddy, on the strange and turbulent waters. Old Neptune is not, as a rule, gallant
enough to let the ladies pass without paying that stomachic debt with which most of
us are familiar ; but she did not, as many do, lie for days and nights in her cabin.
She struggled with the sickening prostration, that total indifference to everything
that desire for oblivion ; that perfect content, in short, to go down with the ship, if she
were going down, rather than trouble to raise one’s head. Mabel, in her better
courage, staggered on to her feet and accepted the escort of a bluff young officer to
the deck, where she found the fresh air revive her. And so may you, young ladies,
when you travel that way ; and by eating homely red herrings and biscuits, instead of
indigestible cakes and sweetmeats, impart strength to your stomachs and steadiness
to your heads. . .
And Old Neptune, besides being very, exacting with the gentler sex, has, it is
pretty certain, an influence upon them in love. He is an amorous old sea-dog, to say
the best for him, and when he gets the fair creatures in the tropics well, you have
seen what then. The dreamy feeling which attends that easy, gentle motion over
those genial seas, the health which usually succeeds to sea-sickness, the warm
sun, the soft breezes, the placid moonlight nights, the undisturbed reverie—the indo-
lence of the life altogether, are but too favourable to Love ; and, more than all, that
sensation as of being entirely apart from the world —these, and this it is that makes
Love so busy with them all.
When Mabel' had recovered, she found herself the object of many attentions
from the officers and cabin passengers. Rut the young fellow who had attended her
so generously and delicately in her sickness was perhaps the most unremitting.
She was grateful for his kindness ; but the sentiment which perhaps he would have
inspired her with was lost upon her.
Time went on, and the cheerful ship, which seemed to delight in her own happy
progress, carried the people over the bosom of the ocean to the south of the line,
and music, and happy voices floated upward from her decks and drifted away into
obscurity. And then Mabel wonld listen, foolish girl, to his softer accents, and
thought it would be ungrateful not to seem kind. She conceded too much of her
company, and in those calm, dangerous evenings, when Nature offers to Love her
softest and most enticing mood; when forgetfulness had stolen upon her un-
guardedly ; when all the world, except that boundless sea and sky, appeared to her
in her dreamy stupor as something unreal, or else the present but a dream—it was
in such an evening that she—she forgot, “just at the very moment she should not.”
You could hardly judge her severely. Nor was her seducer to blame to the full
wickedness of the act. Rather the circumstances which allured them—the love-


inspiriting climate which intensifies desire, the dreamy stillness of the ocean, and, to
her, the leisure of those bright days and warm evenings, should he held accountable.
The illusion did not last long. Almost immediately, indeed, she realised at a
blow the horror of it. Affianced to an honorable man—to whom she was even now
on her way to be made his wife—she had suddenly betrayed his trust and forfeited
her own esteem. At heart, virtuous ; truthful and faithful, and while yet loving him
fondly, she had in a moment of ruinous forgetfulness so trespassed against him that
her heart rebelled against herself, and she felt remorse taking possession of her
soul. She had never loved this young officer, far from dismissing Herbert from her
heart for him. Hubert’s self was engraven there ; this man had been barely reflected
on its surface. That she should have made the sacrifice at all was agony enough
that it should have been made for any but him she truly loved, was madness.
Man is privileged in these matters ; and though Herbert might have erred with-
out incurring censure, she as a woman could not. It seems hard upon the sex, for
the difference is more imaginary than real except in the result. Nature is said to edge
their chastity with the power of denial. This may be ; but how often do they forget
to deny, particularly in balmy climes like this. As Byron hath it—
‘ ‘ What men call gallantry, and gods adult’ry,
Is much more frequent where the climate’s sultry.”
Poor Mabel ! That one moment of oblivion !
Purely the wantonnoss of this strange life upon the ocean, it may be said ; this
complete severance from the world ; her fancied security ; and the familiar household
life within the narrow limits of the vessel, had linked her to one who, with Hubert
near her to love, had never been treated half so kindly.
Full of mocking remorse, she began now to avoid him. Ah ! pity that one
fleeting moment should so change her from what she was into what she sees herself.
He sought to know the reason of her coldness, but she only wept, and though she
did not reproach, she repulsed him. She frequently shed tears of sorrow upon her
one-time innocent pillow, and her poor heart ached when she awoke and thought of
her meeting with Hubert. Her soul upbraided, taunted, and humiliated her, and,
by degrees, as the coast of Australia was neared, she felt the burden of her shame
sit so heavily upon her —her sense of right and honor became so shocked at the
thought of deceiving him j her nobility of nature was so strong within; her love of
truth and her pride —especially in Hubert’s sight—so real, and a profound respect fop
his right so unblemished, that her finer sensibilities were wrought upon almost to
distraction, and, despairing of her own worthiness, she resolved not to meet him
at all.
In this frame of mind she looked with growing distaste upon her present life
and associations, and became, towards the end of the voyage, secluded and unhappy.
At length the voyaging drew to a close ; the ship entered Port Jackson ; and Mabel,
without affording time for Hubert to reach the vessel, hurried her luggage on shore,
and, taking a cab, found a lodging, gloomy enough, to suit the slender resources of
her purse. But having a strange feeling of disquiet and an indisposition to rest, or
to talk with the rather uninviting people of the house, she passed again into the open
air, looking about her, as she entered upon the crowded thoroughfares, bewildered
and alone in a strange city !
Who would not have pitied her ? Sacrificing her love, herself, and her station
only from a deep sense of her Own misdoing. To some this may seem a paradox ;
but to more refined natures the poor girl’s sacrifice will be clear, and her motives in
this one act spotless.


CHAPTER II.
“ Oh ! woe is me,
To have seen what I have seen,
See what I see ! ”
To Mabel, just upon her arrival in Sydney, the sudden transition from the repose of
the limitless, breathing ocean was keenly perceptible. The busy hum of the
thousands around her, and yet among them all not one in whom she could confide,
not one with whose sorrow she could mingle her own, was so perplexing and solitary,
that she felt bewildered, and the world seemed changed, as, alas ! it was to her.
The danger of her position and the intensity of her remorse now redoubled itself,
and, disconsolate, she wandered up and down the city streets. Her tears were at
length wrung from her by the utter desolation of her young and gentle soul.
As night added its gloom to her melancholy forebodings, her heart seemed to
darken with its approach. Still she bravely sought to calm her disturbed thoughts.
Then the first surprise of her situation began gradually to wear off, and the streets,
with the continual passing along of almost every specimen of humanity, to become
the least bit familiar.
She returned early to her poor lodging, to seek forgetfulness in sleep.
This lodging Mabel had taken in her ignorance of locality, and also with a desire
of concealment from eyes likely to look for her. It was in Kent-street. Many of
the older houses may now be seen, lying, as it were, in a pit, their roofs level with
the feet of the passer-by, and built close to the sidewalk. Looking down, peeringly,
St them at night, you may wonder, as you gaze at the small, dimly-lighted windows,
whose unwashed blinds give them a yellowish hue, how access is gained to them at
all, stuck as they seem to be in the earth itself. But if you look further, you will
find in some corner a flight of steep, wooden steps. Other dwellings, again, are in
the opposite extreme, being thrown up on the tops of wall-sided rocks, as high
above the sidewalk as the others are below it. The lower dwellings have a cosy look,
the others an awkward air, and an unsocial, naked, isolated aspect altogether.
It was in one of these latter, indeed, that Mabel had found a lodging. She
knew nothing of the mistress except so much as being recommended to her by the
cabman as he brought her luggage up from the quay. She could not help thinking,
though, that the immediate vicinity wore a sinister look. When she retired to her
little room that night, and darkness filled the apartment, she felt nervous, and a
feeling of insecurity settled upon her.
She could not have slept long when she was suddenly startled, rather than
awakened, from her uneasy sleep by a violent altercation at the street-door. She
heard distinctly loud oaths in a man’s voice ; than a woman’s gentler remonstrance —
evidently a young woman’s, followed by the whining interference of the woman
from whom she had hired the lodging. The man was angered ; he swore, and
seemed to be on the point of striking one of them as he vehemently demanded
the money he declared they had robbed him of.
Instantly the terrible thought flashed upon her that she was in a house of ill
repute. She lay there trembling, stunned and terrified by the discovery. Presently
another man’s voice was heard, in ill-sounding words of command. A scuffle ensued*
and he evidently thrust the first man out of doors. His voica was hoarse, as though
from drink. But he was master there, and from his words Mabel surmised him to
be the husband of the elder woman and father of the younger, whom she had heard
remonstrating with the first man.


‘ ‘ And so, Poll, you’ve found a girl for the little room, eh ? ”
“Yes, Joe,” answered the wife, meekly.
“Is she young—and handsome—and genteel? Now, don’t be b well
dumb, missus—l want to know —is she pretty? You won’t answer, won’t you?
Well, I know she is, for didn’t I drive her up, eh s—didn’t 5 —didn’t I drive her up ? I’ll go
and make love to her, damn me ! ”
“ Oh, father,” interposed the daughter. “ let the girl be.”
“ Let her be d d, you mean ! ”
Mabel heard this ; a shudder thrilled through her veins. She seemed for a
moment unable to move a muscle.
then, hearing the man’s steps approach, §he leaped with a quick resolution from
the bed. Now, a revulsion of feeling fired her with a new character. Real danger
changed her nervousness to strength.
The man knocked at the door, telling her to unfasten it. She told him, with a
show of resolution, to go from her room, and even surprised herself by her boldness.
She had began hastily dressing. He swore he would break in the door if she did not
open it : then she opened the window, the room being on the ground-floor, and
placed the chairs against the door. At this moment he hissed an oath at her, and
struck the door so hard that it gave way but at the same moment Mabel glided
quickly through the window, and he caught but a glimpse of her figure as she dis-
appeared through the little garden and descended quickly down the rock into the
roadway.
But with a yell of disappointment lie bounded after her, and she ran hard to
escape him.
Along the street on this dark night she ran, nor saw anyone to call to for pro-
tection. He was gaining on her, too, and was now no doubt actuated more by
the fear of the police court, should she escape thus, than by the desire of her com-
pany. If she escaped him, she would comftiunicate with the authorities, and his
easy, drunken life, supported by the shame of both wife and daughter, would be
exchanged for the stricter discipline of a prison.
Mabel’s strength seemed fast failing her ; she breathed with difficulty; then she
came up with one or two of those houses whose roofs were little higher than the
footpath. With but a moment’s hesitation ■ lesperation fitting her for any emergency —
she glided over the roof of one of them to the back, and found descent easy by
means of a tree, whose branches partly overhung the house, into the street below.
Those who have narrowly observed the houses here referred to, lying as some of
them do close up to the sidewalk, with their roofs abreast of foot passengers, will not
be surprised that such a possible means of escape should be chosen by the frightened
girl.
Safe in the street, she stopped a moment to take breath and seek assistance.
But no one appearing, she turned to walk away, when suddenly she beheld her
villanous pursuer again coming on, he having gone round by a lane, and away she
fled again.
She soon found herself in the rnid.-u of those crooked lanes of all imaginable
curves, and blocked by houses of the most unshapely angles, which she may well
have imagined to be the homes of poverty and vice in every shape which so young a
city could nurture. Every step increased her uncertainty as to whither she was
speeding. She could still hear her drunken pursuer behind. Finding herself blocked
in at the end of one lane, she ran down hill on to a wharf: still there was no one to
bring succour to her. As she trod (ipou the wharf, his footsteps echoed not far
behind her, and her desperation almost urged her into the gloomy waters.
But turning suddenly behind some heavy machinery, and seeing no one on the
ships, she lowered herself over the wharf, by a heavy rope which passed to a vessel,


on to the piles beneath. Breathlessly she listened to the footsteps. They neared
her —were overhead. She heard him swear in so ■ blasphemous a way that her blood
chilled. He appeared to be searching ; and then, believing that she had made up
the lane again, away he ran. . jnf;v/ ~]r fl j
She now breathed more freely ; but the water wg.s ; over her; feet she stood
grasping the slimy piles in the utter darkness of that glopmy refuge. Her footing
was not secure, and she felt afraid of slipping into the black pool and drowning.
The water was cold to her feet, and the tide might be rising ; and now that the first
danger was passed she felt herself weaker. Alone there with the murky, babbling
water, it seemed to rise and wash about her legs as impatient to engulf her. She
found her hold, too, was uncertain; her footing slippery ; and she could hear the
rain pattering above her head and chilling the atmosphere. , ~ ,
Gradually she was becoming terrified. She as yet feared almost to stir,
lest her pursuer should be lurking near at hand. Indeed, although for immediate
safety she had flung herself under the wharf, she could not see how to ascend again.
She clutched the rope, but found it impossible to draw herself up. Again she tried,
but with no better success. She thought to cry out, but was afraid. The night
seemed long—endless. Should she wait for daylight ? She felt the cold, and was
chilled every time she looked down upon the water : it filled her with such undefined
fears. She could only hope on, as she gazed through the interstices of the planks at
the one or two stars the wild clouds had left unhidden.
At length, cold, weary, and with the water rising above her knees, the horror
of her position increased by dwelling on it, and she found herself growing nervous
and fanciful. Horrid rats ran by her; she imagined the water to be alive with
slimy creatures ; and with every sigh of the night wind she thought she heard the
dying reproach of a father, or the piteous shriek of a mother, or the stern, half-
suppressed reproach of a lover. In her agony, she suddenly cried out, without
intending it almost. Her voice sounded so weird-like and unnatural there, that it
surprised herself.
Then she thought she heard other voices—words kindly spoken. Was she
deceived ? —in truth she was; her timid fancy, in such a position, deceiving even
her hearing, a result not uncommon under such circumstances. Then she thought
Hubert’s voice fell upon her ear, as he came along hurriedly to succour her. But
too soon the sounds died away ; and then they seemed to her imagination replaced
by the oaths of the man whose treacherous touch she had barely escaped.
' Thus terrified and fanciful, cold and exhausted, poor Mabel —in all her gentleness
and submissive spirit —would willingly have passed away ; and, great as might be
all the unknown horrors that lurk in the black melancholy tide in which she was even
now half immersed, she —but for the sin—would have been content to seek oblivion
in it.
In the midst of her blighting reverie, three men might have been observed
cautiously moving along the wharf, each one carrying something. They had not an
honest look. Presently they approached that part of the wharf where Mabel lay
hidden, and, without a word, one of the three seized the hawser and lowered himself
on to the piles, almost by her side. The next, he felt about just under the planking
of the wharf, and in the increased darkness his hand came in contact with the arm
of the terrified and speechless girl.
The man was not less startled than poor trembling Mabel. His first thought
was that he had touched a corpse, and he almost fell backward with the start he got.
He was at first as speechless from terror as herself, and seemed afraid to touch her
again ; her eyes being more accustomed to the darkness, she saw his hand uplifted,
as if to touch her, without the power of motion. He then moved away quietly to the edg


of the piles, and whispered something to his fellows. One of them in a low voice
said he’d strike a light, but this the others were afraid might be seen.
Mabel, at this juncture, knowing they would discover her, and hardly knowing
but their ways were those of honest folk, spoke in a trembling voice :
“ I am but a girl,” said she, timidly and earnestly, “and came here by accident,
n escaping from a bad, brutal man. Help me to the wharf again, for I am very
cold and faint.”
“ Oh, oh,” said the man, who was considerably bolder in the presence of a live
girl needing assistance than in the company of a fancied corpse. “So you’ve been
escaping from a man, have yer ? ” i ,
“Now then, Bill, let’s have her out, if she’s not dead,” said another.
“ Yes,” whispered the third, “ and my missus and pretty Sue will see to her if
she’s cold and wet. ”
In the hands of these men Mabel was lifted up, and she stood upon the wharf,
her benumbed limbs aching in every joint : but her terrors had calmed, and she felt
little alarm in the presence of these men. The two above passed down to the other
several parcels, which he put away out of sight among the piles. Mabel noticed this,
and thought it odd, and almost guessed they must be thieves and burglars. And
she then endeavoured, by thanking them for their kindness, to walk away; but this
the two would not permit, and the third who had spoken of pretty Sue and who had
a better appearance and manner than the rest, insisted that she should go to his house
till daylight and dry her clothes. In her doubt and suffering —for suffering will
make the human heart callous to its company, and knowing that she needed dry
clothes and the warmth of a bed, Mabel at length consented, and went away with
them, the elder of the trio talking to her of pretty Sue.
CHAPTER III.
“For haunts of men, where’er they be,
Awake my deepest sympathy.” —Mary Hewitt.
In one of the g rrowest lanes in the vicinity of Milsom’s Point, already referred to,
the man who had been talking with Mabel stopped, and tapped cautiously at the
door of a small, misshapen liquor shop. The door was quietly opened, and a young
gentle voice fell reassuringly upon Mabel’s ear, as the girl within exchanged a word
or two with this man. It was a darksome, ill-looking place inside, and only made
cheerful by the presence of this young girl, of not more than seventeen, whom they
called Susie. A dark-eyed, cheerful girl she was, with a ready but not forward
tongue, and mingling with many girlish attractions a grace of manner one could not
fail to observe. Her companionship, which Mabel instinctively sought, was beyond
expression acceptable to her, and Susie was not more slow to welcome one who,
wearing every indication of misfortune and suffering, disclosed at the same time
a manner that was gentle and refined. The man was greeted by Susie as father,
though as seen together that night a more incongruous consanguinity seemed hardly
conceivable. A wizen old woman was seen in the back room, dozing in an arm-
chair. This was the “ missus,” though only in the sense of being useful in the
house.
The two other men were now seen in the light, and Mabel was convinced by
their now unguarded conversation and blackened oaths that they were thieves and
blurglars. One of them had evidently made an acquaintance with the degradation of
a jail. He was tall, not stout, but active and muscular, and they called him Tony.
Susie’s father was addressed shortly as Ned, the other is already known as Bill.
It seemed to Mabel that Susie’s father had become leagued with these men


unwarily. They, being frequenters of the house, had one day sounded Ned when
poverty was close upon him, and they found in him a listener whom they easily per-
suaded to join them. One step, and they held in their power him, his house, and
even his daughter, whom they had contrived to mix up as an accomplice in secreting
Stolen goods in the house.
The following morning Mabel related to her new-found friend the shocking
adventures she had met with on the previous day, and which had ended so strangely.
A tear trembled within the eye of the sympathetic Susie as she listened ; her
father, too, heard Mabel’s story of the dastardly cabman, and undertook to recover
her luggage, in which he later in the day succeeded.
Mabel now thought of seeking lodgings, with Susie’s assistance. But she was
persuaded by the latter to remain a few days, until she should have recovered her-
self and decided on her future course. This mutual friendship which had sprung up
entirely influenced Mabel in staying. Indeed, the associations of the house had been
such as to disgust Susie, and she was often persuading her father to give it up, so that
in asking Mabel to remain she was warmly alive to the uncongeniality of the place,
hut hoped that for a few days each would be to the other a consoling and genial
companion.
Two or three nights afterwards, the two men who had been in company with
Mabel on that eventful night, came again, bringing with them the bundles she had seen
hidden under the wharf.
The following day they again came, and there was evidently a deep-laid scheme
a-foot. All three went away at night, in spite of Susie’s entreaties with her
father to break his association with these men. They never returned ; but, in their
stead, the next morning, two police officers came to the house, to the consternation of
the girls, and searched it. Finding the bundles which had been brought, both Mabel
and Susie were apprehended as accomplices. The old woman, who had got some
intimation of what was happening, disappeared. The three men had been taken in
the act of housebreaking. Being also suspected of a former robbery, the result just
described brought it home to them. The police shut up the house, and removed the
two girls in custody.
This great misfortune fell upon them with such keen dismay that they felt stunned
by the blow, and their incarceration in a common jail was so degrading to their
feminine sensibilities that they needed all the consolation one could afford the other
in their unmerited distress. On being charged, poor Mabel was silent but for a
murmur of innocence ; and Susie could only sob out their innocence and think of the
shame she had unwittingly brought upon her friend in persuading her to remain in the
ill-fated house. They were found guilty of being accomplices, and sentenced to im-
prisonment for one month.
The men were tried and found guilty of burglary, and sentenced to two years on
the roads. The father looked his last upon the daughter he had so foolishly and
ruinously endangered ; and she, knowing it, yet gazed with all the forgiving sympathy
of a young and affectionate daughter upon her remorseful father.
The miserable days—which dawned with the deepest melancholy, and wore away
with the most heartfelt disgrace, and closed again with tearful dejection and sombre
fancies—had never run their course so slowly, yet at length marked the lapse of a month.
The companionship of that wicked place could not be without its result. The girls had
been shocked by unfeminine behaviour ; their ears were assailed by obscenity and
brutal oaths ; the female prisoners with whom they were compelled to mingle con-
taminated their young lives. If they remonstrated, they were jeered at; if they wept,
they were laughed at.
But at length they were liberated, and once more breathed the fresh air of heaven.


They walked joyfully across the Park and into the Domain. Though without a
friend, the exhilirating influence of that genial morning, and the excitement of their
new-found liberty, acted like a charm upon (hem. As the day wore on, and they
still lingered about the grass-grown shades of the Domain or the cultivated slopes of
the Gardens, all Nature rejoiced with them, and for an hour they were children again.
As the cool evening came on, Susie thought it would be best to seek out an old
neighbour of hers with whom to take up their abode for the present. But Mabel
shrank from appearing among the people who knew of the disgrace that had fallen
upon them ; and so in sooth did her friend, but she was solicitous of Mabel’s
protection. So they took a room, humble enough and among strangers.
But when the first joy of their freedom had worn off, their future plans became
a matter of serious moment. The little money they had was soon spent. In seeking
situations in domestic service, they were invariably asked for characters ; but what
characters had they to offer ? Neither had been brought up to any business. Mabel,
with one disgrace heaped upon another, could not think of turning to the protec-
tion of him to whom she had been betrothed. It would have been in her eyes,
despicable, and she was proud. Something had to be done, and when Susie was offered
a barmaid’s place in the country, it’s not to be wondered at, much as the two friends
disliked to be parted, that she accepted it. Indeed, this necessity of parting almost
decided Susie not to leave Sydney ; but they considered that she would be better
able there to assist Mabel, by finding her a situation.
And so the friends parted. Mabel felt, when Susie, her only, her dear friend
was gone from her side, as though a sombre veil had fallen upon all in the world
that had ever been bright or happy. One evening, to deaden the torture of her
mind, she visited the theatre. It was a relief to her pent-up soul, she fohnd.
Hers was a pitiful condition. Overwhelmed with disgrace; alone, and in
poverty, she was in danger of becoming a prey to all that is evil. Of some educa-
tion and refinement; accomplished even ; she had almost touched the brink of the
last precipice in the life of woman.
She now obtained a situation as barmaid in a city hotel in the leading thorough-
fare. In her new sphere, she disclosed so gentle and generous a disposition that
it became a by-word. The habit of sipping, however, with some who were ever
ready to ask her, grew upon her, and she thought it made her less sensible of
her position. But the employment was uncongenial in some respects too. The
proprietor was a coarse, brutal fellow, and sought to enjoy her society ; but she
persistently shunned him.
One day, as she stood in the bar, she was stunned on seeing Hubert walk in, and
would have fallen had not a gentleman in the parlor caught hold of her. He led
her hastily out of the bar. The unsuspecting Hubert did not see her face, and
there was no recognition. This incident so agitated and terrified poor Mabel, th.it
in her dread lest be should again come in and discover her, she determined on
leaving the place altogether.
She felt herself wholly unworthy at his hands; yet how gladly would he have
befriended her. He no doubt had guessed at something of the cause of her disappear-
ance, but he knew nothing. And, oh ! that he had known all, to have saved her.
But she is one of those who refuse to dishonor others, who dislike pity, and will
rather suffer than proclaim their misery. She felt that society was lost to her ; could
she even stop short in her career now, she had passed the rubicon, and was still lost.
The acquaintances she had made in the bar, too, had influenced her; the company
she found herself in excited her, and excitement was to her forgetfulness. Wine
made her witty and fascinating ; she began to love it.
She corresponded with her friend Susie, who though unable to obtain for Mabel


a situation near herself, was more than ever affectionate, and the generosity of her
heart flowed unknown to herself upon every page she wrote.
Having left her employment, Mabel found herself in danger of becoming poor.
She could obtain no respectable employment, and did not hesitate to’accept from her
friend a small sura for immediate requirements. Blit a love for pleasure and excess
was gradually stealing upon her. She had more than once been sensible of a strange
lethargy after drinking with those acquaintances, caught up, like her love of wine, in
the dangerous bar-room. Those associations, and the gayety of the theatre and the
dance, deadened the finer feelings of her nature and stopped the current of her
memory. The past had been a bright summer dream, but the melancholy of the
present fell for ever like a pall upon the promising vision of a happy home, a loving
husband, and beautiful children. Ah, me ! she had only to do with the present.
One evening, with the gayest of her associates, she drifted from the giddiness of
the ball-room into unusual indulgence in the wine-glass, and one of her admirers being
only too ready to take advantage of such excess, the sober morning dawned upon her
with the Christian woman’s last sin committed !
CHAPTER IV.
“ I must have rest. Oh, heart of mine,
When wilt thou lose thy sorrow ?
Never till in the quiet grave—
Would I sleep there to-morrow.”-— Letitia E. M‘Lea)i.
We left Mabel sleeping —or, rather, just awakening with the grey morning ligh
stealing upon her with all the consciousness that she had made the last sacrifice. No
had she been pillowed altogether on a fond and manly breast. In the light of day
he, the flatterer of the night, turned from her ; he had no interest in her now. Her
sobered reflections showed her more an outcast than ever ; unbridled dissipation
seemed to hare too deeply sunk her for an honest life. She arose with the deep
shadows of melancholy upon her, and went from the scene in the conviction that her
sifti had set.
Poverty, for the time, it is true, had been driven from her side : but money, on
the other hand, had become invested with an odour of sin. She endeavoured to
walk off the oppression at her heart, and later on in the day joined her female com-
panions of the night before. Like herself, virtue was not for them to boast of. The
turning in their lives was entered upon, and the goal of degradation bid fairjto be
attained by them.
In the evening she visited the theatre with a gentleman acquaintance. The per-
formance assisted to chase away her gloom, and wine inspirited her ; but there was
a strange foreboding hovering over her that night. As she was passing out, a form
she might well have known was standing in the entrance. She was passing quiekly,
but at that instant he turned to her : she beheld Hubert. Her handkerchief imme-
diately half covered her face ; she clung to her companion for support, and almost
sank between the fear that Hubert would speak and the agitation which a flood or
remembrances brought upon her. But he did not in that momentary glance
nige in the fashionably-dressed lady—her face half hidden too as it was—the bright,
but modest Mabel he had taken leave of one summer evening at h une, under promise
that she would be his wife.
She and her companion, whe wondered at her strange manner, hastened away,,
and then entered a refreshment room at Emerson’s. Here they were secure from
intrusion, and she calmed herself sufficiently to account to her companion for the
emotion she bad betrayed, by saying she had seen a Iriend whom she was afraid would
recognise her. She recovered herself so far as to walk home—her new, not


her innocent home. Yet the form of her first love was so strongly linked to her
heart that she could not tear it away.
To court forgetfulness she now plunged more wildly into sin : but though she
had plunged as deep down into sin “as hell’s from heaven,” she would still have
found the likeness of Hubert engraven reproachfully upon her heart. And the more
unworthy she became the more poignant were her shattered hopes.
Poor girl, alas ! and how many such. Is it so rare a case ? Mark her a month
afterwards. Signs of dissipation begin to peep through her beauty ; her dress is not
arranged with the elegant taste she was wont to observe, and her manner savours of
an abandon which betrays too plainly her wild course. Money comes to her, and
she spends it, she hardly knows how—nor cares. It is no care of hers, beyond
supplying her giddy and unreflecting wants. Were she calmly to reflect, she would
shrink from her own sober condemnation with horror.
Her education and manners fit her for the society of the”educatedj: 4 yet, in her
sense of shame, she does not even seek the higher ranks "of vice. So careless of any
earthly, or heavenly, consideration is she, that life may happen as it may.
But through all she had not forgotten her friend Susie. Letters of almost
sisterly affection passed between the two girls, though Mabel had not breathed a
word of her present course, and Susie supposed her to be in employment like her-
self.
Faster and faster Mabel sped on her career of sin. One night, though not so
late, the vivacity of her tongue, the brightness of her eye, and even the least
unsteadiness in her step, disclosed that the wine-glass had become too familiar. She
is interesting in her strange humour, perhaps, but she commands our pity too. A
female in the least under the influence of wine is an object always of much concern,
and when she happens to be prepossessing, and youthful, and of a perceptible
refinement, which even debauchery cannot erase, as was the case with Mabel, one’s
sympathies extend to her, and some hearts may soften at the recital of her misfortunes.
As she moves with a subdued air of recklessness along King-street, she by
accident brushes against one of those untutored demireps'who are all ribbon and
blasphemy, and this obscene harlot, just escaped from hell, turns about to Mabel,
with the chaste rebuke, “Go to , you b w ! ” So much were
her feelings hurt at this that her tongue was stayed with amazement ; her sensitive
feelings were shocked, yet she would take no notice, wishing to avoid (trouble with
such disgusting antagonists. Going into a cafe, she partook of more drink : its
effect was becoming more than ever longed after, for it alone seamed to steel her
heart against her own reproaches.
Coming out at the door, three or four loud and obscene creatures instantly
deride her condition, and abuse her in wanton phrases for having on a previous night
carried off their cullies. Mabel, if she had done so, was innocent of the design, and
so told them. But one, with a pious wish that she might go to h—ll if it were not so,
gave her a push : another plucked at her costly hat, and the third dragged at her
light summer shawl.
Far gone as she was in sin, this treatment, before the public gaze, and their
unmerited abuse of her, brought a fountain of tears to her eyes. Poor Mabel, what-
ever she may be, her heart is still penetrable. But with that flood of tears oome a
change of feeling. As these waifs from hell let loose the blasphemies of their
tongues, the natural courage of the young girl fired up, and, enraged beyond control
—without a word, she made a plunge at her three assailants, and, strengthened by
her despair and. sense of wrong, attacked them so suddenly and so well that these
quickly dilapidated beauties were fain to ask for quarter, as she struck them
upon their painted cheeks. Hats and ribbons were flying about, an


lay scattered in handbills, while that of ore. of them had come off altogether, as though
she had been scalped.
But just at that moment up ce nt the police, and the least culpable one was the
first to be seized. The constable did not use Mabel harshly though. He saw she
was in tears ; her good clothes torn from her : her hat battered and mutilated
beyond recognition ; even the heart of a policeman was touched. Her three
assailants, who bore many evidences of Mabel’s retaliation, escaped. Mabel, in the
height of her passion, had no doubt looked guilty enough to the constable, who
could not be aware of the provocation she had received. She was led, tearful,
ashamed, bleeding and torn, along the street. Her hat and shawl were rolled up
together, and the officer grasped her by the wrist. Ihe lock-up was reached, and
the charge being taken, she was thrust id upon the chill stones of a cell. In the dark-
ness she could not discern her companioi s, though their female voices and reckless,
horrible oaths told her but too plainly in what company she was to spend the night
She crouched down in her misery, arc |wept a flood of wretchedness. Her own
insane sacrifice of herself, the world’s contumely, and the wretched, sudden, and
degrading calamity of the night, pierced her poor sobbing heart, and almost rent it
in twain. Her thoughts flew bach to (he home of her childhood —to the thousand
kindnesses of her loving parents, whose best hope in life she had been. Ihe
wickedness which had brought upon her die ignominy of that night smote hard upon
her —yet, to turn back seemed harder now than ever.
To her parents, she had even neglected to write. They had been utterly avoided
by reason of her shame. So strong was her remorse that she almost cursed herself,
as many have done, and, in a paroxysm of despair, doubly cursed her fate. I oor
girl ! Oh, that you had stayed in your -Id home ; or that your intended husband
had gone home for you, as he should have done, in preference to exposing a young
girl to a long voyage.
Mabel’s parents, about this time, were anxiously looking for letters, but still
had no doubt of the safe and happy meeting of their daughter with young Hubert.
One day there came a letter bearing the Australian postmark. The expectant father
tore it open, while the tender mother stood by and watched him with a strong
maternal interest. A few lines, and wh-u a change from joy to agony The letter
fell into the hands of the wife, and the stricken father sank upon a chair, speechless
and almost insensible. The mother read, slowly—amazed, and half doubting at
first; and then, as the full meaning, of it broke upon her, she leaned upon her
husband’s shoulder. But neither spoke. Ihe silence of those two, could Mabel
have observed it, would have struck u-rrm to her young heart.
The letter was from Hubert, mid. told, in keen agony, that their daughter, on
arrival, had eluded him : adding tb; . fn-m ilie little he had been able to glean, the
worst was to be feared. But he enjoined them not to be cast down under the painful
tidings it was his duty to convey tc then instead of word of the happy union they
had looked for. He would seek oit every trace of her, and never stay his search
till successful. They had better, he added, not think of coming out, but leave all
to him.
Hubert, the reader will see, hid made up his mind to rescue Mabel from further
harm, whatever had befallen her. i k h-ved to think of her as she was in that more
innocent youth at home. Her artless smile and the affectionate glances of their
early 10. e would incessantly intrude upon Idm; he landed her sweet face looking
upon him penitently as he lay upon his sleepless couch. Little did he think that
twice he had been near enough to speak with her, had his eye but seen.


CHAPTER V.
To return to Mabel, as she lay upon the chill floor of the police cell, weeping pain-
fully through the long night. The curses of those drunken, degraded women whom
every sin a woman knows had brought often to the direst pass, alone fell upon her
ear, and her lot seemed more than ever bitter. The faintest streaks of day, which
stole through the prison bars, brought to her a calmer sense of the calamity that had
overtaken her. She looked around, and saw the poor, dirty, tattered drunkard
lying heedlessly upon the floor ; and there the gayly-bedecked frequenter, like her-
self, of the midnight nurseries of vice, her finery all bespattered and battered, and
her’clothes half in tatters. For herself, her face was besmeared with blood, her hair
clodded with it, and her apparel totally unrecognisable as that which had made her so
attractive the day before. As suffering always finds some relief in fellow misery,
even the companionship found in this revolting group could afford Mabel some
amelioration of the agony which had kept her company through the night. And she
had become more used to her condition by morning, just as anyone may learn, by
degrees, to endure the acutest pain.
Then the time came to be led into the dock. She had stood there before, an
innocent girl, but had been convicted. She now stood there again, guilty in the act
of an assault and breach of the peace, and innocent from the great provocation
received. As she was recognised as having been convicted before, she was not per-
mitted the option of a fine, but sentenced to two weeks’ imprisonment.
Her feelings when she heard this may be much better imagined than described.
Not a tear forced its way through her eyes—she was too much amazed at the justice
which could permit the guilty to escape and should so punish the innocent. She was
taken away to prison, and found herself, between her paroxysms of grief, growing
hardened of heart. _
Those two weeks of disgrace wore slowly away. The depressing details of
prison life robbed her of still more of that elasticity of spirit which had characterised
her youth.
Coming from the jail, at the end of two weeks, with the odour of prison life
upon her she found she had no companion with her now, as of yore with Susie.
The day was a stormy one. Dressed in the soiled and creased garments she had
worn on that unlucky night, she now offered a forlorn mark for the driving sleet,
while the ruthless wind toyed with her dress, blowing its wet folds against her limbs
and beating the rain into her face, while the gloom which hung over everything
saemed to cast its dullness upon her soul.
As she walked into the city and along Castlereagh Street, lost in deep meditation
as to what her course was to be now, she was suddenly confronted by Hubert .'
He had stopped abruptly, as his eye caught sight of her form, and he looked
ardently at the wretched girl before him, like one in a dream. She, too, was trans-
fixed to the ground, and something akin to terror threw itself into the agonising
expression of her face. For several seconds their eyes were fixed upon each otheq:
his, lit up with the excitement of beholding her, yet softened by a beam of tender-
ness • hers, full of that awakened penitence, shame, and tenderness which is rare
enough perhaps, but which in some women is so beautiful a quality.
As the tears at last welled up to her gentle eyes, Hubert, still without a word,
approached her, and took her gently by the hand. She did not fall fainting ; her
anguish was too keen for that. Her sensibilities were too much wrought upon t«
allow a word to escape her. But with a silent sympathy they moved away, side by
side towards the avenue of the Racecourse, where they would be unnoticed.
’it is ever the case that when young lovers hav« most to say they are most dumb.


This unexpected meeting had agitated both Mabel and Hubert to such a degree that
for some minutes each chose to remain silent. They walked on, to and fro, Mabel
ready almost, humbled as she was by her weight of wretchedness, to throw
herself at his feet and ask forgiveness for the wrong she had done him, and he but
too ready to forgive, much as he had suffered. Nor must this be mistaken on her
part for an absence of that nobility of nature which makes some women refuse to see
a man sacrifice himself, and which causes a man to hesitate at it too. Mabel had no
thought of ever being again what she had been ; with him, no faint glimmering of
happiness in the future now pictured Mabel as a sharer of it. In this true story of
Sydney life, the two principal actors felt all the glow of “ what might have been,”
and all the horror of what is. Yet the memory of their youth, and their first fond
love united them so much in mind, early associations, and sweeter remembrances,
that each one’s life hung upon the other’s.
“ Mabel,” at length said Hubert, “we are, it seems, too well able to read each
others’ sorrow. That yours is no less deep than my own I am sure. But what the
details of your life have been, I don’t know. I have promised your mother and
ather to search for you, and to ensure your return home. Will you tell me all, and
accept my services in your behalf.”
“Oh, Hubert,” replied Mabel, “I so wickedly betrayed your trust; and cir-
cumstances and misfortune have combined in throwing me into such a life that I
feel punished for a thousand years of wickedness. You, I know, will believe me
when I say, though I acknowledge the sin, fate seems to have pursued me ever
since I left home. Why, I am but this day let out of jail. But why there?
you will ask. Because I defended myself from the abuse of degraded women with-
out one touch of tenderness in their natures. But I was a “ former offender ” known
to the police as an accomplice in a robbery, although as innocent as yourself. These
things have made me, Hubert, what you see.”
“Mabel,” said Hubert, earnestly, “ I know, from what I have lately gathered
of you in Sydney that you have sinned, and I have believed that the greatest mis-
fortune has attended your wayward steps. But why did you evade me on your first
arrival, and go no one knew whither, and, I suppose, with another ? ”
“ No, Hubert, not with another ! I had during the voyage compromised you,
and my sense of shame and pride prompted me to avoid our meeting.”
“ Mabel, you were wrong to court your own destruction by throwing yourself
among strangers and in a dangerous city. The result only too clearly proves
this, and has more and more embittered the days of your parents, mv own life, and
rent your own young heart. ”
“ I know, Hubert, now how foolish I was to commit myself to danger as I did.
But my pride was predominant, and it has always been so amongst my friends,
with whom I could not bear even to think myself degraded.”
“ And what, Mabel, do you intend doing now? Will you allow me to provide
for you a temporary home ? ”
“ Yes, Hubert, but on one understanding—that you will henceforth regard me
in the light of a friend. The wretchedness in which you have found me to-day,
demoralising as it may be, is not enough wholly to drown my pride, and in accepting
your offer of assistance it is partly out of consideration for yonr promise to my poor-
father and mother.”
He accompanied her, then, t« the house of a respectable friend of his, and intro-
duced Mabel, straightforwardly, as a young person requiring lodgings. These arrange-
ments were soon made, and they poured into each others’ willing ears as much of
their lives as was fraught with interest to the other. Before he left her that day, he
had besought her to allow him to take a passage home for her, without delay, that


she might by her presence relieve her parents’ old age of its suffering on her
account. He would be remaining in Australia.
But Mabel was too much troubled to give an answer to that, and the thought of
returning as she was to the home left under such happy auspices was enough
to make her hesitate.
She was young, of fine sensibilities ; generous and truthful still. The rebuke
which the home of her childhood, every time that memory brought it before her,
seemed to contain, saddened upon her and made her loth to accept Hubert’s offer
And her pride rebelled at the thought of the scorn which her old acquaintances in
England would visit her with when the girl who had left to be made an Australian
bride should be seen returning unmarried. And however forgiving her parents might
be, it were hard to see their fond pity and solicitude mingling with a subdued
reproach, as she must fancy it.
The next day she learned upon inquiry that her clothes and other personal effects
had been sold by the woman who had kept the house she had lived at, up to the
night of being locked up. She had owed but little, bat the woman had, with a
probity peculiar to the mistresses of such places, seized everything promptly. Mabel
now wrote to Susie, acquainting her with the recent events of her life.
Susie, on reading the letter, was greatly shocked. She whs fond of her friend
Mabel, and to be by her side now was a natural and worthy desire. Having a few
pounds saved, she gave notice to leave her situation, and a week afterwards was
hurrying up to Sydney.
CHAPTER VI.
Susie arrived in the metropolis, and, with a feeling of great anxiety, hurried to
Mabel’s lodgings. The two girls, separated for many months, greeted each other
with the sincerest tokens of deep attachment. Susie was now rapidly rounding into
womanhood, and the events and conditions of her life during the past twelvemonth had
impressed upon her brow a shade of thoughtfulness which rather became her. She
had found a lover, too ; one she had chosen out of by no means a few that had offered.
She had been unguided and unadvised by any solicitous mother, and few as had
been the purer associations and homely ties that she had known, it is not to be
wondered at that the natural springs of her affection lavished their strength upon
him. Her affection was of that strong, unaffected character which thinks not of
dissimulation, or even hesitates at sacrifice, but renders the whole soul freely :
and this was in fact her first love.
So she had something to tell as well as to listen to. And Mabel, with a quick
discernment, soon perceived that her friend had a disappointment in her heart as
well as love.
He who had won so sure a place in this true little bosom was incapable of
knowing its worth. He treated the affections of the devoted girl lightly, and
even though he knew she had resigned all to him in her tenderness, the only
effect it had on his stony nature was to make him boastful of his conquest.
The truth did not flash upon her suddenly. The first love of trusting youth
does not like to be intruded on by any doubts and fears. But by degrees she became
sensible of a patronizing air he sometimes assumed, and her woman’s pride was
more readily injured than her affections could be shaken. Then he had grown
neglectful, and was less mindful of the pretty barmaid. Susie now felt some concern
for the safety and happiness of her life ; and in proportion as she became more
earnest, he was colder and more patronizing.
At length she detected him in paying more attention to another girl than was
in keeping with his promise to her. Her pride rebelled at this treatment, and


she accused him of his unfaithfulness. The unfeeling brute, having robbed her of
her roses, almost laughed in her face. There was no longer any occasion for the
mask he had worn to win her, and his good looks and honeyed words were
now seen by the betrayed girl to be a mere sham.
Tears fell fast upon her pillow that night. Her dream of happiness had been
cruelly dispelled, and by him who was the brightest vision in it. She had turned a
page in her life, and all had suddenly become blank. She thought not of any legal
proceedings against him for damages in his breach of promise ; she thought only of
having thrown a pearl away, to bring an insult from him who had influenced her so
strongly during the past few months of her life. Her pride, while it taught her to
hear this discovery with outward calmness, created a storm within her breast. At
times her feelings were suffocating, and nothing seemed to afford the desired relief.
She had been deceived in an unmanly, cowardly way ; seduced only under a false
promise of wedlock She was alone, too, in the world, and having none near her,
and only Mabel anywhere, to whom she could unburden her soul, her lot—at a period
of life when the affections are so susceptible and the ardour of the heart is so con-
centrated —seemed to her most crushing.
But she nevertheless rose above the pettiness of his nature, and, though the
.gony of the calamity—which it was to her —were twice as great, she would boldly
cut him out from her credulous heart.
Mabel, as may be supposed, when the first excitement of the meeting had
calmed down, and the two friends had grown more familiar in their confidence
and chat, listened to Susie’s recital with very much concern. Mabel was the elder,
and she was now, alas ! also older in sin, yet always with an under current of good-
ness which kept her better than she seemed. Susie had, notwithstanding her fewer
years, been monitor, or at least adviser, in their first friendship. But in her present dis-
appointment she felt how weak her heart and judgment had been, and ho v much in
need she was of Mabel’s soothing words.
And Mabel herself had much to relate which her friend did not expect to hear.
And whatever she may have been tempted to conceal from others, she had no secrets
from her present listener. Susie was startled at these passages in her life, and the
young girl’s eyes filled with tears at the accidents and hardships which had fallen
to the lot of Mabel in her short career in Sydney.
In the afternoon of that day Hubert called, and saw Susie for the first time.
There was enough of interest in the lives of these two girls to enlist the sympathies
of many a less kindly man than lie. He gave the girls some good manly advice,
and repeated his persuasion wflth Mabel that she should return to her parents.
' * Now, with her this return was a most perplexing thing. Within her heart, she
longed to return—deeply longed to see again her mother and father and friends : but
to return when fortune was looking so blackly upon her, and with all her faults fresh
and florid upon her heart, was too humiliating—too humiliating She besought
Hubert not to press her return immediately, but to let the influence of
time act upon her a little first, so that she might gather mere fortitude with which to
look again upon those anxious faces at home.
She thought that herself and Susie, in the meantime, should seek employment in
the city, to which Hubert could raise no opposition, but strongly advised them not
to engage as barmaids, an occupation which he considered beneath respectability for
a young w'oman, knowing, too, as he did, the characters of many of the proprietors,
and he could not be ignorant of worse traits in many of the frequenters. The girls,
however, met with more difficulty than was anticipated in obtaining situations in a
private family, even with Hubert’s reference : they had not been in such service
before, and having been barmaids, the fact was against them.


Hubert about this time was called away on business, and though he greatly
wished to see them settled in a respectable calling, he feared that the bar of a public
house would be their only resource.
Mabel and Susie, when another few days had passed over them without success,
felt themselves fairly compelled to accept employment oi some kind, to avoid living
on the generosity of their friend. So one day they disclosed themselves behind the
bar of one of the most frequented hotels in the city. They were quiet in their
demeanour and neat in dress, and were a good deal noticed. They might have been
made giddy with flattery, but Mabel began to be a reader of character, and knew
what spooning over a bar was worth ; while even Susie, though accustomed to a low
house in her girlhood, had learnt something of late from more assuming gentlemen,
and could not be expected to listen to them with the credulous ears which had
characterised her recent affair of love. -
The proprietor of this place, well known for the “excellence of his liquors, as
he chose to express it, the luxury of his table, and the beauty of his barmaids, was
not a man to be content with looking upon a rose : he must have it. He set his
cunning springes for Mabel first, but she avoided ’them. She had made up her
mind to live honestly, and at the first step on the new path, she was assailed by one
who should rather have encouraged than have thwarted. He then turned his atten-
tion to Susie. Not credulous, but yet less on her guard than Mabel, and perhaps
feeling flattered that the proprietor himself should take so much interest in her,
she did not rebuke him altogether. As time went on, he became, in private, still
more attentive, and asked her to accompany him to that favourite resort of barmaids.
Manly Beach. This honour she declined, but chose rather to walk out on Sunday
with Mabel, and enjoy an hour or two exclusively in her society.
One afternoon, when Mabel was in the bar and Susie taking an hour s rest in
her room, there came a tapping at her door. To her “ Come in, appeared the
squat and dark-skinned form of the proprietor, his black hair and whiskers giving
him the appearance of having a darker design. But he only inquired for a book,
which set the girl at ease. He then began to talk of the merits of that book, and
of the beauties of literature, the beauties of nature (witness himself), and, asking her
to share with him a small bottle of wine, he got so far as to admire the beauties of
women. His suit was evidently prospering ; he never was so well advanced before.
She even submitted to his arm encircling her waist, but declined the honour of his
unsavoury kiss. By this time, however, deeming his conquest certain, he pressed her
for other gratifications, and partly forced her down, when, with a sudden
strength, she threw him against the washstand, and his foot catching in the carpet,
down he went, bringing washstand, water-jug, wine-bottle and all, upon his silly head,
and drenching himself with water. In spite of the serious aspect affairs had taken,
Susie was on the brink of bursting into a laugh, when tbe door opened and Mabel
appeared on the threshold, just as he was collecting his ideas and realising the
unpleasant fact that he was fairly outwitted. Looking around, he beheld the
unexpected visitor, and, with a curse, mingling with the titter of the two girls, he
rushed from the room.
CHAPTER VII.
The comical discomfiture of the publican, and sinner, with which the last chapter
closed, but that it is a fact, might have been left out. Still, as something far
coarser than that has recently been narrated by the daily press here in connection
with a notorious divorce case, no apology is needed in exposing one of a class by no
means celebrated in Sydney for nobility of character.


Mabel and Susie, under the circumstances, could hardly help laughing over this
little episode. They fully anticipated the anger of their dark-browed employer would
last. They knew he could not get over the disgrace he had fallen into, and so they
both gave notice, knowing that he would surely discharge them if they did not.
The dark-eyed, cheerful Susie, with her ready tongue, first of all lashed him into as
much sense of shame as he was capable of, while Mabel was not altogether silent ;
and so they left.
Hubert was not returned from the country, and they hardly knew when he
might be expected. The friends of his with whom the girls had lodged had removed,
and they were compelled to seek other lodgings. In looking again for employment,
the difficulties they had formerly encountered were repeated. No really respectable
situation was obtainable, and their little fund of earnings were soon exhausted.
Susie then, with a perseverance which the necessity of the situation gave her, sought
and obtained a situation in another hotel.
Mabel was now beginning to despair of gaining, by her own exertions, a position
of respectability and independence. She had failed to get anything better than the
situation of a barmaid, and even that seemed to fail her now. Her misfortunes
made her feel resentful, and a shadow passed over her attractive features. A cloud
seemed to hang over her young life, and, instead of placing herself in a better position
for returning to England, she was still as poor and hopeless as when she issued from
an unjust imprisonment. She disliked writing to Hubert for money, and Susie had
none. The few articles of dress she could spare had gone from her, and with the
rent of her poor lodging to pay, and even an unsatisfied hunger, she found herself
without a shilling. And thus she wandered forth in the evening, sorely puzzled to
know what course to pursue. She had much of pride in her still, and she shrunk
from telling even Susie that she had not another sixpence. Mabel, too, was
possessed of a nature buoyant enough when the sunshine of peace a»d prosperity
was across her path ; but when social hardships heaped themselves like an incubus
upon her, her spirits sank, and she became rebellious against fortune and impa-
tient of the world’s coldness and the restraints of society.
As she walked into the city that evening, all the avenues of social rectitude and
honesty seemed closed to her ; she seemed to read her fate in the dark pall of night,
as it spread more heavily around her; and, later on, an indescribable dread came over
her of returning to her wretched pillow, whence she could only raise her head to
behold pinching poverty at her bedside and the unpitying landlady at the door. The
picture was too distressing ; she must have money ; her heart would not submit to
the humiliation and despair of the morrow.
In very desperation, then, she walked along towards the Prince Consort statue.
In the shadows, there she stood like a guilty thing; and then, half repenting of the
unchaste resolve, and half ashamed, she would wander on a bit. As the night grew
older, her heart became more defiant and more reckless. She would not, however,
risk joining any of her old companions in sin by going lower down the street, but
remained in the shadows of the spot described.
She had just passed over toward the statue, when the wrapped-up form of a
gentlemen moved towards her. She had taken but little notice of this figure, which
indeed was enveloped in so large a coat, and so much muffled about the throat that
he was unrecognisable. He looked toward Mabel, who felt emboldened to address
a word or two to him. She felt at the same time unaccountably timid, and it was
with a tremor on her tongue that she whispered, “ Good evening! ”
At the sound of her voice, this strange figure —toward whom she felt strangely
drawn by ome secret workings of the heart—seemed suddenly horror stricken. He
put out his hand as if he would take hold of her, his eyes gazing wildly upon her


■with a startled look ; his mouth half opened, as if he would speak, but he could not.
He was as immovable as the statue beneath whose shadow they stood.
Mabel, aroused from the reverie which her misfortunes had weighed upon her,
And startled by the strangeness of this spectacle, moved to his side and peered into
the stricken face before her. A loud, ringing shriek broke from her inmost soul—it
•was her father ! ,
She fell upon his breast, which seemed to be of stone, so immovable was he.
She crouched down before him in an agony of mind, piteously * For-
give me—forgive me, father ! Speak ! speak to me ! your daughter Mabel!
He turned his eyes upon her, but his tongue refused utterance. Then he raised
her tenderly from the ground, and passed his arm around her. The gent est an
smoothed back her dishevelled locks, and the most lender eye looked an eloquent
forgiveness. They moved slowly away beneath the trees, the father and daughter.
Those beautiful lines of King Lear came upon his memory—
“ Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia, ,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee .
He that parts us shall bring a brand from Heaven,
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes.
“ When thou dost ask me blessing, I’ll kneel down,
And ask of thee forgiveness.”
That kind father, whom the reader last saw in England, overcome by the
terrible tidings conveyed in Hubert’s letter, was for weeks half prostrated by the
blow. The mother of the erring girl, afflicted as himself at the sad news, mmg e
her own sorrow with that of her husband, and sought to soothe his troubles, and by
doing so to lighten her own. But nothing in their simple lives could turn the
current of their sorrow for the absent Mabel; she was ever present to t em in
imagination, and their imagination pictured her as suffering every evil to w ic a
young girl of many attractions could be subjected in a strange land, though even
they did not dream of one phase of ignominy to which she had twice been the victim,
innocently. In the unhappy frame of mind which had fallen upon the mother an
father, they found the suspense of waiting for further intelligence insupportable, and
so determined on seeking their daughter, and, if possible, reclaiming her themse ves.
With this resolve, they disposed of the little property they possessed, sold off their
home, and embarked for Sydney. If this meeting of father and daughter has
been unexpected by the reader, it was quite as unexpected by Mabel, and the incidents
of her life are the subject of this narrative. The hour of this meeting was to her
the most momentous of her life.
In this hour, Mabel’s gentleness all came back to her ; and the misfortunes
her life and the poverty and despair which had culminated on this evening in driving
her to the extremest desperation, had all combined to so chasten her spirit, t at s c
had never felt true repentance till now. From her own desire of living an honourable
life, and from a consideration for her connexions, she would have avoided anot er
fall; and just when she was most distressed and the tempter Satan most pressing—her
heart still yearning for better influences—just at the moment she might have fallen
never to be raised up again, her father came to save her.
When the pure-hearted man had by slow degrees calmed the violent s oc
which his system had received on being actually accosted by his own child, and w en
the agitation which had rendered him for a time speechless and horrified had given
place to the joy of again clasping his lost daughter in his arms, the fervency o is
thanksgiving, though unexpressed, was transparent in the extreme. There in the
night they still walked, and though they spoke but little, volumes of eloquent
meaning passed between them.


then he led her home, where the wife and mother awaited his coming, but who
did not dare hope that Mabel would be so soon found. He would not leave
her even to apprise her mother of her coming, but led her in with the glad exclama-
tion, “I have found her ! I have found her ! ”
One look at her daughter, and she was folded in her mother’s arms. Their
hearts were too full to utter a word, but each wept a copious flood of tears. To
woman tears are ever a relief. What the feelings of those three were on that
memorable night, what pen could fully describe ? The prodigal child was in the arms
of her parents once more ; they were as tender with her almost an’ she had been an
infant again. Much cause for sorrow as she had given them, no word of reproach
even for an instant dwelt in their hearts. They received back their child, freely for-
given, nor ever meant to look one single reproach upon the penitent girl. Nor would
they, then or at any time, even question her : she could tell as much or as little as she
chose, but the parents wisely resolved there should be no questioning.
This new home, which the mother and father had taken up on their arrival,
had an air of homely comfort about it which to Mabel was refreshing and hopeful.
She fell asleep that night, with her dear father’s “ Good night, Mabel,” lingering so
beautifully upon her ear, while her mother knelt beside her couch, praying silently, and
offering up thanksgivings from the deep recesses of a mother’s breast. What a con-
trast was this with the night of sin she might have passed, but for her father.
CHAPTER VIII.
When the cheerful sun threw its genial rays upon the house next morning, Mabel
rose from a refreshing, happy sleep, if not a long one. She was commencing her
new life, and she felt once more happy.
Her parents hardly intended to return to England, and as they readily perceived
that Mabel must have an objection, it was discussed what should be their next step
As there was now an objection to Sydney, neither parents nor child being able to
look upon the scene of Mabel’s disgrace with any favour, Melbourne was chosen as
their future home, and they prepared to leave in a few days.
From England, Mabel’s father had written to Hubert, but as he and the mother
had started for Sydney within a few days of deciding on the voyage, Hubert had not
been made aware of their coming. On receiving a letter now, acquainting him with
their arrival and Mabel’s reception by them, he hurried up to Sydney, and in a
few days stood in their midst, but only a few hours prior to their departure. It was
as well that Hubert was not to be long with them. Neither Mabel nor her parents'
deemed the present a fitting time for Hubert to think of the affection that had once
existed between himself and Mabel; nor did he, knowing that circumstances had
hopelessly estranged them. Still he was not one of those who thought a woman should
be for ever damned because she had committed a great fault; he believed in
winning her back to virtue, and if she became as good as others to consider her as
good, but he had months before stifled the idea of marrying Mabel, and he knew
that she, with her guilt upon her, was as opposed to it as himself.
To Susie, Mabel went with a sisterly,affection and narrated the events of the
past few days. It is needless to speak (of Susie’s surprise and pleasure ; and yet a
shadow spread itself across her youthful .face. Mabel interpreted it, and declared
that Susie was to go to Melbourne with them ; but this she [refused to do, as she
wished again to see her father.
When the little party left, Hubert was not idle in looking after the details of
their departure. His big heart expanded as he assisted them on every hand with
their luggage, or with a suggestion or advice. He was more than happy at


seeing that little party so united. As the steamer moved from the wharf, he bid
them again good bye, and, watching the vessel disappear from his sight, he
turned to make his way back to the country, confessing to himself, then, how solitary
and heavy at heart he felt.
The house in which Susie was barmaid had for its landlady one of those meek
and peaceful women who are so rare that when they are met with in life they make a
deep impression on the memory. She was somewhat tall, and lithe and graceful of
figure. Her face was oval, and girlish almost in expression, while her rich hair
clustered in ringlets about her smiling face. But what pleased most of all was her
gentle, winning manner, and the silvery notes of her voice. Her happy generosity,
and simple, innocent ways, made up the principal beauties of her nature, combined
with which she had given many evidences of a skill and courage recklessness even
—in horsemanship, which, mingling with her personal attractions, had enlisted
everyone’s warmest admiration. Susie’s heart naturally warmed towards this lady,
whose kindly disposition brought back the sunshine to Susie s life which the going
away of Mabel seemed to have withdrawn.
But this true-hearted woman was not blesssd with a good husband. Aot only
was he a drunkard— he was also a brute. His days were passed in a half-muddled
state ; he literally smoked and idled away his time, while she went busily about, hard
at work, keeping a roof over his head when otherwise he would have been houseless.
But he had no appreciation of all the excellent qualities in a wife which she possessed;
and, worse than this, his brutal nature wronged her by unmanly attentions to other
women. He swore at her upon the slightest provocation, and once he had struck
her a blow with his fist.
A husband’s drunkenness she could have borne ; but when he followed that by
personal ill-treatment and neglect of her by a dastardly familiarity with shameless
women, her gentle spirit rebelled with just repugnance of him whom she had at one
time loved. It was just after Susie went to the house that matters arrived at this
pass. About the same time a constant visitor to the hotel was observed by Susie
in the person of a gentlemanly young fellow who was engaged at business in the
city. A Strong sympathy sprang up between the landlady, Mrs. S •, and
this young man. He saw she was unhappy with her husband, and knew too well
the reason. Being single, he felt much interested in her, and this platonic attach-
ment, which it was at first, threatened to ripen into something more.
Susie, who was not slow to perceive the course affairs were taking, could hardly
blame this generally estimable lady. The husband was becoming more debauched
and drunken day by day, and his brutal nature was more and more aggravated.
He became almost a by-word in the locality, and was a mark for scorn to point its
slow and moving finger at.”
Yet Susie was not aware that any full understanding existed between Mrs.
g and the young visitor. So that it was a surprise to discover, one morning, on
going from her room, that some one had been up before her, and that the door had
been already opened. Susie ran to the mistress’s bedroom, and, seeing the landlord,
asked for Mrs. S .
With a quick wittedness he was not generally remarkable for, he caught at the
truth, and rushed about the house frantically. For once in the course of months he
was sobered ; for once he discovered what the woman’s worth had been. He felt as
though his heart had been torn from him. He rushed from the house in a purpose-
less manner, half hoping he might encounter her. His wild air, his excitement in
speaking, and the agony of mind he evinced, made him thoroughly terrible. After
rushing about in this state all day, he returned home at night exhausted and miserable,
and quite sober. No tidings had been gleaned of her beyond the fact that she


had been seen to drive away early that morning with a gentleman who waited for her
with a cab.
Susie, who had a warm regard for Mrs. S , was made very unhappy at the
turn affairs had taken. She had not guessed at the possibility of such a dinoument.
The lady was so gentle, generous, and good. Yet who could well blame her. Mar-
ried to a drunken beast who never till he had lost her had the least appreciation of
her worth, is it any wonder that her affections wandered elsewhere? Constantly
subjected to the brutal sneer, and taunting oaths even, of this man, is it strange that
her gentle nature, in spite of itself, turned to one who sympathised with her, and
around whom and herself, there gradually entertwined more tender bonds ?
This elopement left Susie the only occupant of the house save its master. He
was so utterly awestricken at the calamity that had overtaken him that he moved
.about the place like one in a dream. If he drank, it was mechanically, and drink
failed to wrap him in forgetfulness now. Susie told him she should leave, as she did
not care for the place at all now. But he begged so earnestly that she would remain,
until at least he had made other arrangements, that she consented to stay in the mean-
time.
Two or three weeks more had passed away, and Mr. S was still in ignorance
•of the whereabouts of his wife. The city of Sydney had entirely lost its charm for
kirn. He was still a drunkard, and an unhappy one. In this frame of mind he
esolved to sell the house and leave the city. He did so, and Susie had the option
of remaining with the new tenant. This, however, she did not care for, as the people
were neither highly respectable nor highly educated. And so she left, taking a lodging
in Prince’s-street.
This neighbourhood has a decidedly chaqueied aspect, but many respectable
people live in it nevertheless. Susie had acquaintances not far away, and she thought
of seeking them out to inquire for her unfortunate father, for it was now about the
period for him to regain his liberty. With this view she walked down to the house
•of an elderly woman whom she had known in her girlhood, and before her father had
. made the evil acquaintances which had led him into a lawless life. This purpose was
prompted by the girl’s natural affection for one who, whatever his faults, was her
f father. She was strongly devoted to him, and the right-minded disposition which
in spite of many evil influences had remained with her, impelled her to secure, if
possible, his speedy restoration to an honest life.
On going to this woman’s house, its inmate hardly knew Susie in the lady-like
young woman who now presented herself. “ Pretty Susie ”of two years before had
certainly not depreciated. Her lustrous eyes had lost none of their sparkle ; her
cheeks, which an indoor occupation had paled down, regained, with a few days of
leisure, their wonted rose-tints; her form was taller, and had more of womanly full-
ness, while her carriage mingled with a natural ease of movement an air one would
think could hardly have been acquired among the lawless men in whose company she
was first introduced to the reader. Her mother she had never known, and to her
early questioning of her father, she had only learned that her mother had died
when she was yet an infant.
To Susie’s inquiries now, the old woman had nothing to communicate, having
heard nothing of the father, or of Susie herself, since their house was seized and
the calamity already described fell upon the two hapless girls. She thought
it likely that he would come there to ask about his daughter, but who knows ?
A few evenings afterwards, as the young girl, in searching and inquiring for
her father, looked in at one of those low houses frequented by men and women of
more than questionable character, three men who were hustling together in a corner
of the rude bar-room attracted her attention. She had attired herself plainly that she
•.might not attract notice in these places. As she watched for a glance at their faces,


a feeling almost of certainty came upon her. Then, as one of them got up to light
his pipe, she beheld her father. Looking intently for an instant at the other
two men, she recognised his former associates who had come to the house with Mabel.
Without an instant’s thought, in her spontaneous way, she rushed into the room, and
with the one word, “ Father ! ” upon her lips, she took his hand and fell, sobbing,
upon his shoulder.
CHAPTER IX.
The genuine emotion with which Susie was folded in the embrace of her father was
new to the man. He had watched her grow up from infancy, and, prior to this two
years of estrangement, had perhaps thought less of her than she deserved; at least,
he had been too unmindful of her welfare, as he had been too reckless of his own
good name. Although he had been much stricken, when he realised, two years
before, the full extent of the disgrace and bitter shame he had brought upon the two
innocent girls, it was not until this moment that he had felt how true, touching, and
beautiful was Susie’s affection for him. In this moment remorse crowded thickly
upon him, and the crime of his life had never looked so black. Her silent tears were
like drops of molten lead upon his heart. Her every sob shot out, as it were, an
earthquake to shatter his peace of mind. Had she met him with reproaches, he had
been perhaps stolid and unbending ; but to be met thus, more as though she had
been the offender than he, broke down his pride and filled him with tenderest love
for his faithful daughter.
At length, unable to bear the mingled pleasure and pain which the sudden meet*
ing caused him, he passionately raised her head, and, gazing steadfastly into her
lovely face, fervently kissed her. Her hat had escaped from her in the excitement,
and her dark, dishevelled hair was streaming over her shoulders. Her eyes, red with
tears, opened upon her father with such an eloquence of filial duty and devotion, that
even those two men, hardened aad steeped in crime as they were, turned away, no
longer able to look unmoved upon a sight pourtraying so reproachfully to them this
bright spot upon the human heart, i
“ Oh, father,” presently murmured Susie, “how glad lam to find you. I was
afraid you had left Sydney, and without looking for me.”
“ Susie,” he replied, “ I had not the courage to seek you out, so much has the
wrong I did you, together with my own disgrace, unmanned me.”
“ Do not speak of it, father ; but I am sure you were never so bad as in the
eyes of the law you seemed to be: but for the persuasion of those two men there, of
such evil omen upon our lives, this great calamity had never overtaken us. Oh, why
are you even now with them ? ”
“ Susie,” he replied, “that I am with them now is no great wonder, since we
have been so much together of late years —you know what I mean,” said he, looking
sharply at his fellow associates. “But that’s at an end! I’ve just dis-
covered I have a daughter still—a hundred times more prized than when her worth
was so indistinct to my clouded brain.”
“ Oh, damn all that,” said one, “ and let’s finish our drinks ! ”
“ And the fresh villany we were hatching, eh ? No ! I have something better
to live for—look at her ! Is not that enough to stay the father in his lawless career—
is it not enough to stay even you in the new crime, in which I too, had she ■-been an
hour later, had again dyed my conscience with ? ”
“ Oh, if that’s how you’re going to cut with old pals, maybe you’ll blab too. We
thought you’d come under when business was to be done ; but if you pipe the peeler
on us, I’ll double you up like an old hen with the cramp ! ”
“ Father —father, come from this place —do I ”


But he turned his eyes upon Bill, who had spoken. “ You double me up ! Look
here, Bill—l’ve been quiet with you two, but I was never false or cowardly. You
think because I’ve been easily led that I’m afraid of you—as much afraid,
perhaps you think, as you were when your hand lighted on the chill girl hiding
beneath the wharf. You’re mistaken—yet I’ve done with you. Let us pass ! ”
“ Take that —curse you—and pass away to h —ll ! ” and the man struck a blow at
him with a short heavy stick. The blow was intended for his head, but by a quick
grasp of Susie’s the aim was diverted and its force checked. Her father then made
a lunge at him with his fist, and, dealing him a powerful blow, laid him at his feet.
Susie had seized a chair, aud stood before the other man, threatening to strike ff he
moved. At this moment the landlord appeared, together with a number of other
people, who were well known to the initiated as thieves, prostitutes, and beggars, and
the door, was closed to shut out the police. Bill got up menacingly, and made
to renew the attack, but the thick, crooked form of the landlord interposed, and a
further conflict was prevented.
The company in which Susie now found herself seemed to her of the most
dangerous type. The landlord himself , was a man of sinister and forbidding
aspect. His body was knarled and knotty ; his shoulders were uneven, and the
pose of his head had a list. But an immense strength lurked in those misshapen
limbs, and his grip was not to be made light of. One of the ol hers had one arm
only ; his clothes were old and dirty, while with the one hand he had he kept up an
unpleasant habit of scratching himself in every possible direction. On his uncombed
and rather carotty head rested a brimless hat, if it could be called a hat. Susie at once
recognised this man (and so may you) as one she had seen on the Racecourse, begging. She
had seen him accost people for money, while a shorter man, who was now in the room,
waited for him. Obtaining money from one man, they had both made up Market-
Street, and as she was also going in that direction, in search for her father, she had
observed them enter the Hotel, and call for beer. Among the women
was an old decrepit woman she had also seen in the streets ol Sydney begging. Her
clothes were a quilting of dirty rags, laid one upon another without any attempt to
form distinctive garments, and were drawn in and kept together at the waist by a
ragged scarf. She had a quick, biting way of speaking, and, ragged and loathsome
as she was, had some influence with that sickening crew. Even the younger men
and women wore ,a most unwholesome appearance, and the finery of the latter was
torn and faded.
They gazed with surprise on Susie, who, abashed almost at her boldness
a minute before, now crept up to her father’s side. He had kept his feet, but some
of them were occupying the rude seats which the room afforded. The landlord was
the first to question, and he did so in a way peculiar to himself.
“ What the h —ll’s all this d trouble about —do you want to fill the place
with traps —blast you ? ”,
“It’s that white-feather peacher,” retorted Bill, “with the gal there. He’s
piling it on, now he’s got the gal to make the greed.”
On hearing that imputation on his daughter, the father’s spirit fired again, and
he dashed forward to seize the ruffian by the throat ; but several of the group jumped
up and interposed, and Susie clung to him so, that he was rendered powerless, and
could only hiss between his teeth, “You destroying hound ! would you dare injure
her?" tit nt box n-»w. ®» djpmna Hm |i si
“Father,” implored Susie, “becalm, and let us go —it is past midnight.”
“Oh, there’s no fear of getting run in, is there?” asked he of the one arm,
at the same time giving himself a scratch ; “ain’t nobody a-going to “shout” arterall
this ere hexcitement ? ”


A murmur of approbation of this timely thought of the frowsy individual passed
through the room, and somehow all eyes turned upon Susie, who was certainly, from
her appearance, best able to do so. Unseen by her father, she put down a coin
before the landlord, when the frowsy gentleman, with his one hand scratching like
a steam engine, cried, “Hurrah ! it’ll go a supper too!” The prospect of this
little diversion set everyone in a better humour, and even Susie discovered herself
smiling, while her father, who had eaten nothing since noon, was not altogether
averse to the proceeding, and so, as these people would not hear of their going, they
half consented to remain.
This public-house was not remarkable for any singular luxuries in the culinary
department ; nor, for that matter, were the guests accustomed much to luxuries in
the ordinary acceptation of the term, and all were more or less familiar with hardship
and vice, even to Susie herself. But what the meagre larder afforded was brought in.
A piece of beef was the staple object of attraction, for, as suppers were not uncom-
mon there, a cold joint of some weight was usually on hand. Then there was bread
and cheese, and also that savoury esculent, the onion. To this sumptuous repast
a dozen of the oddest people Sydney could furnish sat down at the coarse uncovered
table, the young girl and her father taking seats apart. Then each was supplied with a
glass of beer or other drink, and for an hour at least in their lives these people
seemed oblivious of their cares. They rattled the blunt cuttlery and joked upon the
unwonted enjoyment of their stomachs. The one-armed man, between the stratches,
even attempted a gallant compliment to Susie —who, however, only looked surprised.
Her father said little, and both were anxious to get away, when they could do so
without exciting the ill-feeling of the more demonstrative of the men and women
around them. Two or three rounds of drinks, paid for by putting a hat upon the
table, and anyone putting in what he chose or could afford, followed upon the supper-
and one or two of the company were getting hilarious. At this juncture, the clock
striking two, Susie and her father rose to leave the house. But Bill had not yet
digested the affront he had received, and drink having emboldened him, he gave
the pair an unmistakable sneer, aud muttered something about “the funky peacher!’’
A consideration for Susie alone withheld the father’s hand ; but when that was
followed by the remark, “You’d better stay another hour—it’s too late for the gal
.to do anything ! ” his passion was wholly aroused, and he made for Bill, knocking
him down like a calf. The other mate then made a rush at him ; but Susie, in her
strong love for her father, boldly seized hold of the villain, and got a blow in the face
But still she clung to him, to keep him off, while some ran to lift up the
prostrate man, and the women shrieked. This last was unlucky, for it alarmed the
police. While the landlord was seizing hold of the girl’s father, and the disorder
was at its highest pitch, the police thundered at the outside. The publican went to
the door, and Susie, whose clothes were half torn from her, saw the decrepit woman
beckoning her towards the back door. Without a moment’s hesitation, she whispered
in her father’s ear, “ Come ! ” and glided toward the woman, holding her father by
the hand. The woman had the back door open, and as father and daughter glided
through the police entered at the front door.
They found themselves in a lane. Indeed, it was one which by the evidenc* of
the police has been proven to be a den of thieves and prostitutes. They hesitated for
a few uncertain moments. Then, upon going forward, Susie thought she detected
a shadow in the darkness. The next moment she felt a heavy blow, and became
insensible.
The old hag had basely lured them into a trap. Bill and his mate, stung with
disappointed rage, were seen to follow them quickly. Susie was struck and fell into
her father’s arms, but the next instant he himself was felled to the ground.
When the chill air of the nighthad brought the girl back to life, still hardly to


consciousness, she was sensible of a stiffness in all her limbs, as though she were
frozen. It was yet dark—the night was a dark one- and the stillness of the tomb
seemed to have fallen upon the earth. Nearly all her clothing was stripped from
her, and her little purse had been torn from her bosom. She stretched out her hands,
and they touched only upon the cold earth. A sudden terror took possession of her ;
she felt all about her —she half raised herself from the ground ; then gazed about
intently and with a terrified heart —her father was not there!
CHAPTER X.
It was with mingled feelings of shame and terror that Susie, as she recovered from
the effects of the cowardly blow which had lain her prostrate and senseless in the
lane, rose to her feet. As already stated, half her clothes had been torn from her,
and her father, with whom she had been on the point of escaping from the infamous
den in which she had found him, was no longer near her. In her trepidation, chilled
as she was by the cold night air, with darkness shrouding every object around her,
she knew not where to turn for safety. But notwithstanding the great disaster which
had overtaken the young girl, her most acute fears were for her father, whose
unaccountable disappearance wore so ominous an aspect to her troubled mind *
she could not even compose herself for a moment to reflect.
It was purely upon impulse that she crept along the lane to the back of the
•public-house. Here, too, all was dark, and as she listened at the door and window
no sound was audible save the heavy breathing of men and women asleep within.
Then she looked peeringly at the low-roofed hovels adjacent, and listened by their
doors and gazed over the dilapidated fencing, but could perceive nor hear anything
of wak'ng life. The night was so far advanced now that even that howling, offensive
spot was hushed. Going to the corner, the measured tread of a policeman fell upon
her ear ; but, in her nervousness and fear lest further harm might come to her father,
she was afraid to seek his protection, and shrunk back into the lane. Again she
'glided hither and thither, with an undefined instinct that he for whom she searched
must be somewhere near. Just as she was growing sick at heart from her hitherto fruit-
less search, and was almost benumbed with cold, her quick ear caught a half inaudible
groan. It seemed to come from inside the broken fencing, and she glided quickly but
cautiously to the spot.
Her eyes, now accustomed to the darkness, quickly discerned the prostrate
form of a man, from whom anon came a low moaning. With an instant conviction
that it must be her father, she darted to his side, and recognised him. She took his
bleeding head between her hands, and kissed him with a fervency that such a situation
•could alone exact. His hair was matted with blood from his wound, and the red
stain touched disagreeably upon her white hands. She let his head rest upon her
knee, and whispered anxiously in his ear. Then she chafed his hands, and breathed
upon his lips, and clung to him in her dread lest consciousness should not return.
Her efforts were not unsuccessful, and ke at length opened his eyes wonderingly,
and turned them upon her. His ideas were confused, and he did not at
first realise anything. She spoke to him tenderly, and endeavoured to raise him to
his feet. For a while her attempts were almost useless; but, as the circulation of
blood infused fresh life into his limbs, he grew stronger, and, as yet unable to speak,
he feebly clasped his daughter to his arms.
He was much hurt, having received a heavy blow upon the head, and, in falling,
his shoulder had been much bruised. He also felt bruises all over his legs and body,
as though he had been kicked and cudgelled, as indeed he knew he had been, and
that by his former mates, whose revengeful spirit had been so conspicuous during the


night. After having assaulted him, they had evidently dragged him to the more
obscure spot where Susie had discovered him, while there is hardly less probability
that the old woman had robbed Susie of her purse and outer clothing. Her father
had had no money, and his clothes were hardly worth stealing had that been the
object of the assault, which he was persuaded it was not.
As soon as he realised the true state of affairs, he took off his top coat and
wrapped it about Susie. They hastened away from the lane, and the girl walked
mechanically in the direction of her lodging. She could gain admittance, but what
was to become of her father ? She could not take him into the house, and yet she-
would not leave him. And so they walked and walked till the day gave the first indi-
cations of its coming, when the girl entered the dwelling, saying to her father that
he must remain near at hand, and as soon as the people of the house were up
she would see if accommodation could be provided for him also.
Susie entered her humble abode as quietly as possible, and fortunately without
being observed in the grey of the early morning. Hastening upstairs to her little
room, she felt a great relief, naturally, at having gained its privacy, undetected, in her
half-dressed condition and beneath her father’s great-coat, which fortune had luckily
placed at their disposal. She then washed and redressed herself, so that by the time
her landlady had risen she presented her usual appearance ; and as the landlady was
in the habit of retiring early she knew not but her lodger had returned home the
previous evening before the night had grown very late : nor was it desirable that she
should be enlightened.
Susie acquainted her with the coming of her father to Sydney, and, in reply to
her inquiries, was glad to learn that he could be accommodated with a room
in the house, so that they could live together. She had* five or six pounds saved,
and on that they could, if need be, manage to live for a month. On this understand-
ing she hurried out to her father, and with him first went to a chemist’s to dress the
wound he had received, and then went to a restaurant to breakfast.
They now felt at ease, and even happy. The dangerous incidents of the cold
night, now that the bright and hopeful sun was smiling upon them, lost much of their
terror. They were happy to be alone with each other, they had so much to say
and to ask, and so much to plan for the future. Their breakfast over, they returned,
purchasing on the way a few necessary articles of apparel for the father, who was now
about to commence a new life. He had never been accustomed to laborious work,
but, possessing as he did a strong and-well-knit frame, he resolved that any work
should be acceptible. He had realised all at once such a treasure in this devoted and
noble-hearted girl that he really felt himself entering on a life more promising
and happy, and to brighten under, than anything he had felt since he had lain Susie’s
mother, a young and gentle woman who for him had left friends and everything behind
her in Englhnd— since he had lain her in the quiet tomb. That day, indeed, had been
sad to him. Coming to a new country as he had done with his young wife, and having
no family connections here, their love had strengthened upon each other tenfold for
having no other course to flow in. Then Susie was born, and their infant seemed like
anew sun to shine upon their little household. But the mother of the babe was
weakly, and less than a year after her confinement her state of health had alarmed
the affectionate husband. Notwithstanding the best medical advice he could procure,
she gradually became more and more enfeebled ; at last, a pulmonary disease which
deep hold of her at home at last bore her to the grave. That loss had made him
a changed man. His wife he had held more dear than aught else this world could
grant, or, as it seemed to him, heaven itself could promise. He had lost her—he
had lost everything. The tranquillity of his mind was gone. Life seemed valueless
—without a bright spot upon its horizon. For years he fought with the dread
and oppressive feeling which weighed down his heart. The infant life which heaven


had given him was not enough, and much as he then loved his little daughter, the
wife and mother was still the absorbing vision ever present to his mind. He held
a situation then, and had a housekeeper to nurse the little girl. But as time went on
he became addicted to drink, and a few years before this history commences he had
found himself thrown out of employment through it. He was not a rising man.
He felt this, and very few there are who, slaves to the intoxicating glass, do not.
He obtained work again, however, but did not improve his habits or his company.
His employment was not regular now, and he found it difficult to pay his way at
times. Then he received a couple of hundred pounds from home. Most of this
he spent before he well knew he had it; with what he had left, on the advice of a
dear friend—dear in more senses than one—he bought into the public-house which
he occupied at the opening of this story, when Susie was a well-grown girl.
Susie is not at this later period of the story regarded as a mere matter of course.
They have been separated for two years, and they have met under circumstances that
would touch the heart of the most unimpressionable being. A new life seems opening
to them both.
During this time of Susie’s search, Hubert was in the country—surveying, in
fact, and it may be added that he was advancing rapidly in this new profession of his.
He was not likely to be much in Sydney for some time, even if he did not find him-
self as near to Melbourne, and go there in preference. He was often thinking of
Mabel. It was not that he was weakly in love with her. In their youth he had
felt that more impassioned devotion which only youth can feel. It had been checked
by her own though not altogether culpable acts. But she would not deceive
anyone. She had come to the country betrothed to him : rather than deceive him on
arrival as to her innocence, she had cast from her all her hopes of happiness as a
wife, and, pursued by disastrous circumstances, had even fallen to the lowest ebb of a
woman’s life. Yet withal it had been a constant spirit of self sacrifice, rather than
she would deceive or dishonor him by not avoiding the alliance. No doubt her sin
had grown upon her, but she had been in every case the victim of circumstance.
Her desire always to do what was right and good was clear to anyone who knew
her well, and Hubert had known her from a school-girl. The purer emotions of the
human heart had never been absent from her bosom. She was capable of the keenest
friendship, and, once beside her parents, her filial love was boundless.
Hubert thought of her pretty much as he knew her to be. His love had not
been given to another ; if he did not love her, he fervently admired many traits in
her character, and since he had seen her restored to her parents, he felt sure of the
future rectitude of her life. But he was aware that besides an opinion that she
would disgrace a man by marrying him, her pride, by no means as a rule objection-
able, would make her hesitate as well.
Mabel, with her mother and father, arrived safely at Melbourne. For the first
few weeks they lived in furnished apartments. Then Mr. Escott bought a small
farm, which his experience and knowledge eminently fitted him to manage, some
fifty miles from Melbourne. This quiet country life suited him now that he was
advancing in years, and both his wife and Mabel liked the retirement which a rural
fcfe in Australia affords. A peaceful calm now shed its soothing influence over their
days. Rising early as was their wont, the cheerful prospect which greeted them upon
those fine mornings was laden with brightness and hope. The past—the unpleasant
past—was by degrees disappearing before the new occupation, simple associations,
and healthful work of their present lives.
Mabel, never from any natural inclination giddy, was now quiet and contented.
It was ever a pleasure to her to reflect that she still possessed the affection of her
parents, notwithstanding what she had done to forfeit it. This dark chapter in ker
life seemed, indeed, to link them closer together, and to touch their words with


a kindness they would not else have borne with them, and Mabel, in a sort of con-
scientious atonement, felt that she could not be too mindful of her duty to her parents
and of a sincere penitence and goodness of heart.
In this homely manner the first twelve months passed away without anything
occurring to break the even tenor of their life. Hubert had of course written
frequently to Mr. Escott, who had felt a pleasure in replying to him. Susie had
once written to Mabel, who had replied in the most affectionate terms. No other
letter coming, she had again written, but had received no answer. This silence was
perplexing, and Mabel, who entertained a warm friendship for Susie, asked her
father to make inquiries of Hubert regarding her.
Mabel’s feelings towards Hubert were difficult to express clearly. There is no
doubt that she had loved him as only youth, in its first experience, could love.
But there had been so many conflicting passions since that she could hardly analyse
her own heart. In good truth, she had been endeavouring to wean her heart from
him, but with what success it must be said was doubtful even to herself. Certain it
is, she loved none other. But still she bravely eudeavoured to suppress any tender-
ness her heart might entertain for him, and fully resolved, in her own philosophy, that
she could never marry. Her pride was opposed to what might be considered a
humiliation, but, apart from that, notwithstanding the chastening influences of the
past twelve months, she keenly felt that she was not the pure woman which as a bride
she should be. She had argued this matter with herself time and again, and, with
no dearth of suitors, even in the retirement of the farm, had decided that she could
never marry!
CHAPTER XI.
It was on a bright afternoon, some eighteen months after they had settled into the
quiet of a country life, that Mabel was walking thoughtfully over the farm, the
• deep reverie in which she was plunged rendering her unobservant, and perhaps
throwing a shade of melancholy upon her gentle features. As she approached the
hedge which bordered a grazing paddock, she was too much absorbed to notice the
approach of a horseman, who had just come upon the noiseless grass from the opposite
side. He, too, seemed to take little notice of anything, and permitted his horse,
with loosened rein, to have altogether its own way. He had not noticed the figure
of a lady before him. As she turned through the open gate, the horseman was but
a few yards away. Their eyes met, and as instantly recognised. Hubert (for it
was he) dismounted and approached her. This sudden appearance had startled
Mabel, whom seclusion had made more timid than formerly, and, as is usually the
■ case with the penitent and contrite heart, especially in woman, she was humbled too.
She held out her hand to Hubert with some trepidation, but in his joy at seeing her
amid such peaceful surroundings—and she looked so womanly too—his arm somehow,
in a brotherly spirit as he said, found its way around her waist as he greeted her.
“Why, Mabel,” said he, cheerfully, “how well a country life becomes your
I had almost expected to find you fading, like an autumn rose ; but I see you looking
better than ever, and exactly as I could wish.”
“ Yes ?” half shyly interrogated Mabel. But lam so glad to see you, Hubert,
for you know I have no brother.”
Each endeavoured to seem unconcerned before the other, and rather to appear
as friends or brother and sister; but beneath this seeming lightness of feeling a deeper
sentiment lurked, and Hubert suddenly broke the innocent deception
“To be as a brother to you, Mabel, is a great pleasure indeed. But I have deter-
mined to be something more—Mabel, will you marry ”
“You forget, Hubert, what you are about to ask—you forget,” said she,
piteously, “ what T am !”


“ What you have been I may forget, as I hope I shall; but what you cite, it fills
me with rapture to contemplate, in contrast with what, O God, you were ! *■’
“ Hubert, it is folly for us to speak of marrying—l am not fit to be your wife ! ”
“ Mabel, my girl,” said he, “ there is nothing more beautiful in this world than
a woman who, having erred, is seen, as I see thee, in all the goodness of a penitent
heart. I have studied your character from early youth, and know it almost as well as
yourself. In your present life —for nearly two years past —you have lived as some-
thing more than a virtuous woman. From one to whom vice was familiar, you have
become penitent and Christian, and have, as I believe, a goodness of heart and a present
set purpose in life it were difficult to equal in your most prudent women.”
“I do not deserve your esteem —indeed Ido not! I forfeited all claim to it
and hope of it. I should disgrace you ! ”
“ Had I offered to marry you in Sydney, before your father found you, it would
not have been estimable on my part. At that time I endeavoured to bury the love
which had been so strong in me, and succeeded, indeed, so well as to cease to regard
you with any more than a brother’s interest. But since I left you, though unseen by
vou or your parents, I have several times been near at hand. I have seen you busy
£p work upon the farm, in the village church, at school, and with acquaintances of
the village. I wished to satisfy myself that you were as good as I firmly believed
you had become. In my disguise, I also heard that your society had been sought
after by many worthy people, and that more than one reputable young fellow had
offered you marriage. But you declined these offers, though none here need ever
know your past history. Why did you refuse them ? ”
“ Now that I have become honest, Hubert, I could not consent to lower myself
still further in my own estimation by practising deceit, and I could not tell them of
my shame, nor allow my parents to do so, and disgrace them : besides ”
“Besides what?”
Mabel blushed with some consciousness, and the eagerness with which he spoke-
confused her Her eyes fell upon the ground, and she was silent.
She was more than usually humbled in the presence of Hubert. She had to-
acknowledge to herself that he possessed an influence over her in her secret thoughts
no other had ever held. She felt that it was to him that she would rather look for
sympathy than to anyone. If she were to marry, whom could she possibly love more
than him ? And then her life was familiar to him : there was no confession to make.
That he was too generous a man ever to hint at matters that were past, she very well
knew. Even in the contingency of a disagreement, if such a thing should be, she was
persuaded that, having taken her when knowing all, he would never dream of upbraid-
ing her, and so compromising his own self esteem. If she were his wife, he would
be as mindful of her honour as his own.
Not a woman lives but wishes to be a wife. A girl who has made a false step,
and ruined her hopes of wifely respectability, is stricken with the reality of her loss.
When, with the lapse of a year or two, she looks back upon her misguided folly, and
a sort of hopelessness for the future takes possession of her, there is no condition of
life which looks so truly desirable, and yet is as truly impossible of attainment to
many, as that of respected wifehood.
The conflicting emotions which now filled the bosom of poor Mabel were pain-
fully apparent to Hubert. He felt that the truly contrite girl by his side had for two
years daily, hourly made atonement for the sin for which woman must sooner or later
so much suffer. It seemed to him that under such circumstances it would be too
exacting, and even unmanly, to feel reproachfully towards her. He 'ooked upon her,
indeed, as a girl who had been tried sternly in life, and had at length, by an innate


goodness of nature, risen superior to vice, and had become, in the dignity of that
goodness, a woman worthy any man’s admiration and love.
Mabel was now but little over twenty ; added to her fine features, with a slightly
pale cast of thought, was a grace and dignity of carriage which few ladies could excel.
Hubert, it must be confessed, looked upon the girl beside him with sentiments both
generous and fervent. The love he had formerly felt for her seemed as strong, and
added to it was a maturer affection, and a just sympathy for a penitent and lovely
woman.
He gently drew her closer to his side, and, touched by an uncontrollable emotion
which seemed to eddy between them both, he looked into her eyes for the love which,
wholly from a consciousness of being undeserving, she had endeavoured to suppress.
Their lips met —met for the first time since they had exchanged their vows at home,
and as she turned her face upon his shoulder, he fervently whispered, “ And you will
be my wife, Mabel ? ”
There was no answer, but her silence was more eloquent than words. She
leaned upon his manly form as though the happiness of that moment was more to her
than all the world beside. Her dream of the future—that future which had appeared
to her in her dreams during the best part of two years, but only to be dispelled by a
waking reality and a cooler judgment, had now opened before her in all its happiness
and bright promise of a happy realisation.
The happy pair talked —though not much either, and only at intervals—till the
sun blushed upon the western sky, and made all nature radiant upon that summer
day. As evening closed upon the scene so beautifully impressed upon the heart of
these two young people, they moved away towards the farmhouse. Hubert, remem-
bering his horse, took off the saddle, and left him to graze in the paddock.
Mabel’s father and mother were not a little surprised on seeing Hubert walk in
with their daughter. They saw at the same time that something unusual had passed
between them, and even saw a tear struggling against the smiles of the girl. Hubert
was not long explaining the case. It was a double pleasure to them to learn that
Hubert intended to settle near the old people too. He had had some luck lately ;
he had been for several years successful both in business and as a surveyor. Pie had
enough to buy a farm or go into trade ; probably he would, with Mabel as a help-
mate, prefer the former.
A fortnight after this brightest chapter in Mabel’s life had opened upon her,
the little township was enlivened by a wedding. It was a great day at the farm, and
the hearty hospitality of its owners stamped itself upon the recollections of many who
visited there that day. It was indeed a happy day. More than one fair girl looked
with approval upon the lusty bridegroom, and the handsome and graceful bride was
not looked upon without admiration either. The gentlemen at whose hands she
had been offered a similar honour, seeing now the reason, no longer wondered.
Mabel and Hubert were happy. Mabel had been sought by the man of her
choice—he was her husband —he was to be the father of her children. Hubert had
led to the altar a'girl whom he now believed to be one with as many excellencies as
could be found in a woman. He believed in her, and loved her. The parents were
hardly less happy. Mabel had been their constant care from infancy, and their fond-
est hope. They had ever esteemed and loved Hubert; but they had given up all
idea of his wedding their daughter. As a matter of delicacy they had not pressed
him to visit them. But no fond father and mother were ever more joyed to see their
daughter married to a man than they were to see Mabel and Hubert united. They
indeed looked upon him as a son. And when he bought a half share in the farm
and added a hundred acres to it, building a house for himself and wife, there were
hardly four happier people beneath the bright Australian sun than this little family


But what of poor Susie ? She had not been heard of since the first letter was
received from her, nor had Hubert been to Sydney more than once to find her; on
that occasion he had been unsuccessful. Susie’s history, indeed, deserves a separate
story, and as we have left Mabel happily married and her story closed, the indulgent
reader may, if he chooses, follow in future pages, “Susie’s Fate.”
(The End).
A Shameless Widow.
" Ah ! ah ! are you honest ?
Are you fair ? ’ ’
“ Such an act,
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty ;
Calls virtue hypocrite ; takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
And sets a blister there ; makes marriage vows
False as dicers’ oaths.”— Hamlet.
Come, Widow, fat and fair, and if not forty, yet of years enough — appear ! I want
a word with thee. This page shall show your ways, which savour too much of
early and unrestrained youth. Now—
. . . . “ Peace, sit you down,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff.”
There she stands, like Hamlet’s mother, her husband “ but two months dead ; ”
but, far worse than Hamlet’s mother, the whole town may revel in this woman’s
embrace. Her sighs are to be bought; a price is set upon her smiles ; her whole
being is in the market, like other carrion. If I withhold her name, it is from
respect to her late husband. What an acquisition to the decaying Cafe Blonde, a
Pandemonium to which she has so often added her prostituted shape.
Her figure is not tall by any means, and, as I have said, by no means slender.
Her air and gait, though puffed up with an assumption of dignity, lacks the honest
bearing of a true woman. Her late husband, doubly glad to be rid of one so
unworthy the confidence of any man, shifted off this mortal coil in disgust. It
was something gained to escape—
“ Those bloodless lips, by every vice defiled,
Where Sin has marked her for her only child.”
Who would think that a woman, burying her husband as it were to-day, could
throw herself upon the hell-begotten market of the Cafes within the brief space of
two months—before her suits of woe had well felt the sun —before a blade of grass
had shot up from the obscure mound which covered his remains. Yet there she is,
in mourning still—think of the mockery of it—offering her embraces —and cheap-
ening them too —to any buyer she may happen upon : sbe who had vowed to honor
a husband, but who, now that he be dead, holds out his name at the mercy of every
sneering lip, and puts it upon the tip of every bitter tongue.
“You go not yet till I have set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.”
What shame will a woman not sometimes cast herself into ? What disgrace and
infamy will she not defy ? A highwayman who daringly takes a purse at the pistol’s
muzzle, were honest to her : he does not make half the sacrifice that you women do who
barter away your honour and your body and soul upon the altar of vice. But you are


not the credulous girl led up to the brink of ruin by the honeyed words of a seducer.
The intensity of passion no longer surges like a wave through your form, and offers
excuse for the sacrifice of anything. And in a country such as this, you, who are
not ignorant of its ways, cannot even plead the excuse of poverty. A living were
easy enough made, had you the industry to work for it. There may be many excuses
for younger and inexperienced ones, who are naturally more giddy and more easily
won over to this gayety, which should mock at thee. They throw away the brightest
though unreflecting hours of their lives ; you, with a judgment and years matured,
are past all that, and are but a libel on all that’s womanly.
A Life Sketch of Billy Hogan
WORTH £30,000 ONE DAY—A FORGER IN DARLINGHURST
ANOTHER.
The name of Billy Hogan is familiar to more than one circle of society in Sydney.
It is singularly familiar to sporting gentlemen, with some of whom, indeed, those
two words have been—to quote from the greatest of immortal poets —“ familiar in
their mouths as household words. ” He was a man of large fortune, and is a native
of Sydney. Certain members of the Sporting Ring have cause for regret that his
possessions were not greater, that they might longer have held out to him the deceit-
ful bait; and many a boon companion in the sunny times of pleasure sighs over
departed luxuries enjoyed at his expense ; while fair courtezans group together to
mingle their lingering memories of his lost attentions, and pearly tears tremble upon
the eyelash as they whisper the sad end of his swift and prodigal career.
His pedigree, though not illustrious, is pure. His sire was of the well-known
firm of Caragher and Hogan. Their soap and candle works, which were situated
in that not unfamiliar section of Sydney known as “The Rocks,” will be remem-
bered by many residents of the city; and no doubt the firm have possessed an interest
for some others, who have participated, directly or indirectly, in the profits of “ The
Works.” In view of the moral darkness and the abundance of dirt in the neighbour-
hood, a soap and candle factory should have been considered a boon it were a pity to
see withdrawn. But the old gentleman discharged his last debt to Nature, and was
no more.
To his promising son Will he bequeathed over cash and real property.
Now, William, or, as he was familiarly styled, Billy, had heart enough, like many
more who ‘ ‘ go crooked, ” to think at first more of his deceased father than of the fortune.
But when the shock of his bereavement had worn off, Billy, who had never possessed
so much money before (or since, it is needless to add), leaped upon a determination
that he would enjoy life, and tore away on his reckless course upon the uncurbed steed
of Pleasure, which bore him through as many adventures in the time as did Rosi-
nante bear his gallant master, the Spanish Don.
At the first halting place, he very naturally fell in love. The wisdom of this
step on the part of any hero is always questionable, as it is impossible that a man can
remain a hero in the eyes of a wife any more than to a valet. But he found love too
agreeable to discard it, and so married, settling on the fair partner of his joys cer-
tain property. Billy at this time had a dash about him, though he never caught the
true air of a genuine knight. What is usually termed “ side ” was not conspicuous
by its absence, and he had already engaged in various eccentricities more honoured
in the breach than the observance. Perhaps a good deal of this “side” of his character
was attributable to his becoming so superfluously rich. The bride, then, could not
be strictly considered fortunate in her choice. She is the daughter ©f Mr. Anderson,
piano-maker, late of George-street.
This alliance provided for Billy much better society than he was accustomed to
in the billiard saloons and sporting gatherings. The lady’s brother, indeed, was the
great pianist who played to Madame di Murska, and afterwards married that dis-
tinguished artiste. He did not, though, survive long to enjoy the union : in a few
short months he was laid in the quiet grave, to join four other devoted husbands who
had set loose the holy bonds by wholly shuffling off this mortal coil. But again, in
a most courageous spirit, the lady has married : this sixth time a Mr. Hill, a gentleman
who is now described as the merest shadow of his former seif.


To return to Billy Hogan, whose alliance with Miss Anderson introduced him
to such famous society. The thousands which he found himself possessed of looked
as though they would last for ever. This hobby-horse of pleasure swept him into
a whirl of extravagance and fast living, and he lavished his patrimony alike upon
friends, parasites, and courtezans. He, or his money, found plenty of flatterers.
Going recklessly into horse-racing, he became owner of Lady Clifton ; and though
she won him the Sydney Ledger, beating Tail’s Florence, she proved altogether
the most expensive lady of them all, for about one event he dropped fsooo on her.
The drinks are not yet invented that could produce oblivion to such a loss as that ; so
after trying, fruitlessly, a good many, he went home, describing in his irregular
course the letter S about every ten yards, and on reaching his domiciliary retreat
plunged his diminished head into a band-box, where it remained undisturbed till
rosy morn —a very rosy morn. ,
He also owned, with a propriety one cannot help admiring, “The Fool,”
trotting mare. The old saw, that “ a fool and his money are soon parted,” held
good in the case of the sanguine Billy. He constantly illustrated the case of a man
having more money than brains; and the Betting Ring having promptly discovered
it, he was “lambed down” in the shortest possible time. His tips were astray —
his losses followed fast one upon another, until he became involved. Then a ray of
wisdom all of a sudden penetrated to his brairr: he discerned, in the flash of a second,
that he, and not the mare, was “ The Fool ” about most events he had obligations for.
He also discovered, without any difficulty though, facilities for hazard-ous
gaming, and some other games, all of which tended in the same way to impoverish
and demoralise him. This infatuated gambler, who has squandered a large fortune,
is now seen madly hoping to win it back by the desperate chance of gaming; and
while he can scare up a sovereign or a crown, he will game it, though he hasn’t a
shirt between his shivering form and threadbare coat. Humanity must and does
sympathise with such a man, and though I write of these reverses and misfortunes
with some levity, they are no less deprecated, and the moral lesson may be
of value to many.
It had often been his wont, both for pleasure and to chase away the gloom of
his reflections —to drive away reflection altogether —to revel with “concubines and
carnal com panic.” Indeed, the allurements of those smiling, immoral creatures
entangled him, as they will do, still further in the meshes of staylaces and ruin.
His wife was neglected, and his home robbed of its peace and attractiveness by his
insufferable folly and dissipation. Then he was reduced to the extremity of accepting
some humble situation, and the Registrar-General’s office absorbed him. Before
long, however, people imagined a distillery had been started there; and so, the
office finding him unpalatable, threw him up, and Jonah himself was not in a more
unenviable plight. His full habit of life, so easily acquired, was not so easily
shaken off. He suffered other inconveniences. His “ friends ” dropped from him
like water ; they seemed without the remotest speculation as to his identity even. The
lowest of his associates alone knew him now, and he might more profitably have
been unknown by them but for the soothing effects of one “Johnny Warder” rubbing
against another. Perhaps, too, he thought he detected coldness in some who should
hardly have changed, but who in reality may have reflected back his own manner. A
man sometimes shuns the world without knowing it, and seeing his own coldness as
in a glass, he believes all the world agree in shunning him.
The downhill course with which he had become familiar was now accelerated.
His fortune squandered ; his home dissipated and thrown madly away for the empty
nothingness of gaming and the affected endearments of heartless women of pleasure,
who had smiled upon him only while a sov. remained, he now grew despondent and
reckless to the last degree.
Lower and lower in the world’s esteem he sank. Gloomier and more gloomy
became the outlook for the future. Hopeless and more hopeless was every link
which held him to the earth. Discarded by relatives who had for years patiently
borne with his madcap follies and spendthrift debaucheries ; lost to wife and home —
for which he had exchanged the degradation of public-house corners and the com-
pany of wretched, dirty, loafing men—he shrunk into nothingness beneath dirt and
misery. In the morning, he would shake himself from his troubled dreams, and,
wonderingly regarding his soiled and meagre garments, think that he must still
be dreaming, for surely Fortune had not played him so foul a trick ? But.it was too
true —he was down on the “bedrock.” He no doubt thought how much happier he
had been as a schoolboy with an occasional shilling than as a man with a fortune;
how much more pleasure in those days, with games that cost nothing, than he had
known amid pleasures that had cost him everything !


And so the ruined man sped on. If the poor fellow could find a comfort in
the glass, the glass could hardly hurt him now, for the goal of a career embracing
all that is to be blamed and pitied had been reached ; there was no further to go
—except one more step —that of making himself a criminal. And at last we see
this final step taken, and he standing in the felon’s dock.
This is thus far the finishing stroke to his misspent fortune and his misspent
life. He has been convicted, on the most conclusive evidence, of forging a cheque
for a pound, on which he received a miserable ss. A crime for so small a sum by
one who had had so much ! Justice must not consider that, and he is sentenced to
two years’ imprisonment! There is here a lesson in life which arrests the attention
of everyone, and what it teaches in a moral and social way may be profitably studied
by very many.
He is now in Darlinghurst, a wiser and a sadder, and it is to be hoped a better
man. He has plenty of time for reflection on his great failure in life ; and, though
such reflections cannot be pleasant, they may yet be profitable. He is employed
in the musical occupation of a tinsmith. Judging from the quantity of “tin” he has
handled, this apportionment of labour is singularly well chosen. The “tink, tink
may still be pleasing to his ears. But he says he misses his drinks, for there are
none there to “shout.” The smiles of his “ lemans dear’’are only present in his
dreams, but dreaming, perhaps, is the best part of his life, and at Read’s Hotel they
retire early. Whether this arrest in his career will really be attended with good, is a
matter for conjecture—none will wish but that it may be. Good fortune has in reality
been his ruin ; ill fortune may redeem him.
OUR LIVES.
BY
"ONE OF THEM.’
“ And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his music vows.”
“ No more—no more —Oh, never more, my heart,
Canst thou be my sole world, my universe ;
Once all in all, but now a thing apart,
Thou canst not be my blessing or my curse.”— Byron.
“ Soon on this unsheltered walk,
Flung to fade,- and rot, and die.”— Coleridge.
The human heart — whether it beat on some lone, unthought-of isle, washed by the
untiring waves which cut off the whole universe from its few inhabitants ; or whether
it beat, nurtured by luxury, amid the costly splendour of lordly halls ; whether it beat
under the soiled garb of shame, or beneath the silken vesture of purity —beneath the
torn and bedraggled garments of the girl, new almost to vice, whom the giddy glass has
just thrust upon the chill floor of the police cell, or beneath the pure white robe of that
other girl so gently sheltered from the lightest breath of danger or disgrace, and
blessed with everything which a civilized city offers to opulence—the human heart,
wdierever it may beat, is in its springs of emotion, hopes and disappointments, repent-
ance and remorse, the same wondrous centre of all human joys and suffering, influenced
hourly for evil or for good. But, as the mind is refined or the reverse, so is
human sensibility to happiness or suffering heightened or subdued. With many of us,
its thousand and one chords of sympathy, affection, and pleasure are constantly touched
by the events of each succeeding day; and with some, too, despair is often vibrating
through its currents. What stories would hearts tell if the thoughts and anguish
which fill many of them were reflected upon a page as my pen seeks to reflect mine.
The heartaches of many a girl, such as I, are full of days that are passed; of those earlier
-days in our mistaken lives when purity accompanied our thoughts, and our virtuous


plans for the future, and our dearest hopes. Now, remorse and despair is familiar to
us, and the most bitter misery intermittently possesses us.
Whatever we have done amiss, God knows that the sternest atonement is exacted
of U8 —by Society and by Heaven. Whether the fault may have been all our own, or
partly our own, or almost wholly another’s, the result is the same—we are to do penance,
and sometimes with the consciousness that there was an uncharitable design, deep
enough, in one who was regarded as a man of truth. Thus does misfortune come.
And while we are descending the social ladder, our schoolmates are going upward. At
the time “ one of us ” is first thrust into a dungeon—her young life for ever embittered
if not wholly lost—some more prudent girl is led to the altar by the man who was at
least accessory to the other’s ruin.
It is not always the fault of the stronger sex, however, that these things happen,
Some girls grant too much encouragement; they imagine the dangers may be
approached without risk—that their desires can be restrained. But, like one who,
drawing heedlessly to the edge of a precipice, on looking into the abyss, is seized with
an awful longing to plunge within it, so she, holding too lightly the weakness of her
resolution, feels the dreamy allurements of first love stealing over her senses; the
glowing illusion leads her on, and, yielding to its attraction, the plunge is made, and
she is lost. Others require so little persuasion and so little of the influence of ruinous cir-
cumstances, that they themselves are said to be all in the wrong; while others clearly and
deliberately seek their own ruin, and wilfully mark out a course of life they must soon
loathe. But of all those who fill the ranks of the fallen, none surely are so culpable
as women who are married, with which the colonies teem. None have less excuse than
one of these ; and if, in addition to disgracing a husband, whether he has left her or
not, she bring odium on innocent children, she is indeed unwomanly, and the sins of a
hundred foolish girls would not make up her sum.
Some of us outlaws of society have been tenderly reared: cared for by a kind
mother; loved, and dearly loved, by an indulgent father; and educated to fill a respect-
able position in society as the wife of an honorable man and the mother of a beloved
family. These are the girls—of whom there are too many, seldom as they may be
met with in the common haunts of vice—who, beneath the smile and vivacity of
pleasure, may possess a heart as sensitive as that of yon delicate young lady from
boarding school, who is just now speculating upon her future prospects of wedded
happiness, just as her sister, “ who went away,” had done, as I have seen, before her—the
now absent sister, who dreamed as innocently upon the same pillow; who said her
evening prayers, a curly-haired child, at the same fond mother’s knee, and laughingly
kissed “ good night ”to her “ very dear papa.” To that lost sister, on arriving near
womanhood, love had promised as much ; but, gazing ardently along its silvered and
enchanting vista, her warm and trusting heart yielded, too readily, “ to the soft
twilight charm.”
But, like the enticing apple of India, which turns to ashes as it is tasted, how
delusive, too often, the dream. Alas ! how true it is—
“ When lovely woman stoops to folly,
And finds too late that men betray,
No words can soothe her melancholy,
No tears can wash her grief away.”
All women, of course, are not disposed to be truthful and virtuous, any more than
all men are disposed to be false and heartless. Man is to woman, I am sure, her best
friend, her most honest counsellor, and her most lenient judge. Even when she has
ceased to be true to herself, he often remains her friend ; though personally unknown,
he frequently counsels and befriends her. But when women sit in judgment upon
women, can the guilty expect leniency ? Though perhaps only one remove themselves
in point of guilt from us (but having the security and passport of a husband’s protec-
tion), how unfeelingly the fury of their tongues is hurled upon us ! What recks it to
them that the girl were better bred than they, and once virtuous in every sense ; or that
she had in very simplicity been too trusting, fondly but foolishly believing herself secure
in her lover’s affection ?' What care they if her more sensitive passions, too easily
wrought upon, embarked her upon a tumultuous sea of daily blasts; if, pirated and
almost wrecked —her treasure despoiled—she be now disregarded by him whom she loved,,
alas ! too, too much, and to whom she would even now say—say to him —
“ I loved, I love you ; for this love have lost
State, station, mankind’s, my own esteem ;
And yet cannot regret what it hath cost,
So dear is still the memory of that dream :
Yet if I name my guilt ’tis not to boast—
None can deem harshlier of me than I deem.”


What care they indeed ? Or that incessant storms beget recklessness; that the sting
of his neglect, that the wreck of her young hopes, so rudely dismantled on her first
voyage upon the ocean of life, wrings from her the deepest anguish ; and what care they
for the sacrifice and the dull leaden hopelessness of this yonng life—and the atonement,
whenever it comes ? What care they indeed ? Some coldly chaste dame will visit her
with hard-hearted reproach if she chance to bear the fruit of her illicit love, and will
misname her untimely censure, consolation ; and if the girl seek to retain her position
in society, will whisper to other chaste ones, “ the poor girl has had a misfortune,”
Thus all do know of her dereliction, and feeling acutely the disgrace she has brought
upon herself and family, but most of all the world’s injustice and contumely, she con-
signs herselt—in a fit of vexation, pique, resentment, and too often perhaps almost
temporary insanity—to the abyss whence she can never again be raised up !
CHAPTER II.
" Lore is of man’s life a thing apart,
’Tis woman’s whole existence.”— Donna Julia to Don Juan.
“ And now I’m in the world alone
Upon the wide, wide sea ;
But why should I for others groan,
When none will sigh for me ? ”
“ Farewell my pleasures past,
Welcome my present pain;
I feel my torments so increase,
That life cannot remain.”— Queen Anne Bolyn,
At times, life is full of perplexity and gloom—of dreary hopelessness and despair ; but,
like the leaden sky of a dark night, through one little spot of which the moon looks down,
glinting with softened rays, as only Diana can, to cheer some heart with too much of
night in it, so may there be one bright spot upon the heart, which, like the other, tells
of brightness not so far off. One kindly breath of heaven may sweep away the
clouds, and reveal at once the beauties of renewed hope and happiness. My lowly pen is
but the servant of my heart, and moves, almost unguided, responsive to it. What I
■write I feel.
Europeans, and particularly the English, are very severe upon those who have
fallen. But are the faux pas of the wedded, even when known, visited with as much
harshness ? In the married, the greater the sin ; in the unmarried, the greater the
punishment. One false step consigns many a girl to lasting disgrace ; she is shunned
and socially cast off. This contumely it is that drives so many to the verge of distrac-
tion. For one fault, no matter what their other virtues, they are frowned down. The
dangers which ever attend a young girl are too seldom made known to her with that
seriousness which the realities of life demand; on the contrary, much is persistently
hidden that ought to be made familiar : the darker, the unchaste side of Nature is
closely veiled, and the veil is sometimes as dangerous as the hidden rock at sea. By this
secresy, very often, there is imparted to that behind the veil an air and colouring which to
the young imagination and curious mind renders experience of it the more enticing. The
modest ones will hardly admit the existence of a certain phase of life, though they are
side by side with nymphs de la pave daily; they refuse to regulate the evil, though society
and the girls themselves would be the better for it. In some European lands, and in
most Asiatic, the social evil is regulated, and to the advantage of all. It has attracted
some attention, too, of late years, in England, but without any result. Midnight meet-
ings even have not been a success. The law must step in with a system of surveilance
and licensing. This plan is pronounced to be the best, even by English officials in
foreign countries where the British authorities have put it in practice ; but England is
too prudish to introduce it at home and in her Australian colonies.
The downward path of a girl is proverbially easy. Just as the mountain current is
made up of single drops of rain, so is her sura of txansgression and misery attained one
little step at a time. At first, while yet a few germs of modesty remain, she hesitates ;
blushes at the familiar repartee ; is nervous in her manner though so deftly instructed
by some infamous procuress ; and falters, when alone with an admirer, between shame
and a half-determined repentance. But as at the outset her introduction will be
(assuming her to be a girl of some refinement, and perhaps accomplished) to a house
where a glittering splendour, and even luxury prevail, the flowing wine-cup—ever offered


readily to the undergraduates of such questionable colleges—will put to flight all calm
reflection —the exhilirating champagne will elevate her spirits and throw a veil over the
realities of life. But changes from favoritism to being shunned are not infrequent in
these saloons of pleasure, and she must, as all do, some day find herself without the
protection of the mercenary quean of the house, to whom she will always have been kept
in debt, even when fortune was most lavish. Their bills for board, dresses, &c., are
miracles of extortion. Her ungodly earnings are mostly taken by the house. Overcome
by reverses of fortune ; no longer sought after ; in debt, and without a shilLng, her
wardrobe is seized, and she finds herself in the streets. Her only companion is closely-
clinging poverty, and, in the cold night, she draws about her shoulders hei meagre
shawl, with the sad conviction that she lacks even the sympathy of a friend.
CHAPTER III.
“LADY RUTH.”
My pen has disclosed the true picture of a young girl, no longer a favourite of
the deceitful atmosphere of a glittering gayety—where she had been the object of
others’ jealousy—being turned out of her sinful yet only home without a shilling. It
is, as I have said, the policy of these keepers of disreputable houses to keep their
credulous and mistaken dupes constantly in debt, and so keep them in their power.
A few of these houses are marvels of extravagance. I know of one private house for
which seven pounds a week is paid, and which is furnished with some degree of luxury.
Here, merchants and other city men visit; they are often free with their money, and
some of them are as careless of their reputation. Squatters, storekeepers, and others
from the country, on visiting some houses in the city to make purchases, are often
shown “ the lions ” by members of the firms themselves, or perhaps by their clerks.
These little attentions after business hours keep business together. The girls whom
they flatter and caress in their moments of pleasure are immediately afterwards cast
from their thoughts, as they cast away the worthless cigar or the empty champagne
bottle ; and for the girls, attracted like moths by the glare of these salons, the giddy
revelry of the night is only succeeded by a too sober headache in the morning.
But the poor subject of my pen is in the streets, with sadness stamped upon her
chill and shrinking form. No loneliness can compare with that felt by an unfriended
girl in a city.
You who have stood, hesitating on a sidewalk, conscious of the utter desolation of
having no communion with any living soul, though surrounded by so many thousands,
can understand what her feelings must have been.
She involuntarily turned to the outskirts of the city, where the brightness and quiet
of Nature might seem to concede her that sympathy denied by unheeding humanity.
There are days in this genial clime when earth, sea, and sky are bathed in poetry, and
the saddest heart may gladden as the sun rises and warms the friendless outcast. The
smiling earth, which is here and there rounded by gentle curves, is yonder graced by
the thousand mountain tops which seem to kiss the blue and golden sky. They look so
transparent in the pure atmosphere, and smile so upon the susceptible girl, that her
spirits, with all her trouble, melt into a ray of hope.
It is in wandering over the yielding grass, and beneath the breathing trees, on such
days, that our flitting thoughts may catch the idea of reproducing in the minds of
others, those living realities of a life which has been marked by more than common
occurrences ; and one yearns almost to present such living pictures to the indifferent as
will make them hesitate, wonderingly, to know what patient suffering, wicked dissipation,
and even more wicked pursuits of luring away the young, and what concealed horrors, lie
lurking in their midst. Such lives need no flourish of words and laboured sentences to
interest the reader. Like the voice of a child, their claims lie chiefly in their simplicity.
And if the efforts of the writer of these pages afford interest to others, and imparts to
many something of the soothing influence this excursion of her pen affords herself, she
is well content. And if she be successful in rousing the curiosity and attention of
those who would cheerfully seek to lessen vice and encourage virtue, her reward is
complete.
The outcast girl whom the reader has accompanied in the quiet charm of this
autumn day is not, as you have guessed, of that strong, callous nature that can wholly
restrain the workings of her heart; her nature is rather of that gentler mould but too
sensitive to her hard lot and the world’s condemnation.
But, with the coming of evening she has to seek rest for her wearying feet, even


though rest for her heart be found only in that long, long rest of the sweeter by
and by. Mark her, reader: she has not dined; she has not the means of supping.
This young creature—look at her—but a few days since the belle of a gilded
gayety, must now seek the roof of some place that will shelter wretchedness, and
where a companionship of sorrow may soothe her rude misfortune ; or else—there is an
alternative —seek a change in the sad waves of the ocean, which oftentimes had seemed
as if inviting her to their depths, where repose would succeed to shame and despair.
As the day mellowed into a sober light, and the glad sun was leaving her and her
sorrow, she wended her way, tired, weak, and humiliated, to a house of which she had
before heard. It was at least a refuge from the streets, and its associations, she
thought, could hardly matter now. She was received there; she had some one to
speak with—a companionship; and vice, like sorrow, finds relief in freindship.
Her appearance was still attractive and ladylike; her face, oval and with a ten-
dency to thought, was still pretty, at times almost classic ; her figure somewhat tall, and
shapely, with an unassuming dignity. Indeed, she has been best known as “ Lady
Ruth.” She is not a fiction in Sydney, as some of my readers will know.
As the night spread its mantle over the earth, she perceived heavy clouds driving
overhead and massing together over the lights of the city, betokening one of those
changes so common here ; and when she presently heard the rudg storm break and the
heavy rain lashing the house tops and sweeping the streets, she felt doubly grateful for
the shelter she had found. The trees in the vicinity moaned in mournful cadences, and
though the agony of her soul was stilled, a soft, silent melancholy had not withdrawn
.altogether from her pillow as “ gentle sleep, Nature’s sweet comforter, weighed her
eyelids down.”
Had a brother been by when she awoke, or some friend as true, to take her for-
givingly and with sympathy by the hand, she had been saved from further sin. But no
brother stood there ; no sister, father, mother, or any friend to virtue. All were afar
off, grieving over the absent one who had fallen, and who. in her long-nurtured penitence
and sorrow, thought of them with increasing tenderness —yet only as of those who
belonged to another world, or to the vague long ago, and to whom she could never
return. She thought, too, of her childhood, with that singular regard for early
innocence which fills so imperceptibly the soul cf the repentant woman, who is an
outlaw from all that is lastingly dear to every girl who is not a brute.
But what, as she drifts upon the tide which bears her along to deeper wickedness,
can fill this blank in her life ? What can again unite the ties which held her to refined
humanity ? The impossibility of being respected in an honest home is ever present to
her. Books may assist to divert her from herself; perhaps the giddy glass ; or the
melancholy relief of offering the impress of her mind to others, that they may beware.
These occasional springs of thought which the mind yields to suffering are soothing, and
perhaps more.
Her existence was indeed touched with sadness. The dancing hall, the theatre, the
tipsy revelry, she participated in only as one in a dream. Her comparative poverty,
too ; the coarser admirers whose money wrung from her reluctant caresses—all united to
bring home to her the bare truth that she was now exposed to every danger and
wretchedness that attend debauchery, brutality, and disease. How miserable the
condition of a courtezan, whose lot it is to soothe, suffer, and obey the dictates of rage,
insolence, and lust.
CHAPTER IV.
“ Remorse is as the heart in which it grows ;
If that he gentle, it drops balmy dews
Of true repentance ; but if proud and gloomy,
It is a poison-tree, that pierces to the utmost,
Weeps only tears of poison.”—“ Remorse. ” Coleridge.
You who have patiently followed me from the first chapter, have no doubt perceived that,
from the commencement, my thoughts ran much upon the life of one girl in particular,
even when I have written generally. Ruth has had but a short career.
We left her housed—but not luxuriously; with a so-called home—but not a happy
one ;in the company of vice, and vice of not the most refined order; obliged by the
stern exigencies of houseless poverty to seek existence by flattering those she may
detest; by caressing those she feels a repugnance to ; by seeming merry when her heart
is sad. She must smile when she would weep ; speak when she would be silent.
Her existence was not a pleasant one. She has often thought no existence at
all would be preferable. But it seemed so hard to get back, even into the humblest


walks of society. Not yet twenty, she has felt old in sin. Yet she might have been a
happy and honoured wife, but for the unmanly desertion of one whom sne had—
. . . . “ Loved as woman loves,
Eeckless of sorrow, sin, or scorn ;
Life had no evil destiny
That with him she could not have borne.”
Her whole life was rendered a blank, or only varied by storms of feeling which raged
through her soul, because when two people sinned she happened to be the woman, and
so fell; while he, the man, went on unconcernedly, heartlessly, and even prosperously.
Here, then, it was, that while her lot weighed heavily upon her she first met one who felt
in her fate an interest that prompted advice.
She was not callous to it. Her heart was still a woman’s, and she turned with
some feelings of gratitude to this gentle touch of sympathy.
Her sensitive, yielding nature was little fitted for the rough course upon which
she had been drifting. Her heart, like many others, but wanted the encouragement
of enlisting interest in another heart —of engaging solicitude for her welfare and
sympathy for her sorrow, to fill with softened emotions, and to gather patience and
resolution to aspire and work for a better aim in life.
With this honest counsel and timely warning, Ruth makes the attempt. She
has boldly thrown off the soiled shackles which bound her down to shame, and
sought the means in the city, not without success, of obtaining a respectable liveli-
hood. She is strengthened and encouraged by success so far, and has found a still
nobler aim. Resolutely now, but still penitently and humbly, she seeks the roof of
her childhood—her parents’ forgiveness.
Two or three years have passed since she left, foolishly—madly—that happy
home. It has oftentimes intruded upon her thoughts since, and has been a frequent
vision in her dreams. The sister who was so winning and affectionate ; the brother
90 bold and ready ; the indulgent father, the kind, solicitous mother, will be seen
again. Oh, think of that, ye outcast women! —think of that !—all these beloved
faces will be seen again !
That girl is the writer of this little history. She would hardly have given it were
she to remain in Sydney. , As she is leaving the city of her shame, sorrow, and
penitence, nothing but good, she trusts, can arise from it.
“ Ruth,” in bidding her readers adieu, breathes once more the hope, that those
among them who are as she was, will courageously turn to the right path, which, after
all, is easier of attainment than they imagine.
A CHAPTER IN A LIFE.
“ What am I, that thou shouldst contemn me this ?
Or what great danger dwells upon my suit ?
What were thy lips the worse for one poor kiss ?
Speak, fair ; —but speak fair words, or else be mute :
Give me one kiss ; I’ll give it thee again,
And one for interest if thou wilt have twain.” — Venus to Adorns.
What ethereal shape is this ? Its majestic splendour dazzles into
insignificance all the airy fancies of my brain. Her long drooping robe
and nodding plume of snowy white set off her stately form with such
exquisite elegance that all other divinities fade before my entranced gaze.
Her full voice, resonant with heavenly music, should have only
for its accompaniment the Hholian harps of Paradise. Her gesture is
magnificent, and she is altogether, in size and bearing, immense ! What
is she ? Name it not in Absalom ; tell it not in Gath. But who is she ?
Then tell it not again—a woman Is’t not enough to know? Well, she
is—ah ! yes, indeed —Harriet Macg r ! Like a line-of-battle ship (or
a turret say) in a fleet of merchantmen, she bears along majestically
amid the syrens of King Street. But “ Melbourne Carrie ”is no longer by


her side; she decided on matrimonial matters, while yet in the full
rotundity and heyday of her youth. Ah ! how happy I could be with
■either!
How the wheel of time flies round. Harriet’s novitiate is extending
to the third degree—l mean the third year. But the progress of
graduating has not much affected her stalwart form'—though not alto-
gether made of im-penetrable stuff. It seems but yesterday that she was
a romping schoolgirl at her native town of Braidwood : a good little
maiden in short frocks, playing hide and seek with others of her own
innocent age. As her frocks lengthened, she began casting sidelong
glances with some generosity among the swains of that gallant township,
and her high spirit leading her into such feminine diversions as chevy
chase, rounders, leapfrog, and other girlish pastimes for the development
■of the human fabric in females, she found no dearth Jof budding heroes
who were ready to share with her their hardbake or toffee. Still later,
she discarded such trifles, and enlisted the sworn devotedness of down-
right lovers, with whom she dissipated on Sundays—in the intervals of
church and heartrending declarations and horrible oaths of eternal fidelity—
■on sour ginger-beer and over-ripe apples.
The fine old Scottish clan to which she belonged might have been
awfu’ shocked had they caught some of the words which flowed into her
ear, and the stricter Presbyterians would have prayed hourly for the as
yet innocent girl had they known with what rapture her tingling ears
listened. But she left Braidwood with the family for Maitland (where
her late father was warden at the jail), and there added to her other accom-
plishments many elegant touches of manner caught from the brilliant
society of that enchanting town. After a while, the scope afforded by
Maitland was considered insufficient, and she and her sister Alice
at length eventuated in Sydney, amid much splendour, owing to the
brilliancy of the weather. There were two or three other sisters and
a brother, who regarded the entry of the two sisters upon Sydney life
with considerable concern.
These two interesting sisters were thrown into the company of one
M y. He was in a butcher’s shop, and appeared to have an idea
of opening another. Alice was the favourite, but she was too circum-
spect. He then turned his virtuous attentions to Harriet, who was less
nice as to the etiquette of the thing. His suit grew apace, and he became
quite elated, singing out “ Buy ! buy ! ” with redoubled vehemence and
enthusiasm. He’d take her often for a walk. Once he took her to
Ultimo—upon a summer’s night. All was still and balmy on the hill
there, and even the frogs upon the swamp were too indolent to disturb
them with their chirping. They were of course unconscious that the
night was no longer young ; that its entrancing hours were speeding from
them —unconscious, in fact, of all things save themselves, as young love
loves to be. They counted perhaps the stars —or at least she did ; thought
of heaven, aud then perhaps of hell; she wondered why the moon rode
on so rapidly, why all the stars were round; and then she wondered at
the strange end of man ; wondered at pleasure—pain, and several
other things, and then they both clung in a kiss—“ a long, long kiss
—a kiss of youth and love ” —nntil they were surprised by the grey,
unwelcome morn. The morning brings too much reality along with it.
If you have been dding aught that’s wrung, how it does look you in the face ;
if you have been kissing illegally, drinking too freely, or doing anything


you ought not to do, how unpleasantly do steal upon the eastern sky those
first streaks of light, and how forbodingly the eye meets them ! You
can nearly all remember, my readers, some one night or more which
you were grieved to lose—which you would have had remain with you
for aye, so dear were its happy moments. So with Harriet. One
long night such as that would have been heaven enough for her.
But with the garish sun lighting up her blushes, she stole home
again. Sad were her shades. Sadness often succeeds to unusual joy.
Her chosen was not a good mark, and, having despoiled her of her roses,,
very soon cared little for her or her prospects. And as fortune gradually
smiled less sweetly upon the adventurous girl, her way was evidently
marked out to be the “steep and thorny ” one (though not exactly in the-
sense in which Ophelia used the expression), “ whilst he, like a puffed and
reckless libertine, the primrose path of dalliance treads,” and offers a
heart (usually with the fry) to any young lady requiring one, and still
enchants the neighbourhood of Brickfield Hill with his cheery “ Buy I
buy ! ” That she has “ gone crooked ” probably surprised him little,
and touched him less. So they parted. The one sister is still in ser-
vice, having kept more “ within the rear of her affection ” and “ out of
the shot and danger of desire.” Harriet chose a privateering career, to
which she has devoted herself with considerable vigour, discarding the
notion that in this sort of public service “ contagions blastments are most
imminent. 7 ’
Disgusted, no doubt, with the perfidy of man, then, she dawned
upon the very classic shades of King Street. Her young and queenly
form threw a sudden lustre upon this locale; it also threw her family into
sorrow. She spoke words of love to entranced admirers, but every act
of sin was a poisoned dagger to dearer ones at home. She has a brother
.—rather a clever young fellow. He came to Sydney once to shoot
her. A very considerate and laudable purpose, most truly. His
soul was in arms against the horror of her life. He was desperate—
on fire with passion and disgrace. He searched all the fashionable and
unfashionable haunts, until at length his diligence was rewarded by dis-
covering her in a Cafe. Laertes was not more solicitous of his sister’s
honour than this youth had been. No arm was perhaps more ready to
avenge the stain that had been imprinted upon the ancient Macgregor
Clan. But he was not met by the erring (though scarcely timid) girl with
an overflow of caresses and penitence. Probably her immovability sur-
prised —astounded him. Although he implored, she would not move from
the hateful spot. He upbraided her and lost his temper, while she
remained provokingly cool and resolute. She was proud, ambitious, with
more offences ax her beck than she had thoughts to put them in, or time
to act them in. She is stalwart and imposing, and by no means the
sort of girl one can catch up in one’s arms and run a mile with. She
was deaf alike to her brother’s solicitations and imprecations —both were
spurned. She asserted her unalterable determination not to go with
him, and he was beside himself with wonder and horror The memory
of her father was powerless to move her decision. The prayers of a
mother fell unheeded ; the sympathy and advice of a sister were cast from
her; and now the solicitous brother’s persuasion was powerless to touch
the spirit of this wayward, wicked girl. If it had occurred to her to
imitate Rosalind in male inexpressibles, or Moll Flanders, she would
have had the spirit to do so. Then there is in some a deep love of


AGENCIES ,
WHERE THIS BOOK CAN BE OBTAINED.
SYDNEY.
THE PUBLISHER, 40 Plunter Street (2nd Floor).
KING STREET —Wallace’s (No. hi, between Pitt and Castlereagh Streets).
ELIZABETH STREET— Johnson’s, No. —. '
GEORGE STREET — Clarke’s, No. 2 Market Buildings.
GEORGE-ST. SOUTH— Nash’s, No. 629, Haymarket.
~ ~ Hart’s (opposite City Buildings).
~ ~ Little Hill’s Big Shop, No. 794.
~ ~ Cooper’s (Railway Bridge.)
GEORGE ST. WEST — Colliss’ News Agency (nearly opposite Newtown Road)
LOWER GEORGE STREET— Mountford’s (near Bridge Street).
MARKET STREET— Clarke’s, No. 88.
~ ~ Jansen’s, No. 72.
~ ~ Skinner’s.
OXFORD STREET —Schneberger’s, No. 60 (one door from Burton Street).
PITT STREET — Kirby’s (opposite Farmer’s).
RAILWAY STATION (REDFERN).— Mr. Walton, bookseller.
PADDINGTON —H. L. Smith, Stewart Street.
SUSSEX STREET— Barker’s, No. 85.
WILLIAM STREET— Pearce’s.
I and town and country agents generally.
self sacrifice. Some others, ’tis true, would not sacrifice a pin’s head for
anything: but many there are, especially among women, whose soul
impels them to a sacrifice of some nature. The beaten track, “ where
the modest virtues dwell,” is too uninteresting. They want something
with a spice of personal danger in it—and in the Cafe life they find it.
This interview between brother and sister was engrossing. The
on-lookers were startled and eager. The enraged brother, with his judg-
ment and reason unsettled, heard her tell him to go ; heard her declare
that as she had left home and society, she had resolved to drift on. She
had hoisted the black flag, and would stick to it.
Unable to persuade her away from the deadly spot, he drew a shoot-
ing iron, and swore he would shoot her then and there, rather than she.
should continue in this dishonour. She was now excited, too, and dared
him. Perhaps it was the absence of all fear on her part that made him
hesitate. It is not a nice thing to shoot a sister, particularly when her
spirit, even though misdirected, challenges one’s admiration. His hand
fell; and by this time a general interference forced him from the spot,
and he left the Cafe. But he again declared he would shoot her, inside
or out. He preferred seeing a sister dead to being dishonoured.
There’s a daring in the lady’s character—in the family. The
brother is hardly less daring than she. He is not here now ; but she
is ; and I often gaze with a mixture of love, surprise, and awe upon her
well-known shape Her meeker sister xllice once stopped to speak with
her. She gave her one look of astonishment, and then passed on, with,
the feeling remark, “ What the h—ll does she want to speak to me for ?’ r
the end.
SYDNEY:
Printed and Published for the Proprietor by H. J. FRANKLIN.
PUBLISHING OFFICES— 40 Hunter St. and G. WALLACE’S, King St,
Sant anywhere, in or out of the colony, post paid is id. Send stamps to Publishers —
Franklin s, 40 Hunter Street 1 2nd Floor), 01 Wallace's, 111 King-street.


(A SOCIAL AND MORAL PAMPHLET),
SECOND MONTHLY PART
Nos. 5, 6, 7, and 8 (Bound in one Book, Price is.) Contains :
HOW THE PRODIGAL’S RECEIVED—A Blessed Result.
THE TIMES AND ADVENTURES OF MINNIE, GEORGIE, AND
OTHERS —A Mariner on a Lee-shore.
THE CHASTE NUPTIALS OF “MELBOURNE CARRIE”—A Glance at
“ Canary House”—The Police and Houses of 111- fame.
THE CAFE CHEVAL —Sunday Night—ln the Dark—Saturday Night—Smiles
that are now lost to the Consecrated Spot—The Cafe Upstairs, &c.
VERY DRAMATIC DOINGS —Tragic Explosion on the Keilawarra.
MABEL ESCOTT; OR, THE MYSTERIES OF SYDNEY—Wine and Not
Wisdom —Unreflecting Pleasure—A Melee —Thrust into a Cell.
LOTTIE WILL NOT (Pay her Printer) —“ Me and me dorg”—Amusing Efforts
at Lecturing.
VAGARIES —The Great Eastern Restaurant-Hotel, Waitresses, Citizens, &c.
LICENSE REFUSED THE CAFE BLONDE—One Den Doomed.
TUMBLER THROWING —(By the Signora), at the Cafe Roberto.
LIFE AND TIMES OF THE PLAUSIBLE McLEOD —A Successfnl man of
Business—Land and Stock Owner —A Ruined Man, and “Johnny Warder.”
DRAMATIC DOINGS —Dampier’s Reception—Miss Dargon as Lucretia—Miss
Dargon as Lady Teazle.
THE PRODIGAL AND HIS COFFlN—Vagaries, &c.
MABEL ESCOTT ; OR, THE MYSTERIES OF SYDNEY—(A Confession)—
Two weeks of disgrace—A Meeting —Hubert and Mabel.
THE PRODIGAL —A FAIR ONE—How She quoted Scripture— The Prodigal
and the Herald —Refusal of Advertisements.
THE TUMBLER-THROWING—(By La Signora)—Hushed.
NO-GO-NOWSKI AND HIS MAID —How his sympathy was excited—Takes
off his own Boots (a lady’s pair) to give to her —The Tender Passion—Robbery
—Absconding —Scene in the Court —Conflict between Counsel.
MABEL ESCOTT : OR, THE MYSTERIES OF SYDNEY—Susie’s Story-
How She was Betrayed—Mabel Hesitates to return home—Engaged as Bar-
maids —An Amorous Publican —Tableau.
CAFE ROYAL —Eccentricities of the Cafe Brigade—THE CORNER—“The
Vagabond’s Pet ” —“ Gentlemen, mine’s brandy and soda ! ”
POLICE COURT ODDITIES—“ Hard on the Girl”—“Not a week’s liberty
these four years ! ”
NO-GO-NOW SKI AND HIS MAID-SERVANT—His “ Dear”—His “Dear
Little Wife”—How affectionate He was—The Rival in Court—Counsel’s
Humour. ,
THE SUNNY SIDE OF LIFE —Another Introduction.
A NEW VIEW OF CAPTAIN COOK —Demoralizing effect.
POLICE COURT ODDITIES.
DRAMATIC DOlNGS—Dampier in the “Lyons’ Courier”—Joey Gougenheim,
Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, io, n, 12, and 13 are also obtainable separately.
