

N|A(HINERY :
A Device
of THE devil.
WRITTEN FOR THE MASSES.
By W. W. FRASER.
PRICE TWO IPEHSTCIB..
[All Rights Reserved.]




•MACHINERY :
“ A Device of the Devil.”
The Curse of All Nations.
Man’s Master—Not His Servant.
Owned by the Minority of the World.
In tackling the subject of Machinery I have a very
difficult task before me. I am going against what is
called the “Triumphs of Machinery ” and “ Progression.”
If to grind down my fellow-creatur,es to the dust and to
shorten their lives of the brief span allotted to them is
“Progress,” then the sooner It is done away with the
better it will be for mankind, not only in this small State,
but over the whole of the civilised world.
God’s Command.
We are told that Adam was the first man who
inhabited this planet, so I will go back to him to prove
that machinery is a “ Device of the Devil.” After eating
of the forbidden fruit, God appeared to Adam and said
unto him : —“ By the sweat of thy brow shall thou earn thy daily
bread all thy days." Mark it. The: words are as distinct as
they can possibly be. God did not say to him, “You
have.sinned and thereby gained great knowledge, so I will
invent a machine for you, and you can sit down and
watch it work to supply your needs. There is no neces-
sity for you to labor, as, by eating of the forbidden fruit,
you have * Progressed,’ so I will make you a god your-
self and the machine shall be your slave.”
In no part of the Scriptures do you find God or our
Saviour, or even the Prophets (some of whom were
marvellously gifted and inspired men, —more so than any


that have succeeded them up to the present generation)
mention or prophesy that puny mortals should ever use
machinery. It may have been used in some form in the
erection of the Tower of Babel, and you all know how
such presumption was punished.
Why a Device of the Devil ?
If one looks at the whole of the history of the
invention of machinery he will find that nearly all
of the discoverers did not live long enough to
profit by their cleverness, and that the child of
their brain (or rather Satan’s) was perfected by
somebody’else (thus proving that Providence was against
them) to be a curse to mankind and to "benefit only the
capitalist. Was not capital itself given by the Devil, as it
is said : —“ It is easier for a camel to pass through the'eye
ot a needle than for a rich man to enter Heaven,”
Loss of Lives—Perhaps Souls.
Look at the souls that have been lost, and the lives
that have been shortened, through the excessive use of
machinery ? If you take up the newspapers any day you
will read an account of some poor victim losing his life
while working it. Nothing is said ; it has become an
every-day occurrence. What does a human life or soul
matter ? If you go into the factories you will observe the
hectic flush on the unfortunate girl working the sewing
machine ; also on the boot operative. In the printing
offices you will notice the leaden look and plump figure of
the linotype operator as he gradually becomes full of lead,
and after, say, 10 or 15 years, the most of these operators
.fill early graves. Is it not terrible that in an enlightened
age like this such a state of things should be tolerated ?
If a man has a good horse he is proud of him, and will do
all in his power to preserve his life ; but in this “ Pro-
gressive ” age the horse appears to be of more value than
the man, as we make laws for his protection, while we
make machines to kill off the man.
Since “ Progress,” for the benefit of the minority, the
lives of the “ masses ” has shortened, and they find it
harder to get a living ; in most cases a very meagre one,
and, as machinery, like a blood-sucker, is gradually
seizing upon every industry, the future of the masses must
be chaos.


The chijrches of all denominations should educate the
people on the evils of the excessive use of machinery.
Let them prove to the minority of capitalists that it is the
duty of the clergy, not only to look after the spiritual, but
the bodily welfare of the masses, the same as Christ
himself did when he fed the multitude with the loaves and
fishes. They must ignore the hackneyed phrase,
“ Progress.”
Taxation of House Property .
What “ Progress ” has been made in the taxation of
house property. Is it not the same now as it was ages
ago. Does not the owner of it have to pay heavy municipal
and water rates whether it is occupied or not ? If it
wasn’t for this unfair system these bodies would lose at
least a third of their revenue. Why should houses be
taxed and not machinery ? The owners make ten times the
profits, and it could be as easily collected. In fact, there
should be a heavier tax on it than any other class of
property, for it is more dangerous, and is the principal
cause of filling our hospitals. Consequently, it should pay
for maintaining them.
The Labor Party.
The Labor Party got a law passed limiting the
number of boys to be employed. So many men, so many
boys. What is the use of this ? What does a boy
working matter ? He cannot do much under, say, two
years, and then, if he is fairly smart at one branch of a trade,
he is kept at it for the remainder of his time, as it pays his
master handsomely, who does not care whether he turns
out incompetent or not. Would it not be more sensible
to insert a clause in all indentures making an employer
liable to a heavy fine unless an apprentice can pass an
examination in all branches of a trade on completion of
his apprenticeship. The leaders of labor appear to me to
strain at the gnat and swallow the camel. I suggest to
them, and all Liberals, that they should get a law passed
limiting the use of machinery.
It is said a linotype can do the work of six men ; a
bootmakers’ machine of eight or ten, and so on. Is it not
reasonable to ask that if one machine can do the work of
six men, six men be employed to every machine used, and


pro rata all alorfg the line ? This rule could be applied to
all machinery, including the sewing-machine.
The Burning Question of the Hour.
If, by law, you can limit the man to so many acres,
by the same process you can limit him to so many
machines. You argue that legislation should be passed
beneficial to the masses in one direction, why not in the
other? They both represent capital. One grows wool,
which is one of our largest exports, and in a certain sense
beneficial to the community, and does little harm. The
other is a curse to mankind in every shape and form, as it
makes paupers and misery, retards immigration, and ruins
every country where it is excessively used ; while it fills
the pockets of the owners, who, in most instances, spend
the money in England and elsewhere.
With regard to putting the people on small blocks in
the country, it will prove a failure if tried. Those already
on them cannot make a fair living, and it must be heart-
rending to them to grow grapes, apples, potatoes,
onions, &c., and either have to let them rot in the ground
or transport them to a market, where they can get little
more for them than the price of the case or bag that
contains them.
' What is the use of putting more people on the land
unless you can get consumers in the cities ? If we take
the population out of the centres it will make the distress
and misery of both parties more accentuated than it is at
present. It may be said that this year has been an
exceptionally prolific one. Perhaps so. But if we add to
the producers, while we are losing the consumers in shoals,
how are we to better things ? It is said that-we have lost
the vast number of 126,000 or more inhabitants during the
past few years, and, notwithstanding all the bolstering up
of the colony by our politicians and others, the decrease
is still going on.
It is a disgrace to our civilisation and intelligence that
a young country like this, which is little more than half-a-
century old, should not be able to give a living to its small
population of only 1,000,000, and that they should be
leaving us like a plague-stricken city, owing to their


inability to live in the richest and most fertile country in
the world, through the “Triumphs of Machinery.”
Exodus from the United Kingdom.
It is a remarkable fact that the same exodus is taking
place from that great and good country, the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ireland, and we hear of tens ot
thousands leaving it for the comparatively new Dominion
of Canada. Yet the cry in England is—‘<AVe have too
much population ; how are we to get rid of our surplus .
Can’t we send some of them to Australia, or anywhere, as
long as we get rid of them.” Our submerged tenth, which
means at least a third of the population of the United
Kingdom, owing to being displaced by machinery, are, and
have been for over a century, a menace to us. “We must
get rid of them somehow, or there might, when their
misery becomes unbearable, be violent agitations, or
perhaps a revolution.” There is nothing said of this sort,
and though they may not know that this is what they
mean, such is actually the case.
Is it not absurd, when you come to think of it, that
the mother country, since the introduction of the loom
into it in the last century, not to go back any further, nor
yet to mention the millions of men she has lost by war
and other causes, should still have the majority of her
population paupers.
We Australians say we would be prosperous if we had
more population, though we took no steps to stop the
exodus, and those left cannot get a fair living, while the
whole of those nations with tremendous populations are
doing all in their power to get rid of as many as they can
for the self-same reason. This appears to be a paradox.
There must be sometthing wrong and out of joint over the
whole of this “ Progressive ” world. The unprogressive
portion seems to get along all right. Why is it out of
joint ? The explanation is simple. “ Machinery,” in the
hands ofj the few, has become man’s master, not his
servant.
Claptrap.
It is all very well for a number of machinery owners
and wealthy combines to prate about its cheapening
production, being labor saving, and a lot of claptrap about


being an enterprising and “Progressive” age; that man-
kind ought to be thankful to them for its shortening the
hours of labour, making living cheaper, &c.
Not Borne Out .
This statement is incorrect. As little as twenty years
ago this colony was prosperous; everyone could get work,
and were happier and more contented. At that period
you could get a more substantial suit of clothes than you
can now for the same money. With regard to all other
necessaries of life, they are careful not to let you know
that nearly everything done by machinery is inferior to
what was manufactured by labor in the past. We have
all the good ground out of the wheat; our clothing is
shoddy, and almost all our food supply is adulterated, and,
in numerous instances, prepared in filthy and smoky
rooms.
You can see for yourselves that machinery is a
distinct loss to the masses in every shape and form. It
deprives the majority of a decent living; it does away
with labor ; and it enables the sweater, through the keen
competition among the masses, to get the pick of our
young men and women at a beggarly wage, which they
could not possibly live on unless they resided with their
parents.
The Country.
The country, in respect to machinery, is nearly, if not
quite, as bad as the towns. Look at the number of men
the stripper, the harvester, the reaper and binder, the
shearing machine, &c., have thrown out of employment,
and yet the country is not prosperous. We are told that
the whole of the country districts want more producers.
What are they to produce ? As we are now about to do
away with another series of industries, viz., the horse-
breeder and dealer, coachsmiths, farriers, saddle and
harness makers, and others, owing to the very limited use
we will have for horses in future, through the “ Triumphs
of Machinery in the shape of bicycles, motor cars, steam
lorries, and other contrivances, it will necessarily limit the
farmer in the choice of his productions, as in a short
period such trifles as chaff, hay, straw, oats, and a lot of
other commodities will not be required.


The Birth Rate.
One of the greatest curses over the whole of the
civilised world, through the unlimited use of machinery,
is the falling off of the birth rate. Young couples
cannot see their way to marry now, owing to - the
inability of the majority of mankind to get remuner-
ative employment. How can a man keep a wife, not
to mention a family, on a beggarly pittance of from
15s. to 30s. per week, and that, in a great many cases, not
constant ? Even those already married realise the fact
that it is a sin to bring children into the world to starve,
as they say that if things are bad for them it will be worse
for their children every succeeding generation, so they take
all kinds of precautions to avoid having more than one or
two. It is said that a man who has a large family is a
patriot to his country, and deserves to be rewarded. This
good patriot may have married at 30, and by the time he
has reached 40 may be thrown out of employment, owing
to being displaced by machinery. He is growing old, and
shows it ; he has worked at one trade all his life, and,
having no influence, he cannot find employment in any
other avenue, so he gradually falls lower and lower in the
social scale, and eventually has to sell all his little
belongings in order to find food for his numerous off-
spring. When this is done he grows despondent, gives
way to despair, and either commits suicide or dies of a
broken heart. Perhaps his wife, in sympathy with him,
desires to follow him, and does likewise. A grateful
Government then holds an inquest on these victims to
machinery, and, after some assinine remarks that poor
people should not have large families, commits his seven
or eight children to the Industrial Schools, from which
some of them graduate into the criminal classes, to be a
pest to society.
What is—What Might Be.
Look at the other side of the picture. If young men,
without brains, but with very influential friends, need
employment, the curled darlings have no difficulty in
procuring the best positions in the State. In many
instances sinecures, with large salaries attached to them.
If the Government are really in earnest in wanting to
populate the country they should hold out inducements to


people to have children. How would it do to have a law
passed that for the future only married men, with at least
four children, should be eligible for State employment.
When one analyses the trend of the whole of the civilised
world, he is shocked at the evidences of decay all over it.
Man is slowly and surely dying out. When we look at
the thousands killed in every war, the numbers slain and
starved out by machinery, the inability to enter the
married state, the women and children now employed in
avocations when men were previously engaged, it makes
us shudder and ask ourselves, “ How is it all to end ? ”
Does it forecast the near end of the world ?
The Ancients.
It is said the ancients had a knowledge of machinery ?
If they had, they did not use it to the unlimited extent
that we do. Neither did they attempt to lower the birth
rate, or the world would never have been inhabited to the
extent it is. You never heard anything about “ Nihilism,
Socialism, Anarchism, or any other Ism ” until the last
century. Simply because there was no need for it. This
all arises from the inability of the masses to exist. If
each man could get a fair living on this planet,
societies would soon die of inaction. In ancient history
you may read that whole nations, when subdued, were
made slaves to their conquerors, but you will recognise
all through it that they worked with their hands, they
married, and they helped to increase the population. You
never read that "nine-tenths of the world were slaves to one
master. Neither did you read about women and children
displacing man. The woman’s place was her home, and
she looked up to and venerated the man. Even in the
animal world the same rule of the sexes was observed.
Strange to say, the animal kingdom has not “ Progressed ”
since the beginning of time ; but then, they have only
instinct.
Look at the picture to-day. “ Progression ” has
changed all things. We have “ advanced ” to such an
extent that the majority of the world are worse slaves than
the ancients, and the “ Triumphs of Machinery,” in the
hands of the few, is our master. The ancients, even in
slavery, could afford to marry ; we cannot.


I am not surprised that in the “ March of Progress ”
\ lovely woman is beginning to assert herself in no uncertain
way. From being the weaker sex she has evolved into the
stronger, as she outnumbers man over nearly the whole of
the civilised world, v At one time I was opposed to her
having any political views or having a vote, but now I am
a strong advocate of her having both ; also of her entering
the political arena and working out the salvation of man,
by freeing him from the thraldom of his master —to some
extent at least —by limiting the use of that gigantic
octopus, who is winding his tentacles around him and slowly
crushing him, “ Machinery.” I would also remind the
lovelier and softer sex that it is her destiny to marry, as it
is not good for man to be alone. By doing so she is
only following the dictates of God and Nature, as
evidenced in all ages, from Mother Eve downwards.
There are said to be over 50,000 marriageable females in
the Commonwealth, and, from the outlook for the future,
there is no prospect of their ever entering wedlock, owing
to the “Triumphs of Machinery” and sweating doing
mankind out of every class' of employment. When she
secures the vote the issue lies entirely with her, as she
will be able to rule the elections all over the States, and
put in only those pledged to the emancipation of man.
Thus she will cover herself with glory, for, independent of
her being already a comfort and blessing to man, she will
prove herself his saviour and benefactor. This, indeed,
would be the “ Triumphs of Lovely Woman ” over un-
feeling machinery.
Woman to the Rescue.
A Few Examples Given.
We are told all kinds of inconsistent stories in order v
to bolster up the decay of this fine young country of
Australia, and, strange to say, no one mentions the real
cause, viz., “ The Excessive Use of Machinery.”
I will give you a few of the arguments used.
All our politicians and leading men are certain that if
the land were cut up into small blocks it would prove our
salvation. If you take up the daily papers any day it will
astonish you to see the number of small blocks, mostly
with improvements, and within a short distance of the
city, offered at ridiculously low prices. Why are they not
snapped up ?


We want immigration, and we would get along all
right. If such is the case, why did we allow the 126,000
to leave the colony ?
We want a land tax. We are already overtaxed in
this respect, and some of it is unfair.
But, why go any further ?
A Tyumen Is in favor of Machinery .
One of the ridiculous arguments used in favor of
machinery is that it finds employment for a great number
of people. How can this be when most of it is imported,
and we have engineers and others connected with it
crying out that they cannot live.
That it lessens the hours of labor, and by-and-by we
will only have to work four hours per day instead of eight.
Does anyone for one moment think that he will get more
than four hours pay. If he does, he deserves to be
incarcerated in a lunatic asylum.
You are not told that machinery shall work only work
48 hours per week. Not much. A great deal of it works
night and day in the endeavours of its owners to get rich
as quick as possible without the aid of labor.
As to its cheapening production, I will give you an
example. Most of the leading newspapers of the Common-
wealth try to rule it. Whatever they advocate they
expect to be carried out. If they formulate a policy for
the Government, they expect politicians to adopt it, under
pain of their displeasure if they do otherwise. Woe
betide those who have the temerity to differ from them.
They are always preaching about minority rule, but take
good care not to apply this doctrine to themselves. After
all, how many do the combined writers of the newspapers
amount to ? Very few indeed. Most of these newspapers
have not been in existence over half a century, and the
leading ones had little or no competition against them,
were started on very little capital, and before the into-
duction of the linotype, some seven years ago, the majority
of them were very wealthy firms. At that time they all
had to employ a large staff of compositors, whom they had
to pay is. per 1000 ens. Now they employ as operatives


on the linotype (imported from America) less than half
the number of men, to whom they pay skd per • 1000 ens.
Has it cheapened the price of any of these newspapers ?
or, does the public pay less for their advertisements than
it did seven years ago ? No. The price is still the same.
Who benefits ? Not the public. The same holds good all
through where machinery is used. Either the public or
the worker has to suffer. In most instances, both. No
one ever hears 'of any of these newspapers advocating a
tax on machinery to enable the worker to compete against
it. No fear. You cannot expect them to put before the
country any policy that would affect themselves.
Remarks.
You will notice that there is a vast exodus from all
nations to any new country. Why ? The explanation is
simple. In new places little or no machinery is used;
consequently, for a considerable period, mankind has a
chance of getting employment and earning a decent
livelihood.
At the present time there is a lot said in favor of
“Socialism,” I have no doubt that Bellamy, in his
“ Looking Backwards,” is responsible for a deal of this. It is
all nonsense to say that the State should own everything,
because, with our knowledge of the State’s way of
procedure, such a doctrine is unreasonable and un-
workable.
Mankind is supposed to be the noblest and best
creation of of Life. Did He intend
that the best of His work should be cast aside in favor of
inanimate machinery. Most emphatically not. Conse-
quently the theory of “ Progression ” must fall. Every
machine invented takes the bread out of the mouths of
thousands of His people, thus proving that instead of
“ Progression ” it is a device of the devil for the degeneracy
and fall of mankind, and annihilation.


This beautiful country of Australia, which is extremely
rich in minerals, as well as one of the most fertile places
in the world, needs no bolstering-up to attract population.
If we only limit the use ot machinery we need go no
further, as people in the down-trodden nations of Europe
will recognise that they can live in our glorious country,
and come here in shoals.
Owners may think that I have no right to advocate
the “ limitation of the use of machinery,” as it is interfer-
ing with the liberty of the subject, but they must admit
that they themselves interfere with the lives and liberties
of the subject when they deprive the working man of the
means of living. All men are equal in the sight of God,
who tells us to assist one another. It-is better to give
way a little for the benefit of mankind generally, than to
have agitators advocating confiscation, or perhaps a tax
cn machinery, to keep those displaced in idleness. The
old legend says that machinery benefits the masses. How
can this be when it deprives them of the means of buying
cheap productions. The only ones it seems to . serve are
those who are well able to pay for what they want, no
matter what the price may be. One thing is certain.
People must live. If there are 15,000 unemployed now,
there will be more in a short time. What are we to do
with them ? Are they to become a charge on the State ?
Is it a fair thing to expect the Government of a
State or Nation to find employment for numbers dis-
placed by machinery ? Most people think it is. Such
being the case, and as the Government of the day may be
averse to limiting the use of machinery, it is their bounden
duty to put a yearly tax on it to enable them to make
passable roads and approaches to the small areas they
wish settled on. At present most of the roads or tracks
are impassable during nearly the whole of the winter, some
of which are within 25 miles of Melbourne. Under such
conditions, conjoined with excessive railway freights,
settlement must be a failure. This tax, which would be a
just one, would materially assist the Government to over-
come these difficulties, as they could make good roads and


reduce freights, which would tend to make their Settle-
ment on the Land ” a success. Under present conditions
it will be a failure.
Whenever there occurs a depression in this or any
other State, advantage is taken of it to lower the rates of
wages. As the majority of all businesses appears to be m
the hands of combines and machinery owners, they cannot
be affected to any great extent, consequently there is no
need for wages fluctuating in the way it does. There are
only a limited number of the population working at the
present time, and they are entitled to a fair remuneration.
I fail to see the necessity for a costly and cumbersome
Arbitration Court, and think the matter could be fairly
adjusted by making the wages of unskilled labor 6/6 per
day, and for skilled artisans 8/6 per day. This should be
the minimum wage all over the Commonwealth. By
fixing the rate in this fashion there would not be the
difference in contracts there is at present, and the sweater
would not have everthing his own way. By having only
the two scales, it does not debar the man of superior
ability in any particular trade from getting more than the
minimum if he is worth it.
Some employers fill their places with what are called
improvers, and are in the habit of employing men casually,
while these improvers are kept on permanently, and even
have to workovertime. When they have learned a little
the man has to go to make room for them. This needs
adjustment. If eight hours is supposed to be sufficient
work for a man, it is surely enough for a growing lad, con-
sequently they should not be allowed to work overtime at
all in the interests of the health of the rising generation.
Conclusion.
In conclusion, I would point out that the world owes
each man born into it a living. God never created any-
one to starve. The French Revolution arose from the
\ %


grinding down of the masses, and every upheaval of them
that has taken place since, or that will take place in the
future, will arise from the same cause. If we can all gain
a decent living on this earth, as our Creator intended we
should, the races on this globe will be happier and more
contented.
As regards this small State of Victoria, I would
observe that, as civilisation and the white man advanced,
the black man died out; as the “Triumphs of Machinery ”
and “ Progress ” advances, the white man will die out
unless something is done to stop its career in the hands of
the few.
The Last Man.
Those interested in machinery will ridicule my ideas,
and glibly inform you that “ The ‘ Triumphs of Machinery ’
far out-balance the temporary embarrasments of the
moment,” but as nearly the trifle of two centuries have
elapsed since their commencement, it will take until the
crack of doom for them to pass away, when there will
only be one man left, who will gaze on the “Triumphs
of Machinery ” surrounding him on all sides, and
jubilantly exclaim, “ ‘ Beaten at Last ! ’ I will now,
with God’s assistance, start a new world without any of
these ‘ Devices of the Devil.”
FINIS.
Geo, Whitehurst. Printer, 241 Bridge Road, Richmond.
