

Tlie Rise, Progress, Indus-
tries, Resources, and
Prospects
OF THE
TOWN & DISTRICT
MACKAY.
GEORGE J. PERKINS.
P n tla it :
H. B. BLACK & CO., PEINTERS, SYDNEY-STREET,




H: A 6 K. h Y.
Introduction.
Advance Australia ! Is this a prayer ? Then is it in its
deepest and broadest sense, a grand, unselfish and sublime
desire. Is it a hope ? Then who, amongst her rapidly
increasing progeny, will not trom his very soul join in the
hope, that by a rapid, mighty and sure progress, she may
advance to as proud a position in this Southern world, as
her brethren have attained unto in the Northern ? But
once again, is it an imperative call ? Is she demanding of
her children, who are herself, that they raise the honour,
the prestige, and the glory of their land higher and higher
as the cycles roll ? It is perhaps all these, but especially
the last ? For wherein does the glory of a land lie but in
her people ? What avails it that a country be teeming in
natural wealth, either upon its surface, or beneath it, or
both, if her children be not capable of making use of that
wealth ? Or what avails it that the sun shall shine upon,
and the rain sink into the most fertile soils, if the people
care not to develop their fertilizing powers ? Can the
grand rivers of our plains, the picturesque scenery of our
mountains, the indented line of the sea, aye even the coral
rocks and islands of our coasts, be looked upon, and we be
not made to feel, that by a language, more powerful than
the voice of man, they are beckoning us to come and
utilise them ? Do not the rivers call upon us to guide
their majestic currents as they roll along, to the refreshing
of the dry, thirsty, and oft times scorched up plains,
through which they flow ? Do they not tell us, that they
will be glad to spread over the land, at the command, of
man ; that they will bask and revel in the paradise they
will create, and in the prosperous and happy homes that
will spring up upon their banks ? Do not the mountains
call upon us to dig and delve, for they have riches in
their bosom ? And will not even the waves “ lift up their
voice,” when, in exultation, they bear to and fro the
commerce of the nations, and make our merchants
princes ? Such thoughts are more than the dream of the
enthusiast; they have indeed been realised. It has been
by such a response, that Britain, pre-eminently, has
attained to such a grand position in the Old World ; and
that her first-born America is so rapidly coming into close


competition with her in power and riches in the New. It
is indeed by response as strong as we have been able as
yet to make, that our own people of the South have begun
to build to themselves a name and a place, and to bring
to themselves respect as nations. Infant nations we are
it is true. We have much to learn and much to study,
before we shall know how to mature our plans, combine our
forces, and accumulate our strength to the mutual
advantage of every one, and to the best effect. Many
experiments will be made and many errors will no doubt
be committed. But of one thing we must be certain, and
that one thing is success. As infant nations of Australia,
are we not strong, robust and hearty ? Do we not in the
atmosphere in which we live, and from the blood which
flows in our veins, breathe that freedom, and
independence, and emulation, which are bound to lead on
our countries to a glorious? future ? Is not this
magnificent exhibition in our beautiful southern
metropolis, a tangible proof off the stirring emulation of
which we speak ? Is there ome Australian patriot, from
north to south, whose soul does-! not thrill with pride and
satisfaction, when he looks mpon the gorgeous Show of
Melbourne ? Does he not realiise that it is the response,
not only of Victoria and her neighbour colonies, but of
the whole world, upon their halving been called upon, to
pay compliment to, and to bid for, a share of the
■commerce of one of the most flourishing young countries
of the World. We, of Queensland, join our
■congratulations ; and, when we; think that only about fifty
years ago, Batman and his rivral Fawkner, first seriously
began the work of settling Port Phillip, we are led to
speculate upon the greatness off the Victorian nation fifty
years hence, if she only continue the building up of her
state with the same energy and wisdom she has hitherto
displayed.. But individual effort has never been more de-
manded than at this stage of our history ; and that perhaps
especially, in our own grand, undeveloped Queensland.
Never will the words of the immortal Nelson be more
applicable to our condition than now; for indeed to-day
Australia “ expects every man to do his duty.”
Every man ! For there is an independence of action, for
which every man is responsible. Like the numerous
wheels, and springs, and levers, of a complicated machine,
we each have our one place, and according as we enact our
individual parts, so will the united power of our operations
be manifest. We have to scatter over the land, to pioneer
new regions, to prospect and open out new districts, and
then to invite others to come and assist us in our


■enterprises, and to help with ourselves in founding
another centre to strengthen the common cause. It is at
this stage that Queensland now exists; she is, first and
foremost, the colony calling for individual industry and
■enterprise. Her children, whilst exclaiming “ Advance
Australia,” can unselfishly and dutifully pray “ Advance
Queensland.” We will not now dilate upon the resources
ol our mineral and vegetable worlds, upon our glorious
climate and the large capabilities of the soil. Suffice it to
point out, that being Australians we are full of zeal for the
prosperity of our common fatherland; that being
Queenslanders our endeavours are primarily directed to
the country, and to that part of it which we have chosen.
It is expected that every man will direct his energies to
the good of his country ; and to this end every individual
citizen, whether he reside on the station, in the bush, or in
the town, must cut out for himself a circumscribed course
of action, confined more or less to the district or town in
which he dwells. Here let him apply himself heartily to
his plans. Let him be determined to succeed in what we
thus call his business. Let him be honest, upright and
charitable. He will be the citizen, who will be able to
give a substantial account of his own exertions ; he will he
a blessing to the community amongst whom he dwells;
and he will most assuredly he one of whom Queensland
will one day say, that “he has done his duty.” He is a
citizen who will always be ready to encourage others to
come and join us; and to lend a helping hand, and a
cheery word to the new chum, in his first efforts. He will
love tire district he has chosen, and its prosperity will be
swnet to him, Now, the object of this pamphlet is to
search tor, and to find such men, and to tell them, that
should they be seeking a place, where their energies can
have full scope, and their capital can be judiciously
handled, they will do well to thoughtfully consider the
capabilities of this neighbourhood, which we hold to be as
good as any in the land. We want many such citizens to
come amongst us. We believe that much good solid
prosperity would ensue. Our voice is already becoming
strong, but we want thousands yet to join in our refrain
“ Advance Mackay.”
Situation.
Mackay is situated in Latitude 21° 5' South, and in
119° 28' Longitude East, and about 625 miles north-west
of Brisbane. The town is built chiefly upon the south or
right bank of the Pioneer River, about five miles from the
line of the Pacific Coast. Lately, a grand iron bridge.


known, as, the Sydney Streset Bridge, has been thrown
across the river ; so that, in aill probability, the near future
will see an extension of the town on the north side. The
country drained by the Pioneeer, is a plain on the south,
bounded by high broken ivanges, running at unequal
distances of from 20 to 5(0 miles from the coast; and
forming the Watershed of the Pioneer River, Baker’s,
Sandy, Plane, Cherry-tree, Rocky Dam, and numerous
smaller creeks, on the ocean side ; whilst on the western
slope, they form the Watershed of the rivers Connor,
Isaacs, Nogoa, &0., which ultimately enter the Fitzroy,
upon which Rockhampton stands. A range of hills,
leaving the main or Connor’s Range at right angles, runs
north-east to Cape Palmerston, under the name of the
Mount Funnel Range; and forms the southern boundary
of the plain of Mackay.
To the north of the Pioneer, the country is more
uneven, and is well defined, by the continuation
north-west of the elevated coastal range, verging towards
Bowen. This portion of the district, too, is remarkably
well-watered by the Proserpine and O’Connell Rivers, and
the Dempster, Blackrock, Scrubby, Constant, and other
creeks. Some of the Mghest summits in North
Queensland occur in this district; as, for example, Mts.
Mia Mia, The Twins, Black (Gin’s Leap, Roy, Blackwood,
Pelion, Sweetland, &c., mmuntain tops; and Pinnacle,
Dalrymple, (4255 ft.), Macartmey, Miller, &c., peaks in the
ranges. The district of Mtackay, therefore, apart from
Commercial considerations?, possesses the important
advantages of good drainage,, an abundance of water, every
variety of country, and beautiful scenery.
Physical Advantages of Mackay.
By tracing upon a map the boundaries already named,
it will be seen that, following south and east the ranges of
the watershed from Bowen to Cape Palmerston, the whole
of the district is hemmed in by mountains on the inland
side ; whilst along the Ocean line, no obstruction arises to
prevent the salubrious and bracing breezes of the Pacific
from bestowing their full benefits upon the land. Indeed,
it is this peculiar physical feature of the Mackay district,
which makes it in climate, rainfall and dew, to stand
pre-eminently fortunate, as compared with any other part
of tropical Queensland. The mountains inland are high
enough to arrest, in a large degree, the masses of cloud
borne in from the sea, before they can become evaporated
by the intense heat of the interior. This is shown by the


superior rainfall, as compared with other parts of tho
coast, and by the heavier dews. It is also plainly
evidenced in the beautiful verdure of our pastoral areas,
and in the luxuriance of our grasses. We reap the
advantages of our position, again, in the delicious
sea-breezes which rise almost daily in the forenoon, and
continue till towards the evening. It is these
physical advantages upon which I have briefly
touched, that have turned this district, within 30 years,
from an expansive waste of Nature’s richness, trodden
only by the foot of the savage, into an industrial region,
advanced by scientific and good farming to a position
second to none in Australia. I say “It has turned it into
such a region.” I should have said, “It has turned a
small portion, a speck of this beautiful land, into such a
region.” For there are thousands upon thousands of
■acres, still remaining to be worked by the plough and the
harrow; and areas of vast extent are as yet almost as
silent as when left to the savage alone.
Present Population.
The population of the District consists of Europeans,
from the British Islands, Germany, France, Norway,
Sweden, and Denmark. There is a considerable number
of South Sea Islanders and Chinese, who are engaged in
field labour. The total population as returned to the
legislative Assembly in October, 1887, exclusive of
■Chinese, kanakas, and other alien races, prisoners, &c.,
was given at 7491, of whom 2876 are adult males. The
number of European Immigrants landed direct in Port
Mackay in 1886, was Males, 212; Females, 81; Total,
293.
Parliamentary Representation.
This District was represented, during the late parliament,
by M. Hume Black, Esq., a gentleman of Conservative
views, who advocated the cause of the Planters generally,
and who was looked upon in the Assembly as the
representative of the Sugar Industry. By the amended and
■additional Electorates Act passed last session, the District
lias been apportioned two members'for the Assembly, and at
the Election which took place in Mackay on Saturday, May
sth, Mr. Black returned at the head of the poll
■witli a majority of 881 votes over the Ministerial
candidate. The second successful candidate is D. H.
Dalrymple, Esq., now a squatter, but formerly of the town
of Mackay; a gentleman of Liberal-Conservative views.


He was the first Mayor of thee Municipality, and has since-
that time spent much time and labour in advancing the
interests of the place with which he is closely connected
both financially and sociallly. He is a good speaker,
brilliant in repartee, and willl make a valuable addition to
General Committees of the House. Though untried as a
parliamentary representatives he is so popular that his
polling was only 35 votes Ibelow Mr. Black’s numbers.
Out of 1860 voters 1480 wentt to the poll.
Climate, Moisture, llainfall, and Temper-
atmre.
The climate of this district: is very humid. Mr. Henry
Ling Roth thus speaks of it : “The Hollow observations,
reduced, give the humiditSy at 88-1, (that of Sydney
1859-1875, is 73-1.) The hramidity depends largely on the
winds, as well as naturally om the rains ; it rises gradually
from January to June ; falls irather more rapidly, attaining
its mean lowest point in iN owe tuber ; then rises slightly in
December and rapidly im January. Extreme dry
atmosphere is exceptional, selldom lasting more than a few
days ; but extremely saturated atmosphere lasts for three
weeks or more occasionally.. When the atmosphere is
highly saturated, books, clothes, furniture, <%c., are covered
with mildew, and the greatest care is requisite to prevent
their destruction ; lightly bound books must at such times,
be carefully handled, otherwise their backs come off; in
dry weather on the contrary book covers will curl up.
The rainy season usually commences about the end of
December, and continues with alternate two or three
weeks dry and wet, until April, and occasionally into
May. In June and July, there is usually a small amount
of rain ; August is the least supplied ; in September, there
is a slight increase, and this increase continues in October
when thunder storms set in, until December brings the
rainy season on again. The less healthy periods are
towards the the end of the year, before the wet weather
sets in, and during, and after, the wet seasons. From
August to the middle of November the climate is genial.”
As a rule the climate must be considered good for
Europeans. It must, however, be borne in mind, that
very much depends upon the constitutions of individuals,
and their habits of life at the time of, and alter, their
arrival in the colony.
The mean average temperature in the shade, for 12
years, by The Hollow observations, is 72-6°. December is
the hottest month; the mean temperature decreasing


slowly until March, when the decrease is at the rate of
about 4 degrees per month, until the lowest mean (Gl'6) is
reached in July, when the rise is at, the rate of between
four and five degrees per month, until the mean of October
is attained; the rise is often rapid in November, whose
mean is sometimes only slightly less than that of
December.” The following tables will best illustrate the
rainfall and temperature.
Rainfall.
Compiled from Meteorological Observations made by
Messrs Eawson Bros, at The Hollow, Mackay. Latitude
21° 12' South. Longitude 148° 5' East. Distance from
coast 20 miles. Height above sea level 197|- feet.


June 20th ...
32,0
June 26th ...
30.5
July 14th
84.5
August 20th...
87.0
Shade Temperature
Highest Maximum,
Lowest Minimum, and
for each
Mouth, 1887.
Mean for 1;
January .
February
March
Average for 188 T
Average for 12
September
October ..
November
December
Grass Thermometer.
Lowest Readings for June, July, and August, 1887.
Memoranda. —The greatest monthly fall of rain was
60-11 inches in March 1882. Least monthly fall of rain
0-00 inches in September 1883. Greatest fall in 24 hours,
10-40 inches, on January 80th, 1884.
Highest known flood at 2-30 p.m. 31st. January 1884,
on which occasion, the rainfall in 8 consecutive days was
21-45 inches. The river Pioneer rose 52 feet above
ordinary level.”
Messrs. Rawson’s valuable statistics show that, to a
certain degree, the average fall may be depended upon.
This has been most strikingly exemplified during the late
disastrous drought; so that, whereas, in many parts of the
colony the country was reduced to a desert, and stock
owners ruined, in this neighbourhood it was but little felt.
To be able to depend in a measure upon the rainfall is
undoubtedly a very great advantage to the farmer; and the
advantage will be enhanced, in proportion as variety in
agricultural produce increases.


Geological Features.
In the latter part of 1887, the Mackay District was
visited by our learned Geologist, Mr. E. L. Jack. His
report was sent in to the Honourable the Minister for
Works and Mines, dated Bth November, 1887. This is the
first reliable data we have before us, and his report must
be looked upon, rather as introductory, and inducive to
further investigation. I cannot do better than to lay
before my readers portions of this report, in Mr. Jack’s
own words. He says : —“ Having a rich soil and sufficient
rainfall, Mackay has, till recently, depended mainly on
agricultural and pastoral pursuits, but within the last few
years, some attention has been devoted to prospecting for
mineral wealth.
Coal.
“ In the immediate neighbourhood of Mackay there is
abundant evidence of the presence of the coal measures.
In a railway cutting at Pleystowe Station (11J miles from
Mackay) shales and sandstones are seen dipping mainly
Southward, at an angle of ten degrees, with an intrusive
mass of yellow felspathic porphyry, which has been quarried
(on the south side of the railway) for ballast. At Green-
mount Station (12 J miles), another cutting discloses a long
section of dark clay shales, dark argillaceous sandstone,
and greenish-grey sandstone, dipping west at a low angle,
The stratified rocks are here interrupted by two sheets of
intrusive basaltic rock, which as usual assumes the form of
‘ white trap ’ at its junction with the carbonaceous strata.
At Pleystowe Bridge, grey shales and sandstones occupy
the bed of the Pioneer Eiver, and dip at a low angle to the
west-north-west. A few chains below the bridge, a sheet
of basalt crosses the river, having been intruded along the
planes of bedding. On the Walkerston and Eton road the
flats and hollows mostly exhibit outcrops of rather highly-
inclined grey sandstones, and dark shales, (dipping on the
whole to the north-west), while the hills are composed
either of basaltic or dioritio rocks or of yellow felspathic
porphyry. These igneous rocks may be presumed to be
intrusive through the stratified rocks, like those seen in the
railway cuttings above referred to. Along the road between
Walkerston and Eton, the intrusive rocks occupy probably
a larger area than the stratified rocks which they have
displaced.
“ Three miles south-west of Mount Britton township, on a
ridge near Mr. Richards’ selection, some beds of ferruginous
and in part calcareous sandstones are seen dipping to the


north-west. They are full of fossils, of the type of the
middle or marine series of the Bowen River Coal Field.
On the right bank of Bee Creek, above its junction with
Hail Creek, two shafts known as ‘ Walker’s ’ were sunk.
about nine years ago. The coaly seams of the section are
composed of black carbonaceous mud, with streaks and
films of coal. A water-worn sample of coal from the bed
of the creek had a specific gravity of 1.57 and contained—-
Water ... ... ... ... ... 2.87
Volatile Hydrocarbon ... ... ... 12.61
Fixed Carbon (hard stony coke) ... 60.91
Ash (white) . 23.61
100.00
In the bed of Walker’s Creels, about two miles above its
junction with Reedy or Carborough Creek, three small
shafts have been sunk on a coal seam, but in no case has
the bottom of the seam been reached. There can be no
doubt that the coal measures of this district are on the
horizon of the Upper or Freshwater Series of the Bowen
River Coal Field (Newcastle, Woolongong and Bowenfels
beds of New South Wales.) A gratifying and promising
circumstance is the absence of intrusive igneous rocks from
this district.
“ Coal is known to occur in Cherwell Creek, and near
Lake Elphinstone Station, but I did not visit these localities.
“ The coal of Walker’s Creek is an anthracite containing
a higher percentage of fixed carbon, and a lower percentage
of earthy impurities, than any coal of its class known
in Queensland or New South Wales. It approaches in
composition some of the best anthracites of Wales and
Pennsylvania. A specimen analysed had a specific gravity
of 1.38, and contained—
Water ... ... ... ... ... 2.99
Volatile Hydrocarbons... ... ... 8.71
Fixed Carbon (firm hard coke) ... 84.74
Ash (pale brown) ... .. ... 8.56
100.00
The Bee Creek coal visibly contains a large proportion of
argillaceous impurity (resulting in 23.61 per cent of ash).
Purer seams however may exist in this locality than those
which are exposed by the creek.
“ The St. Helen’s coal contains too much argillaceous
and siliceous matter (yielding 18,05 per cent, of ash) to be
of workable quality. It must, however, be remembered
that the sample analysed occurred as a boulder in the
creek, The tendency of the forces, which carry on the


process of erosion, would naturally be to disintegrate the
more carbonaceous, and, consequently, more tender
portions of coal seams, and to leave as boulders only the
harder and more stony portions,
“ Coal seams of workable thickness, and of good quality
are known to exist in the Mackay district, and others may
with confidence be expected to be discovered in localities
not yet explored.
Gold.
“ To the intrusion of igneous rooks among the coal
measures, and consequent metamorphism of the latter, the
district is indebted for the production of gold and other
metals of economic value. From what I have seen of the
Gympie Goldfield, I incline to the belief, that the presence
of carbonaceous rocks, charged with pyrites, is one of the
essential conditions of the production of the gold. Dain-
tree held that another and very important condition was
the intrusion of masses of diorite. In several places in
the immediate neighbourhood of Mackay, the doleritic or
dioritic intrusive masses, which interrupt the coal measures,
and sometimes the coal measures themselves, are inter-
sected by quartz reefs. In one of these, in Selection 661,
the country rock is a quartz diorite. The quartz is
accompanied by a clayey gangue. I was informed that
two samples, assayed by Mr. M, T. Staiger, of Brisbane,
gave respectively loz. sdwts., and Boz. 12dwts. of gold to
the ton. In Mr. Bell’s selection (No. 615), south of Mount
Chelona, two reefs occur in decomposed ferruginous
felspathio sandstone. The quartz is seamed and veined
with iron oxide. Two samples assayed are said to have
yielded 9dwts. and 17dwts. silver, and 16 dwts gold per
ton respectively.
“ Mount Britton Township lies on the west side of the
Marlingspikes Mt., about 75 miles by road from Mackay.
The workings on the goldfield have hitherto been confined
to two groups of reefs ; the first at the head of Nuggety
Gully, comprises the Little Wanderer and other reefs, and
the second comprises the Edith May, Black Slates, and a
few others. From Keeley and Valentine’s claim the three
following assays were made :
4th April, 1884, J. M. Smith, Sydney, Boz. sdwts. Bgrs. gold.
20th May 1884, Chas, Watt, Sydney, loz. ISdwts. gold,
and loz. silver.
11th February, 1885, Sydney Mint, loz. llfdwts. gold.
The sample assayed at the Sydney Mint, was collected from
the shaft impartially, at intervals of 10 feet, and the total
quantity averaged for the assay weighed 1£ cwt. From


the Edith May Eeef, a collection of magnificent specimens,
from 60 feet, were sent to the Colonial and Indian
Exhibition.* Mr. C. Gibbard, manager of the Little
Wanderer G.M. Co., accompanied me over the ground and
pointed out the places where the large nuggets were
obtained. Amongst these were the following -
An Boz. nugget, in the prospecting claim between the
junction of Nuggety Gully and Oakey Creek.
£6O worth of gold got by Chinese among large rounded
boulders on the right bank of Nuggety Gully.
A Frenchman got 60oz. of gold where the dray road crosses
the gully.
Four nuggets were obtained on the banks of the gully,
weighing respectively 450z5., 690z5., 400z5., and 50ozs.
One man obtained 850ozs. on the right bank opposite
Duffer’s Point.
A nugget, weighing 7ozs., and another weighing Bozs.,
were obtained above the old iron public-house.
The scarcity of fine gold, and the sporadic occurrence of
nuggets, both at Nuggety Gully and Moonlight, is very
remarkable.
“It is quite probable that careful prospecting might lead
to the discovery of noble opals and other precious stones
to the east of the township of Mt. Britton.
Silver.
“ East of Mt. Clarke several openings have been made by
Mr. R. T. Horne on veins of quartz with lead oxide, lead
carbonate, and galena, in hardened sandstone underlying
diorite. Some large lumps of galena are said to have been
assayed by Mr. E. T. Staiger, and to have given 180ozs. of
silver to the ton. The country rook is amygdaloidal
diorite. I should not be surprised if the best part of the
Mount Britton field should yet be found in this locality.
“ From Mount Britton I rode to Ewngella, a station on the
Broken River, to see a tin mine reported to have been
discovered there. The lode runs north and south and
underlies at a high angle to the east. It contains from 12
to 18 inches of ore, a mixture of quartz, blebs, mica,
garnets, wolfram, and iron glance. As wolfram is
frequently associated with tin ore, and as the garnets may
really have replaced the tin ore, it is possible that the
desired metal may actually be present in the lode at a
* Some of these form part of the Mackay exhibits in the present
Exhibition.


depth. About 4 miles north-west of the junction of
Tierawomba and Boothill Creeks, a reef or lode, 6 feet
wide, runs east and west. -It contains a good deal of
cavernous and ferruginous quartz, with steatite, carbonate
of copper, a little ferruginous copper oxide (“tile ore”),
and a little lead oxide. An assay by Mr. Heath, of
Rockhampton, gave 25ozs. of silver to the ton, and a trace
of gold. There are other similar lodes in the
neighbourhood.
Yatton.
“ A good deal of money has been expended wastefully in
opening up the new (Yatton) Gold Field. It is only lately
that systematic mining can be said to have had a
commencement in the Yatton Prospecting Company’s
mines. The gold sells for £8 17s. per oz. from the Red
Streak reef. Some stone from the St. Catherine reef gave
excellent prospects, and 40 or 50 ozs. of gold were got in a
bend of the gully beside the Mountain Maid reef. Gold
was first found at Yatton seven years ago, and 500 ozs. are
said to have been then got by “ gully-raking,” but the
working had to be abandoned on account of the drought.
Messrs. Mackie and Keppert found a patch of “ specimens ”
in one of the reefs, in the prospecting claim, in September,
1885. Payable gold was reported to the Warden on 24th
March, 1886.
Marble.
“ Hunter Island is in longtitude 149° 9' east, and latitude
21° 58' south. It extends from north to south about a mile
and a quarter, and has an average breadth of less than a
quarter of a mile. The limestone of which there is an
unlimited quantity would serve admirably for a building
stone, or for the manufacture of lime. Some argillaceous
portions would make hydraulic lime. The marble is
minutely crystalline and pure white, and quite fit for
ornamental architecture or statuary. What I have alluded
to as “ pink ” marble is a very beautiful stone, suffused
with a faint blush-rose tint. Two parallel quartz reefs
occur in the granite of the northern portion of the island.
Prom a shaft, which has been sunk, I was informed that
half a ton of stone yielded 16 dwts of gold.
Lead.
“ I assayed two samples from a vein of ore, two feet wide.
The first, consisting mainly of carbonate of lead and earthy
impurities, gave 42 per cent of lead, and 19 ozs. 12
dwts. of silver, to the ton. The second gave 6 per cent, of


lead, and 5 ozs. of silver, to the ton, besides a trace of
antimony. If, as is probably the case, the silver is strictly
in accordance with the proportion of lead in the ore, this
is not so poor an assay as it may at first sight appear. In
the same ratio per unit of lead an ore containing 70 per
cent, of lead, would yield 58 ozs. of silver per ton. About
70 yards further to the south-west a small paddock of ore
shows quartz with lead carbonates and oxides. Mr. H.
Varcoe, the manager of the tunnel claim, informed me that
this ore assayed 28 ozs. of silver and 7 dwts. of gold per
ton. He gave me specimens of bullion, said to have been
smelted from the pyritous veins in the tunnel. One of
these was assayed by Mr. E. B. Lindon, of Brisbane, and
gave 90.4 per cent, of lead, and 582 ozs. 9 dwts. 8 grs. of
silver and 1 oz. 8 dwts. of gold per ton.
Copper.
“ On a little unwooded hill near the beach 8 miles north
of Marion Creek is a small lode with stains of carbonate of
copper and crystals of copper (carbonate and silicate. A
mile to the south, on the easft side ot Green Hill is a
cupreous lode. I was informed tthat an assay by Mr. K. T.
Staiger, gave 12 per cent, of copper and 5 dwts. of gold per
ton. A block of ironstone with quartz, found a little way up
the inlet, assayed, I was informed, 4 ozs. 18 dwts. of gold
per ton.”
Summary of Mining Resources.
The Report, from which I have so extensively quoted,
is valuable beyond merely the information it contains.
It is the first official notice that has been taken of our
geological resources ; and Mr. Jack’s observations were
naturally limited to those few spots which have already
struck the uninitiated. We cannot then but feel that,
as population and capital increase, and as the land
becomes more thoroughly prospected, there must be found
riches in the earth around us, probably beyond our
present realisation. In all directions the metals abound,
and Mr. Jack has, in the case of Walker’s Creek coal,
pronounced it to surpass any coal of its kind known in
Queensland or New South Wales. Thus we have in
our minerals a vast field for enterprise, both on the
part of the miner and the prospector. From the
foregoing it may readily be conceived that residents
in this district are justified in forming bright anticipations
of the future mineral development of the treasures now
lying hidden in this district, and what is felt to be the


great want at the present moment is the advent of
men of enterprise and energy, possessed of a fair amount
of capital, and imbued with a speculative spirit, which
would enable the undoubted mineral resources of the
locality to be fairly opened up. That this would result
in advantage to such men can scarcely be doubted,
for, if science counts for anything, we have the assurance
of a man of unquestionable scientific knowledge that
here all the best indications of vast stores of mineral
wealth are present, while at the same time the tentative
experiments already made at Mount Britton and Mounts
Gotthardt and Orange have afforded the practical proof
of the reliability of Mr. Jack’s forecasts. At Mount
Britton there have, for years, been from 40 to 100 men
making a living at least from fossicking about, and
prospecting in the gullies and flats, while during the
seasons when the reefs have been worked an additional
number have necessarily been employed. Mr. Keeley
informs me that during tire past ten years a considerable
amount of energy has been expended upon the mining-
development of this district. At Mount Britton, where
five distinct reefs have been opened up, there are at present
about 100 men employed, and the fact that, in addition to
the assays included in Mr. Jack’s report, the Mount
Britton Gold Mining Company have had several crushings
put through, when the returns were from three to seven
ounces to the ton, gives the most substantial assurance of
the genuine character of the reefs. Mount Gotthardt is
situated 94 miles from Maekay, and is one of the chief
centres for copper production in this district. The ore
averages 25 per cent., and furnaces and smelting works
were erected and a large quantity of copper, in the form of
“ pig” has been sent away. At Mounts Orange and Flora,
within 80 miles of town, large works were carried on a few
years ago. A large quantity of ore was shipped from the
latter mines to Newcastle, and after treatment there,
showed a good profit. From Mount Orange also, where
several lodes have been opened up, and where a furnace
and stack have been erected, a quantity of copper has been
sent to the market; and the whole vicinity has been
correctly described when it is said that the ranges around
are a network of copper. Just now some of these copper
properties are being offered in the London Market, and it
may be confidently predicted that they will be readily
taken up. The only reasons which can be assigned for
their temporary abandonment in the past are that the
price of copper fell so low a few years ago, and that the
shareholders were unable to agree among themselves.


With an improved tone in the copper market, such as is
now shown, those extensive and thoroughly proved copper
mines will, when developed by the influx of a moderate
capital, without doubt prove highly profitable investments.
Already they are attracting the attention of Southern
capitalists, who are now in treaty for the purchase of some
of the properties ; but the numbers of splendid lodes in all
directions still furnish opportunities for speculation of the
safest and most substantial character.
The Soil.
The next subject for our consideration is the soil of the
Mackay District, and its capabilities for agriculture. We
will classify the soil as Scrub, Flats, and Eidges, The
first is for the most pant alluvial, very richly
supplemented by the decayed vegetation of river banks and
well watered districts. It is known by its black colour,
.and is similar to the artificial mould for potting so
carefully prepared by our own professional gardeners in
the old country. This ‘humus,’ as it is technically termed,
is sometimes as much as twenty feet in depth and is the
richest of all soils. Plants and especially fruit-bearing
species, will grow in it in the utmost luxuriance ; and its
fructifying powers are of the highest order. The flats are
formed chiefly of alluvial washings from the higher
grounds, lying either upon a more or less pure clay, or
upon a gravelly clay loam. This soil will yield good cane,
hut more quickly becomes exhausted in its organic
constituents, and should be fed from the first with
systematic manuring. The ridges are formed, to a large
■extent, from the decay of the sandstone and grit rocks, and
volcanic formations. Where the latter predominate, the
land is highly retentive, and always fertile. Thus on
.apparently rough mountain ridges, magnificent timber is
found, and the directing hand of man only is needed, to
secure almost any other kind of tree produce. The
mineral constituents of the soil, too, abound. Thus cane
will continue to produce a fine stalk even when its yield
■of saccharine juice is diminished ; and a little scientific
knowledge will explain why a paddock’s crushing may
yield a much smaller amount of juice, than the appearance
■of the canes, on the field, would have led one to
estimate.
There is no part in Queensland, of equal size, more
thoroughly farmed than is this district; and the richness
of the soil has shown itself, in that it continues to yield
good returns, notwithstanding years of cultivation, and


barely any aid by manure. It is absurd, however, to
expect that the land, unaided, will yield crops for ever ;
and it would be well, if small farmers and selectors, from
the first breaking up of their homesteads, provided as far
as they could for a periodical manuring, taking their
paddocks by rotation. Even the grasses of the unbroken
homesteads and pastoral districts bear witness to the
richness of the ground; for wild and unkept, as most
paddocks are, the grass is of such a satisfying and
nutritious nature, that probably in no country in the world
can horses be sustained so well on grass alone, under the
same quantity of service demanded.
For the perusal of those of my readers who may be
interested in the scientific view of the matter, I will here
append a few analyses of soils of this district, and as a key
to their better understanding, I will first give the
celebrated Dr. Yoelcker’s Analyses (1) of a fertile loam of
the highest order, as published in the Royal Agricultural
Society’s Journal, Yol. XXI, part 1; and (2) of a pasture
1. Analysis of a Fertile Loam.
Surface Soil. Subsoil.
Organic matter and Water of com-
bination ... 4.38 ... 2.59
Alumina ... ... ... ... 2.15 ... 5.89
Oxide of Iron ... 3.15 ... 7.16
Lime 0.77 ... 0.26-
Magnesia 0.13 ... 1.22
Potash 0.49 ... 0.88
Soda 0.13 ... 0.28
Phosphoric Acid ... ... ... 0.12 ... 0.19
Chlorine Trace ... Trace
Sulphuric Acid 0.06 ... 0.02
Carbonic Acid 0.31 ... 1.79
insoluble Silicate and Sand
sisting of—
Silicts Acid ... 85.11 62.61
Alumina ... 2.36 14.55
Lime 0.85
Magnesia ... 0.50 0.23
Potash ... 0.25 1.77
Soda 0.09 0.21
100.00 100.00


2. Analysis of a Pasture Soil.
Moisture ... ... ... 2.42
Organic Matter ... ... 11.70
Oxides of Iron and Alumina ' ... ... ... 11.86
Carbonate of Lime ... ... ... ••• 1-24
Sulphate of Lime ... ... ... ••• 0.31
Phosphoric Acid ... ... ... •• • ... 0.08
Chloride of Sodium... ... ... 0.11
Potash (soluble in acid) ... ... ... ••• 0.91
Soluble Silica 4.09
Insoluble Siliceous Matter... ... ... ... 07.58
Total 100.25
3. Analysis of Cane Soils, Mackay
District.
Soil I Subsoil
G rave! and Sand
Fine Earth
100.00
Moisture.
Organic flatter & Com-
bined Water
Total Water & Organic
Matter
Silica, insoluble in Hy-
drochloric Acid
Soluble Silica
Chlorine ...
Sulphuric Acid .
Oarlxmic Acid .
Phosphoric Acid
Alumina
Lime
Magnesia
Alkalies .


Specimens of Canes
The following analyses of twelve different Specimens
of Canes were made in the West Indies by Dr. Stenhouse
and are here quoted upon the authority of Simmonds in
his Treatise on Sugar :
O O CO O r* CO
ci | O Cl CO CO -—i I' CO CO
r}s CO r* U 0 1 o CO
to
e 3
y
*«3
1 co O »0 <N <—i eo to
r-• t-* O CO O O rr l ■ O (M
CO (M* »C 5 —> lO I o <N
I - -
| O'* T* CO* Cl O Cl
o I CM O CO O O O CO | CM
Cl CO CO O »Q O O ' Th
I 10 - -< -
OTO ODt'CC—' -+H HH
ijotsaa-xf) es | " “I, S "! . I M . °
L ky i CO <0 CD 1C »d —1 1 —1 I>-
CM cc
l> N H W W OO
VIVIQIUVa CO I O CO O CC O O , <N
V 1 i>* ir- cs cc * o r-
1 no
«“q CO rji Cl Cl O I Cl
t-6 l''» ■rf *-h O r-i I
( V —t —I
o
y
1 ?
3)
:
O CO o Cl f— Cl CO Cl
0 | o »C rji O O CO CO I Cl
O CC CC uo CO CO r-H 1 CO
ICO r-H
CO o IN CO - C 5. N
o th -* 10 o Ci iq I o
o co i> io id d I co
i i-- cs co <m cs «r> co
co o cs • cs cs | cs
TjH o cs o »o • CO
- -
O CO O — 1 O CO
CO •'*olo 0 0 0 I rf! OJ
O CO rr’ cc rp’ O ‘ O
!
OOt^OCO—«C: CJ
O O C. Oj O CC i o
j oi o cc ci cm i—< • r-4
1 1— cc O O CC O I— Cl
I I O O o >0 I Cl o
I | to c 6 O C 5 co >o ' « ci
I r* e*
;j;:; i : I I
*o ■© o
. <3 y . . . • Ch
: „<: : ; : -
o *C •- O o
~ » f—> r
s o rs .s
H «““< .. Q CQ U. »
g £ H to « 4; ,2 °
ccp^c^^lSP-idoQS


The first seven were all fine canes with the leaves ; the
eighth had no leaves ; No. 9 but few leaves ; No. 10 was
in full blossom, and had been manured with pen manure ;
No. 11 were old ratoons, manured in the same way; and
No. 12 were young Mont Blanc canes, manured with pen
manure, guano, and marl.” My limited space will not
permit me to enlarge upon these valuable analyses. By
comparing them together, it is easy to observe the
proportions common, or nearly so, to all; and even the
unscientific, by comparing these with the constituents of
soils, as found by analysis, will be able to judge
approximately of the suitability or otherwise of their land.
Should the proper food for the cane, or any other crop, be
wanting in the land, it is evident that, unless supplied by
manure, the yield of crop must suffer. A portfolio of
Agriculture, with a permanent Under Secretary, has been
recently added to the Ministry ; and, there is but little
doubt, that full information such as I have quoted upon
sugar will be at disposal for all enquirers, upon
Government authority. No more useful work, than the
analyses of soils and Queensland vegetable products, can
be done by the Scientists of the Department.
One of the great evils hitherto, of these parts, has been
a hungry desire to amass large areas of land, not to-
cultivate and populate them, but to hold them in reserve,
till chance events enhance their value, and they can be
sold for a fortune. But, as population increases, and a
better market is found, close cultivation must be more
carefully studied, and it will bring its own reward.
Hitherto, the cultivation of the district has been almost
totally confined to sugar, of which we will more fully
speak hereafter. Other tropical products, however, may
be grown, and when large families are settled together, a
considerable increase in the income may be made by
combining smaller industries with the main crop. A few
of these I will briefly touch upon.
1. Cocoa.
“Of all domestic drinks this is the most alimentary;
and the Spaniards in South America esteem it so necessary
to the health and support of the body, that it is considered
the severest punishment to withhold it even from
criminals. Dr. Taylor gives the following as its most
important constituents ;


■Cocoabutter ... ... ... ... ... ... 50.0
Albuminoid Substances ... ... ... ... 20.0
•Starch, Sugar, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 13.0
Salts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.0
Theobromine ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.0
Other Substances ... ... ... ... ... n.o
Simmonds in his “ Tropical Agriculture,” whence the
above quotation is taken, comments thus upon the
analysis : —“ We first notice the fat or cocoa butter, which
forms about half the substance of the nibs. It is a hard,
tatty, material, which when clarified, is of a dead white
colour. Its melting point is about 100° Fahr., which
being the heat of the body, renders it of great value for
therapeutical purposes. This fat never becomes rancid,
however long it may be kept, a quality peculiar to itself.
It is hardly necessary to point out how valuable this
property is, for it places cocoa-butter first in the list of
the fatty class of our carbonaceous or heat-giving foods.
The albuminoid constituents form about 20" per cent, of
the nib. These are classed amongst the nitrogenous
principles of food, and their presence renders Cocoa one of
the richest flesh-formers we have. The alkaloid of cocoa,
theobromine, is very similar in its physiological effects to
its analogues theine and caffeine, from which it differs but
slightly in chemical composition.” I have said enough
to show that, in a climate where so much waste is
engendered during the hours of labour, no drink is more
suitable than cocoa/ and to open up its cultivation would
be a national gain. The cultivation is now confined to
the est Indies and the tropical coasts of America. It
has also lately been introduced into India ;. and the ever-
increasing demand admits of much more extended
operations. Mr. Simmonds shows the annual export from
Trinidad in 1851, at 5,552,4371h5. In 1874, it had
increased to 11,191,4341b5. The French colonies in
America yield about l,000,000!bs. Ecuador, the largest
producing state, in 1874 exported 247,498cwt5. According
to F. Engel, a flourishing cacao plantation requires less
outlay and trouble, and yields more profit than any other
tropical plant. The cultivation is suited to large
capitalists, or to very small cultivators, who grow the trees
in their own gardens.” lam not aware that any attempt
to grow cacao has yet been made in North Queensland.


2. Coffee.
The Mackay district will undoubtedly in time, be a good
coffee-producing district. The trees are already to be
found in almost every settler’s garden. A few grow and
prepare coffee for their own consumption; and there is
already one plantation in the district, whence a good
article known as the “ Millioent ” Coffee, is placed upon
the market. So high a character for delicacy of aroma
does the Millioent coffee possess that the whole product of
this plantation finds a ready sale within district
at a price much in excess of that paid for the imported
article. Millicent is situated in the country
on the north side of the Pioneer River, and there is plenty
of available land for many such plantations. “ Coffee
trees flourish in hilly districts, where the sub-soil is
gravelly; for the roots will strike down obtain
nourishment so as to keep the tree alive and fruitful for
thirty years. This is, however, about the extreme limit at
which the tree will bear fruit. Trees planted in a light
soil and in dry and elevated spots, produce smaller berries,
known as pea-berries, which have a better flavour than
those growing in rich, flat and moist soils. It is the
usual calculation, that each bushel of ripe berries will
yield 10K>s. weight of merchantable coffee. In the ten
years from 1861 to 1870, the coffee-growing countries
produced nearly 68 millions of cwts. of coffee, and the
demand is ever increasing.” The production of the
berry is so easy, and its preparation so simple, that even
for the consumption of the household, apart from all
commercial considerations, the coffee tree should have its
place upon every selector’s homestead.
3. Tea.
“ Of all drinks, none can he compared in importance
with tea, the consumption of which over the world is
enormous, and continually increasing. Tea is a very
accommodating plant, both as regards climatic range, and
the nature of the soil in which it is planted. In both
climate and soil this district offers a most promising area.
The volcanic nature of our hills and our copious rainfall,
together with our favourable climate augur well for the
future of the tea-plant in our midst. The hill-sides of
Hamilton, Ossa, and Mia Mia, are splendidly adapted ;
and although it is said, that hill-sides are to be preferred,
yet if sufficiently removed from the salt air of the sea, the
plant will flourish on level country well drained. I cannot


within the bounds of this essay enlarge upon the growth
and preparation of the leaf; such knowledge is most easily
obtainable. I will merely quote a letter from “ Tcha ” to
Mr. J. Dick, of Gooktown, which appeared in the
Qmemlander, to bear out my observations upon the
suitability of our district: —“In answer to your letter of
the 25th January, re growth of Tea in Queensland, I am
confident, that if judiciously entered upon, it must prove
successful, and be a source of benefit to the community at
large. The chocolate soil with volcanic stone is all that
could be desired in that respect. But now we want the
rainfall, which is a very important feature in the success
of the enterprise; there must be at least 100 or more
inches of rain during the year. In India, it is the rain we
depend on, when the trees are in full vigour and throw out
leaf, and when the rain ceases the sap stops flowing, and
the plant as it were becomes dormant, and that is the time
we prune and get the plantation in working order for next
season. Regarding altitude, a great many men axe of
opinion, that 1000 feet to 2000 feet is necessary for the
actual success of a plantation, but I have seen some
splendid plantations in Chittagong that are not I am sure
more than 50 feet to 100 feet above sea-level. However,
from my personal observation of twenty-four years, I
certainly prefer at least 1000 feet to be above the salt air,
but it is not necessary to be hilly; plants produce more
leaf on flat land. I certainly do think with you, that the
Government should hold out an inducement, and then
probably some one will be found with sufficient energy to
start the ball rolling, and there is not the least doubt, that
the venture will be successful. In my opinion, a grand
national benefit would thus be initiated, and at the same
time, such a course would be the means of utilising
thousands of acres of valuable land, that are now idle.
4. Tlie Cocoa-Hut Palm.
This is one of the most useful of all tropical trees, and
can be made to occupy land, which may not otherwise be
utilised. “A plenty of sunlight, a sandy soil, and full
exposure to the sea-breezes, are its main requirements.
Even the mangrove swamps along the coast, and marshy
land, the seashore banks of back-waters and rivers, can be
made use of, by shelving or throwing up into terraces
the banks along which the nut is to be planted.” “ The
produce of the tree in full health and properly tended is
much dependent on soil and climate. The average may be
put down at 60 to 80 nuts in the twelve months. It is


calculated that where the roots of the trees can reach,
water, and the soil is alluvial, the trees will bear from
eight to ten bunches or crops of fruit; in other and higher
lands, not more than six. One hundred cocoanuts
perfectly grown, and carefully dried, will, it is generally
calculated, yield when pressed ten to thirteen edangalies
(each containing 92 cubic inches,) of oil (40 nuts to an
imperial gallon.) Fruit taken from trees on salt
marshes have the least oil. Trees growing in the
most fertile soils will live for a century; others
less favoured from sixty to eighty years. They
yield their fruit, commencing about the tenth or
twelfth year, and continuing, with rare intervals, for
about forty years. The copra, or dried albuminous
pulp, yields from 55 to 56 per cent, of oil, which is
prepared in various ways. The coir, or fibrous husk of the
oocoanut, is a valuable product. It has been found suited
for the production of a variety of articles of great utility
and elegance of workmanship ; e.g., table mats, fancy
baskets and bonnets ; brushes and matting; cushions and
cordage. The constantly increasing demand for the
prepared fibre is sufficient to induce many planters to,
cultivate largely the growth of the cocoanut.”
5. Maize.
The cultivation of this plant has already received some
attention in this district; and the good yield, on many
occasions, has proved that it is possible to give it a place
amongst our cereals. It is so well-known, that it is
unnecessary for me to enter here into particulars. Some
farmers have at times complained, that when the rainfall is
irregular, the harvest is too doubtful to make it worth their
while to persevere in the growth of it. But seeing that
the climate is every year becoming better known, and that
a careful series of Meteorological Observations are now
published, it appears possible, that with our splendid
rainfall, farmers will be able to calculate much more
accurately their time for sowing, and will, consequently,
get that start to the young plant which is essential to its
successful growth and yield.
6. Rice.
At the present time, many farmers are experimenting in
the growth of rice in this neighbourhood, and appearances,
bid fair for success. In some instances Chinamen have
been entrusted with its sowing and management. “It


forms the chief food of about one-third of the human race,
and is consequently raised in immense quantities. It is
susceptible of cultivation on land too low and moist for the
production of other useful plants. “ Although there are
such innumerable varieties cultivated, practically they
resolve themselves, agriculturally, into two kinds, the
upland or mountain rice, and the lowland or aquatic rice.”
A clayey impervious soil, with a small proportion of sand
near the surface, is found to be the best for rice. When
water is let into the rice field it should be so irrigated that
in passing from one level to another the water should be
in a continual gentle motion. It is necessary to remove
all trees from the immediate vicinity as shade is very
hurtful to the crop.” Doubts having been frequently
■expressed as to the value of, or necessity for, irrigation for
rice crops, a great number of experiments to ascertain the
out-turn of irrigated and un-irrigated crops were carried
out in 1873, by Mr. Apjohn, in the Midnapore district
in India. From them may be inferred the following :
“ Firstly, that in bad seasons the canal-irrigated crop will
be, say, 4-J- times better than the unirrigated one ; and
secondly, that in ordinary years, the canal-irrigated crop
will compare with the unirrigated one as 6 to 5 at least.
This increase may not appear great when merely one acre is
considered, but becomes of vital importance, when the area
of cultivation is reckoned in hundreds of thousands of
acres.”
7. Tobacco.
Statistics prove that every year all over the world the
increase in the quantity of tobacco consumed is enormous,
and whatever may be the merits or demerits of the plant,
it is without question a grand source of income to
thousands. In our district plants from castaway seeds
unkept and untended flourish in great luxuriance. There
is no doubt then that with careful cultivation and in
proper soil the plant may be made a highly profitable
source of income. The best soil for growing tobacco
according to Mr. H. W. Norrie, is a good deep loam or
black soil with a mixture of sand in it. The best tobacco
for smoking in the pipe he continues, “ is that grown in
the southern states of America, especially Virginia, and for
cigars and cheroots, Havannah and Manilla. The planter
should if possible procure seed imported from those
places.” He says, “ Where there is no frost I do not see
anything to prevent tobacco from being grown all the
year round. In newly cleared land that cannot be


ploughed on account of roots and stumps, the soil should
be well broken up with a hoe at the proper distances apart
for planting. The best crops have been got from off new
land. If a good fire has been burnt over it with the felled
timber there will be little or no trouble with grubs or weeds
for the first year. The heaviest crops of leaf in this district
have been raised on volcanic hill scrub land.
8. Pine-Apple Cultivation.
The Minister for Lands has published a series of essays
for the instruction and guidance of selectors and as this
subject is ably set forth in one of them in the Planter and
Farmer, I cannot do better than to select such portions as
I hope may lead to further attention being given to the
subject. The writer says, “ The pine-apple grows in this
country (and I will add, in this district,) with a luxuriance
and productiveness that brings it within the reach of every
working family. Nevertheless it is one of the best paying
crops grown in Queensland at the present time. This is
principally caused by the comparatively unlimited demand
for this delicious fruit in the adjacent colonies of New
South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and New Zealand,
in which colonies the pine-apple cannot be successfully
cultivated. It is essentially a marine plant, and thrives
best near the sea ; but it is very accommodating as regards
soil. It will not endure stagnant water, therefore perfect
drainage is absolutely necessary ; and it is very sensitive
to cold. In selecting land for pineapple culture, position
is the first consideration. It should be in a district where
little or no frost occurs. A well drained sandy ridge is
excellent, or still better, a ridge of red soil of volcanic
formation, where the drainage is sure to be perfect. If no
natural shelter is near, shelter trees should be planted.
For this purpose seedling oranges or loquats should
answer perfectly well, costing nothing to raise, while they
would ultimately pay for the ground they occupy over and
above their services as shelter. Fifty to one hundred
acres make a very useful homestead, and is all a man
requires for fruit growing purposes to ensure a comfortable
income.”
9. The Banana.
Simmonds says :—“ The name of plantain and banana
is very indiscriminately applied in many countries where
they are grown, but properly speaking the term plantain
is restricted to the large plants, the fruits of which are


usually eaten cooked, while those of the banana, when xipe
bein" more saccharine, can be eaten raw as fruity The
stem is filled with an abundant pith enveloped in fibrous
cases, and containing much starch. This boiled might
serve as human food ; animals like it very much. The sap
is so abundant, that it escapes whenever an incision is
made into the outer coating. According to Boussingault it
contains tannin, gallic acid, acetic acid, chloride of sodium,
salts of lime, potash, and aluminium. If cotton, linen, or
flax, be dipped into it, whilst perfectly fresh, it deposits a
colouring matter of a yellowish grey, which adheres to the
fibre. It eventually assumes a purplish tint, which is
durable. The sap has also medicinal properties, and is used
to stop internal and external hemorrhage, as tannin is in
other countries. The banana in good soil grows to the
height of 20 feet. It is about 9 inches in diameter at the
base tapering towards the top, whence it sends out a shoit
stalk bearing a heavy cluster of fruit weighing from 501hs. to
701b5.” The banana loves moist situations, and requires
for perfect development a rich soil. The scrub lands of
North Queensland are unsurpassed for the production of
this useful fruit. In the southern parts of Queensland,
large fortunes have been made by banana growing; but
there the plants take dry rot after seven or eight years,
probably from the effects of the too severe cold of the
winter season. In the north, it does not happen, and
already, from the Cairns district, a large shipping traffic is
carried on with the South. There is ample scope, and a
good market, for any extension of this industry in our own
district. “ Missionaries in the Congo region in Africa
have discovered that a beverage made of bananas is a
preventive of malarial fever. A banana liquor company
has recently been started in India for producing banana
liquor in either an alcoholic or non-alcoholic form, to be
used with equal advantage as an ordinary liquor or diluted
with hot or cold, or soda water.
10. Nutmegs.
The Nutmeg is indigenous to this district, being found
in the scrub of the Pioneer Eiver banks. It is said to
be a native of New Guinea ; and now that the Malacca
yield has been almost cut off by disease, there is no
reason why the enormous profits which have been
derived from the Malacca plantations should not be
obtained equally well here. The drawback with selectors
is, that 8 or 10 years must elapse _ before they can reckon
upon any adequate return. It is astonishing, however,


how quickly the time will fly by ; and if the selector will
at the outset start with his nutmeg paddock, he will find
that the fruit will be in bearing almost as soon as he
will be be prepared to attend to the industry. The
average yield in the Straits is £4O per acre. The trees
produce from 1000 to 2000 nuts per annum, which
at 2s. per hundred gives a gross return of £1 to £2
per tree.
11. The Olive.
This tree has long been confined to the south of
Europe. Latterly, however, it has been introduced into
South Australia and Victoria, and is now being cultivated
with great success. The large demand for the oil of the
olive will always ensure a ready market. “ Sir Samuel
Davenport, of Beaumont, Adelaide, has a small plantation
containing about 1500 trees, which yield on an average
about 1 cwt. of fruit per tree, producing 2 gallons of oil.
Some 2000 gallons of oil are made annually, and it is
said to be the best oil obtainable for table use. The
present market value of olive oil in London is from ss.
to 9s. per gallon, and in the Melbourne market from 6s.
to 10s. per gallon. The olive will grow in almost any
soil except heavy clay or low damp situations. In this
country ridges having an easterly aspect would be the
preferable situation. The trees need manuring to ensure
a full supply of fruit. All kinds of animal and vegetable
matter are suitable; and guano, nightsoil, and all the
more soluble manures have an immediate effect upon
the tree.”
12. Saisins.
The adaptability of our climate to fruit-growing is so
remarkable that in introducing yet one more article to
the attention of my readers I will confine the subject
to a quotation from the Planter and Farmer, a journal
which should be in the hands of every selector. It says,
“ What is good for the Cape should be good for the
colonies. It is encouraging to learn, on the authority
of Sir Gordon Sprigg (remarks the Standard) that the
late Colonial and Indian Exhibition has given a great
and direct stimulus to one new branch of agricultural
industry in the Cape Colony. Sir Gordon Sprigg, while
in London last year, was told by an eminent merchant
that he was ready to buy 100,000 tons a year of raisins
like those exhibited by a few Cape farmers at the


« Colinderies.’ The quality of the fruit was declared by
the experts to be as fine as the best produced by Spain.
Consequent upon this the Cape Government offered prizes
for the best samples of raisins produced in the colony ;
and at the first raisin fair, upwards ol forty tons of
this class of produce were exhibited. The Cape cannot
just yet even satisfy the local demand for the fruit, but
the impetus already given to this industry is so great that
in three or four years the colony will be in a position
to export considerable quantities to Europe.”
I have very briefly touched on twelve different articles
of produce all of the highest utility, of good value in the
market, and in great request. All these may be grown
in our district easily, and many others besides. I have
omitted only for want of space our beautiful Mango trees,
with their most luscious of all tropical fruits; the rich
deep scarlet Eosella, which makes the finest of preserves,
and is useful for its fibre of silken texture ; grapes, which,
though unpruned and little tended, yield in profuse
abundance; huge melons with their cooling juices for
summer; and hosts of others too numerous to give in
detail. These have been grown just sufficiently as yet
to warrant the great success of extended culture in time to
come. I will now advert to the industry upon which
we mainly depend; which has been the making of
Maokay, and of which we are justly proud.
13. Sugar Planting.
For the history of this industry I am indebted to the
Christmas Supplement of the Mackay Standard, 1881,
from which I quote verbatim. “It was in the year 1864
that Mr. J. Spiller planted the first cane grown in the
district. In 1866, twelve acres were planted, and in 1867,
this acreage was increased to 140. One year later the
Alexandra Mill was set in motion, and 280 tons of sugar
were produced, and 148 hhds. of rum were distilled.
Another season and Pleystowe Mill, attached to which
is the now famous distillery where the ‘ Anchor ’ brand
rum is manufactured, was erected. The town was now
beginning to assume proportions, and on the 25th of
September, 1869, the Municipality was incorporated,
D. H. Dalrymple, Esq., being chosen for the honourable
position of Mayor. From this date the Sugar Industry
began to give visible evidence of progress, and mill after
mill was erected, and plantation after plantation formed.
A severe check was experienced in the year 1875, by
reason of the visitation of rust, which played havoc


among tlie cane fields. This, however, happily passed
away, and, in 1877 and the following year, the crops
nearly reached 7000 tons. In 1879 the sugar sent into
town amounted to 9970 tons, and there is no doubt that
over 10,000 tons were actually produced. In 1880 there
was a falling off, the output of that season being only
7500 tons, but it is gratifying to be able to believe that
the time is now past, when anything less than 10,000
tons will be produced. In fact, the present outlook
distinctly points to a not distant period, when 50,000 tons
per annum will be produced.” Following the history
from a similar Supplement for 1888 we quote :—“ In
1881 a total of 10,000 tons was reached, while last year
it again receded to 8000 tons. Owing to the impetus
which the industry received, from two to three years ago,
by reason of the introduction of considerable capital from
various parts of the world, the area of cane under
cultivation was very much increased in 1882, and the
result has been, that the crop now in course of being
taken off, is considerably larger than any hitherto operated
upon. Early in the season it was estimated that not less
than 18,000 tons would be harvested; but a lengthened
drought having intervened, the crop has fallen far short of
expectations, and it is now calculated that 14,000 tons
will be about the quantity of sugar made this season.
Looking back fifteen years, we see that, taking the average
price of sugar to be £25 per ton, the annual output of this
district alone has increased from £BSOO to £350,000, while
it may safely be estimated that the total money value of
the sugar produced in Maokay, since the early infancy of
the industry, is not much less than two millions sterling.
We have alluded to the great impetus which the industry
received during the last few years, and as a proof of this,
we may instance the fact, that within the past two years
no less than eleven new mills have been erected, with a
total crushing capacity of about 12,000 tons per season,
that of the whole district being at present not less
than 80,000 tons. A very fair test of the progress of the
place is afforded by a knowledge of its power of absorbing
labour, and we may point out that during the past two
years 8200 European immigrants have been landed in
Mackay. The white population of this district has more
than doubled during the past two years, and may now be
estimated to number 7000, while the number of kanakas at
present employed is 3500. These figures do not include
the Cinghalese, Malays, and Chinese, who cannot at the
present moment number less than 1000. What Mackay is
to-day will surely be the position of numbers of the


Northern sugar districts within far less a number of years
than have been required to bring Mockay into its present
position. This district has really been the pioneer of the
industry, and others will profit largely by our experience
gained at considerable cost. We have heard occasional
suggestions thrown out, as to the possibility of sacrificing
the Sugar Industry of Queensland rather than allow it to
be carried on with coloured labor ; but our own conviction
on this matter is, that those who have made such a
proposition have done so without a knowledge of the
importance of the only agricultural industry worth
speaking of which Queensland possesses. In conclusion as
evidencing the extensive area over which the influence of
the sugar industry extends in this district, we may remark
that the total area of land selected in this district is about
400,000 acres, and in round numbers this is comprised in
1000 Conditional purchases, and 800 Homestead
selections, the annual rents paid at our local office being
about £18,000.” I have quoted thus largely from the
Journal of the district representing the Sugar Industry, in
order to set before my readers a fair picture of the hopes
and fears of the planters towards the opening of 1884. At
this time a change of Ministry took place, and Mr., now
Sir Samuel, Griffith succeeded Sir Thomas Mcllwraith as
head of the government. Sir Samuel took office in the
middle of November, 1883, and between that date and the
November following, a series of atrocities came to light
which shocked the whole civilised world. A commission
of inquiry was instituted, _ when it was shown that the
recruiting ships had gone for the first time to the
prohibited coasts of New Guinea, where they came into
violent collision with the wild cannibal tribes of those
regions; and according to the report many islanders had
been brought to the plantations without understanding in
any way the nature or duration of the agreements they
had entered into. The government prosecuted the officers
of the labour vessels, arid sent back to their islands all
boys who were said to have misunderstood their
engagement. Legislation also was initiated, to check, and
otherwise more closely control, the importation and
labour contracts of the islanders, and finally to stop the
traffic altogether after the year 1890. Thus the whole
system of coloured labour was condemned; and throughout
Australia and Britain it was boldly declared, that North
Queensland was fast becoming a slave colony, and rivalling
in cruelties and tyranny the Southern states of the
American Union. The planters on their side indignantly
repelled the insinuations and accusations thrown at them,


and thus a feud sprang up between the government and!
the planters which is not yet healed. The strife however
has opened up a new phase of the question. During the-
late parliament a sum of £50,000 was voted for the
erection of Central Sugar Mills, the cane to be grown by
white labour only, and no coloured labour to be employed
in the mill. One of these mills was recently opened by
Sir Samuel Griffith, at Eton ; and the other mill, which,
is erected near the Mackay Race Course, is being fitted
with machinery, and will be ready for the ensuing season’s,
crushing. Under these circumstances, it would be more
than indiscreet to venture an opinion, as to the
advisability of such a system of state assistance to a
particular industry, or to prophesy upon its ultimate
success or failure. It is sufficient for the purposes of this
essay to state, that two splendid mills, with the latest and
most improved machinery, at an ordinary crushing power
of over 3000 tons of sugar in a season, are at the disposal
of small growers, and are managed by directors, who are
themselves practical working men, and who are risking
their all, in some cases, upon the success of the venture.
When therefore, it can by this means be demonstrated,,
that white labour can be found sufficiently abiding and
reliable, and that the Central Mills can put upon the-
market a product payable to the selector and small planter,,
nothing will be a stronger argument in inducing struggling
farmers from the Southern colonies and Britain, to come-
into the district, and throw in their lot with us-
Meanwhile, the works of the older plantations have all
been curtailed; every economy both in labour and in
supervision has been put into practice, and all erections of
new mills in contemplation have been brought to a
standstill, pending the return of greater confidence in the-
times, and a better market. Altogether 82 sugar factories,
have been established in the district, of which 18 are-
still going on, and the two new Central Mills, when in
operation, will make 20, with a total crushing power of
from 26,000 to 30,000 tons of sugar per season. It must
not be inferred, however, that the cultivated lands of the
fourteen abandoned mills have been also abandoned or
allowed to run out of cultivation. In one or two cases this
is so, but with the majority, cane is being grown as far as
circumstances will allow, and crushed at one or other of
the mills still working. The district is sighing for some
satisfactory and reliable understanding to be come to, on
the labour question, and the Central Mills experiment is
watched with far more than idle curiosity. If it be the
means of satisfying the planters and capitalists, and.


bringing about wise and beneficent legislation, then
indeed, will this district smile in its wealth ; for instead of
twenty mills only, thrice the number can be well kept on,
.and land yet be found for further development of the
industry. It is not my intention to speak on behalf of
or against the employment of blade labour in agricultural
work. For four during the whole of the
agitation here spoken of, I resided upon a sugar
plantation ; at the same time I was neither connected with
the plantation, nor dependent upon it; and I had ample
opportunities daily of observing both the method of
treatment of the kanakas or black labourers, and also their
reliability and utility as workmen. It is my duty to give
my opinion, that if any error lay with the Managers of
sugar plantations in this neighbourhood, it was that of
according more liberty on Sundays and holidays, and
-evenings after work, than the kanaka could profitably use.
The supplying the boys with beer and liquors, when out
from the plantation, has been most reprehensible on the
part of many tradespeople, and has been productive of
more ills than anything I have ever observed on the
plantations. There they are well-fed and well-clothed,
the payment to ensure their return to their islands, upon
the expiration of their contract, is always in the hands of
the Government Agent in advance, and their wages have
to be paid down promptly in cash in the presence of the
same official. There is. in Mackay a hospital and skilled
medical attendance always at their disposal; and every
death on the plantation is rigidly enquired into. From
the fact, that in very many intances, the same boys return
again for another term of service and insist upon coming
back to their old plantation, it must be inferred that, at all
events no great hardships associated themselves with the
boys’ experiences. Again, I have been often struck with
the lively and talkative way they have whilst
working. Laughter and repartee were really the usual
order of the day around me ; and the steady application of
the hoe under a broiling sun appeared easy and not
unpleasant. I have heard that in earlier days rough and
•even brutal treatment was oftentimes resorted to; but
that is all gone by ; and the black boy of to-day is just as
well aware, that “ the big master along town,” that is, the
Government Agent, will investigate any matter he
complains of to him, as a white man would be in appealing
to the Court. It is as unjust to the planter, as it is
detrimental to the colony, to spread such false and
•exaggerated accounts as have from time to time appeared
in the Colonial and English newspapers. Every one will


rejoice when white labour can fill the place of coloured
labour; but by all means get rid first of the insinuating.
Chinaman; then of all other alien races, Coolies, Singalese,
and the like; but reserve the quiet, steady and good
natured kanaka till the white man is prepared to supplant
him.
14. Timber.
The timber of the bush and scrub of this district is
valuable and abundant. The most common tree is the
ti-tree. Its wood is soft, very durable in wet swampy
places and fairly good for fuel. Its bark separates from
the trunk and hangs loosely in irregular sheets. This is of
a highly fibrous nature and may be utilised in the
manufacture of coarse strong packing paper, matting, &c.
Trees of more importance to the selector are the Gums.
The three chief varieties are the red, the grey, and the
poplar gum. The red species is the most valuable, and is
in general request for fencing purposes. Posts of red gum
stand well in the ground, and resist for a long while the
attacks of the white ant. The poplar gum is the least
valuable ol the gums, and quickly rots under ground.
Like the ti-tree it is fairly useful for fuel and for the top
rails of fencing when other hardwood is not to be got.
The Moreton Bay Ash is a fine, straightly grown, tree,
regular in the trunk, and valuable. Its wood is tough and
elastic, and is used for the poles and shafts of drays, &o.
Bloodwood is a hard wood of excellent quality, and
durability. It is a splendid timber for posts, both on
account of its straight and regular growth, and its long
resistance under ground to white ants and decay.
Ironbark is one of the best timbers in the bush. It is
very hard and very durable. It is also easily split up by
the bushman into slabs, which are useful in a hundred
ways.
Messmate is a timber used for the upper rails in fencing,
but it will not stand long in the ground. It has a fibrous
kind of bark. Mahogany is common, but it is not of much
value except for fuel. The tree is very crooked in its
growth, and the trunk gives out a series of swellings like
huge warts right up to the branches. It is not likely to
supersede the American species. In the scrub of the
mountains the two most valuable timbers are the Hoop
Pine and the Cedar. Both these trees flourish in great
luxuriance and beauty. The Hoop Pine is very
ornamental in its foliage, grows to a great height and is
cut up for soft wood planking. It has two layers of bark.


the first running perpendicularly, the second horizontally
round the trunk ; hence its local name.
The Cedar is too well known to need description. In
this neighbourhood, it is pretty well untouched, as
settlement is not yet sufficiently advanced to raise a
demand for the wood. The native fruits are very few,
inferior and insipid. The two chief are the quandong and
the native fig. The former is a species of blue plum,
having a large round stone, and a sharp acid taste, like
the English sloe. The fig has somewhat the taste of the
cultivated fig, hut is a small, and very indifferent fruit, not
worth the attention of the gardener.
The fencing in of the selection is one of the
requirements demanded by the Government, and it will be
observed, that the bush readily furnishes the best wood for
that purpose. Slab-huts, cattle-pens, and other such
necessaries in bush life will make a large call upon the
better kinds of timber, and the small selector should be
careful to reserve as much of the hardwood as possible, for
the subdivisions of his paddocks, gate-making, fencing and
the like. It is a common plan to ring-bark the timber, so
as to destroy the growth of the tree. This increases the
strength and richness ot the grasses. At the same time,
the selector should do this gradually, as the white ant
begins its attacks very quickly, and soon renders the
timber valueless. The smaller trees, too, fall down and so
cause a considerable hindrance and danger to cattle.
Indeed the removal of dead timber is a source of great
expense to the squatters.
Summary of Agricultural Eesources.
After the exhaustive manner in which allusion has
been made to such agricultural products as have already
been grown in this locality, as well as those for which the
soil and climate of Mackay appears suitable, it is only
requisite to point out the means by which the existing
natural circumstances of the place might be further
utilised, so that many articles of commerce which are
largely imported at present might cease to appear in our
list of imports, and ultimately find a place among our
exports. A reference to the various articles of
consumption which pay duty at this port opens up a wide
field for the speculative imagination of the farmer, and it
will be seen that if anything which could be profitably
grown here, for local consumption alone, was so produced
a very large sum of money, probably not less than
£40,000 a year, would be saved for this district. This


money kept here in local circulation instead of being sent
elsewhere would provide a large amount of employment
for farmers and their laborers, and it only requires that
this fact should be understood to induce many of those who
in other parts are struggling along, to throw their lot in
with the people of Mackay. The quantity of maize
imported annually to Mackay exceeds 40,000 bushels, the
duty on which reaches £lOOO, and with protection to this
amount it should surely be possible to produce it locally at
a profit, more particularly since at present there are large
areas of open and cleared land, already fenced, which
could easily be rented at a nearly nominal figure. Coffee
has been proved a profitable crop here and the same may
he said of tobacco, for both of which there exists a general
demand which could be supplied after local requirements
were satisfied. Such crops as tea, opium, potatoes, and
fruits of various kinds may all be grown here, and as the
imports of these articles reach in value to many thousands
of pounds a year, to which may be added the duties by
which they are protected, these duties being nearly as
great as the value of the products themselves, it is evident
that a very extensive scope exists for the energies of
farmers, particularly those who with a moderate capital
would be able to bring a practical experience to bear upon
their operations. The production of vegetable oils for
which an immense demand exists throughout the whole
world would undoubtedly realise a fortune for anyone
undertaking it in this district where such plants as the
castor oil and candle nut grow like the rankest weeds
without any cultivation whatever. If an example of the
prolific nature of the soil is sought for, such may be found
immediately opposite the town on the North side of the
river. Here is situated what is locally known as Barnes’
Garden, a low sandy stretch of country which when first
cleared for cultivation caused everyone to question the
possibility of its tillage proving remunerative. Here at
present is a grove of cocoa nut palms whose beauty is an
endless source of attraction to the visitors. This grove is
ten acres in extent, carrying about 1200 trees, themajority
of which are in bearing and bringing in a steady income to
their proprietor who very appositely remarks “that they
cost nothing to keep in order and you only have to pack
up the fruit when it falls and send it to the local market
just over the bridge.” In addition to this grove of cocoa
nuts there is a large area of orange and mango trees, but
the special feature from a commercial point of view at
these gardens is a four acre patch of pine apples,
comprising not less than twenty varieties, from which Mr.


Barnes declares lie would not like to say how many
hundreds of thousands of pines have been picked and sent
to market. Residents in the Southern colonies will have
frequently seen and tasted these magnificent fruits, for,
from time to time, large consignments of them have been
shipped south. Of the twenty varieties all but one are of
the prickly sort, producing fruit from 11b. to 91bs. weight
each, while the one smooth leaved sort produces those
mammoth pines so often used for decorative as well as
edible purposes, and which generally weigh from ten to
fifteen pounds each, but one of which has been known to
turn the scale at 321bs. Here again is ample scope for the
agriculturist with a certainty of an extensive and rapidly
increasing market. With regard to rice Mr. Thomas an
old resident of this district tells me that on his land rice
has been grown for three years. The first crop yielded
50 cwt. of paddy rice per acre which when dressed was
reduced to about 41 cwt. The second crop, last year,
yielded about the same. This year, rain did not fall in
sufficient quantity at the critical period of germinating and
early growth, and the result is a failure in the crop. Mr.
Thomas argues, however, that even allowing for one
failure in three years the industry may easily be made a
profitable one. He calculates the cost of labour in
preparing the land and sowing at £4 10s. per acre; and the
cutting and dressing at £‘2, 10s. ; making the total cost of
production £7 per acre. Now reckoning the marketable
value of the dressed product at from £2O to £22 10s. per
ton he believes that as much direct profit may be secured
as from the average cane crop. Then again to this must
be added the £9 6s. Bd. per ton customs duty which would
of course be a protection to the grower to that amount.
Mr. Thomas’ land is a stiff clay loam of fairly good
quality. Could irrigation be applied to this land, the
chances of failure would be much minimised; and
certainly a profit of £lB per acre clear is worthy of
consideration. Another point in favour of rice growing in
this locality is the small amount of field labour required.
He says that the surface soil must be thoroughly
pulverised before sowing, but that deep ploughing is
unnecessary; and that after the sowing, the plant itself
keeps down weeds and needs no further attention till the
reaping and dressing have to be attended to.
Mr. Thomas has also made experiments in the growth
of canary seed, and he says that owing to its prolific yield
in this part of the colony, the expressed oil may be made
to return a handsome dividend upon the expense of
culture. From the general tenor of the remarks included


in this summary of the agricultural resources of the
district it will be demonstrated to agriculturists that an
immense field here lies open to them for their energy and
enterprise, and that while agriculture in many countries
provides a mere living here they may reasonably look
forward to realising competence and acquiring substantial
wealth.
Irrigation.
In a preceding paragraph, when speaking of maize, I
quoted the uncertainty attending the start of growth, or
germinating, of this useful product. It is in the nature of
the climate, that all plants, springing from seed, demand
water at the critical period of early sprouting. The
elements of the seed germ must be moistened from without
plentifully, or, they will fail in producing the diastase
wherewith to feed the young shoot. The excessive heat
■of the midday sun quickly makes the seed bed too dry to
afford the necessary moisture, and, unless rain falls,
failure will be the result to the sower. This is a most
simple truth, upon which the whole utility of irrigation
rests. Plants do not need artificial help all through their
growth; indeed, in some seasons, they need scarcely any
at all. It is unwise to force a plant beyond its usual
development; and irrigation, excessively used, will be
found rather injurious than beneficial. The great
advantage it offers the farmer lies, in that he can use it
when rain cannot be had, and when it is badly wanted.
The people of this district have scarcely yet felt” the need
of it. They have almost confined their agricultural
labours to the production of sugar cane; but with
irrigation, there are many other crops equally to be
depended upon and affording good marketable returns.
Even in the case of the sugar crop, the yield can be relied
upon with greater certainty if water can be put upon the
land at will. The drawback to the small selector is the
expense of the steam pump to raise the water out of the
creek or river. If this can be met, the rest is easy enough.
At Pleystowe Sugar Plantation last year, about 400 acres
were irrigated with the best results. Trenches were run
by the plough along the highest ground of the paddocks, the
water turned into them, by a 12 h.p. steam boiler and a
6-inch. Blake pump, and thence let off down the ridges of
cane. In the case of gardening, the advantage is
■enormous. If the agitation against the Chinese, now
going on in the colony, result in their being kept away, the
supply of vegetable food must engage the serious attention


of the community. In fact, there must be gardeners, and
irrigation must of necessity be resorted to, to secure and
increase the supply. The magnificent scrub, which mow
lines the banks of our creeks and rivers, must be cleared
away ; then with the assistance of the water, which now
flows into the sea, gardens may be made to flourish with a
luxuriance new to us; and the untidy, disorderly and
crowded Chinese patches may be swept away, along with
the dirty and disgraceful hovels, which usually help to
adorn them. There are thousands of acres of land in the
immediate neighbourhood of the Pioneer River, which are
splendidly adapted for irrigation. These are mostly suited
for sugar, and are already taken up. Besides the Pioneer
the numerous creeks, abounding on all sides, may be made
to yield a supply of water enough to irrigate the whole
district. No doubt, the abundant rainfall makes us more
independent of irrigation than are some of our less
fortunate neighbours ; nevertheless, for garden produce,
and for the cereals, irrigation simply means a certainty of
production ; it will make certain a return, which otherwise
must depend upon particular rains. There are not many
selectors whose land is without a creek or some other
permanent water supply; and those, who turn their
attention to this important subject, will most assuredly be
amply repaid for any trouble they may take.
Before quitting the subject of the land, I would direct
attention to the many indirect means, open to the
industrious settler, of augmenting his income, outside his
main industry. Cattle are cheap, and a few cows can
easily be attended to. If some in the family understood
dairy work, butter can always be disposed of at a good
price. Poultry too, are very prolific ; and with these,
ducks, geese, guinea fowls and turkeys may be reared.
Another industry, which is astonishingly neglected, is the
culture of Bees. The gums and other trees in the bush,
are rich in their yield of honey ; and bees ad libitum may
be reared, and their valuable stores collected, with
comparatively little labour ; but with a very substantial
gain to the funds of the household.
I will here append certain information useful to new
comers, extracted chiefly from Government Returns ; and
which will help to throw light upon our present stage of
progress.
1. Land Agent’s District.
From Grown Lands Act of 1884. Mackay. “ Commenc-
ing at Cape Palmerston and bounded thence by Mount


As
an Agricultural
Farm
(witliin
Agricultural
acres.
As
Area, No. 1) ...
1280
an Agricultural
Farm
(within
Agricultural
.As
Area, No. 2) ...
320
a grazing farm ...
5120
Funnel Range south-westerly, the watershed separating
Funnel Creek from waters flowing direct to the coast, and
the watershed separating the Bowen River from the
Pioneer River, O’Connell River, and other coast waters
north-westerly to the source of the Andromache River,
by that river and the O’Connell River downwards to the
coast; and thence by the coast south-easterly to the point
of commencement, —inclusive of adjacent islands.”
2. Special Provisions.
For acquiring freehold in the case of holdings not
-exceeding 160 acres after personal occupation.
Crown Lands Act 1884. Clause 74.
With respect to agricultural Farms, the area whereof
does not exceed one hundred and sixty acres, the following
provisions shall have effect: —
1. It at any time before the expiration of seven years
from the commencement of the term of the lease the lessee
proves to the Commissioner in open Court that the
condition of occupation hereinbefore prescribed has been
performed for the period of five years next preceding the
tendering of such proof either ;
(a.) By the continuous and bona fide residence on the
holding of the original lessee himself, or,
(h.) In case of the death of the original lessee before
he has so resided for five years by the continuous and hona
fide residence for the remainder of the period of some
person beneficially interested in the holding under the will
&o. and that a sum at the rate of ten shillings per acre has
been expended in substantial and permanent improvements
on the land, the lessee upon payment of a sum which
together with the rent already paid will make up the sum
of two shillings and sixpence per acre together with the
prescribed deed fee and assurance fee, shall be entitled to a
Deed of Grant of the land in fee simple.”
3. Notes from District Maps, Mackay
Land Agent’s District.
The Maximum areas which may be selected by any one
person are


4. Statistics of Queensland for 1886,
hTackay District.
Total extent of Land under Cultivation ... ... 19,607
Total extent of Land in Fallow ... ... ... 2370
Total extent of Land under Crop 17,237
Description of Crop. Area Cultivated. Gross Produce.
Oats, for Hay ... 51 acres ... 60 tons
Oats, for Green Feed 1 ~
Barley, for Grain ... 1 ~ ... 15 bushels
Maize, for Grain ... 493
11,371 „
Eice, for Grain
Potatoes, English ... 20
57 tons
Potatoes, Sweet ... 323
2431 „
15,511 „
Sugar Cane ... ...16,165
Tobacco ... ... 2 ~
13 cwt.
Sorghum ... ... 38
Lucerne, for Hay ... 10 ~ ... 25 tons
Other Sown Grasses 7 ~ ... 3 ~
Vines, for Table Use 2 ~ ... 1272 lbs.
Vines, Unproductive 2
Bananas 42 „ ... 8370 dozens.
Pineapples ... ... 7 ~ ... 776 ~
Oranges ... ... 4 ~ ... 2210 ~
Other Crops... ... 14 ~
Gardens and Orchards 58 ~
5. Eetiirn for 1886, shewing Area,
Population, &c„ of the Pioneer
Division.
Estimated Area, 1831 square miles.
Persons, (Census, Ist. May, 1880), 0976.
Estimated Number of Dwellings, 080.
Number of Ratepayers, 620.
Amount of Rate struck in the £, 1 shilling.
Estimated Capital Value of Rateable Property :
Freehold, £558,060.
Selections and Homesteads, £240,000.
Lands leased for Pastoral purposes, £7,200.
Other rateable property, £211,940.
Total Capital Value, £1,012,800.


6. Return of the Municipality of Mackay,
not included in Pioneer Division.
When first proclaimed, 22nd September, 1869.
Estimated Area, 8 square miles.
Estimated Population, 4000.
Estimated number of Dwellings, 850.
Last Rate levied, General, Is. in the £; Separate, 6d. in the £.
Number of Wards, 8.
Number of Aldermen, 9.
Extent of Eoads and Streets, 49 miles.
Total number of Registered Electors, 715.
Number of Votes recorded at last Municipal Election, 435.
7. Return of Paying Traffic on Mackay
Railway for tlie year ending 31st
December. 1886.
Passengers’ Tickets, Single, Ist. Class, 5720; 2nd Class,
20,041.
Excursion Tickets, Ist. Class, 1326 ; 2nd Class, 2400.
Season Tickets, 55.
Total tickets, 80,148. Amount, £2940 Is. lOd.
Parcels, £145 12s. 4d. Miscellaneous, £B2 18s. 7d.
Goods weight, 4864 tons 3cwt. 2qrs. 24Hbs. Amount,
£1585 Bs. 4d.
Working Expenses, £ll,BlO 7s. 2d.
There are 82 miles of rails and the total cost of
Construction was £108,278.
8. Return of Live Stock on 31st
December, 1886, Police District of
Mackay.
Horses, 5818; Horned Cattle, 50,493; Sheep, 249;
Pigs, 1905.
9. Sugar Manufactories and Rum Dis-
tilleries
Number of Sugar Mills, 26.
Acres crushed, 12,809.
Quantity of Sugar Manufactured, 10,188 tons.
Quantity of Molasses Manufactured, 500,880 gallons.


Number of Rum Distilleries, 8.
Quantity of Rum distilled duriing the season ended 31st
March 1887, 40,502-9 galloms.
10- Return of Registered Sreweries,
from 31st April, 1886, to 31st
March, 1887.
Number of Breweries, 1.
Quantity of Beer brewed, 26,928“ gallons.
11. List of Sugar Manufactories now
working with their approximate
crushing power
Mills. Power.
Meadowlands ... ... ... ... ... 1500
Te Kowai ... ... ... ... ... ... 1500
Palms ... ... ... ... ... ... 2000
Palmyra ... ... ... ... ... ... 800
Pleystowe ... ... ... ... ... ... 1800
Marian ... ... ... ... ... ... 800
Victoria ... ... ... ... ... ... 800
Barrie ... ... ... ... ... ... 500
Homebush ... ... ... ... ... ... 5000
River Estate ... ... ... ... ... 2000
Coningsby ... ... ... ... ... ... 800
Ashburton 2000
Farleigh ... ... ... ... ... ... 1800
Mount Pleasant ... ... ... ... ... 500
Beaconsfield ... ... ... ... ... 500
Richmond ... ... ... ... ... ... 600
Nindaroo ... ... ... ... ... ... 2000
Habana ... ... ... ... .. ... 2000
Eton Central Mill, about to crush ... ... 1000
Race Course Central Mill, about to crush ... 1000
Total Estimate of Crushing Power per Season ... 28,800
12. Return showing the Quantity of
Colonial Rum
Received into Bond at Mackay from the Distilleries from
the year 1878 to the year 1887 inclusive. Fractions
omitted —-


Year. Gallons.
1878 61,785
1879 83,061
1880 74,629
1881 61,957
1882 72,440
1883 50,620
1884 59,680
1885 47,446
1886 31,352
1887 16,664
Total 559,638
13. Amount of Land taken up in the
District since 1868, Freehold-
Acres.
Amount from 1808 to 1876, under the Crown
Land Acts of 1868, and Pastoral Leases,
1869 580,905
Amount under Act of 1884 ... ... ... 5,424:
Amount under Sugar and Coffee Regulations and
auctions ... ... ... ... ... 30,000
Total 610,329
Estimated price paid, £1 per acre, including town and
suburban as well as country lands.
14. Eeturn of Applications for Farms
from Ist January to 31st December,
1887, inclusive Mackay District.
Number of Farms, (Agricultural,) 23.
Area, 4707 acres 1 rood.
Rent, ,£B3 4s. Od.
Survey Fees, £193 15s. sd.
The Town of Mackay
Is situated upon the right or South bank of the Pioneer
River, and is about five miles from the sea. There is only
very gentle fall to the drainage of the town, and the
general aspect of the place is flat and uninteresting. Now


that a substantial iron bridge opens communication with
the North Side, the town willl in all probability spread
in that direction ; seeing thatt the country is pleasantly
elevated, undulating, and with a pleasant prospect. The
town lies East and. West, wiith its chief streets running
parallel in that direction ; wliile the cross streets, also
parallel to one another, cut (them at right angles. The
business part of the town is as yet confined to parts of
River street for wharfing traffic, and of Sydney and Victoria
streets; and these have consequently a town, appearance.
The remainder of the place, however, is irregular, many of
the streets are not yet rounded up, and grass walks have
not yet given way to macadamised or metalled
thoroughfares. Most of the houses are constructed of
wood, but a few buildings of more pretentious appearance
have been erected from time to time. The finest of these
are the Post Office, Court House, and Australian Joint
Stock Bank, all built of brick, and fine structures. The
Church of England, the Girls’ State School, and the
School of Arts, rank next in order of importance. Some
few private residences and the Hotels follow next. The
latter buildings are on the whole, of superior arrangement
and style ; and if I may he permitted here to say so, are
managed, in most cases, by proprietors who are superior
to those usually found in small towns in their anxiety for
the well-being of their guests, and the accommodation is
comfortable and homely. The principal day for business
is Saturday, when the town, in fine weather, is gay and
lively. Large numbers of country people come in, in
their buggies and spring carts, teamsters are arriving and
departing with their loads, business men meet and discuss
local topics, weekly auction sales are going on, and the
general aspect is animating. In the evening the stores,
which really do great credit to their decorators, are
profusely lighted up with gas; the townspeople make
the pavement a promenade, and up till ten o’clock
■everybody seems about, and pleased. There is as yet, no
Market House to the town ; but it has a reserve to be some
day utilised for that purpose. Any account of the town
which omitted to mention the extensive foundries
conducted by Mr. W. Robertson in one part of the town,
and Messrs. Mackay, Cameron, and Green in another part
would be incomplete. From their workshops castings up
to several tons in weight are turned out, and but recently
Robertson’s Victoria Foundry produced the whole
of the material of which a large cylinder pier bridge
across Sandy Creek is built. The advantage to Mackay
in having workshops where the largest jobs can be taken


in hand and expeditiously finished in good style will at
once be obvious in a district where so much machinery is
used in the manufacture of its chief product. Mackay was
proclaimed a Municipality in the latter part of 1869 ; and,
till the present—we hope—-temporary check in the sugar
industry, was making bounds in prosperity and wealth
beyond any place in the North. We cannot but believe
the depression to be temporary; for, when the rich and
fertile lands behind us, and the great probability of mineral
wealth within our district, are taken into consideration,
the most sceptical must admit, that the position of
Mackay in the first rank of importance, is simply a matter
of time. As fast as the necessary funds are available,
streets are metalled, drains cut, and pavements formed.
Within the last few months, and chiefly through the
persistent energy of a few of the leading business people
of the town, Gas Works have been completed, and gas laid
on in the principal streets. On Easter Day the English
Church was beautifully lighted with gas for the first time ;
and the School of Arts and various other public buildings
are already lighted with gas. The streets are not yet
supplied; but it is confidently expected that the Council
will soon see their way to a system of lighting. There is
an excellent hospital for the white population, built on the
banks of the river, a convenient distance from the town.
The State Schools are free, and receive on the average
about 500 scholars daily; and there is a High School
lately established with an average attendance of about 50
scholars. The various religious denominations have each
their place of worship, and commodious residences are
provided for their ministers. There is a Convent and a
school in connection with the Roman Catholic Church, and
a Guild and Sunday Schools in connection with the
Anglican Church. Clubs and societies abound. A
stipendiary magistrate is resident, and there are Police
Barracks with a staff of men under a Sub-Inspector.
Cricket, boating, racing, fishing, and athletics are the chief
sports. There are three published newspapers, the Mackay
Standard, conservative, and the Mackay Mercury, liberal,
each with three issues weekly ; and the Mackay Banner,
radical, with one issue. The School of Arts has a fine
circulating Library, and the tables of the Reading Room
are furnished with all the leading Australian papers, and
British Journals and Quarterlies. There is a Union for
the cultivation of Vocal Music ; and lectures are from time
to time delivered by the savans of the town and by visitors,
on scientific and other subjects. It will thus be seen, that
for the most fastidious, recreation and healthy exercise is


amply provided both for the body/ and the mind. The
lovely bits of scrub on our river bajnks, the windings of the
stream, the distant mountains, amd the sea, will always
afford material to the artist; the mew unstudied wonders
of the vegetable and insect life of tide bush form an immense
volume for the naturalist; and the philosopher, and
religious devotee, can equally revfel in the bountiful and
beauteous display of nature about Mm. The beach of the
bay, at the mouth of the Pioneer Biver, has good bathing
sands, but they are available at high water only. When a
little money and attention can be given to it, the beach
.may be made a most valuable and attractive resort of the
townspeople, as the view is pleasing, there are good shade
trees, and the breeze is delicious. One of the chief
troubles of the town is its defective port. The river forms
accumulations of sand, and, to remedy the difficulties
arising therefrom, various schemes have been propounded.
During a visit to the Colony by Sir John Goode, the
Government, benefitting by his presence in the
neighbourhood, requested him to make an inspection of the
river between the town and the sea, and to draw up a
report thereupon. As the matter is of such great
importance to the town and district I feel justified in
quoting at some length from the Deport which Sir John
sent out from London under date 20th April, 1887.
Sir John Goode’s Report.
“ In compliance with your intructions, conveyed to me
when in the Colony, I inspected the Pioneer River
between the town of Mackay and the sea, including East
Point Spit, and thereafter proceeded to Flat Top Island,
where I made an examination of the southern, western,
and northern foreshores thereof. I was accompanied by
Mr. Nisbet, Engineer for Harbours and Rivers, Mr. A. W.
Jardine, District Engineer, and Mr. J. 11. Baynes,
Resident Engineer. General description of the Port as at
present. The improvement of the Harbour of Mackay
must, from the adverse conditions which surround the case,
be a work of exceptional difficulty. Situated at the
embouchure of the Pioneer River, its mouth is to some
extent blocked by a shifting Sand-Bar. Between the
latter and the Wharves the channel is tortuous and subject
to variation. Shelter is afforded to the Estuary, or water
space lying between the Bar and the Township, by East
Point Spit, which is increasing in extent and is growing
towards the south-west, thereby increasing the difficulties
of approach to the Wharves. Again, the conditions of


1871 ...
Value of Imports.
£21,864
1881 ...
... ... ... ,. #
97,807
1888 ...
••• ... ... ...
820,191
1884 ...
143,691
1885 ...
...
100,593
1871 ...
Value of Exports.
£7,325
1881 ...
••• ... ... ...
77,798
1883 ...
...
153,303
1884 ...
78,739
1885 ...
67,914
rainfall ara such that the River is generally either in a
state of gorge or of drought, and at the time the data for
the new survey were obtained, at low water of spring tides
the Harbour bed was practically dry. Again, although
the rise of spring tides at sea is 20 feet, the depth at high
water of those tides in the fairway opposite the Pilot Boat
House and just to the eastward of the Railway Wharf, is
only from 12 to 14 feet and at high water of neaps, this
depth is reduced to the extent of 6 feet 6 inches. At
present, British India steamers calling at Mackay, anchor
between Round and Flat Top Islands, whilst the
Intercolonial steamers bring up inside Flat Top. No
vessels go into the Harbour now which draw more than
about 10 feet, the trade being largely carried on by steam
tenders working to and from the shipping lying in the
anchorage. The New Bridge across the Harbour at
Sydney Street which does not contain an opening span,
may be regarded as the head of the navigation for masted
and sea-going craft. From returns kindly furnished
to me by the Collector of Customs, it would appear
that the trade of the Port, which up to and
including 1888 had advanced with rapid strides, fell off
considerably in 1884 and 1885, in consequence of a serious
reduction in the price of sugar which formed the principal
item of export from Mackay. The following figures may
be of interest as bearing upon this question :
“ Although as shewn above, the value of the Imports and
Exports has been considerably reduced since 1888, the
number of steamers which arrived at the Port up to and
including 1885, appeared to have increased from 35 in
1871 to 212 in 1881, and again to 506 in 1885, the sailing
craft having somewhat decreased in numbers since 1883.
“ The works hitherto executed for the improvement of the
Harbour have been of a limited character, and consist
mainly of Wharfage and a Training Bank between the-


Township and the point near the Pikot Boat House.
“ The votes, &c., taken on accounts of these works amount
to £98,589, the expenditure up tco March 31st, 188 G,
having been £34,775, thus leaving, at that time, an
available balance for further works cof £68,764.
“ When in the Colony at the end cof 1885, I reported in
favour of a prolongation of the Training Wall as far as the
Pilot Boat House, also the dredging of the bed of the
River from the Railway Wharf easttwards for a length of
120 chains, and the diversion of Samdfly Creek.”
Sir John then submits three altermative designs ; _
“Design A. contemplates the,fornication of an entirely
new entrance to the Harbour. It. proposes to construct
two Moles, or Breakwaters, thait on the south side
commencing near the Pilot House, running across the
existing Waterway to East Pointt Spit, and thence to
seaward easterly at a total length off 6400 ft. To form the
North Side of the entrance a crarved Mole would be
constructed 8800 ft. long, with a width of 600 feet from the
South Mole.” The estimated cost Hinder this design is set
forth as follows
North Mole, 8800 feet in length ... ... £128,000
South Mole, 6400 feet ... ... 825,000
Training Bank, 2700 feet ... ... ... 16,500
Mooring and Buoys ... ... ... 2,000
Total cost of Structural Works, (Ist
instalment) .... ... ... £472,800
Dredging Channel 150 ft. bottom width, from
the proposed entrance up to and
opposite the Railway Wharf ... ... £37,650
“ Design B. contemplates the formation of a sheltered
Harbour and berthage for steamers at Flat Top Island,
and the connection of this Harbour with the shore by
means of an iron viaduct. ' The estimated cost of the
Structures under this Design is as follows :
North Breakwater, 2000lt. in length ... £245,950
South Breakwater, 2000 ft. in length ... 55,400
Connecting Road and Walls along West face
of Island ... ... ... ... ••• 19,800
•Jetty 800 feet in length ... ... ... 52,000
Iron Viaduct 6500 feet in length with Root
at shore end of same ... ... ... 233,900
Total Cost of Structural Works ... ... £607,050
“ Under design C, it is proposed to fix and control the
present channel and approaches to the wharves by the con-


Dredging Channels
.
...
23,000
Total
...
£108,000
struction of low training banks of rubble stone extending
from the Harbour along by the inner face of East Point
Spit and out over the Bar. The total of the two banks
would be fully six miles. They would be constructed
entirely of stone from “ The Rocks,” supplemented by
material from other local sources. At the Bar the ends of
the mound would be 600 feet apart, and should be
indicated by Beacons visible at high water. Similarly
the Channel throughout the new track would require
to be carefully buoyed. In connection with these training
banks it is proposed to dredge a channel of 150 feet
bottom width, and having a gradient of 12 inches per mile.
The present depths over the Bar and in the channel
compared with those which would be available after the
execution of the works under this design may be expressed
as follows:
Depth at spring Depth on corn-
tides at present pletion of works
On the Bar 18ft. to 20ft. ... 22ft.
Opposite East Point ... ... 18ft. to 22ft. ... 21ft.
Opposite Pilot Boat House ... 12ft, to 14ft. ... 19ft,
Opposite Railway wharf ... 14ft. to 17ft. ... 18ft.
As before named, Neap Tides rise 6 feet 6 inches less.
than Springs.
I estimate the cost of these works as follows ;
Two low Training Banks having a total length
of fully 6 miles, including buoys and
beacons ... ... ... ... ... £85,000'
“ Having regard to all the circumstances of this
peculiarly difficult case, I would unhesitatingly recommend
that Design Cbe adopted. The works contemplated
under that project cannot fail to prove of material benefit
to the Port.
“No doubt the time will come when the splendid natural
Breakwater, Flat Top Island, will be converted into a
sheltered Harbour such as I have suggested, and in
carrying out these works hereafter the lines I have laid
down should be adhered to. The new fixed channel from
the bar onwards contemplated under Design C would
enable the steam tenders to run with increased
convenience between the Town and the sheltered Harbour
at Plat Top, when means can be found for executing the
works there, deferring the erection of the Viaduct, and the
formation of the Railway, the cost of which would not I
fear be justified for a considerable period.”


The Government has within the last few weeks accepted
a tender for the conveyance of rock to begin the
improvements under Design C in accordance with Sir
John Coode’s suggestion.
The Coast Line of the District.
In order to give my readers some idea of the
configuration of the coast, amd of the character of the
interior, we will imagine ouirselves sailing down from the
Northern limit of the Mackay Lands’ Office jurisdiction to
Cape Palmerston, its Southeirn limit. We start from the
junction of the Andromache River with the O’Connelh
some ten miles from the seat, and following the course of
the river we pass on its right hank the resumed portion ot
the runs St. Helens Nos. 3 aand 4, a large district of good
country, intended by the prcesent Government for close
settlement. The mouth of tthe O’Connell opens into a
deep mangrove swamp, and mangroves line the shore for
some considerable distance (east. Passing Midge Point,
we come to a shallow bay, retceiving the Dempster, Julian,
Cedar, and Hervey Creeks. These drain the ridges of
St. Helens No. 3 and 4 Lease. Thus far no real
settlement can be said to be made. The coast continues
of the same low shallow character, and is skirted with
mangroves. Rounding Dtewar Point we come to
Blackrock Creek, which receives many tributaries. These
smaller creeks of which there arc Zamia, Alligator, and
Catherine Creeks, are more useful than the tidal part of
the stream ; the land is good and fully selected. The bona
fide resident selectors, however, are few, numbering about
30 souls only. There is a Reserve near the mouth of the
Creek for Township purposes ; but as the low ground by
the coast is thick in mangroves, it is not likely to be soon
utilised, Further east is Murray or Scrubby Creek, the
most important on this part of the coast. Steamers of
about 100 tons can go up several miles by the tide ; the
country is good, and is taken up in the vicinity of the
Main Bowen Road, which crosses the creek close by
Mount Pelion. The Government has here surveyed an
area for Agricultural Farms, and a Town Reserve, making
a semi-circular bend of the creek the boundary of the
selections taken up on the right bank. There is another
township and agricultural area also surveyed at Port
Newry, the nearest distance between the two being about
four miles. As this species of Area with Township, is
somewhat of an experiment, I will explain the idea. The
recent Minister for Lands —Mr. Jordan —was most earnest


and enthusiastic in his efforts to bring about closer and
more hona fide settlement; and in order to induce people
to take up land for arable farming, he had a number
of districts surveyed in farms of 80 acres each, to be
granted on the Homestead principle ; each selector, having
one half-acre allotment in the township thrown in with it
gratis, He argues, that the expense at the outset will not
be so great to the settler, that cultivation will be more
thorough, and that through the proximity of the township,
settlers can live together from the commencement, and
not suffer the loneliness attaching to the old method.
But to continue our journey. Leaving Scrubby Creek
and the new townships, which by the way, are not
jet proclaimed, we round Cape Hillsborough, where the
coast is rocky and broken but possessing charmingly pretty
little coves and inlets, where some day, summer residences
will be bright with the laughter of childhood, and which
will afford that calm repose, after years of struggle and
privation, which nothing like the soughing of the winds
and the heaving of the ocean can sustain. We next pass
Constant Creek which drains the parish of Hampden,
bounded by the main Bowen Road, and Basset Parish;
both of which parishes contain splendid agricultural land
largely freehold. A few years ago the small township of
Amherst at Slade Point was surveyed, and sold at good
prices; but as the sugar trade of Mackay fell back, the
township did not develope, and it is as yet only a name.
Frorn Amherst to East Point off Mackay is a fine beach,
skirted in the lower part by extensive mangrove swamps.
Rounding East Point we enter the Pioneer, and the first
half of our survey is completed. Again sailing out of
Mackay, after passing East Point, we proceed South East
by a low sandy coast, with its interior country all freehold,
and occupied for sugar or pastoral produce. This forms
the parish of Howard, and extends to Baker’s Creek, a
river of fine size, but like most others on this part of the
coast, shallow and of not much service to navigation. A
fine iron bridge built by Robertson & Co., Founders, of
Mackay, spans the river on the St. Lawrence Main Road.
On the South bank of Baker’s Creek begins the Parish of
Chelona, whilst further inland, towards the Ranges, are
the parishes of Greenmount, Eton, Abingdon, and
Hazeldean. The coast has a high deep margin of
mangroves and salt-pans. The land is excellent in most
parts, and yields hardwood, Moreton Bay Ash, the gums,
and other bush timbers. The large sugar estate of
Homebush lies south of Chelona, on the banks of Sandy
Creek, on which is erected the largest and model mill of


the district. This mill in the season is illuminated by the
electric light. Sandy Creek, which drains the parishes
of Eton and Homebush, is a tidal river, opening into a
large shallow bay called Sandringham Bay, into which
also flows Bell’s Creek, six miles tidal. Passing on down
the main line of the coast south, we come to Sarma Inlet,,
a low sandy opening into which Plane Creek empties itself.
This inlet in part divides the parishes of Hector and
Sarina. All the land thus far is fully taken up, and is
devoted almost entirely to pastoral purposes. The parish
of Sarina is remarkably well watered; but in the South
part of the parish, the selections are closely confined to
banks of the creeks. A considerable number of these are
freehold, having been purchased at an average of about £8
an acre, and the land is of excellent quality. The coast,
which is low with numerous shallow openings, here turns
to the West and continues irregular. The two chief
openings are Aird Bay and Ince Bay, into the former of
which Cherry Tree and Rocky Dam creeks empty
themselves. Both these creeks bear the tides for six or
eight miles inland. They drain the parish of Kelvin,
where selections are thickly fstudded along the creeks.
The township of Kelvin, whiclh as yet is only a name, is
on Rocky Dam Creek, about fhve miles from the bay. No
further settlement has yet beem made in this direction,
within the South boundary of tlhe district. From Mackay,.
a road goes through the coastal! parishes to St. Lawrence,
passing the new township of Keilvin about five miles East,
and crossing the Mount Funnel I Range, which at this point
is merely a low watershed ridjge, about midway between
Cape Palmerston and Connor’s JRange.
Interesting Items connected with the
Town of Mackay.
Estimated Revenue and Exipendituee of the Town.
Civil Service ... ... .... ... ... £BO,OOO
Sugar (total expenses, less cash leaving district) 250,000
Other crops ... .. ... ... ... 1,000
12 Cattle Stations, wages, rations, &c 7,000
Dairy Farming ... ... ... ... ... 8,000
Mining 5,000
Bank Salaries ... ... ... ... ... 6,000
Private Incomes from Investments ... ... 5,000‘
Travellers and Shipping... ... ... ... 2,500*
£309,500


It is evident from the above approximate figures, obtained
from reliable sources, that the district has been brought
into existence, and is now maintained, by the production
and export of Agricultural Produce, supplemented by cattle
and mining. Of these, the very chief support is sugar, in
the growth and manufacture of which, an immense sum of
money has been invested. If the cost of production in this
industry cannot be kept duly within the receipts for
export, and a profit be made to cover wear and tear, risk,
and a fair dividend, it is very plain that the legitimate
motive of enterprise will be withdrawn ; capital will be held
back, and the whole district will languish, At least 15
per cent, upon the gross receipts should exceed the
cost of production to make an industry of such vast
proportions as the Sugar Industry, a financially sound
concern in the eyes of the capitalist. But when a district
relies so fully upon one such industry, the strain upon it
in periods of depression, and in bad seasons, is too great
to warrant the general stability of that district in other
minor branches of trade. Hence the great importance and
advantage all round, in the accumulation of small
industries and productions, such as those I have already
briefly touched upon.
Haeboubs and Eivbes Depaktmbnt
Expenditure in Mackay during the last 10 years £37,000
Yoted by the Assembly, but unexpended ... 67,000
Customs Depaktmbnt.
Port Mackay revenue during the past 18 years ;
1878 £BO2B 7 8
1879 9530 18 0
1880 10579 16 0
1881 15458 5 0
1882 19677 18 5
1888 26956 9 4
1884 29743 14 1
1885 22511 6 8
1886 22619 10 11
1887 27538 10 1
£192,644 17 2
Lands Depabtment.
Annual Rents from Selections ... ... £BOOO 0 0
Annual Rents from Runs ... ... ... 250 0 0
Selections made Freehold, Survey Fees, &c. 1200 0 0
£9460 0 0


Licenses,-, Held.
Carriers, 15, at 2s. Gd. .... ••• £1 17 6
Hawkers, 13, at £lO 130 0 0
Slaughtering, 16, at 2s. Gd 1 17 0
Publicans, 29, at £BO ... S7O 0 0
Publicans’, 13, at £l5 196 0 0
Wholesale Spirit Merchants, 88, at £2O ... 00 0 0
Auctioneering, 5, at £5 ... 25 0 0
Bagatelle, 3, at £5 ... ••• 15 0 0
Billiard, 8, at £lO 80 0 0
Brewery, 1, at £5 J 0 0
Timber ... ••• ••• ® ?
Fishing 20 0 0
£1483 15 0
Eailway, Blbidges, &c.
Maokay Railway, Total Capiital Expenditure £lBO,OOO
J J ,-rr Ct A KAA
Pioneer Bridge,—Wood ..... ... £14,500
Sydney Street Bridge,—lron ... £20,000
y f ° noo non.
Central Mills Loan £38,990
Societies and Associations.
Agricultural, Pastoral, and Mining Association ... 1
-•-•tv- ■> . . 7 w -j
Caledonian Association ... ... • ■ • • • • x
Good Templars 2
Rowing Club ... ... •• ■ •• • •• • •• • 1
" o ~
Cricket Club ... ... ■■ • •• • •• • •■ • 1
Mackay Turf Club 1
Rifle Club 1
Freemasons ... ... •• • •• • •• • •■ • &
Oddfellows 2
Druids ... ... •• • •• • •• • •• • •■ • 1
Orange ... _ J
Protestant Alliance Association
True Sons of Caledonia
Musical Union... ... ••• ••• J
Building Society ... •• • 7
Gas Company -*•
School of Arts.—Subscriptidms, £2OO ; Endowment, £lOO ;
Hall Income, £l7O.
Hospital.—Revenue, £23818 11s. 4d. ; Expenditure,
£1923 Us. Id.
Divisional Board.—Rates, £3000; Endowment, £0000;
Loan, £l5OO.
Municipal Council.—Rates,, £2897 18s. Od. ; Endowment,
£2850 Os. 2d.; Total amount of indebtedness to loan.
£23,000.
Cemetery Board. —Burials amd ground bought, £lol.


Churches.
Anglican, clergyman, Rev. A. Edwards 1
Roman Catholic, clergyman, Father Bucas 1
Lutheran ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Wesleyan Methodist ... ... ... ... ... 1
Presbyterian ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Banks, —Branch Offices.
■Queensland National, Manager, A. Ulcoq, Esq.
Union, Manager, H. Westbrook, Esq.
Australian Joint Stock, Manager, J. H. Allen, Esq.
Sydney Commercial, E. P. Ashdown, Esq.
Local Officials.
Chairman of Divisional Board, W. T. Paget, Esq.
Mayor of Mackay, H. L. Black, Esq.
President of Rifle Club, T. Mowbray, Esq.
Captain of Defence Force, G. Dimmock, Esq.
Chamber of Commerce President, W. J. Byrne, Esq.
The I»lackay Railway
Is intended to be the commencement of an inland
Line West and South to the Ranges, constructed for the
benefit of settlers in these parts, and especially for the
conveyance of the sugar traffic to the Port. The line runs
south west for about two miles, through the town and
suburbs, after which it turns, and runs due west for the
remainder of the distance of twenty miles to Merani. The
land along the line forms the estates of Meadowlands, Te
Kowai, Alexandra, and Palms, all devoted to the
production of sugar cane. Besides these estates, a few
private owners grow cane for the mills, and in the
neighbourhood are the smaller planters who are the
supporters of the Central Mill Scheme. The new Central
Mill is erected about mid-way between Meadowlands and
Te Kowai, close to the railway, and admirably situated to
meet the wants of the farmers. Ten miles from town is
Walkerston, the first out-station on the line. This is an
interesting little township, containing three Churches, a
State School, a Good Templar’s Lodge, a Progress
Association, and other similar institutions. The place has
not escaped the depressive influence of the dullness of
trade, for it relied largely upon the teams traffic, which by
the introduction of the railway has been almost entirely
superseded by steam carriage. The people of the township
are very enterprising, however, and they will, without
doubt, with their fine lands, substitute sugar, dairy,
gardening and other operations, which it is to be hoped.


may eventually prove even more remunerative than
teamstering. The line next passes by the fine plantation
of Pleystowe to the Marion Mill, which has been used as a
factory only. The new township of Mirani is surveyed
along the banks of the Pioneer, and is at present the
terminus of the Railway west. The river has a firm
crossing for traffic when not in flood ; but befove the line
can be extended in this direction, a bridge of about four
hundred yards span will have to be thrown across from
bank to bank, which are here about 80 feet above the low
run of the stream. Beyond as the fine district of Hamilton,
in which the township of Ecothesay has been surveyed and
thrown open to purchase. r JThe best of the land was taken
up under the Act of 1876 by/ a party of capitalists, whose
intention, it is said, was to Hay out farms, build mills, and
invite farmers as leasehold tenants, to convert the district
into large centres of the sugar industry. At Newbury
Junction, a short distance fi'rom Pleystowe, a branch line
runs south to Eton, a pretty little township built on the
uplands from Scrubby Cureek, about five miles from
Homebush. There is a large area of land also devoted to
cane in this direction, of which the chief estate is Barrie.
A little distance from this estate is the new Eton
Central Mill, which has communication with the Railway
by a siding. At about every mile on the line either
stations or stopping places have been provided ; and from
the Mills, tramways and sidings have been laid down, by
which trucks can be brought to the mill doors, and taken
back to the main way, with the greatest ease.
Whilst speaking upon this subject, I may mention that
a north coast line is in contemplation from Mackay to
Bowen; and the Government Surveyor is now (April 28th)
in the town, to commence the survey of a line to St.
Lawrence south. The opening up of our District, by this
extra railway communication, must eventually prove of
immense value to all classes; of the people.
Central Mills.
As I have several times alluded to the experiment of
Central Mills, founded upron a Government Loan, an
exjflanation of the system niaxy not be deemed superfluous.
The scheme originated in tliiis neighbourhood of Mackay,
and Mr. Thomas Pearce, an old and highly esteemed
resident of the town, has tlhe honour of first putting the
idea into shape. The Prennier, Sir Samuel Griffith, was
taken by it, and not only froamed the scheme, but placed
upon the Estimates a sum off £50,000 to be devoted to it.


The scheme is this : —A sum of money is granted on loan
to a body of farmers, represented by a Board of Directors ;
every member of the body is a shareholder, and his shares
are reckoned by the value of an acreage of cane. Ten
shares represent ten acres of cane in cultivation, which
have to be sold to the mill at the current price year by
year. The directors are chosen in part, by the farmers,
and it is intended that all net profits go towards the
liquidation of the loan; after which the Mill will become
the property ot the shareholders. Every shareholder must
show his land to be held in fee simple and without
encumbrance ; and the Government, for security, simply
endorses upon his title deeds a lien to cover the value of
his shares as calculated by the cane produce. The
following is a copy of the Bill of Encumbrance together
with the Clauses binding the Encumbrancee to the
particular Central Mill to which he belongs.
Bill of Encumbrance.
I of being registered as proprietor of an estate
in fee simple subject to such encumbrances, liens,
and interests as are endorsed hereon, on that piece of land
situated in the county of parish of containing
be the same a little more or less; being and being
the whole of the land described in No Yol
Eolio do hereby myself, my executors, administrators,
and assigns, agree with the Central Sugar Company,
Limited, as follows ;
Then follow the following clauses, not statutable but
binding to particular Mill Company :
1. That I will plant this season acres, in the
season of the year 18 , acres, and in the season of
the year 18 , acres in all acres of the said land
with sugar cane of approved varieties, chosen by the said
Company, and, whenever necessary to maintain the said
area under cane, to replant the cane, and to carefully
and efficiently cultivate, trash, and tend all the said cane
during the period of years, from the Ist day of
January, 188
2. That I will do all things necessary during the whole
period aforesaid to protect the said cane from injury of all
kinds', and to ensure the said Company receiving the same,
sound, well trashed, and in a fit condition for
manufacturing into sugar.
8. That I will cut the said cane, or at the Company’s
option, permit persons employed by the Company, to out
the said cane in a fair and proper manner and will
permit any cutters employed by the Company to encamp


on the said land and provide them with firewood and
water.
4. That I will cart the cane when so directed by the
Company to a convenient place, (state how the cane is to
be delivered.)
5. That I will execute yearly, if required, liens over
the said crops, in conformity with “ The Mercantile Act
of 1807,” or any amendment thereof.
0. That I will, provided that the said cane is, in the
opinion of the officers or agents of the Company, sound,
well trashed, and fit for manufacturing into sugar, sell the
same to the Company at the pirice of (State how
weight determined and cutting to> be provided for.)
7. That the Company shalll have the sole right of
determining at w T hat times during the said period of
years the said cane shall be crat and removed, but the
Company undertakes to receive: once in every twelve
months all such cane as in the judgment of its officers or
agents may be fit for manufacturing into sugar, and that it
will not cause any cane growm under this agreement to
remain uncut on tire said land for a longer period than two
years and three months, unless the same is then unfit to
be manufactured into sugar.
8. That if the Company’s factory should be destroyed
or prevented from working by fire or flood, or other serious
accident, the Company shall not foe responsible for any loss
I may sustain through the Compamy not cutting or taking
delivery of my cane until the faoatory is again in working
9. That I will employ labourers of European extraction
and no others in and about the (cultivation, cutting, and
carting of the cane.
10. That if any reduction is miade by Parliament in the
existing duty on sugar, and if anjy excise duty is imposed
on sugar grown in Queensland amd manufactured at any
time during the currency of this Agreement the Company
shall have the right to cancel thej agreement hereinbefore
contained without incurring any irresponsibility for any loss
to me thereby.
11. That if I fail in anyof the: conditions aforesaid, I
will, on demand, pay to the Conupany the wdiole amount
of (£ ) due by me toitthe Company in respect
of shares in the Compamy of which I am the
holder or so much thereof as may for the time being
remain unpaid thereon, or such part of the sum so due
and payable thereon as the Directors of the Company may
require. And desiring to render the said land available
for the purpose of or securing to the said Company the


said sum of £ and for tlie purpose of securing the
performance of the several agreements and stipulations
hereinbefore contained, I do hereby encumber the said
land for the benefit of the said Company with the said
sum of £ to be raised and paid when and as the
same shall be required by the Directors of the said
Company.
In witness whereof, &c., &c.
Conclusion.
I trust that what I have briefly written may prove of
benefit to this District. I have spoken as well as I was
able but I have not made exaggerations. Like the
Honourable the late Minister for Lands, Mr. Jordan, I am
an enthusiast for close settlement, and if any remarks I have
made, tend in any way to promote this, and the welfare and
advancement of Mackay, where my own lot is cast, where,
when a new chum, I met with much kindness, and where
I still meet kindness, I shall be gratified indeed. I have
finally to thank those gentlemen who have supplied me
with data for this essay. lam especially grateful to John
Wilson, Esq., the Crown Lands Ranger, for maps and
information upon those parts of the District, which I have
not personally visited, and for the courteous way in which
he has placed himself at my convenience; also to H. B.
Black, Esq., of the Standard for statistics, &c., which he
has been good enough to collect for me. The quotations
have necessarily been extensive. For Tropical
Productions I am chiefly indebted to the admirable woi’k
on Tropical Agriculture by Professor Simmonds ; also to-
that useful little Journal The Planter and Farmer, a
monthly six-pennyworth, full of valuable information, and
practical suggestions. The Meteorological Tables have
lately been put into print by E. S. Eawson, Esq., of the
Hollow ; and the other tables are chiefly extracts from the
Government Returns.


INDEX.
Introduction 3
Agricultural Industries 22
Bananas 28
Cocoa .... 22
Cocoa-nut Palm 25
Coffee 24
Maize ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 26
Nutmegs ... ... ... ... 29
Olive - .. ... ... 30
Pine Apple ... 28
Baisins ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Rice 26
Sugar 31
Tea 24
Timber ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36
Tobacco ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Agricultural Summary 37
Analyses of Soil 19
Analyses ok Canes 21
Climate 8
Coast Line 53
■Geological Features 11
Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Copper 16
Gold 13
Lead ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Marble ... ._ .. , 15
Silver ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Tin 14
Harbor 49
Irrigation 40
Land Agent’s District 41
List of Sugar Mills 45
Mackay Central Mills 59
Mackay Railway 58
Parliamentary Representatives 7
Physical Advantages 6
Population 7
Situation of Mackay 5
■Soil of Mackay IS
Statistics 43
■Statistics. Additional 55
Summary ok Mineral Resources 10
Town of Mackay 46
Yatton 15
Conclusion 62


..xiaawi
!.M I . > '
B*ll*l . 1
>
... ... ... mis*! Jim-no
' ' ■■
Bysm ’ A
...
...
*
..
■
I
'
..
. . , irr>.
.
