





whole of the vast orbit is peopled by flights of meteorites in endless chase,
and that the comet, as the gem of the ring, moves round preceded and
followed by a retinue of cosmic chips. That all comets are associated with
meteors, though fairly probable, cannot be confidently asserted.
I must now come to the most difficult, but also the most fascinating,
part of the subject—the so-called tail of the comet. When this appendage
is shown at all, it is only while comparatively near the sun. A comet may
develope a tail in approaching the sun and show none after perihelion; or it
may only develope tail after perihelion; or it may show one both before and
after; or neither before nor after.
The nucleus of a comet is separated from the coma by a dark ring, as
the sunlit surface of a cloud might be separated from the earth by a band
of invisible air. The nucleus is similarly parted from the tail, which
appears to be an extension of the coma in the direction opposite to the sun.
The nose of the comet is like the flame of a torch blown back by the wind,
or like the apex of an upright jet of water from a fountain, where the
liquid turns to fall back. The theory now very generally accepted by
astronomers is that for some kinds of matter, or for matter in certain con-
ditions, the sun has a repulsive force far more potent than his power of
gravity ; that, under the influence of intense heat, jets of volatilized matter
are thrown out, perhaps in all directions, but certainly towards the sun;
that presently the repulsive force overcomes their forward motion, turns
them back, and sweeps them away into space until the particles are so
widely dispersed as to be invisible.
It was at one time hoped that Mr. Crookes’ radiometer was about to
show us the repulsive force of the sun’s rays at work in our very hands ;
but the dream vanished, and the repulsive force is still theory, although
Sir J. Herschel declares it is proved beyond question by his own observa-
tions and those of others. This theory also explains some other pheno-
mena, as the curvature of the tail, and the fact that the convex side of the
tail is the brightest and least curved. The convexity of the tail is always
towards the direction of the comet’s motion. This has led to the gross
idea that, like the smoke of a steamer, the tail was retarded by the medium
in which the comet moved.
If we conceive of a comet being a rigid body, and that the tail is swung
round as a walkingstick might be brandished by the handle, it will be
evident that the end of the tail will have much further to travel than the
head. But when matter is repelled from the nucleus, and from the sun, it
has exactly the same forward momentum as the nucleus ; as, therefore, it
is driven further and further from the sun, and has a larger and larger
orbit to describe, it of necessity falls behind, and cannot therefore be swung


round like a stick, but only like a jet of water from a hydrant. The
curvature would, therefore, afford data for finding the velocity with which
the repelled matter was driven off.
Again, the convex, or front side of the tail is brightest and straightest.
In Donati’s comet, 1858, small straight tails preceded the main tail.
One explanation serves for all these facts. The sun analyzes-the matter
of the comet. Some parts of it he can dart away at an incomparably higher
velocity than others. This matter, most swiftly ejected, either makes sepa-
rate straight tails, as in 1858, or somewhat straightens and brightens the
convex, or front, side of the main tail.
There is much room for speculation and enquiry in connection with this
repulsive force. Does it pursue the repelled matter, and drive it away with
an ever-increasing motion, so that it will leave our system altogether, or
does it give an initial impulse, and have done ? Will the repelled matter-
change its condition by cooling, axrd cease to be liable to the persecution of
the repelling force ? Or has it lost its affinities and the power of changing
its condition ? Whatever may be its destiny it is certainly divorced from
the comet for ever.
There is reason to suppose that all the matter of a comet is not suscep-
tible to this repulsive force, and that a sufficient number of perihelion
passages will sift all the susceptible matter out, and leave the comet inca-
pable of producing a tail. Hence almost all the short-period comets that
are in perihelio every few years are tailless ; while visitors from the eterni-
ties of space, who can only be in that sifting position once in ten or twenty
millions of years, frequently make a prodigious display of tail.
Am. LXl. —Macquarie Island. 13y John H. Scott, M.D., F.E.S.E.,
Professor of Anatomy and Physiology in the University of Otago.
[Read before the Otago Institute, 21 st June, 1881 and 9 th May, 1882.]
Plate XXXIX.
In most of the maps which I have seen, an island named “Emerald” is put
down in latitude 57°, a long way to the south of Macquarie Island. This,
is, however, now generally regarded as mythical, for its supposed site was
sailed over by the American Transit of Venus Expedition and no land was
observed. In all probability its discoverers mistook an iceberg for snow-
covered land, a not unlikely mistake in misty weather.
We may therefore safely consider that Macquarie Island is the most
southerly island of the outlying members of the New Zealand group, indeed,


with the exception of some of the islands in the neighbourhood of Gape
Horn, it is the nearest point of land to the great Antarctic Continent. It
lies considerably to the south of Kerguelen Land, or the Crozets.
On this account then considerable interest attaches to it. I therefore
availed myself of the opportunity offered me by Messrs. Elder and Nichols,
in the latter end of 1880, for a trip down to it in the “ Jessie Niccol ”
schooner. It is the results of this excursion that I propose to give in this
paper.
The changes which the New Zealand flora undergoes in the Auckland
and Campbell Islands have been often noted, but almost nothing was known
of its characters in Macquarie Island. I wished to notice how many plants
survived in that high latitude, and what changes in appearance and habit
these had undergone in suiting themselves to the rigorous climate ; whether
our New Zealand alpine forms were to be found there at the sea level, and
whether there were to be found any new forms unrepresented even in
the highest and most remote parts of New Zealand.
Four or five of the Macquarie Island plants had been sent to the Hooker
Herbarium by Mr. Fraser, of the Sydney Botanic Gardens, about fifty years
ago. I cannot, however, make out whether he had visited the island him-
self, or whether one of the sealers had brought the plants to him.
I was also anxious to see and study, so far as practicable, the sea
elephants, which make it their summer resort. They never, so far as I
know, come as far north as either Campbell Island or the Auckland group,
so in this part of the world Macquarie Island is the only place where they
can be observed.
Macquarie Island lies about 600 miles to the south-west of New Zea-
land, more than twice as far away as the Auckland group, and is separated
from that group and from Campbell Island by very much deeper water than
that which lies between them and New Zealand. There is a great valley
3.000 fathoms deep between Macquarie Island and the Auckland and
Campbell Islands, while the sea between them and New Zealand is not
1.000 fathoms deep.
It is wrongly put down on all the charts. For the following correct
position I am indebted to Captain Cowper, who, in the “ Jessie Niccol,
has made a number of trips to the island ;
Latitude, north end, 54° 26' South.
Latitude, south end, 54° 44' South.
Longitude, north end, east side, 159° 5' 45' East.
Longitude, south end, east side, 159° 1' 45" East.
It is about 18 miles long and 5 miles broad, its east side lying N. i- W. and
S. \ E. magnetic.


It is a solitary island, but it has two outlying rocks. One called the
“ Bishop and Clerk ” lies 80 miles to the south of the south end ; the other
called the “Judge and Clerk ” is 7 miles to the north of the North Head.
It is exceedingly hilly. The hills, however, are of no great height, not
more than 600 or 700 feet I should think. They rise as a rule almost
directly from the sea, leaving but a narrow interval of shingly beach, while
occasional spurs run out from wide open bays which afford no shelter
to vessels. Towards the north end of the west coast there is a greater
extent of flat land between the hills and the sea. Between the steeper part
of the hill-side and the shingle, there is always a more gently sloping belt of
extremely swampy land. And here the tussock grass grows in “Maori heads”
above the soft treacherous mud. At both ends of the island, however, the
land rises in cliffs abruptly from the sea ; and the North Head forms a bluff
distinct from the rest of the island, and only connected with it by a narrow
neck of sand, through which the sea in stormy weather has been known to
break.
The west coast is, as might be expected, more cut into by the sea than
the east, but there are no bays suitable for harbours. At the south-west
corner of the island, there is, indeed, a beautiful deep bay called “ Caroline
Cove, completely sheltered from every side except the south-west. It is
completely open to that quarter however, and as the prevailing wind blows
from the south-west, and therefore straight into the bay, it would rather
prove a trap than a shelter to any vessel that anchored in it. There are still
visible on the beach the remains of a vessel which was wrecked in this man-
ner. The sealing vessels always lie some distance off the coast ready to slip
and go to sea at any moment. The oil in large casks is floated out to them.
The Caroline Cove wreck is not the only vessel that has gone ashore on
Macquarie Island; and there are still to be seen the graves of some of the
shipwrecked seamen. On the bit of plank which served as headstone for
one of them I was able to decipher the name, John Bilsham, but the date
was illegible.
The interior of the island shows the rocky tops of the hills blown per-
fectly bare by the wind, and fissured by the frosts; and in the hollows of
the uplands lie a number of little lakes, which empty themselves by streams,
ihese either make valleys for themselves down to the sea, or tumble down
the steep hill-sides in miniature cascades.
The general appearance of a Macquarie Island landscape is barren in
the extreme. There is not a tree or shrub on the island, and what vegeta-
tion there is has a great deal of sameness, long stretches of yellowish
tussock, with occasional great patches of the bright-green Stilbocarpa polaris,
or of the peculiar sage-green Pleurophyllum. These, with the rich brown


mosses near the hill-tops, are all that strike the eye in looking at the island
from the sea. This paucity of species is, as we shall see again, one of the
characteristics of the flora of antarctic islands.
The rocks of the island -belong to the older crystallines, greenstones.
They have occasionally an amygdaloidal structure, the amygdules some-
times containing zeolites. Mesotype, with concentric radiated fibrous
structure, occurs in one of my specimens ; and in another, what is probably
analcime, is to be seen. The rocks are sometimes veined with quartz.
Botany.
Unfortunately tlie season at which I visited the island was not well suited
for collecting plants. I was there in November and in these latitudes
spring is but little advanced in that month. I therefore found compar-
atively few plants in flower. This of course has added much to the diffi-
culty of identifying my specimens, and combined with the thick weather has
helped to make my collection smaller than it might have been under more
favourable circumstances. There are certain plants, common in the Camp-
bell and Auckland Islands, which may, for these reasons, have been over-
looked by me in Macquarie Island, such as the Anthericum rossii, a lily,
whose golden flowers are said by Hooker to form a very striking object in a
Campbell Island landscape; if present, however, it cannot be at all common.
Another genus which one might expect to find, but which I did not meet with,
is the Veronica. A plant so common in New Zealand and in the Campbell
and Auckland Islands, at all elevations, ought surely to have some represent-
ative in Macquarie Island. I have little doubt but that my collection is
imperfect, but even allowing largely for that, it shows that many species
have disappeared which are common in the Auckland and Campbell Islands,
and that those plants which are present have a much more stunted growth.
Those plants I did collect, however, are, with one exception (the Azor-
ella selago ), distinctly New Zealand in their characters, quite as much so
as those belonging to the Auckland or Campbell Islands ; and they also
show that all these islands agree in having, in common with all other
antarctic islands, a flora characterized by few species, but what there
are, growing luxuriantly. This is very distinctly seen in Macquarie Island,
where the number of species of flowering plants is certainly most limited,
but where great areas are covered by a close growth of Stilbocarpa and
Pleurophyllum.
It is curious to contrast the poverty of Macquarie Island in flowering
plants with the richness of countries in the northern hemisphere. The
corresponding north latitude runs through the north of England ; and
even in islands in very much higher north latitudes, such as Spitzbergen,
this greater richness in their flora is to be observed.


I have to thank Mr. A. C. Purdie for the trouble he has taken in the
naming and arranging of my plants.
The following is a list of the plants collected, with the natural orders to
which they belong. None of them are new to science ; I have therefore not
thought it necessary to give any detailed botanical descriptions.
Ranunculaoeae.
1. Ranunculus (acaulis ?), not in flower. Found in damp places. Occurs
in New Zealand, and Auckland Islands.
CAEYOPHYLLEiE.
2. Colobanthus muscoides, not in flower. Found on rocks near the sea.
Occurs in New Zealand, Auckland Islands, and Campbell Island.
Rosace.®.
3. Acana (buchanani ?), not in flower. Found on the hillsides.
4. Acana ascendens, Bidibidi [Piripiri], in fruit. Found on the hillsides.
Both of these common in New Zealand.
Cbassulacb®.
5. Tillaa sinclairii, in flower. Found in damp places. Occurs in Now
Zealand, Auckland Islands, and Campbell Island.
Umbellifeb®.
6. Azorella selago, not in flower. This is a rare and peculiar plant. It
does not occur in New Zealand, and has never been observed in either the
Aucklands or Campbell Island. It grows on the hillsides, forming pro-
minent globular masses often 4 feet across. These are green on the
surface, where the living part of the plant lies as a crust to the great mass
of debris which forms the interior. This is the decaying remains of former
years’ growth, through which the roots descend. The whole makes a solid
mass on which one can stand. The surface crust is particularly dense. The
young shoots are so closely packed together and make so uniform a surface,
that lichens and other small plants are sometimes found growing on it.
This same plant is best known from its occurrence in Kerguelen Land
and the neighbouring islands. There it grows more abundantly. It is also
said to occur among the mountains of Fuegia.
7. Azorella lycopodioides (?), not in flower. Grows in small masses. It
has often been confused with Colobanthus subulatus, and as my specimen has
neither flowers nor fruit it is named with some diffidence.
Abaliaoe®.
8. Stilbocarpa polaris, “Macquarie Island Cabbage” of the sealers, in
flower and fruit. This plant is found all over the island growing in large
patches. In sheltered corners on the lower ground it is a handsome plant,
and its bright green leaves are always conspicuous.


In last year’s Transactions Mr. Armstrong described two varieties from
Stewart Island, one of which had hairy the other smooth leaves; and last
summer these two varieties were brought up from Auckland Island. I did
not notice the smooth-leaved variety on Macquarie Island.
This is a very common plant in both the Campbell and Auckland
Islands. It is also found in Stewart Island, and Lyall has found it on the
west coast of the South Island of New Zealand. What is known as the
“ Kerguelen Cabbage ” is an entirely different plant—the Pringlea anti-
scorbutica."
Eubiace m.
9. Coprosma repens, not in flower. Found in New Zealand, Auckland
and Campbell Islands.
Composite.
10. Pleurophyllum criniferum, in flower and fruit. This, like the Stilho-
carpa, occurs in large patches all over the island. It is the handsomest
plant on the island. Its long sage-green leaves and its purple flowers make
it particularly noticeable. It occurs in the Auckland and Campbell Islands
and there grows much larger, becoming a much more showy plant.
11. Cotula plumosa, in flower. Occurs plentifully close to the sea. It
is very rare in New Zealand, but has been found in Otago.
Jdnce.®.
12. Luzula crinita, in damp places. Occurs in New Zealand, and in the
Auckland and Campbell Islands.
13. Luzula campestris. Occurs in New Zealand.
GraminejE.
14. Poafoliosa. The ordinary tussock of the island. It differs a good
deal in appearance at different levels, and in swampy and dry ground.
Occurs in New Zealand and in the Auckland and Campbell Islands.
16. Poa annua. Found near one of the huts. Possibly introduced.
16. Festuca duriuscula. Differs from Buchanan’s figure of this plant in
having the inner empty glume bifid at the extremity, not acute as given by
him.
Filices.
17. Aspidium aculeatum var. vestitum. Occurs occasionally not far from
the sea, and grows to a fair size. Common in New Zealand, and in the
Auckland and Campbell Islands.
18. Polypodium australe. My specimens show an extremely alpine form
of this fern. It is a very common New Zealand fern, but is not mentioned
in Hooker’s “ Flora Antarctica ” as growing on the Auckland or Campbell
Islands.
19. Lomaria alpina, also common in New Zealand.


Musci.
20. Dicranwm robustum.
21. Dicranum menziesii.
22. Batramia elongata, mixed with a Jungermannia.
23. Racomitrium lanuginosum.
24. Andrecea mutabilis.
25. Zygodon, sp.
26. Trematodon flexipes.
27. Campylopus introflexus.
Liohenes.
28. Stereocaulon ramulosum.
29. Sphcerophoron coralloides (?).
80. Cladonia cariosa.
~ pyxidata.
31. Parmelia parietina.
32. Lecanora parella.
33. Lecidea coarctata.
Fungi.
34. Uredo antarctica, growing on the stems of Luzula crinita and
campestris.
35. Sphceria phaosticta, growing on the stems of Luzula crinita and
campestris.
36. Sphceria herbarium, growing on Poafoliosa.
37. Sphceria depressa, growing on Poafoliosa.
38. Hendersonia rnicrosticta, growing on the dead stems of Stilbocarpa
polaris.
39. Dothidea spilomea, on dead stems of Stilbocarpa polaris, and of Pleuro-
phyllum criniferum.
The plants which were sent by Fraser to the Hooker Herbarium are:
1. Accena sanguisorba.
2. ~ asemdens.
3. Pleurophyllum criniferum.
4. Cotula plumosa.
5. Poa foliosa.
6. Azorella selago.
7. Luzula crinita.
Birds.
The most common birds on the island are the penguins. Of these
there are four different kinds occurring, either separately or mixed, in
rookeries scattered at intervals all round the coast. They were all incuba-
ting at the time of my visit.


Aptenodyfes pennanti, “ King Penguin.”—These build no nest. They
lay their single egg anywhere in the rookery, often in running water, and
sit over it, tucking it with their feet into the fold in the lower part of their
abdomen. The egg is large and much pointed at one end. The young
are almost as large as the adults, but are covered with a thick brown coat
of down. A few of the females were sitting at the time of my visit. The
King Penguins have not been known to migrate.
Eudyptes schlegeli, “ Royal Penguin.”—More numerous than the other
varieties. They build a nest of stones, in which they lay three eggs as a
rule. They are said to discard their first egg. The young are coloured
like the adults with the exception of the yellow crest. The “ Royals ” leave
the island in June, and return in October.
Eudyptesfilholi, “Victoria Penguin.”—These also build a nest of stones
and lay two or three eggs. Their rookeries are generally among the rocks.
The young are coloured like the adults, but have no crests. They, like the
“ Royals,” leave in June and return in October.
Pygoscelis taniala, “ Rockhopper.”—A name much more suited to the
Victorias than to this variety. They have their rookeries amongst the
tussock and build nests of grass. Their eggs, of which there are generally
two or three, are generally much rounder than those of the other penguins.
The young are coloured like the adults. They have not been known to
migrate.
Ossifraga gigantea, “ Nelly,” “ Stinkpot.’’—Lives in rookeries, generally
inland. Builds grassy nests, in which are usually two eggs. The females
were sitting at the time of my visit.
Phalacrocorax carunculatus, Shag.—Was also incubating. Dr. Bullor,
who saw my specimen, named it as above.
Prion hanksii, “ Night-bird.”—Makes its nest in burrows under the tus-
socks, where it can be heard during the day cooing like a dove. It leaves
its nest at night and picks up its food at sea, a short distance from the land.
Platycercus nova-zealandia, Parroquet.—Same as New Zealand form.
Occurs in great numbers round the shore. Makes its nest under tussocks.
Ocydromus, “ Maori Hen.”—l only saw one specimen of this bird. Its
plumage was of a bright reddish-brown colour.
Rallus macquariensis.— Much smaller than the “ Maori hen,” and not at
all uncommon. There seemed to be two varieties—one, slightly the larger,
was reddish in colour, the other was black.
Lestris antarctica, “ Sea Hen,” “ Skua Gull.”—Most of the eggs of this
gull are hatched by the end of November. The nests are, as a rule, at a
considerable elevation above the sea. The adults are as savage and pre-
datory as they are in other parts, and it is not quite safe to go inland with-
out a stout stick.


1 did not see any nests of the ordinary white gull, which is also common
on the shore.
The sealers told me that teal were occasionally seen on some of the
little lakes among the hills. I did not, however, see any.
I was also informed that an albatross nest was once found on the high
land towards the south end of the island. This was some years ago, and
none had been observed since then.
Mammals.
There are no land mammals peculiar to the island, but the übiquitous
rabbit was introduced a few years ago, and now swarms at the north end,
where it feeds largely on the thick fleshy roots of the Pleurophyllum. Very
few rabbits were originally landed, and these, I was told, were all of the
tame parti-coloured kind. It was curious to observe how their descendants,
in the process of reverting to the wild type, had all become one-coloured —
black, or white with pink eyes, or yellow—while many had become regular
wild rabbits in colour as well as habits.
Morunga elephantina, “ Sea Elephant.”-—This is the largest of the seals,
and receives its name of “ elephant ” from the curious manner in which it
elongates its nose when excited or angry. It is regularly hunted for its
blubber, which forms a thick layer underneath the skin. Macquarie
Island is the only place near New Zealand where these elephants are found,
but they are common on the shores of Kerguelen Land and the neighbouring
islands, and occur even as far north as Juan Fernandez.
I judged some of the larger males I saw to be over 20 feet long. The
females, however, are very much smaller. They are thick in proportion
and are huge unwieldy creatures.
The usual colour is a yellowish-brown, some, however, are redder in
colour. The young ones are almost black. For about one week after their
birth they retain a beautifully soft furry coat, also black in colour.
The main peculiarity of these creatures is the mobility of the nose.
This, when the animal is asleep or undisturbed, presents no peculiarity.
Irritate him, however, or see him naturally excited, and you will soon see
the curious change which rage produces in his face. He invariably, how-
ever young, rears himself, sometimes at both ends, and opens his mouth to
its fullest extent, showing all his teeth and uttering a peculiar barking roar.
At the same time the nose in the adult males undergoes its peculiar change.
It is, partly by air being blown forcibly into its elastic-sided cavity and to a
certain extent by muscular contraction, puffed out in great sacs above the
animal’s head. It elongates as well as swells, and hangs down as a trunk
for some inches in front of its mouth. None of the plates of sea-elephants
which I have seen, represent this nasal swelling at all as it is. I was for-
tunate enough to see two large ani als thoroughly angry.


THAHS.N.Z.1NST1T0TE,V0L.MP1IM.
MMQMRR/E /SLMD.
DSScott, id. JB.lilk




I was not able to observe much of this animal’s habits during the few
clays I spent on the island. I usually saw them lying asleep in groups on
the shingle, or in the long tussock near the beach. I sometimes saw them
gambolling in the shallow water among the kelp, and occasionally I noticed
them fighting in a half-hearted sort of way. The scarred hides and broken
tusks of the old males, however, show that they sometimes have savage
encounters. In fighting they rear themselves against each other and try
to seize their opponent with their large canines. These are the only teeth
they could use for such a purpose, as the others barely pierce the gum.
They are never to be seen feeding on the island, and during the breeding
season live on their own fat. Little or nothing in the way of food is ever
found in their stomachs, but these and the intestines are infested with
parasitic worms.
The island is never entirely deserted by the sea-elephants, but by far the
greatest number are to be found after October, when they come up to calve.
The period of gestation is said to be eleven months.
The cows, I was told by the sealers, suckle their young for three weeks,
and then wean them by deserting them for a time. Whether this be the
case or not I cannot say, but I certainly often saw very young animals lying
on the beach apart from the adults.
The sealers say that a bull is not worth killing for its blubber till it is
three years old.
The tongue of these animals when well cooked is excellent eating.
No fur seals are found on Macquarie Island, though they are so common
on the Auckland group.
The only other seal is the Stenorhynchus leptonyx, or sea-leopard, the
ordinary spotted seal of our coasts.
It is a great contrast to the sluggish sea-elephant, and is the terror of
the penguins.
Art. LXII. —Is New Zealand a Healthy Country?—An Enquiry.
By Alfred K. Newman, M. 8., M.E.C.P.
With Statistics by F. W. Frankland.
[Read before the Wellington Philosophical Society, 3rd February, 1883.1
That “ National health is national wealth,” has become a firmly fixed
article of belief among all modern thinkers. Much has been written upon
the resources of New Zealand: authors have described in glowing words
its boundless mineral wealth, and the luxuriant fertility of its rich soil. A
few have touched upon the healthiness of the climate, but these latter have


made statements chiefly consisting of vague and shadowy beliefs, and not
the results of patient enquiries. Upwards of forty years have come and
gone since this colony was founded, and since 1874 the censuses have been
so many and so accurate, and the population so large, as to afford us a suf-
ficient supply of facts whereon to base the statements made by us. In the
childhood of the colony several army surgeons collected statistics of the
healthiness of the troops stationed in it, and compared these with those of
our soldiers quartered in other parts of the globe. These statistics, though
few, pointed strongly to the fact that the climate of New Zealand was good.
In conjunction with my friend Mr. Frankland I proposed to examine
carefully what were the grounds on which this belief was based. We
agreed to contribute a joint paper. Subsequently this plan was slightly
changed, but the statistics in this paper were all supplied by him, and of
their accuracy there can be no question. Mr. Frankland’s great mathe-
matical powers and his long and thorough acquaintance with the vital
statistics of the colony are an absolute guarantee of their correctness.
Any physician investigating the question whether this colony is or is
not healthy, would make search for diseases, old and new; for diseases
well known to him and for diseases hitherto unrecognized. He would
draw up a list of prevalent diseases, just as a botanist or geologist would
prepare lists of plants and rocks.
Subjoined is a list (No. I.) of diseases known to exist in this colony and
another (No. II.) of diseases not yet imported, whilst the last list (No. III.)
shows the list of diseases peculiar to these islands. Though I have taken
great pains and made many enquiries for the purposes of making these lists
as accurate as possible, it must be remembered that no such lists as the
first two can be perfect. Of one thing we are certain, viz., that all the
diseases named in No. I. have actually obtained in New Zealand. It is
possible that a few in No. 11. may also have existed. These lists are com-
piled from various sources. The Registrar-General’s returns are valuable
only for diseases which kill; they take no heed of the others.
An examination of these lists shows us that people coming to this colony
have no need to fear that they run a risk of catching new diseases, for the
only indigenous diseases are the bite of the katijw, and very rare deaths
from the eating of two or three different kinds of poisonous berries. From
the Maoris, the original inhabitants, we have not acquired one single disease.
They have not one new disease of their own. Earlier writers on the colony
talk of a disease called ngerengere, but this is merely a variety of pure
leprosy, which is common to all the Polynesian inhabitants of the Pacific
isles. It presents no feature worthy of notice, except that it is fast disap-
pearing, and is far less common now than it was forty years ago. Probably


