



MADGE’S TRIP
TO
EUROPE AND BACK






CHESTERFIELD PARISH CHURCH, THE SPIRE CURIOUSLY TWISTED.


MADGE'S TRIP
TO
EUROPE AND BACK
BY
HERSELF
George Robertson & Company
PROPY. LTD.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide
AND BRISBANE




Preface
In response to the request of many friends, who
tell me they have found pleasure in reading my
simple and informally-written letters, with great dif-
fidence I venture to send them forth, hoping they
may he a small help to others contemplating such a
tour.
The addresses contained therein are all genuine;
and the trip, lasting eighteen months, cost £5OO, but
I have no doubt could be done for considerably less.
This money covered the expenses of my visits to
many other places, as for instance Stratford-on-Avon,
York, Leeds, Halifax, Windsor Castle, and the Eng-
lish Lakes; but want of space has made it impossible
to include all my letters.


TO “DENNIS,”
My Faithful Little Companion,
who gave me such a warm
welcome on my return,
These Pages are lovingly Dedicated.


Contents
Page.
Letter I —Colombo il
Letter II —Naples . 16
Letter 111 —Genoa ' 21
Letter IV —London 26
Letter V—Edinburgh 34
Letter VI —Dairy and Kilmarnock 38
Letter VII —Liverpool 41
Letter VIII —Cologne 44
Letter IX—Cologne 49
Letter X —Cologne and Elberfeld 54
Letter XL—Dresden 60
Letter Xll—Dresden 64
Letter XIII —Berlin 69
Letter XIV —Berlin 73
Letter XV —Vienna 78
Letter XVI —Vienna .. .. 83
Letter XVll—Munich 86
Letter XVIII —Niirnberg 91
Letter XIX —Rothenburg 94
Letter XX —Cologne again 97
Letter XXl—Cologne iox
Letter XXll—Goodbye to Germany 106
Letter XXIII —London again .. 107
Letter XXlV—Rouen Ix 3


Letter XXV — Montlucon lIS
Letter XXVI —Paris 120
Letter XXVII —Ayr 126
Letter XXVIII —Paisley and Oban 128
Letter XXIX —Crianlarich 132
Letter XXX—London (Covent Garden) .... 134
Letter XXXI —Lausanne and Montreux .. .. 136
Letter XXXII —Geneva and Bern 142
Letter XXXIII —Lucerne 147
Letter XXXIV —Milan and Venice 150
Letter XXXV—Venice 154
Letter XXXVI —Good-bye to Switzerland .... 159
Letter XXXVII —Newquay 160
Letter XXXVIII —Marseilles and Pompeii.. .. 164


Madge’s Trip to Europe
and Back
I
Colombo
R.M.S. July 19 —.
Dear Nan, —
And so lam really going to Europe 1 A first-class
ticket in my bag, and a nice sum of money to spend
en route.
Perhaps when I arrive there, I shall realise the fact,
but at present I feel as if my Journey ought to end
at Sydney or Brisbane, for my travels, so far, have
not extended beyond Australia.
Now, after years of anticipation, here I am on the
deck of a fine steamer, my journey to the land of my
fathers just begun, and my mind made up to enjoy
everything as it comes along.
Later.
Adelaide, Fremantle, the long stretch of ocean, and
now—Colombo.
How am I going to give you the least idea of its
charm?


I watched the lights of harbour and city gradually
come into view, and we had no sooner dropped
anchor, than I heard a weird sound on the water,
which turned out to be a boatload of natives singing.
Very soon other boats came alongside, each one
rowed by picturesque-looking men. Such a 1 clat-
tering as went on among them all. They all
seemed to talk at once, and when I saw passengers’
luggage being carried down the gangway by these
creatures, and fought for on the way down, I was glad
none of mine was among it, for it looked as if part of
it might land in the sea instead of in the boat.
Donald met me, and a steam tender took us on
shore. After leaving my dressing bag at the Grand
Oriental Hotel, the next item on the programme was a
’rickshaw ride. That was great fun. I felt like a
child being pulled along in a little toy cart, but was
very comfortable, and the man in the shafts jogged
along without seeming to exert himself in the least.
Then we went for a walk along some of the streets,
which were teeming with interest on every side.
Dozens of ’rickshaws with their attendant coolies,
dozens of coolies without ’rickshaws. Quaint waggons
drawn by quainter oxen, animals that look not much
larger than a St. Bernard dog, their reins going
through the nose like the ring of a bull.
My bedroom was large, with a polished floor, and
of course, the bed was covered with mosquito net. A
double door opened on to the balcony, which latter was
protected by bamboo blinds, and on each side of this
door was a swing shutter window, always open at
night, I expect, whatever it may be in the day time.


I had a nice supper of bananas and paw paw fruit,
for which I paid so many cents, but as I gave the coolie
English money and he brought me the change in
Ceylon coinage, I’m a bit hazy as to what it cost.
Next day, a little after six, he brought my morning
tea, which I carried on to the balcony.
Opposite, a large building was being erected, th«
scaffold poles for which were enormous bamboos.
I sat in an easy chair watching hundreds of dark-
skinned people of all sorts coming round a corner from
the native quarter to the main street. They made
such a clatter and chatter as they came towards me,
and besides the noise they made, hundreds of crows
flew about and added considerably to it.
I dressed in stages, going out to the balcony every
few minutes, fascinated by all that was passing before
me.
At last I managed to complete my toilet, and went
downstairs, where I found Donald waiting for me with
a victoria, driven, of course, by a native.
We drove straight to and through the native quar-
ters, a part of the town one shouldn’t miss seeing.
Dark and light-skinned people, children big and
little, many of the latter evidently considering the
weather too hot for clothing.
The funny thatched roofs and queer little shops
with all sorts of things for sale, their owners squatting
at one end of the bench, and the swarms of natives in
all sorts of costumes, were fascinating to a degree.
Passing through all this, we came in a little while
to the Kelaniya River. On it were native boats with


thatched roofs, and on either bank exquisite palms and
trees of all kinds.
We drove for about an hour, I think, along a lovely
forest road, coming every now and then to native
huts, and groups of natives.
The little children, such pretty little creatures with
their lovely white teeth, called out to us for money as
we drove past, and indeed ran a long distance beside
the carriage.
At last we arrived at Kelaniya Temple, and alighted
to inspect it. At once a pretty little girl came to me
with an exquisite pink lotus lily, which, of course, I
had to buy.
After signing our names and paying two rupees, we
were shown over the temple, which was more queer
than beautiful, and was certainly smelly.
Just before going back to the carriage, I threw a
handful of small copper coins into the air, to the intense
delight of our band of small followers. Immediately
after this, and without any warning, a tropical shower
descended upon us, and my spirited run to shelter
caused no small amount of amusement.
Then came our return drive along the beautiful
road, meeting every now and then one or two native
carts drawn by the little oxen.
The foliage is quite beyond description.
Bright red trees, not flowers, but leaves, lovely cala-
diums, palms of different varieties, and many other
plants quite new to me.
Ten o’clock brought us to the Galle Face Hotel and
breakfast, which included mangosteens, a delicious


fruit, the outward appearance much like a passion
fruit, but the inside something like white orange liths.
After breakfast we went on to the terrace facing the
sea, and there we watched an Indian conjuror and his
boy. One of the first things he did was to open a
basket, when up popped a real live cobra. I popped
up, too, and off my chair in an instant, but as the
wretch put it back, I settled down again.
He had a mongoose with him, and if I had allowed
it, would have started these two creatures fighting.
Another ’rickshaw ride brought us to the wharf, and
a row of about ten minutes to the steamer.
From the moment of our arrival until we steamed
out of the harbour, my mouth was in a perpetual state
of smile—yes, even while I slept, I verily believe.
Fascinating Colombo!
There’s the bugle announcing lunch, a sound a good
sailor doesn’t feel inclined to disregard.
Give my dear little doggie, Dennis, a pat. I’m so
glad he is to be in your care during my absence.
The best of greetings.


II.
Naples
On Deck,
August.
Dear Nan, —
Since I last wrote, we have steamed up the Red Sea
and through the Canal, stopping at Port Said to coal,
then along the Mediterranean and past Mt. Strom-
boli, a great mountain rising straight out of the sea, the
one side quite bare and rocky, the other green, with a
village of white square dice-like looking houses down
at the water’s edge.
I shouldn’t like to live there, I can tell you.
Smoke was pouring from the crater, and while
watching it, it became quite pink with the light from
the rising sun.
Yesterday we passed the Island of Capri, such a
majestic-looking piece of land. Cliffs hundreds of
feet in height are skirted by the blue Mediterranean,
and in between these cliffs, high up, lies the white town.
Then came Naples.
See Naples and die! I have seen Naples. I don’t
wish to die, I wish to live that I may see it again.
I had the most perfect two hours there that is pos-
sible for anyone to have.


I was a little disappointed with the Bay itself. Syd-
ney Harbour is prettier, but still, it was, of course,
beautiful and interesting.
High hills, with towns or villages at the foot and up
the sides, Mt. Vesuvius higher than all, a little smoke
coming out of one crater. Pompeii, away in the dis-
tance, and Naples, exquisite, fascinating, delightful,
dirty Naples stretching round the coast and away up
the hills.
We went ashore in a steam tender, which took about
fifteen minutes, then, at the quay, got a carriage and
pair, and with a guide, started off on our glorious
two-hour drive.
Narrow streets, wide streets, crooked streets,
straight streets, streets with fine old houses, and
streets with small, poor dwellings. Men and women,
children, cats, dogs, goats, hens and chickens, and
even rabbits living, incredible as it seems, under the
same roof.
Vehicles of every description, and horses, ditto.
As to the horses, I was thankful to see that most of
them looked fairly well cared for.
Their harness is sometimes elaborate, the saddle
especially, which towers up about a foot above the
animal. The bits are quite different from ours, not
being put into the mouth, but a band is placed round
the nose, with a little piece standing out on either side,
to which the reins are attached. To me, this seemed
very sensible. Sometimes three horses are driven,
the one in the centre a little farther back than its two
companions.


Round this street and that, we went, the guide
pointing out places of interest.
By the time we —or at least I—had nearly wagged
my head off trying to see things on both sides of the
street at once, we had arrived at a fine arcade.
Here we bought some post cards, got into the car-
riage again, and went on through more quaint and in-
teresting streets, some a network of clotheslines, on
which hung the family washing.
Then up and up, round one rocky cliff and another
till we came to Bartolini’s Hotel.
If ever I stay at Naples I shall live at Bartolini’s in
preference to any other hotel or pension. It is in a
superb position, commanding a view of the city and
bay.
Arriving there, we went inside, walked through a
long white corridor to the lift, which took us still
farther up and up, and at last let us out on to a wide
balcony or terrace, 250 feet above the sea.
Never shall I forget the half-hour I spent there.
A perfectly lovely day, the sun shining, the sky blue,
the wide terrace, with plants growing in boxes or pots,
and climbing up the walls, and below us, rocks, cliffs,
houses, built one on top of another, it seemed, green
trees and grass, flowers, red roofs, blue sea, ships at
anchor, and the musical sounds of the city rising in the
clear air.
Fancy sitting on a very wide terrace in such a posi-
tion, drinking delicious tea out of thin cups (no thin
cups on board), eating freshly made toast, little rolls
of unsalted butter, and very nice cake.


Then down, down, a different way from that we
came up.
The streets were thronged with people, typical
Neapolitans, lounging in graceful attitudes, men,
women and children; many were untidily dressed, but
their very untidiness seemed to add to the picture.
Well dressed women, out shopping, without hats,
but carrying a silk or muslin head wrap, that I sup-
pose they would use in the wind or sun, we met fre-
quently.
Little children, like the grown-up folk, carry fans,
and use them with much grace.
Near the quay I bought two watermelons, and ar-
rived on board with one tucked under each arm, much
to the amusement of my fellow passengers.
About 7.30 p.m. we left the Bay, and Naples, still
beautiful, with all the lights along the shore, and dot-
ting the hillsides.
Now this must be posted, but I could go on in-
definitely, if I could only put all that is in my brain
on to paper.
My first peep at a European city was a very happy
one—and, only think of all the joy that is still to
come!
I expect to be pretty tired by the time I reach Lon-
don, for Genoa and Milan come next, and the long
railway journey, to say nothing of the excitement
which goes along with it.
I’m ever so glad I’ve decided to go overland; shall
have company nearly all the way, and we go via Milan,
through the St. Gotthard Tunnel, Lucerne, Basel,


Strasbourg (makes one think of potted ham, doesn’t
it?), Coblenz, Bonn, Cologne, Dusseldorf, then through
Holland to Flushing, and across the channel to Queen-
boro’, where Jean will meet me.
I must off to bed, good-night.
Oh, those to-morrows!


III
Genoa
Hotel du Nord,
Milan,
August —, 19 —.
My dear Nan, —
I ought to be asleep instead of writing, but I feel
that unless I tell you a little about my doings since
I left the steamer, I shall not be able to keep up to
date, and many things that I should like to tell you will
be forgotten.
We arrived at Genoa about 8 p.m. yesterday, early
enough to get our luggage through the Customs.
A short drive brought us to the Hotel de la Ville,
the exterior quite ordinary looking, but with the most
extraordinary interior I have ever seen.
Certainly the entrance hall, with its marble staircase,
is pretty, but when we went up in the lift to our rooms
I can’t quite describe my feelings when we stepped into
a sort of hall, with plain, square, low-roofed'and out-
of-condition corridors branching off in all directions.
No doors to be seen anywhere, only a dim light here
and there in the distance—corridors that made me
think of catacombs.
However, when I got to my room, I found it large,
and comfortably furnished, a bed-sitting-room really,


with a crimson plush covered sofa, and easy chair, a
covered table and bed-room furniture, the floor being
all done in Mosaic tiling, with rugs here and there.
Thank goodness the others were not far away, or
I really think I should have sat up all night. The eeri-
ness of those blank-walled corridors, with their seem-
ing dead-ends, made me feel as if anything might
happen.
In justice, let me say that, despite its peculiarities
in the way of architecture, it is a most comfortable
house at which to stay.
This morning, the first thing we did, after breakfast,
was to go to Cook’s to see about our railway tickets,
and to send a wire to Jean,
My ticket, right through to London, will cost me
only twenty shillings more than by boat, hotel expenses
not included, of course, and I’m still awfully glad that
I decided to come overland, for, by sleeping here to-
night, and at Basel to-morrow, I shall travel as far as
Cologne in daylight, cross the Channel at night, and
arrive in London at 8 a.m. on Saturday.
But now to tell you a little about Genoa itself, which,
like Naples, has a background of hills.
Of course, it is old, consequently most interesting,
with its stone-paved, narrow streets, without footpaths,
going in all directions, so narrow, that I felt as if I
was walking along back lanes. Here and there is a
fine square, but many of these alley-ways are narrower
than our Flinders Lane, and all are thronged with
people, not the lazy, indolent Neapolitans—that indo-
lence is quite absent—everyone goes about in a busi-
ness-like way, the ladies without hats, but wearing, in


stead, a lace scarf, put across the hair like a ribbon, and
tied under the chin.
There seem to be a tremendous lot of windbws, all
of which have green shutters, and a very large pro-
portion have two sticks projecting, between which,
underclothing of all colours is hung out on little lines
to dry. A queer mode of decorating the front of one’s
house.
Trams run in every direction, even along some very
narrow streets, and the traffic, as nearly everywhere
on the Continent, is the opposite way to ours, at home.
We go to the left of an approaching vehicle; here, to
the right.
The famous Campo Santo (cemetery) claimed our
attention for a while. Its corridors are fine, so also
are some of the monuments, but others are execrable.
When I tell you that during the first hour after
leaving Genoa we went through twenty tunnels, you
can perhaps imagine a little what the country was like
through which we passed.
We arrived at Milan during the evening, and came
straight to this hotel, which is close to the station. It
has a pretty garden in front, and in this garden, under
a lovely trellis of Virginia creeper, are set little tables,
the whole place being well lighted.
Here we had supper, then, before going to bed, each
had a one and eight-penny hot bath! The first bath
for which I have had to pay.
Later.
This morning I was up and dressed by 8 o’clock, and
went for a little stroll by myself, bought a few post-
cards, wrote and posted them.


Just after breakfast we started off in a carriage to
see the Cathedral and town.
The Cathedral is a building of such beauty that no
words of mine can give you the least idea of it. The
exterior, roof, and all, being marble, is adorned with
no less than 2000 statues. It holds 40,000 people, and
covers an area of 14,000 square yards.
After a walk round the somewhat dimly lit interior,
we went to the roof, a little gallery at the top of the
spire being our destination. From here we had a
magnificent view of Milan, the guide pointing out the
different buildings of interest.
During our drive round, we passed the celebrated
La Scala Opera House, the King’s Palace, the Arco
della Pace (a triumphal arch of white marble), and
went into a fine arcade, the Galleria Vittorio Emanuel,
the most spacious structure of the kind in Europe.
Hotel de I’Univers,
Basel.
Basel, but just to sleep. No time to look round, for
I start on the last part of my railway journey at 9
a.m. to-morrow.
Before telling you about our run from Milan, I
must tell you that the platforms at the different rail-
way stations en route from Genoa are only six or
eight inches in height, so one has quite a climb into the
train. The guard, instead of giving a shrill whistle
to start it, gives two toots on a little trumpet, after
which, without any whistling from the engine, it glides
smoothly away.


From the time we left Milan, we passed through the
most magnificent and beautiful scenery that I could
have imagined, and I did nothing the whole time but
feast my eyes on the superb mountains, beautiful
waterfalls, and blue mountain brooks tumbling along
over rocks and stones.
We passed Lake Como, skirted Lake Lugano, and
later on, after passing through the St. Gotthard Tunnel
(which takes fifteen minutes), came to Lucerne.
The scenery was worth coming much farther than
from Australia to see.
The mountains, though not snow-covered entirely,
were majestic, and I only wish you could have seen
them with me.
On one, a patch of snow was the exact shape of a
huge kangaroo, which I took as a personal compliment
from the country!
Lunch, my first meal in a railway carriage, was
served just as at an hotel, though drinking was a little
difficult, but that was a detail.
No more to-night, dear Nan.
I’m longing for news of fny dear Australian folk—
and little Dennis—but must possess my soul in patience
till I get to London.


IV
London
London!
Lancaster Road,
Hampstead,
August, 19 —.
Yes, Nan, life is well worth living!
I am actually in London, the anticipation of years
an accomplished fact.
We left Basel, as arranged, passed through Strass-
burg, and on to Bingen, from which place we ran
alongside the beautiful Rhine for about two hours, to
Bonn.
Tell Dennis, by the way, that he is a lucky little
dog to have nothing to do, for I saw, en route, between
Milan and Basel, dogs drawing carts, and not for play,
either.
The broad river was lovely. Every here and there
ruined castles stand on prominent cliffs or headlands.
The banks abound in charming scenery, which unfolds
itself at each curve of the river.
At half-past five we arrived at Cologne, where I
parted with the last of my steamer companions.
Then came dinner, a good sleep, and I found my-
self at Flushing.


My cabin on the Channel steamer was one with no
less than six berths, and as I didn’t fancy sleeping
there, I just opened up my rug and cushions, settled
myself comfortably on a bench, aind slept till 5 a.m.,
when I went downstairs and prepared for breakfast.
We arrived at Queenboro’ punctually at six o’clock,
and there, on the quay, was my dear cousin Jean, wait-
ing to welcome me. We had been parted for three
years, so our meeting was a joyous one.
Train to London! A motor ’bus—great, ugly, cum-
bersome, but convenient thing—a hansom, and aunt
and cousin Tom for a grand finale.
Then questions asked and answered about our dear
Australian people. Did I leave my 90-year-old grand-
mother well ? Had Ellison and Kenneth started
school yet? And, of course, my little mother was just
the same, sunny-tempered and unselfish—did sister
Nell still make play theatres, and dress dolls?
After breakfast, a motor ’bus took Jean and me to
Charing Cross to get my cabin trunk, which had been
sent by a short route from Basel.
Afterwards, as we drove along, I saw many, and
recognised some, well-known places Trafalgar
Square, the National Gallery, Westminster Abbey, the
Embankment, the Strand, Liberty’s, and Peter Robin-
son’s.
This afternoon, during a walk with Tom, I passed
the “ Bull and Bush Inn,” of ancient memory. It
looks old, especially the windows, with their tiny panes,
while inside are various monograms and articles of in-
terest that belonged to famous and long-dead patrons.


From there we went to Golder’s Hill, a beautifully
laid out estate, belonging to the public, one bed in a
large walled garden containing all the flowers men-
tioned by Shakespeare.
Here, for the first time, I saw grapes growing under
glass, looking almost unreal with their bloom unim-
paired by wind or rain. They will be sold for four
shillings a pound.
We got a ’bus home, rode on top, and of course
talked to the driver.
It seems to me that I have seen all the ’buses the
world has ever produced!
Later.
This morning, just after breakfast, Jean and I, act-
ing upon the advice of many, started off to “see Lon-
don from the top of a ’bus.”
We passed Lord’s Cricket Ground, Regent’s Park,
Hyde Park, St. Paul’s, The Exchange, Mansion House;
the Bank of England, Bow Bells Church (don’t expect
me to remember the order in which they should come),
drove over London Bridge and walked back, saw the
Tower Bridge in the distance, and shops 300 years old.
Got out of one ’bus into another, and ditto, ditto, about
a dozen times during the day.
Oh, that traffic! and Jean says that London is empty.
It took forty-five minutes to drive to the Bank, and
by the time the said drive was over, I had a violent
headache. My heart was in my mouth ever so often, at
the seemingly narrow escapes from collision.
I arrived in London just sixty-two hours ago, but
feel as if I have been here for a month, and as if the


steamer and I parted company somewhere in the dim
past.
In the window of a Regent-street fruit shop were
grapes at 8/- a lb., a basket of six pears for 3/6, and
six peaches for 7/6! The latter would cost us about
sixpence a pound.
Later.
Letters from home! How I did enjoy them! After
such a long silence it was comforting to hear that alt
is well, even to Dennis, who seems to have taken kindly
to his new mistress. I’m not surprised that he scratched
at my door the morning after I left.
I mustn’t forget to tell you of two very interesting
hours I spent in behind scenes of one of London’s prin-
cipal florists. Here I was fortunate enough to see a
most unusual, and very cleverly carried out piece of
floral work, besides other beautiful and interesting de-
signs.
This special one was a pall to cover the coffin of a
very rich Italian lady,—and now to try to describe it.
Have you ever seen a cloth pall over a coffin? The
outline of the top of the coffin shows, and the cloth
hangs loosely in folds to the bottom.
For this design, a wire frame was made to exactly
resemble the contour of a pall. This frame was en-
tirely covered with flat white chrysanthemums, a band
about two inches in width of pale violets outlining the
shape of the lid. All round the lower edge, which, of
course, waved in and out to represent folds, was
another band of violets, and above the violets, a band,
the same width, of lilies of the valley, without leaves,


only the little white bells showing (made up in the
same manner as long green festoons for decoration).
From the band of violets outlining the lid hung fes-
toons of similar ropes of lilies of the valley, and at each
of the four corners of this outlining were graceful and
lovely white carnations, lilies of the valley with their
pale green leaves, delicate fern, and trails of ropes of
lilies of the valley. In the centre of the pall were very
delicate, long, palm leaves, bending over, and lying on
the white chrysanthemums, with also exquisite sprays
of white orchids and more lilies of the valley. Each
bloom in the posies at the four corners and the centre
was perfect. Certainly a very unusual design, and
most artistically carried out. It cost £6 o.
In that room about a dozen girls were wiring and
preparing flowers, while three artists carried out dif-
ferent designs. While I was there, about £BO worth
was being made, and that sort of thing goes on all
day and every day.
Madame Tussaud’s is another interesting place to
visit. While standing near the entrance to the hall up-
stairs, I saw a man walk to a desk at which a very
life-like attendant was sitting, a pile of catalogues be-
fore her. He put down sixpence and asked for one,
but, getting no response, quickly picked up his money,
smiled, and hurried on.
Later.
Imagine me walking down Whitehall!
I always said, that when I went to London I should
make a point of seeing the two mounted Life Guards
who are posted as sentinels every day. So I stood


close beside the beautiful black horses, and had a good
look at both them and the gorgeous individuals seated
on them. I should dearly like to have patted the
former, but thought the latter might run a sword
through me, or do something equally disagreeable.
A little farther along, stood a woman in uniform
(cap and apron), with a money-box, and beside her,
sitting on a basket, was a pretty grey cat. It was once
lost and starving, and was there to plead for its less
fortunate brothers and sisters, of which there are hun-
dreds in London. Of course, I couldn’t pass pussy
without putting a few pennies in the box. One always
has pennies here, they are so often given for change in
the ’buses.
At last I came to Westminster Abbey, where I just
revelled in the absorbingly interesting interior. It is
a vast place, big enough to lose oneself in. Among
many others, I saw the tombs of Mary Queen of Scots
and Queen Elizabeth. It is very difficult to realise that
their bodies are really lying underneath, and not that
people just say they are.
Later.
Yesterday afternoon Jean and I turned ourselves
into rabbits, and burrowed underneath London in the
underground railway to the Austral Club. They are a
great institution, these underground railways. Pas-
sengers are conveyed by electric lifts to the platforms,
the depth below the surface varying from 20 to 180
feet. What with passages turning and twisting, then
the curves of the line, and again passages, you arrive
once more in the street, with the feeling that you’ve


been “he” in a game of blind man’s buff, and don’t
know where you are.
Arrived at the Club, the name of which tells you
it is a great meeting place for Australians, we met our
Sydney friends, Dr. and Mrs. Robert. Of course, we
all had a great chat over our tea, about things Aus-
tralian and things English, and the friendly feeling
that exists between the countries.
Last night I went to my first London entertainment.
Six of us from this boarding-house, two Germans,
two Bohemians, Jean and I, started off for the Vaude-
ville. When we arrived there, we found there was only
standing room, so promptly left, and went to the Savoy,
where the same fate awaited us. Then off again, I
rushing blindly along streets that I knew nothing about,
half losing sight of the others in the crowds (and with
no money in my pocket!) to the Gaiety, to meet once
more with the same reply, “Only standing room.”
At last we ended up at the Coliseum, about which
the others knew little or nothing, and found it to be a
variety show of the Rickards type, but not of much
interest.
It’s a most bewildering place, this London, and
hitherto I haven’t attempted to grasp the route I was
being taken, but have iust followed Jean blindly, into
tubes and out of tubes—tubes, meaning underground
railways.—into ’buses and out of ’buses, up streets and
dow r n streets, and as to the crossing of the latter,
it’s really too funny. We go quite “on our own,”
make a dash to an island in the centre of the road, and
stand there waiting for an opportunity to make a rush
to the opposite pavement.


Was I ever “Cook” in Australia? If so, I am any-
thing but that (iere. I have never in my life felt so
utterly at sea on shore!
This morning we began our packing, then, leaving
Jean at home to rest, I summoned up courage and went
alone to Cook’s to get our tickets to Glasgow, via Edin-
burgh. These cost us £2 12s. each, third-class re-
turn. It seems so strange getting into third-class car-
riages instead of first—not even second.
Tipping is a great institution here. After afternoon
tea, you leave twopence (!) on the table, or if a gorge-
ous individual calls a “taxi” for you, you present him
with threepence. You would expect him to fling it at
you, but he seems quite pleased to get it. The taxi
chauffeur almost demands his twopence in the shil-
ling, and luggage porters will touch their caps and
watch for you on your return journey if you give
them sixpence.
To-morrow we leave St. Pancras railway station—
one of the many huge London stations—at 9.30 a.m.,
and are due in Edinburgh at 6.15 p.m.
This is a long letter, but London is a big subject,
and I’ve only just touched upon it.
Must get my packing finished, and then for Bonnie
Scotland, the Home of my Fathers!
Yours in a chronic thrill of delight.


V.
Edinburgh
Scotland!!
66 Marchmont Crescent,
Warrender Park,
Edinburgh,
September, 19 —.
Yes, just think of it, dear Nan, really and truly in
Bonnie Scotland, and it is bonnie, I can assure you.
This morning Jean and I were up at seven, had
breakfast at eight, and left Lancaster-road at a quarter
to nine, in a “growler,” with our luggage piled on top,
each piece costing twopence extra.
Leaving St. Pancras Station at 9.30 a.m., by the
Midland and North Britain Scotch express, travelling,
as I said, third-class, we were most comfortable.
First of all, we enjoyed lovely rural England, look-
ing so peaceful, with its quiet streams, green meadows
divided by hedges, and pretty valleys—just like the
different paintings we have seen!
Then we came to a busy part, Leicester and Leeds,
later on to Carlisle, and into Scotland, past Hawick,
Melrose, and Galashiels, through the land of Walter
Scott, and to Edinburgh, where we arrived at 6.15
p.m.


The journey was full of interest, and the hours just
flew past.
As we passed through Chesterfield we saw a most re-
markable church spire, all twisted out of shape, and
leaning over about six feet. I should prefer to live
somewhere else than underneath it.
Between Hawick and Melrose we travelled at the
rate of between sixty and seventy miles an hour, but
it didn’t seem so fast. The train ran very smoothly
and with little noise, so unlike those dreadful Italian
trains, that shot me from one side of the carriage to
the other.
The hills, valleys, rivulets and woods (Oh, those
woods!) were simply perfect. Deep gorges, with per-
haps a waterfall, came occasionally into view, while
on the ground of the tree-covered hills delicate bracken
was everywhere to be seen, all making a varied and
beautiful whole.
It was almost dusk when we arrived, but I saw the
Castle outlined against the sky, and towering above the
city.
We have a bed-room and sitting-room in this clean,
comfortable house, and Mrs. McN. does everything
for us. We order what we want, and she buys and
cooks it.
Our tea to-night was delicious, the most appetising
I have had since I came to Europe.
Later.
“It’s a saft mornin’,” was the greeting we got from
our landlady next day, and it was “saft” off and on
all day—a real Scotch mist.


Our breakfast, beautifully cooked, consisted of fried
haddock, toast, bread and butter, strawberry jam and
tea, and we both ate an enormous meal.
Being Sunday, we went to the morning service at St.
Giles’ Cathedral.
Outside, on the paved court-yard, is the tablet show-
ing where John Knox is buried, and close by is a heart-
shaped design in tiles—the “Heart of Midlothian.”
Inside it was most interesting. Tattered remnants
of flags hang from the tops of the pillars, silent wit-
nesses of many an interesting ceremony, and a beauti-
ful memorial to Robert Louis Stevenson sent our
thoughts flying to Samoa—a far cry from Edinburgh.
The choir was a good one, but to me their chanting
seemed extraordinary, and at the ends of the lines in
the hymns they hung on so long that I was at bursting
point to hold on as long as they. This seemed to tickle
us both, and I’m afraid that for the next few minutes
we didn’t belong to the “unco guid.”
Coming home via Princes-street, we admired the
lovely gardens that run along it. They are brilliant
with flowers; indeed, I have been much struck with
the brilliancy and quantity of flowers everywhere,
especially in the well-kept public gardens.
We got home to dinner at 1.30, and an hour later
were seated on the box of a four-horse drag, and about
to start for Roslin Chapel and Castle, which delightful
drive of an hour each way cost us only 2/- each.
When we arrived at Roslin, we set off at once to
see the Chapel in which is the wonderful Apprentice’s
Pillar, but alas! it was closed, except during service,
and though we hunted up the caretaker, and begged


him to let us see it, even telling him that we had come
from Australia, he was adamant.
From there we went to the Castle, such a lovely
ruin, and after paying sixpence each at the entrance
gate, a guide took us all over it.
Part of it was built in 1304, and another small part
in 1622, after Cromwell had done his best to destroy
the first.
The people of those days liked comfort, for they
had speaking tubes from one storey to another, and
even a lift to carry things up and down.
It is delightful, and sort of unexpected, to hear
everyone talking with such a Scotch accent. When-
ever you ask a question, it kind of brings you up with
a round turn to hear it, though it’s only to be expected
in the capital of Scotland!
I gathered my first blue-bells at Roslin, such dainty
little flowers.
I should like to write of Holyrood with its memories
of Mary Queen of Scots, of Edinburgh Castle, stern
and grand, hundreds of years old, but I want to re-
serve a little strength for future sight-seeing.
There are other remarkable things in Edinburgh be-
sides castles and palaces, for our own front gate here
is something of a mystery. When we arrive at it, we-
pull a bell and have to wait patiently—no matter if it
is pouring, or if a mad dog is after us—then the front
door opens, and simultaneously the gate, in some ex-
traordinary way, quietly opens itself before us.
There’s Jean calling me, so I must away.
I hailed two copies of the “Argus” and “Age” with
delight, last mail. A little bit of home.


VI
Dalry and Kilmarnock
Dairy,
Ayrshire,
September, 19 —.
Cousins, at any rate, Scotch ones, are very delightful
and satisfactory things to possess—l own between
twenty and thirty, and those I have so far met must
have made up their minds before I arrived, to vie with
each other in the warmth of their welcome. If they
choose but to look, they must see pure joy and happi-
ness radiating from me., Jean doesn’t own these in
Dairy, nor an aunt and cousin in Saltcoats, but we are
part proprietors in others that we shall see later on.
Now, if I can tear even my thoughts away from
here, I must tell you of Our doings after leaving Edin-
burgh.
We left Waverley station at 9 a.m., and soon after
crossed the wonderful Forth Bridge. Eleven o’clock
brought us to Stirling, where we broke our journey, in
order to see the Castle.
Here again it was most interesting. Were Ito w rite
in detail all that I see, I should never have time to
sleep, so I must only say Of this, that we saw among
other things the magnificent banqueting hall, the room
to which James 1., when a baby, was brought when he
was taken from Edinburgh, the terrace where he used


to play, and beyond which he was not allowed to go
until he was thirteen years old, and a horrible, dimly-
lit dungeon, ten feet deep, just like a cellar. Here un-
fortunates were imprisoned till they were executed.
John Knox’s pulpit is shown, and a seat on the high ter-
race, with peep-hole in the stone wall, where Queen
Mary of Guise, the mother of Mary Queen of Scots,
used to sit and watch the tournaments below.
From the Castle we went to the East and West
Church, a restored min, at one end of which, Mary
Queen of Scots was crowned, and at the other, her son
James.
Then to the station, wrote post cards and got the
1.30 p.m. train to Dunblane, where, fifteen minutes
later, our first contingent of Scotch cousins met us.
They took possession of us till next day, then saw us
safely on our way to Glasgow and Dairy.
This morning we all went to the same Church, but
not the actual building, in which my great-grandfather
used to preach. A memorial tablet tells of his loqg
ministry and good deeds.
Later.
Since I last wrote, Jean and I have spent two de-
lightful days in Glasgow, even though it rained. By
the way, I may as well tell you that it seems to rain
nearly all the time in this part of the world.
Later.
Kilmarnock, the birthplace of our mothers, has
proved a most interesting little corner of the world
to us.
For a preface, another cousin and another welcome


which, if judged according to the quantity of cream
in our tea, must have been a real “ guid ’ane.”
Next day we hired a “ machine ” from the George
Hotel and drove out to “ Carmel Bank,” our mothers’
home when they were children.
We walked up the drive to the house, and knocked
at the door, a nice Scotch girl appearing in answer to
our knock.
I was spokeswoman, and told her that we had come
from Australia, that our mothers used to live here,
and would she give us permission to walk round the
grounds. At this moment, the occupier himself ap-
peared, not only gave us a most friendly and kind
reply, but took us in hand, and the dear old fellow
showed us right through the house from top to bottom.
Into the square hall with the cupboard in front, and
the staircase leading up on the right of it. Into the
room on the right, which used to be the diningroom,
into the kitchen on the left. Then upstairs to the first
floor, the drawing-room above the dining-room, a peep
into the other rooms, and then to the attics. Here
we pictured our mothers playing ladies, or, as they
have often told us, playing at being wrecked, sinking
to the bottom of the sea—the first floor—and finding
mermaids there.
Afterwards we went to the back of the house and
strolled along the banks of the Carmel. A short chat,
very sincere thanks, a good-bye, and two happy Aus-
tralians walked down the drive and out the gate.
Later.
Only time to send my greetings, for the mail closes
in a few minutes.


VII
Liverpool
Mossley Hill,
Liverpool,
October, 19 —
Here I am in another big city of the Old World, and
with yet another cousin.
After Jean and I left Dairy, we travelled together
as far as Hellifield. Here I had to leave her, for she
was going to Leeds, and I to Liverpool. From the
station, my cousin, and a short motor drive brought
me to Mossley Hill.
Of the city itself, with its fine buildings and miles
of docks, I must not write in detail, but you must
hear about our doings to-day.
Four of us left here in a motor at half-past ten, and
drove through Liverpool to the Mersey. Here, a ferry
took us, motor and all, across the great wide river, to
Birkenhead, through which we passed. After a mile
or two we came to the Sands of Dee, saw the Irish
Sea in the distance, and came later to the River Dee.
About 12.30 we arrived at Chester, with its lovely
old Cathedral and ancient houses, the latter built with
great wooden beams and plaster. After a walk along


the top of its Interesting walls, lunch at Blossom’s
followed, and we started off again.
From here we drove through the most lovely Eng-
lish lanes and country roads, winding this way and
that, with little woods every now and then, till we
came to Eaton Hall, the Duke of Westminster’s man-
sion.
We all got out of the car at the gate, and walked up
the absolutely straight drive of over a mile. Such a
fine entrance, the beautiful building in the. distance
gradually getting more distinct as we got nearer. The
drive would be about 150 feet in width, the road bor-
dered by grass, with woods on either side beyond.
All the way along we saw ever so many pheasants,
beautiful and very tame, and rabbits just as tame,
while near to the mansion was a lovely herd of deer.
Another half-mile brought us to the exquisite lawns,
private gardens, and front entrance which faces the
River Dee.
The Duke has certainly a very magnificent back
door!
Retracing our steps to the car, we continued our.
route through more country lanes for some miles. All
at once a very horrid and inconsiderate fog came on,
so the rest of the beauties were lost to sight. We
wanted very much to get a good view of Hawarden
Castle, but could see only the faintest outline.
The wretched fog was in wet and dry layers, and
our clothes got saturated. When we came to a dry bit
about 4.30 p.m., we got out of the car, made tea, and
sat on the edge of the road by a little wood, to drink
it. I went into this wood and walked through the long


grass with a scornful feeling of safety, for I hadn’t
to think about snakes. All over the ground ivy was
trailing, and many of the tree trunks were covered
with it. It looked so pretty running wild.
About 5.45 p.m. we got back to Birkenhead and the
ferry boat. It was very eerie, crossing in such a fog,
and I wasn’t sorry when we were safely at the other
side. With our hair in rats’ tails, our hats and veils
anyhow, and our clothes very moist, we ended our
trip and interesting day at Mossley Hill.
It is so entertaining to find English country scenery
just like the pictures I have seen all my life. Rather
reversing the order of things to compare the country
with the pictures, isn’t it ?


VIII
Cologne
Cologne,
October, 19 —
I am sitting in my “ hot-house ” bedroom on the
third floor of the “ Ewige Lampe ” Hotel, a stranger
in a strange land.
Fortunately the weather was good crossing the
Channel, and the boat got early to Ostend, the result
being that I had an hour to wait at the station before
the train left at 4.5 p.m.—or as the Belgians put it—
-16.5. Imagine having to wrestle with a time-table in
a foreign language, in which 19.35 means twenty-five
minutes to eight!
Shortly after leaving Ostend, my boots began to
burn the soles of my feet, and I discovered that an
iron grating running along the floor of the compart-
ment, was the cause of the trouble. In no time the
place was like an oven. The only window that could
be opened was the centre one, and that, only for about
six inches at the top. In time of danger, and at no
other, must the bottom part be opened, so of course
I kept that miserable little top bit open, and went


through various contortions trying to keep my boots
from getting the soles burnt off.
By and bye three men came in. Alas! I knew what
it would be. They sat contentedly for a little, then
shrugged their shoulders, looked at me, shut the corri-
dor door, and then asked in French to have the win-
dow shut. I said, “Yes, for a little while, but it is
too hot.” Then they began to smoke. It is allowed,
so I could say nothing. By and bye they left, and in
no time I had the window open again.
As we went along, I saw the peasants, men and
women, preparing the ground for next year’s crop.
In several fields (you’ll notice I don’t say paddocks)
a bullock and a horse, harnessed side by side, were
drawing a harrow. It was comical to see every now
and then an advertisement of, not “ Sunlight Soap,”
but “ Sunlight Savon.”
It got dark fairly soon, so I saw no more.
Our route lay through Bruges, Gand, Termonde,
Malines, Louvain, Liege, and Aachen (Aix la Cha-
pelle).
After various passengers had come and gone, I
stretched full length on one of the seats and prepared
for a good rest, if not sleep, as I had still about an
hour and a half to travel. I had hardly got comfort-
able, when the conductor put his head in the door and
called out, “Coin” (Cologne), and something else
which I didn’t understand in the least. However, the
word “Coin” made me spring up without any delay.
My hat was put on, and my cushions gathered together
and strapped more quickly than ever before. I was


just ready when the train stopped. The explanation
—an hour’s difference in the time. I had been going
east all day.
When I was shown to my room at the hotel, I just
gasped, it was so fearfully hot. I can assure you it
didn’t take me long to get the window open, and I
hung out of it for some time till I thought the room
had had time to cool down a little. After a cup of
coffee, the next thing was bed, and I slept under a
feather mountain—an eiderdown about two feet high,
like an enormous cushion.
Next morning I set out on my explorations, armed
with a plan of Cologne, a German-English dictionary,
anu a German phrase book. The plan I used a great
deal, the phrase book not at all, and the dictionary
once.
I musn’t forget to tell you about an extraordinary
door I came across during my search for a pension.
The house, a very large one, is several stories in
height and has a somewhat imposing front door. Out-
side are a number of electric bells with the names above
them of the different people to whom they belong. I
rang the one underneath the name “ Helldach.” In a
few seconds I heard a tremendous click, which seemed
to come from a part of the door, but nothing further
happened. Then I began to wonder if this door re-
sembled the uncanny gate at our Edinburgh lodgings.
Venturing to try it, I found it opened heavily.
I closed it behind me and went upstairs, half
expecting to be given in charge for being
illegally on the premises. Going up several


flights, I at last came to a door where a maid was
waiting, and who evidently expected me. As she did
not speak English, I had perforce to carry on a con-
versation in German about the rooms and prices. Then
down I went again, closing the big door after me, with
great caution. Whether it gave another fearsome click
when I was well away, I know not.
By the bye, when I am lying in this wonderful bed
of mine, I can’t see the foot of it over the tops of this
big red-silk-covered-with-cream-lace feather mountain.
I don’t wonder there is a sofa in the room, for no
one would dream of resting on the bed during the day.
Later.
I am now comfortably installed in a pension in
Hansa Ring, where no one speaks or understands
English, which is all the better for me.
The Cathedral here is said to be the most magnifi-
cent Gothic building in the world. It seems in its
magnificence to dominate the whole city. Its two lace-
like spires rise to the height of 511 feet, and I found
it no light task to climb to the top of one of these.
The view, however, after having accomplished this, is
a never-to-be-forgotten one.
Before its final completion, the Cathedral had several
ups and downs, being at one time converted by the
French into a hay-magazine. The walls are 150 feet
in height, the roof 201 feet, and the total length 444
feet. The interior, with its 56 pillars, is 390 feet in
length. I felt an insignificant atom when walking
about this awe inspiring edifice.


I sally forth every day with my plan and dictionary.
Even when I go to table, that little red book goes too.
I shouldn’t be surprised if I suddenly discovered that I
had taken it to the bath-room!
The people here certainly have a foreign look about
them, even the horses look quite different to those in
England. Laugh if you like, but it’s true. The latter
have little round tins instead of bags, for their food,
and all look so well cared for.
No more this mail. I’m very happy.


IMMENSE GLASS WINTER GARDEN IN THE FLORA GARDENS, COLOGNE.


IX
Cologne
47 Hansa Ring,
October, ig—
Still Cologne, dear Nan. I want to stay in this pen-
sion for some time, that I may have the necessary
practice in speaking German.
As I wish to be up at half-past seven to-morrow, I
must ask my landlady to waken me then, instead of
at a quarter to eight. All this has to be said in Ger-
man, of course. At table there are very few quiet
moments. Either I am listening with both my ears
(and wishing ! had a third) to what Frau R. is saying
to me, or else I am making her use all her brains (no
doubt wishing she had more) to understand what I am
saying to her. But we get on famously.
To-day is a harvest day for the florists, for to-
morrow is All Souls’ Day. All the graves will be
decorated, with flowers and candles.
Every few minutes this morning when I was out,
I met people carrying wreaths, or flowers of some sort.
Two beautiful carriages were almost filled inside and
covered outside with enormous wreaths, all being
taken to the cemetery. Rich and poor alike, decorate
oh this special day.


The Hohe Strasse, one of the principal streets with
fine shops, is narrow and winding. The footpaths are
so narrow that people go up one side and down the
other, or else wander along the middle of the road.
In this particular street there is practically no vehicular
traffic.
Later.
This afternoon Frau R. and I went to see the ceme-
tery. People, people, people, rich and poor, old and
young. Wreaths, wreaths, wreaths, candles, candles,
candles. The enormous place was thronged.
They’ve no enterprise, these people. Almost every
wreath was like its neighbour or neighbours on the
next grave. I didn’t see one to approach our lovely
and artistic Melbourne designs. Some of them, made
of small heliotrope flowers, something like lavender,
were pretty. These had large bows of velvet ribbon to
match. Others were made of green leaves, and many,
of pine cones and red berries.
Now to tell you about the Opera House, a very fine
building inside and out. The decorations are magni-
ficent, and there are four galleries, the highest rising
to the ceiling. Every seat, even the cheapest, is num-
bered, therefore reserved. How sensible! My ticket,
costing x/9, entitled me to a seat in the third gallery.
The curtain is quite different from any I have seen.
A dark ecru, with a narrow dark stripe every here and
there, and a very deep design across the bottom. The
whole thing reminded me of a huge Paisley shawl.
The lights were all extinguished before the orchestra
began to play, and the overture was listened to in


absolute silence. Then the lights went up again for a
minute or two, then out, and the opera began.
The chair seats turn back as in our theatres, only
there is this difference, that they go back with a
spring, and stay there. Therefore, if you are not care-
ful enough, you may find yourself on the floor, the
seat in the meantime against the back of the chair.
At the first interval, before I had time to think, the
whole place was almost empty. With few exceptions,
everyone left their seat and went into the foyer, there
to promenade till the bell rang for the next act. Then,
before I knew where I was, the place was quite full
and the play proceeded.
Later.
This morning I went to the Wallraf-Richartz Mu-
seum, a very fine and interesting place. The building
and most of its contents were bequeathed to the city
by the two men whose names it bears.
Among the exhibits were bronze statues from 300
years before Christ! Others about 200 and 300 years
A.D., also old vases and jewellery that had been dug
up in Cologne and the surrounding district.
Then I went to the picture gallery, where I saw
some most astonishing things. Most of them were
religious subjects, but very extraordinary. Devils
catching hold of men, the former with a face at each
shoulder, the mouth open and the arms coming from
it. At the knees the same, the hips too, following suit,
and even a face in the middle of the stomach! For feet
and hands, two huge claws to the front and one to the
back.


One terrible effort of an old painter was composed
of ever so many naked (or nearly so) men, each and
every one staking themselves through the body, arms,
legs, or head, on immense thorns that were sticking out
of the ground. These looked to be about two feet in
height, fine at the top, but terribly thick at the bottom.
From every place where these martyrs had staked
themselves, the points were showing above their bodies,
and blood was spurting.
You get surprises every now and then going about
these big buildings. All at once, you find yourself con-
fronted by a rush of very hot air, which serves instead
of a fire. However, “it’s an ill wind that blows no
good,” and when your handkerchief gets very damp,
as mine did during my walk in the frosty air, you have
only to hold it in front of this hot draught for a few
seconds and it is as dry as a bone.
There is no Saturday half-holiday here, and all the
shops are open for a certain number of hours on Sun-
days, even bread being baked.
Good kid gloves are M. 3.50 (3/6) a pair; I always
pay 6/6 in Melbourne. The “ Daily Telegraph,” which
in London costs a penny, is no less than fourpence.
There is some uncanny thing bubbling and fizzing
in the middle of my wide hot window-sill. It makes
me think of underground disturbances, but it is only
the heating apparatus. I washed a pair of woollen
gloves the other night and put them on the sill. In
the morning they were perfectly dry. A very con-
venient sort of thing to have in one’s bedroom.
I had a hunt lately for a biscuit shop, and when I
caught sight of some of Huntley and Palmer’s biscuits


felt quite an affection for them. , I bought a small
quantity, for which I paid about ninepence. They
would be half the price in London.
The boy spoke rather indistinctly when I asked him
how much they were. Not understanding him, I re-
peated my question, and when he replied, he roared at
me as if I were as deaf as a post. I nearly laughed
outright. When you are told that your purchase comes
to “dreiundsiebzig Pfennige,” instead of ninepence,
you have to gather your wits together before you can
grasp the meaning.
This last little experience must end my letter.
I’d give a good deal to have a peep at my dear
Australian contingent. But I don’t feel nearly ready
to go home yet.


X.
Cologne and Elberfeld
Hansa Ring,
November, 19 —
If you could see me now, Nan, I verily believe you
wouldn’t know me. I’ve just had my hair shampooed
and dressed in the prevailing Cologne fashion. The
whole thing cost 1/9, and a tip of 3d. to the hair-
dresser. This tipping business is a nuisance. I would
never have dreamt of giving the man anything if Frau
R. had not told me to do so.
I wondered what was going to happen to me, when,
after gathering my hair to the top of my head, the
dresser put on it a wide india-rubber hat rim—no
crown. This came round my forehead and just over
my ears, flattening them down a bit, like a small boy
with a large hat, then to my neck at the place the hair
began. No water or soap got anywhere near my eyes
or down my neck. In my best German I told him
what a good idea I thought it was.
Ottenbriicherstrasse
Fiber f eld.
A kind invitation from a German family, friends of
my Dairy cousins, has brought me here, 28 miles from
Cologne.


For part of the route, the railway line was em-
broidered on either side with the most exquisite and
vivid autumn colourings, that I have ever beheld.
Not tintings, but rich reds, browns and golds.
Though a stranger to them, my host and hostess
gave me a warm welcome. That seems to be my for-
tunate experience wherever I go.
From the station, we travelled part of the way to
Ottenbriicherstrasse on a most weird and wonderful
overhead railway. Its route runs above a small stream
which winds through the town. Great iron girders on
either bank, slanting towards the centre, support an
overhead platform. And yet, it isn’t a platform, nor
is it a set of rails, for the cars hang from it, and are
electrically driven. It is called the Schwebebahn (sus-
pended railway), and is certainly unique.
There are houses built entirely of slate here, all the
windows with green shutters.
At Frau R.’s and in this house, everyone has a little
knife rest of their own at table, on which the knife
and fork is set. To-day, the joint was carved by my
host, on an oval wooden tray with a handle at each end.
This stood on a small table beside him.
We had some delicious pears for dinner one day
lately. They were put into a pan with a good deal of
butter, and partially cooked. Water and sugar were
then added, and the whole gently stewed.
After dinner, which is at mid-day, everyone disap-
pears for an hour, to sleep.
Hansa Ring Again.
A lovely bundle of letters awaited me on my return
from Elberfeld. You give me a real good laugh every


now and then, about Dennis. Although by myself, I
laughed outright at your description of taking him to
visit Mrs. King’s friend. He doesn’t like paying calls,
and is always greatly excited when I say to him, “Well,
Dennis, what about going home?”
Jean and I are together again! She arrived last
night after a “ calm crossing.” The way the English
talk about the crossing of that Channel amuses us very
much.
To-day we went through some of the oldest parts of
Cologne. Also to see the lovely old Rathaus, and the
Giirzenich. The latter has very fine wall painting the
whole length of the hall, depicting the pageant which
took place in Cologne when the Cathedral was com-
pleted in 1880.
Later.
A holiday all over Germany to-day. It is the “ Day
of Repentance,” so the church bells are going nearly
the whole time for the different services. “ Holy ”
Cologne, as it is called, has many churches, therefore
many bells.
Whenever we are out, we make a point of seeing
the interiors of one or more of these churches. St.
Andrea’s, not large, but with immense side altar carved
in wood, and vivid colouring on walls and ceiling.
The Church of St. Gereon old and interesting. The
present building was erected in 1219, on the spot where,
according to tradition, St. Gereon and his Theban
legion were killed by Diocletian in 286 A.D. In front
of the high altar is a marble slab, on which the martyrs
of the legion are said to have been slain. On the side


walls of the choir in large, glass-covered cases, are
thousands of skulls and bones of these martyrs. Hor-
rible looking things! You can only see the top of the
head, and sometimes the eyes, for the nuns have em-
broidered covers for the lower parts. On one of the
side altars stood about five of these gruesome things
with their red and gold frames. In some of the side
chapels old stone coffins are built half into the walls of
the church.
The decorations are very elaborate, and it is said
to be the oldest and most interesting church in Ger-
many. To the right of the vestibule is an exquisite
Carrara marble group of Christ and the Virgin, pre-
sented by the Kaiser. In the crypt is an old Italian
mosaic floor, extraordinary figures, and the signs of the
Zodiac.
St. Ursulas’ Church is in its way as extraordinary
as St. Gereon’s. It, too, has its hundreds of skulls.
The golden treasury is a most remarkable room. The
walls are lined with cases, richly ornamented with gold,
which contain the skulls of virgins who, with St.
Ursula, were murdered on their return from a pil-
grimage to Rome. Tradition says there were 11,000
of them! The attendant opened one case after an-
other, and there, in each little compartment of its own,
stood an embroidered and framed skull.
There, we were shown, too, the leg-bone of St.
Ursula, a finger-bone of St. Ursula, St. Ursula’s skull,
and so on. The lovely alabaster sarcophagus of St.
Ursula, and lastly, one of the wine jugs said to have
been used at the “Marriage feast at Cana of Galilee.”
Of course one can’t believe everything, but really there


are so many old and wonderful things here in Europe
that nothing seems too extraordinary to be true.
This morning Jean and I went to the Post Office,
armed with no less than too letters and post cards —
our Australian Christmas mail!
From there we went to buy a 3/- ticket in a lottery.
7266 prizes! First prize, £3OOO. They have these
lotteries every month here.
It is something quite wonderful to see a free and
untrammelled dog. They are all muzzled and led by
old ladies and young, old men and young. I feel in-
clined to cut the cord sometimes and let the poor
things have a good scamper round. Dennis doesn’t
know how fortunate he is.
Later.
This morning I was lazy and stayed in bed, while
Jean went to Cook’s to make enquiries about trains
to, and pensions at, Dresden.
After dinner we went to the Flora Gardens. At
this time of the year the trees are all bare, and the
beds in the lawns empty, except for standard roses.
The branches of these are carefully wrapped up and
covered with a green pine, then tied with string, thus
being shielded from the severe winter temperature.
We had a walk through palm houses and then went
into the enormous glass hall. Here were tall palms,
trees, and ferns. Ever so many little tables with red
and white covers were on the floor and in the bal-
conies, and you will hardly believe me when I tell you
that in this hall 6,000 people can have afternoon coffee
at once.


There is a concert every afternoon, and women bring
their knitting or other fancywork, seemingly prepared
to spend several hours there.
I like this central heating very much. The whole
house, passages and all, is beautifully warm. I never
feel cold going from one room to another. The only
trouble is, that it is difficult to know what the tem-
perature is outside, and what amount of extra clothing
to put on when going out.
Later.
We leave for Dresden to-morrow. As there are
four different classes on the German trains, we are
going to try travelling third. By doing this we shall
save 12/- on each ticket. If we find it uncomfortable,
we can change to second class during the journey.
Oh, that packing! However, it has its compensa-
tions.
And so, Nan, goodbye to Cologne, for the present
at any rate. I shall probably return this way, to pick
up luggage which I am storing at the station.


XI
Dresden
Reichenbach Strasse 8,
Dresden A,
December, 19 —
Here I am safely in Dresden. Our train left Col-
ogne at 8.36 a.m., and arrived here at 8.40 p.m. We
came third class, our experiment in doing so being
most successful.
The country is not at its best at this time of the year.
One thing that interested me was seeing forests which
are grown specially for Christmas trees, which are now
daily being cut down in thousands, to be ready for
next week. They all look so pretty, these little Noah’s
Ark fir trees.
This morning we had our breakfast nicely served
in our room. At ten o’clock Ida came for us, since
when, our eyes, brains and bodies have been hard at
work.
Dresden is a very handsome city, with wide streets,
fine shops, and magnificent public buildings. The King
of Saxony lives in a beautiful palace, near to which
are the Opera House, Catholic Cathedral, and Picture
Gallery.


Once more those delightful post cards come in to
show you better than I can explain, the beauties of
these places. All that I have just mentioned are within
a stone’s throw of the river Elbe.
When we three started off, we took a ’bus at Reichs-
strasse down to the centre of this interesting group of
buildings, walked round them, then along one or two
of the “ shop ” streets, and then to the Picture Gal-
lery, where, armed with my Baedeker, we thoroughly
enjoyed an hour.
The first thing we did was to find out the where-
abouts of Raffael’s “Sistine Madonna,” and go at
once to see it. Well may it be double starred in the
guide book, and well may it- be cotinted as one of
Dresden’s priceless treasures. It stands on a pedestal,
in a room all by itself. On entering this room you are
at once struck by its perfect beauty and absolutely
satisfying effect. In that room, and in the presence
of that exquisite picture, nobody speaks above a whis-
per. At least, no one did the whole time we were
there, and I can quite believe that no one ever does.
In that Gallery we saw many other lovely pictures
by artists whose names are familiar to me—Differ,
Titian, Tintoretto, Rubens, Guido Reni, and Hoffmann,
among many others.
Policemen on magnificent horses stand at the inter-
sections of busy streets, and direct the traffic by a
movement of the right arm.
In Cologne the cab drivers all wear long, dark green
coats, and tall hats made of a shiny white substance.
Here, they wear dark blue or black, with a cape and
cap which look like Astrachan.


Dogs play quite an important part in the traffic of
the city, drawing, or helping their masters to draw,
small carts. I saw also a woman who, with a long
handled spade, shovelled coal which had been tipped
on to the street, into a great basket, which basket she
afterwards slung on her back, and carried into the
cellar of a house.
Being winter, all the statues in the public gardens
are covered with wooden boxes like houses, and little
round box trees are encased in baskets, while all the
garden beds that have plants left in them are strewn
with a green native foliage to protect them.
After afternoon tea, on looking up our news-
paper, we found that “Hansel and Gretel” was to be
performed this evening, beginning at six, and ending
at a quarter to eight, so, although we had decided to
write quietly at home, we suddenly changed our minds,
got on our coats, took the ’bus, and away we went,
arriving at the Opera House about ten minutes to six.
Now, Nan, what do you think we paid for our tickets?
Just ninepence each! Certainly an absurd price for
such a performance.
The building itself is very fine, the interior decor-
ated in white and gold, a Royal Box in the centre of
the lowest circle, and another at the side, each sur-
mounted by a crown. There are five circles, seats in
the top one costing sixpence.
The whole outing cost us M. 1.20 each—barely 1/3.
Later.
This morning we have been in the “Grimes Gewolbe”
(Green Vault) on the ground floor of the King’s
Palace, and have seen many most exquisite art trea


sures, among them some of the Royal jewels. Such
diamonds, such emeralds, rubies and sapphires. One
green diamond alone is valued at several million marks
—a hundred marks being equal to five pounds.
The whole collection is one of the most valuable in
existence.
One of the most wonderful of all these wonderful
things, was a single piece of ivory about one foot in
height, which was carved into 142 tiny figures, and
represented The Fall of Angels. You can imagine all
the different positions necessary to give such a mar-
vellous result. Ever so many lovely vases, drinking
cups, and so forth, were embellished with jewels, and
I held in my hand a solid gold cup weighing two
pounds. Articles made of onyx, lapis lazuli, rock
crystal, agate, and jasper abounded. What made it
all more interesting was the fact that many of them
were made in Dresden centuries ago.
I must write one more letter from here—l could
easily write ten —but in the meantime adieu.


XII
Dresden
Dresden A,
December, 19 —
Train travelling in Germany is a terrible business, as
far as ventilation is concerned. The only way we can
get a breath of fresh air into the carriages is to sud-
denly discover we are passing something very interest-
ing, and that to see it properly it is quite necessary
to open the window and lean out. By the time we have
both done this, the air of the coupe is cooler, but the
tempers of the other passengers warmer.
As I go about now, it is so strange to see pumps here
and there all carefully bound round with straw, to keep
them from bursting or freezing I suppose. Inside the
shop windows, low down at the front, is a row of tiny
gas jets, to prevent the glass from getting blurred, for
it is so much colder outside than in.
Ida and I had a most interesting excursion to the
Meissen China Works the other day.
We left Dresden at 9 a.m., and travelled third class
(1/10 return). En route we passed, just out of the
city, a great number of what looked like small fowl
yards, each with a little summer house.
These are tiny pieces of ground, let to poor people
who live in crowded attics or houses, and who use


ELECTRIC HANGING RAILWAY AT ELBERFELD. NOTE THE THREE MODES OF TRANSIT.


them for summer gardens. They measure about 12
x 16 feet, but small though they are, they must be a
great delight all through the spring and summer.
We arrived at Meissen at xo o’clock. This ancient
town is charmingly situated on the river Elbe. You’ve
no idea how fascinating these old towns are, with their,
crooked and narrow streets, and houses that look as
if they would collapse , any minute.
A ten minutes’ tram ride from the station and we
were at the china works.
We were first shown into a large room where all the
lovely, things are sold, but had not been there long,
when a guide appeared and took us in hand. Visitors
are charged 1/- each, then of course there’s the never-
to-be-forgott'en tip. We gave him 2/-.
He took us first to see the ovens, one in which china
was being baked was sealed up; another open, and the
china being taken out. It is baked three times, the,
heat for the first baking being 1500 degrees Fahrenheit.
For that, the oven is sealed up for twenty-four hours,
and has seyen fires going, to keep it hot enough. Then
it must cool for another twenty-four hours before
being opened.
Perhaps the most interesting room was that in which
the artists modelled the clay on the potter’s wheel.
How they do it is a marvel. They take a lump of clay,
just like, white dough, put it on a flat disc which turns
round, and with, their hands, shape, in no time, a vase,
plate or cup ready for a first firing.
In another room we saw the different tiny pieces of
a subsequent whole figure being moulded. A small


hand, foot, arm, or leg is completed and neatly joined
to the body.
Then we saw plates and cups being most exquisitely
painted with flowers, fish, or dainty little Watteau
figures. Another artist was making a most elaborate
clock. So far all white—flowers, leaves, figures and
animals—but afterwards, all would be beautifully
painted. In still another room, girls were burnishing
the gold embellishing with agates.
One artist who does the most delicate of the paint-
ing, is 87 years of age.
At last, after going through various other rooms
and passages, we found ourselves once more in the
show-room. Here I “ plunged ” —not very deeply, but
I had to buy a souvenir of my visit.
It is two hundred years since the manufactory was
first founded, and there are now seven hundred work-
men.
In looking over the visitors’ book, I saw the names
of several Melbourne people.
After leaving there, we walked along some of the
crooked narrow streets, to the Dom (Cathedral),
climbing eventually up a lot of steps and stairs beside
a high old wall.
From this old wall we had a fine view across the
river. Then we went down again, by another series
of steps and stairs, to the lower part of the town and
the railway station.
“Gdtterdammerung” last night was magnificent.
There was a fine orchestra of about seventy per-
formers, the singers, too, very good, and as the Opera
House was packed, it was a gay scene.


We tried to get seats for 3/- or 4/- each, but could
only get very bad ones for 5/-. Then we thought we
might just as well get bad seats at a cheaper part—they
had to be bad, wherever they were—and paid x/6 each.
These were in the fourth circle, or “Rang,” as they are
called here. I stood at the back of the chairs from six
o’clock till half-past ten, but saw and heard every-
thing.
To-morrow we say goodbye to Ida and Dresden, at
10 a.m., and are due in Berlin at 1.47 p.m., not quite
three hours later. We shall go third class again, and
our tickets will cost 6/6 instead of 8/6 each.
It is dull to-day; yesterday it rained, but we have
been very fortunate in the matter of weather.
By the way, Nan, I notice you didn’t mention Dennis
in your last letter!
Later.
Just a few minutes, after packing, to tell you about
a visit we paid to a charming old couple, with whom
we had afternoon coffee.
The old gentlemen is 82, and is hale and hearty as
can be. I told him several things about Australia. He
was keenly interested, brought out a map, plied me with
questions, and got me to point out different places to
him.
The table-cloth and serviettes were embroidered in
coloured silks, the design being flowers and leaves, and
over the table were spread sprays of Christmas tree
pine.
We left there just before six o’clock, and went to
the city to see the crowds. The last Sunday shopping
before Christmas.


There were crowds indeed.
In every available space were dozens, or hundreds
of Christmas trees for sale, each on its own little
wooden stand, and the Altmarkt was a veritable can-
vas town, every passage way between the stalls just
packed with people.
We shall be in Berlin on Christmas Day; the tem-
perature very different from our Australian Decem-
ber.


XIII
Berlin
Berlin,
December, 19 —
We are here in Berlin on the Spree!
Before I go farther, I may just as well remind you
that Berlin is on the Spree—you might possibly think
I meant Jean and myself.
Berlin is a great city, and from the little we have
seen, as beautiful as it is great.
There are 2,500,000 inhabitants in the city proper
and near suburbs.
The country between Dresden and Berlin is very
uninteresting, but the city when you come to it makes
up for that.
From the station we got a cab, and after a fifteen
minutes drive (3/6) came to the well known Unter den
Linden, a very fine street 198 feet in width. It made
me think of Sturt Street, in Ballarat.
This pension seems so far most comfortable. Shar-
ing a room, it costs us M. 5 (5/-) a day each, lighting
and heating sixpence a day extra. Our landlady is
Fraulein Fritz, and we are at number 62 and 63, the
third etage. (Make a note of all these addresses, Nan,
you may find them very useful when you go to
Europe.)


As soon as we arrived we had lunch, then started
off with my Baedeker, to explore.
The buildings, bridges, and statues are magnificent,
and once more the useful little post card comes in, to
let you see how beautiful they are.
We went up the Linden, through the Brandenburger
Thor, and past the Reichstags Gebaude to the Monu-
ment of Victory. Then we got on to a tram that the
conductor told us would take us past Friedrich Strasse,
but it didn’t, so we just went where it took us, then
left that and took another. This, we found, was going
in the opposite way to that we wished, so off we got
again, and on to yet another, eventually arriving back
at the Brandenburger Thor.
Next day we set out, armed with Baedeker and plan
again, and went along the Linden in the opposite direc-
tion, past the Kaiser Wilhelm Palace, the Opera House,
University, Kaiser Friedrich Palace, the National
Monument, to Emperor William L, and Konigliches
Schloss. Into this last, after paying our modest 50 Pf.
(6d.) we went with about twenty others, mostly Ger-
mans, and were shown over it by one of the Palace
guides.
At the entrance are two large groups in bronze called
the Horse Tamers, after admiring which we went
through a small side door. This brought us into a
large square court. Here we went “ links ” (left)
through an arch into another large court. In this is a
fine bronze group of St. George and the Dragon.
At last we got into the entrance hall of the building
itself, and waited a few minutes to admire the marble
staircase, pillars, and ceiling. Then, led by the guide,


we went up the “ staircase ” on the left side, which
“ staircase ” turned out to be a ramp.
At the top Of this, we entered a large Saal, or hall,
at one end of which was a most lovely group in
marble. I went along to see this, leaving the others in
a sort of huddled group at the other end. When, in
a moment or two I joined them, I was presented with
a pair of slippers, larger and uglier than any I had
ever seen. At last, when, attired in these hideous
things, the throng began to move off in a gliding,
sliding sort of fashion, it was too much for Jean and
me, and we laughed till the tears ran down our cheeks.
I wish you could have seen those shoes! They were
long enough and broad enough for a giant to wear.
If we had lifted our feet in an ordinary way they
would have dropped off. Really, it was too funny to
see this company shuffling noiselessly through the
rooms, each room with its exquisite, inlaid, polished
floor. I don’t blame the authorities for providing
shoes, but such shoes!
We went through room after room—Red Eagle
Room, Black Eagle Room, White Room, Picture Gal-
lery, Throne Room, and one containing the gold plate
used only on state occasions. This plate was very fine,
but, as in the Green Vault in Dresden, much of its
beauty was lost by being placed on elaborate gold
brackets, instead of on' some very simple dark and
unobtrusive material.
The decorations in the different rooms were beau-
tiful. Some of the ceilings had what looked like a soft
dark red embroidered cloth draped on them, but which
was really only painted.


The last thing we saw was the private Chapel. Its
dome is exquisitely decorated, indeed the whole in-
terior is most elaborate.
We left our “ boats ” in one of the grand reception
rooms just before entering the Chapel, and really they
looked very funny, those ugly, rough old things, in such
aristocratic surroundings.
Give my dear little black doggie a pat from me, Nan.


XIV
Berlin
Unter den Linden, 62 and 63,
Berlin,
December, 19 —
Berlin is said to be the cleanest city in the world, and
I can quite believe it is. Nowhere have I seen the
streets so beautifully kept.
This morning we took our way down Dorotheen
Strasse to the Old Museum, where, in the high round
entrance hall, was the best echo I have ever heard.
At first when we went in, we couldn’t understand
just what was happening. We soon found that when
anyone entered, the closing of the swing doors, and
the sound of their footsteps, made a noise like the roar
of a lion. I mean it.
Of course I at once thought I should like to sing,
and as we were alone, I sang, rather softly, the three
notes of a major chord. To my delight, I heard the
complete chord continuing on for ever so long. Then
I sang again softly, the notes of a minor chord, with
the same enchanting result. Before singing the notes
G, B, D and F, I whispered them with my lips closed.
Jean, who was close by me, could hardly hear me, but


MADGE’S TRIP
to our astonishment we heard them quite clearly,
circling around away up in the dome.
On our return to the Pension, we found the Christ-
mas tree had been decorated during our absence, and
was ready to be lit in the evening.
Just after dinner, Fraulein Fritz came into the sit-
ting-room, armed with parcels, which she arranged on
the table. These contained, besides other things, a new
black dress for each of the three maids, and a fine
overcoat for the “ Buttons.” To these were added a
special Christmas cake and large plate of fruit, cakes,
and nuts for each.'
At half-past seven the tree was lit; then the servants
came in, admired it, received their several parcels,
shook hands with Fraulein Fritz, and departed.
Then our turn came. We, as well as the others in
the house, had each a plate of good things presented
to us.
A glass of wine followed, and when bed-time came,
like a couple of children, and amidst great merriment,
we carried off our precious possessions.
During the evening some orphan boys, under the
leadership of their teacher, came into the courtyard
below, and sang carols really beautifully. We wrapped
money in paper, and threw it down to them three
stories below us.
In every home in Germany, whether it be rich or
poor, there is a Christmas tree, which, as a rule is kept
until New Year’s Day.
Later.
We had a real German Christmas yesterday, for our
friends Herr and Frau Wolff had most kindly invited
us to dine with them at their flat.
74


Their Christmas tree was really a beauty, about 13
feet in height, and so artistically dressed. There were
presents galore!
The three members of the house each had a table.
Each table was covered with gifts. Nor were we two
forgotten.
•After dinner we sang German carols, and later, had
afternoon coffee and tea. Then there was a great
doing up of parcels, for every visitor had received
presents, and we all went our several ways home.
This morning there are traces of snow, which must
have fallen in the night. Why can’t it fall in the day-
time, so that I may see it?
People were in the streets in thousands when we
came home last night. The vehicular traffic is always
tremendous, and you would laugh to see the way we
skip across the streets when we get the chance of a
clear space for a second or two. Taxis are counted
by thousands, and everything, horses and all, seems to
go at such a pace.
Later.
I wakened yesterday morning to see a lovely white
world. My first experience of snow. Each tree, and
every available ledge, had its own soft white pad or
cushion. From one ledge I picked up a little and found
it just like kitchen salt, quite coarse and powdery. '
This morning we wrote for a while, then got a taxi-
cab with a good horse and driver, gave the latter a list
of places we wished to see, and had a fine drive round.
If you really wish to see places, don’t go in a motor,
it whisks past too quickly. A horse-drawn vehicle is
much more satisfactory.


Our route was along the lovely Sieges-Alice, Tier-
garten Strasse to the Wagner Denkmal—a fine statue
of Wagner with others representing different charac-
ters in his operas—across the Lichtenstein bridge, past
the entrance to the Zoo, along Kurfursten-Damm to
Meinicke Strasse, then Kleist Strasse, Potsdamer
Strasse to Potsdamer Platz, and home.
The whole drive took about an hour and a half, and
cost just under M. 4 (4/-). However, as the driver
had been very good in pointing out places, we gave
him s/-.
The Dom (Cathedral) here, is another interesting
building, completed in 1902. It is fine outside, and
really magnificent inside, white, with black marble
pillars, the altar arch much decorated with gold.
We put on our very warmest clothes when we go
out. To-day, the thermometer is 18 deg. Fahrenheit,
that means 14 deg. below freezing. Fancy me going
about in 14 deg. of frost, and not being a sort of
gibbering idiot with the cold.
Later.
Let me just tell you a few items of the day.
Men, women, and children, all with their ears cov-
ered. Men with frozen moustaches. The perspiration
on the horses, like snow, and their whiskers all white.
Men carrying their hooked walking sticks hung in the
front of their coats, their hands in their pockets. I
am going about in my big fur-lined coat, muff, and
have a silk shawl over my mouth, with very small
pieces of wadding in my ears as I felt the cold in them
yesterday. A handkerchief that I had been using fre


quently, as one does in the cold air, actually got quite
stiff in the pocket of my coat. The thermometer
standing at 12 deg. Fahr.—2o deg. below freezing.
How is that for a picture of winter?
This morning we were up in good time, and after
breakfast Jean finished her packing while I went across
to Cook’s to engage seats in the train for her to return
to London, and for me to go to Vienna.
This, Nan dear, must be my last chat from Berlin.


XV
Vienna
Vienna,
January, 19 —
Oh, Nan, but I’m fortunate in having such a tour
in this beautiful Old World!
The temperature the day before I left Berlin was
4 deg. below zero, and my thirteen-hour train journey
from there was through an absolutely white land.
The coupe was so insufferably hot that I stood for
hours in the corridor. By dint of much rubbing, I
managed to keep a clear round spot, large enough to
see out of, on the window. That coupe, with windows,
door and ventilators all closed, was occupied by five
men, and, as much as possible, I let them have it to
themselves. Imagine if you can what the air was like.
I am sitting in Doris’s drawing-room by the fire, and
am trying to write with my woollen gloves on!
It is some time since I wrote to you, but I must
tell you briefly what I have seen and done.
One of the first items on my programme was to find
Cook’s and get some of my circular notes changed. I
got a pile of horrid little paper money—not even a
decent size—one piece of which I promptly lost.


Near to Cook’s is St. Stefan’s Kirche, a fine old
building, but so dimly lit that one cannot see the in-
terior properly.
A little distance away, at the corner of a building
in one of the principal streets, is an old stump of a
tree. In olden days, when an apprentice had finished
his term, he drove a nail into this stump. Now you
can see nails only; the wood itself is completely cov-
ered, though the form of the stump is exact.
One afternoon I paid a visit to the Zentral Friedhof
(Cemetery) and saw the graves of Beethoven, Schu-
bert, Brahms, Strauss, von Suppe, and Wolf, all close
together.
Another day Doris and I had lunch at a restaurant,
the walls of which are lined with small branches of
trees, and birds fly about the rooms.
From there we went to visit the Royal Stables. They
were most interesting.
All the harness that is used on state occasions was
shown, and trappings that have been presented to
Austrian Emperors at different times. Harness of
black cloth that is used when an Emperor is buried.
A Sedan chair in which Marie Therese used to ride.
Then the carriages. Such carriages! Huge gold
affairs, some of them ever so old, and hung in the old-
fashioned way. We saw, too, the carriages, go-carts,
and perambulators that the Emperor’s children used.
All these carriages and trappings are upstairs, but
downstairs —that was the lovely part.
Horses grey, horses brown, horses black and horses
white, such beautiful creatures! Each in its own stall,
with its name and pedigree above it. A manger with


a place for food and one for water. Such heaps of
straw for beds, and a worked edging of straw running
the whole length on each side of the passage way.
There are no less than 400 of these lovely animals,
all groomed to perfection.
It is not nearly so easy to find one’s way about in
Vienna as in Berlin. The latter is modern, Vienna
so old. The greatest difficulty is to know which trains
to take to the different places. Going from here to
Leila’s I have to take three—quite a journey.
One afternoon I spent at home resting, before going
to hear “Siegfried.” What an opera! What music!
What a superb production! The artists were of the
first water, and the scenery, effects, and orchestra were
beyond description.
My ticket cost 8/4. Add to that tod. to have it
booked for me at the opening of the plan, 1/- for a
book of English words, and 6d. for tram fares, cloak
room and programme.
At the first interval, a man seated next to me, began
to speak about the performance. He found, of course,
that I was a foreigner, and at once asked me in Ger-
man where I came from. When I told him that I was
an Australian, he looked hard at me, and said, “ But
you are not brown!” This was said seriously, and I
simply laughed outright. It was my telling him that
I was an Australian that worried him—not that I came
from Australia only.
It is the first time that I have heard the remark,
though I have been told it is often said.
When I tell some of the people here and in Ger-
many that I come from Australia, and was born there,


TREE STUMP IN VIENNA INTO WHICH, MANY YEARS AGO, EACH APPRENTIC
ON THE COMPLETION OF HIS TERM DROVE A NAIL.


they gaze open-mouthed at me for a minute. Then
come lots of questions. Is this my first visit to
Europe? Have I never been out of Australia? And
so forth. But when I tell them that it takes five weeks
to come, all they can say is “ Mein Gott!”
By the way, I must tell you that in Vienna, if you
leave a friend’s flat after 10 p.m., you must pay the
caretaker 20 Heller (2d.) to get out of it, and 20 Heller
to the same important personage at your own flat
before you can get in!
The night of the opera I did not get home till mid-
night—had to stand outside this great building for over
five minutes after ringing, while the poor caretaker got
out of her bed to let me in. She got 40 Heller that
time.
You have to tip in all directions here. At lunch, the
boy who brings the wine or beer, the waiter who serves
you, and the head waiter to whom you pay your bill.
In the trams, too, should the fare be 20 Heller, you
give the conductor 2 Heller extra.
Yesterday, I had my hand kissed by my washer-
woman ! I had given her a good tip.
The horses in the public vehicles are all splendidly
cared for. Each one has two rugs, one fastening
across the chest, the other thrown over the hind
quarters,
A unique performance at the Opera House took up
one afternoon. It lasted for two and a half hours, and
was all pantomime, and quaint, beautiful, or clever
dancing. During the whole of the time, not a word
was spoken. How Nell would have enjoyed it!
I don’t know how mother would get on here, for


there is tobacco smoke everywhere. The people seem
to be terribly afraid of fresh air—so necessary to an
Australian—and have double windows with cushions
or pads in between, and very often double doors. A
large cafe on the Ring Strasse has no less than three
doors and a heavy curtain. Imagine the atmosphere.
Almost every table occupied, and three-fourths of the
men smoking.
Later.
Such an interesting Australian mail to-day. How I
do enjoy the “Argus” and “Age” you send each week.
Many thanks.


XVI
Vienna
Vienna,
January, 19 —.
I wonder what “Young Australia” would say to see
horses and carts standing on a frozen river, and men
sawing the ice into blocks, and stacking it on to those
carts. Loads of ice are tipped on to the street and
shovelled into the cellars of restaurants or hotels, and
last the whole summer. Of course, it is not put into
the different drinks, not being clean enough, but is
used to keep them cool. It is quite an ordinary occur-
rence to see “eighteenpenny” blocks lying about,
dropped from the carts as they pass. I wonder how
much it costs a load. The price is certainly not at
“eighteenpenny” block rate.
Two days ago, Leila and I had a most interesting
walk along the Eroica Gasse. We passed the window
of the room in which Beethoven composed his Eroica
Symphony. Then along a little stream and valley to
a spot called “Beethoven’s Ruhe (Rest),” where his
bust, on a pedestal, commemorates it.
From there we continued our walk to the little old


fashioned town of Grinzing. The roofs of some of
the houses are so low that they come down to one’s
nose.
Projecting above the door of one house was a long
pole, a bunch of pine tied on the end. This signifies
that fresh wine is to be had there.
Yesterday I had a quiet day at home, a nice rest
after so much sight-seeing. In the morning I did a
little mending, in the afternoon wrote letters, and now
feel that I am getting up-to-date in my correspon-
dence. Christmas and New Year post-cards have all
been acknowledged.
I don’t see much of Leila. She works very hard,
that same little Leila, and it will not be her fault if
she is not successful. Doris, too, is a splendid worker.
The orchestral concert given by the Philharmonic
on Sunday morning was simply perfect. There were
over 120 performers, and the conductor (Weingartner)
is one of the most celebrated in Europe.
. When you order a fresh supply of fuel, a load of
black bricks is brought to your house. Splendid things
they are, too, these bricks, so easy to handle, and so
clean. No breaking up of coal, and no rattle when
the fire is being made up. Invaluable for a sick-room.
I notice many trivial things, but it is impossible to
remember them, though I know they would amuse
you. I feel sometimes as if lam a little apt to take a
lot for granted—as if everything isn’t such a novelty
as at first. Not that lam less interested, but, still see-
ing different little customs week after week, I take
them all as quite reasonable.
To-morrow I go on my way.


My ticket, which takes me to Cologne, via Munich
and Niirnberg, cost 74 Kronen (about £3 35.) second-
class.
I shall soon be back to German money, which I like
much better than Austrian. The myriads of tiny cop-
per coins are absent in the former.
You ask me, in your last letter, if I get very home-
sick. What will you say when I tell you that not once
have I been attacked by that desperate malady ?


XVII
Munich
Pension Feldhiitter,
Elisen Strasse 5,
Munich.
January 19 —.
Dear Nan, —
Don’t be surprised if I put capitals to my nouns, as
is always done in German. I’m very shaky in my
spelling, too. Can you wonder at it, when the whole
atmosphere is, and has been for the last twelve weeks
—German.
For some time after leaving Vienna, we travelled
through lovely woods, lovely even now, though the
trees are bare, but the dark red beech leaves that have
fallen, look most beautiful with little patches of snow
every here and there among them.
On the hillsides, too, where there are long hollows,
the snow has remained, and has become ice. It looks
most picturesque.
For the first time, I saw snow falling. Only for a
short time, but it was very lovely. I’ve come to the
conclusion that we have a fair imitation of it in the
theatres.


Here, as in rural England, it was strange to com-
pare the snow landscape with pictures I have seen.
As we neared Salzburg, the scenery was fascinating
—such beautiful hills, all with great patches of snow,
and sometimes a stretch of flat country, absolutely pure
white.
At Salzburg, the Customs officer came into the
coupe, and I had to open my cabin trunk, which was in
the van. So far, I have had no trouble whatever with
the Customs people.
The train came in at one end of the station on one
line, and after our examination it backed on to another
line at the Bavarian end. Here, provided with a Ger-
man staff and a German engine, we continued our
journey.
I arrived at Munich just an hour ago, and before
eating my supper managed to get post-cards sent off
to you and Jean. Now, after a good cup of tea—note
the adjective—l am waiting for the maid to tell me
that my bath is ready.
A hot bath. What a luxury!
In Vienna, baths are at present an unknown quan-
tity, because water is so scarce. As I have been there
a fortnight, I’ll leave you to imagine how much I in-
tend to enjoy this forthcoming one.
10.50 p.m. O! but I am comfortable! The love-
liest hot bath you could imagine. It was so nice that
I couldn’t resist washing my hair, too, and as the stove
in my room (one of those practical German stoves) has
two little ovens without doors to them, in which one
puts things to dry, I promptly put my head in one of
them, with most satisfactory results to my wet hair.


No more to-night. After dark, to-morrow, I shall
continue, for every moment of daylight must be spent
out of doors.
Later.
This morning I was up at half-past eight, and went
down to breakfast, dressed ready to go out.
The people here kindly lent me a Baedeker, by
which I found my way to Cook’s. Now I have one of
my own.
Cook’s is a sort of sun, or guiding star in every new
place one visits. I always travel on their tickets.
From there I went to the Post Office, another very
important place in each new city. Then the “Old
Pinakothek,” with its splendid art gallery, claimed my
attention. lam beginning to look at pictures with quite
different eyes to when I left Australia, where my ex-
perience was so limited.
As far as population is concerned, Munich is about
the same size as Melbourne. But how different! Many
of the buildings look too old to last a week longer.
Those that are modern are very fine. All these Con-
tinental cities have such lovely “Platz,” or squares,
right in the centre of them. Munich seems to be
specially favoured. .
Later.
In this Pension I pay only for my room and what-
ever meals I have. The former costs 2/- a night.
Everything is spotless, and I have once more “Mount
Feathertop” on my bed.
Old churches abound everywhere. In the “Frauen
Kirche” (the Cathedral) I had a good look round. In


it is a large monument in dark marble, to the Emperor
Louis the Bavarian. Baedeker says; “Behind this
monument is a spot from which none of the thirty
windows of the church are visible, except the great
window behind the altar.” Of course, I wasn’t content
till I found that spot.
The Church of St. Peter is the oldest in Munich.
It looks if. The Basilica of St. Boniface, a beau-
tiful imitation of an early Christian Italian Church, is
elaborately painted inside. It, too, has a great monu-
ment of marble, when Louis I. and his Queen Theresa
are buried.
One thing that strikes me very forcibly is the way
in which women work in the streets. They act as
scavengers, alter the points in the tram lines, and drag
or push hand-carts. They are to be seen, too, with
long-handled shovels, piling the dirty snow on one
side. Their brooms are like those of the witches of
our childhood.
On your first introduction to one of these cleaners,
you are not quite sure whether it is a man or a
woman. They wear a kind of uniform, short skirt and
coat, huge, thick-soled boots, black shawl over the
head and ears, and a dark green felt hat stuck on top.
As to their faces, they are tanned and weather-worn to
a degree.
Young girls, both in Vienna and here, dress their
hair very quaintly. They divide it right from the
centre of the forehead, to the nape of the neck, then
comb each half tightly over to its respective gar, plait
it (also tightly), and make a “bun” of these plaits over
each ear, not above, but covering it.


What a lot of kindness one meets with when travel-
ling. The mother of a young German whom I met
lately in London, has been most charming in her enter-
taining of me here, and we spent a delightful afternoon
wandering about the snow-covered park at Nymphen-
burg, and driving round the city.
Now I’m off to bed.
Good-night, I hope you will sleep as well as I intend
to.


XVIII
Nürnberg
Hotel Victoria,
Niirnberg,
January, 19 —.
I suppose folks’ heads and brains are made capable
of taking in a lot before they burst. A very good thing
it is so, otherwise mine would have “gone off pop”
long ago.
Before coming here, I had read up about the town
in my precious Baedeker, so when I arrived, and the
porter took possession of my luggage, I told him to
carry it to the Hotel Victoria, as if I knew just how
far it was, and the exact spot it was in.
Really, it is delightful to set out along unknown
streets in an unknown town.
I’m sure “Mr. Baedeker” would feel gratified if he
knew how closely I follow his instructions, and how
very satisfactory I find them. Everything of interest
is noted, and can be seen in such a short time. How
different to muddling along without plan or instruc-
tions. He says: “Over the portal of the West Portico
of the Frauen Kirche is a curious old clock, known as
the “Mannleinlaufen,” skilfully reconstructed in 1506-
9, with moving figures of the seven German electors
around the emperor Charles IV. (seen daily at noon).”


At noon, of course, I was there, and saw the funny
little creatures.
The town is surrounded by a lovely old wall, with
big arched gates or Thors, at intervals. The wide moat
is now practically a garden, with trees, flowers and
footpaths.
There are statues on ever so many of the houses, and
every Platz has its one or two fountains.
The streets are very crooked, and in some places
very narrow. So are the footpaths. To-day I was
walking along one of these, when I heard shouting
behind me. After a little I turned round, to find a
policeman hallooing at me in German, “Rechts gehen,”
then, in desperation, “Right side.” Being so narrow,
people go up one side of the street and down the other.
I was on the wrong footpath.
This is the first time I have come into conflict with
the German police.
The famous Germanisches Museum is a huge place,
with no less than ninety-six rooms and corridors.
There are antiquities of all sorts. Objects from tombs,
tombs themselves, with objects in them. Peasants’
costumes from all over Germany and Switzerland,
armour, lances, musical instruments, and things too
numerous to mention.
The tramcars are heated. Some of them have the
apparatus under the seat, but this morning I nearly
laughed out loud when, on getting into one, I saw
a stove sitting about half-way along on a seat, the
chimney belonging to it going out through the roof.
, There are too many beautiful places and things in
these old towns. So many churches. In that of St.


Sebaldus is his shrine, a very fine work in bronze. It
is the masterpiece of Peter Vischer, and took him and
his five sons eleven years to make! Time in 1519 was
not so precious as it is now, I’m thinking.
At the Burg, for 2d., I saw heaps of the most hor-
rible instruments of torture that one could wish for.
Then, for another 2d., I looked down a tremendously
deep well. The guide poured a little water six times
out of a pot, and not until some time after the sixth
was poured, was the first lot heard to touch the water
at the bottom.
From the Burg, I started to walk across the town
to my hotel, and among a lot of little crooked streets
got hopelessly mixed up, even though I had my plan
open before me. It was most humiliating to have to
ask my way to a street that I knew was somewhere
near.
Nurnberg is simply entrancing. I think I have en-
joyed yesterday and to-day about as much as any since
I landed.
How shall I ever settle down to ordinary every-day
life again!


XIX
Rothenburg
Rothenburg,
January, 19 —.
Another stage of my absorbingly interesting trip!
Since arriving here this morning, I’ve been walking
along the quaintest and most charming old, narrow,
crooked, pavementless streets you could imagine.
Ntirnberg is lovely, but I think little Rothenburg is
more so. Ntirnberg is, to a certain extent, modern,
with its electric trams, taxi-motors and electric light-
ing, but here there is not even an ordinary public cab.
The only horse-drawn vehicles I saw were omnibuses
belonging to two hotels. The few broken-down old
carts going about the town were drawn by cows.
From a point of architectural beauty, and in its many
picturesque mediaeval streets, Rothenburg, as a town,
stands first in Germany.
An old wall, with little bits of an older, surrounds
it. Built on an eminence, it overlooks a fine valley,
through which the River Tauber runs. You can think
how old it looks, when I tell you that it was spoken of
as a town in a document of 942 A.D.


The arches and towers every here and there around
the place, are lovely, and I expect a good many cameras
have photographed the beautiful spots that unfold
themselves every few yards as one walks along. I’ve
bought a great many post-cards, and you won’t wonder
when you see them.
St. Jacob’s Kirche, under part of which a street
runs, contains some fine wood carving and good
stained glass windows. Outside one of the doors, and
also at the entrance to the Rathaus (Town Hall), the
ground was strewn with a green shrub, very much like
our box. I couldn’t think why this should be, so asked
a little girl, who told me that it was because a wedding
had just been celebrated.
I went for a short stroll outside the big wall, on the
hillside, but found it rather isolated, except for the un-
welcome presence of a tramp.
When everything is green, in spring or summer, the
view must be beyond description.
From Niirnberg I had to change twice on the way
here, at Ansbach, and at Steinach, and as I had waits
of 40 and 50 minutes, at the two stations, I didn’t have
much of the train. This is an off-the-beaten-track
line. There are no proper stations, but at the several
halting places the engine-driver rings a little bell to
announce the arrival of the train.
Numbers of ploughed fields were to be seen after
leaving Steinach. Fields which, as I approached them
in the train, were just ordinary dark ridges of
ploughed soil. On looking back at them, they were
quite white with snow. It was very unusual to see a
dark ploughed field suddenly become pure white.


Here comes my train. This has been written while
I waited on the platform. My writing materials go
everywhere with me, and I find my writing book, with
its black leaf, and the agate stylo, invaluable. No ink
to get spilt, or pencil points to break.
How has Dennis become so demoralised as to run
off with half a cake?
Greetings of the best, Nan.


KORMHAUS BRIOGE, BERN, WITH SPAN OP 400 FEET; IS 167 FEET ABOVE THE RIVER AARE, BUILT IN 1895-98.


XX
Cologne
Cologne again.
Denloerstrasse, X5 111 ,
February, 19 —.
Cologne again for a few days, on my way back to
London.
On my arrival at the station, whjle waiting for my
porter, I put a 10 Pfennig piece (id.) into a slot
machine. For that penny I got a small packet, con-
taining, a small black vest button, a collar stud, two
sewing needles, three white pins, 3 black-headed pins, a
safety-pin, some threads of black and white cotton,
and a piece of sticking plaster!
I see a man on the roof of a house opposite beat-
ing a carpet. . They are terrible people for beat-
ing carpets, these Germans. In most of the court-
yards there is a horizontal bar, over which the carpets
are hung. They are then beaten with a sort of flat cane
fan, with a long handle. The occupier of each flat has
the use of this bar on a certain day of the week, and
he, or she, starts off at daylight.


In some buildings, the laundry and drying-room are
at the top of the house. The latter is very necessary
in this climate. Here, again, a certain day is set apart
for each tenant.
At first, when I came to Germany, I exclaimed
about the heated rooms. Experience has taught me
that the heat can be regulated, and I came to the con-
clusion some time ago that it is a sensible and most
comfortable arrangement.
Yesterday the footpaths and roads were in a fear-
ful condition with dirty melting snow. To-day men
are going about the streets, cleaning up. Some are
using sharp steel axes to break up the ice, which, in
the gutters, is level with the footpaths. Others, with
spades, are getting it off the road. Then carts come
along and are filled with this dirty looking stuff, which
is tipped into the Rhine. Lastly comes a water cart.
Immediately behind, and attached to the cart is a spiral
indiarubber broom. When this last has done its duty,
the roads are once more in beautiful condition. The
Rhine, in its half-frozen state, looks as if a giant had
scattered enormous drops of melted candle grease over
it. Some of these drops measure from two to five
feet across.
When walking beside a frozen lake, one day lately,
I heard what I thought was a bird singing most beau-
tifully ; first slowly, then quickening to high trills. The
sound seemed to come from the opposite bank, but I
could see no bird. At last I discovered that two men
were skidding stones along the ice. The stone itself,
as it leapt and skidded, made this lovely singing.


I saw a quaint thing in the way of weddings yes-
terday.
The bride and bridegroom, who evidently belonged
to the working class, entered the church and knelt at
the altar. Four men stood behind them. There was
no sign of a priest, but one appeared five or six
minutes afterwards and performed the ceremony.
Then the bridegroom and three of the men went off
to the vestry. The kneeling bride was left with the
fourth man standing behind her, she, in the meantime
looking round with concern at the disappearance of her
newly-made husband. By-and-by he returned, and
evidently told her to come along, for the two of them
stumped down the aisle, she trying to keep pace with
him, and not even arm in arm. The carriage in which
they drove off had a garland of myrtle across the in-
side of the windows, and the whip had a puffing of
white chiffon the whole length of the handle. The
horses were not forgotten, for bunches of myrtle de-
corated their head bands.
The other day, I passed in the street a woman sell-
ing flowers. The instant she caught sight of me she
stopped her German, and said to me, in broken Eng-
lish, “Violets, lady, a penny a bunch!” Later on,
when passing a cab rank, one of the cabmen called out
to me, in broken English, “Take care going round the
corner, it’s very windy!”
I hadn’t spoken a word. How did they know I was
English ?
It is awfully comical to see the way the men here
look at themselves in little mirrors that they carry in


their pockets. They arrange their moustaches, and
generally titivate themselves, never troubling their
heads if any or everyone looks at them.
At different railway stations, as the train draws in,
men come along selling sausages, and do quite a roar-
ing trade. Two hot sausages, some mustard, and a
roll, served in a little cardboard dish. No knife or
fork, but that’s a detail.
Now I’m off to Cook’s, and to post this. Good-bye,
Nan!


XXI
Cologne
Still Cologne,
February, 19 —.
To-day, I should like to be a man!
To-day, Cologne is en Carnival!
To-day, the whole, or nearly the whole, of the people
are bereft of their senses!
Every year, at this time, for three days, Sunday,
Monday, and Tuesday, people don the most extra-
ordinary costumes, and the streets are one huge fancy
dress ball.
From babies, to old people, I suppose about three-
quarters, if not more, of the population —at least those
who are seen in the streets—are dressed up.
Men with wigs, long red, blue or green satin coats,
knee-breeches, and three-cornered hats. Others, very
ugly, with wigs, masks, and clothes, all hideous. Girls
dressed almost without exception in fancy costume.
Heaps of people carrying small coloured cardboard
sort of closed fans, and whacking everyone they come
across.
Girls and men, four or five abreast, dancing, arm-in-
arm down the centre of the streets.
Mothers and fathers with their children, the fathers
in costume, the mothers’ only attempt at fancy dress


being their hats. Indeed, the elder women’s ambitions
all run to hats, and most extraordinary some of them
are, too.
Everywhere are long, narrow, coloured strips of tis-
sue paper, about a third of an inch wide, and thirty or
forty feet long. When bought, they are tightly rolled
up, but ripple out in long curls when thrown.
Everyone calls everyone else “Du” (thou), not
“Sie” (you), and this mad whirl goes on all day and
all night, till seven or eight o’clock on Wednesday
morning, by which time most of the people are voice-
less.
I really mean it when I say that the whole place has
gone mad.
Practically no business is done during these three
days.
Bands of friends, all in uniform fancy dress, march
in procession, with drums and other musical instru-
ments, down the centre of the streets. All is Pande-
monium !
When in Berlin last year, I heard that Cologne
would be en fete in February, and was told that I
must not go out alone during that time.
Yesterday Donald was with me, so with him for es-
cort I was all right.
We walked along a few of the streets to see the
fun. He, too, cautioned me not to walk anywhere,
even with another woman; indeed, said that it would be
much better if I stayed at home. However, !
At the Ncumarkt, enclosed for the occasion, were
collected all the extraordinary and decorated waggons
that took part in the procession. Admission to this


enclosure is by ticket—l/2 —too cheap to risk taking
one.
As Fraulein Gerdes had one of these tickets, I sug-
gested that we should drive down in a closed carriage,
that I should leave her at the entrance, where she was
to meet her friends, and that I should then drive back
alone.
We started out, but had not got far along the
crowded streets when a policeman held us up. Frau-
lein produced her ticket, and we were allowed to pro-
ceed. We could go only at walking pace even along
those streets that were supposed to be clear for the
procession. When we arrived at the Neumarkt the
people had to crush together to allow the carriage to
pass. Such a motley crowd, all gazing in and talking
at us.
Driving home, I had a sort of little procession, all
“on my own,” for I didn’t see a sign of another
vehicle of any description through all these people.
I had visions of someone opening the door and jump-
ing in beside me, and I really shouldn’t have been sur-
prised if that had actually happened.
Fortunately, I got home without any unpleasantness,
and I heaved a little sigh of relief when I found my-
self safely inside my own front door.
Of course, I have never seen anything like this, but
I felt that it was worth risking something to have
even the peep I had at it all.
Every few minutes a band went along, the players
grotesque. A following of fifty or sixty girls, boys,
men, women and children dancing along after it. They,
too, were all in costume or fancy attire of some sort.


Many of the men wear bright red, green, yellow or
blue satin top hats, and absurd neckties, and enorm-
ous artificial flowers stuck in their coats.
Last night I saw a man wearing a soft blue felt hat,
with a very narrow feather, about three feet long,
stuck in the band, and waving gracefully at the back.
Weeks beforehand tables are engaged at the different
hotels and restaurants, and gay supper parties chat till
all hours of the morning.
Even the horses and harness are decorated for the
occasion, and everywhere on the street, and hanging
from houses, horses, trams, lamp-posts, fences and
trees, are thousands of these long narrow many-
coloured ribbons.
Imagine being shut indoors during the day and
evening when all this is going on.
It is most difficult to give you any idea of Cologne
as it is to-day. The music, the shouting, the singing,
and the gaily dressed people all beside themselves with
excitement.
Many of the poorest pawn their clothes and furni-
ture in order to have a real good time these three days.
Later.
Wednesday—Ash Wednesday—and all are recover-
ing from their labours!
I have just returned from the Post Office.
Cologne is once more sane, but it will take some
time to make the city tidy again. Pieces of coloured
paper, and scraps of all sorts are strewn everywhere.
Yesterday morning I boarded a tram just opposite,
and when I arrived at the terminus, sat still, some


what to the anxiety of the conductor, who assured me
that it was the “last station.” I told him I wished to
go to the other terminus, so went right across Cologne,
and had a great view of the crowded streets. Arrived
there, he looked immensely amused when I told him
that I was going back to where I first got on.
Near the Ehrenfeld end, a man and girl were walk-
ing quietly along together. All at once, another man
in fancy dress dashed out from the crowd, came behind
the girl, put his arm round her neck and kissed her.
Her companion flew .at the intruder, there was a
scuffle, first one on the ground, then the other, the girl
in the meantime trying to separate them. The last I
saw of it all was the girl running away, with the strange
man in pursuit!
The afternoon I spent on the balcony looking at the
crowds. Ever so many of the better class people were
driving in their carriages, enjoying the sight, and the
exquisite sunshine. It is just like spring yesterday and
to-day. The sun is so warm that it reminds me of
Australia.


XXII
Good-bye to Germany
Cologne,
February 19 —.
This is my last chat to you from Germany.
To-day I went to Cook’s and got my ticket to Lon-
don.
I leave to-morrow night at eleven o’clock, and am
due in London next day at 5 p.m.
My ticket, second class, including sleeping berth,
costs 48/-.
It will seem quite strange to be using our own coin-
age again—why is it not decimal ?—and to hear every-
one around me speaking English.
The warmed waiting rooms on the German stations
are splendid. There are small tables all over them,
and one can get almost anything to eat or drink at any
hour of the day or night.
Luggage is a serious item on the Continent. Every-
thing in the van has to be paid for. To keep mine as
light as possible, I make up a parcel of my music and
books, and strap my rug round it. This goes with me
in the coupg. It is a grand idea, and has saved me
many a shilling.
And so, good-bye to Germany!


XXIII
London
London,
March, 19 —.
I am back once more in the “Little Village.”
Still sight-seeing? Yes, of course. Hard at it. I
wish I could tell you all I do, but as that is impossible,
must write of those things I think will interest you
most.
First, an old church—All Hallow’s, Barking, built
in 1087.
On entering, an obliging verger appeared, and told
us many interesting details. Showed us old brasses
on the floors, and tombs, in which different noteworthy
people are buried.
One family, consisting of mother, father, nineteen
children, and their respective husbands and wives, are
all buried together. People didn’t travel as much in
those days as now.
Pepys stood on one of the towers and saw London
burning.
In the register, William Penn’s baptism is recorded.
There are, too, some beautiful wrought iron stands,
for holding the Lord Mayor’s sword when he came


in state, at the time when the Tower was used as a
King’s residence.
I paid a visit to my Regent-street fruit shop—l only
visit the outside —one day lately. Hexe is a list of
things and prices.
Peaches, seven for 5/-; peas, 1/3 a pound; aspara-
gus (green), 6/6 for a small bundle; oranges, six for
3/-; apples, six for 7/-; nectarines, six for 10/6; and
strawberries, 22/- a pound!
A walk through Regent’s Park.
Carpets of crocuses, white, lilac, purple and gold;
one exquisite mass of colour. Here and there large
beds of snow-drops. Birds singing and sun shining.
By the way, talking of sunshine: here it is measured,
and the number of hours recorded in the daily papers.
The London police quite came up to my expectations.
In the first place, they are most courteous and oblig-
ing. In the second, nine-tenths of them are very good-
looking.
From Baedeker, I learned that only Royal carriages
and those of one or two privileged persons, are allowed
to drive through the Horse Guards to St. James’ Park.
On walking there to-day, I noticed wheel-marks, and
it struck me that perhaps the special carriage which
went that way might also return the same way.
I went up to a policeman who stood close by, and
said, “Can you give me any idea as to whether the
Queen is out driving this afternoon?”
“No,” he said, “I can’t tell you.”
I must have looked disappointed, for he bent to-
wards me and said quietly:—


“The Queen will drive through here in two or three
minutes. Don’t let it be seen that you are waiting for
her; but just look about at other things. I’ll give you
a wink when she is coming.”
A moment after, the Life Guards on duty were
called out, and with drawn swords stood at salute.
I popped across and stood near them, for I thought the
Queen would be sure to look at them as she passed,
and would be facing me, too.
It all happened as I hoped.
A beautiful carriage and pair came along. In it was
seated the Queen, her face turned full in my direc-
tion.
My keen observation (noticing the wheel marks)
stood me in good stead, and, thanks to my kind police-
man, I saw for the second time the First Lady in the
Land.
Here are a few quaint names of inns that Jean, Tom
and I passed during a drive out Highgate way on
Sunday.
“The Three Horseshoes,” “The Hand and Flower,”
“The Swan and Pyramids,” “The Old Swan and Two
Necks,” “The Old White Lion,” “The Black Bull,”
“The Red Lion,” “The Blue Anchor,” and “The Green
Man.”
They evidently go in for colours.
On the way, too, we saw Punch and Judy shows in
the street. Crowds round them, and a woman at each,
holding a box for pennies.
At an inn called “The Spaniards,” Dick Turpin’s
spur and horseshoe are nailed on to a door.


Later on we went through part of Hampstead
Heath, which on Monday will be crowded from end
to end with holiday makers.
Later.
Hampstead Heath on a bank holiday!
Genuine costers with all their buttons, and girls with
their brightly coloured garments and long feathers.
People selling “ticklers,” balloons, paper caps, bead
chains, and so forth.
They are all here!
Leaving Jean in the carriage, Tom and I went down
to the grass, and among the booths and people.
My! they were funny.
We had no sooner left the carriage than one girl said
to her two companions, “’Ere’s two swanks.”
“Swanks,” I may tell you, means “swells.”
We smiled and passed on.
Tom had ever so many shots (three a penny) with
balls, at creatures with rows of pipes in their great
mouths. The pipes were very firmly fixed in!
Then he tried throwing a ball into a square space,
and succeeded. Then came my part of the fun, which
was to choose a prize from the wonderful assortment
of articles on the stall. An elaborate cup and saucer
was my choice.
After that we went on past a theatre, a fearsome
looking place. Showmen in dirty red coats, and a
Greek girl, with anything but a Greek cast of coun-
tenance, invited, in strident voices, the people to enter.
The little scraps of conversation we heard in this


throng were very funny, and so like what we have
heard on the stage. One sentence, “ ’Appy! I don’t
think.”
Heaps of booths, with eatables, but, oh, dear! I
should need to be very hungry before I attacked any
of them.
Donkeys and their riders were good fun, till we saw
one girl fall off, and the donkey tread on her.
From there we directed our steps to the barrel
organs. Here we saw the real thing in the way of
coster dancing. More girls than boys. To the accom-
paniment of a barrel organ they danced separately, all
sorts of steps, backwards, forwards and from side to
side. At other times, three would take arms and stand
opposite to three others. Then they would dance in
their own peculiar way. Up to each other, back again,
call out to each other or sing, then separate, and do a
lot of elaborate steps on their own account.
In a clear space, surrounded by onlookers, this was
all done with tremendous earnestness. Many of the
performers were perfectly serious the whole way
through the dance. On and on they went, till I
thought they would drop with exhaustion.
One girl in particular was very pretty, and danced
most gracefully, while her companion was equally ugly
and unkempt.
Every now and then the crowds would rush belter
skelter in one direction. Something was going on.
A row probably, and they wanted to see just all about
it.
A little farther on a young man was being walked
along between two policemen. The one had a good


grip of his coat collar, and a third walked just behind.
Had there been only one, I don’t suppose he would
have had possession of the youth for long. As it was,
several things were thrown at them as they passed.
Swing boats and merry-go-rounds ad lib.
Everyone seemed in great good humour, and I can
tell you that some of the costumes were “just so.”
The most striking I saw was a bright purple skirt, a
very bright green bodice, and a bright pink hair-
ribbon.
How is that for colour ?
A hospital tent, with soldiers ready to perform first
aid, and, finally, a tent for lost children.
I am told that some of the parents make a point of
losing their offspring soon after their arrival, so that
they can have a good time. They know full well that
the children will be cared for.
It was quite pathetic to see some of the dancers.
Very happy they were, but very poorly, and even
dirtily, clad. For the moment all that was forgotten,
and they danced on, regardless of anything or any-
body.
To-morrow, their hard, dull and sordid life begins
again. No other holiday for months.
I saw a little dog one day lately, nearly as nice as
Dennis. Perhaps it was because it looked so like him.
Later.
More packing! This time because I am off to
France.
How quickly mail day comes round. I feel as if I
haven’t told you half of what I wanted.


COVERED FOOTWAY, BERN, PART OF THE LAUBEN, SHOWING QUAINT OLD FOUNTAIN IN THE STREET.


XXIV
Rouen
Hotel de la Poste,
Rue Jeanne d’Arc,
Rouen,
April, 19 —.
What a beautiful world this is!
From Dieppe to Rouen, banks of primroses and
cowslips along the railway cutting. Everything tinted
more or less with a vivid green. A much brighter
green than ours. A little stream keeping us company
for miles, then, Rouen.
Quaint old Rouen, with its wealth of magnificent
churches, St. Ouen, the Cathedral, and St. Maclou. All
of surpassing beauty.
Memorials and statues of Joan of Arc at every turn.
Some of the older streets are quite different to any-
thing I saw in Germany. One, in the poorer quarter,
had a wide ditch or sewer running down one side.
I didn’t go far along that street, for a man in front
of me had a fit, and the crowd that gathered round
him looked so undesirable that I thought discretion
the better part of valour, and retraced my steps.
I have already said “ja” several times to these poor
people, instead of “oui.” My French is lamentable,
but I take comfort from the fact that others seem to


have the same trouble, more or less, when they have
been speaking one foreign language, and go on to
another. Let us except fortunate individuals who
speak both fluently.
In one of the side chapels of the Cathedral, this
morning, four priests, all with such kind, gentle faces,
were sitting at a table, a little girl standing before
them, with her hands on the back of a chair. She was
undergoing her first catechism. Others came after
her, and none seemed afraid, but prattled on in French
to the gentle catechisers, who encouraged them every
now and then with a “tres bien.”
I always travel with as little baggage as possible.
When I leave here, I shall have with me my dressing
bag and a shoe box, in which I have packed two
blouses! I shall require these before Friday; for my
big luggage—that means one cabin trunk—has been
sent direct to Montlugon.
A comfortable bed is waiting for a very tired and
sleepy Madge, so good-night, dear Nan.


XXV
Montlucon
■
Montlugon,
Allier,
May, 19 —.
Here I am, another step farther in this never-to-be-
forgotten journey of mine.
This time I am in a little town out of the beaten
track, right in the centre of France.
At one of the stations en route, I was amused to see
large trucks, on which were printed labels, in French
of course, saying that they carried from 36 to 40 men.
or 8 horses.
I arrived at Montlugon at one o’clock, and was met
by Chou, who looked very well, and little altered.
In five minutes, my old friend’s wife was receiving
me very kindly at their flat, while I, in my best French
(which at present is half German) tried to say some
pretty things to her.
She is charming, this hostess of mine, who can’t
speak a word of English. We get on wonderfully well,
though, for she speaks slowly to me, and I, remem-
bering its value in Germany, have a little dictionary
always beside me.
After a cup of tea and something to eat, the three
of us walked through the town.


It is of unusual design, this town, irregular little
streets running this way and that. A castle on a hill
is the centrepiece. Round the foot of this, and as close
as possible to it that it might protect them from old-
time robbers, are the houses. Some of the streets look
like places that it would be much better to frequent
in the daytime only, but they are quite respectable.
Horses are few and far between. Donkeys are in
dozens. A noise as of someone in distress puzzled me
at first, till I found it was the hee-haw of one of the
latter.
Women wash clothes on the stones at the edge of
the not-too-clean river. They hit them with a flat
piece of wood with a handle. This deadly instru-
ment, which must be disastrous to the garments, is
called a battoir.
Hairdressers have for a sign a great bunch of horse-
hair hanging above their doors.
'two days ago, with the maid, who was carrying a
basket, in attendance, Madame and I went to market.
It is held once a week, and is the only place where
vegetables, eggs and butter can be bought.
What a novel sight it was!
Ranged along both sides of some of the crooked,
cobble-stoned old streets, and with the quaint old build-
ings for a back-ground, peasant women stood side by
side, their baskets, containing their wares, standing on
the stones in front of them.
These women looked one nicer than another.
They were all dressed in black, with white aprons,
white caps that covered their heads, and over the
white caps were black shawls.


Apart from their absolute neatness, I was particu-
larly struck with their sweet faces.
Every few yards—when you could get through the
crowd—you came to a lady and her maid, the latter
with a basket. It was very amusing to hear the maid
bargaining with the sellers, and when things were
satisfactorily arranged, to see the mistress stepping
forward quietly to pay for the purchased goods.
Here are a few of the prices:—A small basket of
potatoes for 3 sous (i^d.): asparagus, yd. a bundle;
eggs, Bd. a dozen; carrots, i*4d. for four; sorrel, Yri.
for two handfuls (we had the last-named chopped up
in soup for dinner) ; 3d. for 25 apples, which are sold
by the quarter hundred, and two always given in!
One woman bought a rabbit, another a kid, both of
which were sold alive.
We got home from this interesting sight in time for
twelve o’clock breakfast. Only coffee and rolls at
eight o’clock.
The work people here don’t get anything like as good
wages as with us. For skilled labour you pay 4/-, or
at most, 4/3, a day of 10 hours. Ordinary workmen
get 2/9 per day, and maid servants 20/- a month!
One day we drove to Neris-les-Bains, a great health
resort, four miles away. Here are hot springs. At
one of the street corners is a pump, and out of this
pump comes a never-ending supply of very hot water.
The poorer people all use it for cooking and washing.
One item of interest was seeing four fine large bul-
locks being shod. They were slung, and the leg being
operated upon was doubled up and roped.
Interesting, too, was the little country cemetery.


Over many of the graves were small gabled houses,
in which are hung the most amazing affairs, made of
black, white and coloured beads. Some of the designs,
about three feet across, have an open-work back-
ground, with enormous sprays, or single blooms, of
bead flowers. Purple pansies were about six or eight
inches across!
A pot plant standing on a grave resolves itself on
nearer acquaintance into pale and dark green beads.
A grave stone says in French, but which I give you
in English, “I shall see many more enter here before I
leave myself.”
One interesting little custom, and then my letter
must close.
This morning I saw a woman enter the hall, carry-
ing on her arm a large circle of wire. On to this wire
were strung a number of long, narrow pieces of wood,
about 12 inches by iy 2.
When Chou came home at noon, I said to him, “A
woman was here this morning with a lot of little sticks
hung on her arm, what were they for?”
“That was the baker.”
“The baker? But I didn’t see any bread.”
“Oh, yes, she had some.”
“Well, but what about the little sticks?”
“Those are for counting the bread.”
What happens is this.
Every month the baker gives you one of these and
has one herself. A loaf bought, the two sticks are
placed together and notched across the edges. These
notches are added up at the end of the month, and, of
course, the sticks must tally. Next month you get a


new one, and the edge of the old one is srpoothed off
ready for future use.
It is only by going to places out of the beaten track,
and into private homes, that one can see or hear of
these little details of interest.
To-day groups of young men are parading the town.
Some are wearing red, blue and white caps, others
rosettes. They have just drawn lots for the places at
which they are to do their military service, and all start
work in a few days.
I start work in Paris to-morrow, work, of course,
meaning sight-seeing.
Au revoir.


XXVI
Paris
Hotel de Nice,
Paris,
May, 19 —.
I arrived safely at my hotel.
It is as well you should know it, Nan, for I doubt
if it will be my good fortune to leave Paris alive!
I thought London traffic was fairly dangerous, but
here it is doubly so.
The magnificent control that one sees in the former
city is here conspicuous by its absence.
I have always said that I don’t intend to be run over,
but—my goodness! I take my life in my hand almost
every time I cross a street. I generally run. Picture
me picking up my-skirts, giving frantic looks to right
as well as left (I can’t get accustomed to the rule of
the road being opposite to ours), and making a wild
dash to the other side. There is method in my mad-
ness, for a fine is inflicted on every unfortunate who is
run over!
’Buses with three horses abreast go in all directions.
One of the first things I saw on leaving my hotel was
the middle' one of a three fall down, but it picked
itself up again instantly, and went on as if nothing had
happened.


Many things are enormous, but I think the traffic
comes on top (I hope it won’t come on top of me). It
is terribly nerve racking. There is evidently no speed
limit to anything, and the wonder to me is that I don’t
see ’buses, voitures, cabs, horses, men and taxis all
crashing into each other before my very eyes, every
five minutes of the day.
On my arrival at the Quai d’ Orsay railway station
I called a cab, on the lamps of which was painted,
“English spoken.” The cabby seemed quite proud of
himself. Thank goodness, his horse was not thin, as
so many are here.
Luggage is brought up from the station platforms
below, on an endless running platform, a sort of nar-
row ramp. As you stand above, it’s ever so funny to
see all sorts and conditions of trunks, boxes, portman-
teaux, baskets and parcels appearing over the edge as
they rise to the top. Here they are smartly put on to
others running horizontally, right or left, according to
their destinations. It’s a splendid idea, and must save
the porters no end of hard work.
I had to go through the customs business, though
why, I don’t know. My trunk had already been
examined as I passed on my way to Montlugon, and
I haven’t been out of France since.
At all the stations the clock in the entrance hall is
five minutes ahead of that on the platform, by which
the trains are started. It means that town time is
always five minutes in advance of railway time.
This morning, “Mr. Baedeker” and I set out for the
Louvre—the wonderful Louvre.


Some of these places are so vast that you are
tempted, when you enter, to sit down plop. You feel
it is quite hopeless ever to think of being able to see
them properly.
Of course, you never do either the first or the second.
Apart from the marvellous and interesting things
they contain, the buildings themselves demand so much
attention.
I spent till noon in the great galleries, then went to
Duval’s in the Rue de Rivoli for lunch.
My friend, Madame de Langen, then took me in
hand.
First we went to see the Tour St. Jacques, a relic of
an old church, but now used as an observatory. Next,
the Hotel de Ville, a magnificent pile of buildings, just
outside of which, in days gone by, many people were
executed. Then to Notre Dame, where, of course,
we went inside.
From there we went along the Latin quarter to a
very old Greek church, where a dirty little man sold us
post cards.
Then on through part of the Sorbonne and into the
Sorbonne church, when Richelieu js buried. A long
way above his tomb, his round hat is suspended.
Here my feet gave out, so we took a carriage. I
hardly know which is the least dangerous, to drive, or
walk, about Paris.
Later.
I am thankful to be in my nice quiet hotel, where I
arrived about 8 p.m., after a very long, but equally in-
teresting day, at Versailles.


Its beautiful Palace, lovely gardens and woods, and
its two Trianons, are all full of memories of Louis
14th, Madame Maintenant, and Marie Antoinette.
One day lately, I wished to take a motor ’bus to
the Place de la Concorde.
That doesn’t sound difficult, does it ? But—first you
must go to a small office on the pavement and help
yourself to a numbered ticket. A clamouring crowd
armed with similar tickets is waiting for the ’bus.
It arrives.
The conductor calls out the lowest number. As
their numbers are called, the people present their
tickets to him. They are then permitted to scramble
into or on top of the vehicle.
He loses no time, but goes on with his French count-
ing, which, if you have not both ears open, to hear,
and further, your brain very clear, to understand, you
run the risk of not getting into that or any other that
day.
Having safely crossed the tremendous and franti-
cally busy Place de la Concorde, I got out.
Oh, dear! that traffic! I know now just what our
country cousins feel like when they go to Melbourne.
In fact, I feel myself to be the genuine article.
Seated next to me, in that ’bus, was a dainty little
Breton peasant girl. Her costume and head-dress were
both quaint and pretty. The former was black. The
skirt full, with pleats standing edgewise out from her
belt at the back. Loose sleeves, a white chemisette
with a little ruche at the top dotted with pearls, and a
white lace square turnover collar, at the back. Her


apron was of grey-green silk, with a little pointed
bodice, and reached nearly to the foot of her skirt.
Her hair was taken back and made into a long knob,
which stood out half-way up the back of her head.
Covering this knob, and fitting it exactly, was a pretty
lace affair.
Over all, she wore a beautifully done up white mus-
lin cap, transparent enough to show the pretty lace
affair through. This last cap came down past her
ears, and was very stiff.
As she had a sweet little face she made quite’ a pic-
ture, and I wished I had been able to “snap” her.
Napoleon’s Tomb, of course, I saw, but details of
that must, like many others, be left till I see you.
I couldn’t resist going up the Eiffel Tower. At the
first platform—l9o feet—you think you are fairly high
up in the world. The second is 380 feet from the
ground. Here you can buy all sorts of souvenirs.
Platform number three is no less than 905 feet in the
air.
Looking down from here, I was much amused at
the way everything is dwarfed. Horses looked like
ants, and men like dots. A large railway yard just
below looked like a 2/- toy for a child. Its carriages
and trucks about an inch long.
To-morrow I am to spend the day with Madame de
Langen. I shall implore her to take me somewhere
where horses and automobiles are unknown.
Later.
My outing yesterday was quite a success.
A small steamer took us up the Seine to Sevres. A
walk through Park St. Cloud followed; then through


the St. Cloud wood, which, in its delicate spring dress,
was perfect.
A wood, I may tell you, is nothing like “bush.” There
is no wildness about it.
Every here and there are paths, great avenues of
trees and patches of grass and small shrubs. The
chestnut trees to-day were in full flower, and looked
very lovely. On the ground below them lots of last
year’s nuts were lying.
From here, a tram took us to Suresnes, where we
changed to another, which brought us through the Bois
de Boulogne and home.
So now I have seen something of the beautiful sur-
roundings of Paris, as well as of the city itself.
In forty-eight hours I shall be once more in London.
Greetings to you, dear Nan, and a pat for my little
Dennis. I shall be wanting to take him out on a
string when I return!


XXVII
Ayr
Ayr,
Scotland,
May, 19 —.
I am making the acquaintance of still another lot of
cousins here, and am ever so happy.
Two of them, schoolboys, make a fine noise in the
house, but I can quieten them at once by telling them
about Australia. Yesterday evening I regaled them
with snake stories. To-day they are thirsting for
more.
Their uncle very often christens a dish at dinner by
an Australian name, for my special benefit. Last
night we had “patties a I’Australian Bight”!
Ayr, of course, means “Bobbie Burns.”
I have visited his monument, house and museum,
Alloway Kirk and the Brig o’ Boon of Tam o’Shanter
fame, and have strolled along the banks of the river.
In Ayr itself I have seen the Twa Brigs and his statue,
bought a copy of his poems, and a souvenir spoon.
The country round about is, looking very lovely.
The varied tints and tones of green on the several


kinds of trees lend a beauty to it all that we have not
to the same extent in Australia, at least, in Victoria.
In the woods, the ground is tinted with a pale blue
mist which, on nearer acquaintance, resolves itself into
a myriad of wild hyacinths. The joy of gathering
these, primroses, violets and forget-me-nots was en-
trancing, and a wish of years was realised.


XXVIII
Paisley and Oban
Paisley,
June, 19 —.
More cousins, a lovely old garden, flowers every-
where, brilliant sunshine, birds singing, a garden lounge
and in it—Madge.
Ninety years ago, my grandmother was born in this
town, and in the Abbey churchyard are the graves of
my great grand parents.
The days just now last nearly all night! I read at
11 o’clock, the sky is still faintly coloured an hour
later, and the sun appears again at half-past three.
Later.
A change of scene again, for I am at Oban.
The journey from Paisley was full of interest. A
steamer from Gourock took me to Dunoon, Innellan,
Rothesay and Colintraive. Then came the Kyles of
Bute. The scenery there reminded me very much of
Sydney Harbour.
On the shore, about half-way through, some rocks
are seen, which look like two girls sitting on the grass.


SPEUER BRIDGE, LUCERNE. BUILT IN MEDIAEVAL TIMES


Every year some of the yachtsmen paint them, making
them appear to be dressed. This year they are wear-
ing red and white.
After the Kyles came Tarbert, then Ardrishaig. Here
I transferred to the Crinan Canal steamer.
We go up hill and down, in this strip of water. There
are no less than nine locks to be negotiated. We
steamed into one, and a big gate shut behind us. That
done, doors under water opened in front, and the boat
gradually rose to the level of the water ahead. Then
we went on our way. Later, instead of rising, the boat
sank to the level of the water.
At the end of the canal, which part of the journey
lasted two hours, a third steamer brought me to Oban.
Again, the surroundings reminded me forcibly of
Sydney Harbour.
I can’t see the whole of the world, and much as I
regret it, must leave Staffa and lona out of my pro-
gramme.
Yesterday I went to Glencoe.
The first part of my journey was spent in the train,
which I left at Ach-na-cloich.
Here a small steamer was waiting, and for an hour
we went up beautiful Loch Etive to Lochetive Head.
En route we stopped for a moment in a narrow chan-
nel to pick up mails brought alongside in a rowing
boat.
The next part of the trip was done in an open coach,
which, with four fine horses, was waiting for us. I
took possession of a seat on one side of the driver,
who sat in the middle. Our route from here lay be


tween great barren mountains and deep glens or gul-
lies, rocky and forbidding, but magnificent.
At the fifteen mile stage (the whole drive is thirty-
two miles) we changed horses.
On some of the hills we saw mountain ponies, and
once a large herd of red deer.
Occasionally, we saw a house!
Some of the mountain tops were hidden by clouds.
Big boulders and huge rocky cliffs took the place of
trees. In places a white line running down the sides
showed the empty stony bed of what in winter is a
rushing and foaming torrent.
A steep descent took us to the Pass of Glencoe.
On our way through we passed several men and
dogs. The former were sitting by some low, stone
walls, the divisions of about six little yards. On being
questioned, our very uncommunicative coachman told
us they were shearing yards.
No fine wool-shed and machinery here! I thought
of our Australian sheep stations and smiled.
After some fearsome bends in the road, there came
into view the rock from which the signal was given to
begin the massacre. Here, too, are ruins of some of
the little cottages belonging to the poor victims.
After passing Glencoe, and as we got to the lower
level, the scenery changed to beautiful green woods.
The tiny village of Glencoe was the next point of in-
terest, then Ballachulish, with its ugly slate quarries,
right on the edge of beautiful Loch Linnhe. At this
quaint little town I left the coach, for my ticket brought
me back by train to Oban.


That trip was well worth the twenty shillings it cost
me.
The hotels here are horribly expensive. I grudge
spending money for the privilege of walking on thick
carpets, and being raced after by uniformed officials.
It is strange to hear people talking Gaelic, also to
find our pale green and white dinner plates put before
me at this hotel!


XXIX
Crianlarich
Crianlarich,
Next Day.
I am sitting on the platform of what we in Aus-
tralia would call a little wayside station. Probably the
Crianlarich folk wouldn’t agree with us, for I hear it
is a great fishing centre.
Oban, beautiful Oban, is miles behind me.
At this tiny place, which boasts of one shop, one
hotel, a post office, and a few houses, I arrived at 2.30
p.m. I had to change from the Caledonian railway,
with its bright blue engines, to the North British line.
The two stations are about two hundred yards apart.
Having three hours to wait, I took out, and began to
read, a copy of the “Argus.” In a moment or two, a
lady who was sitting next to me, said: “Excuse me, but
is that the ‘Argus’ you are reading?” Then I learned
that she lived for years in Australia, somewhere near
Hamilton.
Imagine the “Argus” being recognised in a little
station away in the West Highlands.
Later.
Back again to Paisley and my cousins, but only for
a few days.


Some delightful excursions, details of which must
wait till we meet.
One, up Loch Lomond to Inversnaid, Stronachlacher
(try to say that, Nan—your English tongue won’t
get round it!) where was a very fine show of rhodo-
dendrons, Loch Katrine, Ellen’s Isle, The Trossachs,
Callander, Glasgow and home.
Another, a most delightful motor drive to and
through Inverary; a picnic lunch on the edge of Loch
Fyne.
And now comes the inevitable good-bye to all the
cousins and to Bonnie Scotland.
Over that we’ll draw the curtain.
It has been a tremendous pleasure to meet them all,
and I was very sorry to say good-bye. However, as I
told them —I’ll come back in five years, though how
I’m going to manage it is quite another story.
Don’t you wish you had a lot of cousins, Nan?
Good-bye, dear, the usual amount of love.


XXX
London
London again.
August, 19 —.
I’m glad the postage from Great Britain to Aus-
tralia is only half what it is from Australia to Great
Britain. Even so, it is a serious item.
If only we had as many little streams in our sunny
land as there are here, we should all be very wealthy.
Wherever I go, there seems to be a perfect network of
them. If it doesn’t rain for a week or two, the people
begin discussing the drought!
With Tom to bear me company I had an interesting
drive one day last week.
Beginning at Blackheath, we passed Herbert Col-
lege, the last place visited by Queen Victoria before
she died; the military college, at which the Prince
Imperial trained; the house where General Gordon
was born; the Woolwich Barracks; Shooter’s Hill,
where Dick Turpin hid during his memorable ride
from York; the Naval College at Greenwich, where
Queen Elizabeth lived for a time, and last, but by no
means least, Greenwich Observatory.
A twenty-four-hour dial clock on the outside wall
gives the time to passing pedestrians. Close by, on
another wall, is the registered British yard, two feet,
six inches, and three inches.


How I should Jike to have gone inside those walls.
I must tell you, too, about Tom’s and my visit to
Covent Garden Market.
The tube took us right to the spot.
We at once found ourselves among a maze of carts
of all descriptions, loaded and empty, that had arrived
much earlier in the morning. It was only half-past
six then.
We wandered into the huge building, where were
enormous quantities of vegetables of all kinds. Little
round baskets of very young mustard and cress for
sandwiches; boxes of French beans, each bean lying
neatly alongside its neighbour.
Then the fruit—such fruit. Magnificent grapes
lying on wadding, and neat little boxes or baskets of
strawberries, raspberries, peaches, plums, and nec-
tarines. A fine price some of them were, I expect.
Afterwards, the flowers. Roses, sweet peas, bunches
of lavender, lilies, exquisite carnations, cornflowers,
and many others, some of which I had not seen before.
We bought armfuls to take back to Jean.
As we were leaving, we came upon a square of
between twenty and thirty women, each and every one
of them shelling peas as hard as they could go. A
thick carpet of pods was in the centre.
One or two of them worked specially quickly. After
cracking the pod with the right hand, they ran the peas
out with the left, while they picked up and cracked a
fresh one.
It was all very interesting, and the enormous quan-
tity of everything made me realise once more, what an
immense place this London is. It’s fine!


XXXI
Lausanne and Montreux
Pension Trolliet,
Avenue des Alpes,
Lausanne.
November 19.
One month longer—and only one—in Europe. Then
I must turn my steps homewards.
The night after my long journey from London, I
slept nearly eleven hours, with the result that I have
felt rested ever since.
Above, you see the name of the pension in which I
am staying. Make a note of all the addresses i have
given you at different times, Nan, they may prove
useful to you one day. My last two in London were
13 Upper Bedford Place, Russell Square, and 66
Greencroft Gardens, South Hampstead. Both are very
comfortable houses, exceptionally so. The former
central, therefore convenient for sight-seeing, the latter
about twenty minutes drive from Oxford Circus, but
in the purer air of Hampstead.
The morning of my departure for Switzerland I
was ready to leave at ten o’clock, and rang up for a
taxi. No taxis on the rank. A four-wheeler—very well.
A minute or two afterwards the telephone rang—no


cabs on the rank. By this time I was getting desper-
ate. It’s quite a different matter going from Hamp-
stead to Victoria in a four-wheeler. A taxi takes half
the time. The next thing was to see if there was a
messenger hanging about the street who would carry
my small amount of luggage to the Finchley Road sta-
tion—not one to be seen, and precious minutes flying.
A two-wheeled canvas-covered cart came into view.
I hailed, and asked the driver if he would take it. Yes,
he would, so, much to the amusement of my landlady
and one or two others, and in the middle of remarks
about enterprising Australians, I got in too, and drove
off in state. Fortunately, I picked up a taxi, and hur-
riedly transferring my baggage and myself, arrived just
ten minutes before the train left. This was cutting
things rather too fine for such a busy one as the n
a.m. to Dover.
However, all’s well that ends well.
It is all hills, this place, and I can quite believe there
are many lovely views.
Opposite to my window in the Avenue des Alpes is
a vineyard, and behind this house, at a much lower
level, is the Lake of Geneva.
My first walk was down, down, down to the lake.
Here I stood on the quai and admired, as well I might,
the view from there. The long stretch of trees away
to the left was a mass of autumn colouring. The
Savoie Alps in the distance and the Lake at my feet
completed the picture.
After a cup of coffee taken at a little table standing
in the park, I went up, up, up to Place St. Francois,
the meeting place of all the trams.
137
TO EUROPE AND BACK


Crowds were hanging about there, so I concluded
that something of importance must be going to take
place.
In my best French I asked a young girl why the
people were waiting. She looked vacantly at me and
said “ Russe,” so I concluded that she was a Russian,
and passed on.
Then I approached a respectable-looking elderly man
and put the same question to him. His answer was
“pompiers” something, which I didn’t understand—
looked as if I did—and said “Thank you,” thinking that
the thing itself, when it came, would explain matters.
It did. A review of the fire brigade.
Just outside the church stood the inspecting officers.
First came a band, a good one, then uniformed fire-
men with ropes slung across their backs. They all
turned their heads towards the officers, who later, as
the colours came past, saluted them.
Each group of men had different fire appliances.
Such quaint, old-fashioned things they were. Funny
little ladders, and an engine that looked a hundred
years old.
Hanging above each cart was a lantern, in which was
a candle. There were three or four carts, each drawn
by two horses. The latter certainly were not primi-
tive, but were very fine specimens.
The want of quality in appliances was made up in
the numbers of men.
Children danced up the street in front of the proces-
sion, chattering and calling to each other in French.
That over, I wandered on and up to the Protestant
Cathedral, which occupies a very fine position.


It is not always easy to follow these crooked little
streets from a plan; but all the more fun in the con-
quering of them.
The one before reaching the Cathedral was excep-
tionally steep and stony, vehicular traffic quite out of
the question. All the way along it, at one side, was a
covered wooden staircase.
It was tiring work, but I was well rewarded by the
view from the terrace before the Cathedral. The
Chateau was the highest point. Here, spread below
me, were the irregular roofs of the houses, piled one
on top of another; the sun well down in the sky; a
wide gold shaft of light across the lake; and the Alps
in the distance.
At different stages of my walk I met groups of fire-
men with their impedimenta, returning to their several
quarters.
Electric trams run in all directions, and, I should
say, are much used.
Darkness at last drove me indoors. But what a
lovely afternoon I had had.
Later.
Since coming here I have expatiated on the beauty
of the Autumn tints, but to-day’s ride in the funicular
up to the Signal, out-heroded Herod. The gorgeous-
ness and beauty of those tree covered hillsides, was
beyond description. I felt as if it must be a huge pic-
ture painted in exaggerated colours.
The view from the Signal was fine, and not far
away, was the loveliest wood you could imagine—just
fairy-land. Trees of various colours, and the ground
beneath, a mass of faded fallen leaves.


It was not difficult to picture the dainty Arcadians
peopling this lovely spot.
Do I rhapsodize too much ? It’s impossible! I
feasted my eyes on all this loveliness till the prosaic
tram called me. In a few moments I was back among
the quaint old streets and houses.
One afternoon, a steamer from Ouchy landed me at
little Evian les Bains, on the south side of the Lake,
in about forty minutes.
The lovely, but very elusive mounta’ins, became
clearer as we went along. They are very fascinating,
one minute showing majestically above a bank of
clouds, the next completely hidden. They looked very
rugged as we drew into the wharf.
As I went along the busy little street, oxen-drawn
carts met me at every turn.
Thank goodness both they and the horses are well
cared for in Switzerland.
Just now the number of goats and oxen there are
unusual. They are all being brought down from the
hills for the winter, and the tinkle of their bells is
heard on every side.
Later.
Another day, Montreux, a half-hour train journey
from Lausanne.
The line runs not far from the edge of the Lake,
and on either side were miles of vineyards. On the
left, in terraces up the sides of the hills, the leaves, ex-
cept for a rich red group here and there, were almost
all yellow.
The surroundings of Montreux are magnificent.
The town itself beautified by gullies, old bridges, foot


paths, uneven and varying in width, and, as usual,
crooked streets.
The Chateau de Chillon was of course my goal.
It is a massive edifice, built on a solid rock some
few yards from the shore, with which it is connected
by a draw-bridge.
A pleasant little woman, who spoke French very
distinctly, was my guide.
We went through a lovely old court-yard to the
large dungeon where Bonivard was kept chained for
six years. The ring is still on the pillar. A huge slab
of rock was pointed out, the bed, on the night before
their execution, of unfortunate prisoners; near it a
beam from which they were hanged, and close by, a
door in the wall, through which their bodies were
thrown into the Lake, at that spot over 300 feet deep.
Less gruesome was a large iron travelling trunk
that belonged to the Duchess of Savoy. I don’t think
she did much travelling with that trunk.
It was a certain relief to find myself at last out-
side those dreadful walls.
Back to Lausanne in time for afternoon coffee at
“Old India,” a splendid cafe close to Place St.
Frangois.
Midnight already and all chance of “ beauty sleep ”
gone. Time goes on wings when I am writing to you.
Good-night.


XXXII
Geneva and Bern
Lausanne,
November,. 19 —
Dear Nan,
My Melbourne friends, Dr. and Mrs. Victor, have
just arrived, and until I leave Switzerland, we shall
travel round together.
Here’s our programme from Saturday till Wed-
nesday :
Leave. Arrive.
Lausanne .. ~ 2.23 p.m. Bern .... 4.50 p.m.
Bern (Sun).. .. 1.50 p.m. Interlaken 3.25 p.m.
Interlaken (boat) 6.5 p.m. Brienz .. 7.30 p.m.
Brienz (Mon.) .. 9.50 a.m. Lucerne 1.2 p.m.
Lucerne (Tues.) 11.3 a.m. Zurich .. 12.49 P- m -
Zurich .. .... .. 7.46 p.m. Lucerne .. 9.15 p.m.
Lucerne (Wed.) 9.8 a.m. Milan .. 3.5 p.m.
I looked up all the trains, and made it out myself.
I feel more deserving of my old name “ Cook,” which
I couldn’t claim when first in London.
We do practically all our travelling in daylight you
see.
Later.
Before visiting a town, we read up and find the best
route to take when we arrive. By doing this we lose


no time, and we see twice as much as we otherwise
would.
To-day it was Geneva.
We are all indefatigable sight-seers and find that
by walking we see much more than by driving. The
shop windows always appeal to Mrs. Victor and my-
self, while the Doctor’s first enquiry is for a good
tea-room.
We gazed with longing eyes at the lovely little
watches in the jewellers’ windows. So cheap, that I
was almost tempted to buy one.
By the lake, hundreds of sea-gulls were flying, and
swimming on it we counted more than sixty white
swans; while in little netted “ yards ” of water we
discovered some of our dear black swans from West
Australia.
From the Quai, we had a magnificent view of Mont
Blanc, sixty or seventy miles away, snow clad, and
sparkling in the sunshine. Fortune favoured us, for
the air was particularly clear.
Later on, during the first few miles of our return
journey, it was superbly coloured with the setting
sun.
Later. Hotel Bellevue,
Bern.
Is there any country so beautiful as Switzerland?
The route from Lausanne was through Siviriez,
Romont, with its fine old walls and watch-towers, and
Fribourg. Everywhere the same glorious autumnal
colouring.
We arrived at Bern, according to our programme,


just before 5 p.m., and are staying at the above hotel
for to-night.
No sooner had we settled about our rooms, than we
were off for a walk round the most mediaeval town
in Switzerland.
In some of the older streets, the footpaths covered
by the second storeys of the buildings, form long ar-
cades, called the Lauben.
In the gathering darkness, we crossed the Kornhaus
Bridge. Its main arch has a span of 400 feet, and
the whole structure is 157 feet above the river. Un-
derneath, between it and the river, is a second bridge.
Three hungry people returned to the hotel in time
for dinner, since when I have had a hot bath! This
particular bath took over half an hour to prepare, and,
as usual, had to be paid for.
From the chair in the bathroom, I took up what
I thought was a bath sheet, and nearly burst out
laughing when I saw that it was a long loose sort of
shirt, fastening here and there in front, and with wide
short sleeves. I haven’t yet determined whether it
was meant to bathe in, or for drying purposes.
Later. Brienz.
I've done so much to-day, that I have to think where
I am, before writing the name of the town.
We had breakfast at eight o’clock; left instructions
for our baggage to be sent to the station; and sallied
forth in a fog, to see Bern and its much talked-of
views.
The views, as far as the Alps are concerned, we had
to imagine, but we thoroughly enjoyed our walk round.


GROUP OF STATUARY TO COMMEMORATE THE INTERNATIONAL POSTAL
CONFERENCE HELD IN BERN, JULY 1900.


First of all, we went past the splendid Parliament
Buildings, to the Kleine Schanze, where there is-an
unusual, but very fine group of statuary, commemorat-
ing the International Postal Union.
A huge sphere represents the World. Encircling it
are five figures, representing the five Continents, each
one handing a letter to the one before. Clouds,
cleverly contrived, keep the sphere in position. The
figures are an Australian Aboriginal, a Red Indian,
and a Negro; the symbols for Europe and Asia being
two females, which depict the race of each Conti-
nent.
After this, away we went, down one street and up
another. Curious old fountains are every here and
there, down the centre, while trams run along' one side.
The fountains in these old cobbled streets are gay
with plants and flowers, all in perfect condition.
By this time, the Doctor’s thoughts were of tea-
rooms. We soon found one. We were there served
by a girl who spoke English, French, German and
Greek. It is amazing the numbers of people you come
across who can speak two or three languages.
Before leaving Bern, I as usual bought twenty or
thirty post-cards, and am sending them by this mail.
When they are all arranged, I shall go over them with
you and tell you much of interest that I cannot take
time to write.
, The fog gradually lifting, and the sun shining, our
journey from Bern to Interlaken was of exceptional
interest.
By degrees we came closer to some of the snow-
covered Alps, and were fortunate in having a travelling


companion who knew them all well. He very kindly
pointed out to us, Monch, Jungfrau and Blumlisalp
on the one side, and Stockhorn and Niesen on the
other. The first three quite white, Stockhorn, with
its thick, hat-like top, and Niesen with its delicate point
being almost green.
Gullies and deeper gullies. Tinted trees to the wa-
ter’s edge of Lake Thun.
From Thun, we ran alongside the lake to Inter-
laken, the snow covered mountains getting more and
more distinct, till at last in the numerous bends of the
line, they were hidden from view by some darker and
close at hand.
Interlaken is a small place, very busy in summer,
for it is a good centre from which to make excursions;
its hotels are during the winter nearly all closed, and
the town is very quiet and empty.
A fine view of the Jungfrau was the principal attrac-
tion for us.
From there we steamed across the Lake of Brienz.
Going from side to side to pick up and land passen-
gers, it reminded me very much of Lane Cove River.
Mine host of the Croix Blanche Hotel, where we
are staying for the night, soon provided some supper,
and eggs, steak, vegetables, asparagus and coffee dis-
appeared in no time.
Now I shall disappear to bed.


XXXIII
Lucerne
Lucerne,
November, 19 —
The hotel at which we stayed here shall be name-
less. It was most uncomfortable.
I’m so tired that I don’t know how I am going to
write, but whatever happens my doings must be set
forth.
Breakfast just after eight and a smart walk along
the quaint “ Swiss-cottaged ” street brought us to the
Carving School.
Brienz being the home of wood-carving, we saw
some very beautiful work.
I wish money didn’t melt so quickly. Even though
I buy only trifles, it disappears like magic.
From Brienz to Meiringen, the train ran along be-
tween two rows of mountains.
On the other side of Meiringen, it took us over half-
an-hour to cover three or four miles, but in that short
distance we ascended nearly 1300 feet.
We followed our usual programme on our arrival
here. We shall soon be, if we are not already, good
walkers.


The Lion of Lucerne (28 feet in length) hewn out
of sandstone cliff, is very impressive.
Two old bridges, built in mediaeval times, cross the
river obliquely. Both are roofed, the one painted with
the “ Dance of Death,” the other with scenes from the
lives of St. Leodegar and St. Mauritius.
We crossed by these rather than by the more
modern but less interesting ones.
We left for Zurich this morning by a train earlier
than we intended.
Zurich is the largest town in Switzerland, and is
famous for its silks and machinery. (That sounds
like “ Child’s Guide,” doesn’t it ?)
It also has a very interesting Museum, in .which we
spent about two hours.
I have said before, that I meet with great kindness
wherever I go.
To-day, for instance, we met by appointment the
mother of a young German who stayed for a few
weeks in the same boarding-house as myself, in Lon-
don.
I had strict orders to let her know when I was going
through Zurich.
They are studious people those Germans. Here was
a lady of forty who had never been in England, speak-
ing English very fluently.
She insisted on getting a carriage, and under her
directions we had a most delightful drive.
Acting on her advice, we took the train that same
afternoon to Schaffhausen, to see “ the finest falls
in Central Europe.”


After spending two hours there we came direct to
Lucerne.
With to-morrow, comes our long journey to Milan.
A letter from Tom tells me he has been enquiring
about a berth for my return journey to Australia. I
haven’t seen half enough yet!
All this railway travelling is being done on our
Swiss season tickets. They last for two weeks, carry
us over almost every line, and cost £2 16s. each,, 4s.
of that £2 16s. to be refunded when we return our
tickets.


XXXIV
Milan and Venice
Hotel Cappelo Nero,
Venice,
November, 19 —
Venice! Nearly the last, but by no means the least
of the foreign towns I shall see.
We left Milan at ten o’clock, travelling second class
as usual, but found that the Italian trains are not so
nice as the French, German, or Swiss. The coupe was
not clean, and all the porters along the line looked
slovenly.
Italy may be sunny, but her people are dirty. The
officers, however, look ever so smart, their lovely grey-
blue capes being slung over one shoulder.
Between Milan and Verona, the country was not
anything like so interesting as that in Switzerland; but
then, there are not many Switzerlands.
When we arrived at Verona about 2.15 p.m., it was
really very funny to hear me trying English, French,
and German to the porter who took the baggage. He
didn’t understand any one of the three, and I had to
hang on to his coat to keep him from marching off
goodness knows where, with our precious belongings.


At last we came across someone who understood a
little French, and who eventually had our things put
into a carriage for us.
Then we showed our driver a paper on which were
written some Italian words meaning We want to
drive round for an hour,” and a list of the places we
wished to see.
Before writing you of Verona, I ought to tell you
of our visit to La Scala Opera House, at Milan.
By paying 50 centimes (5d.) each, we were allowed
to go over it. A guide, in broken French, and still
more broken English, explained things to us. Had
there been an operatic performance, we would cer-
tainly have gone, but the season does not begin till
next month. However, it was something to see the
interior. It holds 4,000 people, has six balconies, the
four lower all boxes belonging to different private
families in Milan, so the public can use only the two
top tiers and the stalls. Each private box has its own
dressing-room. The stage is immense. Part of it was
at one time a church. All was in confusion, ever so
many carpenters were busy building a ship—part of
the scenery in “ I’Africaine.”
A clap of the hands and a whistle by the guide,
roused a wonderful echo. He tells us the acoustics
are exceptionally good, so I thought I might as well
test them. Never in my wildest moments did I dream
that my voice would be uplifted in La Scala!
And now about Verona. Certainly the oldest Italian
town I have seen.
Our horse was pretty thin, but we had to take the
best we could get and not think about it.


At the walled entrance to the city, our driver was
stopped by a soldier and something was said, but as
the reply seemed to be satisfactory, we Were allowed
to proceed. Along tiny, narrow, rough, dirty, crooked
streets we drove; the people looking in many instances
like the streets!
We passed interesting old palaces and went into the
Dome—in twos, one always on guard in the carriage.
Then we drove on again to the Tombs of the Scaligers,
great monuments right in the city; on again past
“ Juliet’s ” house, through the market, and past the
Arena, built in A.D. 290, now crumbling to decay.
At the entrance we bought post-cards, then con-
tinued our drive to Juliet’s tomb, and on to the
station.
All through this drive we were, the centre of in-
terest.
At the station restaurant, we were wondering how
we would fare in the matter of something to eat, when
a pleasant-looking girl, evidently in charge, came for-
ward and addressed us in pure English. We nearly
embraced her! Coffee and rolls soon appeared, but
nothing in Verona seemed as if it could be very clean,
and we didn’t enjoy them much.
Another two and a half hours in the train brought
us to Venice.
By this time it was quite dark, and as we approached
we could only see the lights of the city and their reflec-
tion in the water. A bridge about two and a half miles
in length, connects it to the mainland.
At the station, one of our travelling companions, a
young Italian who spoke French, very kindly took


charge of us and handed us and our baggage over to
the porter from this hotel, who, with the hotel gondola
was waiting for visitors. However, rather than take
the time necessary in the gondola we went by a small
steamer. Our young friend was also on board, and
piloted us to the hotel, which happened to be his too.
It was quite an experience getting there. First of
all going along the Grand Canal to the different stop-
ping places; seeing the gondolas glide past us in the
dark; then, getting off and following him along street
after street, all footpath!
There was not a sign of a horse or cart of any
description; the only animal I saw was a little dog.
Crowds were walking about these still crooked, curved
and narrow streets. When we came to the Rialto we
turned off and eventually arrived at the hotel, which
is within a few yards of the Piazza di San Marco.
After getting our rooms fixed up, and having some
dinner, we went into the Piazza. Everything about it
was familiar to a degree, and it is wonderfully inter-
esting to be able to say, there’s so and so, that we have
known by sight for years.
To-morrow I shall feed the pigeons, but in the mean-
time I must go to sleep, and any further news must be
in my next letter.
My dear, love to you all.


XXXV
Venice
Venice,
November, 19 —
And now for an account of my first day in Venice,
dear Nan. Fascinating, unique, charming Venice! I
can never be too glad that I came. It is quite an
experience to be in a city without horses, vehicles, and
noise of traffic.
One ought to be a millionaire when in Venice. It’s
a difficult matter to get along; the windows of the
shops are so enticing, and once inside, then it’s good-
bye to one’s money.
This morning, then, we had breakfast just after
nine o’clock. It ought to have been half-past eight,
but I slept solidly from about 11.15 p.m. till 8.30
a.m., and when Mrs. Victor came along to see if I was
ready, she was quite pleased to find me late for once.
Breakfast over, we went to the Piazza and bought
maize to feed the pigeons which flew all about us, on
to our hands, arms, heads and shoulders, and which
thoroughly enjoyed themselves. So did we. Lovely
birds they are, and without fear.
After that, we went with a guide into San Marco
Church, a magnificent building with ever so much rich


mosaic work in gold and colours, so old that it is
wonderful to see it still in existence.
From the Church, the wily guide took us to a
Venetian glass manufactory, and there Doctor and
Mrs. Victor made some purchases. These people in
their turn conducted us to a lace factory, where we
saw point and other Venetian' lace being made, both
needles and bobbins at work. Here I became the pos-
sessor of some exquisite pieces.
After that, we steamed down the Grand Canal to
see the pictures at the Academy. Pictures are a joy
to me, and I should dearly like to write at length of
all I see.
From there, our route lay through a labyrinth of
lanes, and over bridges, across narrow canals, to Chiesa
Maria della Salute, another very fine church of enor-
mous proportions and with valuable paintings.
Then we wandered along the streets again—streets
that reminded me of Queen’s Walk in Melbourne, only
not quite so new looking—and came back by steamer
to a landing place near the Piazza.
The Doctor then clamoured for tea. It was past
three o’clock, and we had had nothing since breakfast.
However, Ortes, in the Via Ventidue Marzo, was close
at hand, and three hungry Australians enjoyed what
was put before them.
The next item in our delightful programme was new
to us all. We hailed a gondolier and away we glided
in the picturesque gondola, along the Grand Canal
as far as the Rialto, noting as we went, the different
old palaces of the rich, seeing among other places,


Desdemona’s house, the house where Byron lived, and
one in which Wagner wrote part of Tristan and Isolde.
In front of the houses, tall posts stand .up out of
the water, each group the heraldic colour of the owner.
The landing steps are washed by the water of the
Grand Canal, the ones visible at low tide being very
slippery.
At the Rialto we paid our gondolier three lire, and
tipped a man who helped us on shore over the slippery
steps.
Going “ across country ” it is more by chance than
good guiding that we get to the place we set out for.
The streets are so irregular, many of them unnamed
and not even marked in the plan, that it is most diffi-
cult to find our way.
Eventually we arrived at our hotel, each got a cir-
cular note for £5, and went off to Cook’s to change it,
and with a fresh supply of money set out to spend
it!
The Rialto bridge is very quaint, with a row of
shops on either side, but a footpath also behind the
shops. And oh! Nan, I wish you could have seen the
fearsome looking concoctions, and hot at that, sold in
some of the poorer streets.
Later.
I am sitting in the train and have about fifteen
minutes to write, before it starts at 5.30 p.m. Venice
I can see no more—what a place of charm it is!
This morning we went to the Doges’ Palace, very
fine outside, and gorgeous inside. We entered by a
great portal—to call it a door is too absurd—and went


on into a square court, then up a staircase at the top
of which the Doges were crowned. The old prison
where in olden times political and other prisoners were
kept, came next. One cell was a horrible place without
a ray of light, and only one small round hole to admit
air and food. Then came room after room, each inter-
esting in its own way. The ceilings or walls or both
exquisitely painted by Tintoretto, Veronese, or Gio-
vane.
A penny to a small boy (there are plenty of them
about) to lead us through the maze of tiny streets
saves us time.
The churches of Santi Giovanni e Paolo, and Frari,
are well worth far longer visits than we could give
them. Both were erected in the 14th century, and
both contain fine pictures. In the former the funeral
services of the Doges were always performed.
By this time we all clamoured for tea, so paid an-
other visit to Ortes. Having refreshed our own
“ in’ards ” we went again to the Piazza, where hun-
dreds of people were strolling about, and fed the
pigeons. An old man and woman sell long pointed
bags of maize and peas for 5 or 10 centimes. The
birds know perfectly well when they see someone going
towards the sellers, that that someone is worth fol-
lowing, and they came round in crowds.
At times, the whole Piazza is under water; rather
an anxious time for the shop-keepers all round it, I
should say.
While there, I suppose because it was Sunday, we
saw several processions of girls and boys, the former
in dark grey dresses with pretty pieces of black lace


over their heads, the latter in a sort of uniform. Then,
on the Piazzetta, we saw a lot of fine young Italian
cadets, who looked very aristocratic beside most
of the other people about.
Italian beauties were conspicuous by their absence;
in fact the girls and women were rather ugly.
Just before four o’clock I went to the hotel to put
the finishing touch to my luggage, and a little later,
Dr. and Mrs. Victor accompanied me to the station,
and we said good-bye. Our next meeting-place will
be in Melbourne, where we shall talk over our de-
lightful trip together.
We are off, so my writing must come to an end.
I wish my visit to Venice hadn’t.


XXXVI
Good-Bye to Switzerland
Lausanne.
Later.
Such a lovely bundle of letters was waiting for me
here. I’m sorry to hear that D’Arcy’s holiday was
spoilt on account of his losing Paddy. I hope it
meant that the dear little dog died, not that he was
really lost.
On my way from Italy, I passed through the won-
derful Simplon Tunnel. We entered that at 3.35
a.m., all the train windows shut because of the heat,
and we came out at the other end just twenty-two
minutes later, the train being taken through by an
electric engine. The windows that before entering it
were trickling with moisture, were during the journey
quite warm, and got perfectly dry.
I stay here to-night, and to-morrow begin my jour-
ney back to London.
Why does time fly so quickly?


XXXVII
Newquay
Newquay, Cornwall,
November, 19 —
My Dear Nan,
It seemed really like going home, when two days ago
I engaged my cabin. I am torn in two. Ido not wish
to leave Jean and Tom ; I long to see my sunny Aus-
tralia once more, and those whom I love, but I am
more than sorry to go away from this absorbingly
interesting side of the world.
The heading to this will tell you that I am at the
coast. Jean, Tom and Dr. Edwards with his dear
little Pomeranian “ Ngare ” are here, and it is at this
interesting Cornish fishing town that I must part with
Jean.
At breakfast-time, our Australian mail arrived.
Long letters from you, Loo and Mother. Nothing
special to answer.
Yesterday we all went down to the quay. The tide,
which rises 30 feet, was quite out, and the harbour
where all the fishing boats come in was dry. It was
strange to see a horse and cart, men, barrels of fish
and stranded boats, to say nothing of ourselves, on the
spot which a few hours later would be covered with
water nearly 20ft. in depth. The beach at low tide
is about 100 yards wide, all lovely firm sand; at high


tide it is quite covered. It was a beautiful picture down
there yesterday. The two high stone piers, stranded
boats, horses, blue sky, blue sea, hundreds of sea-gulls
on the water rising and falling with the waves, or,
when an extra big wave came, leaving the water and
circling in the air before settling down again; the
clean stretch of sand, and eight or nine boats with
their brown sails, at anchor a short distance from the
shore, waiting till there was water enough in the
harbour for them to come in with their loads of fish.
This afternoon we drove to Crantock, a small village
three or four miles away. Here there is an interesting
old church, part of it dating from 1400. It has been
carefully restored and a very fine wood screen added.
There are some quaint verses on some of the tomb-
stones in the graveyard; here are three, all written
with the long “ s ”; —
“Ye that pass by, behold this tomb,
Stop here a while and think;
Death seized me while in my bloom,
And you are on the brink.”
“Death! Like an Herald from on high,
The fatal stroke it gave;
A flash of lightning from the sky
Sent me into my grave.” 1827.
“A blooming youth lies buried here,
He to his parents was most dear.
Nature adorned his mind and face
With every muse and every grace;
About the marriage state to prove,
But death had quicker wings than love.”


The drive to Crantock was along a lovely country
lane, the hedges on either side being of holly, haw-
thorn and ivy. In the village is an old well whose
waters are as pure and good as they were 1000 years
ago!
Cornish “pasties” are much in evidence in New-
quay. They resemble a roly-poly with mince inside
and are large enough for a meal or two. The child-
ren go about at lunch-time armed with them.
I’ll be glad to get vegetables boiled with a little salt
when I get home. Here in England the general rule
is to cook them without, and they are tasteless things.
The French and Germans are quite right when they
say that the English don’t know how to cook veget-
ables.
66 Greencroft Gardens,
South Hampstead.
Later.
London again, and for the last time.
Only one more good-bye to say now, for I left Jean
at Newquay yesterday.
A day or two before I arrive, you had better begin
to speak of me to Dennis. By the way, I must tel!
you about little Ngare. He goes about a great deal
with his master, and at Newquay the other day, when
he saw him beginning to pack preparatory to going to
London, that clever little creature ran downstairs
and brought his small ball to him, down again for his
other ball, and down a third time for his teddy bear!
It’s almost incredible, but it’s quite true.


Later.
I’ve done a fine thing this time! I can hardly believe
it possible that I could completely forget to post my
precious Australian mail, but that is just what hap-
pened. I discovered the fact when sitting at dinner
at the Criterion with Tom. The next minute a waiter
was called, a post-card asked for and written, and a
messenger sent post haste to Charing Cross station to
catch the mail as it left for Dover.
This morning a sewing-woman came and did all the
odds and ends so necessary to my clothes and that a
dressmaker won’t do. While she sewed, I packed. At
seven o’clock the last label was put on to my luggage,
and it is ready to go to Southampton to-morrow. One
cabin trunk I keep, for I shall be here for some days,
then pick up the steamer at Marseilles.
I am not sorry to have done with packing, but bless
me! I’d pack every day in the week to have such
another trip as this has been.
So the piano has been moved. I’m glad to know it,
for if I had not been able to see it on entering the
drawing-room, I might have thought it had been con-
verted into money to send to me!
I haven’t yet stopped being surprised at so completely
forgetting to post my mail.
My next, and last, letter, will be posted at Adelaide,
and will tell you anything of interest en route.
Good-bye, dear.


XXXVIII
Marseilles and Pompeii
Marseilles,
December, 19 —.
Good-bye to beautiful England! When shall I see
it again ?
Yesterday morning I was up betimes to put the
finishing touches to my packing, then Tom and I had
breakfast together.
Of course he came to Victoria station with me, and
when we arrived half-an-hour before the train was to
start, the place seemed to be nothing but a mass of
porters and luggage, luggage of all kinds—and porters,
too, for that matter.
Here I said my last good-bye.
Except for the horrid part of saying good-bye to
people, it seemed quite an ordinary thing to start off on
this long journey. I suppose all the going about that I
have done makes it seem so.
To an Australian like myself, brought up in a young
country, comparatively without history, it is a wonder-
ful experience to travel about Europe, where every-
thing breathes of the past, and is teeming with interest.
Think what it is to visit Westminster Abbey, and see
the tombs of Mary Queen of Scots and Elizabeth. To
go to the Tower of London, with its past horrors. To


walk down Whitehall, past the spot where Charles I.
was publicly beheaded. Or to visit Hampton Court,
the actual palace in which Henry VIII. lived, and the
garden in which he walked. To walk about that same
house, through the self-same rooms and doors, and
about those same gardens. It is just overwhelming.
I found it most difficult to realise that’ things had
really happened in the different places; that dainty
dames and gay cavaliers peopled those one-time splen-
did palaces. That kings and queens lived in them, and
that dark deeds were performed there.
The way. to make myself best realise them all was
to concentrate my thoughts, shut my eyes to, and put
on one side all present-day surroundings, then picture
the differently costumed people, with their manners
and customs, belonging to the times in which they lived.
Europeans who have lived always in the old world
do not, and cannot, feel about all this as we Austra-
lians do. Having it always with them, they take it
for granted, and hardly give a thought to it.
Several to whom I spoke of the great impressions it
made upon me were quite struck with what I said.
Marseilles is a big, busy place, some fine buildings,
but horrid, stone-paved streets. Many of the vehicles
are drawn by three horses abreast, others by four tan-
dem. The traffic, the opposite way to ours, makes
you hold your breath when you go whisking round a
corner on what seems to us to be the wrong side.
Later—on board.
No more packing till I leave the steamer at Mel-
bourne !


We arrived at Naples yesterday morning about eight
o’clock. I was up in good time, and was ready to go on
shore for the day, with other passengers, if possible;
otherwise, without them.
Guides came early on board, and by nine o’clock we
had a party of twelve gathered together to drive round,
visit the Museum, and go to Pompeii. What an in-
teresting day it was!
Naples I have already told you about, and I find it
no cleaner and not any less smelly than it was last
year.
The Museum, which I did not see then, contains the
lovely statues and other precious works of art which
have been brought from Pompeii for safe keeping.
From there we drove to the station and got a train
to Pompeii. The wretched thing took over an hour
to go twelve miles.
The route was pretty, as it ran along the sea shore,
with its black sandy beach. Later there were ungainly
cactus plants, with their broad flat leaves grown to a
great size. Here and there, in different yards, I saw
long lines of yellow fringe, about two feet in depth,
and discovered that it was macaroni hung over poles to
dry. I used to like macaroni!
I feel all the time in Italy a sort of doubt as to
whether the food I am eating is clean, my opinion lean-
ing to the side that it isn’t.
Vesuvius was in much the same condition as last
year—a little smoke constantly coming out of the top.
As soon as we arrived at Pompeii we had lunch at
Hotel Suisse, just outside the boundaries, and then
started to see the wonderful old city. I wish I could


give you a good description of it, but as I can’t do that,
I must do the best I can.
At present, only about a quarter of it has been exca-
vated, but the Italian Government is going on con-
stantly with the work.
The entrance through which we went is so interest-
ing that you want to stay there for ever so long to look
at it. It consists of two passage ways, arched over, one
a shallow staircase for pedestrians, the other, an in-
cline, for vehicles. On the walls of these are coloured
remains of paintings.
A few steps farther on the right is a museum con-
taining some interesting things that have been exca-
vated; among them a petrified dog, and some human
bodies. Two gold rings can be seen on the fingers of
the latter, but otherwise they look like stone, except,
indeed, for the teeth on two, which are perfect.
Skeletons of a cat, a chicken, and horses, bones of a
little pig, jars and lamps, cooking utensils and doors,
are every one of interest.
The city was destroyed in 79 A.D., and it is amazing
to see it now, ruined and all as it is. To me it appears
as if when only half built, a serious strike had oc-
curred, and everything was left roofless, and to be for
ever unfinished.
The buildings, courts of justice, temples, Basilica,
swimming and other baths, must have been very mag-
nificent and splendidly built.
It was very interesting to walk along the streets,
some of them named, and past rows and rows of ruins,
stopping every now and then to be told something
special. For instance, a wine shop, the counters in


lovely marble, with round holes here and there, under
which openings large jars of wine were kept. A
baker’s, with mills for grinding corn, and a large oven,
in which to bake the bread.
An amphitheatre to seat five thousand; some of the
marble seats still to be seen.
One lovely home, the finest so far excavated, be-
longed to someone called Vetti. At the request of the
late manager, this, with its art treasures, was left
exactly as found. As a rule, the contents of the dif-
ferent places are sent to the Naples Museum.
This villa was wonderful. The decorations on the
walls were still in their original vivid colourings. Two
old chests stood in the square hall, exquisite statues,
marble tables, and fountains, were in the square court
garden, and the dining-room was in parts a brilliant
red with designs forming a dado. It must have been
most carefully excavated to leave it in such a good con-
dition.
The streets almost all at right angles, are narrow,
and paved with large stones. The footpaths at either
side are high and kerbed. Every here and there, cross-
ing the streets, are three large flat stepping stones. Deep
ruts are to be seen, showing that the traffic was con-
siderable. What a nuisance these stepping stones must
have been!
In two or three places we were shown the lead pip-
ing for the water supply, and at the present time the
Neapolitans use the water from the same source as
did those old Pompeiians.
On leaving that absorbingly interesting city, we went


back to the hotel where we bought post cards and
souvenirs.
From there we took carriages again. A drive
through dirty, smelly streets, with crowds of equally
dirty men, women and children, brought us to the rail-
way line, where, for a solid fifteen minutes, we had
to wait for a train to pass, just the time we should
have been spending on our drive. However, we went
to see a three-storied house that now has its two lower
stories buried beneath lava, and which is, of course,
surrounded on all sides by it.
Here we were only about three miles from Vesuvius,
and I quite decided that I would prefer to live some-
where else than in that district.
That outing, including drives, lunch, train ticket and
entrance to Pompeii, cost twenty shillings, and was
well worth the money.
To-day I feel brain-weary. Do you wonder?
Later.
Port Said, Suez, Aden, Colombo and Fremantle
have all come in their turn, and to-morrow this, my last
chat, must be posted in Adelaide.
And so my trip is finished. All the anticipations of
years have been more than realised. I have enjoyed
every minute of the time, and my only hope is that I
may one day set out on another.
My heart beats quicker at the thought of seeing you
all so soon.
My dear love to everyone, and a special pat for little
Dennis.
