

f 0 V o
•“&00C§-^OOC§-~4<X>o§-"-§OOC§ —§000§ — -£oOC:h'-gOOO§ ■;-;■•■> &■&£>
Iff iff
111 ■ I®l
til Clifford s
: s w
11, pi
I®:;
I*
& T
<X> r^>
® I
if
t
i f
|®
f®
I ®
* 06
A
• a •
if
■3
if
II
X <W»
I 8
if
®|
T(| William Basevi Sanders , Ay., ;|] T
| '| of Her Majesty's Records.
IS ||
ill ||
If Clifford’s . ft
11 ; * I
11 |lbanlascoptc |J
II (Entertainment. ! f|
.JJ . |||^
o o#--4doo#-4 0 oo§-400044>000f- -§oc>c^4oooi-4ooo§-4ooc^
. sy £>.




MAGNA CARTA.
John, by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Normandy and Aquitaine, and Earl of Anjou: To the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justiciaries, Foresters, Sheriffs, Reves,
Ministers, and all Bailiffs and others, his faithful subjects, Greeting.
Know ye that We, in the presence of God, and for the health of Our
soul, and the souls of Our ancestors and heirs, to the honour of God, and
the exaltation of Holy Church, and amendment of Our kingdom, by the
advice of Our reverend Fathers, Stephen, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, and Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church;
Henry, Archbishop of Dublin; William of London; Peter of Winches-
ter, Jocelin of Bath and Glastonbury, Hugh of Lincoln, Walter of
Worcester, William of Coventry, Benedict of Rochester, Bishops; and
Master Pandulph, the Pope’s subdeacon and familiar; Brother Ay meric,
Master of the Knights of the Temple in England ; and the noble per-
sons. William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke; William, Earl of Salisbury ;
William, Earl of Warren ; William, Earl of Arundel; Alan de Galloway,
Constable of Scotland; Warin Fitz-Gerald, Hubert de Burgh, Seneschal
of Poictou, Peter Fitz-Herbert, Hugo de Neville, Matthew Fitz-Herbert,
Thomas Basset, Alan Basset, Philip Daubeney, Robert de Roppelay,
John Marshal, John Fitz-Hugh and others, our liegemen, have, in the
first place, granted to God, and by this Our present Charter confirmed
for Us and Our heirs for ever—That the English Church shall be free
and enjoy all her rights in their integrity and her liberties untouched.
And that We will this so to be observed appears from the fact that We
of Our mere and free will, before the outbreak of the dissensions
between Us and Our Barons, granted, confirmed, and procured to be
confirmed by Pope Innocent 111., the freedom of elections which is con-
sidered most important and necessary to the English Church, which
Charter We will both keep Ourself and will it to be so kept by Our
heirs for ever. We have also granted to all the free men of Our King-
dom, for Us and Our heirs for ever, all the liberties underwritten, to
have and to hold to them and their heirs of Us and Our heirs. If any
of Our Earls, Barons, or others who hold of Us in chief by Knight’s
service, shall die, and at the time of his death his heir shall be of full
age and owe a relief, he shall have his inheritance by ancient relief; to
wit, the heir or heirs of an Earl of an entire Earl’s Barony, £100; the
heir or heirs of a Baron of an entire Barony, £IOO ; the heir or heirs of
a Knight of an entire Knight’s fee, 100 s. at the most; and he that oweth
A? ass/p Si g &
£ £-7T


less shall give less, according to the ancient custom of fees. If, however,
the heir of any such shall be under age and in ward, he shall, when he
comes of age, have his inheritance without relief or fine. The guardian
of the land of any such heir so under age shall take therefrom reasonable
issues, customs, and services only, and that without destruction and
waste of men or property; and if We shall have committed the custody
of any such land to the Sheriff or any other person who ought to be
answerable to Us for the issues thereof, and he commit destruction or
waste upon the ward-lands, We will take an emend from him, and the
land shall be committed to two lawful and discreet men of that fee, who
shall be answerable for the issues to Us or to whomsoever We shall have
•assigned them. And if We shall give or sell the wardship of any such
land to any one, and he commit destruction or waste upon it, he shall
lose the wardship, which shall be committed to two lawful and discreet
men of that fee, who shall, in like manner, be answerable unto Us as
hath been aforesaid. But the guardian, so long as Ije shall have the cus-
tody of the land, shall keep up and maintain the houses, parks, fish
ponds, pools, mills, and other things pertaining thereto, out of the issues
of the same, and shall restore the whole to the heir when he comes of
age, stocked with ploughs and wainage according as the season may
require and the issues of the land can reasonably bear. Heirs shall be
married without disparagement, to which end the marriage shall be made
known to the heir’s nearest of kin before it be contracted. A widow,
after the death of her husband, shall immediately and without difficulty
have her marriage portion and inheritance, nor shall she give anything
for her marriage portion, dower, or inheritance which her husband and
herself held on the day of his death; and she may remain in her hus-
band’s house for forty days after his death, within which time her dower
shall be assigned to her. No widow shall be distrained to marry so long
as she has a mind to live without a husband; provided, however, that
she give security that she will not marry without Our assent if she holds
of Us, or that of the Lord of whom she holds, if she hold of another.
Neither We nor Our bailiffs shall seize any land or rent for any debt so
long as the debtor’s chattels are sufficient to discharge the same ; nor
shall the debtor’s sureties be distrained so long as the chief debtor hath
sufficient to pay the debt, and if he fail in the payment thereof, not
having wherewithal to discharge it, then the sureties shall answer it,
and, if they will, shall hold the debtor’s lands and rents until satisfaction
of the debt which they have paid for him he made them, unless the chief
debtor can show himself to he quit thereof against them. If any one
shall have borrowed money from the Jews, more or less, and die before
the debt be satisfied, no interest shall be taken upon such debt so long as
the heir be under age, of whomsoever he may hold; and if the debt
shall fall into Our hands We will only take the chattel mentioned in the
Charter. And if any one die indebted to the Jews his wife shall have
her dower and pay nothing of that debt; and if the children of the said
deceased be left under age they shall have necessaries provided for them
according to the condition of the deceased, and the debt shall be paid out
of the residue, saving the Lord’s service; and so it shall be done with
regard to debts owed to other persons than Jews. No scutage or aid
shall be imposed in Our kingdom unless by common council thereof,


except to ransom Our person, make Our eldest son a knight, and once to
many Our eldest daughter, and for this a reasonable aid only shall be
paid.' So shall it be with regard to aids from the City of London, and
the City of London shall have all her ancient liberties and free customs,
both by land and water. Moreover We will and grant that all other
cities, boroughs, towns, and ports shall have all their liberties and free
customs. And for obtaining the common council of the kingdom con-
cerning the assessment of aids other than in the three cases aforesaid or
of scutage, We will cause to be summoned, severally by our letters, the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and great Barons; and in addition
We will also cause to be summoned, generally, by Our sheriffs and
bailiffs, all those who hold of Us in chief, to meet at a certain day, to
wit, at the end of forty days at least, and at a certain place ; and in all
letters of such summons We will explain the cause thereof, and the sum-
mons being thus made the business shall proceed on the day appointed,
according to the advice of those who shall be present, notwithstanding
that the whole number of persons summoned shall not have come. We
will not, for the future, grant permission to any man to -levy an aid upon
his freemen, except to ransom his person, make his eldest son a knight,
and once to marry his eldest daughter, for which a reasonable aid only
shall be levied. No man shall be distrained to perform more service for
a knight’s fee or other free tenement than is due therefrom. Common
pleas shall not follow Our Court, but be holden in some certain place.
.Recognisances of Novel Disseisin, Mort d’Ancestor, and Darrein Pre-
sentment shall be taken in their proper counties only, and in this wise :
We Ourself, or, if We be absent from the realm, Our Chief Justiciary,
shall send two justiciaries through each county four times a year, who,
together with four knights elected out of each shire by the people
thereof, shall hold the said assizes on the day and in the place aforesaid.
And if the said assizes cannot be held on the day appointed, so many of
the knights and freeholders as shall have been present thereat on that
day shall remain as will be sufficient for the administration of justice,
according as the business to be done be greater or less. A free man shall
not be amerced for a small fault, but according to the measure thereof,
and for a great crime according to its magnitude, in proportion to his
degree ; and in like manner a merchant in proportion to his merchandise,
and a villein in proportion to his wainage if he should fall under Our
mercy ; and none of the said amercements shall be imposed unless by the
oath of honest men of the venue. Earls and Barons shall only be
amereed by their peers in proportion to the measure of the offence. No
clerk shall be amerced for his lay tenement, except after the manner of
the other persons aforesaid, and not according to the value of his eccle-
siastical benefice. Neither shall any vill or person be distrained to make
bridges over rivers, but they who are bound to do so by ancient custom
and law. No sheriff, constable, coroners, or other Our bailiffs shall hold
pleas of Our Crown. All counties, hundreds, tithings, and wapentakes
shall stand at the old farms, without any increased rent, except Our
demesne manors. If any one die holding a lay fee of Us, and the sheriff
or Our bailiff' show our letters patent of summons touching the debt due
to Us from the deceased, it shall be lawful to such sheriff or bailiff to
attach and register the chattels of the deceased found in the lay fee to


the value of that debt, by view of lawful men, so that nothing be removed
therefrom until Our whole debt be paid; and the residue shall be given
up to the executors to carry out the will of the deceased. And if there
be nothing due from him to Us, all his chattels shall remain to the
deceased, saving to his wife and children their reasonable shares. It any
free man shall die intestate his chattels shall be distributed by the hands
of his nearest kinsfolk and friends by view of the Church, saving to
every one the debts due to him from the deceased. No constable or other
Our bailiff shall take corn or other chattels of any man without immediate
payment for the same, unless he hath a voluntary respite of payment
from the seller. No constable shall distrain any knight to give money
for castle-guard, if he will perform it either in his proper person or by
some other fit man, if he himself be prevented from so doing by reason-
able cause ; and, if We lead or send him into the army, he shall be quit
of castle-guard for the time he shall remain in the army by Our com-
mand. No sheriff or other Our bailiff, or any other man, shall take the
horses or carts of any free man for carriage except with his consent.
Neither shall We or our bailiffs take another man’s timber for Our castles
or other uses, unless with the consent of the owner thereof. We will
only retain the lands of persons convicted of felony for a year and a
day, after which they shall be restored to the Lords of the fees. Prom
henceforth all weirs shall be entirely removed from the Thames and
Medway, and throughout England, except upon the sea coast. The
writ called “ Praecipe ” shall not for the future issue to any one of any
tenement whereby a freeman may lose his court. There shall be one
measure of wine throughout Our kingdom, and one of ale, and one
measure of corn, to wit, the London quarter, and one breadth of dyed
cloth, russetts, and haberjects, to wit, two ells within the lists. And as
with measures so shall it be also with weights. From henceforth nothing
shall be given for a writ of inquisition upon life or limbs, but it shall be
granted gratis, and shall not be denied. If any one hold of Us by T fee-
farm, socage or burgage, and hold land of another by knight’s service,
We will not have the wardship of his heir, or the land which belongs to
another man’s fee, by reason of that fee-farm, socage or burgage; nor
will We have the wardship of such fee-farm, socage, or burgage, unless
such fee farm owe knight’s service. AVe will not have the wardship of
any man’s heir, or the land which he holds of another by knight’s
service, by 7 reason of any petty 7 serjeanty which he holds of Us by 7 service
of rendering Us daggers, arrows, or the like. No bailiff shall for the
future put any man to trial upon his simple accusation without producing
credible witnesses to the truth thereof. No freeman shall be taken, im-
prisoned, disseised, outlawed, banished, or in any way destroyed, nor
will We proceed against or prosecute him except by 7 lawful judgment of
his peers or the law of the land. To no one will We sell, to none will
AVe deny or defer, right or justice. All merchants shall have safe con-
duct to go and come out of and into England, and to stay in and travel
through England by land and water for purchase or sale, without maltolt,
by ancient and just customs, except in time of war, or if they belong to
a country at war with Us. And if any such be found in Our dominion
at the outbreak of war, they 7 shall be attached, without injury to their
persons or goods, until it be known to Us or Our Chief Justiciary, after


what sort Our merchants are treated who shall he found to he at that
time in the country at war with Us, and if they he safe there then these
shall be so also with Us. It shall be lawfful in future, unless in time of
war, for any one to leave and return to Our Kingdom safely and securely
by land and water, saving his fealty to Us, for any short period, for the
common benefit of the realm, except prisoners and outlaws according to
the law of the land, people of the country at war with Us, and merchants
who shall be dealt with as is aforesaid. If any one die holding of any
escheat, as of the honour of Wallingford, Nottingham, Boulogne, Lan-
caster, or other escheats which are in Our hands and are baronies, his
heir shall not give any relief or do any service to Us other than he wmuld
owe to the baron if such barony should have been in the hands of a
baron, and We will hold it in the same manner in which the baron held
it. Persons dwelling without the forest shall not for the future come
before Our justiciaries of the forest by common summons, unless they be
impleaded or are bail for any person or persons attached for breach of
forest laws. We will only appoint such men to be justiciaries, con-
stables, sheriffs, or bailiffs as know the law of the lam Land will keep it
well. All barons, founders of abbies by charters of English Kings or
ancient tenure, shall have the custody of the same during vacancy as is
due. All forests which have been afforested in Our time shall be forth-
with disafforested, and so shall it be done with regard to rivers which
have been placed in ferce in Our time. All evil customs concerning
forests and warrens, foresters, warreners, sheriffs, and their officers,
rivers and their conservators, shall be immediately inquired into in each
county by twelve sworn knights of such shire, who must be elected by
honest men thereof, and within forty days after making the inquisition
they shall be altogether and irrevocably abolished, the matter having
been previously brought to Our knowledge or that of Our Chief Justi-
ciary if We Ourself shall not be in England. We will immediately
give up all hostages and charters delivered to Us by the English for the
security of peace and the performance of loyal service. We will entirely
remove from their bailiwicks the kinsmen of Gerard de Atyes, so that
henceforth they shall hold no bailiwick in England, Engelard de Cygoy-
ney, Andrew, Peter, and Gyon de Cancelles, Gyon de Cygoyney, Ralph
de Martiny and his brothers, Philip Marc[el] and his brothers, and
Ralph his grandson, and all their followers, and directly after the
restoration of peace We wall dismiss out of Our kingdom all foreign
soldiers, bowmen, serving men, and mercenaries, who come with horses
and arms to the nuisance thereof. If any one shall have been disseised
or deprived by Us, without the legal judgment of his peers, of lands,
castles, liberties, or rights, We will instantly restore the same, and if
any dispute shall arise thereupon, the matter shall be decided by judg-
ment of the twenty-five barons mentioned below for the security of
peace. With regard to all those things, however, whereof any person
shall have been disseised or deprived, w ithout the legal judgment of his
peers, by King Henry Our Father, or Our Brother King Richard, and
which remain in Our hands or are held by others under Our warranty,
We will have respite thereof till the term commonly allowed to the
crusaders, except as to those matters on which a plea shall have arisen,
or an inquisition have been taken by Our command prior to Ourassump-


tion of the Cross, and immediately after Our return from Our pilgrimage,
or if by chance We should remain behind from it We will do full justice
therein. We will likewise have the same respite and in like manner
shall justice be done with respect to forests to be disafforested or let
alonej which Henry Our Father or Richard Our Brother afforested,
and to wardships of lands belonging to another’s fee, which We have
hitherto held by reason of the fee which some person has held of Us by
knight’s service, and to abbies founded in another’s fee than Our own,
whereto the lord of that fee asserts his right. And when we return
from Our pilgrimage, or if We remain behind therefrom, We will forth-
with do full justice to the complainants in these matters. No one shall
be taken or imprisoned upon a woman’s appeal for the death of any
other person than her husband. All fines unjustly and unlawfully made
with Us, and all amercements levied unjustly and against the law of the
land, shall be entirely condoned or the matter settled by judgment of the
twenty-five barons of whom mention is made below, for the security of
peace, or the majority of them, together with the aforesaid Stephen,
Archbishop of Canterbury, if he himself can be present, and any others
whom he may wish to summon for the purpose, and if he cannot be
present the business shall nevertheless proceed without him. Provided
that if any one or more of the said twenty-five barons be interested in a
plaint of this kind, he or they shall be set aside, as to this particular
judgment, and another or others elected and sworn by the rest of the
said barons for this purpose only, be substituted in his or their stead. If
we have disseised or deprived the Welsh of lands, liberties or other
things, without legal judgment of their peers, in England or Wales,
they shall instantly be restored to them, and if a dispute shall arise
thereon the question shall be determined on the Marches by
judgment of their peers according to the law of England with
regard to English tenements, the law of Wales respecting Welsh tene-
ments, and the law of the Marches as to tenements in the Marches.
The same shall the Welsh do to Us and Ours. But with regard to all
those things whereof any Welshman shall have been disseised or
deprived, without legal judgment of his peers, by King Henry Our
Father or Our Brother King Richard, and which We hold in Our
hands or others hold under Our warranty, We will have respite
thereof till the term commonly allowed to the crusaders, except as to
those matters whereon a plea shall have arisen or an inquisition have
been taken by Our command pi’ior to Our assumption of the Cross,
and immediately after Our return from Our pilgrimage, or if by
chance We should remain behind from it We will do full justice therein,
according to the laws of the Welsh and the parts aforesaid. We will
immediately give up the son of Lewellyn and all the Welsh hostages,
and the charters which were delivered to Us for the security of
peace. We will do the same with regard to Alexander, Kitig of the
Scots, in the matter of giving up his sisters and hostages, and of his
liberties and rights, as We would with regard to Our other barons of
England, unless it should appear by the charters which We hold of
William his father, late King of the Scots, that it ought to be otherwise,
and this shall be done by judgment of his peers in Our Court. All
which customs and liberties aforesaid, whicn we have granted to be


enjoyed, as far as in Us lies, by Our people throughout Our kingdom,
let all Our subjects, clerks and laymen, observe, as far as in them
lies, towards their dependants. And whereas We, for the honour of
God and the amendment of Our realm, and in order the better to
allay the discord arisen between Us and Our barons have granted
all these things aforesaid, We, willing that they be for ever
enjoyed wholly and in lasting strength, do give and grant
to Our subjects the following security, to wit, that the
barons shall elect any twenty-five barons of the kingdom at will,
who shall, with their utmost power, keep, hold, and cause to be
holden the peace and liberties which We have granted unto them,
and by this Our present Charter confirmed, so that, for instance, if
We, Our Justiciary, bailiffs, or any of Our ministers, offend in any
respect, against any man, or shall transgress any of these articles of
peace or security, and the offence be brought before four of the said
five and twenty barons, those four barons shall come before Us, or
Our Chief Justiciary if We are out of the kingdojn, declaring the
offence, and shall demand speedy amends for the same. And if We
or in case of Our being out of the kingdom, Our Chief Justiciary,
fail to afford redress within the space of forty days from the time
the case was brought before Us, or Our Chief Justiciary, the aforesaid
four barons shall refer the matter to the rest of the twenty-five
barons, who, together with the commonalty of the whole county, shall
distrain and distress Us to the utmost of their power, to wit, by
capture of Our castles, lands, possessions, and all other possible
means, until compensation be made according to their decision,
saving Our person and that of Our Queen and children, and
as soon as that be done they shall return to their former
allegiance. Any one whatsoever in the kingdom may take oath
that, for the accomplishment of all the aforesaid matters, he will
obey the orders of the said twenty-five barons, and distress Us to the
utmost of his power; and We give public and free leave to every
one wishing to take such oath to do so, and to none will We deny
the same. Moreover We will compel all such of Our subjects who
shall decline to swear to, and together with the said twenty-five
barons to distrain and distress Us of their own free will and accord,
to do so by Our command as is aforesaid. And if any one of the
twenty-five barons shall die or leave the country, or be in any
way hindered from executing the said office, the rest of the said
twenty-five barons shall choose another in his stead, at their dis-
cretion, who shall be sworn in like manner as the others. And in
all cases which are referred to the said twenty-five barons to
execute, and in which a difference shall arise among them, sup-
posing them all to be present, or that all who have been sum-
moned are unwilling or unable to appeal-, the verdict of the
majority shall be considered as firm and binding as if the whole
number should have been of one mind. And the aforesaid
twenty-five shall swear to keep faithfully all the aforesaid articles, and,
to the best of their power, cause them to be kept by others. And we
will not procure, either by Ourself or any other, anything from any man
whereby any of the said concessions or liberties may be revoked or


abated ; and if any such procurement be made let it be null and void ; it
shall never be made use of either by Us or any other. We have also wholly
remitted and condoned all ill-will, wrath, and malice which have arisen
between Us and Our subjects, clerks, and laymen, during the disputes
to and with all men; and We have moreover fully remitted, and as far
as in Us lies, wholly condoned to and with all clerks and laymen all
trespasses made in consequence of the said disputes from Easter in the
sixteenth year of Our reign till the restoration of peace ; and, over and
above this, We have caused to be made in their behalf letters patent
by testimony of Stephen, Archbishop of Canterbury, Henry, Archbishop
of Dublin, the Bishops above-mentioned, and Master Pandulph, upon the
security and concession aforesaid. Wherefore We will, and firmly
charge, that the English Church be free, and that all men in Our
Kingdom have and hold all the aforesaid liberties, rights, and concessions,
well and peaceably, freely, quietly, fully, and wholly, to them and their
heirs, of Us and our heirs, in all things and places for ever, as is
aforesaid. It is moreover sworn, as well on Our part as on the part of
the Barons, that all these matters aforesaid shall be kept in good faith
and without malengine. Witness the above mentioned Prelates and
Nobles and many others. Given by Our hand in the meadow which is
called Runnymede between Windsor and Staines, on the Fifteenth day
of June in the Seventeenth year of Our reign.
(Indorsed) Agreement between King John and the Barons by
grant of liberties to the Church and Kingdom of England.
Lincoln. Lincoln.
Translated by WILLIAM BASEVI SANDERS, Esq., Assistant
Keeper of Her Majesty's Records.
CLIFFORD’S
PHANTASCOPIC
ENTERTAINMENT.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.




