

MAJOR CALEB HUSE C.S.A.
STUDIES IN CONFEDERATE HISTORY NO.l


THE CONFEDERATE HISTORICAL SOCIETY, founded 22nd February-
-1962, was established to serve those interested in the
American Civil War and especially those interested in the
rise and fall of the Confederate States of America 1861-1865.
1865.
An illustrated Journal is published quarterly and meetings
are held at the Ordnance Arms, York Road, London, S.E.I.
Suggestions for further titles in this series of STUDIES
IN CONFEDERATE HISTORY or offers of manuscripts for
publication will be welcomed by the Editor - M.A. Rich,
95 Valley Walk, Croxley Green, Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire.
Enquiries concerning the purchase of copies of this
publication or membership of the Society, or Institutional
subscriptions to the JOURNAL should be addressed to the
Hon. Secretary, K.M. Broughton, 19 Montague Avenue, Leigh-
on-Sea, Essex.


MAJOR CALEB HUSE C.S.A.
A MEMOIR AND AN APPRECIATION
BEING
A REPRINT OP THE HUSE PAMPHLET OP 1904
TOGETHER WITH
AN APPRECIATION AND TWO APPENDICES
BY
THOMAS W. GREEN
STUDIES IN CONFEDERATE HISTORY NO.l
CONFEDERATE HISTORICAL SOCIETY
LONDON
1966


CONTENTS
Page
The Supplies for the Confederate Army 1
by Caleb Huse
Major Caleb Huse - An Appreciation 22
by Thomas W. Green
Confederate Finance Appendix A 37
by Thomas W. Green
Statement of supplies purchased by Huse 1861-2
ILLUSTRATIONS
Facing Page
Caleb Huse 6
C.S. Government Warrant for Cotton 20
Huse's House in London 29


THE SUPPLIES
FOR THE
CONFEDERATE ARMY
HOW THEY WERE OBTAINED IN EUROPE.
AND HOW PAID FOR
PERSONAL REMINISCENCES AND
UNPUBLISHED HISTORY
BY
CALEB HUSE
MA.I’Ut AMI I’l’Ufn ASIMI AO I! XT, S. A.
BOSTON
PRESS OF T. H. MARVIN & SON
1904


In the Summer of 1903 j two friends of Major Huse were hospitably
entertained by him at his charming home, "The Rocks," on the Hudson,
just south of West Point, and, during their visit, were greatly inter-
ested in listening to his recital of some of his experiences as agent
in Europe for purchasing army supplies for the Confederate States
during the Civil War.
So impressed were they by this unique bit of history that they
succeeded, after much urging, in inducing him to write it, believing
that it should be preserved, and knowing that no one else could furnish
it.
His four years• experience would, if fully told, fill a large
volume, but this brief recital is all that can be hoped for.
If the cost of publication is not met by the nominal price
charged for this pamphlet, the satisfaction of preserving the record
in print will compensate for any loss sustained by the
TWO FRIENDS.
August, 190^.


REMINISCENCES
On my return in May, iB6O, from a six months' leave of absence spent
in Europe, I found an appointment as professor of chemistry and commandant
of cadets in the University of Alabama awaiting my acceptance. During my
absence the President of the University and a committee of the Board of
Trustees visited West Point and the Virginia Military Institute and, pleased
with the discipline of both institutions, decided to adopt the military system,
and applied to Colonel Delafield, then the Superintendent at West Point, for
an officer to start them. Col. Delafield gave them my name but was unable to
say whether or not I would resign from the army, I was then a first lieuten-
ant of artillery; and, as such, was on the rolls of the garrison of Fort
Sumter,
I accepted the position and began my duties in September. My leave of
absence had expired in May; but the authorities of the University, fearing
that I might regret severing irrevocably my connection with the array - which
I had entered as a cadet at sixteen - obtained from the Secretary of Wan an
extension of the leave till May, 1861, when I was to resign if all was satis-
factory at that time.
It is proper to mention here that the introduction of military drill
and discipline at the State University had no connection whatever with any
secession movement in Alabama, and the fact that a Massachusetts-born man and
of Puritan descent was selected to inaugurate the system, will, or ought to
be, accepted as confirmatory of this assertion.
Discipline was almost at an end at the University, and in seeking ways
and means for restoring it, the attention of the Faculty and Trustees was
directed to the Virginia Military Institute which had been in successful
operation for about fifty years. As this institution had been organised by a
graduate of West Point, and in some respects resembled the United States
Military Academy, it was hoped that in Alabama good results might be secured
by the adoption of similar methods.
Military drill is taught at the present time in many schools and
colleges, but the intention of the Alabama University authorities was not
merely to drill students, but to hold them tinder military restraint, as is
effectually done at West Point, and, I may add, as cannot be done in any
college designed to qualify young men to become civilian members of a great
republic.
West Point and Annapolis have proved themselves noble institutions for
the purpose for which they were designed - that of training young men to become
officers over other men - but the mission of these schools is not to fit young


men for civil life. Their methods cannot be grafted upon literary or technical
civil institutions, and it is not desirable that they should be applied to
civil colleges or schools of any kind. But the University of Alabama was a
military college so far as concerned discipline, and to this end I was given
a Colonel's commission by the Governor of the State, with two assistants, one
a major, the other a captain. Tents, arms and infantry equipments were pur-
chased of the United States Government, and a uniform similar to that of the
West Point cadets was adopted. The students were assembled on the first of
September, and a camp established on the University grounds. Drills were
inaugurated at once and regular camp duties were required and performed.
Everything seemed to be progressing very satisfactorily till one day,
some three weeks after the pitching of the camp, the President of the Univer-
sity (Dr, Garland) desired to see me at his office. On entering I found him
and a trusted professor awaiting my coming, with disturbed looks. No time
was wasted in the preliminaries; Dr. Garland came to the point at once by
telling me that there was a mutiny brewing in my camp which it would be imposs-
ible for me to quell. He then explained that the cadets were dissatisfied
because I was a northern-born man; that they called me a d d Yankee, and
intended running me out of the State. He thought they would be successful, foy
the ringleaders were old students who had given a great deal of trouble before
I came, and, what made the matter worse, these students were sons of influen-
tial men in the State, and the mothers of the mutineers were encouraging them.
I asked if any of the Trustees or the Faculty wished me to resign and
was assured of the contrary. I then said that, but for one thing, I should
have no hesitation in resigning. The cadets, backed by their families, had
threatened to run me out of the State; I should put upon them the responsibil-
ity of executing their threat; I should not resign. I went back to camp and
never heard anything more about the "mutiny."
I mention this incident only to show the feeling existing in an extreme
southern State at that time - less than two months before the election of
President Lincoln,
The story of the intended mutiny was well founded, and was only one
phase of the general feeling of unrest throughout Alabama. But, even at that
time, which was within six weeks of election day, the idea of secession did not
prevail. Probably had its people been called upon to vote on the question,
there would have been a very large majority against secession. After the
election in November the unrest manifestly increased, and conservative men
began to consider secession possible and even probable.
At the University there was no excitement. Instruction went on as
usual and the era of orderly deportment, begun in camp, continued, much to
the satisfaction of every one and especially to the citizens of Tuscaloosa.
But military discipline, to which, as admitted by every one, the improved
deportment was due, added to the outgo of the University without materially
increasing its income, and the only hope of obtaining money to meet the
increased expenses was through an appropriation by the Legislature. To secure
this, President Garland proposed that the battalion of Cadets - for so the


students were called - should go to Montgomery and be reviewed by the Governor
and by the Legislature, which was then in session.
This idea was strongly opposed not only by members of the Faculty but
by men whose sons were in the University, The fear prevailed that the students
would be unmanageable under the many temptations which Montgomery would afford,
and that even the well-meant hospitality of the citizens, which was sure to be
generous, would cause trouble. Whether to make the trip or not was left to my
decision, I decided without hesitation in favor of the expedition, and
arrangements were made for two steamboats, one to take us down the Black
Warrior, the other for the journey up the Alabama to Montgomery.
In Mobile the cadets were cordially received, and conducted themselves
to my entire satisfaction. On the steamboats their behavior was all that
could be desired, and in Montgomery everybody was proud of their appearance
and deportment. For sleeping accommodations the cadets carried their own
blankets and turned in on the floor of a large hall. Camp discipline was
maintained and perfect order prevailed.
The battalion was reviewed in front of the State House by the Governor
and both Houses of the Legislature, and everything passed off most satisfact-
orily. In the evening, after the review, a committee of the Legislature
called on me and asked what I wanted. The reply was: An annual appropriation
so long sis the military organization was maintained at the University.
I remember that a cousin of Senator John P. Hale of New Hampshire (one
of the most pronounced abolitionists of the county) was a member of the
committee. He said to me: "Now you come up to the House tomorrow and see how
we will put this matter through." I did so, amd certainly it was "put through,"
for, while I was there the bill was given all its readings - the rules being
suspended for the purpose - and it was taken to the Senate and similarly
rushed. The Governor sighed it, and the next day the cadets started on their
return home.
We had left Tuscaloosa in a heavy rain-storm, escorted to the steamboat -
some two miles -by the Montgomery Guards. The trip had been entirely success-
ful and there had not been a case of misbehavior from start to finish. Of
course drinking was the one thing to be feared, and when one Considers all
the temptations on the steamboats and in Mobile and Montgomery, it is a little
remarkable that there were no infractions of the rules, one of which was that
no cadet should enter a bar-room on pain of instant dismissal.
As already stated, I went to the University of Alabama under leave of
absence which was to terminate in May, 1861. In February I received an order
revoking the unexpired portion of my leave and directing me to report for duty
in Washington, I replied that my leave was granted with the understanding
that I was to resign at its expiration, and as I saw no reason to alter my
determination, I offered my resignation. There was no expectation on my part
that my future would be any other than such as my position as professor in
the University of Alabama would occasion.


My resignation was accepted February 25th. In April - I think it was
April Ist - I received a telegram from the Confederate States Secretary of
the Navy Mallory, to ’’come to Montgomery and take a commission for active
service.” I think lam quoting the words of the message. I started without
delay, and on arriving in Montgomery was introduced to Secretary of War Walker,
who soon said to me; "The President has designated you to go to Europe for
the purchase of arms and military supplies; when can you go?” I replied that,
of course, I could go immediately, but if any preparations were to be made
which would require time, I should like to return to my family before starting.
"Take ten days,” said he. "Be back here at the end of that time.” I was then
introduced to Col, Gorgas, Chief of Ordnance, to whom I was to report.
I returned to Tuscaloosa and early in the morning of the tenth day of
my leave of absence, I drove into Montgomery on the top of a stage-coach.
When near the town we met a man on horseback who shouted that Beauregard had
opened fire on Sumter. By this I know that it was April 12th. There was
naturally much excitement in Montgomery, especially about the War and Navy
Departments.
On reporting to Col. Gorgas, I found that no arrangements had been made
for my going to Europe. I had no orders and did not know what I was to do for
money. I called on the Secretary of the Treasury, Meminger, but he knew
nothing about my going abroad. "When are you going?” said he. I replied that
if I expected to get through the North,. I had no time to lose; and it was
finally arranged that he should provide me with money for my trip to New York,
where I should receive funds for my journey to Europe. During my interview
he remarked that he had no money; and it would appear that the statement was
literally true, for it is difficult to conceive from what source, so soon after
its organization, a new Government could derive any revenue.
Before leaving Montgomery, Mr. Davis called me to his office and asked
me to be seated while he received his callers, saying he wanted to talk with
me about my mission, and that ideas would come to him between his-interviews
with his callers. I took the chair assigned me, and while he was reading the
pile of letters which lay open before him, the callers began to come in. I
do not recall any of the conversation which took place, but I remember clearly
one incident which some may say was characteristic of the man. Looking over
a letter of four full-sized pages, and standing up with some show of irritation,
he said, "I wish people would not write me advice,” and he tore the letter in
two; and, repeating the remark, tore it into small bits which he threw upon
the floor. He mentioned the name of the writer, who, I knew, was a friend and
neighbor.
I may be permitted to narrate a personal incident which occurred before
I left Montgomery. One evening about sunset, while I was waiting in the office
of the Secretary of War, for the comparatively insignificant sum of money to
be provided for my expenses to England, Mr, Davis greeted me as Major. I
replied: ”1 might ask, Mr. President, in .what regiment,” having in mind the
well known anecdote of the subaltern who, on handing the Emperor Napoleon his
chapeau which had fallen, was thanked under the title of captain. Mr. Davis
then explained the principle he had laid down for himself in appointing


officers who had been in the U.S, army. It was to advance no one more than
one grade. He said that Beauregard was only a captain of engineers, and had
been made a brigadier general; but in this, the rule had not been violated,
for, by serving at West Point as superintendent although for a few days only -
five, as shown by the records - he was a colonel in the army, and had, there-
fore, been advanced but one grade. Mr. Davis remarked that there were officers
enough for all field purposes, but the trouble was to find men qualified to
prepare the army for its work.
I had arranged to pass through Charleston in order that I might visit
Sumter and see the effect of the artillery fire upon it. Arriving in
Charleston in the evening I went to Morris Island the following morning, and
from there in a rowboat to Sumter, accompanied by two young artillery captains.
We were all young in those days; I was just thirty, and these young men were
my juniors by some years. They had both been under my instruction as cadets
at West Point when I was on duty there, but I cannot now recall their names.
On our return from Sumter, we three lay on the warm sand near the shore, and
naturally the conversation was chiefly on the events of the last few days.
In the course of our talk, I remarked, "What in the world made Anderson surren-
der the fort?" For in my opinion it was no more damaged for defence than a
brick wall would be by a boy's snapping marbles against it. As for anything
the Confederate artillery could bring to bear upon it, it was literally
impregnable - as shown by the fact that with all the resources of the United
States army and navy it was never retaken. The wooden quarters had taken fire,
and, for a time doubtless, the fort was a very uncomfortable place, and it was
feared that the magazine would explode. But when Anderson surrendered all that
danger had passed.
Major Anderson was a gallant officer who had proved his efficiency and
bravery in the Mexican War, for which he was rewarded with two brevets; but
for one who saw Sumter as I did, shortly after its surrender, when nothing had
been changed since Anderson saluted his flag and marched his command on board
the Confederate steamer Isabel, it is impossible to understand why the surren-
der should have been made when it was. Eventually his command might have been
starved out. But although for several days it was short of some kinds of
desirable food, and destitute of fresh provisions, there remained several
barrels of pork which he took with him when he left. Not only was no assault
ever made, but the enemy had no boats or scaling ladders with which to attempt
an assault, as Anderson must have known.
If the United States Government deliberately intended to force a war
and thus settle once for all the entire question between the North and the
South, no strategy could have been more effectual than that of sacrificing
Sumter exactly as it was sacrificed. The whole affair could not have been
arranged with greater shrewdness and finesse. Anderson and his officers -
without an exception, gallant and competent - were made to appear as heroes
and, in a sense, they were; the North was completely unified, and the same
can be said of the South. The lines were now distinctly and definitely drawn,
and every man from Maine to Georgia must declare for the Government or against
it. War began such as no man could have foretold and such as could not cease
till one side or the other should be completely exhausted.


From Charleston I went to Baltimore by the Bay Line steamers from
Norfolk, arriving on Sunday morning - the day that the men who had been killed
the Friday previous were to be buried. The excitement was intense, but the
city was quiet - uncomfortably quiet. No one knew what next to expect. I was
for my own part, concerned only about getting to New York, There were no
trains running, bridges having been burned, and no one could say when railway
traffic would be resumed.
There were a few other travelers bound northward who were eager to
continue their journey. Two of these - young men from Charleston - approached
me cautiously with a proposal that we three should hire a carriage to take us
to York, Pa., and we arranged to go. Before we were ready to start, an elderly
gentleman asked to be permitted to join the party. He was a large, handsome
man, and was anxious to get to Philadelphia as soon as possible, to see a
daughter who lay at the point of death. The new comer would be a serious addi-
tion to the weight in our carriage, but I had reason to be thankful that we
accommodated him, as will appear later.
After starting, it was determined - why I cannot now say - to go to
Havre de Grace, instead of York. On our arrival in the evening, we found the
ferry boat had been taken to convey troops to Annapolis, and there was nothing
to be done but wait. We all found comfortable lodgings at a small hotel, and
in the morning a flat boat took us across to Perryville.
Among the passengers were several men and women who, as soon as the
boat landed, collected on the piazza of a little country hotel near the land-
ing and began singing patriotic songs. They were apparently overjoyed at
their escape from the south-land.
At Perryville there was a large wooden shed which served as a railway
station; employees were standing about, but none could give any information
concerning the trains, all of which, they said, had been taken by the Govern-
ment, Before noon, however, a long train came thundering into the station,
and immediately men in uniform poured out of the cars and ran to the water-
side, where they bathed their faces and hands. They were going to the front.
The same train was soon ready to return to Philadelphia and all who desired
to go were accommodated.
It was impossible to get farther than Philadelphia that day. The next
morning, on taking my seat in the train, I recognized the gentleman directly
behind me as the Hon, Caleb Cushing. I did not accost him, not caring to meet
acquaintances just then, and, moreover, I had no reason to think that he knew
me, for although we were born in the same town, - Newburyport, Mass., - he was
a distinguished public man when I was a boy.
The route from Philadelphia to New York was by the way of Camden to
South Amboy, and thence by steamboat. The latter was a ferry boat with room
for teams on each side of the engine. There were no teams on board, and, as
I had been sitting for some time, and now that we were nearing New York where
I was likely at any moment to meet an acquaintance, I was a little nervous, I
walked about the lower deck. In doing so I met Mr. Cushing face to face. He


[?]


was passing the time in a similar manner. I lifted my cap, as I would to any
superior officer, or public man. Immediately Mr. Cushing stopped and said;
"Good morning, Mr, Huse, you are with the South, I understand."
For the moment I was staggered, but quickly calling to mind that Mr,
Cushing had been chairman of the Charleston Democratic Convention which nomin-
ated John C, Breckenridge for President, I replied:
"Yes, sir, what chance do you think the South has?"
"What chance can it have?" he said, "the money is all in the North; the
manufactories are sill in the North; the ships are all in the North; the arms
and arsenals are all in the North; the arsenals of Europe are within ten days
of New York, and they will be open to the United States Government, and closed
to the South; and the Southern ports will be blockaded. What possible chance
can the South have?"
There was nothing for me to say in reply, and I probably did the best
I could have done under the circumstances. Looking him squarely in the eye,
I lifted my cap and said; "Good morning, Mr. Cushing." I never saw him after-
wards.
On landing at the Battery, I gave my baggage checks to an expressman,
taking his receipt and telling him to hold the baggage until called for. As
it might be very important not to be recognized, I took the precaution to leave
no trail by my baggage, which was taken to Liverpool later by one of the young
men who had been my carriage companion from Baltimore. I went at once to the
Bank of the Republic, where I was to find letters which would enable me to
obtain money for ray voyage.
I was told to call for Mr. S , the cashier of the bank. On his
coming to the window, I asked if he had any letters from Montgomery, His face
immediately showed real fear. Opening a door near by, he said, "Come in," and
I found myself in the bank parlor. He immediately locked the door, pulled
down the window shades and then asked, "Now what is it?"
In the brief time occupied in drawing down the shades, etc., I deter-
mined what to do, and replied, -
"I see, Mr. S., that you are much agitated by my visit, and I will not
further compromise you by giving you my name; but if you have any letters from
Montgomery, which you do not recognize, will you be good enough to send them
around to Trenholm Brothers, in Pine Street,"
He assured me he would, and I bade him good morning. As I was leaving
he said there was intense excitement on the street; Anderson's command had
just marched up Broadway and aroused the greatest enthusiasm. I had observed
a small United States flag near the entrance, and Mr, S. said he believed if
that flag were not at the door, the mob would attack the bank.


At the office of Trenholm Brothers I inquired for Mr. Wellsman, and was
shown into an inner room where I met a large, middle-aged man bearing a strik-
ing resemblance to the white-haired gentleman who had been one of the party
from Baltimore to Havre de Grace. I introduced myself by saying that Captain
Wellsman was my travelling companion from Baltimore on Sunday,
"He is my father," said Mr. Wellsman. I told him of meeting Capt.
Wellsman at the Philadelphia station that morning, and that he asked me to say
he had found his daughter much better than he expected, and they now had hopes
of her recovery. I then explained to him that I was an officer of the Confed-
erate States Army, on my way to Europe to purchase arms and other army supplies;
that I was to be provided with funds through Fraser, Trenholm 8c Co., Liverpool,
and expected to get money from Trenholm Brothers for the expenses of the voyage.
Mr. Wellsman had no letters for me, and had received no information from Mont-
gomery concerning me. Having no money for ray voyage, the situation was becom-
ing serious.
Excusing himself after a short time, Mr. Wellsman left the office, and
returning within half an hour, was even more alarmed than Mr.S. had appeared
to be. He said the excitement was very great, and that he believed if the
crowd discovered my business, they would hang me to a lamp-post; I must not
leave the office till I started for the train. What did I propose to do? I
ought not to think of sailing from New York.
I replied that I would go to Canada and take the steamer from Montreal,
But I could not sail from anywhere without money.
"You can have the money," said Mr. Wellsman. "How much do you want?"
"Five hundred dollars."
"And you want it in gold?"
"Yes."
He procured the gold, ordered some lunch to be brought, and about three
o'clock I started for the Erie Railway station. Sometimes we entertain angels
unawares. Captain Wellsman seems to have been a veritable angel. The simple,
verbal message that I carried to his son served me as a letter of credit.
Without it, I cannot now see what I could have done. Ten years after the war,
when I met an old friend, he assured me that he would have had me arrested,
had he known my mission while I was in New York.
When I left the office of Trenholm Brothers, a man on the sidewalk
signaled to another on the opposite side of Pine street, and one of these men
sat opposite me on the ferry-boat. Whether or not they were shadowing me I
never knew. I saw nothing more of them after leaving the boat, and had no
further adventures till I reached Turner's, where trains stop for supper. In
the restaurant, I recognized a number of friends, and my only prudent course
was to go without my supper or seek it elsewhere. I chose the latter, and
got what I could at a bar near by.


I had no baggage - not even an overcoat - and the night was cold. I
was in an ordinary day-coach on my way to Hamilton, Canada, Through trains
were not so frequent then as now, and in Buffalo I had to wait some time, much
of which I passed in seeing the town. While walking in a retired part of the
city, I just escaped meeting an officer of the army whom I knew, by turning
down a cross street.
At Hamilton I purchased clothing for the voyage, and was disappointed
to find that I should have to wait several days for the next steamer from
Montreal; I therefore decided to sail from Portland, but delayed purchasing
my ticket till I could take the last train that would reach that city in time
to board the steamer. This train went only to State Line on the day it left
Hamilton, where I stopped over night, I remember the place from the fact that,
although late in April, I was obliged to break the ice in my pitcher the next
morning, when I started on what proved to be my last journey in the United
States for several years. At nearly every stopping place on the way to Port-
land, men in uniform and fully equipped entered the cars. We were picking up
a regiment under orders for the front.
We finally arrived, and my ship was in sight at anchor. I confess to
a feeling of relief when I stepped on board from the tug, and that feeling was
enhanced when we weighed anchor and the screw began pushing us out into the
neutral territory of the broad Atlantic.
There were few passengers, and the voyage was without incident save one
of no importance except as tending to confirm the theory of transmission of
thought without language. My table-neighbor was a young sea-captain from
Maine, who was returning to his vessel, which he had left in Liverpool some
weeks before, to confer with the owners.
One day at dinner, without any previous conversation whatever ,to lead
even indirectly to such a remark, he said: "I believe you are going to Europe
to buy arms for Jeff. Davis."
I was in the act of taking a piece of potato on my fork, and, to gain
time before answering, I passed the potato to my mouth and then made about as
foolish a reply as was possible, saying, "If he wanted arms he would be likely
to select a man who knew something about arms," The captain immediately re-
marked, "Sometimes those fellows that know the most, say the least." I could
think of nothing to say to advantage, and said nothing; the matter was never
referred to again.
On arriving in London I went to what was then a favorite hotel for
Americans, - Morley's in Trafalgar Square, Hie remark of the ship-captain
interested me, and I resolved to probe the matter a little by calling on a
gentleman with whom I had conversed more freely than with any other passenger.
He was a lawyer from Portland, who in his younger days had taught school in
Mississippi, He was stopping at a near-by hotel in the Strand. On meeting him,
I asked if he knew the object of my visit to Europe. He replied he had not
the slightest idea why I was there. I then told him of the captain's remark,
and that his surmise was correct. lam very sure that, during the voyage, I


said nothing from which the nature of my business could be inferred; and as
for papers, I had received none since leaving Montgomery.
My orders were to purchase 12,000 rifles and a battery of field
artillery, and to procure one or two guns of larger calibre as models. A
short time before the beginning of the war, the London Armory Company had
purchased a plant of gun-stocking machinery from the Ames Manufacturing
Company of Chicopee, Mass. Knowing this, I went to the office of the Armory
Company the day after my arrival in London, with the intention of securing,
if possible, their entire output.
On entering the Superintendent's office, I found there the American
engineer who superintended the erection of the plant. I had known him in
Chicopee. Suspecting he might be an agent for the purchase of arms for the
United States Government, I asked him, bluntly, if he was, and added, "I am
buying for the Confederate Government." Such a disclosure of my business may
seem to have been indiscreet, but at that time I thought it my best plan, and
the result proved that I was right. He made no reply to my inquiry, but I was
satisfied my suspicion was correct and resolved on the spot, to flank his
movement if possible.
As he had entered the office first, it was in order for me to outstay
him, which I did. On his leaving, I asked for a price for all the small arms
the Company could manufacture.
The Superintendent said he could not answer me, but would refer me to
the Chairman of the Company, - President, we should call him - and would accom-
pany me to his office. There I repeated my inquiry for a price for all the
arms the Company could make for a year, with the privilege of renewing the
order. The President was not prepared to give me a price, but would do so the
next day. On calling at his office the following day, he told me that the
Company was under contract for all the arms it could turn out, and considering
all the circumstances, the Directors felt they ought to give their present
customer the preference over all others.
Confirmed in my belief that my competitor was no other than the man
whom I had encountered the day before, I was now more determined than ever to
secure the London Armory as a Confederate States arms factory. The Atlantic
cable was not then laid, and correspondence by mail required nearly a month -
an unreasonable time for a commercial company to hold in abeyance a desirable
opportunity for profit. Within a few days I succeeded in closing a contract
under which I was to have all the arms the Company could manufacture, after
filling a comparatively small order for the United States agent. This Company,
during the remainder of the war, turned all its output of arras over to me for
the Confederate army.
Baring Brothers were, at that time, the London financial agents for the
United States Government, and they would unquestionably have been supported
and gratefully thanked, had they assumed the responsibility of contracting
for all the arras in sight in England, Any army officer, fit for such a mission
as that of buying arms for a great Government at the outbreak of a war, would


have acted, if necessary, without instructions, and secured everything that
he could find in the line of essentials, especially arms, of which there were
very few in the market. There were muskets enough to be had for almost any
reasonable offer, but of modern Enfield and Springfield rifles - which were
practically the same - there were only a few thousand in England, and none
elsewhere except in Austria, where all were owned by the Government. And,
according to Mr. Cushing, these would be available by the United States but
impossible of purchase by "the South." Yet even so high an authority as Ex-
Attorney General Gushing proved to be wrong in his assumption, as will be
shown below.
Any young, intelligent West Point graduate holding an army commission
sind as fearless in assuming responsibility as the average "graduate," would
not only have prevented my making this important contract, but would have
blocked my efforts in every direction; for in sill Europe the supply of arms
ready for use or possible of manufacture was very limited. Such sin officer
would have secured everything worth having - in other words, all the best -
and only inferior arms of antiquated model would have been left for the Con-
federacy. The effect would have been not only to give the United States good
arms in profusion, but utterly to discourage their opponents by the inferior-
ity of their weapons.
Mr. Davis did not make the great mistake of sending a civil agent to
purchase supplies - a duty as thoroughly military as any that could be named -
nor the still greater blunder of setting several men to do what one man, with
uncontrolled authority, could do so much better. Doubtless he could have
found men who would have performed the duty as well as did the young officer
whom he selected, and some who would have done their part better; but, during
the whole war, no change was made, although not to remove him often required
that firmness - not to say obstinacy - which was a prominent trait of Mr.
Davis's character, and which, right or wrong, but especially when he was right,
he exercised to a remarkable degree.
When I arrived in England, the Confederate States Government was already
represented by Hon. William L, Yancey, Commissioner to England; his secretary,
Mr. Walker Fearn, afterwards United States Minister to Greece; Judge Rost, of
New Orleans, Commissioner to France, with his son as secretary; and Mr. Dudley
Mann, commonly known as Col. Mann, who held an appointment as Commissioner,
but to what country I do not know. Later, Hon. L.Q.C,Lamar, afterwards United
States Secretary of the Interior, and later still Justice of the United States
Supreme Court, was appointed Commissioner to Russia, but he went no further
than Paris, and returned to Richmond before the end of the war. Commander
James D, Bulloch, previously of the United States Navy, whose sister was the
mother of President Roosevelt, was in charge of all naval matters. Messrs.
Fraser, Trenholm & Co., of Liverpool, were the fiscal agents.
All these representatives worked in complete harmony, without jealousy
or clashing of opinion; each was ready to assist the others in every way
possible. They were all cultured men, of agreeable personality, and as far
removed from the genus homo which has been designated as "hot-headed
Southerner," as can well be imagined. The lived unostentatiously, in modest,


but entirely respectable lodgings in the West End, London, except Judge Host,
who resided in Paris, and Commander Bulloch, who made his headquarters in
Liverpool. None of the representatives of the Confederate Government required
much money in the discharge of his duties, except Commander Bulloch and myself.
We were both to look to Fraser, Trenholm & Co., for all the money we were to
expend, as indeed were all the diplomatic agents.
The fiscal system was, almost of necessity, of the most simple charac-
ter. Fraser, Trenholm & Co., of Liverpool, John Fraser & Co., of Charleston,
S.C., and Trenholm Brothers, of New York, were practically one concern, and
the senior member of John Fraser & Co., Mr. William Trenholm, became Confed-
erate States Secretary of the Treasury early in the war. Mr. Wellsman, senior
member of Trenholm Brothers, in New York, joined the Liverpool house, the
senior member and manager of which was Charles K. Prioleau, formerly of
Charleston. There was no loan to negotiate; for the Confederacy - recognized
only as belligerents - had no credit among nations, and no system of taxation
by which it could hope to derive any revenue available for purchasing supplies
abroad. But it possessed a latent purchasing power such as probably no other
Government in history ever had.
The cotton crop of its people was a prime necessity for the manufactur-
ing world outside, and, for want of machinery, was utterly valueless in all
the Southern States except Georgia, where there were a few small factories.
Almost immediately after the outbreak of hostilities the Confederate author-
ities began to buy cotton, paying in such "money" as it had; that is to say,
its own promises to pay whenever it could. Some of these promises bore
interest and were called bonds; some bore no interest, and these constituted
the currency of the country.
The cotton, as it lay on the plantations or in the warehouses, was for
sale, and the Government was almost the only buyer. To all others there was
a difficulty, amounting almost to impossibility, in getting cotton to market.
Some, no doubt, was smuggled across the border, to the advantage of "patriots"
of each side; but this outlet for a bulky article like cotton was altogether
inadequate, and, practically, every one was compelled by the very condition of
affairs, without the application of even moral force, to sell to the Govern-
ment and receive in payment the best that the Government had to offer,namely;
its own promises to pay, which, whether stated as a condition of the promise
or not, could not be made good till after the favorable close of the war. If
the South failed, the promises would be valueless; if it succeeded, the
obligations would be met as promptly as possible. The situation was accepted
by the people, and the Government acquired cotton and shipped it to Nassau,
Bermuda, and Havana as fast as it could.
To get cotton through the blockading squadron called for daring and
skill; but there seems to have been no lack of either, and it was not long
before every steam vessel that could carry even a few bales, and was seaworthy
enough to reach Nassau, was ready with a crew on board, eager to sneak out
any dark night and run to a neutral port, - generally Nassau.


For a long time this traffic went on almost without a capture, and the
Confederate Government not only deposited in places of safety large quantities
of a commodity in general demand throughout the world, but also had the satis-
faction of seeing its property advance rapidly in value as the war went on,
and its necessities increased. The cotton thus shipped was all consigned to
Fraser, Trenholm & Co., Liverpool, and the consignments for the army, navy and
diplomatic departments were carefully kept separate. There was, therefore,
no clashing of interests between the army and navy, as to disposition of
proceeds. The requirements for the diplomatic agents were trifling compared
with those of the army for supplies and the navy for building, equipping and
manning ships.
I had not been long in England before the sinews of war began to be
available, and I found myself able to meet my engagements in a manner entirely
satisfactory to my creditors. To buy supplies was simple enough; but to ship
them was another matter. As was to be expected, detectives employed by the
U.S, Government as well as volunteer spies were about me. Efforts were made
to intercept telegrams and to tamper with employees, but few of these attempts
at stopping Confederate array supplies were successful.
One success scored by the United States was the capture of the "Stephen
Hart," a schooner of American build, but purchased by an English house and put
under the British flag for Confederate use. The proof that she was loaded with
army supplies destined for the Confederate States was so complete that no
expense was incurred in defending the rights of the quasi British owners. It
was a mistake to ship such supplies by sailing vessels, and there were other
errors of judgment which were not repeated.
After the "Stephen Hart" episode, all army supplies were carried by
steamer, either to a Confederate port direct, or to Nassau or Bermuda. There
was little difficulty in chartering steamers to carry supplies to "The Islands."
Generally both ship and cargo belonged in good faith to British subjects; and,
as the voyage was from one British port to another, the entire business was as
lawful as a similar shipment would have been from London to Liverpool. But
one of the most innocent shipments was not only captured, but the capture was
confirmed, and there was not on board one penny's worth of property belonging
to the Confederate States or to any American citizen. The ship "The Spring-
bock," was loaded by a firm from whom I had purchased many supplies; but in
this instance, the cargo was to be sold in Nassau, and there was nothing of a
suspicious character on board, excepting some brass buttons bearing the device
"C.5.A.," and these buttons were put on board the last day against the wishes
of one of the partners who feared they would be considered as tainting the
whole cargo. And so the United States Court decided. Everything else on
board was likely to be wanted in any country whose ports had been blockaded
for several months, but none of the articles were such as could be classed as
military supplies.
To get supplies from "The Islands" to the main land required sea-worthy
steamers of light draught and great speed. Many such vessels were purchased
and sent out under captains who were equal to any emergency, among whom were
severed former U.S. Navy officers. Some of these steamers had been private


yachts, as for example the "Merrimac;" (there were two "Merrimacs"); some were
engaged in trade between British ports, as the "Cornubia;" some were taken
from the Channel service between England and France, as the ’’Eugenie;" some
were built for opium smuggling in China. Later in the war, steamers were
built expressly for the service.
During the first two years, the captures were so infrequent that, it
may be safely stated, never before was a Government at war so well supplied
with arms, munitions, clothing and medicines - everything, in short, that an
army requires - with so little money as was paid by the Confederacy. The
shipment from England to the Islands in ordinary tramp steamers; the landing
and storage there, and the running of the blockade, cost money; but all that
was needed came from cotton practically given to the Confederate Government
by its owners.
The supplies were, in every instance, bought at the lowest cash prices
by men trained in the work as contractors for the British army. No credit was
asked. Merchants having needed supplies were frankly told that our means were
limited, and our payments would be made by cheques on Fraser, Trenholm & Co.,
Liverpool, an old established and conservative house. The effect of such
buying was to create confidence on the part of the sellers, which made them
more anxious to sell than we were to purchase. When the end came, and some
of the largest sellers were ruined, I never heard a word of complaint of their
being over-reached or in any manner treated unfairly.
As long as the system thus described continued, the South not only
equipped an army able to cope with the colossal forces constantly advancing
upon it, but it accomplished this without distressing its people with taxes.
And thus, in part, was answered Mr. Cushing’s apparently unanswerable exclam-
ation: "What possible chance can the South have?"
But the supply of acceptable arms was not equal to the demand. The
civilized powers had but recently been equipped with modern arms. The United
States had the Springfield; England had the Enfield, which was practically the
same as the Springfield; Austria had a rifle bearing a close resemblance to
both, and of about the same calibre; Prussia had a breech-loader which no
Government would now think of issuing to troops; France had an inferior muzzle-
loader, and was experimenting with an imitation of the Prussian needle-gun,
which finally proved ruinous to the Empire. There were few arms for sale,
even in the arsenals of Europe, which Mr. Cushing had said would be open to
the United States and closed to the South. Austria, however, had a consider-
able quantity on hand, and these an intermediary proposed I should buy.
I knew something of the armament of Austria, having visited Vienna in
1859, with a letter from the United States War Department, which gave me some
facilities for observation. At first I considered the getting of anything
from an Imperial Austrian Arsenal as chimerical. But my would-be intermediary
was so persistent that, finally I accompanied him to Vienna,and, within a few
days, closed a contract for 100,000 rifles of the latest Austrian pattern,
and ten batteries, of six pieces each, of field artillery, with harness
complete, ready for service, and a quantity of ammunition, all to be delivered


on ship at Hamburg. The United States Minister, Mr. Motley, protested in
vain. He was told that the making of arras was an important industry of
Austria; that the same arms had been offered to the Unites States Government
and declined, and that, as belligerents, the Confederate States were, by the
usage of nations, lawful buyers. However unsatisfactory this answer may have
been to Washington, the arms were delivered, and in due time were shipped to
Bermuda from Hamburg, Mr. Motley offered to buy the whole consignment, but
was too late. The Austrian Government declined to break faith with the
purchasers.
I confess to a glow of pride when I saw those sixty pieces of rifled
artillery with caissons, field-forges, and battery-wagons, complete - some two
hundred carriages in all - drawn up in array in the arsenal yard. It was
pardonable for a moment to imagine myself in command of a magnificent park of
artillery. The explanation of Austria's willingness to dispose of these
batteries is that the authorities had decided on the use of gun-cotton in the
place of powder; and the change involved new guns, although those sold to me
were of the latest design for gunpowder. I believe gun-cotton was given up
not long after.
Again Mr. Cushing's "What possible chance can the South now have?" was
in part answered. At least one of the greatest arsenals of Europe had been
opened to the South.
That the ports of the South were blockaded, as Mr. Cushing said they
would be, was true; but never before had steam vessels been employed by a
vigilant enemy to search out the weak intervals in the line and avail himself
of darkness and even storm, to enter and leave blockaded harbors. In spite of
large squadrons, under command of competent and zealous officers, enough war
material was carried into ports of the Confederate States to enable them, for
three years, to contend vigorously against all the armies the United States
could collect, not only from its own population, but from all the countries of
Europe.
Well may the people of the Northern portion of the reconstructed Union
be proud of their fellows, who for four long years contended against such
fearful odds.
The fourth year of the war saw an end of the struggle, not only because
of the immense superiority of the North in men and material, but also on
account of a change of policy in procuring supplies. For a long time there
were no contractors between the European sources of supply and the great con-
sumer, the army. Cotton, the only article of value to the outside world,
passed into possession of the Government continuously and without friction,
and was landed in Nassau - exceptionally in Bermuda - with no back charges
due. Every shilling that a bale was worth, as it lay at the landing-place,
was so much to the credit of the Weir or Navy Department with Fraser, Trenholm
& Co., Liverpool, and was available as soon as the arrival was announced by
mail via New York. There were literally no leaks. More devoted or more
intelligent and trustworthy agents than were Fraser, Trenholm & Co., during
the four years in which they acted for the Richmond Government, never served
any principal.


But in the latter stages of the war, contracts with the Government
began to appear. These contracts, made in Richmond, were generally a sort of
partnership affair by which the contractor, usually an English company, shared
equally the freighting capacity of each blockade runner. A representative of
one of these companies brought to me, one day, a draft on myself for a large
sum in sterling - I think it was £IO,OOO, but this may not be the exact sum.
What to do with it was a difficult problem. The payee, a respectable merchant
of Richmond, presented it in person, and there was no doubt of its genuineness.
After considering the matter a few minutes, I said:
,f I can't pay this, Captain C ."
"What."' he said, "Repudiate the draft of Colonel Gorgas?"
"Can't help it; I cannot and shall not honor it. I need much more money
than I have received, to pay for what has gone forward, and I have large con-
tracts out for supplies."
"I will assume your contracts," he replied.
"But I will not assign them to you."
Here was a collision between officer and Government contractor, which
might result in the professional ruin of the officer; for the draft was an
order from his superior. Although a good many rough words were interchanged,
I stood my ground and did not pay the draft. I read between the lines of Col.
Gorgas's letters that he would stand by me, and he did. The draft was undoubt-
edly made by higher authority - probably the Secretary of War, Mr. Seddon -
who at the time had not been long in office, while Col. Gorgas had served
from the organization of the Confederate Government in Montgomery. I never
heard anything more about the repudiated draft, and, not long after, I was
informed that, at the request of the War* Department, I had been advanced to
the grade of Major.
In this connection I may mention an incident that occurred somewhat
later. Mr. Yancey had returned to Richmond, and Mr. James H. Mason had taken
his place as Commissioner, It would be difficult to imagine two men more
opposite in character, discharging the same functions. Mr. Yancey was a much
younger man, and had been a student at Williams College, Massachusetts, He
had represented Alabama in the United States Congress, and was sufficiently
acquainted with affairs in general to hold his own in almost any company. His
voice and manners were pleasing, and his estimate of himself was sufficiently
modest to make him an appreciative listener, I never heard him address an
audience but once, but that once convinced me he was a born orator. It was at
a Fishmongers' Guild dinner, and the few representatives of the Confederate
States were the guests of the evening. Mr. Yancey sat on the left of the Lord
Warden, I sat four or five seats from him, on the opposite side, the tables
being arranged in the form of a horse shoe. There was a large number present,
and many were evidently Americans from the North.
Very early in the list of toasts, the toastmaster, - a butler possessed


of a ringing voice, and who stood just behind the chair of the Lord Warden,
from whom he received his orders - called out:
"Gentlemen, fill your glah-ses, the Lord Warden will take wine with
you."
The glasses being filled, the toast was announced. X do not now recall
the words, but it had reference to the "new nation," and to Hon. William L.
Yancey, and "our guests from the Confederate States of America." The Lord
Warden made a short address of welcome and called on Mr. Yancey. All the Con-
federate guests were expected to stand while their spokesman replied. But I
declined to make myself so conspicuous, fearing that in a company so entirely
new to Mr. Yancey, as I felt sure this English company was, his speech would
be anything but appropriate.
I could not have been more in error. What he said exactly fitted the
place and the occasion; the audience was delighted, except some people at the
lower ends of the tables, who, by rattling their glasses and moving their feet,
did their best to disconcert the speaker. In this they failed. The speech
was short, and at its conclusion the storm of applause clearly showed the
pleasure it afforded the great majority of the audience. I remember well a
barrister - a member of the city government - who after the dinner was over,
commented enthusiastically on the eloquence of Mr. Yancey.
Mr, Mason was a very different man. He had, for forty years been a
prominent member of the United States Senate, and seemed never to be unmindful
of the presence and importance of the Honorable James H. Mason of Virginia.
The two Commissioners were as different, one from the other, as a Kentuckian
and a Boston man of pilgrim blood, I saw but little of Mr. Mason. Mr. Yancey
had always been ready to confer with me. I freely talked over my plans with
him, and by his counsel and cordial endeavor to aid me, he was an ever present
help.
There was in Mr. Mason no magnetism to attract young men, and I do not
remember ever to have asked his advice or opinion. In this he presented a
strong contrast to all the other Commissioners. Mr. Slidell was as old a man
smd as experienced in public affairs as Mr. Mason, but he was a genial compan-
ion even to younger men, and I consulted him quite as freely as I had Mr,
Yancey.
One morning I received a note from Mr. Mason's secretsiry, asking me to
call at Mr. Mason's lodgings, I lost no time in obeying the summons, and Mr.
Mason lost no time in coming to business.
"Major," he said, "I have sent for you to request you to inspect some
army supplies that some of our English friends are sending over under a contr-
act with the War Department,"
Without a moment's hesitation, I replied, ''Mr. Mason, I will inspect
the contract, and if I approve it, I will inspect the goods."


I cannot convey an adequate idea of the man's astonishment. It was too
great for him to express himself immediately. He was standing in front of the
grate. Taking a package of "fine-cut" from his pocket, and removing from his
mouth an immense quid which he threw into the grate, he replaced it with a
fresh wad and, looking at me, said, "Do you know who I am? Whom do you look
upon as your superiors?"
Instantly, but very quickly, I replied, "I believe you are the Honorable
James M, Mason, Confederate States Commissioner to England."
"Yes," he replied, "and in a very few days I shall be Minister of the
Confederate States to the Court of St. James." It was when England, France
and Spain were on the point of acknowledging the Confederate States of America
as a nation.
I then said, "I acknowledge no superior on this side of the ocean; in
America the Secretary of War and all officers senior to ray are my superiors,
and especially Col, Gorges, from whom I receive my orders. Not only on general
principles can I take no orders from you, but I have an order sent me after
the battle of Bull Run, giving me carte blanche, and directing me not to allow
myself to be governed by political emissaries of the Government. Now, if you
are not a political emissary of the Government I don't know what you are."
There was no possible answer to this defining of our relative positions
and there was no more controversy. The dispute lasted some time, but I have
related enough to answer my purpose.
The order to which I referred was sewed into the sole of a boot, the
wearer of which, a German by birth, made the journey from Richmond to London
by way of New York. On arriving in London the order was removed from its hid-
ind place by cutting the stitches of the sole. The incident serves to show
the impossibility of preventing secret correspondence in time of war.
Another incident of the same character may be mentioned. The first
vessel to run the blockade from England was the "Fingal," Commander James D,
Bulloch, It was necessary to send to Savannah, the port for which Commander
Bulloch intended to strike, a set of signals in advance. These were secreted
by removing the wrapper of a well-made cigar and carefully replacing it, after
rolling the paper containing the signals upon its body. I myself did this bit
of cigar work. On arriving off Savannah, Commander Bulloch displayed his
signals, which were immediately answered, and he piloted his ship into the
harbor with which hevas familiar. So long as the War Department depended
entirely on its own officers to get cotton out and run supplies in, the value
of every bale of cotton that reached the Islands secured, in due time, its
full equivalent in array supplies. There were some captures of cotton going
out, and others of supplies going in, but the losses were for a long time
inconsiderable. When, however, the contract system got into full working
condition, although there were more vessels in the service, the supplies began
to shrink. Contractors were "on the make." That was their business, and they
pursued it eagerly, for the profits were large.


The "Nashville," which had been a packet between New York and Charles-
ton, was purchased by the C.S. Government and converted into a cruiser, and
as it was very desirable that there should be some show of naval power in a
European port, she was sent under command of Captain Pegram to Southampton,
where she arrived in good order. On reading the news of her arrival, I went
immediately to Southampton to call on her officers, with Mr. Fearn, secretary
to Mr. Yancey. The ship was, like all American ships, trim and in beautiful
condition, but she was only a converted passenger ship, and must have made a
poor showing had she met a U.S, ship of any size. However, she served the
purpose of displaying the Confederate States flag in a foreign port and on the
high seas.
My object in calling on Captain Pegram was not one of courtesy alone.
A most outrageous proposal had been made to me, involving the capture of a
British ship bound from Hanburg to New York, loaded with a hundred thousand
Austrian rifles. The proposal, in brief, was: That I should deposit £lO,OOO
in the Bank of England subject to the draft of one of two persons. In the
event of success of the scheme, one was to draw the money; in case of failure,
the other. The plan was to capture a British ship, then loading with arras at
Hamburg for New York. It had been proposed to me that with a tug, having a
gun on board, I should intercept the ship, fire a gun, and demand her surrender.
The captain would have orders to comply with my demand, and I was to direct him
to sail to Charleston.
The scheme was not impossible for any one holding a privateer's comm-
ission, and I applied to Mr. Yancey for a letter-of-marque. On hearing my
story, Mr, Yancey said he had such commissions, but that they were contrary
to the spirit of the age, and he had determined not to give any of them out.
However, in this instance, he would issue one if I wanted it. I believed my
land-service commission would protect me, but I asked for the letter-of-marque
as an additional safeguard. Captain Pegram, after considering the matter in
conference with his executive, Lieutenant Fauntleroy (formerly of the United
States Navy), determined not to make the attempt, and the matter was dropped.
Perhaps it is well that the "Nashville" arrived, and that Captain
Pegram declined to act; for I had the money ready to deposit, and what seems
now to me a madcap scheme might have been attempted.
The ship sailed and delivered her cargo in New York. The projectors
of the scheme stood to receive double payment for the arms and ship, the insur-
ance against war-risk having been assumed by the U.S. War Department. The arms
were from the Vienna arsenal, from which I received, later, the same number of
small arms and several batteries of field artillery.
At the time the "Nashville" arrived in Southampton, I had a large
quantity of supplies ready for shipment, but was deterred by the endeavors of
agents of the United States Government to stop me. The problem was finally
solved by a hint from the British authorities to clear them for Australia,
which was done. The shipment was made on the steamer "Economist," bought for
the expedition, and Lieut. Fauntleroy was detached from the "Nashville" to
command her; of course a British captain in nominal command. Although the


"Economist" had speed of not more than eight knots an hour, Lieut. Fauntleroy
made a successful run into Charleston and delivered his cargo in excellent
condition.
An incident worth relating is connected with this period of the weir.
A ship which Lieut. Fauntleroy and I visited one morning was loading in London
Docks for Nassau. In the same dock were two very handsome steamers which had
been built for the opium trade, but for some reason had not sailed for China.
They were now for sale, Lidut. Fauntleroy, after examining them, was most
eager that I should buy one and put him in command. To do so, however, was
impossible; I had no money. Several months afterwards I was asked to buy a
steamer and her cargo of arms, clothing, shoes, ammunition and medicines, then
lying at St. George's, Bermuda, The ship was one of the two opium smugglers.
She had been bought by a company of Englishmen, and, loaded with a most desir-
able cargo, had started for Wilmington or Charleston. On arriving at Bermuda
the blockade had become so close that the owners decided not to make the
attempt to run it, and they offered to sell ship and cargo to me at a bargain.
I was still unable to buy her, although I knew what a valuable blockade-runner
she would be and what a desirable cargo she carried. The owners, of whom
there were several, were so anxious to sell her that they importuned me till
finally I said: "Well, gentlemen, I can do one thing: I can offer you cotton
for your ship and cargo," They jumped at the proposal, saying that was all
they wanted. Where would I deliver the cotton?
At Charleston, Mobile or Wilmington.
When?
Thirty days after the presentation of my order to the War Department
in Richmond.
Strange as it may read, these men were perfectly satisfied with my pro-
position, although I could not see how they were to get their cotton out,
since they were selling their ship to me. However, we agreed upon the weight
and quality of cotton to be given for ship and cargo, and it only remained for
me to satisfy their lawyer that I was duly authorized to make the purchase.
For this purpose, a meeting was arranged for the next morning, when I presented
the leather-stained order which had come to me through the lines, sewed between
the layers of the sole of a shoe. On reading this, the lawyer said; "That's
enough to cover anything," and a contract was signed and am order given me for
the ship and cargo. As this contract may interest the reader, a fac-simile of
it is given. (See plate.)
The quantity of cotton being too large for one owner to handle, it was
arranged to have warrants engraved and printed for smaller quantities.
The "Merrimac" ran into Wilmington and delivered her valuable cargo in
fine order. She was then loaded with cotton, and one favorable night - dark
and stormy - started on her return trip to the Islands. Before clearing the
harbor she collided with another steamer on her way in, and the "Merrimac"
was obliged to return to Wilmington, where it was found that she could not be




repaired, and she was finally sold, with her cargo, for /1,100,000, The
vessel with which she collided was her sister ship which had lain alongside
of her in London Docks. Means were not to be found in Wilmington to repair
the "Merrimac" for the Confederate Government; but it was easily accomplished
as soon as she passed into private hands, and she was again sent to make her
run to the Islands. To my great satisfaction, she was captured the next
morning.
There were greedy contractors in the South who cared just as much for
"the cause" as did their fellow-contractors in the North for the Union. They
were full of patriotism - of their kind. Months after the "Merrimac" sailed
from Bermuda, one of the negotiators of the sale asked me if I would sign
duplicates of the warrants I had issued. My reply was: "Does the Bank of
England issue duplicate notes?" lf You don't mean to say you will not give us
duplicates!" "I certainly do." And then I explained to him that at the time,
I might have been willing to sign warrants in duplicate. But the war had
reached a critical stage; the Confederate army was hard pressed on every side.
Moreover, the contract system had begun to produce results. Instead of all
cotton sent out being for army or navy account, only a portion of the army
cotton was turned into army supplies. The contractors, English and Confederate,
were taking the rest.
I believe that not one of those cotton warrants which bought the
"Merrimac" was ever presented in Richmond, and that vessel, with her cargo,
cost the Confederate Government literally nothing. It is a curious fact that
these same cotton warrants, which as it proved were really not worth the cost
of printing them, at one time sold at a premium in London,


MAJOR CALEB HOSE C.S.A.
AN APPRECIATION AND TWO APPENDICES
BY
THOMAS W GREEN


Any account of Confederate Purchasing operations in Europe and the
United Kingdom is, of necessity, an account of the career of Caleb Huse in his
capacity as Chief Purchasing Officer of the Ordnance Bureau of the Confederate
States Army. From his arrival in the U.K, in April 186 l until the final
collapse of the Confederacy in 1865, Huse spent millions of public money in
contracting for supplies of an amazing diversity ranging from heavy guns to
thread. For the first 18 months of his mission alone, his expenditure was six
million dollars. It is extremely difficult to arrive at accurate figures for
the rest of the war, but the report of Fraser & Trenholme for the year ended
December shows Huse as drawing drafts on them for a total of £801,913 or
approximately k million dollars. A return made to Secretary of War Seddon in
February 1863 itemises Huse's expenditure until December 1862 and is reproduced
here as an example of the diversity of Huse's purchases for the Ordnance
Bureau. (See Appendix B).
In addition to all the purchases itemised in the return, he also con-
tracted with Messrs. Greenwood and Batley of Leeds for the supply of all
necessary machinery for the manufacture.of small arms and the new metallic
cartridges necessary for them. Still incomplete at the end of the war, the
contract was taken over by the victorious United States and the machinery sold
to the Cuban authorities, where no doubt its output played a vital part in the
toll of casualties inflicted on the U.S. troops in the Spanish-American war of
1898.
Since confidence in the Confederacy was always lacking in the Old World,
it was necessary to pay for all.these supplies in cash, and since many of the
artisans and middle classes of Europe were hostile to the Confederacy because
of its involvement with slavery, all these operations were carried out under
the surveillance of a widespread intelligence service of Emancipation Societies
and Union supporters, who reported all movements to the U.S, Consular author-
ities in their vicinities.
Sometimes this "disapproval" took a more active form, as for instance
in Hamburg early in 1862 when a ship, the "Bahama", under charter to Huse, was
loading armaments from lighters when one of the lighters, fully loaded with
supplies, was run down and sunk by a British steamer under a German pilot. On
the bottom, together with a rich and varied freight of ordnance stores, were
eight pieces of artillery with their carriages and limbers. There was reason
to believe, said Huse to Gorgas, that the collision was deliberate, the pilot
having been bribed. (1)
Soon after his arrival in the U.K. Huse made contact with the firm of
Isaac Campbell, an experienced organisation used to military contracting, with
offices at 22 Austins Friars in the City of London, and placed contracts worth
hundreds of thousands of pounds with them for all sorts of war material, chiefly
for the Ordnance Bureau, but including purchases for other Army Departments,
notably the Q.M, branch, headed in Richmond by Quartermaster General Abraham
C, Myers.


In 1862/3 there was a widespread shortage of funds for all agents of
all Confederate Departments, but Huse was allowed to continue shipments long
after all his available funds had been exhausted, through the auspices of
Isaac Campbell. By the end of 1862 they had supplied some 5 million dollars
worth of supplies, and had received from Huse slightly more than fifty per
cent of the amount due. Before the end of the war the company had been dis-
credited in circumstances to be detailed, and with its downfall had come
attacks on the character and integrity of Huse himself. The facts of the
matter are not dealt with by Huse in his pamphlet, amd are summarised as
follows.
In 1862 the staff of purchasing agents wais increased and among the new
appointments wais that of Major Ferguson who was sent to Europe to purchase
supplies for the Quartermaster Department. Ferguson was no stranger to the
task. He had been sent to the U.K. in 186 l to report on Huse's competence.
He had returned in October 186 l on board the "Fingal", a vessel chartered
between Huse amd Bulloch and loaded with what proved to be the largest cargo
of arms shipped during the war. His report on Huse had been favourable, and
his own competence having been amply displayed in the matter of the "Fingal",
he was returning to Europe and the U.K. as a purchasing agent in his own right.
In December 1862 the Confederate Government signed a semi private
contract with William G. Crenshaw, a resident of Richmond, Va., to furnish
supplies for the Army. Since this contract was a bone of dispute between all
the purchasing agents for the Army, it is as well to examine its provisions
and intentions.
They were outlined in a letter from Secretary of War Seddon to James
Mason, Confederate Minister to the court of St. James in London. It introduced
William Crenshaw as an ex captain of artillery who had had a distinguished
career with the Army of Northern Virginia, and who was by profession a highly
experienced and extremely successful merchant. His purpose in coming to
England was to inquire into the possibility of setting up an organisation to
run the blockade and to purchase and ship out munitions, army supplies and
medical supplies to the Confederacy.
To further his intention he was to purchase or build suitable steamers
in England in association with some reputable English business house of large
means. In conjunction with them he was to take one fourth interest in the
vessels and their cargoes, and would purchase and sell on commission the goods
to be sent on to the Confederacy, where cotton would be loaded in payment.
The commission on the cotton was for Crenshaw and his English partner alone
and was not to exceed The fourth of cargo belonging to Crenshaw was at
the option of the Government who could purchase at a fair market price if they
so required, otherwise Crenshaw's agent was to dispose of it on the open
market. (2)
These goods were to be allowed into the South free of duty, but his
share of the cotton was liable to 1/2# duty as a pledge for the Government
loan which would be necessary to start the scheme off. The exemption of duty
on the incoming goods was held to be a considerable inducement to an English


business house to partner Crenshaw. . Mason was urged to facilitate the supply
of funds to Crenshaw, who was completely acceptable to the Department with
regard to his character capacity and Judgement.
Crenshaw arrived in London at the time when the Erlanger loan was being
floated and lost no time in seeing Mason who assured him of the necessary funds
when he should need them. Meanwhile Crenshaw had found his partner in
Alexander Collie & Co., a London business house, who like Isaac Campbell, were
experienced military contractors. Crenshaw and Collie commenced by ordering
four fast iron steamers for running the blockade and were preparing a cargo
for loading on the first vessel in early April, a cargo containing meat which
prosaic item was, as any Civil War student knows, a commodity in desperately
short supply in all the Confederate armies.
Huse, who was on the Continent, was not yet aware of any of these
arrangements. When he returned to London and met Crenshaw he was extremely
hostile to the whole plan and insisted that his contracts would still go to
Isaac Campbell, (3) The War Department had failed to tell Huse anything
about the Crenshaw contract. Perhaps it considered it had no need to do so,
and if this be true, it was a further cause of pique to Huse.
Again, Huse knew, as neither Mason or Crenshaw did, the financial and
moral obligations of the Confederacy to Isaac Campbell & Co, This firm had
given its wholehearted support to the Confederate cause, even to the supply
on credit of over £500,000 worth of supplies for which they were still trying
to exact payment from Richmond. Understandably Huse had earmarked all avail-
able funds to easing this prodigious debt. Isaac Campbell had supplied money
and goods at a time when no Confederate purchasing agent could buy so much as
a tenpenny nail without paying cash on the barrel. He was not going to see
Crenshaw and his new associate, Alexander Collie & Co., utilise funds that by
rights should go to Isaac Campbell, nor was he willing to place orders with
Crenshaw on which he paid more commission than he was paying to Isaac Campbell,
a fact he emphasises in his pamphlet,
Crenshaw, on the other hand, thought that the instructions from Richmond
which Huse would surely soon get would give the reluctant Ordnance Agent a new
aspect of the situation, leading to his fuller co-operation. He therefore
continued his operations, notifying Mason of his financial needs, money to pay
for the steamers and their cargoes. He was promised by Mason that Erlanger
would give him £55,000 (4) by April 10, 1863, from the proceeds of the
Erlanger loan, and that further amounts would be sent forward by the Treasury
Department.
By sth May Crenshaw had notified Seddon that his first steamer, the
"Venus" had left the U.K. with a cargo consisting of 358 packages for the Q.M.
Department purchased by Ferguson and some packages for the Navy Department,
Another steamer, the "Hebe" was loading with Navy Department cargo, and with
a shipment for the Commissary. (5) Things were not going well however, and
he complained to the Secretary about Huse, saying that "his opposition to my
arrangements will prevent him from co-operating with me to carry out what I
understand to be your wishes and orders". If the Secretary concurred with


Huse, continued Crenshaw, he would be willing to cancel the contract (6), and
he had therefore sent copies of his correspondence with Huse and Huse's replies
to Mason, and enclosed duplicates for Seddon's information.
The correspondence enclosed showed a widening gulf between the two men.
Huse was obdurate. He would only allow Crenshaw to purchase supplies at prices
that he, Huse, considered favourable and he repeated his previous statement
that he would not place the purchasing of ordnance and medical supplies in
Crenshaw's hands, and gave as his reasons the lack bf any instructions from
the War Department, the inexperience in purchasing army supplies of Alexander
Collie, and the inadvisability of changing established purchasing procedure.
(7) He also claimed that he had four steamers and a fifth on order, and that
these would lie idle if Crenshaw's ships carried the Department's goods, and
a dded for good measure that much of his material was purchased direct from the
manufacturers and without positive Government instructions to do so, he could
not increase the costs of these materials by Crenshaw's commission through
placing their purchasing in Crenshaw's and Collie's hands.
The latter was the nub of Huse's opposition, as he indicates in his
pamphlet. Although anxious to keep the contracts in Isaac Campbell's hands,
Huse was undoubtedly correct in refusing to pay over his present costs.
Probably he was right too in not upsetting the existing procedures. Better the
evil that was known than that which was not.
Even as he wrote he received instructions from the Department to
purchase two more steamers, and he had insufficient funds to purchase enough
supplies to fill all the steamers. In fact in these early months of 1863 the
Confederacy was largely without funds in Europe. The purchasing agents pf the
Navy Department were out of funds and unable to keep up the payments on the
vitally important construction programme in which Bulloch had two formidable
ironclad turret rams building at Lairds of Birkenhead, and James North had a
giant heavy ironclad under construction on.the Clyde by the Thomson Bros.
The South had placed all its financial eggs in the somewhat shaky
basket of the Erlanger loan which, far from raising the millions expected, was
barely holding its own in the financial markets of Europe. For the moment
there was no money and the agents who were quite capable of raising loans on
cotton were refused permission to do so lest this should still further weaken
the loan. In this, the crisis year of the Confederacy's brief and stormy
existence, muddled thinking and financial intrigue in Richmond and Paris had
dried up its monetary resources and slowed to a dribble the vital flow of war
supplies.
Nevertheless Crenshaw needed money badly. A Mr. Bosher, to whom he
was indebted to the amount of £22,500, was pressing for payment, and when Huse
was asked for a draft for this amount by Crenshaw, he replied to the effect
that Crenshaw would have to pay it from the funds advanced by Erlanger, which
was of course the £55, 000 needed for the ships, Crenshaw was greatly taken
aback by this, since the amount of his purchases to date grossly exceeded the
amount advanced by Erlanger via Mason.


His reply to Huse was bitter. "You intend", he wrote, "to throw every
obstacle that you can in the way of my accomplishing the business intrusted
to me. It is in my opinion unfortunate for the Government that the recent
orders from Mr, Seddon giving you the control of the finances will enable you
not only to prevent me from moving on as rapidly as I think the wants of our
Government require, but also embarrass me very much in carrying on what I had
undertaken before your return from Paris. Believing however that those orders
were based on incorrect information, and, in fact given in total ignorance of
the condition and management of the Government business here, I shall embrace
the earliest opportunity of writing to the War Department as to the facts as
I think they exist here. In the meantime, if you continue to refuse to furnish
me with any funds for the carrying out of the Government portion of the contract
and for the purchase of meat ordered for the commissariat, the responsibility
will rest with you". (8)
Having delivered himself of this broadside, the offended Crenshaw took
himself to Mason and unburdened his troubles. He believed that Huse was
buying steamers in opposition to Secretary Seddon’s wishes. Crenshaw was
worried at the opposition presented to his five steamers (each of which was
3A owned by the Confederate Government) by Huse's steamers which were wholly
Government property. (9)
He asked Mason to state whether in his opinion the Government would be
better off if the contract was cancelled, saying that if Mason thought this so
he would, with Alexander Collie, be willing to take the whole ownership of the
five vessels contracted for and would return the £55,000 already received.
Mason did not consider the contract should be cancelled. "The Secretary .still
anxiously relies on the complete execution of the arrangements entered into
with you", he wrote in reply. (10)
Huse had been to see him about the business too, he informed Crenshaw,
and the main difficulty seemed to be one of funds, since nothing could be ex-
pected from the loan until June, There was, however, the fact that Huse
considered his new orders from the War Department superseded the separate
duties entrusted to Crenshaw and therefore he, Mason, thought that tintil ex-
planatory orders were received from Seddon, there was little likelihood of
any concerted action by Huse and Crenshaw.
Crenshaw lost no time in forwarding copies of all this correspondence
to Seddon with a covering letter in which he voiced his complaints. "Every
officer here to whom I have had occasion to explain the arrangements I am
endeavouring to carry out expresses himself as highly pleased with it except
Major Huse", he wrote, (ll) The reasons for Huse’s dislike of the contract,
said Crenshaw, were quite clear. The contract took the purchasing of Govern-
ment supplies out of the hands of Isaac Campbell, whose services Huse wanted
to retain because of their liberality to the Confederacy. Warming to his
task, Crenshaw said that it was common knowledge that liberality was not in
their nature. Their contracts with the British Government had been cancelled
because of allegations of bribery of an officer. Although partially exonerated
by an enquiry held in 1859, they had failed to recapture their contracts.
When they had commenced dealings with the Confederate Government they had


nothing like the funds they now professed to be owed by the Pi nhmnnd .author-
ities . Crenshaw then continued with a bombshell.
Commander James North, he said, had been offered a bribe by Isaac
Campbell and had scorned it. (12) This accusation was backed up by an
affidavit forwarded to Quartermaster Myers by Ferguson. In it North bluntly
stated to Ferguson, "...I did call on S, Isaac of the firm of S. Isaac Campbell
& Co., on a matter of business; that Mr Isaac did in the course of conversation
make an offer to divide with me a commission of 5% on a business transaction
for the Confederate Government, and that I did regard that offer as sin attempt
to induce me to enter into a transaction to defraud the Confederate Government
and that I did reject the same on that ground". (13)
This was damning evidence against Isaac Campbell, but Crenshaw had
further disclosures to make. Huse, he said, had admitted to Ferguson and North
that he had received some commissions on Government purchases he intended to
apply to his expenses, and to the purchase of a Technical Library to send as
a present to the Ordnance Bureau at a cost of £l,OOO to £1,500. Subsequently
he had told Mason that the Government being pressed for money, he had paid
the amount into the credit of his account with Isaac Campbell & Co. (14)
"I cannot help from looking at this in connection with the reports I
hear of goods bought at 5% and charged at 7%, refused guns bought at 35% and
charged at 65% although I can gain no absolute evidence of these facts
and especially with the proof that I have that he opposes my arrangements
because they take the busines out of the hands of a house who proposed to
bribe one of our officers. Mr. White, a commissioner sent here by the State
of North Carolina who has had some opportunity of seeing something of Isaac
Campbell & Co. informs me that he entertains of them the same opinion that I
do." (15)
Anticipating Huse's argument, Crenshaw said the shortage of funds could
be overcome by investing in steamers to ship out cotton which would in three
or four months pay for the steamers. This was true, but it was to be months
before the Confederacy really buckled down to the task of hypothecating cotton
and by then it would be too late.
It has been stated that had the South shipped the whole of the 1860/61
crop overseas before the blockade clamped down, or better still, before
commencing hostilities, they would have netted sufficient credit in Europe to
have perhaps gained the victory, but under the delusion that shortage of
cotton in Europe would compel France and England to force the blockade to
stave off economic disasters, the South had not shipped a bale in the early
stages of the war, and had in fact been destroying the crop to accentuate the
shortage. By the time they had seen the error of their ways, the blockade
had clamped its vice about the Southern ports and their approaches, and bulk
exports were reduced to the trickle taken out by blockade runners, most of
which were not for the Government's credit, but in payment for goods run in,
goods that were often of no use to the war effort whatever - ladies corsets,
hats and similar fripperies.


Slimming up his complaints, Crenshaw said that he had originally nothing
against Huse except that he came from the North, but now he was satisfied that
he was not the man for the job. He hoped that a "true born Southern Gentleman"
(16) would be selected. He included as a fillip to this series of accusations
a letter from Bulloch in which he concurred apparently with Crenshaw’s opinions
of Huse and Isaac Campbell. I say apparently, because the letter has never
been found, but there is little doubt that its contents were substantially as
Crenshaw stated since Bulloch in his correspondence, as in his bearing, was
frank and open.
At the same time that Crenshaw was writing his indictments of Huse to
Seddon, Major Ferguson was doing the same to Quartermaster Myers. On his
arrival in the U.K., he said, he had had an interview with Huse in which the
latter had mentioned the £500,000 worth of business for which he was indebted
to Isaac Campbell, and had suggested that since £lO,OOO of this was on the
account of the Quartermasters Department, Ferguson should make the fluids he
had brought from the C.S.A. over to him in repayment. This Ferguson was un-
willing to do.
It was then that Huse made his admission about taking commissions and
spending them on the purchase of a library. Ferguson had pointed out that the
commissions should have been paid the Government as a discount, and that things
like libraries were best left until the debts were paid and the Army shod and
clad. A few evenings later there was a meeting of all the Government Agents
consisting of Prioleau of Fraser & Trenholme, Spence, administrator and agent
of the Loan in the U.K., Maury, Bulloch and North of the Navy, and Huse and
Ferguson of the Army. Financial affairs were fully discussed and each agent
presented his wants. It was agreed that all their securities were to be with-
drawn from the market in order to strengthen the Erlangen Loan. At the close
of the meeting Huse again insisted that Ferguson made over his funds to him,
but it was the unanimous opinion that his instructions forbade his doing so.
It was after this incident that North revealed to Ferguson the attempted bribe
by Isaac Campbell.
Thoroughly alarmed over these revelations, Ferguson called on Huse the
following day and examined some of his invoices for materials purchased for
the Quartermaster Department. His familiarity with some .of the materials
invoiced led Ferguson to believe that extortionate prices had been charged.
One item in particular, cloth, of which Huse had sent out 12,000 yards at 7/6d
per yard, Ferguson considered could have been bought at k/6d. to VlOd. per
yard, and yet in addition to this overcharge of at least 50% over what it
could have been purchased for in cash, there was added a commission of 2j|s,
Ferguson named three counts against Huse, which were briefly as follows:
1. He admitted taking commissions,
2. The senior partner of the house through which Huse made nearly
all his purchases had tried to bribe an officer of the Navy
Department.


3* Exorbitant prices bad been, charged for such items as
Ferguson could identify.
Considering these three points, Ferguson had decided that the best and
wisest thing for the country was for him to disburse his funds according to
his instructions, and accordingly, having set up office in the centre of man-
ufacture, he was making his own purchases without the aid of commission agents
and would like them and their prices to be compared with goods hitherto
supplied.
In conclusion he said he was willing to co-operate with any officer of
the Government who had its interest at heart, but was sure that the Quarter-
master would not wish him to transact business with any house who would divide
with him a commission on any transaction for the Government. (17)
On receipt of this complaint from Ferguson, Quarter Master General Myers
lost no time in passing it on to Seddon. In his letter (l 8) he requested that
funds be made available to Ferguson, who should be empowered to act independ-
antly to Huse, who, indeed had never been constituted official agent for the
Q.M. Department. Furthermore, said Myers, Huse's inexperience would entail
pecuniary loss to the Department, and his lack of education and previous
experience coupled with the disclosures of his relations with Isaac Campbell
led Myers to deem it his duty to..."express my unwillingness that Major Huse
should continue to be an agent of this Department." (19)
Seddon passed Myer’s letter immediately to General Gorgas, Chief of the
Ordnance Bureau with a brief note saying, "Referred to Colonel Gorgas for
special consideration. This matter seems of a serious nature. The taking of
a commission is altogether inconsistent with the purpose and duty of a trusted
agent of the Department. The matter should be fully investigated,"
Gorgas was quick to spring to the defence of his agent and his Depart-
ment. As a testimony of the esteem he always felt towards Huse, the letter is
worth repeating in full. Dated 22nd of May, it ran as follows:-
"Hon. J.A. Seddon,
Secretary of War;
Sir: In returning the accompanying papers I deem it due to Major Huse to
remark:
First: That I believe from information derived from Capt. Stiles who is just
from London, that the receiving of a commission by Major Huse will be satis-
factorily explained by him. Major H is an officer of nearly fifteen years
service. He knows perfectly well that the naked transaction of taking a
commission on purchases, or receiving, directly or indirectly, compensation
for purchases for the Government, would dismiss him from the service with
disgrace; yet he makes confession of this flagrant crime to a stranger in his
very first interview with him. It is unnecessary to suggest the propriety of
at least hearing Major H's statement.


HUSE’S HOUSE
38 CLARENDON ROAD, NOTTING HILL, LONDON.


Second That I have no doubt Major Huse was frequently compelled to pay quite
50 per cent over the actual market value of his purchases. lam free to admit
that if Major H had applied to me for instructions as to whether he should
procure supplies at such rates, authority to that effect would have been given
to him without a momentfe hesitation. Purchases made at those rates have saved
ray Department and that of the Quartermaster General millions of dollars if
compared with the charges made by Confederate Houses at Confederate ports.
The Quartermaster General has not weighed the matter of his letter, or this
count in his indictment against Major Huse. It should have been left out, or
supported with further testimony.
Third The matter of Major Huse’s unfitness for making purchases is assumed by
the Quartermaster General probably on the testimony of Major Ferguson. I think
it proper to say I am perfectly satisfied with his business capacities, and so
far as that is concerned desire no change. He has, however, declared his
unfeigned regret at having volunteered to do service for the Quartermasters
Department to which he was induced by his sense of the nakedness of our Army.
This appears abundantly in his letters from the first. If he did wrong it
must be admitted that it was a most venial error. He has, since the expression
of his own wishes on this point, been formally directed to confine his purchases
to the Ordnance end Medical Departments, Doctor Moore having full confidence in
his judgement. (20)
Very respectfully, your obedient servant
J. Gorgas
Colonel and Chief of Ordnance"
Here at least, was a friendly voice raised in defence of the much
maligned Major, Seddon pondered over the business and finally forwarded
Gorgas* reply to Myers with the comment that he hoped that, "...Major Huse end
Major Ferguson have only been each so zealous in his own branch of business as
to cause some little collision between them, which a better acquaintance will
mutually remove." (21)
At the same time Seddon made an order to have Huse *s accounts verified
and settled. Desirable as this settlement was, it still did nothing to help
Crenshaw, and he was soon at the Secretary for funds, writing him on 12th June
complaining that he had heard nothing from the Secretary, and that owing to Mr.
Bosher's still being unpaid the provisions could not be shipped to reach the
islands in time for the steamers.
In his search for funds he had called on Slidell in Paris and soon found
that his contract with the Government was much frowned on by the Commissioner
to Paris, In the ensuing argument he told Slidell he would do nothing at the
suggestion of Huse, since he did not believe the Major had at heart the good
of the cause, but that he would seriously consider any suggestions the Commiss-
ion might make, adding that he had written the Secretary offering to discontinue
the contract, and he must have been taken aback when Slidell said that the
Commission, consisting of himself, Lamar, Mcßae and Mason would unanimously
propose to close it, giving Crenshaw and Alexander Collie the option of either


taking (and paying) for all the property themselves, or of handing it to the
Government. Cracking the whip he went on to say that if anything were done it
must be done at once.
Returning straight away to London to await the Commissioners' decisions,
Crenshaw told Mason he was awaiting their unanimous proposition. Mason was
surprised at this and said there was no unanimity, since he approved of the
contract. Slidell, he said, must have been misunderstood. He enclosed a state-
ment of accounts showing that he heeded £115,334 by August Ist. £75,000 of
this was for ships, and he had options on 100,000 lbs. of preserved meat for
£3jßoo, and the possibility of a further 175»000 lbs, per week for four weeks
at a price of £4,000 per week, (22) . This was an urgently needed item, meat
was practically a non-existent item on the menu of the Confederate soldier,
but with no funds to clinch the deal it was liable to remain off the diet sheet.
The money owed to Bosher was proving a formidable obstacle to further business,
Alexander Collie had already advanced some £30,000, and £20,000 was due in
addition to this to settle for provisions ordered. Huse was adamant against
paying Bosher the £22,000, and, indeed, considering his commitments to Isaac
Campbell, it was small surprise that he would not settle. Crenshaw appealed
to Mason to do something about it. (23)
At this stage Seddon was writing to Crenshaw to express his views. In
a letter dated 21st June he expressed his regrets at the embarrassments caused
by the difference between Crenshaw and HuSe, caused as he thought by distrust
on Crenshaw's part and jealousy and a desire to engross the Whole business of
the Department by Huse, He was, he told Crenshaw, "...very adverse to enter-
tain suspicions against a Regular officer,....and must, in common justice,
require very satisfactory proof before taking steps which might cost him both
his commission and his character I .' (24) However, the statements had so
influenced him that he was having sin enquiry into and settlement of Huse *s
accounts, to be presided over by Mcßae, who was now administrating the loan,
and heading the agents. Seddon did add, however, that he had,"...felt some
surprise and annoyance that in his (Huse's) relations with you.,..he has
exhibited a disposition to thwart sind a refusal of all aid." (25)
At the same time as he regretted the differences between Huse and Crens-
haw, he pointed out that it had been Crenshaw's opinion that there should be
only one financial agent for the Department, supervision of purchases and
expenditure exercised by one mind, Huse being by virtue of his position the
obvious overseer. For the future, Crenshaw was to be dissociated with Huse
in the further conduct of operations. Seddon wished his contract with Crenshaw
to continue and was pleased that Mason had so advised the merchant, Huse
would in future purchase all ordnance stores and arrange for their shipment,
ensuring as far as possible thereby that Crenshaw and Collie's ships did not
carry contraband of war with the ever present risk of seizure.
Whilst admitting that he had so far been Unsuccessful in the matter of
funds, he promised that such as became available from the Treasury would
be devoted to their mutual enterprise. Although this doubtlessly papered the
cracks over in Seddon's view, he did not reckon with the extreme time lag in
getting mails from Richmond to the European capitals. These delays could often


amount to three months lapsing between despatch and delivery. Frequently
mails would be captured by the blockade as they entered or left Confederate
waters, and in these cases the would be recipients had the mortification of
seeing their reports or orders and their domestic affairs printed and discussed
in the Northern papers.
So whilst this appeasing letter was making its protracted way to Europe
the Crenshaw/Huse imbroglio continued to boil. Crenshaw was again writing
Seddon for funds on 10th July. Once again he had fallen foul of Huse, His
disputed draft for £22,500 had finally been approved by Mcßae, who had paid
the sum to Huse in order to have the draft paid up. Huse would only pay on
Bosher's signature being given in triplicate. But Bosher, as Huse knew, had
gone home to the Confederacy after purchasing £*+o,ooo of stores from Collie
and leaving them with the draft in part payment. Now it was again blocked,
and Crenshaw was furious and told Mcßae in no uncertain terras what he thought
of things. (26) Mcßae apologised for Huse having "embarrassed the matter in
this way," (27) and promised to have the draft paid at once. However, this
final episode spelt the end of co-operation between Alexander Collie and
Crenshaw, for the company asked to be excused from the contract.
Huse had not been silent during the controversy. His arguments against
Crenshaw are set out in his pamphlet, although he refrains from mentioning the
imputations on his honour. The War Department sent an auditor, M, Hildreth
Bloodgood, to England to audit Isaac Campbell's accounts and Huse's vouchers,
but before Hildreth, with Mcßae, began this task, about half of Isaac Camp-
bell's debt had been paid off. On 25th May 1863 this debt had amounted to
£515,000 or $2. ,500,000 approximately. They agreed to accept as collateral
for the debt /2,000,000 of 8 per cent cotton bonds and cotton warrants, and
Huse arranged with Erlanger to pay off over half of the debt with Erlanger
bonds. Some £300,000 of Erlanger loan bonds, equalling /1,336,120 of the debt
were made over to Isaac Campbell. (28)
Their joy at this payment was to be of short duration. On July *+th
1863 Vicksburg surrendered to the armies of U.S. Grant, and coupled with the
defeat sustained by Lee, whose retreat from the stricken field of Gettysburg
began on the same day, caused the bottom to drop out of the Erlanger Loan,
and the bonds were unsaleable except at a figure 30$ of their face value.
This would involve Isaac Campbell in a loss of £BO,OOO, Mcßae, writing to
Gorgas on 15th September, pointed this out with some concern adding, "This
house, which has been so much maligned by our overzealous friends, is likely
to be ruined by having trusted our Government when nobody else would." The
Confederate credit, he said, is greatly depreciated, and the fact being known
that this house (Isaac Campbell) has a large portion of their capital involved
with us has also affected their credit to such an extent as to prevent them
from making such financial arrangements as under other circumstances they
would have no difficulty in effecting, (29)
Any sympathy that the authorities in Richmond might have felt for the
beleaguered company was nipped in the bud when the examinations of Mcßae and
Bloodgood revealed that the company had been keeping a double set of books on
the Confederate purchases. This came out as soon as the examination got fairly


under way and from the moment of this disclosure the star of Isaac Campbell
set irrevocably.
Writing to Mcßae on 29th December 1863, Seddon was particularly bitter,
"I learn with less surprise than regret of the discoveries which have been
made in the examination of the accounts of Messrs S. Isaac Campbell & Co.,with
Major Huse. For some time past I have had strong suspicions that the practises
of that firm were more sharp than honest, and that Major Huse, through over-
confidence or some other motive, was allowing the interests of the Department
to suffer in his transactions with them. I had given on several occasions to
the Ordnance Bureau, whose officer Major Huse was, and who conducted the
correspondence with him, injunctions to bring all dealings with that firm to
as early a close and settlement as possible; but in this, as in some other
instances, Major Huse has seemed more inclined to thwart than to carry out the
wishes of the Department, and has so acted as to render the continuance of
relations and dealings difficult of termination.
I should have recalled him but for my apprehensions that, as some charges
had been made against his integrity in connection with his transactions, they
might appear to be countenanced by the conduct of the Department, and thus do,
perhaps, injustice to a faithful officer. In consequence I preferred the
examination should be made of his accounts by persons having fully the confid-
ence of the Department, and all the facts ascertained before any action was
taken, I hope the result may yet indicate his fidelity and character, both
as an officer and man of business, but the information given by your letter
cannot fail to excite some doubts as to both."(3o)
Having delivered himself of this diatribe against Huse, the Secretary
had some hard things to say about Isaac Campbell. Although wishing a settle-
ment of all the accounts outstanding by mutual consent or by "equitable
arbitrament" he nevertheless wished the seizure of certain assets of the
company which were to hand in the Confederacy, particularly a sum of gold
amounting to some £50,000, (31) Mcßae was also to "freeze" £50,000 worth of
Erlanger bonds, part of the settlement with Isaac Campbell, to help to induce
them to come to terms. Should this fail then action through "rigid justice"
would be necessary.
The wrangling with Isaac Campbell & Co. dragged on into 1864. In early
July of that year Mcßae was writing sombrely to Seddon, "...little progress
has been made in the settlement of accounts....they have in many instances
made charges that can be characterised by no other term than that of fraud-
ulent. ~ .they have in many instances charged in addition to the commission
from 5 to 20 per cent more than they paid and claim that under the circumstances
(e.g. the precarious credit of the Government) the profit they have charged is
not unreasonable or excessive." Unable to proceed further, both parties had
agreed to arbitrate under a barrister to be agreed on by both contenders. (32)
Meanwhile the investigation into the integrity of Huse was also dragging
its feet. Such an enquiry should have been carried out with the minimum of
delay for the sake of Huse if not for the well being of the Department, but in
the midsummer of 1864 that, too, was still incomplete. By the end of the year,


however, the Department made the grudging admission through J,A. Campbell,
Assistant Secretary of War. "The correspondence of Messrs. Mcßae and
KLoodgood acquitted Major Huse of intentional error and malfeasance" he wrote,
(33) "and testified to his zeal, honor, in April last. But the papers since
the date of that letter, while exonerating Major Huse from any criminality or
dishonor, diminish materially the character given to him as an efficient and
capable officer. They attribute to his failure to give notices and to his
facility in dealings with Isaac Campbell 8c Co., large losses, and their
estimate is that his merits and demerits being considered, that upon the whole
he is not a subject for severe censure. My indorsement was made upon early
reports and correspondence, and I have been advised that in the progress of
the investigation their judgement has been modified."
Actually Mcßae's report was warmer in tone than Campbell's letter
indicated. "It was not our intention...to clear him from blame," Mcßae had
written, "but to relieve him from any charge of collusion, and to place before
you the difficulties he had had to encounter, and the good he had done and
tried to do as palliative or offsets against his errors and mistakes. We
wished to keep from speaking too severely of his mistakes, because of the
difficulties of his position, but not to indorse or overlook them. We would
suggest," he concluded, "that some additional allowance over his pay,
commutation etc, be made to cover the expenses he has been compelled to incur
for the performance of his duty and the support of his family, in which, from
all we can learn, he has not been extravagant." (3*o
The whole of this unpleasant episode shows that there was a determined
effort to undermine Huse's position in Europe and his standing with the War
Department, Nor were these the only attacks made on Huse's probity. In the
period from October '63 to February *6*f Huse had been employed in intricate
negotiations which resulted in a provisional contract for 100,000,000 francs
worth of supplies, including six ships. At the height of these dealings sin
article appeared in the New York Hereild. Attributed to Mr, Charles Lemar, it
stated that Major Huse lived in great style in a country house at Auteuil,
near Paris, having received the house from his English friends. (35) He wsis
defended against this csilumny by Slidell and Erlanger, the latter writing
Mcßae to say that the house referred to was his; that he was the owner of
several country houses in Auteuil, "which I do not like to let, and that I
have offered Major Huse and Colonel (sic) Bulloch the use of one of these
houses." (36)
Slidell, in his turn, advised Mcßae that Huse impressed him most favour
ably, and that he lived with great simplicity and economy in the suburbs of
Paris, and that he seemed always to be "animated by an anxious desire to perf-
orm most scrupulously and consistently the duties intrusted to him," (37)
Huse continued to purchase large quantities of ordnance stores right
up to the collapse of the Confederacy. One of his last, if not the last,
shipments left Liverpool in the steamer Delia towards the end of January 1865.
Heavily laden with guns and ammunition and carrying many passengers, mainly
naval personnel returning home, she foundered in a storm and went to the bottom
of Liverpool Bay, Among the many drowned were Commander Sinclair, who had been


trying to have a super Alabama built on the Clyde, and Gunner Caddy of the
Alabama.
As for Isaac Campbell, loaded with the worthless bonds they went into
bankruptcy, the blow for Isaac, the senior partner, was greater for he lost
his son who died in Nassau of the fever whilst endeavouring to take passage
to Richmond for personal negotiations with Benjamin and Seddon over the
disputed accounts. The Confederate Government was less than just to the
company. It had given notable service to the Confederacy. Like the house of
Fraser and Trenholme, it gave all to the cause and lost all in consequence.
Gorgas was never convinced of their so called fraudulent transactions. In
point of fact, a careful scrutiny of its reports and comparison with contracts
concluded by others show that it sought to profit less than many so called
Southern patriots engaged in contracting.
When the credit of the Confederacy had been practically non-existent
and agents could secure nothing without immediate cash, this house of Isaac
Campbell had given credit where no others would take the risk. Moreover it
never pressed unduly for settlement. Huse knew, more than any starry eyed
politician in Richmond, the jungle that was the European arms market. He
knew also that he could get full support from Isaac Campbell, and in fact did
get that help, not once but many times.
Again, in defence of Huse, it must be said that his duties here were
far too onerous for one man to satisfactorily handle. Communications with
Richmond were generally poor, and the authorities there seemed never to keep
their agents fully informed of their intentions, as when Seddon did not con-
sider it necessary to inform Huse of the details of the Government's contract
with Crenshaw. Complaints were made by Huse and Bulloch from time to time of
the multiplicity of Government and State purchasing agents all scrambling for
the small amount of supplies on offer, The net result of all these gentlemen's
activity was to push prices up still higher, yet there was never a firm
directive from Richmond.
There was also a lack of urgency about the Commissioners, particularly
Mason, who once told North, who was desperately in need of funds to pay an
instalment on the large and badly needed ironclad he was building, to tell his
contractors that the Government would be in funds, and if they were not satis-
fied then they could do as they wished. Hardly the way to get supplies flowing.
A highly accomplished procrastinator, Mason was ever a weak prop to lean on.
It comes to this, in fact, that the agents were operating on their own,
with the proviso that if successful they were given faint praise and if
unsuccessful they were heartily damned by ministers far less competent than
they themselves were.


FOOTNOTES
1. Official Records, Navy, Series 11, V 01.2, page 178, Huse to Gorges 1/4/62
2. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 244 et seq. Confederate Corres-
pondence and Orders, Ist. July 62 to 31st December 63. 18/12/62.
3. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 4?8 et seq. Crenshaw to Seddon
11th April 63 and enclosure dated 30/3/63.
4. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 481. Crenshaw to Seddon 30/3/63
5* Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 535* Crenshaw to Seddon 5/5/63
6. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 555. Crenshaw to Seddon 5/5/63
7. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 535* Huse to Crenshaw 14/4/63
8. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 541. Crenshaw to Huse 27/4/63
9. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 541. Crenshaw to Mason 15/4/63
10. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 543. Mason to Crenshaw 28/4/63
11. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 544. Crenshaw to Seddon 5/5/63
12. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 544. Crenshaw to Seddon 5/5/63
13. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 558. North to Ferguson 1/4/63
14. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 545. Crenshaw to Seddon 5/5/63
15. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 545. Crenshaw to Seddon 5/5/63
16. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 546. Crenshaw to Seddon 5/5/63
17. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 557. Ferguson to Myers 18/4/63
18. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 555* Myers to Seddon 16/5/63
19. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 555* Myers to Seddon 16/5/63
20. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 564. Gorgas to Seddon 22/5/63
21. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 556. Seddon to Myers 1/6/63
22. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 589.
23. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 590. Crenshaw to Mason 4/6/63
24. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 600, Seddon to Crenshaw 21/6/63
25. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 600, Seddon to Crenshaw 21/6/63
26. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.2, page 627. Seddon to Mcßae 29/6/63
27. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 628, Mcßae to Crenshaw 2/7/63
28. King Cotton Diplomacy, Owlsley, page 381
29. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 890. Mcßae to Gorgas 15/9/63
30. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 1067/B.Seddon to Mcßae 29/L 2/63
31. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,2, page 890. Mcßae to Gorgas 15/9/63
32. Official Records, Series IV, V 01,3, page 525* Mcßae to Seddon 1/7/64
33* Official Records, Series IV, V 01.3, page 704.
34. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.3, page 703* Mcßae to Seddon 1/10/64
35* Official Records, Series IV, V 01,3» page 158. Thomson - Confederate
Purchasing Operations Abroad, page 29.
36. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.3, page 158.
37* Official Records, Series IV, V 01.3, page 158. Slidell to Mcßae 14/2/64
FOOTNOTES TO APPENDIX A
1. J.C, Schwab. The Confederate States, Page 347.
2. Gorges. Civil War Diary, Page 92.
3. Thomson. Confederate Purchasing Operations Abroad, Page 57*
4. Mason Papers, Vol. IV, Page 908,
5. Thomson. Confederate Purchasing Operations Abroad, Page 93*
6. Official Records, Series IV, V 01.3, page 525/59. Mcßae to Seddon 4/7/64.


APPENDIX A
CONFEDERATE FINANCE
When war broke out, the Confederacy was prepared for a brief conflict
of a scant few months duration. The leaders never at any time during the
first onset of hostilities anticipated a war of four years duration because
they had convinced themselves that the European powers were dependent on the
South's economic resources, so dependent in fact, that the industrial well
being of Europe, and of Britain and France in particular, were based on an
uninterrupted supply of cotton - the 'white gold' of the Confederacy, This
opinion was shared by the vast bulk of Southern planters, and it was a simple
extension of this theory to postulate, that neither France or Britain would
allow the supply of cotton to be endangered, that political and economic
upheaval would occur in both countries if the supply was stopped, and that
rather than risk this stoppage, intervention on the Confederate side would be
resorted to, and victory of the Confederacy over the Union thereby ensured.
As a measure to assist, all exports of cotton were deliberately with-
held by the Confederate Government, an inducement, it was thought, to Britain
and France to break the Union blockade of the Southern ports. This measure
did not have the desired effect on the European powers, but it did eliminate
the only real basis for the establishment of Confederate credit. The situ-
ation was not helped by the frequent changes in Davis' cabinet. From the
outbreak of war to the collapse of the Confederacy four men served as
Secretary of State, six as Secretary of War, five as Attorney General and
two as Secretary of the Treasury. Most -of the changes occurred in the first
two years of the war, and it was during this period that there was much
vacillation in Confederate policy, and a good deal of confusion resulting
from overlapping duties and conflicting plans. The first Secretary of the
Treasury, Christopher B. Memminger of South Carolina had a very heavy burden
placed upon his, on the whole, inadequate shoulders. A man of great personal
courage and honour, he struggled with the gigantic task of financing the
nation at home and abroad against the opposition of Congress until he resigned
in Although he made mistakes enough, in passing judgement on his career
as Secretary of the Treasury it should be remembered that "The financial
legislation of Congress was, in the most vital points, opposed to his judgement
and contrary to his often repeated and strongly urged recommendations", (l)
Gorgas commented on Memminger as being rude, dogmatic and slow, (2) Seddon
regarded him as an ass, but like Pharaoh, Davis hardened his heart and refused
to change the Secretary for one more generally acceptable. This resulted in
Congress refusing to pass Memmingefs measures as a means of forcing him out
of office, and thus, whilst the politicians played at games the vital funds
for purchasing armaments were dryihg up.
Shifts in the post of Secretary of War also contributed greatly to the
confusions and muddles of 1861/3. Agents were unwilling to act on orders
issued by Seddon because they considered him inexperienced, whilst adminis-
trative officers within the department were much disheartened and demoralised


by constant changes at the top, each change bringing its--own conflicting
orders and confusions.
The first cash for the Confederacy was obtained by the seizure of funds
in the customs houses and the New Orleans, Dahlonega and Charlotte mints,
which together yielded some /718,294, Gash was also obtained by the sale of
patriotic bonds in the first year of the war, and by the seizure by the
Government of /4,192,998 in specie, the assets of the New Orleans banks,
rushed out of the city just before its capture. Revenues such as import tax,
suid export taxes on cotton, brought in /3»480,617 and a sequestration law
seizing funds and properties of enemy aliens brought in another ,#7 >468,094.
Congress, however, shrank from imposing a rigid system of taxation to raise
further fluids and sought to lay the financial burden of the war on the future
generations by issuing bonds, but since Memminger failed to devise a method
of selling them similar to that employed by the Union in its National Bank
Act of 1863 which gave the banks a strong incentive to buy U.S, Government
bonds, it became very difficult for the Confederate Treasury to dispose of
bonds after the first issue of jfLs>ooo,ooo. Because the people had no money
after this, the Government were forced to sell bonds for cotton or agricultural
produce and by these means accumulated vast stores of cotton (some 430,000
bales of 500 lbs. each), sugar, rice, tobacco and wheat of which only a small
amount could be shipped to Europe for conversion to cash or credit.
Recourse was had to the printing of vast supplies of paper money for
its internal expenses, the notes unbacked by specie, and not made legal tender
by law, bore the promise to pay "two years after the ratification of a treaty
of peace between the Confederate States and the United States of America".
Individual States also issued floods of notes of small denominations and all
of these were counterfeited with ease in the North by way of weakening the
Confederate economy. The result was colossal inflation, in which fantastic
prices were a feature, s6 dozen for eggs, /25 per lb. butter, jtLO for an
ordinary cigar, turnip greens /4 per peck and flour /275 per barrel.
After Gettysburg the fall in the currency was catastrophic, August '63
saw the dollar at 8 cents in gold, dwindling to 4J cents in January '64 and to
less than 2 cents in March 1865. The U.S. dollar, whilst depreciating, never
fell below 1/3 of its face value in gold.
All of this did not in the least help Confederate credit abroad. Such
specie as could be had was converted to credit and deposited with the firm of
Fraser and Trenholme in Liverpool, to whom all agents were accustomed to
report for such credits as were available for their use. These credits soon
gave out, and the agents realised that the only way they could obtain the cash
they needed was by bringing in cotton. The exchange rate had mounted heavily
until it became prohibitive at 1000# by October '63 so cotton had to be tried,
Confederate policy notwithstanding. It was discovered that up to four or five
million sterling could be raised in Britain by selling cotton bonds at an
agreed rate of 4d. per lb. Whilst the authorities in Richmond were pondering
this, George T. Sinclair arrived in England in 1862 with orders to have a super
Alabama built out of funds to be provided by Bulloch, The funds were exhausted
and Mason took the responsibility of issuing Sinclair with £62,000 of bonds,


these being the first cotton bonds used in Europe, This success enabled
Mallory to send Captain Maury C.S.N., to Europe with authority to obtain
money by means of cotton bonds and to issue like authority to other Naval
officers entrusted with building programmes.
It was obvious that if all Departments proceeded in this manner they
would become competitors and the bonds would become a glut on the market. It
was considered necessary to have a financial agent abroad, and an Englishman,
James Spence, who was a staunch and literate supporter of the Confederacy was
somewhat loosely appointed.
As the news of this method of raising capital was passed around specu-
lative interest was aroused and companies such as Isaac Campbell and Lindsay
& Co., offered supplies in return for bonds. Meanwhile, in Paris, Slidell
and Huse were negotiating with the French banking house of Erlanger et Cie
for a bond issue. It was at this time that it was intimated to Slidell that
naval purchasing operations might be carried on in France free from inter-
vention. Slidell was convinced of Erlangerfe political importance and believed
that in the event of a contract being drawn between Erlanger and Richmond the
very strongest influences would be brought to bear in favour of the Confederacy,
A tentative contract was drawn up between Erlanger and Slidell to dispose of
£5,000,000 in Cotton Bonds bearing 8 per cent. The terras were exceedingly
sharp, but their infatuation with the supposed diplomatic advantages clouded
the vision of Slidell and Huse, and also of Benjamin, but not that of Mason
or Spence.
Lindsay & Co. had a counter proposition, that of raising small amounts
as had been done in the case of Sinclair. ■ Raising cash on small amounts at
4d. per lb. would increase the premium and the Government would enjoy the
prestige and benefit of such increased prices. The authorities decided against
this and eventually agreed to take £3*000,000 instead of the £5,000,000 offered
by Erlanger, the banker conceding to give 77 % for the bonds instead of 70$.
The interest rate was reduced from 8 to 7 per cent, and in case the bonds were
redeemed in cotton, 6d. per lb. would be allowed.
Whilst these negotiations were in progress at Richmond the agents were
desperately short of funds. The cotton bonds in the possession of the various
departments could not be used at more than 50 cents on the dollar, due to the
increased rate of interest in England, which rose in January 1863 from 3 to 5
per cent. The bonds were withheld accordingly until the Erlanger loan
proposals were known to Mason. In their desperate need for cash, the agents
had to pledge some 15,300,000 lbs, of cotton whilst awaiting the outcome of
the direct loan. (3)
When the news reached Europe that ah agreement had been concluded with
Erlanger but for a smaller amount, Mason, Spence and other agents were secretly
pleased since they thought the sale of cotton certificates offered a more
advantageous method of raising money. Indeed, Bulloch had never doubted that
the Erlanger loan would not be a success and had so informed Mallory, North
had done the same, and Spence and Mason had been against it, but led on by the
ignis fatuus of "political advantages" Richmond had turned a deaf ear to the


advice. When the terms became known the astute Spence described them as
preposterous. He sent Erlanger a plan for raising the loan before the public
in a way that would save the Government thousands of dollars interest, but
Erlanger was evasive, and conferred with Slidell who, unaware of Spence's
appointment, regarded him as an interloping meddler. Spence appealed to
Memminger but was told that his appointment was as "financial agent in Great
Britain" and as such would be required to "negotiate and carry out such
arrangements for the raising and payment of money" (4) as the Treasury would
from time to time require. Furthermore General C.J. Mcßae, a cotton merchant,
had been appointed as Special Agent for the Erlanger loan.
The loan prospectus was issued on lBth March 1863 and the books opened
the following day in Liverpool, London, Paris, Amsterdam and Frankfurt.
J.H, Schroeder & Co. were the London agents, and they received orders for
£5,000,000 the first day, almost twice the sum of the loam. For two and a half
days the books were kept open end the total subscriptions reached nearly
£16,000,000, more than five times the authorised issue. Although hailed sis
a moral victory by Hotze and Slidell, the oversubscription was no real gauge
to judge the demand for the loan. It was customary for such loans to be over-
subscribed. Allotments were based on the amount subscribed. If an individual
wanted ten bonds, and he estimated that there would be an oversubscription of
three times the value he would put down for thirty, and this peculiarity of
European finance seemed unknown to anybody on the Confederate side with the
exception of Spence, who was not exhilarated at the news of the oversubscrip-
tion.
The bonds were offered at 90% and sold at a 5% premium on the first
day. Within a week, on the drop in speculative interest, they stood at 92,
and when in less than two weeks they stood at 85 to 86, Erlanger and Mason
were distinctly alarmed. Erlanger claimed that the drop was caused by Northern
propaganda and was substantially correct insofar as a Union supporter, R.J,
Walker was campaigning against the loan by distributing pamphlets about pre
war Southern repudiation of debts. He put strong pressure on Mason to spend
the receipts from the first instalment to bull the market. Reluctantly Mason
and Slidell consented and bought more than ,500,000 of their own bonds.
This saved the stock from any danger of forfeiture, but by May 9th, despite
constant purchases, it was dropping around 1/2 - 1 per cent premium, and on
the 11th it closed at par. After this it slipped steadily until it was 4
below par by July 23rd, Then the double defeats at Vicksburg and Gettysburg
took the bottom out and it sank to 36 per cent discount. It finally steadied
at 22%.
Spence was bitter, and accused Erlanger of betraying the Confederacy's
trust by unloading sill his bonds on their agents who were buying to sustain
the market. Erlanger, he claimed, had pocketed most of the £1,500,000 that
Mason had spent to sustain the market, purchasing his stipulated quota of
£400,000 of bonds at 77% and collecting 5% commission, then selling them back
to the Confederacy at 90. Slidell was always sensitive to criticism of
Erlanger - he was marrying his daughter into the family - and Spence's
accusations enraged him beyond all measure, yet Spence was only too right in
his warnings. The Confederacy finally received about J? 2,599,000 instead of


the ,500,000 of the sum called for. Erlanger made a fat profit, but the
British friends of the Confederacy lost ell their investment. But as was jseen
in the introduction, many of the bonds left on the Confederacy's hands were
unloaded on contractors like Isaac Campbell. The loan did not realise enough
to meet even the Navy Department’s needs, Mallory .actually wrote Mcßae to
supply Maury with 200,000, more money than the loan realised. The agents
were in desperate straits, the war was at its most critical point and the
Erlanger loan, far from solving the financial troubles, had proved a ghastly
fiasco.
There was only one answer. Cotton fetched 60 cents per lb. in Liverpool
in 1863, the Government had a supply on hand and the means to augment it.
What simpler than to export it to Europe and to control blockade running in
order to acquire the carrying capacity? In January Congress passed an
act authorising this measure, thereby accepting the fallacy of their early
thinking. The act provided the three vital regulations affecting the Blockade
runners,
1. That every vessel owned by private persons shall be considered on
every voyage as chartered to the Confederate Government for one
half of her tonnage, outward and inward.
2. That all private owners of cargo exported from the Confederacy
shall bring in return supplies equal to one half of the proceeds
of their expected cargo.
3. That the several States shall remain at liberty to charter the
other half of each vessel and shall be free to carry out or
bring back cargo on that half without being subject to the
regulations.
An agreement made on April and approved by Davis provided for the
purchase and transportation abroad of tobacco, cotton and naval stores, and
Congress made an appropriation of /20,000,000 for their purchase by the
Treasury, Navy and War Departments. After much opposition from commercial
houses the scheme got under way, and funds were made available to the depos-
itories at Liverpool and were apportioned by Mcßae.
The confiscation and compulsory purchase of the Laird Rams by the
Admiralty, and the enforced sale of the ironclads building in France, whilst
it wrecked forever the Confederacy's naval programme, yielded a plentiful
supply of cash which was more than sufficient for what purchasing was left to
the Navy. These receipts were augmented by the sale of Northh ironclad to
Denmark, and of Sinclair's half built ship, ' ’
As the new scheme got under way, moreover, interest revived in the
Erlanger loan, with the result that it rose 10$, partly due of course, to
the favourable impression created by the efficiency of Mcßae. (5) It maintained
its rise when Mcßae began projects to provide shipping through a well known
firm, J,K. Gilliat & Company, to establish a line of steamers to run on the
Government account.


Borrowing on the Erlanger loan to start with and financed by Fraser
Trenholme he had eight first class steamers built or purchased by Bulloch,
and whilst waiting for them to materialise, he arranged with Alexander Collie
to ship supplies for six months. Four large steamers were thereupon supplied
by them to carry out Quartermaster, Ordnance and Medical stores. Since the
Government already owned four steamers, and had a 3/4 interest in five ships
operated by Crenshaw, and the ships contracted for by Mcßae were augmented to
14, he could place 27 ships at the service of the Government as rapidly as
they could be built or purchased.
By July 1864 the credit of the Confederacy was rapidly improving, and
by August the Erlanger loan had risen from 42 in the Spring to 77, and it was
confidently expected that by the end of the year the Government would have
the means in its own hands to obtain sill the supplies required abroad. (5)
In his report of 10th December 1864, Seddon was able to report that
27,299 bales of cotton had been exported under the new plan to a value of
/$5,296,000 equal in Confederate currency at 25-1 to #132,400,150. These
figures were reflected in the importation of supplies, as for instance, in
the Trans Mississippi where, by the year ending Ist November 1864, 136,832
small arms, 1,490,000 lbs lead, 1,850,000 lbs saltpetre and 6,200,000 lbs
meat and many other stores items had been received.
Supplies flocked into Wilmington too, from October 31st to December
4th 1864, 26 blockade runners made the run to that port, 23 being successful,
1 captured, 1 beached and 1 destroyed. Furthermore, European banks began to
take interest, a consortium offering to set up a £10,000,000 Confederate Bank
in Europe.
By December things had reached the stage that Duncan F, Kenner was
appointed to proceed to London and Paris to complete the negotiations on
behalf of the Treasury, But before the month was out, Wilmington had fallen,
Sherman was completing the march that cut the Confederacy in two and from all
over the territories of the South came the news of universal disaster. The
proposed negotiations were abandoned and the agents, with no home port to
accept their cargoes, closed their operations down and went home.
The measures that might have given victory to the embattled Confederate
armies had been applied three years too late.


APPENDIX B
ABSTRACT OF SUMMARY STATEMENT SHOWING QUANTITY AND VALUE OF ARMY SUPPLIES
PURCHASED, AND SHIPPED BY MAJOR C. HUSE ON ACCOUNT OF CONFEDERATE STATES
GOVERNMENT
(House Documents, V 01.71, N 0,658 War of Rebellion, Series 4 V 01.2. 56th Cpngress
Ist Session, 1899-1900. p.p. 382 - 84).
• One hundred and thirty one thousand one hundred and twenty nine stand
of arms, as follows: Seventy thousand nine hundred and eighty long Enfield
rifles, 9,715 short Enfield rifles, 354 carbine Enfield rifles, 27,000 Austrian
rifles, 21,040 British muskets, 20 small bore Enfields, 2,020 Brimswick rifles
at.a cost including cases, molds, kegs, screwdrivers etc, of £417,263, 9»Ud,
One hundred and twenty nine cannon, as follows: Fifty four 6 pounder
bronze guns, smooth: 18 howitzer bronze guns, smooth: 6 twelve pounder iron
guns, rifled; 2 howitzers, iron; carriages and caissons for same; 6 rifled
Blakely cannon; 6 3*lo inch carriages for same; 18,000 shells for same; 2,000
fuses; 3 rifled cannon, 8 inch Blakely; 680 shells for same; 12 rifled steel
guns, 12 pounders; shot, shell etc for same;. 32 bronze guns rifled (Austrian)
with caissons etc complete; 10,000 shrapnel shell, and fuses for same; 2 bronze
. guns rifled, 200 shells and fuses; 756' shrapnel shell, round; 9,820 wooden
fuses; 4 steel cannon, rifled, 9 pounders; 1,008 shells and fuses for same;
•220 sets harness; spare parts artillery harness etc, all costing £96,746.1.8d.
One thousand two hundred and twenty six cavalry equipments, 16,178
cavalry sabres, 5,592 cavalry sabre belts, 5,392 cavalry sabre knots, 1,360
Cavalry humraals (sic), 1,386 cavalry surcingles and pads, total expended for
cavalry £20,321.12. 3d.
Fifty sets Webb harness (104, 3, l 8 leather weight), 456 leather butts,
198 leather packages; all costing £9,7l7*Hs.
Thirty four thousand seven hundred and thirty one sets accouterments;
40,240 gun slings; 34,655 Knapsacks, complete; 4,000 canteen straps; 81,406
bayonet scabbards; 656 sergeants accouterments all costing £54,873*165.3d.
Three hundred and fifty thousand pounds cannon powder, 94,600 pounds
musket powder, 32,000 lbs rifle powder, 900 lbs bursting powder, 4,137,000
cartridges for small arms, 2,800 lbs chlorate potassa (sic), 1,024 lbs
saltpetre, 89,900 friction tubes (not all the details to hand as to cartridges),
10,100,000 percussion caps all costing £47,010.105.3d.
Quartermasters Department
Seventy four thousand and six pairs boots costing £28,422.165.4d.;
62,025 blankets, £23,903*25.1id.; 78,520 yards cloth, £24,660.155.5d.;
8,675 greatcoats, £13,294.175.8d.; 8,250 pair trousers, £5,144.115.3d.;


170,72** pair socks, £9.292.18547d<} 6*703 shirts, £738.95.8d.; 17,89** yards
flannel, £1,632.05.5d,; 97 packages trimmings, £3,**35.H5.6d. Total expanded
in clothing etc. £110,525.35.9d.
Forty six sets armourers tools, 36 sets saddler tools, 10 sets farriers
tools, 5,336 pieces serge for cartridge bags, 2,000 cartridge bags, 1,013 cwts
Lead, 100 cwt sheet copper, 16 Flags, worth medical supplies,
87 tarpaulins, 10 cwt shellac, 1,192 boxes tinplate, 75 packages steel, 6*f cwt
steel. Total for medical and other supplies as above £33,0**9»65. Freight,
railway carriage etc., £**9,683.195.5d.
Supplies that have been shipped
£. s. d.
For small arms *l-17,262 9 11
Artillery and harness 96,7**6 1 8
Accouterments etc. 5**,873 16 3
Ammunition *f7,010 10 3
Leather 9,717 U 0
Clothing 110,525 3 9
Medical supplies 13,**32 10 7
Ordnance Stores etc. 19,616 15 5
Freight, Railway carriage etc 19,732 7 8
Insurance etc 29,951 n 9
818,869 18 3
Supplies now in London ready for shipment
23.000 rifles to be delivered at Nassau (value at Nassau) 87,950 0 0
20.000 Scabbards 1,500 0 0
**6 casks saddlers material 631 5 0
11 cases nitric acid 38 *+ 8
2,012,000 cartridges 5,533 0 0
3,000,000 percussion caps 68l 0 0
10.000 pouch tins, prepared for accoutrements,
order (illegible) 250 0 0
286 Ingots Tin 628 2 6
931 pigs lead 1,252 17 9
3 cases thread etc. 2*fo 17 3
1 bale serge 60 19 6
13,750 pair trousers, Quartermasters dept. 8,565 2 1
1*f,250 greatcoats " " 23,835 13 3
l,Bo*t pair boots ,f " 887 11 6
** chests tea, Medical department *fB 7 6
2**9,853 1 0


In Vienna awaiting payment
£. s. d.
30.000 rifles 115,550 0 0
30.000 scabbards 2,230 0 0
Total expended and under order 117,750 0 0
Shipped up to date 818,869 18 3
Ready for shipment in London, to be shipped by December 15 1 0
In Vienna awaiting payment 117,750 0 0
l9 3
Received by Fraser Trenholme Co, 613,589 0 0
Total Required 372,883 19 3
Indorsment
Respectfully referred to the Secretary of War for information as to purchases
made by Major Huse.
J. GORGAS
..Colonel, Chief of Ordnance
3/Feb/1863
