

Major Ropata Wahawaha,
N.Z.C., M.L.C.
THE STORY
HIS LIFE AND TIMES
Related by LIEUT.-COLONEL PORTER.
Reprinted from THE POVERTY BA V HERALD.
©iebutme:
Printed at the Poverty Bay Herald Office, Gladstone Road.
xm - m
4
i /
l\b




Major Ropata Wahawaha,
N.Z.C., MX.C.
THE STORY
HIS LIFE AND TIMES
Related by LIEUT.-COLONEL PORTER.
Reprinted from THE POVERTY BAY HERALD.
©ifiburtte:
Printed at the Poverty Bay Herald Office, Gladstone Road.




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
Poverty Bay Herald, Friday, July 2nd, 1897.
One of New Zealand’s bravest and most
loyal sons has passed away. The strongest
and most striking feature in Major Ropata’s
life was his absolute fearlessness as a warrior,
but this admirable characteristic is closely
matched by another sterling trait, his un-
swerving loyalty to the Crown. Although
his right to the title may have been dis-
puted, he was undoubtedly by birth and by
achievements a great ranyalini —his gallant
deeds, uprightness, and honesty of purpose
stamped him as one of Nature’s noblemen.
Major Ropata was known to the latter
generation only as an honored and respected
member of the Legislative Council and one
who had been great in war; and there are
few remaining who, having fought side by
side with him, are able to tell of his courage
and prowess as a fighter. But even then,
only one half, the latter end, of his career is
remembered —to learn the story of his early
fighting life we must go back to Maori
traditions of the days before the pakeh i
came to the colony, and there we find that
the same valor and indomitable pluck has
distinguished him. Major Ropata’s gallant
services on behalf of the Europeans at a time
when the new colonists had to fight for their
existence in the land of their adoption were
marked by the special distinction conferred
upon him of the New Zealand Cross, and
from the hands of the Queen he received a
handsome sword, whilst in the days when
true merit was recognised as the only
qualification for a seat in the highest branch
of the Legislature he was made a member
of the Legislative Council. The honorable
gentleman faithfully fulfilled his duties
in the Legislature for many years, be-
ing constant in his attendance until last
year increasing feebleness and ill-health
compelled his absence, and amongst the
notable faces fast disappearing from that
august Chamber there was none nobler than
that of the old Major, who, though dis-
tinctly a silent member, never taking part
in the debates, was always observed to take
a keen interest in the proceedings, and to
cast his vote intelligently. Ropata was be-
loved by his native people, and from them
and a wide circle of Europeans there will be
a very deep expression of regret at the news
that he has passed away.




Major Ropata Wahawaha.
N.Z.C.. M.Iv.C.
THE STORY OF HIS LIFE.
II (IMPUTING his age from some
II notable event, according to the
v, usual custom of the Maoris,
Major Ropata said he was a
full grown boy at the date of the
introduction of the Gospel into
'J)• New Zealand. Taking that date,
r lBl4, and allowing him to be
seven years of age at the time, it would
appear that at the date of his death he was
90 years old—a score above the allotted
span of life. This statement is proved
to be about correct by other comparative
estimates.
By birth Ropata was a chief of the sub-
tribe of the Ngatiporou, Te Aowera, although
not of the Ariki, or blue-blooded line. The
lines of ancestry from which he traces
descent were all of a good fighting stock,
many of his forefathers being distinguished
in battle. One of his immediate ancestors,
particularly noted for his warlike prowess,
followed the good old Rob Roy plan—
He may take who has the power,
And he must keep who can.
The remains of the ancient stronghold of
the warrior are still in existence, being just
above the late residence of Major Ropata,
upon a rocky eminence commanding a clear
view of the Valley of the Waiapu for miles
around. By a curious freak of nature a
remarkable stone projects from the front
face of the parapet of the stronghold, and it
was the custom of the old warrior, just
prior to a plundering raid, to have the stone
colored red, intimating to the surrounding
LIFE.
tribes his intention of descending to the
valley to forage supplies, and notifying that
any resistance offered to his foragers would
invariably result in the killing of the
offenders and destruction of their villages,
crops, etc., and the cooking of some “as a
relish to the vegetables of the war party ”
(to put it in the Maori vernacular).
Major Ropata so soon as he was able to
carry a weapon became an active participant
in the internecine wars of his people, and he
was present at more than one cannibal feast.
It was in one of these early fights that an
event occurred which gave a strong incen-
tive to the actions of Ropata at Poverty
Bay some forty years subsequently, when lie
had the opportunity of paying off old scores
upon his enemies and capturers. Agrarian
disputes had arisen between the Rongouha-
kaatu, a Poverty Bay tribe, and the Ngati-
porou, and an engagement took place, in
which the Ngatiporou were defeated, a
number of them being killed and eaten, and
others being made prisoners. Among the
prisoners taken was Major Ropata, then a
mere lad. He became the prize of the
old chief Rapata Whakapuhia—hence his
name of Rapata Wahawaha. The name,
perpetuating the remembrance of his days
in captivity, was always distasteful to the
old man, and it was a relief to him when,
through the peculiar Highland accent of Sir
Donald McLean, the latter changed his name
from A’apala to A’opata, and by the latter
title he became generally known.
For some years Ropata was detained a
prisoner among the Poverty Bay tribes, an
indignity and disgrace, according to Maori
EARLY


custom, that could only be wiped out by the
blood of the conquerors, hence the state-
ments sometimes made that lie is only a
plebeian, as one who has been taken prisoner
is considered but a slave by his captors, and
too often, also, by his own people, and so
loses caste.
Ropata wa eventually ransomed by the
chief of the Whanau a Rua and Aowera
tribes, Tama i Whakanehua i te Rangi (“ the
Eldest Son who was Buried in the Heavens”).
This chief signed the Treaty of Waitangi on
behalf of the East Coast people, and was the
uncle of the chief Hcnare Potae, and father
of Mrs Porter.
Returning along the coast, after having
been ransomed, Ropata, at the village of
Whangara, was shown the hands of his
relative, Te Rerehorua, nailed to a cross-bar,
upon which kits of food were suspended.
This chief had been killed in one of the
engagements and his body eaten, the hands
being dried and kept by the chief of the con-
querors, who had placed them there as a
mark of derision. Incensed at this outrage
upon his kinsman, Ropata, upon his arrival
at Tokomaru, reported to the chief of the
Whanau a Rua (the gentleman with the long
name, before referred to 1 , who at once
organised a war party to avenge the death
of Rerehorua and rescue Ids remains from
the degradation and insult to which they
were being subjected. In the raid and
fight that followed Ropata distinguished him-
self, beginning his instalments of revenge,
which were only completed upon the Poverty
Bay tribes at the cessation of hostilities in
1872. The chief who had killed Rerehorua
was taken prisoner in this fight, and was
being marched by the war party along the
coast for immolation among the relatives of
Rerehorua, but before reaching these, the
chief Tama i Whakanehua said he could no
longer endure with patience the presence of
the murderer of his relative, and there and
then dashed his brains out with his mere.
For many years subsequent to this Ropata
remained under the protection of his chief
till the latter’s death, in about the year 1850.
THE HAUHAU REBELLION: ROPATA FIGHTING FOR THE
QUEEN
It was in 1864 that Ropata emerged from
the oi polloi of Maoridom to become a
prominent figure in the turbulent times
that followed the outbreak of war in that
year. The early part of the year saw the
birth of the new religion—Te Pai Mairere,
afterwards called Hauhau —a fanaticism that
spread like wildfire throughout the North
Island, and led to a long series of disturb-
ances and hostilities, with much bloodshed,
in many parts. As the religion was the
cause of bringing to the Europeans a know-
ledge of Ropata’s true worth as a warrior
and loyal subject of the Queen, it may not
be uninteresting nor out of place at this
stage to state what was its origin. Te Ua,
its propounder, was a wild fanatical sort of
fellow not held in any high esteem by his
people. Early in 1864 he got into trouble,
and was taken prisoner and tied up. During
his captivity, so the story runs, lie dreamt
that the Angel Gabriel came to him and
gave him power to burst his fetters. The
atua, or inspiration, entered into him, and
the Angel told him that he was to start a
religion amongst the people called Pai
Mairere (good and peaceful). By the assist-
ance of this Pai Mairere and the god, who
was to be Hau, the Maoris would be able
to overcome and expel all Europeans from
New Zealand. Te Ua was to erect a pole of
worship upon which there were to be various
stages —resembling the yard-arm of a vessel
—emblematical of the three heavens. Around
this pole the people marched and danced and
worshipped. By following this religion Te
Ua said they would become powerful and
invulnerable to shot or weapons of any kind,
and they would drive all the Europeans from
the island. Disturbances were at that time
going on, and in a fight which ensued Cap-
tain Lloyd and several privates were killed.
Their heads were cut off and preseiwed, and
that of Captain Lloyd was secured by Te Ua,
who took it to bed with him, saying that his
atwi was using this head to teach him the
proper form of worship and to teach him to
speak English, He then pretended to be
6
Major Bopata Wah.aivaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


inspired, and his first form of worship was a
peculiar incantation, which the Natives were
beguiled into believing was English, but
which was the veriest gibberish, bearing the
faintest resemblance to the commands that
Te Ua may have heard given to the British
troops. The chant, however, was tuneful,
and when some hundreds of Maoris trooping
round their nw- (pole of worship) took it up
the effect was very fine. This, however, was
only the peaceful portion of this “ good and
peaceful” religion. Just prior to a fight
the white flags, with various designs and
emblems upon them, which had been flying
from the u»i were hauled down, and the
rtki, or red flag of war, was put up, and then
commenced another incantation, each line or
verse ending with a loud cry of “ Hau,” the
name of their mythical god. It was from
this peculiar shout “Hau” that the new
religionists got the name of Hauhaus. It is
interesting, further to note that the original
nw, or pole of worship, erected at Waka-
mara, near Mautahi, in Taranaki, was
destroyed by a force of which Colonel Porter
was a member, in 1860.
“ Te Pai Mairere” having been established,
in order to spread it far and wide, Te Ua
sent out prophets, the principal one of whom,
Hapanaia, was early shot in an engagement
on the West Coast. Two others, Kereopa
and Patara, were sent to the tribes of the
Rawhite (Rising Sun, East Coast), and
the murders and fights that followed the
preaching of these peaceful prophets are a
matter of history. They brought with them
the heads of Captain Lloyd and Private
Kelly, and the latter, left with a Poverty
Bay tribe by Kereopa, was afterwards taken
and forwarded to Napier. At Opotiki the
Rev. Mr Volkner was hung, and his body
decapitated and the eyes swallowed by
Kereopa, who henceforth was called Kai-
whatu (Eye Eater). From Opotiki Kereopa
came inland to preach to the Poverty Bay
tribes, and Patara travelled via the coast
to the East Cape, the headquarters of the
Ngatiporou. Led away by the new religion,
numbers joined from the various sub-tribes
of Ngatiporou, and simultaneously Kereopa
was making converts of the Natives of
Poverty Bay. These simultaneous rebellions
made the position of the Europeans on the
East Coast the more serious, and necessitated
the employment of two forces to suppress
the rising. The promulgation of the new
tenets amongst the Ngatiporou, however,
was not allowed to go on unresisted. At
the most critical time, as there was danger
of it spreading throughout the whole com-
munity, a stand was made by certain chiefs,
the principals being Ropata Wahawaha,
Mokena Kohore, and Henare Potae. The
Hauhaus soon began to arm and erect
fortifications, and they threatened those
who did not join them that they would be
put to death. Several persons, indeed, who
resisted were murdered by them. Being
almost defenceless, the loyal chiefs appealed
to the Government for aid in arms and
soldiers, which the late Sir Donald McLean
speedily afforded, a small force under Major
Fraser and Captain Biggs being sent to
Waiapu as well as a supply of arms and
ammunition for the loyal chiefs and their
men.
Prior to the arrival of relief several
engagements took place, in which Ropata
distinguished himself. In repulsing an
attack at Tikitiki, where his small body
of loyal followers were outnumbered in arms
and men, Ropata decided the battle in a
truly Maori fashion. The parties were
firing from terraces on either side of a
valley, and Ropata’s men were • falling
rapidly. This enraged him so much that,
in defiance of bullets, he rushed midway
into the valley, gnashing his teeth, jumping,
flourishing his mere (axe), being otherwise
unarmed, and yelling defiance to the rebels
to come on. Moved by his taunts a chief
from the enemy rushed out to the front.
Ropata, excited and impatient, and imper-
vious to the bullets which were being
fired at him, advanced to meet the ton
(brave). It was (prickly over. After a few
frantic rushes and blows, Ropata succeeded
in catching his opponent by the hair and
dashing his brains out with his mere. This
was the stroke of victory, the rebels, panic-
stricken by the fall of their chief, retreating
with considerable loss.
The arrival at Waiapu of the Hawke’s
Bay volunteers under Major Fraser and
Captain Biggs was followed by several
sharp engagements between the allied troops
and the rebels, one taking place at Pakai-
romirorni and another at Pukemare. From
the latter pah the Hauhaus retreated to an
inaccessible fortification in the back ranges
of Hick’s Bay, known as Hungahungatoroa,
where they were pursued and defeated with
very severe loss. This virtually ended
the lighting in the district of Waiapu
proper. The casualties on both sides had
been considerable At each of the engage-
ments Ropata was the leading ton,, and at
Hungahungatoroa he particularly distin-
guished himself by scaling a precipice with
7
The Story of Hi a Life.


a few men in the teeth of a heavy fire and
engaging in a hand-to-hand encounter with
the enemy. It was immediately after this
that the pah fell.
We now come further south. At this
time a large number of Coast Hauhaus had
fortified themselves in the rear of Tokomaru
at a strong pah called Pukepapa, and they
were reinforced by fugitives from Hunga-
hungatoroa. Henare Potae, the chief and
nephew of the redoubtable Tama i whaka-
nehua i te Rangi, with a few of his immediate
relations had taken refuge at Te Mauhai, a
headland jutting into the sea at the south
end of Tokomaru Bay and naturally fortified.
It was at this place that one of the pluckiest
actions of the war took place. The chief
Henare, with all the available fighting men,
left to bring in other loyal Natives from
along the coast, leaving only the women and
children with three old men and two young
ones to defend the pa. The Pukepapa
Hauhaus, hearing of the defenceless state
of the pa, decided upon an attack and
capture.- At daylight one morning the pa
was alarmed by an attack from the seaward
side by about 200 Hauhaus, some of whom
were scaling the cliff’s and about to gain an
entrance, when the daughter and only child
of the late chief Tama i Whakanehua, a girl
of 19, seized a gun and shot the leader, the
body falling to the rocks below. The regular
attack then began, the Hauhaus attempting
to scale the cliff in numbers. The inmates
of the pa had only five guns. Te Hate
Houkamau, the young chief of Hick’s Bay,
and the other young man retained one each,
the others being given to three young
women, Te Rangi i Paea, Mere Arihi te
Puna, and Heni te Pahuahua. The old men
loaded the guns for the women to fire. Te
Hate then incited a strong repulse of the
attack, shooting down all who attempted to
gain a footing on the parapet. The three
girls did Spartan duty, regardless of all
danger, shooting the rebels down without
mercy. Some of the older women aided by
casting stones down upon the attacking
force. This strong resistance, and the heavy
loss they had sustained, caused consternation
among the Hauhaus, who thought the place
more strongly manned than they had antici-
pated, and they then retreated to their
stronghold at Pukepapa, leaving thirteen
dead and having many wounded. Several
of the defenders were wounded and one
killed. Amongst the wounded was a
Pakeha-Maori, an old whaler named John
Henderson, who afterwards died from his
wounds in Auckland Hospital.
Henare Potae sent a letter by whaleboat
to Ropata at Waiapu asking the latter to
come to his assistance. Ropata readily
responded, and with his band of one hundred
fighters came down the coast and over
Tawhiti Hill, joining forces with Henare
in the centre of Tokomaru Bay, the latter
having just returned with his reinforcements.
Together they advanced to the attack upon
the strongly fortified Pukepapa. Ropata
organised the attack, and separated the
forces to right and left flanks. In a brief
engagement, although opposed by between
400 and 500 rebels—Ropata had 200 men—
the loyalists captured the pa, and made
its garrison prisoners, very few escaping.
Among the prisoners were some of his own
men, of the sub-tribe of the Aowera. He
had them tied up, and then addressed
them in these terms:—“You belong to
the Aowera. When they brought this
Hauhauism I warned my people not to
join it, to have nothing to do with it,
because it was evil and the results would
be evil. Now you have joined it in dis-
obedience to my advice, and the evil has
come. I care not for your religion, but I
will have no members of my tribe disobedient,
and this is the way I treat them.” With
that he shot them.
After the fall of Pukepapa, the united
forces of Ropata and Henare Potae turned
their attention to a number of the Tolago
Bay Natives who had joined the rebels and
fortified a place inland from Tolago Bay
called Tautauhopo, Midway between An aura
and Tolago Bay they met a force of rebels
going to Anaura to commit depredations in
that locality, and a very brisk engagement
took place. Both forces extended in skirmish-
ing order along two parallel ridges, and in
the lower part of the valley between was an
impassable swamp. Ropata outflanked the
enemy and defeated them after a very smart
fight, in which many hand-to-hand en-
counters took place. In one of these Ropata
accounted for two men himself, by striking
one with a tomahawk, and seizing a rifle from
one of his own men shot another man just
as he was retreating into the swamp. The
Hauhaus retreated to Tautauhopo, w hich
was invested by Ropata and Henare’s force
and overturned. A majority of the rebels
surrendered, and swore allegiance to the
Queen. That ended the rebellion upon the
coast. Thanks to the prompt and decisive
action of Ropata and Henare, and their brave
and loyal followers, Te Pai Mairere had been
overturned. Our next article brings us to
the events that occurred nearer home.
8
Major Itopaia Wahawaha, X.Z.C., M.L-C.


POVERTY
The anti-pakeka crusade of the Hauhaus
was commenced in Poverty Bay simul-
taneously with the propagation of Te Pai
Mairere in Waiapu. Their apostle in this
district was Kereopa, the Eye Swallower,
the murderer of the Rev. Mr Yolkner.
Kereopa met with far greater success in his
mission than did his fellow prophet, Patara,
in the north. Practically the whole of the
Poverty Bay tribes embraced the new reli-
gion—none remained friendly and loyal to
the Queen, with the exception of the chief
Hirini te Kani and his people, living to the
north of the Turanganui River. The
converts to Hauhauism fortified them-
selves in a strong pa at Pukeamionga,
a fine commanding position upon one
of the hills overlooking Patutahi, and
also at Waerenga-a-hika and Oweta. Bishop
Williams and the missionaries were warned
that their lives were in danger, and to seek
safety had to abandon their mission station.
The hostile attitude assumed by the rebels
led to the Government sending forces to
support the few Europeans who were living
in the district, and to quell the rebellion.
Sir Donald McLean, who was empowered by
the Weld Government to act with full
authority as General Government Agent for
the East Coast, came in H.M.S. Brisk and
summoned several of the rebel chiefs to an
interview at Turanganui. Answering his
summons they met him at the pa on the
Kaiti. He appealed to them to cast off their
religion, to give up their arms, and to con-
tinue as loyal subjects of Her Majesty. One
significant remark was made to the chiefs
which they and their people have often
since had cause to remember, and will pro-
bably never forget. It was this : “ What
you are doing,” he said, “is trying to drive
the Europeans from your district, and it is
just the step to have all your district over-
run with Europeans. Now I warn you
that you will lose your lands you will
lose everything,—and the Europeans will
settle upon them, and I give you this note
of warning, that this is the result of your
action.” A certain time was given them to
consider the ultimatum, and after six or
seven days’ deliberation they sent in their
answer, refusing Sir Donald’s demands,
whereupon the Government Agent returned
to Napier, sent up further reinforcements by
H.M.S. Brisk, and ordered the Waiapu
forces to come down and attack the rebels.
BAY: 1865
Ropata and his mcn had not long returned
from Tolago Bay when they received word
from Sir D. McLean that their services were
required in Poverty Bay. They promptly
obeyed the call. The forces united and
built a redoubt on Kaiti, upon the spot
where Mr C. P. Davies’ residence now
stands. Those were the days before Gis-
borne was. The site of the town was one
dense wilderness of prickly acacia trees and
manuka scrub. There was not a house to be
seen. An old pa stood near where the present
Courthouse is located, and there was another
and larger pa on the Kaiti side of the river,
whilst Captain Read’s old trading store and
landing stage were also upon the left bank of
the Turanganui, at the site of the present
blockyard. The nearest* settler lived
at Makaraka, at which place, and in the
direction of Matawhero and the Waipaoa
river mouth, there were a few scattered
homesteads of Poverty Bay pioneers.
After the chiefs had returned their
answer to Sir Donald McLean’s ultimatum,
the forces were ordered to march into the
country and to take the new forts erected
by the Hauhaus. An advance was made
upon Pukeamionga, which was vacated by
the rebels, who retreated upon Waerenga-a-
hika and reinforced the pa at that place
The united forces then advanced upon
Waerenga-a-hika in November, 1565. The
rebels were holding that pa with a great
force of about 1200 people, but when the loyal
troops arrived very early one morning they
were taken by surprise. They were in the
act of stripping the Bishop’s residence and
the college of all the available lead and
zinc, with which to make bullets. The
cavalry, under Captain La Serre, drove
them from the Bishop’s house before
they had time to effect its destruction by
fire, but they had already demolished the
schoolhouse and outbuildings. Hastening
within their fortification, the Hauhaus then
began their service round the niv, and would
not cease till it was completed, although
the attacking force opened a heavy fire upon
them from the roof of the Bishop’s house and
other available commanding portions. It
was only after Piki, the red fighting flag,
went up that they finished their devotions,
and then they rushed to their trenches and
began a response to the British fire. The
pa was very strongly fortified, and the siege
lasted for seven days, during which the
9
The Story of His Life.


soldiers never left the trenches. One
evening after the attack commenced, rein-
forcements for the enemy arrived from
inland, and these took Captain Wilson’s
force, in the rear of the pa, by surprise.
Being exposed to two fires, this gallant little
force was in a very awkward pinch and had
to cut its way through the newcomers. A
number of Wilson’s men were killed, and
the remainder had a very narrow escape from
annihilation. This was on a Saturday, the
Hauhau’s Sabbath, and a prophet told them
that that day their G od had shown his strength,
and next day, the pakeha Sabbath, they
would attack the Europeans in force and kill
the lot of them. On the Sunday morning
bodies of 200 and 100 rebels came out of the
pa and ranged themselves in a dense mass,
as if for. a war dance, at the same time
hoisting their white Hauhau flags with the
red emblems on them. This was supposed
to be a demonstration for a truce or peace,
and Colonel Fraser ordered the bugler to
sound “ cease firing.” This order, it may
be mentioned, was given contrary to Ropata’s
advice. When the Maoris appeared with
their white flags, Colonel Fraser consulted
the latter as to the meaning of them.
Ropata said that this was a foolish action ;
that no doubt it was a ruse to attack and
was not a truce, and that they should not
stop firing. Some considerable difference
occurred between the officers over the
matter, and it is notable as a proof of Ropata’s
intimate knowledge of Maori character and
methods of warfare that his opinion was the
correct one. When the order to “cease
firing” was given these two bodies of rebels
advanced across the flat in the direction of
the European trenches, and when within
about 20 yards of the corner of the nearest
trench they received the order kok'ni (charge).
A heavy Are was immediately opened upon
them from all sides, but regardless of this
many rushed to the European trenches, and
hand to hand fights took place over the embank -
merits. The first to fall was the Hauhau pro-
phet who had predicted victory. This caused
a panic and retreat of the rebels. Ropata
with his force took up a position to the right
and poured in a heavy fire upon the rebels as
they retreated. Many of the Hauhaus, in
their escape across the plain, ran holding
their right hand in the air and calling out
“ Pai mairere, Hau, pai mairere,” in the
belief that as long as they did so they were
invulnerable from bullets. A number
of the bullets, however, found their
billets in the bodies of the retreating
fanatics. The specious explanation afforded
was that the faith of the dead men failed
them just at the critical moment. Ropata, it is
appropriate to mention, used to laugh at this
ridiculous Hauhau belief. “ Look at me,”
he said, “ I don’t believe in your Hau, and
I have never been shot.” Truly he led a
charmed life. Always in the forefront of
the battle, never known to take cover, seldom
adequately armed, he never received a scar,
never had a ball in his clothes.
After seven days’ siege the pa fell and 800
Maoris were taken prisoners, and marched
under the Union Jack, where they swore
allegiance to the Queen. Three hundred
were picked out as the worst offenders against
law and order, and were deported to the
Chatham s.
It was at the Waerenga-a-hika fight that
Te Kooti made his first appearance in the
field. He was then on the side of the Euro-
peans, and during the engagement was
arrested by Paul Parau, for, it was alleged,
having communicated with the pa and car-
ried ammunition to the rebels. He was held
in suspicion for some days as a prisoner in
the guardroom in the Bishop’s house. It
was found from subsequent strict enquiry
amongst various rebels and others present
that the allegation was untrue.
With the conclusive defeat of the rebels
at Waerenga-a-hika the disturbance was
quelled in Poverty Bay for some time.
EARLY DAYS: TE KOOTI.
We concluded the third section of this
narrative with the fall of Waerenga-a-Hika
—which, by the way, means “the clearing
of Hika,” showing that at one time the
Poverty Bay flat surrounding that place was
covered with bush—and the advent in the
field of turbulence and massacres of the
notorious rebel leader Te Kooti, otherwise
known to the Natives as Rikirangi, and by
himself and immediate followers as Te
Turuki. Before following up Major Ropata’s
career, it may be interesting to relate a few
incidents of the siege of Waerenga-a-Hika
and of the early life of Te Kooti.
10
Major Ropata Wahawaha, JS'. Z.C., M.L.G.


In descriptions of warfare much has often
been said of the pinging whistle of the
bullets, but the fight at Waerenga-a-Hika
was unique for this warlike music. The
rebels had manufactured a large quantity of
zinc bullets, the lightness and roughness of
which during a fusilade caused a most
unpleasant whizzing, affording a treble to
the double bass of the leaden bullet, and
this weird sound gave quite the reverse of
pleasant sensations to those who were
exposed to the fire of the Hauhaus.
In the attack and charge by the rebels on
the Sunday morning before referred to, large
numbers fell, the dead lying, scattered on
the plain on the outer side of the Govern-
ment trenches. The dead of Wilson’s and
Richardson’s party, killed the night before,
also lay exposed close to the pa. The bodies
remained unburied for days, neither party
daring to venture outside the trenches to
bury their dead. This state of things
became so disagreeable, not to say unhealthy,
that a truce of an hour was arranged for
funeral parties to gather up the corpses and
inter them. One large grave was dug, on
the spot where the present Ormond cheese
factory stands, in which some 63 of the
rebels were buried, and in another nearer
the pa many more. The rebels did not
strictly observe the conditions of the truce,
taking advantage of it to gather up arms, to
re-supply the pa with water, etc., and they
failed to bring in our dead as had been
arranged. Seeing this duplicity Ropata
became angered, and with other chiefs urged
a resumption of the fighting at once. Major
Fraser gave a short extension of time, in
order that a number of the rebels still
unburied might be put under ground, and
time being up, the bugle sounded “com-
mence firing,” and the siege was renewed
with fresh vigor, the disagreeable odor of
the dead having been removed. The bodies
of the dead Europeans, however, were still
lying close to the pa, the Hauhaus having
failed in their agreement to remove them,
and the loyal soldiers being afraid of Hauhau
treachery to venture too near to the rebel
lines.
Upon the surrendering of the pa, Te
Kooti, who had been kept a prisoner in the
Bishop’s house, was released, but was after-
wards re-arrested and deported to the
Chatham Islands with a large body of
prisoners, not specially for rebellion, but
because he was one of those notoriously
dangerous characters better out of the way.
Te Kooti had before the outbreak of the
war made himself conspicuous amongst his
own people, and notorious amongst the few
early traders settled in Poverty Bay. He
had a dare devil way of breaking the com-
mandments, and among other transgressions,
it is related of him that he was the culprit
in a very ingenious and mysterious robbery.
One of the traders used to miss large
quantities of rum from the casks in his store,
but was quite unable to account for its
disappearance until roused one night by the
loud barking of the dogs of the establish-
ment and the noise of a number of beehives
capsizing. Rushing out with a gun, the
storekeeper was just in time to pour a charge
of small shot into the lower extremeties of
the quickly retreating robber, who turned
out to be the subsequently notorious Te
Kooti. The method in which the latter had
been stealing the liquor was then discovered .
He had been wont to crawl underneath the
store, having previously located the position
of the casks, to bore thfdugh the floor and
through the bottom end of the cask, then
inserting a long toitoi reed through which
he drew the grog, afterwards replacing the
reed with a plug.
On another occasion Te Kooti coveted his
neighbor’s wife, and determined to evade
the vigilance of the relatives by a ruse. On
a day appointed he rode up to the village
where lived his adored one, carrying with
him a dead pig in a bag, slung across his
saddle bag. Te Kooti persuaded the false
wife to take the place of the pig, and it was
by this means that he escaped with his prize
to the interior. This little elopement
brought a mnru, (plundering raid) upon the
members of Te Kooti’s tribe by the tribe of
the injured husband, when everything valu-
able was plundered as utu for the offence.
Te Kooti retaliated by raising some ‘2OO
young malcontents, who, after loading
themselves with plunder, made away to
another part of the district, where they
erected a fortification, from which they
were driven some time afterwards by the
united tribes.
There are many other interesting incidents
of the early days which would cause a
longer digression—and the above are only
referred to as incidental to the career of the
arch-rebel Te Kooti, who will necessarily
figure, largely in our subsequent articles
descriptive of the life of Major Ropata.
Reverting to the story of Ropata, we now
follow him to
11
The Story of His Life.


THE WAIROA DISTRICT.
Shortly after the fall of Waerenga-a-Hika
the Natives of Upper Wairoa, under the
chief Te Waru, embraced Te Pai Mairere,
and commenced threatening the outer
settlements. Every effort had been made
to induce them to remain steadfast to the
Queen, by Mr S. Locke, afterwards M.H.R.
for the East Coast, who was representing
the Government in the district, but without
success. Mr Locke, however, was successful
in inducing Ihaka Whanga, the great Mahia
chief, and his people to unite with the
Government forces in repressing any advance
the rebels might make. Representations
were made to Sir Donald McLean, who
decided at once to crush out the sedition,
and ordered part of the field force of Major
Fraser to proceed to Wairoa, Ropata and a
small force of his own hapu of Ngatiporou
comprising part of the expedition.
Wairoa was in those days a township con-
taining but twenty or thirty families. Much
excitement and not a little apprehension
prevailed amongst the inhabitants, as
messenger after messenger came in bearing
all sorts of evil tidings, which were,
however, mostly exaggerated. It was
certain, however, that the Hauhaus had
been largely increasing, and their numbers
were being supplemented by fugitives from
the fights in Poverty Bay. At last the
rebel band arrived, and advanced on a
village on the opposite side of the river to
the township of Clyde, as Wairoa was then
called. As they came they were firing their
guns, no doubt as a token of their warlike
intentions and to frighten any wavering
Natives into submission. Comparatively
helpless as the Europeans on the south side
of the river were, the action of the Hauhaus
caused considerable consternation. A de-
fence force of from fifty to seventy men was
rapidly got together and armed with
muskets. Mr Locke was in command, and
the party included Kopapara (the most
renowned war chief on the coast), and Ihaka
Whanga, the Mahia chief, who stripped to
the waist and mere in hand pranced up and
down before the astonished fanatics.
“Come,” said Kopu (the Evening Star),
“ come, Opotiki! Come, Turanga ! Come,
Ngatikahuna ! Come, all of you ! Hauhaus
and everybody, and I, Kopu Taurewa, will
make you welcome. There is plenty of
food,” —but, continued he, with run, bound,
and gesture, quite undescribable, “You
must not pass the river to the other side,
where my pakehas live never, never,
never!
Mr Locke, Ihaka Whanga, and others
issued similar notes of warning and kept the
rebels at bay till a blockhouse was erected,
and reinforcements in the shape of Major
Fraser’s and Ropata’s men arrived, when
the rebels, cowed at the display of force,
dispersed.
The Wairoa district, however, was not to
remain in peace. The seeds of sedition had
been sown, and the influence of “ the good
and peaceful ” religion was such that bands
of rebels bent on slaughter must spring up
wherever it had been planted. The united
loyal forces were soon called upon to suppress
risings in the country, and their first fight
took place at Marumaru, where the rebels
were defeated, but at the cost of the life of
a gallant officer, Captain Hassey, No. 9, of
Taranaki Military settlers.
On the advance from Marumaru towards
Waikaremoana some three or four rebels
were captured, among them being a man of
considerable note, from whom information
was demanded as to the position and
strength of the enemy. This man refused
to give it, and was threatened by Ropata
that he would be shot if he did not. Ihaka
Whanga and others, being to a certain
extent friendly to the Wairoa man, were
disposed to intercede, but Ropata said,
“We must not waste time over a man like
him,” and the prisoner persisting in his
refusal, he drew his revolver and shot him.
In a densely fern-clad defile, situate about
20 miles from Wairoa on the Waikaremoana
road, and known as Te Kopane, the next
action took place. Between 500 and 600
Hauhaus held a very strong position in this
pass, and were so protected and hidden by
earthworks that the friendly troops walked
into a trap. The Hauhaus opened fire by
heavy volleys from two sides. Six men fell
dead rnd 20 to 110 were wounded. Our men,
of course, at a great disadvantage, made a
bold stand, and when the Hauhaus gave the
order (charge) brave Ihaka Whanga
organised a counter charge, but his men
failed to follow him, while two or three
dropped. Forcing his way onward the brave
old fellow fired his carbine in the face of the
12
Major Ropata W'ahxiwaha, N.Z.G., M.L.C.


advancing enemy, at the same time receiving
a ball through his body just below the hip.
Staggering, but not falling, he snatched the
rifle from his immediate attendant, and fired
again, again receiving a bullet, this time in
the leg, which felled him to the ground.
This caused a rally and an immediate rush
to recover Ihaka’s body, and the gallant old
warrior was borne to a place of safety, soon
to recover and oppose the Hauhaus in many
a future fight. The Hauhau position was
so strong, and the number of casualties on
our side so rapidly growing, that a retreat
was under consideration, when Ropata re-
ceived an inspiration that won the day.
“Let some 20 or 30 men, who - can run well
and are not afraid, put away their rifles and
set fire to the fern. Do you not see how the
wind blows ?” said he. In a few minutes
volumes of smoke were rolling up the hill-
side, blinding and discomfiting the concealed
enemy, behind which the now exultant
friendlies, when they once gained the crest
of the ridge and rifle pits, were enabled to
decimate the Hauhaus, who retired with
great loss upon Waikaremoana, leaving some
00 or 80 of their dead upon the field. No
prisoners were taken, but it is said that
many badly wounded crept into the thick
fern to die, or perished miserably alone in
the many caverns and concealments of that
rugged country. Ropata’s “inspiration”
was only one of the many touches of genius
he possessed that always came into use at
the critical moment and stamped him as a
splendid general.
THE CHATHAM ISLANDS.
The fight and defeat of the Hauhaus at
Te Kopane terminated the troubles in the
Wairoa district, and for a time peace reigned
on the East Coast until the escape of Te
Kooti and prisoners from the Chatham
Islands.
After the action at Te Kopane the chief
Te Waru and his people were sent as
prisoners to Napier, and there a number of
the worst characters were drafted out and
deported to the Chathams. Te Waru and a
large number of his people were conditionally
pardoned by Sir Donald McLean, and sent
back to Wairoa by the old p.s. Sturt,
which did so much good service during the
war under the command of the popular
Captain Fairchild, now master of the
Government steamer Tutanekai. It may
not be uninteresting to relate an incident
characteristic of Captain Fairchild which
occurred on this trip. The skipper had
some difficulty in getting Te Waru to keep
his place and to prevent him from passing
on to the quarter-deck, so he made a chalk
line between the deck-house and the rail
and delivered this ultimatum, which students
of Maori will appreciate: “ Ehoa ! Tenei
te marky, au akoe makey the heromai
kekoni au makey the pukeru akoe !” Te
Waru, however, attempted to trespass over
the line, and Captain Fairchild, always a
firm master of his own ship, took strong
measures to repel him.
At this time Ropata returned to his tribal
home with his war party, and for a period
settled down to peaceful pursuits, maintain-
ing in his capacity of a Native Magistrate
the Queen’s authority throughout the East
Coast.
Although active hostilities had ceased,
the peace was not expected to be permanent,
as the strong fanaticism and anti-pakeha
feeling everywhere were still very marked,
and the smouldering fire of rebellion, which
it was impossible to extinguish in a day,
might at any time burst into flame. It did
so, and the outbreak came from a most un-
expected quarter. The deported prisoners in
their island exile were hatching conspiracies
and only seeking opportunities for escape.
The prisoners at this time were some 280 in
number, and Te Kooti had become a promi-
nent figure amongst them as a lay reader
and exponent of the Bible. He selected
parts referring to the captivity of the
Children of Israel, and always foretold that
God would break their bonds and release
them as He had released His chosen people.
The worship instituted by Te Kooti was one
very acceptable to the fanatical minds of the
Maoris. It comprised an intonation by men,
women, and children, of a weird, impressive
cadence similar to that of the “ Pai Marire.”
The auspicious day of release from bondage
foretold by Te Kooti at last arrived. For
the account of the escape we must consult
13
The Story of His Life.


the early records, and from the New Zealand
Independent of July 23rd, 1868, we cull the
following extracts from the narrative of the
chief officer of the schooner Rifleman. The
Rifleman, which was a schooner of 82 tons
burthen, arrived at the Chathams from Wel-
lington with Government stores on July 3rd.
The following day, after a quantity of stores
had been landed, Sergeant Elliott and Messrs
Hood and Taylor were taken ashore by the
Native prisoners engaged in the boat service,
Captain Christian having previously gone
ashore. As soon as the boat reached the
beach those on board heard a great hallooing
and shouting by the Maoris and the report of
four muskets. The Maoris were seen run-
ning backwards and forwards in a very
excited manner on the beach. The prisoners
then seized the Government boat, and ten of
them came on board the vessel armed with
rifles. On coming alongside, the chief officer
endeavored to prevent them boarding, but
they forced themselves on board and were
quickly reinforced by another boat load from
the shore. The Maoris swarmed on deck,
and armed sentries were placed in the fore-
castle and cabin. All hands belonging to
the ship were forced to go aft and remain
under guard, being threatened with death if
they dared to move. Several of the fellows
had swords which they brandished threat-
ingly, and also exhibited pistols and revol-
vers. The rest of the Maoris were mean-
while busily employed in bringing off
the women and children, making a total
of about 200 souls. Some of the Natives
then went and seized the ketch Florence,
Which was at anchor near the Rifleman,
and brought her alongside the latter
vessel. Captain Priest and four men of
the Florence were ordered to go ashore
in the Rifleman’s boat. The Natives then
lifted the ketch’s anchor and allowed her to
drift on to the beach, where she lay high
and dry next morning. They then com-
pelled the chief officer of the Rifleman (Mr
Payne), Captain Christian being forcibly
detained on shore, to weigh anchor and sail
for Poverty Bay, which, after much threat-
ening, was reluctantly done, the Maoris
promising to spare the lives of the crew and
surrender the ship as soon as they were
landed. During all this time no signs of
life or activity were visible on shore, and the
chief officer feared that all the Europeans
on the island had been murdered, which
happily was not the case. Nothing unusual
occurred on the passage until Thursday, 9th
July, when, having a head wind for two
days, Te Kooti ordered one of their number
to be thrown overboard “to bring a fair
wind.” This was accordingly done, and at
about 7 a.m. the unfortunate man was
dragged on deck, his hands were tied, and
notwithstanding his pitiful cries and resist-
ance, he was pitched overboard. He was
seen for some time afterwards struggling in
the water, but his cruel fellow countrymen
did not relent. They evidently regarded
him as a kind of Jonah, and he was sacri-
ficed to propitiate “ the God of the Winds.”
The Maoris were generally quiet through-
out the passage, but an armed guard walked
the deck day and night, narrowly watch-
ing every movement of the crew. A Maori
stood near the helm, armed with a carbine
and a sword, to see that the proper course
was steered. The crew were not allowed to
cook ; a half-caste named Baker, assisted by
the Maoris, took possession of the galley
and did all the cooking. Baker and some
others spoke English fluently. The Rifleman
anchored off Whareongaonga, six miles south
of Poverty Bay, at 7 p.m. on Friday, July
10th. The landing of the Natives, their
women, and children, occupied the whole
night, during which the crew were kept
below. The Maoris stripped the ship of
cargo, wearing apparel, blankets, etc., and
after bringing off two casks of water to the
vessel told the crew that they could go, as
they had done with them. Sail was imme-
diately set, and the Rifleman started for
Wellington to report the matter to head-
quarters as soon as possible, but head winds
delayed the passage, and the schooner did
not reach Wellington till July 22nd. “The
escaped prisoners,” continues the report,
“are well provided with arms. They had
38 rifles, 7 double-barrelled guns, 4 revolvers,
9 pistols, about half-a-dozen swords, three
kegs of powder, and a quantity of cartridges.
All these, with tomahawks and other weapons
of offence and defence, will make them a
rather formidable enemy in their entrenched
position.” And so we shall presently see,
for our next article brings us to the stirring
times and dark days of the Poverty Bay
massacre.
14
Major Ropata W'ahawaha, N.Z.G., M.L.C.


WAIKAREMOANA
To preserve the chronological order of
events, yet not to digress too far from the
life and actions of the prominent figure in
these memoirs, it has been suggested that a
short reversion should be made to the events
in the Napier district, as it was really there
that the last outbreak of the Pai Marire was
crushed in 1866. Ropata was not an active
participator in those hostilities, but some of
the leading chiefs in that rebellion some
years subsequently fell into the hands of his
force and were summarily dealt with. Before
also leaving the Wairoa campaign, dealt
with in a previous article, a few words as to
Ropata’s personal actions culled from notes
taken at the time may not be lacking in
interest.
After the defeat of Te Waru and his people
at Marumaru in January, 1866, by Major
Fraser’s force of Europeans and friendly
Natives, Ropata joined him with a force of
150 men, and the united loyalists marched
upon Te Kopane, near Waikaremoana. It
was proposed to divide the forces, but
against this Ropata contended that such a
disposition generally failed in rough country
owing to the difficulty in regulating the
march so as to attack at the same time.
This advice was accepted, and the force
marched in one column. Ropata selected a
dozen of his Toas (braves) and proceeded as
an advance guard and scouting party.
Getting too far ahead, and coming upon an
old pah, his men remonstrated, but Ropata
characteristically replied, “They will double
up when they hear us firing.” Proceeding
further, they detected an ambuscade in a
narrow gorge, formed by a thick bush and
two ridges, which afterwards were found to
be deeply rifle-pitted. Returning to the
main body, Ropata reported the discovery,
and the friendly Wairoa Natives claimed
the right of advance, to which Ropata re-
plied, “ Very well, this is your country, and
you know it; therefore lead the way. I
will follow, but I would advise opening fire
before entering the gorge, so as to ‘ draw ’
the ambuscade if concealed there.” The
advice was, unfortunately, disregarded,
and when the friendlies were fairly in the
gorge the enemy opened fire from the front
and both flanks, killing some eleven men
and wounding many others. Ropata, with
the ready eye of a soldier, saw that the only
way to prevent defeat was to storm the
right flank rifle pits. This was done by his
small force in grand style, completely defeat-
ing the Hauhaus, killing and wounding
many, and taking many prisoners. Among
the prisoners was a great fighting chief
Tamaiongarangi, a name of which he was
given to boasting meant the Taniwha
(mythical crocodile) of the Wairoa, referring
to his high rank. Hearing that this high
personage was amongst the captives, one of
the officers remarked that he ought to be
shot. Ropata replied “ Yes ; and as all
appear afraid to do it, I am not. ” There-
upon he took him to the side of the lake and
shot him with his revolver, also three others
of less note. Upon being remonstrated with
by the chief Kopu, Ropata said “Serve all
like this, and there will be no more stragglers
to trouble us,” the truth of the remark being
made apparent a few months afterwards.
NAPIER
In October, 1866, a number of fanatical
fugitives from various parts, led by some
noted rebel chiefs, and inspired by a prophet
named Panapa, organised an attack upon
the town of Napier by concentrating at
two points, at Petane, on the north, and
Omarunui, on the|west. Sir Donald McLean,
forewarned, took immediate action by calling
DISTRICT.
out the local militia and volunteers, and re-
quested Sir George (then Colonel) Whitmore
to take command and attack Omarunui. He
also requested Major - Fraser to march fronr
Wairoa upon Petane. On October 11th,
about midnight, the Napier militia and
volunteers, about 180 strong, and 200
friendlies, marched upon Omaranui, and an
15
The Story of His Life.


hour after daybreak a very smart engagement
took place, in which the inexperienced local
forces behaved remarkably well, inflicting
a complete defeat upon the Hauhaus. Both
sides sustained considerable losses. On the
next day Major Fraser’s force fell in with a
reinforcing party of rebels going to Petane,
and a sharp but short engagement took
place, the chief Te Rangi Hiroa being killed
with twelve others. From among the
prisoners taken during these engagements
many were deported to the Chatham Islands
to join others already there, and afterwards
to return among the escapees as related in
the last article.
RETURN OF TE KOOTI.
Wharkongaonga is a pretty cove harbor a
few miles south of Young Nick’s Head. It
is naturally secluded and formed a very
suitable place of landing for the runaways,
in fact they could hardly have selected a
more suitable site at which to effect a
landing. Immediately after getting his
people ashore, Te Kooti sent messengers to
the various hapus, or small tribes, along the
banks of the Waipaoa river, advising them
of his escape, and inviting them to co-operate
with him in a “forward movement” upon
the Waikato, where he intended to dethrone
the Maori King and establish his own pre-
eminence in New Zealand. Major Biggs,
the then resident Magistrate, of the district,
hearing rumors of Te Kooti’s arrival and
intentions, sent messenger s to ascertain the
truth of the reports which of course were
confirmed, the information conveyed being
that the rebel leader had established
himself in a strong defensive position.
Major Biggs at once raised a force of
mounted volunteers with Captains West-
rup and Wilson in command, and pro-
ceeded with them to Whareongaonga to
demand Te Kooti’s surrender and the return
of their arms. Te Kooti replied that God
had released him from bondage, and asserted
that he had no desire to cause disturbances
or to interfere with the residents of Poverty
Bay, but that he proposed to march through
to the Waikato and dethrone the King.
He flatly refused to surrender or to give up
his arms. If he was interfered with in his
march, he said, he would have to show fight.
The number of the rebels was about 200
men, pretty fully armed, and therefore too
strong for the small force which Major
Biggs had at his command. The latter
therefore returned to Matawhero, the then
headquarters of Poverty Bay, to raise
reinforcements, and this having been done,
he sent two parties under Captains Westrup
and Wilson in the direction of Whakaonga-
onga, on the Wairoa road, to intercept the
march of Te Kooti’s band, which had by this
time commenced. On the morning of July
20 the advance guard of the rebels appeared
in the bush on the seaward side of Paparatu,
a point about four miles from Mr William-
son’s homestead now stands. A party of them
were detached and went in the direction of
Wilson’s position, and were fired upon. A
short engagement took place, and the
rebels, finding Wilson’s position too strong,
made a flank movement and attacked
Westrup, who was in a less secure position,
being located in a hollow, in order not to be
seen by the enemy as they were advancing.
Captain Westrup, finding himself surrounded
and fired upon from all sides, made a plucky
defence, showing great personal courage and
coolness. Wilson went to his aid, but
before a combination could be effected a
retreat had to be made. The engagement
was short, as the overpowering numbers of
the Hauhaus compelled a stampede of the
force, leaving two dead, and the wounded
narrowly escaping. The pakehas were
compelled to abandon their horses, tents,
and camp equipage, the estimated loss at the
time being £I2OO. The retiring men had a
very rough journey home. Te Kooti pro-
ceeded onwards in the direction of Te
Reinga Falls, and on reaching a hill above
the present site of Tiniroto township, at a
place called Te Koneke, fell in with a force
from the Wairoa side under Capt. Richardson
and Ihaka Whanga. This force had promptly
responded to a call from Major Biggs, con-
veyed by Captain Gascoigne, now Magistrate
at the Chatham Islands. Major Biggs had
had some difficulty in getting a volunteer to
undertake so perilous a journey as the ride
to Wairoa from Poverty Bay, and offered a
16
Major Ttopata Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.G.


reward of £3O, but Captain Gascoigne, dis-
carding the reward, undertook the task, and
got through in 24 hours, a splendid feat con-
sidering there were only the roughest of
tracks in those days. To show how perilous
the undertaking was, it may be stated that
upon Captain Gascoigne’s return, near Tini-
roto he met a messenger named Paku
Paraone, who only two hours afterwards was
caught by Te Kooti’s vanguard, and with
his dog was shot and thrown into a hole.
Captain Gascoigne narrowly escaped a
similar fate. Captain Richardson’s force
consisted of 25 Europeans and 50 friendly
Maoris. Upon the Hauhaus opening fire the
bulk of the friendlies under Te Apata at
once bolted, leaving Richardson and a few
of Ihaka Whanga’s men to stand the brunt
of the engagement. The odds being too
great, Captain Richardson was compelled to
retreat upon Te Reinga, which he did in a
very soldierly manner, pursued a certain
distance by the rebels, who then deviated
and proceeded on their journey northwards.
No other engagement took place until the
arrival of a pursuing party from Napier
under Colonel Whitmore.
RUAKITURI
Owing to want of telegraphic and steamer
communication in those days, considerable
delay occurred in sending information to
Napier of Te Kooti’s escape and asking for
reinforcements. Overland communication
was cut off, and it was only through Captain
Gascoigne’s daring ride to Wairoathat news
reached Napier. Upon receipt of the in-
telligence Colonel Whitmore raised a number
of volunteers from among the settlers of
Napier, and with a detachment of Major
Fraser’s No. 1 division came to Poverty Bay
by steamer, arriving on the day that
Captains Wilson and Westrup were
defeated. They were joined here by
Westrup and a number of Poverty Bay
volunteers, and followed on the line of Te
Kooti’s progress by a series of hard forced
marches. The country was of the roughest
description, thickly bushed, and was heavily
covered with snow. The men were often
up to their knees in snow, and to add to
their privations they were very short of
supplies, having no organised commissariat
and food supplies not being obtainable en route.
On reaching Whenuakura, near Te Reinga,
near where Richardson and party had been
defeated, Te Kooti’s line of march was found
to have deviated by the ranges towards
Ruakituri, in the direction of Maungapohatu.
At this point the Poverty Bay volunteers
returned, deeming . it useless to proceed
further without supplies, and believing it
improbable that they would be able to
catch up with the rebels. Colonel Whitmore,
however, persisted in the pursuit with the
small party under his command, numbering
from 80 to 100 men. On falling into the
bed of the Ruakituri river near Te Papanui
(the source of the Ruakituri, and the old
bed of an inland lake, which apparently at
one time burst its bounds and emptied itself
by means of the river) they were attacked
by Te Kooti’s rear guard in an ambuscaded
position. Colonel Whitmore’s force, in the
river bed, being seriously exposed to a heavy
fire from the banks, suffered considerably.
The first to fall was Captain Carr (late
Royal Artillery) and Mr Canning, a well-
known Hawke’s Bay settler. Captain (after-
wards Major) Tuke was wounded, as were
several others. Owing to the difficulties
of the position, and the small strength of the
party, the men also being fatigued and
hungry after their long and trying march,
the Government force were compelled to
retreat. If, however, they had only known,
a few moments’ longer endurance would have
won the day. Te Kooti was shot through
the ankle and was carried off, this mishap
nearly causing a panic amongst the rebels,
who were m aking a retreat simultaneously
with the Europeans. Whitmore and his
force returned to Poverty Bay after an
arduous march, in which they had had no
little difficulty in carrying in their
wounded.
Te Kooti fortified himself on a point
overlooking the old bed of the Papanui lake,
and sent messengers to the Wairoa and
Uriwera tribes, inviting them to join him,
as he had been molested on his march to the
interior. Having received (as he put it) a
blow from the Government, he intimated
17
The Story of His Life.


that he was going to take satisfaction out of
the Europeans, and he also threatened the
tribes that refused to support him that he
would take it out of them also. The settlers
in Poverty Bay, knowing that Te Kooti had
taken up a strong position in the back
country, and anticipating some further
trouble from him, a redoubt was built
at Toanga, Matawhero, upon which they
might fall back in case of assault. Re-
gular scouting parties were also continually
out to guard against a surprise, as Major
Biggs had heard from Native sources that
Te Kooti contemplated a descent upon
Poverty Bay, seeking revenge for the
obstruction offered to him. At this time,
also, Colonel Whitmore and his men having
returned to Napier, arrangements were
being made for a force to proceed from the
Wairoa side against Te Kooti and to drive
him from Puketapu.
ROPATA AGAIN
Whilst Te Kooti was preparing for his
raid in his stronghold at Puketapu, Te
Waru, the notorious character who has
previously been referred to, was making
preparations to join him, and had taken as
prisoners three scouts of the Wairoa friendly
Natives and shot them at Whataroa. Upon
hearing of this Sir Donald McLean again
called upon Ropata and his tribe to come
from Waiapu, and sent a steamer for them,
upon which Ropata’s force, numbering some
2UU men, embarked and proceeded to Clyde.
Soon after landing they, with other forces
under command of Colonel Lambert, number-
ing in all about 600, proceeded to Whataroa,
where they had an engagement and drove
the rebels _out, burning and destroying
IN THE FIELD.
their settlement. Here they took some
prisoners, who informed them of the in-
tended raid on Poverty Bay. Ropata urged
an immediate movement to attack Te Kooti’s
{>a at Puketapu, or to pursue him if he had
eft. Colonel Lambert, however, overruled
this proposition, and the forces returned to
Wairoa, which they reached on November
4th, five days before the massacre. There
can be no doubt that had the force gone on
to Puketapu, as Ropata wished, on October
26th, there would have been no tragedy to
record. Another serious omission made was
in not advising Major Biggs at Poverty Bay
of the prisoners’ statements. Te Waru and
his brother Reihana, with their people, had
already gone to join Te Kooti.
THE POVERTY
Te Kooti, having been reinforced by
the Urewera and Wairoa Natives, and
having completed his plans for a raid upon
Poverty Bay on October 26, 1868, marched
with a strong force of fighting men only to
perpetrate the massacre. His line of march
was down the Ngatapa Valley, and he thus
avoided the scouting party under Captain
Gascoigne which was in the direction of
Waerenga-o-kuri, expecting him to come
that way. Upon arriving at Patutahi Te
Kooti was met by some of the Poverty Bay
friendlies, and from them made minute and
particular enquiries as to the situation of
the Government forces and the homesteads
of the various outlying settlers, thus be-
BAY MASSACRE.
coming fully possessed of the best in-
formation. At about 11 o’clock on the
night of November Bth, he marched with
some eighty men in fighting order by
the upper Patutahi ford, where Mr Wyllie’s
homestead used to stand. This he passed
without molesting, evidently not desir-
ing to cause any alarm until he had got
into closer settlement, and stating that they
would leave that place until they got back.
He then broke his force up into small parties,
sending a small detachment to Dods’ and
Peppard’s at Repongaere, other small parties
to Makauri bush and “ French Bob’s ” and
others living there. Himself with the re-
mainder marched to Matawhero, where he
18
Major Bop at a Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.G.


again broke the force into small parties,
sending a detachment of eight or ten men to
each settler’s house. His soldiers were
instructed, so as not to create alarm, to do
their butchery without firing shots, to use
hand weapons instead of guns in their
killing. Te Kooti himself led a party to
Major Biggs’ house. Te Kooti went on to
the verandah and saw Major Biggs sitting
alone with the candle alight at his table,
Mrs Biggs and child having retired to rest.
Te Kooti or one of his men knocked at the
door and Major Biggs from the passage
wanted to know who was there. Te Kooti
replied “Open the door and .see.” Major
Biggs, evidently suspicious, would not do so
and hastened to get his revolver. He came
back at the moment that the murderers
were bursting in the door. Major Biggs fired
two or three shots at them before he was
shot down by one of the rebels. Mrs Biggs
came out screaming with a child in her arms,
and was immediately shot down. The house
was plundered and set fire to. A similar
mode of procedure was adopted in nearly
every case at the other settlers’ houses, the
surprise being very complete, except in the
case of Captain Wilson, who, alarmed by
the firing at Biggs’ residence, not very far
away, attempted to make some defence.
After making a short stubborn resistance,
in which* he also used his revolver freely,
Captain Wilson, however, unwisely sur-
rendered on the promise that he and his
family would be spared, a promise that was
of course not long kept, for when being led
away and in the river bed, he and his family
were shot down and tomahawked, and left for
dead. Mrs Wilson, it will be remembered
from the well-known stories of the massacres
was afterwards found alive in the scrubs
where she had been nourished for some days
by her small boy, who had also managed to
escape from the slaughter. It is needless,
however, to here recount the heart-breaking
details of that bloody night, when destruc-
tion and distress were brought to so many
homes of Poverty Bay pioneers. Even yet
tire memories of that dreadful massacre cause
pangs of pain in many hearts, in which there
were then made sores that have not yet, and
will never heal.
On the morning following the massacre
Te Kooti captured a number of friendly
Natives on the opposite side of the river,
and had them shot. The European settlers
who were left took refuge, some in what is
now Gisborne, and others in the direction of
the Mahia. Many took ship for Napier and
Auckland, leaving practically only the fight-
ing men to man the redoubt in Gisborne.
MAKARETU.
At this time Ropata and his force were at
Wairoa, and at the earliest possible oppor-
tunity messages were sent to him to march
through to unite with the troops that were
being organised to pursue Te Kooti on his
retreat inland again. As soon as reinforce-
ments, consisting principally of friendly
Natives, arrived at Gisborne, an advance
was made inland, and a simultaneous move-
ment took place from the Wairoa side. The
Poverty Bay division all along the line of
their march found dead bodies of friendly
Natives executed by Te Kooti’s orders.
On reaching the upper Patutahi Valley
they fell in with Te Kooti’s rear and
brisk skirmishing took place, and next
day, advancing further, it was found that
the rebels were entrenched in a strongly
fortified position, on the Wharekopae river
at a alace called Te Karetu, or Makaretu.
The Government force took up a position on
a long ridge flanking the enemy’s position,
and there entrenched themselves. Fighting
continued between the parties for about a
week, the Government forces only just being
able to hold their own whilst they awaited
the arrival of the force from Wairoa. The
casualties on both sides during this week
were pretty considerable.
Te Kooti during the week played a smart
trick upon his opponents. Detaching a force
of about sixty men, he sent them on a detour
round by Repongaere to descend upon the
depot at Patutahi, in the rear of the Govern-
ment force. They made a successful attack
on the depot, scattering its small garrison,
firing the tents, and helping themselves to
as much food and ammunition as they could
carry away.
19
The Story of His Life


On about’December the Ist Ropata and
his party of some 160 men joined the force’
at Makaretu, having had a long and starved
march. After making due enquiries as to
what had transpired, Ropata proceeded
to personally reconnoitre the position of the
enemy, and returning in the evening said
“To-morrow we will turn that pa over.”
He thereupon organised the form of attack
which was carried out next day. Ropata,
with a party of his best men, made an
advance down a bush slope on the left flank
of the rebels’ position. He skirmished in a
splendid manner out of the bush and down
through the fern, and then made an
advance on the pa, keeping up a steady
and heavy fire. When within a short
distance he gave the order to charge,
having on the previous day satisfied
himself that he had nothing worse to contend
against than walls with insignificant pali-
sades. Ropata and his men gallantly stormed
the position, and succeeded in driving the
rebels pell mell into the river at the rear,
the stream being at this spot very deep.
Some seventy or eighty of Te Kooti’s
murderous band were shot in one hole, a
great number were killed in the pa, and a
large amount of plunder that had been taken
from the desecrated homes in Poverty Bay
was recovered. Some little time after the
fight Ropata espied one of Te Kooti’s men,
a notorious character, in the hole in which
such a large number had been shot. The
fellow was evidently pretending to be dead
floating with his eyes closed and his nostrils
just above water. It was his only hope of
escape that he would not be discovered.
Ropata said, “ That man’s eye is winking,”
and at once ordered that he be fished out of
the stream. One Hemi Tapeka went and
pulled him out, and being found very much
alive and not even wounded, he was there-
upon shot. Te Kooti with his greatly-
reduced band bolted to Ngatapa, miles
further inland, at which place, as we shall
find in our next article, Ropata displayed
great gallantry that won for him the New
Zealand Cross.
THE FIRST NGATAPA: Where Ropata Won the N.Z. Cross.
After the fall of Te Karetu, as related at
the conclusion of our last part, Te Kooti and
his fighting men who escaped from the fight
retired upon the masked hill fort of Ngatapa,
some four miles higher in the ranges. Te
Kooti himself had a very narrow escape, as
when retreating the wound he had received
at Ruakituri caused him so much pain and
weakness that he was unable to walk, and
he was alternately carried upon some of his
wives’ backs.
As one instance of many how Maoris, when
uncontrolled in warfare by European
customs, treat the prisoners under vengeful
feelings of “utu,” (satisfaction, or payment)
the following will illustrate. Among the
wounded was the rebel Nama, a man who
had rendered himself atrocious by acts of
violence, and in the murder of the Wilson
family, also in the murder of the four scouts.
Some of Ropata’s soldiers then addressed
him in Maori, to the following effect
“Your Atua (God) has deserted you. Now
Hatana (the Devil) has you, and we will
give you a taste of fire in this world before
you get it in the next.” Thereupon they
astened ropes upon him and dragged him
backwards and forwards through the fire of
the burning pa till dead.
The pursuit of fugitives by Ropata was
continued throughout the day, and at the
close of the day it was decided to make an
attack upon Ngatapa on the morrow. Next
day in force, Ropata, having personally
reconnoitred the position, advanced upon
the fort. When preparations for attack
were being made disputes arose over some
prisoners between Ropata’s men and those
of Tareha, the Napier friendlies, resulting in
the latter, who numbered 300, refusing to
operate and withdrawing, leaving Ropata
with only about 250 effective men, including
a small portion of the loyal old chiefs (Ihaka
Whanga) tribe. Ropata was annoyed at
this desertion, but undaunted, determined
to advance to the attack unsupported, and
on the sth December, 1668, did so in
extended skirmishing order up the range
through the bush, leading to the pa. Here
a severe fight took place between a party
who were making a sortie from the fort and
Ropata’s advance guard, the casualties on
both sides being heavy, and a panic took
place among Ropata’s force. The result was
20
Major Ropata Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


that a rather disorganised retreat took place
to Makaretu camp, Ropata being left with
only thirty men to face the formidable
stronghold and force of the enemy. He,
after some hours of fighting, succeeded
in driving the enemy back within
their fortifications, and then for the
first time, after getting outside the bush,
the fort became unmasked to him, and
its impregnable appeai’ance was enough to
daunt the strongest and bravest force.
Ropata, however, did not hesitate, but
pursued the retreating rebels up to their
own wall of defence, and there established
himself, fully expecting to -be reinforced.
Gallantly the little force, opposed to many,
held their position, fighting muzzle to
muzzle, with only the wall between. Many
were the personal acts of bravery among
this band of toa*, but conspicuous of all was
the quiet determined courage of a well-
known man in Gisborne, Ruka Aratapu,
also Wi Tahata, of Tuparoa, and one of
Ropata’s noted to* os (scouts), Watene Ketua,
all of whom by their cool acts of bravery and
courageous excitement ably supported their
chief Ropata throughout a long night of
desperate fighting. Ropata, towards day-
light, finding reinforcements did not arrive,
and his ammunition being exhausted, greatly
against his inclinations, found himself com-
pelled to retreat, but it was long before he
would give the order to do so. At dawn of
day he retreated under a heavy fire from the
pa, still showing a bold front and carrying
off his wounded. The enemy did not pursue,
being rather glad to get rid of him. Of
Ropata’s small force of thirty men at this
attack he lost six killed and seven wounded.
Sullen, hungry, and enraged, Ropata
marched back to and right through the
Te Karetu camp, his men, with arms across
their backs, not deigning to speak to anyone
till well outside the camp, when Ropata
sent for the narrator, who with some diffi-
culty brought him to a more pacific state of
mind after his toa* had been supplied with
food and rested. Ropata then expressed his
determination to return to his tribal home
to recruit a new force, strongly expressing
his resolve not to again take the field with
those of his people who he considered had
deserted him. No argument or persuasion
would make him change his mind, as he said
to do so would be a certain atiua (fateful
omen).
On the march out Ropata met the West
Coast reinforcements, 800 strong, under
Colonel Whitmore, who endeavored to get
Ropata to join him and return to the attack.
Ropata replied, “ No; I cannot trample
upon my own order, but will speedily return
with fresh men.” Ropata’s force shipped
for Ngatiporou district by the Government
steamer St. Kilda, leaving Colonel Whitmore
with his force, who advanced by establishing
a system of small forts along the Ngatapa
valley, till a last position was occupied
within 2£ miles from Ngatapa, called Fort
Richmond.
Prior, however, to the advance, Colonel
Whitmore’s scouts reported that Te Kooti
had retired from Ngatapa, and destroyed
the fort by fire. This was a mistake, and
arose from Te Kooti, after Ropata’s attack,
ordering the cutting down of the surrounding
bush and burning it, so as to destroy any
possible cover for an attacking force. Colonel
Whitmore then withdrew his force and was
shipping them by boat to Whanganui, when
Te Kooti, with 10'l men, made a raid down
to Patutahi and Te Arai, there killing Mr
Fergusson, a brother of our respected
settler, Mr John Fergusson, also at the same
time a brother of Mr Wyllie. This daring
raid recalled Colonel Whitmore’s forces, and
the advance referred to was made, which
ended a few weeks later in the attack,
storming, and fall of Ngatapa, which will
be dealt with in our next part.
THE FALL OF NGATAPA.
The hill fort of Ngatapa was the most pictur-
esque and formidable of any the forces in
New Zealand had to contend with during
the wars. It towered above all the high
surrounding country, quite impressing one
with its impregnable strength, commanding
every possilde approach of an attack. The
front of the position was defended by three
lines of parapets and trenches, each con-
nected by covered ways. The first, or outer
line of defence, was about 250 yards in
length, its walls being eighty feet in height,
each flanking angle terminating upon the
scarped cliff at each flank of the fort. The
21
The Story of His Life.


second line of parapet was about ten feet in
height, and the third protecting the houses
upon the summit of the hill was at least
sixteen feet high, surmounted with sand
bags, or rather Maori kits in approved
European style, between which were loop-
holes for firing. These sand bags were no
doubt adopted by Te Kooti in the emergency
of a hasty defence, not having time to erect
the usual Maori palisades, found hy experi-
ence to be so effective in repelling assault by
storming. The whole fort covered a con-
siderable area of ground, and the Natives
say it was in generations gone hy the site of
an old Maori pa of their ancestors.
On the ‘27th December the force under
Colonel Whitmore had taken up a position
on the ridge a mile and a half in front and
below Ngatapa, named Fort Richmond,
after the then Defence Minister. Without
attempting to describe in detail the siege,
which lasted from the 27th December till
January sth, 1869, and giving only a general
review of its progress, it will be necessary
to greatly curtail accounts of various
incidents in order to fit the narrative into
our limited space, and in order to deal more
especially with Major Ropata.
At the time the forces had taken up the
position at Fort Richmond Major Ropata
arrived at Patutahi with a fresh contingent
of Ngatiporou, numbering 370 men. Ropata
at the time was unwell and had to advance
rather slowly, and Colonel Whitmore becom-
ing impatient at the delay sent word to him
to hurry up, or he would take the pa with-
out his aid. To this Ropata replied “ Very
well, I tried but failed.” Next day Colonel
Whitmore himself interviewed Ropata, the
narrator himself acting as interpreter.
Ropata’s first question was ‘ ‘ Have you
taken the pa?” After a long talk it was
arranged that the forces should unite to
attack the next day at Wharekopae stream,
near Te Karetu. Ropata’s force stripped
for the national war dance (/>eruptru). going
through all the forms of attack, challenge,
charge, and repulse, in true Native style,
unseen by the restraining eyes of Europeans
except one, the narrator. The signs
(tohuH) to be marked upon such an occasion
were all favorable, and victory was pre-
dicted. On uniting, the force made an
advance upon the point called “The Crow’s
Nest,” within 800 yards of the pa. Here a
party of about 50 Ngatiporou and Arawa
were detached to surprise the outer defence.
Guided by some of Ropata’s men who had
taken part in the Ngatapa first attack, they
made a detour to the ravine below, and then
scaled the cliff under heavy fire, gallantly
driving the enemy from that extreme out-
lying defence which covered their water
supply. Here Ropata joined, and estab-
lished a strong position by entrenchment,
and was shortly after reinforced by Colonel
Whitmore. From this base the attacking
forces gradually extended siege operations
to the flanks and rear, and heavy fighting
continued for days. The elevation of the
upper part of the pa being so great, the
rifie firing had little effect; therefore small
cohorn mortars were imported into the
siege, the shells dropping into the upper
works and doing much damage by burst-
ing on the houses, which the enemy en-
deavored to protect by covering with earth.
On the 4th January Ropata consulted with
Colonel Whitmore and said, “ The signs are
now favorable for an assault upon the pa. ”
Fifty picked men were told oft' to form the
storming party, the narrator being the only
European officer among them. The advance
was one of great difficulty and danger, the
party having to climb up a steep cliff by
holding on to roots, etc., while the enemy
kept up a heavy fire from their short flanking
angle upon the left of the pa, where, fortu-
nately, not more than from twenty to thirty
could fire at one time. While the storming
movement was proceeding, the forces in
front and rear kept up a heavy fire to
protect the storming party, and as soon as
its front appeared close up to the flank of
the enemy’s outer wall, Major Ropata stood
up from the line of European trenches, fully
exposed to a heavy fire, and there, revolver
in hand, stood a prominent figure, alone
directing the movements of the storming
party. He requested Colonel Whitmore to
order cease firing all round, lest the stormers
should suffer. At the flanking angle the
storming party had hand-to-hand work,
but at last succeeded in scaling the
cliff and parapet and driving the enemy
within the. upper defences of the pa,
and securing to themselves the cover of
the first line of parapet, along which they
extended and were soon reinforced from the
supports in the rear. Those watching the
movement from the rear said it was a pretty
sight to mark the several phases of the
storming. The casualties upon both sides
during the short and sharp affair were heavy,
and there were many notable incidents, but
they need not be dealt with here.
It was late in the evening when the outer
defence was taken, and it was determined
to wait for daylight to carry by storm the
upper fort. This the enemy no doubt
expected, and after information proved that
Te Kooti therefore by a quiet masterly
22
Major Eopata Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


movement prepared to evacuate the pa by
the only part deemed by the besiegers
inaccessible. Blankets, sheets, etc., were
cut in strips and used as ropes to lower the
defenders down the precipice at the left of
the pa. This was done so successfully and
quietly that the attacking force was not
aware of it till about 2 o’clock in the
morning. A woman Mere Karaka Te Rere-
horua, called out from the upper parapet
that the pa was evacuated, she being the
only one left except the dead and wounded.
At first this was deemed to be a ruse to lure
on the force, but as day was just breaking
a part} 7 advanced and found it »s the woman
had stated, and as it is ever customary in
Maori warfare the Ngatiporou were soon
running through the pa and despatching the
wounded. It may not be out of place to
mention here that in all Maori warfare
wounded are never spared, and there is no
instance during the wars where an European
has been taken prisoner and spared.
Ropata allowed no time to elapse before
he sent out pursuing parties upon the trail
of the retreating enemy through the dense
forests in the direction of the Urewera
country. Many skirmishes and hand-to-
hand engagements took place in the hush,
and many prisoners were brought in—to the
number of about 120 in all.
Before this Colonel Whitmore was on his
return march, leaving Ropata to await the
return of the pursuing parties. As each
detachment came in with its batch of
prisoners Ropata rather unsparingly ordered
them for execution, particularly those known
to be escapees from the Chathams and also
those who had participated in the massacre.
The place of execution was upon the verge
of a cliff, where the prisoners were stripped,
then ranged in line and shot down by the
firing parties, their bodies falling over the
cliff. The retribution lasted for three
days, and among the last batch of
prisoners dealt with was Renata Tupara,
a well known Poverty Bay chief of rank in
those days, who was related to Ropata by
marriage, and who at Waerenga-a-Hika and
other places had been spared. Some of
the chiefs urged Ropata to again exercise
clemency towards this man, but to all he
turned a deaf ear, having already given
secret instructions for his execution, and
when the chiefs at last concluded by saying,
“ Very well, we leave it to you,” he replied,
“ That is well, as he is already dead.” This
rebel Renata was a fine handsome man, of
undoubted courage, displayed to the last, as
when ranged up in front of the firing party
he dashed forward, striking one with his
fist and breaking through the line into the
bush, where he was, however, shot down.
Ropata, among many of the Natives of this
district and his own people, is rather blamed
for this act of stern justice, if it can be so
called.
Before finally leaving the Ngatapa fight to
follow Ropata in the Urewera campaign, in
our next part a few incidents of the siege
may be related, interesting to those un-
acquainted with New Zealand warfare.
UREWERA
On the dispersion of Te Kooti’s force after
the fall of Ngatapa, Colonel Whitmore, with
the West Coast division of the field force,
returned to Whanganui, whence he had
hastily come to reinforce the East Coast
forces after the massacre. Lieutenant-Colonel
McDonnell was left in command of the West
Coast forces to stem the victorious advance
of Tito-ko-Waru and his strong band of
rebels along the coast line from Taranaki to
the suburbs of the town of Whanganui itself,
destroying flourishing homesteads and life
almost without check, and in several engage-
ments inflicting heavy loss upon our forces.
The narrator returned with the field force
to the West Coast, and Ropata remained to
protect the East Coast from any probable
COUNTRY.
rising or raids. Colonel Whitmore wanted
Ropata to go with a force of Ngatiporou to
take part in the West Coast campaigns, but
Sir Donald McLean opposed this, considering
that his presence was essential for the
protection of this coast, and the wisdom of
that decision was subsequently proved when
raids and massacres of Te Kooti’s bands
were made upon the outlying settlers of
Whakatane and Mohaka.
During the advance and siege operations
at Ngatapa none did more arduous duty and
distinguished themselves more than the few
old settlers of Poverty Bay who volunteered
under Westrup to do their duty and avenge
the death of so many of their fellow settlers' 1
Among these may be mentioned Captain
23
The Story of His Life.


Tucker, Messrs Charles Evans, Sam Steven-
son, Woodbine Johnson, Maynard, Benson,
and others who have departed this life or
scattered to the cardinal points of heaven.
Many instances are related of the damage
done during the siege of Ngatapa by the
bursting shells, by which, unfortunately,
several women were killed and others
wounded severely. A curious incident is
related in the case of Mere Karaka Rere-
horua, wife of the Renata Tupara mentioned
in the last part, and the woman who advised
the force of the pa being evacuated. She
never embraced the Hauhau religion, al-
though following her husband. She and
several women were in a whare when a shell
fell through the roof, exploded, and killed
or wounded all but her, she being untouched.
Strange to relate, upon her removal to
another whare a similar thing occurred, a
shell bursting inside and she being the only
one unscathed. This Mere always attri-
buted to her faith in Christ, and she always
held the incident up as an example to the
fallers-off from the faith.
Among the killed of the rebels at this
siege were several Urewera chiefs of note,
this tribe suffering heavily, as was usually
the case, its men being such undoubted tons
and always in the forefront of the battle.
It may not be generally known that at the
historical fight at Orakau, Waikato, where
Rewi made such a gallant defence against
General Cameron’s troops, it was the
Urewera contingent that stood the brunt of
the engagement and made such a determined
defence, and in the reply to terms said,
“No, we fight, Ake, Ake, Ake, for ever and
ever.”
The Urewera country has been of late
years often referred to as, and is still to
many, a terra incognita. The Urewera
Country proper, or Tuhoe land, is almost a
circular mass of mountainous country
covered with heavy, dense forest, and
having little or no level land within its
limits. It is bounded on the Poverty Bay,
or eastern side, by the watershed near the
head waters of the Hangaroa river, and the
boundary follows across the range and down
the Waioeka river towards Opotiki; on the
north it is bounded by the Waimana and
Ruatoke gorges ; on the west by the ranges
abutting on the Kaingaroa Plains, towards
Lake Taupo; on the south-west by the
ranges of the Upper Mohaka, and on
the south by Lake Waikaremoana.
The Urewera people bear a very marked
distinction from other Maoris, both in
features and in lines of tatu, and there is
very little doubt they are descendants
of the aboriginal occupants of the island
prior to the immigration of the Maoris,
which is dated at about 1350, or eighteen to
nineteen generations ago, whilst the
Urewera go back some twenty-six to
twenty seven generations, at which time
they must have been occupying the coast
line; in fact it is more than probable that
the present inhabitants of the mountains
are the descendants of the fugitives from the
slaughter of the invaders. This impression,
it will be seen, is borne out by information
contained in a report made by the narrator
in 1872, which was based on information he
had gathered from the people at the time.
The document reads:—“l have the honor
to report upon the lately subdued Urewera
tribe, with which tribe, owing to numerous
military incursions into their country, I have
to a certain extent become identified. I
have just returned from the Bay of Plenty,
and while there had an opportunity of visit-
ing the various hapus in a non-military
capacity and ascertaining what attitude
they are likely to assume towards us
in the future. It may not be amiss to
revert to the prior history of these
people, who have for generations inhabited
what until lately was deemed inaccessible
country. The traditional origin of the tribal
name Urewera is thus given. The tribe
claims no “ivaka ” (canoe), but traces its
descent from “Murakarake,” the original
ancestor of the tribe. Murakarake was
escaping across the Kaingaroa plains after
the destruction of his people accompanied by
his sons, the two youngest of whom were
Tamakai Moana and Tuhoe Potiki. Nearing
the Rangitaike river, hungry and exhausted,
they halted to rest and refresh, but being
without other food Murakarake ordered the
dog to be killed and the choice parts (pluck)
given to his youngest child. The dog was
killed, cooked, and eaten by the elder sons,
and the ears only given to the younger son,
Potiki, who wept with grief at being
deprived of the choice parts. Murakarake,
who, already deep in grief, was roused by
the wailing of his Potiki, learned the cause
and he reproached the elder sons severely
for their disobedience, at which they only
jeered, so intensifying the old man’s grief
that he lay or fell down in a fit by the fire
and was accidentally burned, so seriously as
to cause his death. It was from this inci-
dent that the name Te Urewera was derived.
. . . . I roughly estimate the tribe to
be between 800 and 900 strong, which,
perhaps, is a low estimate. I don’t think
they could bring more than 300 or 400 fight-
ing men into the field, but with such a force,
24
Major Bopata Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


acked by the inaccessible nature of their
country, they would be equal to three times
the number of the invaders.
“ Referring to the military or fighting
organisation of the Urewera, they are
essentially mountaineers, and in many
respects as to tactics similar to the Scottish
Highlanders. In cases of the invasion of
their country, messengers are despatched
with the utmost speed to warn the many
scattered hapus of the foe’s approach. These
messengers travel with most incredible speed
through the difficult forest tracks. If the
alarm is at night, the signal is a flaming
torch carried along the mountain ridges ; if
in the day time, a horn is blown warning
them to muster to repel the invaders. It is
not customary for the Ureweras to fight in
large bodies, their tactics being to waylay
the advancing foe in the most difficult places
in the line of march, shooting down the
leading men of the single file, the only mode
of advance that can be adopted in the
narrow passes of that country. A most
harassing fire is kept up on front, centre, and
rear, and without little chance of effectual
retaliation, as the Urewera are expert in
bush warfare assisted by their intimate
knowledge of the by-tracks of their moun-
tains.
“The beginning of the good feeling now
existing between the Natives and the
Government may fairly be attributed to the
efforts of my old comrade Major Ropata,
who has in the face of almost insurmount-
able difficulties evinced great determination
and courage in propagating a considerate
and conciliatory policy among such a turbu-
lent tribe. Undeterred by the menaces
often freely iterated, he has insisted in
carrying out the two principal objects,
capturing Te Kooti, subduing the country,
and thoroughly bringing into allegiance
these people who for generations have lived
at war with all others. The greatest rebels
and outlaws invariably have taken refuge in
their country, and from the beginning of
hostilities between Maori and pakeha these
war parties have always sent to assist in the
wars of rebellion, a small percentage only
returning to their homes, to express which
they have a proverb “ Tuhoe maumau
tangata, maumau kai” {'.e., Urewera,
wasters of men, wasters of food).”
One of the symbolical expressions of the
Urewera applied to themselves is that they
are the nynkau (belly) of the fish, and that
it is their duty as patriotic Maoris to keep
the fish alive. The tail and fins, the saying
is, might be cut ofi, but the fish would still
exist. Hence their reason for taking an
active part in the rebellious movements to
oppose the encroachments of the Europeans
and their laws. This is an allusion to the
Maori name of the North Island, “ Telka-a-
Maui ” (i.e., the Fish of Maui, Maui being
the traditional ancestral demigod who fished
the island up from the bottom of the ocean).
The symbol is a flight of fancy induced by
the shape of the North Island, which bears
somewhat of a resemblance to a fish, Wel-
lington province being the head, east and
west coasts the fins, Auckland province the
tail, and Tuhoe land the A gakau.
It was to subdue this country and capture
Te Kooti, Kereopa, Hakaraia, and other
notorious rebels who had taken refuge
within its sheltering boundaries that just a
year after the fall of Ngatapa Ropata was
called upon to again take the field, and in
January, 1870, the first campaign began.
UREWERA
The year 1869 was the most eventful of all.
The disloyal Maoris throughout the North,
believing the time had really arrived when
the pakeha (foreigner) would be driven into
the sea, fomented warfare and strife in every
direction. War, raids, and massacre were
rife both on the west and east coasts of the
North Island, also in the interior round
Lake Taupo, and in the Waikato, where the
wavering tribes of Ngatimaniapoto and
Waikato were ready to cast in their lot with
CAMPAIGN: 1869.
Te Kooti. They would have done so, no
doubt, but for certain injudicious executions
of prisoners who were related to the
Waikatos by Te Kooti. If these tribes had
really united with the rebels and taken
common cause against the Government, the
colony’s self-reliant policy at that time woidd
have been severely tested. It was fortunate
for the country that at this crisis Sir George
Whitmore assumed chief command of the
various forces, as his well-known energy,
25
The Story of His Life.


Eersonal bravery, and power of organisation
ronght all the many arms of the service to
a state of unity and soldierly discipline, and
every man who served in the field force
during that eventful year may look back
with pride and satisfaction, recognising that
with all its hardships and discomforts it was
the best year’s real soldiering they had
experienced. Sir George had not always a
conciliatory way of treating his officers and
men, yet it could not be denied that he was
a good soldier both in camp and field, and
no doubt it required a little hard chiselling
on his part to bring much of the rough
material that was at his disposal into proper
form. His punishment for soldierly default
was at times severe. On two occasions men
received fifty lashes at the gun wheel; on
another a man stood in front of his grave to
be shot, and was only reprieved at the last
moment.
By the middle of the year 1860 the forces
under the personal command of Sir George
Whitmore had, by a succession of engage-
ments along the coast line from Whanganui
to Taranaki, driven Tito-ko-Waru’s force to
ultimate dispersion among the forest refuges
behind Mount Egmont and the upper waters
of the Waitara. Just at the termination of
the fighting with Tito-ko-Waru, the Ngati-
maniapoto made a raid upon the White
Cliffs, killing Rev. Mr Whitely, Lieutenant
Gascoigne, and others. A portion of the
force was at once sent to repress this
trouble, and, succeeding, virtually ended
the war on the West Coast. Ropata took
no part in this campaign, for reasons before
explained, but he sent a division of 150 men,
to which Captain Ferris was attached, and
although too late for most of the engage-
ments, it was this contingent that formed
part of the force that ended the hostilities
in Patea district by the capture of the Paka
Kohi tribe on the Upper Patea river. The
prisoners taken were deported to Wellington,
where they were kept for some time on an
old hulk in Port Nicholson, in charge of
Captain Ferris, and were afterwards sent to
Dunedin. It was during this last expedi-
tion that Mr Booth, S.M., took such a
prominent and courageous part. He was
for some time alone among the rebels,
far from support, threatened with death and
the umus (ovens). Yet he did not flinch
from his duty as the Government agent.
It may be mentioned here that during the
war against Tito-ko-waru, many acts of can-
nibalism were perpetrated by the rebels.
When pressed for time, and unable to carry
away the dead and wounded, the heart and
liver were invariably taken as choice parts,
and the European troops frequently found
bodies partially eaten. Te Kooti’s people
on the East Coast never in a single instance
indulged in sucli extreme and vengeful war-
fare as eating their enemies.
Simultaneously with the termination of
hostilities on the West Coast Te Kooti had
organised another large force, consisting
principally of Ureweras, and descended upon
the settlement of Whakatane, Bay of Plenty,
there killing many loyal Natives and the few
Europeans settled in the district, among
whom was Mr Pitcairn, Governmentsurveyor.
Retreating again by Ruatoki gorge, through
the Urewera country, he crossed the Wai-
kare Moana lake and descended upon the
unsuspecting Mohaka settlers, killing all the
Europeans and their families in the out-
lying parts of the district, including Messrs
Lavin and Cooper and their families,
and some eighty loyal Natives, with
whom on this raid he had two pitched
pa fights. It was in one of these that
Rowley Hill, the man of many decorations,
at present a member of the Permanent
Artillery, earned the New Zealand Cross by
gallantly rushing through a heavy fire to the
relief of the pa, and thus by example so
inspiring the defenders that Te Kooti was
repulsed with heavy loss. Relieving forces
were sent from Napier and Wairoa, but
were so badly handled by the officer in com-
mand that Te Kooti leisurely retreated,
recrossed the lake, and again took refuge
with the Ureweras.
Sir George Whitmore at this time, after
leaving military posts to protect Whanganui
and Taranaki districts, came with the field
forces tin. Auckland to Bay of Plenty and
organised an invasion of the Urewera coun-
try. One column advanced by the Ahikereru
Gorge near Lake Taupo, a second by
Ruatoki Gorge, Bay of Plenty, and a third
by Lake Waikare Moana. All these columns
had a good deal of hard fighting, but did not
succeed in penetrating the country further
than the north side of Ruatahuna, whence
they were compelled to retreat, principally
owing to the defection of the Arawa allies.
The southern column did not succeed in
crossing Lake Waikare Moana. Shortly after
this invasion Te Kooti with his force emerged
from the Urewera mountains and went
through to the King country, and cn route
at Opepe surprised and killed all but two of
the cavalry comprising the outpost. After
meeting the King Te Kooti returned to
Taupo, where he was reinforced by Te
Heuheu’s people. Fresh fighting began all
round the lake, as well as round the shores
of Lake Rotorua, and many engagements took
26
Major Hopata Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


place. The European force, then under the
command of Lieutenant-Colonel McDonnell,
inflicted a succession of defeats upon Te
Kooti, and compelled him again to seek
refuge with the Urewera, there to rest and
recruit his force again, and also to recover
from a wound which he had received during
the last engagement at Taupo.
It was at the end of this eventful year of
warfare that Sir Donald McLean arranged
for the invasion of the Urewera country by
Native allies from the north and south, and
the narrator was called, at the request of
Ropata, to be attached to the southern
column, which in January, 1870, advanced
to attack Maunga Pohatu (Rocky Moun-
tain), the centre and stronghold of the
Ureweras.
UREWERA CAMPAIGN
Sir Donald McLean, the Defence and
Native Minister, having at the end of 1869
completed his arrangements for the employ-
ment of Native allies for the bush warfare
and to hunt down the rebels in their moun-
tain retreats, issued instructions to Major
Ropata to raise a force on the East Coast,
and to Major Keepa (Kemp) to raise another
on the West. These expeditions were to
move independently until united in the
centre of the Urewera country at Maunga
Pohatu, where they were to act in concert
under Ropata’s command.
In February, 1870, the two columns made
a forward movement, that of Ropata’s, 870
strong, from Poverty Bay, and Keepa’s con-
sisting of 400 men, from the Taupo side.
One strong point about the employment of
Native allies, apart from their knowledge of
bush warfare, was the ability to dispense
with any organised system of commissariat,
which as every soldier well knows is one of
the greatest difficulties armies and large
forces have to contend against. The pro-
visioning of the Natives was simple—a bag
of biscuits was supplied to every two men,
also to each 41bs of bacon, 41bs of sugar, and
tea. Such other luxuries as salt, pepper,
mustard, etc., were considered entirely
superfluous. In addition to the items men-
tioned, each man carried 100 rounds of
ammunition, so that with arms, rations, etc.,
no man carried less than 801bs weight. This,
however, became lightened as the march
continued, although every man husbanded
his supplies as well as he could, knowing
that nothing could be expected from the
rear, but always expecting a little supple-
mentary food from the enemies in front.
The march of Ropata’s column was along
the Ngatapa Valley, diverging southward at
Te Karetu, just below Ngatapa. Thus they
Maunga Pohatu.
took the line of route followed by Te Kooti
from Puketapu on his raid of massacre in
1868, before described. All along the line
of march the remains of many of his victims
were found bleaching in the sun. Some of
them were friendlies who had been executed,
others his own people who had died from
exhaustion and been left unburied. Upon
the upper waters of the Hangaroa, called
Wai Maha (Many Waters), a fugitive family
of the Ngati Kohatu (Descendants of the
Rocks) tribe were captured in a secluded
position, where they had been living for
some years unheard of and unseen. Some of
the children had actually never seen other
human beings than members of their own
family. The husband, a fine-looking fellow,
escaped, but was afterwards captured by
means of a ruse of Ropata’s. At each camp
Ropata caused some little article belonging
to the family to be left behind, so that the
husband and father, who, he said, was sure
to follow, expecting to find the remains of
his wife and children, might be caught.
With this end in view, Ropata left a garment
of one of the children behind and planted a
small party in ambuscade near. True to
paternal instincts, the father came, and
whilst mourning over the garment of the
child, he was surprised by the party and
captured after offering considerable resis-
tance. Finding his family spared and him-
self well treated, this man became a most
useful guide.
The force visited the site of Te Kooti’s pa
at Puketapu, which he occupied after his
escape from Ruakiture. Crossing the bed of
the old Te Puni lake, the force began to
ascend the densely-forested range leading up
to Maunga Pohatu. The bush here was so
thick that the sun could not penetrate, and
when the day was at all dull or foggy it wqs
27
The Story of His Life.


within the forest almost as dark as night.
The force was now fully supplied by the
prisoner with information as to the position
of the various pas at Maunga Pohatu, and on
reaching the saddle of the watershed below
the mountain divided, the narrator taking
the right division and Ropata the left. By
a flank movement, the right division at day-
light next morning completely surrounded
the pa Horoeka, and by a kokiri (charge)
rushed through the gates, capturing all
within without a shot being fired. The
total number of prisoners taken was 93,
among them being Iharaera, the murderer of
Mr Bennett White, a resident of Opotiki
district. The left division, under Ropata,
were not quite so fortunate, as on the
approach to the Toreatai pa the advance
guard was fired into, and after a sharp,
short conflict the Ureweras abandoned the
position and fled to the ranges. It took
some hours for the two divisions to rejoin,
as estimates of distance in that mountainous
country are very deceptivs, and although
the rifle fire sounded quite close to
the party on the right and reverbrated
like thunder through the ranges for miles,
it was a very long, rough, and weary tramp
before a junction was effected. The Ure-
weras then surrounded the force and kept
up an intermittent fire, accompanied by the
blowing of pu tataras (conch shells), which
were used as trumpets. Ropata then ordered
the erection of parapets, etc., to strengthen
the position and guard against a united
assault. Sortie parties were sent out, and
for the first time in known Maori history
the summit of the Rocky Mountain was
reached by an invading force. Maunga
Pohatu, according to the legends of the
Maoris, passed down from one generation to
another, was surrounded with a halo of
romance and myth as being the “Maunga
Tipua” (magic or enchanted mountain).
These stories are too long to relate here, but
to summarise, it was generally believed that
when any strange foot trod the sacred
precincts of the mountain thunder and light-
ning would rage, dense fogs and snow tall,
and certain destruction overcome the tres-
passer. No doubt this belief was fostered
to prevent superstitious coast tribes molest-
ing the Ureweras.
Maunga Pohatu, strictly speaking, is not
a mountain, but the highest point in the
watershed, terminating at its eastern ex-
tremity in an abrupt and precipitous cliff
of castellated rocks, much resembling the
Whaka Punaki mountain, near Te Reinga.
It is flat on top, and slopes towards Lake
Waikare-Moana and Ruatahuna. From its
summit a magnificent view is obtained,
reaching to every point of the compass —the
Bay of Plenty, Lake Taupo, Hawke’s Bay,
and far towards the west coast, being
visible, also the South Pacific Ocean, called
in Maori Te Moana Nui-a-Kiwa (“ The Vast
Ocean of Kiwa,” Kiwa being a Maori
demi-god).
The Urewera people were at this time
living in a most primitive state, quite devoid
of any emblems of civilisation. Their cloth-
ing was made from the rough fibre of the
large-leafed cabbage tree, found only in the
back country, called Tii. Their houses were
Whare Punis, partly below and above ground,
and with doors and windows closed embers
were burned inside until each house became
almost an oven. The food of the Urewera
consisted of birds, rats, and a small
mountain-grown blue potato. Animal food
there was none. The principal Icinaki (relish)
was wild honey, a sort of pickle made from
a vegetable and allowed to get sour like
vinegar. It was a pretty sight to see a
Urewera kainga with its various devices for
the capture of food supplies. They had long
troughs, shaped like a canoe, with holes
along the rim at regular intervals on both
sides. In each of these holes was inserted
a stick about 6ft in length, to which
was fastened a decoy Kaka (the brown
parrot of New Zealand), tied with a short
string attached to a ring round the leg. It
was the custom at dawn of day to shoulder
several of these sticks and plant them under
trees upon which they had puamanu (snares),
small elbows resembling dead branches, upon
which were loops worked by a string from
the ground. Decoyed by the screeching of the
tame birds, the wild ones would flock round
and settle upon the puamanu, when, by a
dexterous pull from below, they were caught
by the feet in the loop, and their terrified
screeching only helped to lure other birds to
captivity. The various systems of rat
snares were also very ingenious, some being
in the shape of miniature stockyards, others
loops dangling from supple-jacks pegged to
the ground, which, when sprung, hung the
rodent in the air. Others were a species of
trap by impalement. The general method
of capturing pigeons was by a very long
sharp spear, 20 to 30 feet in length.
During the occupation of the fort he had
taken, Ropata opened up negotiations with
the Ureweras through the medium of the
before-mentioned murderer Iharaera, with a
view to obtaining the surrender or capture
of Te Kooti, Kereopa, and others. The
Ureweras, however, remained loyal to their
principles and sent a reply ordering the
28
Major Ropata Wahawaha, JV.Z.G., M.L.C.


Government force to return the way they
came, saying they would not allow “ booted
feet to pass through their country.” Ropata’s
reply was characteristic and forcible: “I
never return by the same track with a war
party, as I consume all the food on the way,
and to return means starvation. I depend
upon supplies in front. If you with your
bare feet get in the way of mine with boots,
I shall trample on you.” A reply came that
Major Keepa’s column at Waimana Gorge
had met Tama-i-Kohaand people and agreed
to a truce with the Urewera and had retired.
Ropata would not credit this statement and
determined to push through the country.
This broke off negotiations, and the Urewera
prepared to oppose the march. The mes-
senger Iharaera never returned, becoming,
so far as the friendlies knew non est, together
with a splendid green stone mere the narrator
had been persuaded by Ropata to restore to
him, so as to avoid apparent distrust when
he was acting as messenger.
On the force advancing from Toreatai, the
Urewera attacked front and rear in their
characteristic mode of warfare before
referred to. Ropata commanded the rear
guard, which was the most harassed, and
the narrator the advance. Having to fight
their way a good distance, the party
succeeded in traversing the country, and
reached the headwaters of the Waimana,
where straggler’s of Tama-i-Koha’s people
confirmed the news of the treaty made by
Major Keepa’s column. Meeting the chief
Tama soon after, a long and angry talk was
indulged in between Ropata and he, ending
ultimately in peace and promise. It was
then also elicited that Te Kooti, with a
large force, was occupying a strong position
some 60 miles up the Waioeka river, at
Maraetai. It was then determined to at
once push through via Ohiwa and round
by Opotiki to attack this stronghold.
UREWERA
CAMPAIGN
Maraetai.
Ropata’s force having thus successfully
passed through the very centre of the
Urewera Country, left the Upper Waimana
on March 17th, and by forced marches down
the Gorge reached Ohiwa, in the Bay of
Plenty, on the 20th. At this pa of the
Arawa they found Major Keepa with part of
his force comfortably quartered in camp,
well rationed, and wasting valuable time.
Ropata, still feeling indignant at the mis-
carriage of the expedition so far by reason
of Keepa’s treaty with the Urewera, used
very strong and taunting language to the
chiefs of the West Coast division, accusing
them of being half-hearted, calling them
Kupapas (waverers), and stating that though
his men were footsore, hungry, and tired,
he would next day march to attack Te
Kooti unaided. Major Keepa, who had
proved his courage and loyalty during the
West Coast fighting, took the taunts to
heart, not caring to cast blame upon the
chiefs of the Arawa and Taupo tribes allied
with him, whose laggard movements had
trammelled his actions. The narrator can
here bear testimony to Keepa’s courage and
soldierly abilities, having been associated
with him in many bush skirmishes and
engagements. Spurred to action by Ropata’s
plain speaking, Keepa struck camp, and
marched at 3 a.m. to rejoin the remainder of
his force at Opotiki, intending to get ahead
of Ropata and retrieve his laurels. It was a
matter of severe reproach that at the lime
Keepa’s force was inactive Te Kooti
descended upon Opape, near Opotiki,
capturing some 170 prisoners, 30 guns, and
a lot of ammunition.
Finding that Keepa had stolen a march
upon him, Ropata thus addressed his men :
“ Your swags are light for want of food,
also your stomachs ; now also let your hearts
and feet be light, and take two steps to
their one, and not be robbed of what we
have come so far to get,” meaning Te Kooti.
On arrival at Opotiki Ropata’s force were
hastily supplied with rations, which were
very acceptable, they not having received
any since leaving Poverty Bay a month
previously. Major Keepa’s force, it was
found, had marched by the Otara, making a
detour that would bring them out on the
right rear of the enemy’s position at
Maraetai. Keepa chose this line of march
upon the information that the direct route
up the Waioeka Gorge was most difficult,
being strongly defended, as all previous
Government forces marching that way had
found to their cost. Ropata, undeterred by
this, determined to march direct and attack
29
The Story of His Life.


in front. The march through the river and
gorge, against deep and rapid currents, was
exhausting, but the men were in good fettle
after their long spell of training at this sort
of travel, apd covered 25 miles a day. All
through the Gorge, where opposition was
expected, they found pas abandoned, the
occupants having retreated to the stronghold.
At daylight on the 23rd the advance guard
surprised the sentry of the enemy’s outlying
piquet at a part of the gorge narrowed in
between steep rocky cliffs with deep rapid
water between. This was really the gate of
the enemy’s position, upon which they
depended to successfully repel attack. The
sentry being disposed of, a rush was made
up the rock, and the piquet of twenty men
surprised and the position won. The firing
at this spot alarmed the pa, but Ropata
pushed over the cliff and descended to the
river bed beyond, directly in front of the
pa, which now stood out clear and bold 300
yards in front, built upon a sloping tongue
of land at the junction of the Waioeka and
Waipuna Rivers. The attacking party had
to advance up the river bed with little or no
cover except what the boulders afforded.
Some of the men hanging back, Ropaca,
although himself fully exposed, rushed from
one to the other, prodding them forward
with his toko toko (Alpine stock). Nearing
the pa, the attacking party divided right
and left, that to the right under the narrator
and the left under Ropata. Under cover of
the banks a heavy fire was poured into the
pa from both flanks. Oidy about an hour
had elapsed from the time of the attack upon
the piquet when a number of men and
women could be seen escaping up the hills
from the rear of the pa. Ropata then
ordered the kokin, and the pa, with a large
number of prisoners and large quantities of
food, etc., fell into the hands of the force.
During the attack Te Kooti had a narrow
escape. Being recognised when upon the
ridge of a whare, he was fired at, and the
bullet struck just underneath his feet.
At daylight on the same morning that
Ropata’s force were attacking the pa from
the front, Keepa’s force were advancing
from the rear, and had succeeded in surpris-
ing and destroying outlying kianya* beliiud
Maraetai, from one of which Kereopa
Kaiwhatu (the Eye Swallower, the murderer
of the Rev. Mr Volkner) narrowly escaped,
but Hakaraea, another notorious rebel, was
killed. A number of the escapees from
Ropata’s attack fell into Keepa’s hands.
The total number of prisoners that were cap-
tured by the united forces was 375, and of
these there were soine 25 killed, including 19
Chatham Island prisoners who were sum-
marily executed in the river bed. About
30 others of the more notorious were drafted
out and deported to Wellington, and confined
in the hnlk, being afterwards tried for
various crimes, such as murder and high
treason, for which some sufi'ered the extreme
penalty of the law. The evidence elicited
at these trials would give volumes of inter-
esting matter, but it cannot be told here.
The expeditionary forces, after destroying
the pa, returned to Opotiki.
Some interesting additional facts are taken
from an official report of Mr H. T. Clarke,
Civil Commissioner, to the Native Minister,
Sir 1). McLean, dated April 18, 1870 : —“ It
had been reported to me several months
ago by Wiremu Kingi. chief of Ngaitai, that
it was a well ascertained fact that Te
Kooti, when he found an asylum at
Waioeka after the fall of Ngatapa, gave
out amongst his followers that, after
visiting the King in Waikato, he would
return and make his final abode there, and
requested that a large house should be built
for a whare karnkh , or praying house
during his absence. Captain Porter tells
me that this information proved to be
correct; at Maraetai a house 80ft long, 30ft
broad, and 9ft high at the eaves had been
erected. The floor of the interior was
covered with two mats or / ako.pau the
whole length of the building ; a great deal
of time and labor had been expended in the
manufacture of the mats, they having been
worked in various patterns and devices in
wools of different colors. This building had
been consecrated a few days before the
place was taken; and Te Kooti, in his
opening address assured his hearers that
they were quite safe from molestation from
the “Kawana Tanga,” an appellation now
applied by the Hauhaus to those tribes who
have taken up arms against them. The
principal kninya contained sixteen houses,
and with those scattered a little higher up
the river amounted to thirty-one.
“ After the return of the expeditionary
forces to Opotiki, Ropata ascertained from
some of the prisoners that there was a con-
siderable supply of ammunition in the
mountains at the back of Opotiki, kept there
at the desire of Te Kooti for future use in
his operations on the coast of the Bay of
Plenty. By threats he managed to obtain
guides to conduct his men to these concealed
stores. They returned to Opotiki with
eight quarter-casks of loose powder, but not
satisfied with this, Ropata still pursued his
enquiries, and found that there was a
further store of twelve casks, and the place
30
Major Ropata Wahaivaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


of concealment was known only to one
individual, a person named Eru Nopene,
confined with 86 other prisoners in the
redoubt. Eru, under a stong escort of
Ropata’s men, guided them to the spot,
many miles in the forest, and the whole
stock was brought in, together with a hag
of ready-cast bullets. The whole loss to the
enemy was, therefore, twelve quarter-casks
of powder and a bag of bullets.
“ I have gone somewhat minutely into
the account of the expedition conducted by
Ropata, and the subsequent able co-operation
of Keepa and Topia, because J think it due
to those chiefs that the facts should be
recorded of the services they rendered to
the colony, and as a proof that we have
the means within our reach, if judiciously
and properly managed, of punishing those
marauders who have for years past been the
terror of the East Coast settlements.
“At a meeting at Hick’s Bay between
the Native Minister, accompanied by Ropata,
and certain chiefs, Ropata intimated that it
was his intention to organise another expe-
dition of picked men for the object of beating
up Te Kooti’s quarters, supposed to be
somewhere near Waikare Moana, and of
getting in the rest of the Ngatikowhatu
hapu. The particular style he adopted in
introducing his views was worthy of the
most approved recruiting sergeant. ‘ I let
you know,’ he said, ‘that I am going out on
another expedition, so as to prevent you
grumbling at me because I did not ask you
to be of my party. Now I do not want
anyone that is timid or afraid of being hit,
for these are the men that do get hit. Much
has been said about the difficulties of the
journey to Maunga Pohatu and its great
length. Why, it is only so long (indicating
the distance by the first joint of his dexter
finger); and as to difficulties, why, I took
two horses right through with me to Opotiki.
I start on Wednesday next. Those who
wish to come let them make haste; I will
not wait. I may be heavy-headed, but lam
light-footed.’ I just relate this to show the
spirit with which this brave and active man
is animated, who, although not a chief of
high birth, is shown the greatest deference
by every one of his tribe.”
Ropata shipped his force to their homes
in the Ngatiporou district, not, however, to
rest long before being called upon to take
the field again to scout the fastnesses of
Waikare Moana and the Uriwera country.
UREWERA
CAMPAIGN
Waikare Moana.
Before proceeding to relate the movements
of Ropata’s second expeditionary force, it is
necessary to revert to the Wairoa column
that was to move at the same time as Majors
Ropata and Keepa’s forces set out. A con-
tingent of some 200 Natives, under Mr E.
Hamlin and Lieutenant Witty, was raised
and made a movement towards the lake,
but meeting with a slight reverse from an
ambush en ro«'<, the loyal ardour of the
Natives evaporated and they retired, leaving
their dead behind. The officers in charge
did their utmost to instil fresh loyalty, but
without effect, so the force returned to
Wairoa and disbanded. In May, hearing of
the success of Ropata’s march to Maunga
Pohatu and the defeat of Te Kooti at
Maraetai, fresh contingents were raised from
the more loyal and reliable tribes of Mohaka
and Mahia, the former under Lieutenant
Witty, and the latter under Mr Hamlin, to
whom Lieutenant Large was attached as a
volunteer, and afterwards took part in all
the subsequent expeditions of Ropata. The
contingent under Lieutenant Witty did a
lot of hard service at and round the southern
end of the lake, ; that under Hamlin at the
northern end made many attempts to cross,
but did not succeed in force, though small
parties crossed the arms near Whanganui a-
Parua (the Long Waiting Place of Parua),
destroying large quantities of food and crops.
These latter successes were largely owing to
Witty’s forethought in procuring grapnels
to raise the boats constructed and afterwards
sunk by Colonel Herrick’s column in the
year previous. In this, as in former cam-
paigns, the formidable natural difficulties
surrounding this grand lake rendered the
expedition abortive in its main object.
It may not be inapproprir te here to intro-
duce a short Maori legend of this majestic
inland sea, Waikare Moana (Sea of Broken
Water). Exactly opposite the outlet of the
lake at Waikare Taheke, the source of one
of the principal tributaries of the Wairoa
31
The Story of His Life.


river, is a remarkable rock named Te Kuha,
and its origin is thus related. On the shores
of the lake in days of yore resided an old
chief, who sent one of his women to replenish
his calabash of water to quench his thirst.
She went to the lake side, but just as she
reached there the Manama (Moon), which
was then at its full, became suddenly
obscured, leaving her in darkness. She
then used the kaanga (curse) for its fickleness,
which so roused the Moon’s indignation that
he sent down Rona (the Man in the Moon),
who descended and cast the woman into the
lake, where she became petrified into stone,
still maintaining the stooping position as if
dipping up water. The head points towards
Wairoa, and it is from this stone figure of
the woman (Te Kuha) that the Waikare
Taheke flows in such a remarkable manner
subterraneously through the solid rock,
plunging in the form of a beautiful cascade
down a fall of 100 feet. This river never
floods, and in the hottest summer its waters
are as cold as ice.
By the end of April, Ropata, in pursuance
of his intention expressed after the fall of
Maraetai, levied another expeditionary force
of 200 men, to take up the pursuit of Te
Kooti, then supposed to have taken refuge
at Waikare Moana. By May 13th the left
wing under Ropata had reached Waihau
Lakes (now Tiniroto, “Many Lakes”), the
right wing under the narrator proceeding by
the upper Hangaroa, the intention being to
take Waikare in front and flank. This move-
ment was upset and forestalled by the
Wairoa column, much to the annoyance of
Ropata, who then diverged and united with
the right wing. After consultation, it was
decided to clear the country of all the small
scattered people and to remove them from
the influence of Te Kooti. Kokiris were
then sent out in every direction, scouring
the whole country far and wide, and bringing
in many prisoners, all of whom were deported
to reside in the Ngatiporou country near
Ropata’s pa at Mataahu. In all, these
numbered nearly 400, and they remained
at Waiapu until released in the end of 1871.
Winter had now set in, and movement in
the Urewera country being almost impos-
sible, the force returned to their kaivgas.
Te Kooti at this time, with the remnant
of his force that escaped from Maraetai, had
taken refuge in the forest fastnesses of Te
Wera country, on the border of the Urewera,
and the upper waters of the Waioeka and
Motu rivers. Among his followers at this
time were some Tolago Bay people who
advised him to make a raid upon that place
to kill Europeans and loyal Maoris, and
recruit his force with supplies, guns, and
kupapas (waverers) ready to join him if a
little force were used. In July Te Kooti
with 100 men made the bold attempt.
TE KOOTI
ATTACKS
TOLAGO BAY.
In July 1870 the residents of Gisborne were
alarmed by the arrival in desperate haste of
a messenger from Tolago Bay—there were no
telephones in those days—who brought the
startling intelligence that Te Kooti had
descended upon the settlement and killed
some of the people, and that fighting was
proceeding when he left. Captain Richard-
son with the narrator and all the available
mounted men, some twenty in number, at
once rode to the relief of the settlers, reach-
ing the settlement at daylight the following
morning. In those days there was a fairly
strong pa on the south side of the river at
Hauiti, and in this the few European
settlers and friendly Natives had taken
refuge. Among the Europeans were Mr
and Mrs Meldrum, Mr and Mrs Robson,
and there were others whose names are not
remembered. Mrs Meldrum did spartan
duty, arming herself with a gun, and doing
everything possible to instil a spirit of
courageous defence into the defenders. On
the arrival of the relieving party, Te Kooti
had retired, and particulars of his raid were
ascertained. With some 60 men he had
come across country from Te Wera, and
travelling down the Mangaheia, near the
present sight of Mr Reynold’s station sur-
prised and captured Te Peka and family,
whom he threatened to execute unless the
very fullest information was given as to the
position of the district and its settlers.
Te Peka submitted, but on the first oppor-
tunity made a rush out into the darkness
and escaped. He was fired at, slightly
wounded, and closely pursued, but neverthe-
less succeeded in reaching the settlement
Major Bopata Wahawalia, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


and giving the alarm, which enabled the
settlers to gain the shelter of the pa. There is
no doubt that but for this brave act of Peka’s
the settlers of Tolago Bay would have shared
a similar fate to the unfortunate victims of
the Poverty Bay massacre. Following closely
upon the heels of Peka, Te Kooti advanced,
and at daybreak in tbe rear of the hill over-
looking Tolago surprised some five Natives,
killing one and wounding two. He then
opened fire upon the pa from the ridge, but
finding it promptly and pluckily returned
knew that his intended surprise had failed,
and therefore withdrew. The moment was
critical, as the least treachery or wavering
would have doomed settlers to death, the
Natives to captivity, and the settlement to
devastation.
Messages were then sent up the coast to
Ropata and to Major Westrup at Gisborne,
the latter at once sending a party under
Captain Tucker to cut off Te Kooti’s retreat
at Mangatu. A pursuing force of some 100
men in addition to the few European
troopers was at once organised, and at
nightfall came in view of Te Kooti’s camp
near Arakihi. The weather was extremely
wet and cold, and travelling all day had been
through rivers and swamps up to the men’s
waists. The force was entirely without
tentage of any kind, and had to laj' all night
in the fern uncovered. It being too late to
attack, operations were deferred till morn-
ing, when it was intended to surprise the
camp. A prisoner afterwards gave informa-
tion that Te Kooti was completely off his
guard, and assured his people that the Govern-
ment forces would not travel in such weather,
as Ropata and Porter were not there. At
daylight the force advanced through the
bush in the rear of the camp, and when
close up were in the act of extending from
both flanks in order to surround the enemy’s
position, when one of the Tolago Natives,
doubtless in sympathy with Te Kooti, fired
without orders, so frustrating the surprise.
The majority of the contingent then com-
menced firing at random without aim or
object, and would not leave the shelter of the
bush. The main body of Te Kooti’s force
had marched half an hour previously, he
remaining with a rear guard of only ten
men, and he was just about to move when
the incipient surprise occurred. But for the
bad behavior of the Tolago contingent, there
should have been an end of Te Kooti’s career,
and he would assuredly have been taken
dead or alive, but even in war there is
a Providence which directs all things. The
narrator with some six men emerged from
the bush and closely followed on Te Kooti’s
heels and captured one of his wives Huhana,
who afterwards gave full particulars of the
raid. The pursuit was continued for several
miles, shots being exchanged at long
distances. The pursuing force having no
food and being otherwise unreliable, returned
to Tolago to await the arrival of Ropata and
his men. He was not long in responding to
the call, and soon appeared with fifty
men, being much incensed at Te Kooti’s
timerity in carrying the war almost into his
enemy’s country. Ropata then started in
pursuit, and proceeded right through to
Mangatu, but did not succeeed in overtaking
the retreating rebel, who dare not delay,
knowing himself to be in dangerous
terrritory. Te Kooti also succeeded in
evading Captain Tucker’s cutting-off party,
as on nearing Mangatu his scouts reported
having seen the smoke of the camp fires
incautiously lit by the men. Te Kooti then
inclined to the right, crossed the Waipaoa
river and Mangatu ranges, and gained the
refuge of Te Wera country once more after
a fatiguing and fruitless raid. The forces
then withdrew to await further instructions.
During the whole of 1870 and 1871 the
military operations on the East Coast and
Taupo district were under the direction of
the Hon. J. D. Ormond, then Superintendent
of Hawke’s Bay, acting as General Govern-
ment agent for Sir Donald McLean, a
position the latter had held in previous
years. Mr Ormond’s instructions were
always terse and to the point, his actions
decided, and the ability with which he
grappled with the difficulties surrounding
the position on the East Coast was un-
doubted. In December, 1870, instructions
were received to raise an expeditionary
force to move upon the Urewera again to
thoroughly clear the country of Te Kooti’s
people—if necessary, to remove the Urewera
to the coast, and at all events to establish a
military post at Ruatahuna.
In January, 1871, the force, consisting of
220 men of all ranks, marched up the
Waikohu and Waihuka rivers into the Te
Wera country. There, in the dense forests,
scouring parties for weeks searched for Te
Kooti and his peoplb. Many of his camps
were found, and at the source of the Waioeka
river the pa in which he had taken refuge
after the retreat from Maraetai, and from
which he made his descent upon Tolago Bay,
was discovered. It was found that this had
been abandoned for some time, the line of
retreat being down the Waioeka. After
destroying this pa, it was determined to
follow Te Kooti’s trail.
33
The Story of His Life.


To describe the density of the Te Wera
forest is impossible. No outlook could be
obtained, as range followed range, and even
the guides were often astray, and Te Kooti’s
people actually lost themselves for some
days on the march to Tolago. Only once
was a glimpse of Maunga Pohatu obtained,
and its bearings taken by the prismatic
compass, which was often found of use in the
bush when the guides lost their bearings.
While in this bush Ropata ascended a range
to reconnoitre, and being rather long absent
it was feared he was lost, and the narrator
with some others went in search. At the
top of the range Ropata was found lying
flat upon his back, with his eyes closed and
arms folded across his chest, as if asleep.
“ Ropata ! Ropata !” his friends called, but
Ropata remained still and took no notice.
Fearing something had happened to him the
next call was more peremptory, when Ropata
jumped to his feet with an expression of
annoyance and said “ Oh, you have spoiled
everything. I was waiting for a falciri (a
twitching or startling) to tell me in which
direction the enemy is. My nose, too,
had just began to itch, and I know
there is an enemy near !” Ropata had a
firm belief in the unfailing nature of the
signs to him, and particularly the itching of
his nose when near an enemy and just before
a tight, an omen from which he always
predicted success.
Following the trail of Te Kooti down the
Waioeka, the force stayed one night in his
late pa Te Wera, which was admirably
situated, being surrounded on three sides by
water and perpendicular cliffs, and in the
rear of dense forest and walls. It contained
30 comfortable ivharr*, thatched with bark
and nikau leaves. Food must have been
exceedingly scarce during their sojourn
there.
CAMPAIGNS :
The march down the rough boulder bed of
the Waioeka river was terribly severe. The
river on either side was bound by precipitous
ranges, rising 200 to 300 feet. The line of
march, as usual in that country, was through
the water, the stream being constantly
crossed and recrossed at places where it was
impossible to get along the side. Marching
in and out of water day after day is terribly
trying to the feet, and experience taught a
lesson that may be of use to others to know.
The pricipal cause of the footsoreness is the
hydraulic movement of the water inside the
boot, from which it cannot escape and by
constant pressure misshapes the boot and
softens the feet. To obviate this was insti-
tuted a system of eyelet holes at the toes to
allow the water to freely escape. This was
found a great relief, and the men did double
the marches without soreness. While
descending the river the men had in many
places to lower one another down the rocks
and rapids. At the junction of the Kahunui
with the Waioeka was found a letter stuck
in a stick at an old camp from the Maunga
Pohatu tribe to Te Kooti, inviting him
there, also one from Te Kooti himself to
three of his men lost in the bush on his
retreat from Tolago. By these it was
understood that he was making for upper
Waimana and Maunga Pohatu, and it was
Urewera Tribes.
determined to follow. The route took the
force to the rear of Maraetai, and as the
men had now been out twenty days and it
was expedient to get fresh supplies of food
the narrator with fifty carriers diverged out
to Opotiki, entailing an extra round of at
least 100 miles. Shortly after leaving
Maraetai, the scouts of this party reported
footprints in front, one made with boots.
The men were ordered to follow and surprise
the party, but not to fire upon them as
they might be Government people. Soon
after the party returned bringing in Major
Swindley and a small party of friendlies
from Bay of Plenty, who had ventured up to
prospect for gold. They did not know the
force was in that part of the country, and
mistook the men for a party of Hauhaus.
It was fortunate the mistake was not
aggravated by shots being fired, else the
smallest party must have gone down.
Ropata continued his march across country,
and was rejoined by food carries at one of
Tami-i-Koha’s kaiangas Tauwhare Manuka.
Here considerable opposition was manifested
to the advance of the force, until, finally,
convinced of Ropata’s determined intentions,
it was agreed that Tami-i-Koha should
himself guide the force through to the
boundaries of his territory. This tribe of
Tuhoe and Ngatihuri of Maunga Pohatu
34
Major Ropata Wahawaha, N. Z. C., M.L.C.


were the most wildly typical of the Urewera.
On reaching the various deltas in the bed of
the Waimana, in which the small kaiangas
were situated, many very interesting
incidents occurred, and picturesque views
obtained of the people in the pretty Native
garments and customs. At one place the
sub-chief, Te Patu Toro (Scout Killer)
advanced from the front of his people in a
ferocious manner, defying the Government
and all its power. Te Patu Toro was a
perfect type of savage, as he was a perfect
model of a man, being above middle height,
symmetrically built, handsome in feature,
with regularly formed lines of t-uv, his hair
in a top-knot surmounted with feathers,
feathers also in his ears, an athlete all over,
lie looked what he really was, the very ideal
of a brave. He was armed with a naval
officer's gold-hilted sw r ord, taken in one of
the fights in Waikato or Tauranga. The
narrator endeavored to effect an exchange of
it for his field glass, but without success,
and could not get him to divulge where he
had obtained it. The name of the Scout
Killer speaks for itself. Many of these
people had never before seen an European
and there was much conjecture amongst
them as to whether the white skin was
a natural or artificial covering, and one of
ohe children with more timerity than the
tthers tested the point by a surreptitious
pinch of the narrator’s leg. On reaching
the boundary of the Ngatihuri tribe, Tama-i-
Koha returned, and the force then began to
ascend Maunga Pohatu, passing several of
the pas which had been abandoned by the
people, who had retired to Te Karetu,
nearer the mountains.
On nearing Tore-a-Tai, the scene of the
first engagement with Ropata’s force in the
expedition of the previous year, the scouts
reported men standing upon the walls with
guns. A closer reconnoitre showed that the
forms seemeil peculiarly immovable, and on
inspection they proved to be the bodies of
Ropata’s men, disinterred, stripped, and
placed on the parapets, in an upright posi-
tion as if about to fire. The method by
which this was done was ingenious though
barbarous. Two poles were placed along-
side each leg and crossed at the chest, round
which was a band to fasten the body erect.
Another pole was fastened in a horizontal
position in the hands, to represent a gun.
Had not Ropata been controlled by Govern-
ment instructions at this time, he would
have wreaked a severe revenge upon the
Ngatihuri for their terrible insult. They,
however, denied complicity in the desecra-
tion, but Rakiroa, a prisoner, afterwards
stated that Iharaera Motu, the absconding
murderer of Bennett White, had pointed out
the burial place of the dead to the tribe, who
dug up, mutilated, and treated the bodies as
described. Before leaving this place Ropata
had the bones scraped, and they were brought
out for interment in the Ngatiporou country.
The force then advanced to Te Kakari and
summoned the Ngatihuri to surrender, and
after some time a truce was come to with
them. Information was then received of Te
Kooti having passed through Maunga Pohatu
some two months previously and gone in the
direction of Wai Maha. Ngatikuri appeared
very nervous whilst the force stayed there,
and on their having promised to no longer
harbor rebels or fugitives—a promise soon
to he broken, as subsequent events will
show —the force marched round the eastern
end of Maunga Pohatu and along the water-
shed range to Wai Maha. Since the expedi-
tion of the previous year a large landslip,
fully a mile in length and a quarter-mile in
width, had taken place. Although at a high
elevation, this contained a number of marine
fossil remains, among them being found a
remarkable fossilised black tooth of a fish
about three inches long. The Urewera said
this slip was an aitua (bad omen) and de-
noted destruction of their mana. On reach-
ing Wai Maha bad weather set in, and the
rivers being highly flooded, seriously re-
tarded operations. The force were reduced
to three potatoes each a day (taken from the
Ureweras), supplemented by berries, fungus,
wood grubs, curled fern tops, and such other
indigenous food as could be obtained. At last
even these rations ran out, and compelled an
outward march to Wairoa, thenearest pointof
civilisation. The difficulties of this march
were serious, trying to all, and the men
were actually three days without food.
After reaching the open country the men
being too weak to break down the high
fern and scrub, and travelling being
even more difficult than in the forest, a
party of the strongest, 30 in number, volun-
teered to go ahead and return with supplies
for the main body. It was, however, seven
days before the force returned, both parties
having undergone extreme hardships and
starvation. The force then rested at Opoiti
until a fresh supply of food was received
from Napier to enable them to resume the
pursuit.
The following four months up to the end
of June was occupied in scouring the whole
country, occasionally discovering old pas and
camps of Te Kooti’s people, also many stores
of good supplies hidden in caves. At one of
these a large supply of wild pork splendidly
35
The Stain/ of His Life.


preserved in wild honey was found, as well
as rifles, watches, money, and a few other
articles. In a secluded valley or canyon
beyond the Mokonuia Range, a section of
the Taitangata Mahaki, te Whanau a Kai,
was captured, having there taken refuge
after the fall of Waerenga a-hika in 1865.
There they had lived in peace, their retreat
being unknown, even to Te Kooti.
Throughout this expedition the force
suffered many hardships and privations,
being snowed up for days, and at times men
were lost in the bush and never afterwards
discovered, others being found frozen to
death. On one occasion when a man was
found in a semi-frozen state a most unique
method of resuscitation was adopted. Dead
leaves were covered over his naked body
and set fire to, and the ashes rubbed in, a
treatment which either from the friction or
warmth proved effectual, the man recovering
and being little the worse for it. It was in
one of these straits that Ropata related the
following legend. Some of the chiefs remon-
strated with Ropata for wintering in the
bush, saying all would die from cold. His
reply was : —“ Remember our hardy ancestor
Tongia, who wove and wore the rough
garment Te Paki and defied the snow and
storm. We are descended from him, and
shall not die. If we were the descendants
of the lazy fop, Ruamoko, we might die as
he died. He was fond of fancy garments to
win the admiration of women. Ruamoko
was in the bush beyond Hikurangi mountain
with some of his people, and being of a weak
nature, improperly clad, was frozen to death
in the snow, Tongia’s people at the same
time, clad in rough garments, and being
hardy, survived, and Ruamoko left his
bones in the bush. We are the descendants
of the hardy Tongia.”
In order to bring this unintentionally long
story to a close many months of stirring
adventure and numerous incidents and
anecdotes have had to be omitted or con-
densed, and the difficulty has been how
much to leave unrelated of the mass of
material there is to work upon. Before
proceeding to the last campaign and closing
engagement of the war a slight reversion to
past events is again necessary. During the
last three months of the expeditions dealt
with in the previous chapter, Captains Mair
and Preece, with a contingent of Arawa,
were scouring the country on the Bay of
Plenty side, penetrating to Ruatahuna and
along the shores of Waikare Moana, while
Major Pitt and Captain Ferris on the south
scoured the shores of Waikare and the
country along the rear of Whakapunake
mountain, the last named officer pursuing
and scattering a raiding party of Te Kooti’s
sent to plunder the settlement of Whakaki.
The party under Captain Ferris captured
some notorious rebels, who were handed
over to justice, one of them being Maaka
Waikato, Te Kooti’s executioner, afterwards
tried and hung at Napier, and for whose
capture Captain Ferris received a special
note of thanks.
It is supposed by some of those un-
acquainted with the nature of the country,
which was of course in those days without
roads or tracks, that the marches recorded
were done on horseback. In no case were
or could horses have been used ; all was on
foot. It must not, however, be supposed
that all the men bore the fatigue with equal
fortitude and endurance. There was a
constant drainage of the sick and disabled,
not detailed in the events recorded, as the
aim has been to deal with the military
doings of the principal figure, not with the
side issues and details, except where neces-
sary to preserve the sequence of events.
In the Hangaroa river a large cave was
discovered, very similar to that of Rob
Roy’s cave on Loch Lomond. It was named
Te-ana-a-Tai (the cave of Tai). The entrance
was from the top of a level rocky plateau,
which is reached by a perpendicular ladder
that could be raised or lowered at the will
of the occupants. This cave had been lately
occupied, but was empty when discovered
by the force. The flat top of the soil-
covered rock in front of the cave had been
utilised to grow a few mountain potatoes,
which were just ripe and very acceptable to
the discoverers, who had been without food
for three days. A shag was caught here,
and devoured raw, hunger being the relish.
The narrator’s share was a leg and three
potatoes. The cave was not extensive, but
would accommodate fifty persons comfort-
ably, and formed a natural hiding place,
easily passed without detection.
After the capture of Whanau-a-Kai (the
offspring of Kai) and their good old chief
Tamati-te-Rangi-Tuawaru (Tamati of the
Eighth Heaven) the force returned to the
Coast and disbanded after their most arduous
wanderings in the wilderness, soon, how-
ever, to be recruited again for the final
expedition.
A little reproachful story is told of the
above-named tribe, whose nick name in
Maori is equivalent to an accusation of false-
hood and decit, and in Poverty Bay if a
man’s statements are doubted it is sufficient
to ask “Are you a descendant of Te
Kawengaßarauhe (the carriers of fernleaves).
36
Major Ropata Wahawaha, .M.Z.C., M.L.G.


Some generations back this sub-tribe was at
enmity with another of Rangowhakaata, who
held a fortified position near Waerenga-a-
Kuri (clearing of Kuri). They could
not subdue this pa by assault, so after
a time disappeared and then returned
about 100 strong, bearing kits upon
their backs, in imitation of Maori food
carriers Slowly they struggled under their
burdens, and when within sight of the
enemies’ pa they raised a sign of peace
and then sat down to rest, releasing with
apparent relief the carrying straps round
their shoulders. Deceived, tjie Rongowha
Kaata came out of their pa and gave the
cry of welcome, “ Haere Mai.” The food
carriers again raised their burdens, arose
wearily to their feet, and marched apparently
unarmed into the pa, where they deposited
their burdens, but instead of food the kits
contained hidden weapons,' covered on the
top as the food usually was with fern
leaves. Weapous were grasped, the pa com-
pletely surprised, and men, women, and
children given up to helpless slaughter.
Hence the reproach for a deceiver, “a
carrier of fern leaves.”
LAST CAMPAIGN: End of
A FRESH force of 200 men having been
raised, consisting partly of men who had
been on previous expeditions, it was trans-
ported by the s.s. Napier (Captain Bendall)
to the Wairoa, landing there on August 9,
1871. The plan of operations having been
arranged, the force marched on the 12th,
Ropata with 100 going by the Putere round
the southern end of Waikare Moana, there
to thoroughly scour the shores ; the narrator
with the other hundred men proceeding by
Orewha round the northern end. Each
division was instructed to act independently,
and to rendezvous at Maunga Pohatu, there
to capture and remove the Ngatihuri to the
coast if Te Kooti was not killed or captured
in the meantime. Ropata’s division was
not again heard of for nearly two months,
for reasons hereafter explained.
The right division marched through scenes
of former engagements, capturing a few
prisoners en route, and when near Lake
Waikare Iti (Lesser Waikare) information
was obtained that Te Kooti with his force
was between there and PaPuni. Diverging
to the right, the force on the 22nd reached
Tupuni, the ascent to Maunga Pohatu.
Here the scouts reported fresh tracks of a
man, and soon after another track leading
towards Rangi Tata. Rising into the ranges
a larger trail was found, which was con-
jectured to be Te Kooti’s. The weather set
in very wet, and marching was very
difficult, but it was always found better to
move in bad weather in order to more
quickly overtake and surprise the enemy.
On the top of a range a camping place three
the War in New Zealand.
days old was discovered, at which was found
a sick dog, recognised by one of the prisoners
as belonging to Te Kooti’s people. It was
then known that the right trail was struck
and that it was fresh. From this camp Te
Kooti, cautious and wily, once again adopted
the ruse of scattering his men in various
directions to mislead pursuit. This necessi-
tated a day’s delay, as scouts had to follow
each trail up to the point where they all
converged into one another, returning when
they had found the main direction in which
Te Kooti had gone. At first this was almost
due east, thence he marched round to nearly
due west. Several camps were passed,
at each of which it was found that
other attempts to cast pursuers off the
trail had been adopted, but the loyal scouts
worked well and the various scatterings did
not cause long delays, as it was assured that
the outlaw was by a circuit really making
for Maunga Pohatu. The trail now led up
the bed of the Anini river. Rough bearings
by prismatic compass were taken and the
ocality determined to be midway between Te
Wera, Tawhana, and Maunga Pohatu. The
marches of the pursuers now doubled those
of the pursued, two of the latters’ camping
places being passed each day. It was wet
and cold the whole time and no fires could
be lit night or day, and the men felt this
very much, though they knew well that it
would be useless pursuing if their march was
exposed by smoke or fire. Some of the men
knocked up and had to be left behind, among
them Captain Wi Tahata, whose endurance
for the first time had given way. On the
37
The Story of His Life.


31st the march began as usual at daylight,
and ascending up a tremendously high range,
from the summit, which was not reached
until late in the afternoon, the scouts reported
seeing smoke resting upon the tree tops,
some four miles in front, on the side of
another range. At the top of this mountain
the trees, although doubtless hundreds of
years old and perfectly formed and symme-
trical were so stunted by cold and snow that
they were mere dwarfs beside the giants of
the same age in the valley below. Descending
from the summit, the party found all streams
running northward and thus knew that they
were on the Bay of Plenty side again. The
course taken was down the river, supposed
to be the Tauranga. Halting within half a
mile of the spot where smoke had been seen,
two scouts were sent forward and cautiously
advanced. Returning they reported that
Te Kooti and people were camped in an old
Urewera clearing on the face of the range.
It was then determined to surprise and
attack at daybreak. Forty men were left
with the camp, sixty being told off in fight-
ing order to take up a position close to the
enemy. It was then nightfall, and the
narrator, after placing the piquet in front,
and on returning to the main body was lost.
It was a critical position, as each party
thought him with the other. Calling or
whistling could not be resorted to, but at
last “ striking stars ” from a centre was
adopted, until one of the rays led him to the
men lying in wait. Such indulgences as
coughing or speaking had to be suppressed.
The night seemed long and cold, and all
were glad when the time for attack arrived.
Te Kooti’s people could be distinctly heard
all night, and they were evidently ignorant
of the proximity of an enemy.
As day dawned on September Ist, 1871,
the force moved to attack, twenty men under
the narrator forming the centre, twenty
under Lieutenants Large and Ruka Aratapu
the right, and twenty under Henare Potae
the left. The two flank attacks extended
from each wing, so as to completely surround
the enemy. The men crept through the
bush with the utmost caution, as the snap-
ping of a twig would have upset everything.
The centre took up its position outside the
fallen timber at the lower part and directly
in front of the clearing, Te Kooti’s people
being camped in temporary whares just
inside the timber. Instructions had been
given to Ruka in the right attack that when
thesurround was complete he was to call upon
Te Kooti and his people to surrender, so as
to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. While the
extension was proceeding a dog began to
bark and a woman moved out. When a
voice, recognised as Te Kooti’s, from the
large whare in the centre asked the cause of
the dog barking, the old woman threw a
stick at it and said she did not know. Te
Kooti then called to his people to light the
fires, so as to get ready to march. Women
began to move about for this purpose, and a
climax was becoming imminent. The centre
received orders to closely watch Te Kooti’s
whare, and if on the surrender being called he
attempted to escape to pour in a volley. The
surround was nearly complete, when a
woman went to chop bark off a fallen
tree which lay along the left flank, and be-
hind which a number of the men were
crouching. She looked over the log, and,
seeing the men, was about to call out, when
one of Potae’s men, instead of seizing and
silencing her, as should have been done, shot
her. This completely upset the plan of
surround, and all was soon confusion
among the Hauhaus. Most of the force had
their guns covering Te Kooti’s whare. The
kokiri was then given, and the clearing
charged. The fighting became hand to-
hand and the firing dangerously cross for
both sides, and unfortunately several women
were killed and wounded in the The
engagement was sharp and short. The
enemy, being so completely surprised, could
offer little effectual defence, and all but
eight were captured or killed. On the first
shot being fired, Te Kooti burst through the
back of the whare, carbine in hand, being
seen only by a few. He stood for a moment
behind a tree ; then called out in Maori, “It
is the Ngatiporou. Escape who can.” He
then, accompanied by one wife, and followed
by several others, jumped down a cliff and
escaped. There were several personal
encounters and narrow escapes, as usual, in
the attack. Lieuts. Large and Ruku. upon
the alarm being given, were the first to
charge from the right flank. Pursuing parties
were at once sent after Te Kooti, but did not
succeed in overtaking him, though a few of
his party were captured and broughtin,among
them being Wi Wchikou, a staunch follower
of Te Kooti’s with many misdeeds to account
for, one being the murder of his own wife
and children, whom he had said were an
encumbrance to him in the bush. This man
was ordered to be shot and not left to the
slow process of the law to deal out justice.
The prisoners were then collected, the dead
buried, and the wounded attended to.
Among the latter were some women, who
were treated with care and carried with the
force. Te Kooti’s wives and all in the
whares with him were captured, he alone
38
Major Eopata Wahawaha, X.Z.G., M.L.C.


escaping from it, and but for his presence of
mind in bursting through the back and
sheltering" behind a tree he must have been
shot or captured. It was a matter of surprise
that Te Kooti had no sentries out, but the
prisoners explained that this was owing to
the bad weather and because they did not
expect pursuit. The party left in the river
with the camp now rejoined and the force
moved on to a Urewera pa upon the top
of a high range. This was found to be
abandoned, and it was cjuietly occupied and
made ready for defence should the Urewera
try to attack. This pa, caljed Opokere,
commanded a splendid view of the surround-
ing country.
From one of the killed a double-barrelled
fowling-piece was taken and recognised as a
valuable “ Joe Man ton ” (a celebrated maker
of the last and early part of this century).
It was taken to Wellington and repaired,
and some ten years subsequently lent to
Captain Trimmer to shoot pigeons with at
Makauri. Here he was met by Mr Thelwall,
one of those who had escaped the massacre.
He at once exclaimed, “Good gracious, that
is my gun.” There was no doubt of this
being a much-prized gun of his father’s, given
him when leaving England and lost at the
massacre. It was thus remarkably restored
to its owner after ten years, and no doubt if
the firearm could speak it would tell of many
tales of bloodshed.
For the information of many strangers to
those days of strife and bloodshed, may be
related here the stoic manner in which
Maoris faced death and endured wounds.
Ranged up with imminent death staring
them in the face, without a word of beseech-
ment, and not a tremor visible on their
features, they received the last shot or blow
that dealt death. If wounded they suffered
pain silently, never allowing friend or foe to
think they could not endure bravely. In
one case the narrator to save life was com-
pelled to roughly amputate a man’s arm,
and he endured the operation without a
groan. In the height oUbattle they fought
silently and steadily without yells, excepting
occasionally the inciting cry of the chiefs,
“ Tahuna, Tahuna.”
SURRENDER OF THE NGATIHURI.
In the night at Opokere snow feel steadily
and silently, or as the New Zealand poet so
beautifully puts it, “Like feathers falling
from the angels’ wings.” By morning the
pa was covered to a depth of from two to
three feet, the snow having to be removed
before exit could be obtained from the
whares. On the rising of the sun, the sur-
rounding country was a scene of white-robed
beauty, the white canopy resting on the
tops of the forest trees, on range, in valleys,
and on mountain. Shortly after sunrise the
wind rose and shook the snow to the ground,
thus rendering travelling impossible. The
force were unable to march or send out
search parties for Te Kooti, who it was
subsequently ascertained was with only nine
men and one woman snowed up not more
than three miles away. The Urewera on
hearing the firing had abandoned their
kainya* at Te Kai Rakau and Te Kai Amo,
taking refuge in their pa, Tauaki. From
this a white flag was hoisted, which was
accepted as a sign of truce, and replied to
with a flag of a similar color. The snow
along the ranges having cleared a little on the
fifth day the pa was visited by several of the
Urewera chiefs, Te Awa-Nui, Whare Raupo,
Polio Korua, Whenua Nui, Hetariki, and
Kingi. They all expressed resentment at
Te Kooti bringing trouble within their terri-
tory again. It was found that fifteen of
Te Kooti’s people had taken refuge at
Tauaki, and in order to test the sincerity of
the chiefs, a surrender of the fugitives was
demanded, which was reluctantly acceded
to, and the prisoners were brought in. The
turbulent and wild Ngatihuri held aloof
from this surrender, and still had to be dealt
with. The Urewera had no tidings of
Ropata, although a month had now passed
since the forces separated. Anxiety began
to be felt, although allowances were made
for the thousand and one obstacles to retard
a march in that country. On the 12th a
small party, guided by a Urewera, was sent
by the Maunga Pohatu track to Waikare
Moana with letters to the Government and
Ropata, if the latter was to be found. Search
parties were still out and scouring the bush,
each bringing in a few prisoners. By this
time the food supply had nearly run out,
39
The Stoi'y of His Life.


and being burdened with so many prisoners,
numbering about 80, and the sick, the
narrator determined to proceed out to Opo-
tiki, via Waimana and Ohiwa, to hand over
the prisoners, obtain instructions and sup-
plies, and recruit fresh men. On the 14th
the outward march commenced with 60 men,
80 being left under Ruka Aratapu and Lieut.
Large, with whom was left the residue of
the biscuits, to await Ropata’s force and the
return of the narrator from Opotiki. The
outward march down the Waimana to
Opotiki again was fatiguing, all the rivers
being swollen in flood, and it was September
24th before the force reached Opotiki. On
October 9th the Government p.s. Luna
arrived at Ohiwa, and all the prisoners were
shipped away, also 40 men who from various
causes were unfit to resume fresh operations.
In consequence of this other men had to be
recruited from the local loyal Natives of
Ngaitai and Whakatohea. This being
done, the force, 65 in all, marched
from Opotiki by Major Keepa’s track
to Maraetai; thence the route was
across rough unknown country direct to
Maunga Pohatu. The nature of the country
could best be compared to the open fingers
of the hand—it was marching over range
after range, up and down, down and up, for
many days, as well as wading waist deep
through the rivers, and it was not till the
23rd that the force rejoined the 30 men left
at Opokere. Both parties had much to
relate of what had transpired, but the
stories are too long to report here. To the
surprise of both parties, there were still no
tidings of Ropata. After a day’s rest an
advance was made upon the Ngatihuri pa,
Tauaki, which was surprised, and seven
prisoners were taken, who stated that the
rest of the tribe were assembled at Te
Kakari. The force then moved still more
cautiously, and succeeded in surrounding
and surprising the Ngatihuri, who were off
their guard at the time, some messengers
having just come in from Te Kooti, telling
of his escaping through to Waikato. Te
Whin was one of these, a man noted as a
quick runner and scout. The surround
being complete, the narrator, with Wi
Tahata bearing a white flag, walked into the
open and demanded all to put down their
arms and surrender, stating that if they did
so their lives would be spared. Seeing
themselves helpless, the little old chief Te
Puehu (The Dust) came to the front of his
people in almost a state of nudity, and after
some time spent in talk and defiance, agreed
that they should lay down their arms and
surrender, provided they were not at once
removed to the coast. A conditional pro-
mise was given, and then all arms were
piled in the marae, whereupon the signal
was given for the force to advance from the
shelter of the bush. It was the uncertainty
of the number hidden that awed the Ngati-
huri, otherwise doubtless they would have
resisted. Te Puehu afterwards said had he
known the smallness of the force he would
have fought. This old man was notorious
among the Urewera as a savage of savages.
He utterly abhorred the pakeha, and would
not use or allow to be used any garment of
European manufacture. It was this old
fellow who said he could not see the crimes
of Te Kooti. If the killing of women and
children was considered one, it was not one,
as that was a Maori custom in war; if for
fighting the pakehas and their Government,
then Te Kooti was not a man of crime, as it
was the duty of every Maori to hold the
island, which was slipping away to the
foreigner. He also asked that if Te Kooti
was captured he might be spared. A suit-
able camping-ground was then shown the
force, and a share of such food supplies as
they possessed was given. Te Pirihi, a
prisoner and fugitive from Te Kooti, re-
ported that the rebel was escaping to seek
King Tawhiao’s protection at Waikato, and
that he had left him on the borders of the
Kaingaroa Plains, also that Kereopa was
near Ruatahuna.
ROPATA’S SUFFERINGS IN THE FOREST.
Acting upon this information, it was the range when three distinct and separate
arranged the force should march to Ruata- volleys were heard from the direction of
huna, leaving 30 men to guard Te Kakari pa Tauaki. These were evidently fired by
and the Ngatihuri, and also to await Ropata. Ropata, and so it proved. He had at last
The advance guard next day were crossing arrived at the rendezvous after being just
40
Major Bopata Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


two months and a half unheard of. A few
hours later the forces joined, and there was
much hongi and shaking of hands, after
which explanations followed. Ropata after
crossing the lake had been attacked by low
fever, and for weeks was seriously ill and in
high delirium. His men wanted to take
him out, but he forbade them, saying “ No,
I will not leave Porter alone in the bush.
None of you move out without my orders,
and do not dare to move me until I am
rotten.” Nearly two months passed thus
before he recovered sufficiently to move by
short marches and picked up ftie trail of the
right wing. Ropata followed stage by stage
of the pursuit until he reached the scene of
the engagement with Te Kooti. He under-
stood from the appearance of the locality
the whole movement as it had taken place,
but to satisfy himself quickly of the final
result he adopted the unique method of
disinterring the dead to ascertain who of
friends and who of foes had been killed, and
on the junction of the forces Ropata was
able to give a description of the fight and its
results almost as accurately as if he had been
an eye witness. Following on then to
Tauaki the old people left there informed
him of the force marching to Ruatahuna,
and he fired the three volleys as the speediest
message he could send to recall them.
Ropata was terribly reduced by his trials
and was but the semblance of his former
self. Although reduced in body, however,
his spirit was still there, and he did not rest
long before he wanted to wreak vengeance
on the Ngatihuri for their past misdeeds,
and he plainly told them that if he had come
first he would not have spared them.
Thirty of the best men, under Lieut.
Ruka Aratapu, were then detached to
establish a military post at Maunga Pohatu.
A party under Lieut. Large, who was always
ready for rough duty and second to no
Native in the bush, started for Wairoa over
the mountains and across the lake to report
Ropata’s safety and the movements of the
force.
CAPTURE
On the third day after uniting the force
marched to Ruatahuna. Here the Urewera
were all requested by Ropata to assemble,
which in due course they did. Runangas
(councils) were held to decide as to the
future. Ropata demanded the surrender of
all outlaws and murderers, particularly Te
Kooti and Kereopa, otherwise, he said, he
should permanently occupy and control their
country, deporting them to the coast. To
show them the earnestness of his intentions,
he drew a design of a pa, which was at
once erected without the Urewera daring to
oppose. This brought them to terms, and
they offered guides to search for outlaws.
Te Kooti by this time had made good his
escape to Waikato and was given refuge
by the King. Te Whiu (The Whip) was
detailed to guide a party to capture Kereopa,
who was known to be in hiding on the
upperwatersof the Whakatane, near Ruatoki
Gorge. At daylight the party approached
the whares, at Te Kaianga, Manawa Rua
(Double Heart), and Kereopa was seen sit-
ting outside. Taking alarm he ran, but the
swiftfooted Whiu soon overtook him and in
the most approved manner collared and
brought him to the ground, when he was
KEREOPA.
at once secured. Men of lesser notoriety
were from time to time captured or sur-
rendered, and the end of the war was near.
Kereopa, with a guard of 25 men, was
marched over the Huiarau range, and across
Lake Waikare to Napier. On the road
many questions were asked Kereopa, to
which he gave ready replies, once saying
he knew his time would come, as when
swallowing the Rev. Mr Volkner’s eyes one
stuck in his throat, which was an aitua and
tohu mate (a bad omen and sign of suffering
or punishment). His nickname of Kaiwhatu
(Eye-eater) arose from this. He was found
to have a razor in his possession while on
the march, but Ropata said, “Do not
deprive him of it, as he may become sad
and heavy, and we cannot carry him. Keep
up his spirits and feet light.” When handed
over to the police at Napier the razor was
forgotten, and when entering the gaol gate
he suddenly drew it from under his clothes
and cut his throat, nearly causing death.
He recovered, however, was tried for
murder, and after seven years of fanaticism
and crime met his just fate at the gallows.
The sum of £IOOO reward for his capture
was paid over to the narrator by Mr Ormond,
41
The Story of His Life.


taken to Ruatahuna, and distributed pro
rata among the force in the heart of the
Urewera country, even Te Whiu taking his
share. Te Kooti now being a fugitive and
broken man, Kereopa captured, the country
cleared of outlaws and murderers, and the
turbulent Urewera subdued, there remained
but little more to be done. Diplomatic
terms of peace were made with the people,
all military posts withdrawn, and the force
marched to Whakatane, where it was met
by the Government steamer Luna (Captain
Fairchild). On Friday, November 22nd,
1871, Major Ropata with the force was
landed at his then pa on the northern head
of Open Bay, and when the last canoe with
Ropata left the steamer’s side a salute was
fired by the order of Captain Fairchild,
and replied to by Ropata in a peculiarly
characteristic manner!
In closing this, the last scene of the ten
years’ war, it would be wrong to omit the
names of other chiefs and comrades closely
allied and associated with Ropata during
these turbulent times. Many have gone
the long journey, but a few of the ions
remain. The chiefs to whom he was so
much indebted for soldiers and active
support were Henare Potae, Hotene Parou-
rangi, Pine Tuhaka, Wi Tahata, Tula
Nihoniho, Pine Waipapa, Hati Houkamau,
Karauria Pahura, Patara Rangi, Wikiriwhi,
and others, also Wi Pere, who invariably
accompanied or sent guides from his people
in the Urewera campaigns.
TE KOOTI’S ARREST.
In 1889 Te Kooti, having recruited his
religious mana, threatened to visit Poverty
Bay, and the intended visit considerably
disturbed the country’s peace. Thereupon
Sir Harry Atkinson called upon the narrator
and Ropata to take command of the military
operations set on foot to arrest him. Ropata
readily responded, but said, “ The heart and
spirit is strong, but I am afraid the body is
weak. But it does not signify, I have had
a dream, and he is in your hands, not mine.”
This march and arrest of Te Kooti is a
matter of later history, and it is needless to
deal with it at length here. The active part
that was taken by Major Messenger with the
Permanent Artillery, also Captain Morrison
of the same, Captain Palmer with the
Auckland Navals, and the splendid forced
and unprecedented march at night through
the bush of Captain Winter’s troop of
cavalry, the splendid discipline and endur-
ance displayed by every man, the conduct of
thestaff, Major McCredie,V. A.,Capt. Kenny,
Lieut. Kenny, Lieut. A. Wetheredand others,
all of whom no doubt look back with feelings
of satisfaction and comradeship to the part
they took in this last scene of Te Kooti’s
career, are yet remembered with pride in
Poverty Bay. When the force advanced to
Waioeka pa and found Te Kooti had
escaped, but arrested his people, the ques-
tion was put to Ropata, “ Now, what about
your dream ?” He replied, “ Oh, the day is
not out yet, it is early in the morning, he is
in your hand.” Truly said, for later in the
day Te Kooti’s retreat was discovered at
Wai-o-Tahi, where he surrendered to the
narrator, Ropata having remained at Opo-
tiki. A strange story is told by the Hauhaus
that Te Kooti had said, “ When Porter and
I meet face to face my end is near.” (Ka
mate ahau.)
LAST SCENE OF ALL.
Ropata’s active political and civil life pre- honored by Her Majesty with a Highland
eminently maintained his strong personality claymore, and in successive years made an
and loyalty in all the varying phases of M.L.C., in which, as in every other sphere
politics and agrarian disputes, he being of action, he gained the respect of all as a
always on the side of law and order. He true man, loyal to his people and the Queen,
was decorated with the New Zealand Cross, whom he venerated as the “ Ariki ”of all
Major Bopata Wahawaha, N.Z.C., M.L.C.


Arikis (the chief of all chieftains). A large
emblematical flag was also presented to his
tribe by the Government, and called Ngati-
porou, and it is held in high esteem by them.
As a Maori chief among his people he was
devoid of all selfish qualities, always study-
ing his people’s interests before his own, and
never enriching himself at their expense.
During the last few weeks preceding Ins
departure for the resting place of his
ancestors his strong will was still dominant
and his brain clear. At the last houyi with
the narrator shortly before the end he said,
“You are at last rigfit. My steps are
downward; I am nearing the last step.”
His end was truly typical of how a chief
died of old. His mind clear, his owhaki
(last words) to his tribe to be loyal to the
Queen, steadfast to the church, friendly to
Europeans, to maintain their unity as a
tribe, “ Ngatiporou,” to whom he then bade
farewell, “ poroporo ake.” He said, “Let
my European friends bury me. You, my
wife, with my honors, I leave to the Govern-
merit, as you have been a faithful sharer in
ray labors.” After a short interval of
unconsciousness he revived ; his voice was
low, his last words being “ Kei hea a Poata?”
(Where is Porter?) Being told not there,
he sighed, and passed quietly away to Te
Reinga, the spirit land of his ancestors.
From that dread track whence none turn back,
None can escape the grave
The weak, the strong, all pass along,
The coward and the brave
At the last scene of all, on August 13th,
1897, all were assembled at the grave side
to pay the last sad rites to the respected
dead. Standing there listening to the
tangi’s plaintive wail, and gazing on that
familiar face, now for ever at rest, the
appropriate lines used by a late writer arose
in the mind of the narrator: —“Alas for
human honors ! how little they are worth !
Alas for human ambition! how small a space
of earth will serve for its grave !”
“ HEI KONA RA E NEHE.”
Notk.— lt was not intended in the beginning to publish these recollections in book form, consequently
the original sheets not having been carefully revised, some errors in the spelling of Maori words have crept
in, particularly in the spelling of the name of the religion “ Te Pai Marire ”
The recollections are of actual participation in the events recorded, memory being occasionally
refreshed by reference to notes taken at the time. Ropata’s military life has been principally dealt with,
but many incidents of that even omitted. His civil and political life is also full of incident that would
be worth recording.
In his inner Maori life he was intimately versed in the traditional, legendary, and genealogical lore of
his people, and was a fluent and good speaker, never departing from the pure Maori language. His age his
been disputed, but close inquiry assures us that he was not less than 85 years o d at the time of his death.
o
43
The Story of His Life.






