

FIJILEPROSY HOSP ITAL
MAKOGAI


Published by the Government of the Colony
oj Fiji. Prepared by the Public Relations
Office for the Medical Department and
printed at the Government Press, Suva .


Introduction . . .
previous brochure describing the Fiji Leprosy Hospital at Makogai
I was published in 1944 since when important advances have been made
I in treatment of leprosy. With the advent of the sulphone group of
drugs leprosy need no longer be regarded with the dread associated
with this disease since biblical times.
The chance of recovery has been so greatly enhanced that those suffering
from the disease have now less tendency to evade detection. This enables
diagnosis to be made earlier with the result that the infection is brought
under control, thus increasing the probability of recovery and reducing the
risk of its spread to others.
The success accompanying modern therapy is gratifying to all those who
unselfishly devote their lives to comforting and caring for leprosy patients
and this success has stimulated the research for still more effective drugs.
The author of this brochure, Dr. C. J. Austin, C.8.E., retired from the
position of Medical Superintendent of the Fiji Leprosy Hospital at Makogai
in March 1953 after 23 years faithful service. The peoples of the South Pacific
owe an everlasting debt of gratitude to Dr. Austin for his wise counsel and
able administration of this institution, and also to Mrs. Austin for her kind-
nesses and sympathetic understanding. They have been loyally supported
by the Reverend Mother and her staff of devoted Sisters —European and
Fijian.
A milestone in the history of the Fiji Leprosy Hospital was reached in
March, 1950, by the retirement of Reverend Mother Agnes, M.8.E., on her
80th birthday after 34 years of devoted service at Makogai. The Reverend
Mother has elected to remain at Makogai during her retirement and in June,
1952 was awarded by the Government of France the highly coveted honour
of Chevalier de la Legion d’Honneur for her services in the cause of leprosy in
the South Pacific.
The generosity of the people of New Zealand by way of gifts and cash
allocations, made available through the Lepers Trust Board, Incorporated,
of New Zealand is gratefully acknowledged, and in this connexion particular
reference is made to the Board’s Field Officer, Mr. P. J. Twomey, M.8.E.,
J.P. Acknowledgment is also made of the gifts and funds contributed by
other organizations and individuals.
I also take this opportunity to thank Sir Henry Scott, Q.C., and Mr. Wilbur
E. Donovan, Chairman and Secretary of the Fiji Lepers Trust Board, for
their ever ready assistance on behalf of Makogai.
J. M. CRUIKSHANK,
Suva, Fiji,
1954.
Director of Medical Services.


FIJI
T
Xhe Makogai Leprosy Hospital
occupies a fairly central position among
the 350 and more islands comprising
the Fiji archipelago, which may itself
be regarded as the hub from which
radiate sea and air routes to the Gilbert
Islands in the north; to Samoa, Tonga
and the Cook Islands in the east; and
to New Zealand in the south. Makogai
is thus admirably placed as a collective
isolation and treatment centre for the
victims of leprosy within this area of
the Pacific.
The reef-encircled island of Makogai
is about 2\ miles in length and three
square miles in area. Volcanic in
origin, it largely consists of a number
of peaks, rising to a maximum height
of 876 feet, and leading down to sea
level by a series of rocky ridges. The
latter divide the more useful land into
a number of “ flats ” stretching inland
for varying distances; and it is these
level areas that are utilised for the
Hospital buildings, outlying villages,
gardens, coconut plantations, dairy
farm, staff quarters, etc.


The main Hospital is situated in
Dalice Bay, protected by the small
islands of Makodraga and Tabaka;
and the men’s villages stretch along
the shore and into contiguous bays.
Almost due south in Nasau Bay lie
the dairy farm, bakery, soap factory,
and staff quarters, connected to the
Hospital by a three-mile motor road.
A large flat at Takewa on the north
of the island is used for gardening by
the patients, in addition to suitable
areas in the hills above their own
villages; and Vagabia, the next bay,
also connected through Takewa with
the Hospital area and so with Nasau,
opens into the largest coconut-bearing
area on the Island.
Makogai is noted for its beauty, and
the view of the Hospital area from the
road above Dalice Bay offers one of the
loveliest scenes in Fiji. The varying
blues and greens of the lagoon, the
white of the surf contrasting with the
golden sands, and the red roofs of the
buildings, enhancing by contrast the
grace and colour of coconut and other
tropical trees, provide a picture to
stimulate the most jaded taste. From
the higher peaks are revealed scenes of
surpassing brilliance; and on clear
days the outlines of Vanua Levu and
Viti Levu (the two main islands of
Fiji), as well as the other Islands of the
Lomaiviti group —Ovalau and Wakaya,
Batiki and Gau, Nairai and Koro —are
readily visible. The picturesque reef,
shaped somewhat like a figure 8,
enclosing Makogai in one loop and
Wakaya in the other, is seen to be a
continuation of the reef extending
down from Vanua Levu rather than
of that protecting the much nearer
Island of Ovalau.
Main Hospital and administrative area in Dalice Bay. The “Makogai” is anchored off the main wharf.


Leprosy in Fiji . . .
There is evidence from Fijian mytho-
logy as well as from the language itself,
that leprosy must have been known in
Fiji long before the arrival of either
Europeans or Asiatics in the group.
Over a hundred years ago, Lyth in his
Journal mentioned leprosy as being one
of the diseases treated by himself and
his collegues of the Methodist Mission
in Fiji; and in 1859 Moore, of the
same Mission, records an instance
known to him of leprosy being “ cured ”
by native means, the victim having
been hung upside-down for some time
in the smoke over a fire of burning
sinu gaga —itself a poisonous tree,
contact with whose leaves or sap pro-
duces an intensely irritating skin rash
Medical work during the twenty
years succeeding the Cession of Fiji
to Britain revealed leprosy as a serious
problem in the Colony; and the Fijian
Chiefs ascribed its increase to the action
of Government in forbidding the
“clubbing” of advanced cases. The
Lepers’ Ordinance, 1899, gave the
Government limited compulsory powers
and forbade certain callings to lepers.
In the same year a leprosy station was
established on the Island of Beqa, but
for various reasons it proved inade-
quate, and its forty inmates were
transferred to Makogai in November
1911.
Since that date, in spite of fluctua-
tions due to the repatriation of numbers
of able-bodied Indians from time to
time, or to the inclusion of further
island groups into the central scheme,
the total number of inmates has shown
a fairly steady increase. Thus, at the
end of 1912 the number was 154, rising
The road past the Women’s Wards in the main Hospital area


Taking a blood sample for haemoglobin estimation.
to 219 in 1914, and to 352 by the end
of 1919. For the next few years,
however, a number of Indians who had
improved under treatment were re-
patriated at their own request; and
it was not until 1926 that the 300 mark
was again reached.
Neighbouring Administrations began
to realise that the Fiji Government was
seriously, and on the whole successfully,
tackling the problem of leprosy, and
from 1920 onwards discussions took
place regarding the possibility of Fiji’s
undertaking the treatment of patients
from other island groups. The first
few Samoans were admitted in 1922,
and in 1925 twenty patients were
transferred from the quarantine station
on Quail Island in Lyttleton Harbour,
New Zealand. Cook Islanders were
first admitted in 1926 and Tongans the
following year, by which time the
number of patients had increased to
438. Gilbert Islanders arrived in 1935,
and the total number of patients rose
to 575. Since then there have been
900 admissions from within Fiji, and
500 from outside territories; and in
spite of loss by discharges and deaths,
the number of patients increased to its
maximum of 744 in 1951. As a result
of the success of sulphone treatment,
the Government felt justified late in
1951 in reducing the period of sur-
veillance of inactive cases at Makogai
from two years to one, with a con-
sequent sudden decrease in numbers.
The present total of 668 includes—
From Fiji—
Fijians . . . . 133
Indians . . . . 226
Others . . . . 58
- 417
From other territories . . 251
668


Inside a Ward in the Women’s Hospital. The women delight in embroider-
ing texts or aphorisms on their pillow cases.
Administration . . .
The medical and nursing staff con-
sists of the Medical Superintendent,
eighteen Missionary Sisters of the
Society of Mary, and ten Fijian Assist-
ant Sisters. In addition to the general
nursing in the Hospital wards, Sisters
visit the villages daily for general
inspection and dressings of individual
cases; patients appearing to require
further attention or special treatment
are referred to the Medical Super-
intendent for advice or admission to
Hospital. The Sisters train a number
of patients as assistants in the village
dressing-rooms and in the Hospital
proper. They also carry out dispensing
and laboratory work, give anaesthetics
and assist at operations; they help
with the medical records and the more
medical aspects of the clerical work;
they control the issue of rations, and
run the patients’ co-operative store
as well as the main Hospital kitchen.
Their duties are, in fact, all-embracing,
and a very large proportion of any
success attained at Makogai is un-
doubtedly due to their efficiency, ver-
satility, and selfless devotion.


It may be recalled here that Sir
Arthur Richards, K.C.M.G., Governor
of Fiji before his transfer to Jamaica,
had been so impressed by the physical
and moral effect of the work of the
Makogai Sisters that, wishing to im-
prove conditions at the Jamaica
Leprosy Hospital, he applied to the
Revd. Mother at Makogai for assist-
ance. As a result, a Nursing Staff of
the same Society was appointed to the
Hospital, with a nucleus of Makogai-
trained Sisters. It is not surprising
that after a subsequent visit, Dr. E.
Muir, Secretary of the International
Leprosy Association and of the British
Empire Leprosy Association, was able
to speak of the marked improvement
in conditions at the Hospital since the
Sisters’ arrival. Five other Sisters of
the same Society were trained at
Makogai for anti-leprosy work in the
Solomon Islands.
The lay staff includes a clerk, farm
overseer, public works overseer, fore-
man mechanic, captain of the auxi-
liary motor ketch Makogai, baker, and
lorry-driver, as well as Fijians and
Indians working under the foregoing.
Three Fijians are appointed as “police”
but their work is largely supervisory,
the fact that they are accepted as
representatives of Government being
sufficient guarantee of law and order.
The Fijian, Indian, Solomon Island,
Rotuman, Tongan and Gilbert Island
villages have each a “ Headman ” of
their own race, and the Polynesian
village, comprising Samoans, Cook and
Niue Islanders, has one of mixed
ancestry. The Headman acts as a
“ liaison officer ” between patients and
Sisters working in the Hospital Pharmacy.


Patients helping to build the Ernest Wolfgram Technical Institute—a gift of the Lepers Trust
Board. At the Institute, named after a former patient at Makogai, the patients are trained in
wood and metal-work.
staff, and is generally responsible for
the cleanliness of his village and the
co-operation of his people.
The main Hospital area is divided
into a large women’s section and a
smaller one for men. The sexes are
segregated; and the only men in the
Hospital area, apart from the trained
“ dressers ”, are those too sick or
crippled to be able to look after them-
selves, those with acute reactions or
other medical conditions, and those
admitted for special surgical or other
treatment.
People living in the villages are
therefore comparatively able-bodied;
and in order to avoid boredom and
depression, so fatal to physical improve-
ment, it is essential to keep them well
and usefully employed. With this end
in view Makogai has developed beyond
the Hospital stage, though neglecting
none of the aids that medicine can
bring, into an agricultural colony.
Large areas of land are available for
gardening and full advantage of them
is taken by the patients, who are
encouraged in this direction by being
paid for their garden produce—yams,
taro, tapioca, sweet potatoes, bananas,
pineapples, peanuts, and green vege-
tables of native or European type.
In this way they receive about £3OO a
month —a substantial incentive. Fish-
ing and the rearing of ducks and fowls
are also encouraged, and provide a
valuable addition to the individual and
Hospital dietary, which is itself subject
to the recommendations of the Govern-
ment Nutrition Committee.


Top: “Washing day” for the women patients.
Bottom: Carpenter patients in the Workshop.
The launch in the background was
built by patients.
The able-bodied women do a great
deal of the necessary washing and
mending for the men, who, as a form
of exchange, bring them regular sup-
plies of garden produce, fish, etc. The
women also receive payment for mat-
making, at which they are so skilled, as
well as for the sewing they do for
Hospital patients and school children.
They take great pride in embroidering
their bedspreads, pillow-cases and
table-covers, so that no one can visit
their wards without being amazed at
the beauty and novelty of the designs
they achieve, and at the brightness
which these decorations, expressive of
the spirit of the women themselves,
lend to their rooms.
In addition to these activities that
are open to all able-bodied patients, a
number of the more active and intelli-
gent among the men have been trained
in various branches of Public Works
activities. As a result, all buildings
in the Hospital area, mainly of timber
and concrete, are erected and main-
tained by patients and about forty to
fifty patients are regularly employed
on Public Works under a retired
foreman of works as overseer. This
avoids the expense of transportation of
outside labour, and not only provides
the patients concerned with interesting
and profitable employment, but also
teaches many of them a trade which
will be invaluable to them on discharge.
A Makogai Boy Scout Group has
recently been formed among the pati-
ents, and at present consists of 17
Senior Scouts, 20 Scouts and 22 Wolf
Cubs. Including the Scouters, the
Group comprises 10 Fijians, 10 Gilbert
Islanders, 12 Indians, 3 Cook Islanders,
7 Samoans, 3 Euronesians, 1 each
Solomon Islanders and Rotumans, and
3 Tongans. Early interest in the Group
was heightened by the fortunate timing
of the visits of two Scout Commissioners
from Imperial Headquarters, as well as
by gifts of flags and flag-mounts
donated by New Zealand Scout Com-
missioners and Scout Troops. There
is no doubt that the physical, mental
and moral training involved will be of
inestimable value to these young boys.


Cubs and Scouts of the Makogai Group. Boys of all races join in scouting activities.
Patients enjoying film show. The open-sided theatre was a gift of the Lepers
Trust Board. Films are supplied without charge by producing companies.


Inter-village contests in cricket and
football arouse much enthusiasm, and
tennis and boxing are very popular;
Baseball has also recently been intro-
duced. Sports days are held from
time to time, and races both serious
and humorous provide enjoyment for
all. The training required for these
recreations is of the greatest importance
in building up physique and general
resistance.
From the point of view of non-
productive but psychologically valuable
amusements, pride of place must be
given to the “Talkies’'. Twin “Kalee”
projectors for 35 mm. him, donated to
Makogai in 1938 through the generosity
of the Rotary Club of Suva, were the
source of great enjoyment to open-air
audiences for several years, and their
value was enhanced in 1946 when they
were transferred to the new Theatre,
referred to later as a gift of the Lepers
Trust Board. The him distributors
of New Zealand have been exceedingly
generous in providing hlms for exhibi-
tion, and it is usually possible to
arrange for two showings a week.
A game of Soccer, as popular in its season as cricket is
in the warmer months.
Stamping outgoing mail. Postage is free to patients.


Communications . . .
The auxiliary ketch Makogai is a
fine vessel of 41-98 gross tons fitted
with a Gardner engine, and is used for
the transport of stores, drugs and mail
from Suva or Levuka. She has also
two comfortable cabins as accommoda-
tion for any members of the staff or
any visitors who may be travelling.
There are four members of the crew in
addition to captain and engineer.
As already mentioned, there is a
motor road from Nasau to the Hospital
at Dalice, continuing through the
garden area of Takewa to Vagabia, the
main coconut plantation, and linking
up the village en route—a distance of
about 6 miles in all. The Nasau lorry
is used for the transport of stores from
the anchorage at Dalice to Nasau, and
of meat, milk, and bread from Nasau
to Dalice, as well as for general Public
Works and farm purposes. The pati-
ents’ lorry is used within their own
area for carrying sick or crippled
patients, and for general Hospital
transport; the Medical Superintendent
also has a car for travelling between
Nasau, the Hospital and the villages.
Two Gardner engines furnish
lighting and power for Dalice and
Nasau. At Dalice, there is a smaller
engine for night lighting of the
Hospital area. The power engine also
provides power for two large pumps for
the auxiliary water supply. At Nasau
is a refrigerating chamber and plant
capable of hanging four carcasses of
meat and of furnishing all the ice
required.
A semi-Diesel engine pumps water
for Nasau, crushes copra to express the
coconut oil for soapmaking, and works
a circular saw, chaff-cutter and
grinding-stone.
Unloading the Hospital’s auxiliary ketch “Makogai”, which brings stores and mail from Suva and Levuka.


The treatment centre in a Polynesian village. The Sisters attend each centre daily to carry out necessary
dressings and examination. More serious cases are referred for hospital investigation or treatment.
Churches . . .
Almost all Fijian and other South
Sea Island patients regularly attend
services in the spacious and attractively
built Catholic or Methodist Chapels,
which stand in the greatest harmony
within a few yards of each other. A
resident Catholic priest attends to the
spiritual needs of the Sisters as well as
of the Catholic patients, being assisted
in the latter regard by a priest un-
fortunate enough to have contracted
leprosy elsewhere in the islands. The
non-Catholic patients from Samoa, Cook
Islands and Gilbert Islands are mainly
•adherents of the London Missionary
Society, but find the Methodist services,
conducted by the resident Fijian
Minister, very similar to their own.
The Methodist minister at Levuka
visits Makogai from time to time, as
does also the Anglican clergyman for
the benefit of his Solomon Island
members.
Interior of the Roman Catholic Church.
Leaving the Methodist Church after a service.


THE BOYS SCHOOL
There are nearly 60
boys of school age
among the patients
at Makogai.
The Lepers Trust Board . . .
From an early period in the history
of Makogai as a hospital for the treat-
ment of leprosy, donations were made
to a fund which came to be known as
the “ Christmas Day and Comforts
Fund ”. When New Zealand and its
dependencies entered into the scheme
for a Central Leprosy Hospital, a
similar Fund already in operation in
Christchurch was continued for the
patients at Makogai. At the same
time Dr. Thomas J. Hughes, Medical
Officer of Health, Auckland, who ac-
companied the first patients transferred
from New Zealand, interested a number
of his Auckland friends, among whom
should be especially mentioned Mr. D.
L. Thomas, in the welfare of Makogai
patients. In addition to “ Christmas
cheer ” over the years, this centre
donated, in the middle twenties, the
first cinema projector and the first
refrigerator to be used on Makogai.
Responsibility for the nation-wide
appeal was taken over in 1931 by
Mr. P. J. Twomey of Christ-
church, through whose enthusiasm and
energy its scope has been enormously
enlarged.
As the Fund increased, it became
evident to Mr. Twomey and his co-
workers that a legally constituted body
should be established to control the
work, and the Lepers Trust Board was
incorporated in New Zealand. Public
interest grew and it was felt possible to
extend the benefactions of the Board to
other territories, and negotiations were
entered into with the Western Pacific
High Commission for assistance to be
given towards the inception of an anti-
leprosy scheme in the Solomon Islands
Protectorate. Large grants have al-
ready been made for this purpose.
For the local control of expenditure
a Fiji Branch of the Lepers Trust Board
was appointed, consisting of His Excel-
lency the Governor of Fiji as Patron;
Sir Henry Scott, Q.C., as Chairman;
the Director of Medical Services; the


Medical Superintendent, Makogai; the
Revd. Mother-in-charge, Makogai; and
Mr. W. E. Donovan (Accountant-
General of Fiji) as Member-Secretary.
Of recent years, many cases of gifts
have arrived for the Makogai patients
every Christmas, and each patient has
also received a cash gift of £l, with
smaller sums at Easter and on Fiji’s
Cession Day (10th October). Prizes
for sports, gardening, school work and
other activities have been provided,
and substantial sums set aside for
providing extra comforts at all times
for the less fortunate members of the
community. Patients receive gifts of
£2 on discharge and a scheme is in
operation for the assistance and re-
habilitation of necessitous discharged
patients.
Top: The Mobile X-ray Unit donated by the
Lepers Trust Board.
Bottom: Patients awaiting service at the Co-
operative Store which has an annual
turnover of about £5,000.


Women’s work-room donated by
the Lepers Trust Board, complete
with sewing machines and cutting
out tables.
School-girl patients practising
the embroidery work with
which the women brighten
their rooms.


Among recent benefactions of the
Fund, the following buildings should
particularly mentioned:—
A large and handsome open-sided
theatre with projection and film stor-
age rooms, used for the twice-weekly
showing of films. Being also equipped
with stage and dressing-rooms it is
admirably adapted for public functions,
and for the occasional patient-sponsored
concerts and stage productions that are
enthusiastically prepared and attended.
An excellently designed X-ray house,
furnished with a mobile model SF2
X-ray unit and with processing, viewing
and store rooms.
A well furnished recreation room in the
women’s compound and a workroom
complete with sewing machines, cutting
out tables and ironing equipment.
A recreation room attached to the
boys school, now largely used by the
recently formed Makogai Group of
Boy Scouts, as well as by the orchestral
band, whose instruments were also
donated by the Board.
A commodious and well furnished
Guest House at Nasau, to be used
primarily for the accommodation of
interested New Zealand visitors, but
which has been offered also for the use
of Medical Officers or others from
neighbouring territories wishing to gain
leprosy experience at Makogai.
A much needed and appreciated
bulk store in connection with the
patients’ co-operative store.
A technical school for the training
of young boys in wood and metal work
gives an assurance of a steady flow of
recruits for “ Public Works ” jobs, thus
fitting them to obtain similar employ-
ment on discharge. The provision of
a recreation room for the school girls
on the same lines as that of the boys
is only awaiting the erection by Govern-
ment of a new school.
A heavy debt of gratitude is due from
the Makogai patients, as well as from
all who have the welfare of the com-
munity at heart, for the initiative and
organizing ability of Mr. Twomey, the
practical interest of the members of
his Board, and the unfailing generosity
of the New Zealand public.
The Guest House
at Nasau —a gift of
the Lepers Trust
Board.


About Leprosy ..
Leprosy is dreaded so much in com-
parison with other diseases because
its manifestations are external and
obvious. It occurs in two main forms:
the one produces localised or wide-
spread thickenings of the skin, which
in neglected cases ulcerate and dis-
charge highly infective material; the
other mainly affects the nerves, pro-
ducing an intensely painful neuritis in
some cases, and leading to loss of
sensation, muscular paralyses, defor-
mities and ulcerations of the extremi-
ties. As a result of modern treatment,
however, particularly with the sulphone
drugs, the advanced stages —formerly
so common in most leprosy hospitals —
have now become the exception.
The leprosy bacillus, the still un-
proved but almost universally accepted
“ cause ” of leprosy, is very similar to
the bacillus of tuberculosis, both in its
appearance and staining reactions.
Unlike bacillus tuberculosis, however,
it has not yet been cultivated, and
apart from the human being, no
animal appears to be susceptible to
infection. The fact that some of the
tissue reactions to the presence of
leprosy bacilli in an infected person
are similar to those produced by
tubercle bacilli is sufficiently indicated
by the application of the term “ tuber-
culoid ” to one of the forms of leprosy.
This has naturally resulted in the
testing in leprosy of drugs thought to
be beneficial in tuberculosis —a policy
already proving its worth in modern
therapy.
‘ Clow hand ’ of leprosy, showing muscular
wasting of the palm and typical contracture
of the fingers. The hand is almost completely
without feeling.
Lesions of the lepromatous type of leprosy.
This is more infective than the tuberculoid
type of disease.


Left: X-ray film showing bony destruction and distortion of foot.
Right: Obtaining tissue fluid by the “ slit ” method for examina-
tion for leprosy bacilli.
Treatment
The treatment of leprosy has of recent
years been revolutionised by the intro-
duction of “sulphones”, a variety of com-
pounds of which are now in use. They
undoubtedly represent a great advance
on the previous Chaulmoogra treatment,
particularly in the more advanced stages
of leprosy, which were largely untouched
by any drug formerly in use.
Originally found effective in the
treatment of tuberculosis in guinea pigs,
diamimodiphenylsulphone (DADPS, or
still more shortly, DDS) was found much
too toxic in comparable doses for human
use. A search for less toxic compounds
of the drug was therefore instituted, re-
sulting in the present series of Promin,
Diasone, Sulphetrone, Diamidin etc., all
of which proved more or less efficacious
in the treatment of leprosy. The original
“ sulphone ” (DDS) has since, however,
been found tolerable in smaller doses,
and results with such dosage are at least
comparable with those of the proprietary
(and therefore more expensive) drugs.
Drugs of the Thiosemicarbazone
series are also proving to be of marked
benefit in leprosy. About 46 patients,
of whom 14 had been unable to tolerate
sulphones, are at present taking one or
other of these drugs.
The most striking result of the newer
treatment is the complete absence
(apart from occasional and temporary
reactive states) of the widespread
lepromatous ulceration of the skin
which, requiring frequent dressings
and extensive bandaging, displayed,
hitherto, so obvious a sign of advanced
leprosy. In the less advanced cases
clinical improvement has frequently so
outrun bacteriological improvement
that in demonstrating cases to students,
the embarrassing confession has to be
made again and again that the patient
shows no clinical sign of leprosy, but
that his smears are still positive. Even
here, however, a careful follow-up of
individual records shows in most cases
a steady though slow bacteriological
improvement, the bacilli becoming
fewer and more degenerate. Unfor-
tunately dosage has to be governed by
the general reaction of each individual
patient to what are admittedly toxic
drugs. Anaemia, dermatitis, leprotic
“ reaction ” and general debility have
all to be carefully watched for and in a
large number of cases the tolerated
dose is undoubtedly below the optimum.


Years
Admissions
Deaths
Discharges
Repatriations
1911-1920 ..
662
146
22
253
1921-1930
793
284
213
104
1931-1940
954
330
303
79
1941-1950
827
333
475
Total .
3,236
j 1,093
1,013
436
Years
New Cases
from Fiji 1
New Cases
per 1,000
of the
population
1911-1920
674
0-45
1921-1930
626
0-36
1931-1940
635
0-31
1941-1950
474
0-18
Progress . . .
The policy of segregation, by which
patients are compulsorily isolated for
varying periods from their relatives
and friends, must be justified by success
from the individual as well as from the
public health point of view.
So far as the individual is concerned,
there is no doubt that the large pro-
portion of patients at Makogai are
living under far better conditions of
housing and diet, and are therefore
much better able to withstand their
disease and benefit from treatment,
than would be possible in their own
somewhat primitive villages scattered
over so many islands.
The following table, indicating pro-
gress at Makogai in 10-yearly periods
since the opening of the Hospital in
1911, shows that of the 3,236 patients
admitted, 1,013 have been discharged
as “ Disease Arrested ”, and that
although over the whole period there
have been more deaths than dis-
charges, during the past ten years
discharges have exceeded deaths by
142. It may be noted also that in
proportion to the number of patients
in each period, the number of peaths
has steadily decreased.
The benefit accruing to public
health, apart from the self evident
advantage of removing sources of
infection, is shown by the fact that the
352 patients recorded at Makogai in
1919 represented 2-24 per thousand of
the population of the Colony at that
time, whereas the maximum of 462
patients from Fiji in 1951 represented
only T 57 per thousand of the increased
population. Taking the four ten-
yearly periods from 1911-1950, new
cases of leprosy in Fiji itself have
fallen, as shown in the following table,
from 0-45 per thousand of the total
population in the first period to 0-36
in the second, 0-31 in the third and
only OTB in the period from 1941 1950.
In 1919, moreover, 24 per cent of the
admissions were hopelessly crippled
Neural-3 (T-3) cases, and 32 per cent
were in the far advanced and highly
infective Lepromatous-3 stage; in 1950
none of the patients admitted was in
so advanced a stage. These facts
indicate that the great majority of
those admitted in 1919 not only stood
no chance whatever of a return to
normal civil life, and would have been
nothing but a serious burden to their
friends or Government had they been
released, but also must have left behind
them a great number of undisclosed
cases among relatives and friends
whom they had already infected. The
Medical and Assistant Medical Practi-
tioner Services of Fiji were then far
less efficient than is the case to-day,
and there is no doubt that hundreds of


earlier cases must have been missed.
At that time, Fiji was doubtless in the
position of many parts of the tropical
world to-day, where it is felt safe to
multiply the known number of leprosy
patients by five in order to arrive at a
reasonable estimate of the true pre-
valence.
This is no longer the case. Only a
very small proportion of the population
of Fiji fails to seek medical aid or
advice from time to time, and it is found
ihat comparatively few cases are
allowed to reach an advanced stage
of the disease before admission, so that
there is much less chance of their
having infected other people. Pre-
judice, compounded mainly of ignorance
and fear, natural in the early stage
of a policy of segregation, has largely
broken down. Discharged cases, ave-
raging 47-5 per annum over the past
ten years, provide the best form of
propaganda, both as to the good living
conditions at Makogai and as proof
that segregation is not necessarily life-
long. Patients realise that they benefit
themselves, at least as much as the
community, by coming to Makogai and,
perhaps still more important, under-
stand, and stress to their relatives the
vital importance of early treatment.
Requests are frequently received from
patients that their relatives may be
examined in case of possible infection.
It is evident, then, the policy of
leprosy segregation in Fiji is meeting
with abundant success. It is imposs-
ible to believe that any system of
voluntary treatment, coupled with
whatever degree of educational pro-
paganda, could have made so much
progress in so short a period, and it
appears a reasonable assumption that
in a community where numbers do not
render it a financial and administrative
impossibility, segregation is the policy
of choice.
Smiling
schoolgirls
being served
at meal-time.


Segregation, however, can only be
justified by continued results, in-
dividual as well as public health.
Every patient must be studied and
treated individually, so that his disease
may, if possible, be “ arrested ” and
the period of his segregation reduced
to a minimum. If this be impossible
the disease process may be slowed down
so that life becomes more tolerable, or
in still more advanced stages his last
days may be eased and his passing
rendered peaceful. As some compensa-
tion for the separation from home and
loved ones, every effort must be used
to make him as comfortable and con-
tented as possible and he must be made
to realise that he is sent to hospital for
his own sake, and not merely as a
sacrifice to an impersonal “community”.
It is the aim of this brochure to show
that the Government of Fiji, with the
aid of most generous support from the
public of New Zealand and Fiji, is
endeavouring, not without success, to
fulfil these conditions at Makogai.
After over forty years of existence,
then, Makogai can go forward with
confidence on the lines already marked
out, but ready at any time to modify
its policy in the light of further know-
ledge, the search for which remains
one of the chief aims of leprosy workers
throughout the world.
“Visitors Day”. Patients wait for their friends to come ashore from the m.v. “Yanawai”.


People of Note . . .
Dr. C. J. Austin, C.B.E . author of this brochure , retired in 1953
from the post of Medical Superintendent of the Fiji Leprosy Hospital after nearly
twenty-two years at Makogai.
In that time he gained a world reputation in the treatment of leprosy , and the
gratitude and affectionate respect of many hundreds of patients. Mrs. Austin shared her
husband' s warm, practical interest in the welfare of both patients and staff at Makogai.
Dr. and Mrs. Austin are now living in New Zealand , where Dr. Austin retains
his association with Makogai as a valued member of the Lepers Trust Board.


The Rev. Mother Mary Agnes, M.B.E.
from France to Fiji in 1883 and for thirty-three years she was Sister-in-Charge at
Makogai. She retired in 1950, on her eightieth birthday.
Makogai owes an immense debt to her enthusiasm , organising ability and quali-
ties of leadership. The then Governor of Fiji , Sir Arthur Richards , said in 1937, when
presenting to her the insignia of the Honour of M.8.E. , “ Without her marvellous
devotion it is difficult to see how Makogai could ever have existed.”
This photograph of the Reverend Mother was taken in July , 1953, when she
received the insignia of the French Honour of Chevalier de la Legion d’ Honneur.
Ernest Wolfgram was born in Vavau , Tonga , and in 1925 when he was
at school in New Zealand it was discovered that he had contracted leprosy. He was
sent to Makogai where he was appointed an assistant teacher in the Boys’ School .
Then he organised a workshop where he gave instruction in carpentry , boat-building ,
and engineering. The Lepers Trust Board helped him with text-books and tools so that
he could expand his work.
He studied music and organised a patients’ band and arranged concerts for the
Makogai community. He encouraged sport and took the lead in organising cricket
and other competitions. There was no aspect of life at Makogai in which he did not
take the keenest interest. He became a respected and well-loved leader.
In 1948, at the age of 40, he died , but his name still lives at Makogai. The
fully equipped school of trade instruction provided by the Lepers Trust Board to
continue the work he began is named the Ernest Wolfgram Technical Institute.




