

A Story of Men and Cattle




/rro_


«


MAN-SHY
A STORY OF MEN AND CATTLE


~ 'v *. '
j~\
7- ✓ • v '/ ' ' '/P
1 * ' f — ■ -- L') '-* • / -< >T ,
**
1 he Round Up.


pi
MAN-SHY
FRANK DALBY DAVISON
Author of “Children of the Dark People” and “Dusty”
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON
SYDNEY • LONDON • MELBOURNE • WELLINGTON


'
First Published 1931
Reprinted 1931, 1932, 1933, 1935, 1937, 1939, 1941, 1942, 1943,
1944 ( txuice), 1946 {twice), 1947, 1948, 1949, 1950, 1951, 1952,
•953. *954 (twice), 1956
Printed and bound by Halstead Press, Sydney
Registered in Australia for transmission through the post as a book.


PAGE
I 1
8
17
28
37
51
69
81
89
101
110
121
133
Contents
CHAPTER
I. TELLING OF THE HERD 1 1
11. THE OLD COW 8
111. ONE IN TEN THOUSAND 17
IV. THE OUTLAW 28
V. MAN-HANDLING 37
VI. THE RED HEIFER WINS 51
VII. THE SCRUBBERS 69
VIII. THE ROUND-UP 81
IX. INSIDE THE FENCE 89
X. THE OLD BULL 101
XI. BULLS IN BATTLE HO
XII. THE TIDES OF CHANGE 121
XIII. BRIEF PEACE 133
XIV. THE LAST OF THE SCRUBBERS 143


MY BROTHER DOUGLAS


Chapter I
Telling of the Herd
T he mustering for drafting and branding was
a distressing time for the cattle. I here was no
escape from the stockmen —hard-bitten fellows,
who came jig-jogging through the timber
astride of slim-legged horses that could out-
pace the fastest bullock. They were armed with
whips, and their companions were sharp-fanged
little dogs, trained to happy slavery and zeal-
ously obedient to the whistled signals that
directed their w r ork.
The stockmen gathered the small mobs
from the waterholes and the camps, and diove
them in big mobs to the stockyards. Here,
there was dust and shouting and bellowing.
There was clouting and prodding with sticks,
scraping of ribs on rails, and banging of hip-
bones on posts, together with a binning of
hides, and a confusion very disturbing to half-
wild stock.
When the purpose of these annual gather-
ings was served, the gates thrown open,
and the cattle, or the greater part of them,
went streaming forth. Those that were left
behind pushed and poked at the rails of the


yard, bellowing their grief and jealousy—but
among cow brutes every beast’s troubles are his
i I
own. - ' r
The liberated ones straggled back to their
own feeding-grounds, or formed fresh associa-
tions and wandered off to other places.
The collective feeling was one of relief-
nothing more. There was no looking back
to musterings past, and no looking forward
to musterings to come. Within a week the
routine of cattle-life was established again, to
remain undisturbed for another year.
At odd intervals during the year a man-
figure astride of his slim-legged horse, with
dog at heel, would appear through the timber,
or approach across the plain. His advent would
cause a little nervousness.
A young heifer, if lying, would swing to
her feet and stand with muzzle pushed for-
ward; a cow with a calf planted nearby would
shake her head angrily; or a bull would stroke
the ground with a challenging forefoot. But
the man never approached very closely—some-
thing about “not disturbing the stock unneces-
sarily”. He would halt his horse some distance
away, or make a wide half-circle round the
mob the while they turned to watch him.
Then he would pass on into the distance to
where some other mob grazed and watered.


Telling of the Herd 3
.A -t ! )
This solitary and stealthy visitor was the
only reminder of the stockyard that the cattle
had during the year. It was not sufficient to
upset the calm of their days. With the van-
ishing of the man the dim recollections of pain
and confusion which the sight of him had
vaguely stirred faded away. There was nothing
but the wide earth, the herd life, the elements,
and the seasons.
There were a few, though, among the
thousands of cattle, to whom the sight of that
man brought sharper memories of the mus-
tering, These, drawn together by mutual
apprehension and finding comfort in the
sharing of fear, deserted their respective mobs,
and in twos and threes found their ways into
the ranges. There was about the stonewalled
hills a solitude and a secrecy that comforted
them.
After the way of cattle-kind, the twos and
threes which had ventured into the hills found
each other. They formed one mob. They had
their waterholes, their tracks from one grazing
ground to another, and their various camps.
They had a herd life of their own.
In the ranges where they hid, the under-
growth was so thick and the ground so broken
and precipitous that a beast had at least a
fifty-fifty chance against a horseman. More-


over, the scrubbers learned to disperse at the
first sign of danger. The ordinary station cattle
huddled together when alarmed, but the scrub-
bers, as well as casting off the yoke of domesti-
cation, abandoned the encumbrance of man-
. i • * C r~ ■ -
imposed habits.
In this environment the scrubbers lived.
There were times of dearth, when famine was
the penalty of freedom; but the scrubbers
were as wild as the wildest of the bush crea-
tures, and as fearful of approaching the haunts
of man.
For over sixty years the scrubber band had
been in existence. Stockmen returning to the
homestead would say, “I saw the tracks of
the scrubbers yesterday. They’re watering at
night at the Big Gilgai.” It was like men
reporting the passing of a phantom herd.
In sixty years generation after generation
had passed. Sometimes—in the good years—
their numbers increased. Calves were frequent,
and recruits came up from the plains below. The
mob divided when its numbers became oppres-
sive. Then, in the bad years, the size of the
herds diminished. Drought killed the older
and the weaker ones. Some were trapped, some
driven off in the planned raids which the
stockmen made—the presence of the wild cattle
was a standing challenge to the men’s pride—


and occasionally one or two fell victims to the
rifle of a wallaby-scalper or kangaroo-shooter
looking for free beef. y^,..:-C., .
But as their membership dwindled the
divided herds came together again, finding
solace in this increase of their numbers. There
were times when the hazards of the seasons
and the efforts of man brought them perilously
close to extinction; but it almost seemed as
if the ranges had a love for the foster-children
who had made their home within their rugged
heights, for never in all the sixty years had the
wild mob been completely disbanded.
There was good feed in patches—quite
enough for their needs. Water was faiily plenti-
ful, and when the supply failed there was
always an abundance of succulent prickly
pear, which provided sufficient moisture, at
least during the cool weather.
When the hot weather came, if there was
no water in the gilgais on the i idges, the
scrubbers stole down at night to drink fiom
the waterholes in tlje creek, and returned before
daylight to their fastness in the ranges.
Theirs was a life for the slave brutes of
man to dream of. Their hides had never known
the searing whip or the sting of the branding
iron; nor did the shadow of the slaughter-
house fall across their years. Companions of


the creatures of the wilderness the emu, the
dingo, and the kangaroo—their life was the
life of the dumb brutes as it was on earth in
the beginning. They were free as the winds
that played about their mountains; free as
the rains that swept up the gorges; and free
as the range itself, hoisting its timber-crested
palisades into the blue. They lived secure and
content in the simple wisdom Nature has given
to dumb things.
The narrow pads along which they passed
in single file from one feeding-ground to an-
other lay in the mountains like the webbed
veins in the back of a leaf; at times flung
high over the naked back of some basaltic
ridge; at times skirting a boulder-strewn hill-
side; again plunged forty feet down in the
shadow of the scrubs; winding deviously on and
on, and then up to where the grass grew tall
and green on a meadow-like expanse below the
crown of the range.
Their sense of locality was infallible. One
behind the other, they would turn from the
grasslands into the scrub and vanish, until, ten
miles distant, they would reappear in the vicin-
ity of some watering-place.
In the rainless sunny winters, when the grass
was dried to straw, they knew where the green
pickings were to be found under the banks in


Telling of the
the higher reaches of the creeks, and where
the saltbush lay in yellow tracery on the hoor
of the scrubland. When the rains came, and
the winter broke early, as it sometimes does
—too early for the grass to grow—they knew
where the crowfoot and wild carrot would be
springing fetlock deep, and where the open
brigalow would be yellow with daisy-burr.
Winter nights, when the coldness of the
void between the worlds came down behind
the departing sun, they camped under the
stunted belahs where the ground was deep
with the warm needles and the low-hung
branches screened them from the seeking
fingers of the frost. On summer nights, when
the stars blinked sleepily in the warm sky,
they made their camp on some ridge thrown
high, to catch the coolness of passing airs.
The early hours of the night were occu-
pied with the ruminative pleasures of the cud,
and there was a soothing companionship in
the sound of so many jaws swinging in unison,
then silence would settle on the camp, dis-
turbed only by the noise of a long and deep-
blown sigh, or the scuffle of some member of
the mob rising to settle down again on its
other side.
In the dawn, while yet the ordinary ob-
jects of day were emerging from the shadows,


' /y 6 p °'o
Chapter II
The Old Cow
Man-Shy
they rose to stretch and to suckle the calves,
then, as the sun came up, revealing an eart
refreshed by the hours of darkness, they moved
out to feed.
Day succeeded day, and year followed year.
The steady stream of their life ran on. The
young ones grew up beside their mothers, and,
passing from infancy to maturity, merged into
the body of the herd. The old ones, their
strength run out, lay down to die a heap o
whitening bones marking the scene of their
passing, and telling of a life that had
lived. j
The cattle-pad leading diagonally down the
creek bank to the waters of the Washpool,
twenty feet below in the shade of sprawling
gum- and apple-trees, was steep; moreover, it
had been worn deep and narrow by the upward
and downward passing of many generations
of station cattle, and, in places, the tree roots,
thick as a man’s leg, were exposed. The .pad '


jolted over these with an eight- or nine-inch
drop on the lower side.
The red cow was going down to drink, and
she went slowly, with the distrustful steps of
extreme age. The rest of the mob whose habit
was to drink there at mid-morning had already
done so. The old red cow, with her calf beside
her, had been one of the first to arrive. Standing
in the sun-mottled shadows at the top of the
bank, the old one looked longingly down at
the water gleaming in the depths. She was
very thirsty. The mid-morning air was hot and
growing hotter, but, impressed with a know-
ledge of her infirmities, the red cow dared
not trust herself on that steep and treacherous
pad until the others had drunk and gone.
With the resigned patience of age she waited
while strings of younger cattle, coming in from
the ridges and the plain, went down to the
water —the reds and the roans, the whites and
the baileys; the growing heat of the day drove
them in from the grazing with a twenty-four-
hour thirst to quench. They came in vari-
coloured and heterogeneous squads yearlings,
with the bloom of milk still in their glossy
coats; young steers and heifers in their vigorous
second and third years; cows, in the strength
and prime of their middle life; and lumbeiing,
looney bullocks.


With the cautiousness of age the old cow
waited and watched them scrambling and
scraping down the bank, and, in the care
less courage of their young strength, plunging
and jostling across the stretch of deep mud
that lay between the bottom of the creek bank
and the water’s edge. Not much consideration
would a feeble old cow find among that bois-
terous crowd. They would soon knock her off
her legs—and no chance for her then, bogged in
that black, waxy muck, half a yard deep.
The old one stood with her calf on top of
the bank and watched them drink. They went
forward into the water until it was half-way
up their flanks, and there they drank; the
sound of their gulping and the deep breaths
blown through their nostrils came up to her.
When they had drunk their fill, they stood
for a while in voluptuous enjoyment of the
water’s coolness round their skins, entirely
regardless of the old cow who watched them
with pathetic patience.
With much splashing and snorting they
waded out, labouring strongly across the deep
black mud, and, grunting and scrambling,
climbed the bank.
They had all finished. The old cow turned
her head to make sure. In the shade of the
brigalow clump they were lying, a hundred


The Old Cow
or more, camped down, with full bellies, to
rest and chew their cuds until the cool of
the late afternoon, when in small mobs they
would again wander out to feed.
Just once more did the old cow look about
her to make sure that no late-comers were
approaching. Satisfied that it was now safe
for her to attempt the daily adventure of the
steep pad and the deep mud, the red cow
began the descent. The water would be dirty
with the slush brought to the surface by the
trampling and wading of a hundred head-
but one must not expect to enjoy the best in
one’s later years.
Very slowly and with great caution did she
set her tottering limbs on the downward pad.
It was all right with the hind legs; they took
care of themselves—almost; but her weight,
owing to the steepness of the path, was thrown
forward on her forelegs, and these she had to
watch jealously. Let one of them catch in a
protruding root just as she was depending on
it to sustain her weight, and she would fall.
Then, with the heaviest end of her uphill,
pinning her legs beneath her, what would she
dol Or she might slip sidewaysl On one side
the bank rose abruptly, and on the other fell
as quickly away. A bad place in which to meet
with an accident.


She was a shocking old bag of bones. A
doddering old granny. It was only by courtesy
one called her red. Life had faded from her
coat, and the hair that in her youth had been
a glossy chocolate-red was dulled to a harsh
ginger-yellow, and stood starvedly on end. Her
hip bones were poking through her hide. You
could count her ribs as easily as you might
count pickets on a fence. Her neck was scurfy
and shrunken, and she was on the verge of
bovine senility* ' ' V
“Blah-ah-ah-ahl”
The cry was thin and quavering and plain-
tive—the baby cry, the world over.
The red cow slopped, and, turning her head,
looked up. Her calf was looking down at her
over the top of the bank.
It was a red calf —chocolate-red, sleek, flat-
sided, and glossy. It was only four days old, and
couldn’t understand why its mammy wanted to
go poking off down into that hole in the
ground. Its ears were pushed forward and
twitching nervously; its large, and liquid black
eyes were questioning; its pink, dewy muzzle
was out-thrust and sniffing suspiciously.
“Moo-o-ol”
It was very soft—the old cow’s answer, barely
loud enough to reach the little one s ears.


The Old Cow *3
Just a reassuring croon —the mother cioon the
world over.
The old cow resumed her downward pro-
gress, and at length, after much hesitating
and faltering and grunting, she reached the
bottom of the pad. There for a while she
halted. . ,
Poor old bag of bones 1 At the back of her
mind was a sort of vague hope that the water
might have moved nearer to the bank since
the day before. The descent of the pad was
easy compared to the journey that confronted
her across the ten feet of mud to the water s
edge.
That mud was wet enough for a beast s leg
to go squelching down into it to a depth of
two feet or so, and dry enough, when once the
leg was down, for it to be gripped and held
tenaciously. A man would lose his boots in it.
Nature, in designing waterholes, hadn t ta en
account of feeble old cows, weakened by recent
maternity, and with young calves depending
on them. , . ,
The old cow’s courage failed her for a few
moments. The winning of that daily drink
was a hazard, from the moment she com-
menced the descent until, trembling and
puffing, she climbed again to the top of the
bank.


Still, it was a day and a night since she
had drunk. The water was very close. She
must hurry back to that calf before harm
overtook it! She went a step forward, and her
hoofs shot down with a suddenness that almost
overbalanced her. She snatched the other fore-
leg upward, and luckily it slid quickly into
a hole made by another beast; so she did not
fall.
Then began a space of sheer labour. It
required the exertion of all her strength to V
pull each leg in turn out of the morass and ■
place it one step nearer to the water. The
adhesive muck clung tightly to the hoof, so
that, with every inch her trembling sinews
raised the leg, the suck of the vacuum below
increased. When, abruptly, the vacuum let go,
it was all she could do to keep from falling
over. Several times she teetered, perilously close
to a fall. Had she fallen, she would never have
been able to rise.
There was something grotesque about that VW<*
skinny old cow lurching and grunting across
the mud, coming close to falling at the end
.
of every step. Odd to think that such a decrepit ' \\
old skeleton should so badly want to live that
she would daily face the peril and exhaustion
of the pad and the mud-flat. For all of life that
was left to her, she might as well have stayed


The Old Cow
on the bank, where she could at least lie down
and comfortably die.
There was something serious in it, too. That
calf up on the bank had to be cared for. It
would be hungry presently, and she was the
only creature in the wide world that could
and would appease its hunger. The other cows
in the mob would kick it, or horn it, if it went
muzzling around them for its milk.
Besides, there were occasional prowling
dingoes. It would meet with short shrift from
one of these, if there were not an old cow
nearby to rush up, brandishing a pair of long
horns.
The red cow reached the water’s edge. For
a moment she paused to regain her breath,
then gratefully lowered her head to drink.
It was foul stuff, soupy with the trampling
of those that had drunk before, and she did
not like it. Farther out, where the water was
deeper, it had settled somewhat, and was
clearer. She stretched out her head to reach
it, putting her weight dangerously far for-
ward.
The muck in front of her forefeet suddenly
gave way, and with a grunt and splash she
fell in. With a strength born of panic she
managed to slew herself round. She got her
forefeet back upon the mud-bank, and there


she stuck, her hind feet deep in the mud of
the waterhole —and the water was up to her
shoulders. She attempted to climb out, but
the bottom was soft, and she just floundered.
It was difficult to keep upright —and she was
winded.
Looking up at the top of the creek bank
she called to her calf, but the calf, becoming
drowsy in the heat, had curled up to sleep in
the shade of a bush.
One more struggle she made, and used up
the last of her strength. With a groan she rolled
over on her side and lay still.
An hour later, the calf awoke, and, as is
the way with the young of all species, thought
immediately about its stomach. It got to its
feet and looked round for its mother. In four
days it had learned that always, after a sleep,
the old one would be standing patiently close
b Y- .
The calf had forgotten having seen its
mammy go down to drink; its memory did
not go back a whole hour. Not seeing her,
it opened its mouth, and a blat issued forth.
That ought to fetch her!
The old cow heard it. She answered, and
her cry was a blending of physical and men-
tal agony —the same as that of any other
mother in like circumstances. Then she


struggled. It was a terrific effort, and it
racked her old frame to pieces. It was a losing
struggle, for with each wrench of her body
she slipped farther back. The water rose up
to her neck and head and bubbled round
her nostrils. There was a short UirnjQil and
swirling under the surface, as she drowned.
Chapter 111
One In Ten Thousand
The calf set oft in search of her mother, or
at least in search of food-the two terms being
practically synonymous. She made no great
haste; just a few steps forward and a pause
while she opened her mouth and uttered her old
and world-wide plaint. That there was now
no old cow to answer, and that a slow and
rather dreadful death was in store for herself,
was of course not within the compass of her
understanding.
After some minutes of aimless wandering,
she realized that she was out by herself for
the first time. She reacted to that knowledge
by kicking up her heels and scampering joy-


fully round in a circle; completing the evolu-
tion with a swift gallop forward that ended
in a sudden stop.
This brought her within a few yards of the
cattle lying at their ease beneath the brigalows,
and whom she now saw for the first time. With
a kick and a twist she was off again on another
wild scamper, possibly for the benefit of her
adult spectators. She halted out of breath,
and, refreshment now appearing even more
desirable, she trotted up to the nearest beast
and began muzzling about in search of it.
The animal chanced to be a steer. Swinging
his head around, he knocked her over. She
picked herself up, and, raising her head, blatted
loud and long for the old cow.
There was no response. Presently, deciding
that she was not so hungry after all, she lay
down and went to sleep again.
When mid-afternoon brought with it a les-
sening of the sun’s heat and a cooling of the
air, there was a general stir in the camp. The
cattle were rising and stringing out through
the bush to feed. Cows with calves at foot got
up to let the young ones suckle.
The little red calf woke with the rest. All
about her, other calves, most of them a few
months older than herself, were drinking


One in Ten Thousand
deeply. Each cow and her calf stood head to
tail, the little one’s side pressed hard against
the mother’s, its tail swinging to and fro in
sign of its enjoyment; the cows calling softly,
and turning from time to time to lick their
offspring.
The little red calf, without any sense of
intruding, walked over to the nearest cow and
proceeded to help herself. A hard kick sent
her spinning.
Picking herself up from the dust, she
opened her mouth and called for the old red
cow. It was a loud call, loud and insistent.
No reply coming, she concluded that there
was a mistake somewhere, and set out to rec-
tify it by a visit to a second cow.
The reception was the same as before.
Stunned by the kick, she got to her feet again
and just stood.
If ever a creature was taking the field against
a thousand to one chance it was the little red
calf. There is one thing a normal cow will
not do, and that is, mother another cow’s
calf. What she has, she needs for her own.
The orphaned and the helpless must fend for
themselves.
Quite suddenly, it seemed, the brigalow
clump was depopulated. One after another,
their calves having been fed, the cows followed


the rest of the stock out to feed, the little ones
trotting happily at their heels.
The red calf found herself alone. The pangs
of hunger were very sharp by now. Her queru-
lous call ran thinly through the bush as she
wandered about in search of her mothei.
Then she began to travel. She was not going
anywhere in particular, just moving aimlessly
along through the bush, stopping now and
again to call; or, prompted by ipfantile curi-
osity, to investigate with suspicious sniffings
a bush, a log, or an ant-heap. The shadows
lengthened as the sun dropped doun, and the
calf, answering the insistence of an empty
stomach, continued its wandering.
She was not the first calf in the cattle country
to find itself motherless and destitute. Such
orphans wander for a day or so and lie down,
then get up and wander again, and lie down
for a longer time. Then they get up and
wander for a short while, after which they
lie down for a long while, until, at last, they
cannot get up at all. Then they stretch out
and slowly pant their little lives away.
The sun went down, and night came on.
Long after the old cow T would ordinarily have
put her to bed in a clump of scrub or warm
thick grass, the red calf continued to move
through the bush like a little shadowy wraith, p


One in Ten Thousand
and at intervals her thin cry trickled through
the darkness.
Once she found herself face to face with a
dingo. Their meeting was so sudden that both
halted in surprise. The red calf first sniffed
suspiciously at the night prowler, then, think-
ing it just possible that she had encountered
a source of milk supply, she lifted up her
voice and announced emphatically her des-
perate need.
The dingo slunk back a pace. He, too, was
hungry, and The thought of fresh-killed \eal
was tempting. He was an old dingo. Once
upon a time, when he was a very young dingo
he had pounced upon just such a young calf
as this one, and it had cried out just as this
one had done. The memory of the bellowing,
horned, and trampling fury that had come
upon him from behind, caused his hair even
now to bristle. Silently he vanished. So, find-
ing herself alone again, the red calf continued
on her way, her little hoofs pattering softly on
the ground.
At times during the night fatigue overcame
the pangs of hunger, and, lying down in her
tracks, she slept.
The chill of early morning aroused her.
Hunger was in the ascendant For a
while after wakening she lay quite still. The


urge to be up and moving in the hope of get-
ting food was not quite so strong as it had
been. The little one was weakening. During
the night she had wandered a long way from
the Washpool, and was now in the neighbour-
hood of another waterhole farther down the
creek.
Daybreak found her again on the move. Her
steps were slower than when she started out on
the previous evening, and the voice that she
still occasionally raised was very hoarse and
feeble.
An hour or more after sunrise she was very
weakly threading her way through a patch
of scrubby wattle, when, from the tail of her
eye, she saw something white—a milky white
blob at the foot of some sheltering bushes.
The mind of a calf is not unlike the mind
of a baby, in that the thing which holds its
eye absorbs its entire attention. So with the
red calf; deflected momentarily from her
pursuit of food, she went toward the white
object with much curiosity.
The white blob stirred at the red calf’s
approach, and, raising a sleek white head,
returned the red calf’s surprised stare. Each
recognized a fellow mortal. The white blob
was another calf. The red calf examined her
find at closer quarters. There was something


One in Ten Thousand
about the way the white calf was camped,
shaded from the sun and from view, which re-
minded her of the care of the old mother who
had deserted her the day before. She took a step
forward. Two noses, dewy and pink, met in
mutual investigation. Here was at least com-
panionship. The red calf plumped down on
her knees and curled herself up comfortably
beside the other.
It was again mid-morning. The cattle, in little
strings and squads, were grazing their way in
toward the waterholes.
From one little mob a white cow detached
herself and made her way in the direction of
the patch of scrubby wattle. The moment she
ceased feeding and began to walk toward the
wattle patch, it was evident from her manner
that she had a purpose in view. She did not
linger by the way, nor stop to crop tempting
mouthfuls of herbage that she passed. Feeding
time for her was finished —other affairs pressed!
She was the mother of a calf a white calf
and she was on her way to the spot where
she had left it carefully planted in the shelter
of some low-growing shrubs since early moin
ing. It would be w’aking about now 7 and requir-
ing her attention. Afterwards, she would go


down to drink with the rest of the cattle at
the creek.
She was a breeder, this cow, one that had been
marked by man for calf-rearing as a career. She
was eight years old —middle-aged in cowdom
and during that time had been the mother of
seven calves. The first had arrived when she
was two years old, and the others, one each
year since then. She had been successful in
rearing them all.
Her daughters, the elder ones grown to
maturity and themselves mothers two and three
times over, lived on different waterholes up
and down the creek.
Of her sons, two at the present time were
in fattening paddocks near the homestead.
Within a short time they would go on a journey
to Brisbane, and bring top prices at the meat
works—reflecting credit on their dam.
So this plump, placid, matronly white cow,
intently making her way to where her calf was
planted, was something of a success in the
field of maternity. There was, however, a sur-
prise in store for her that morning.
There seems to be in the act of giving and
receiving nourishment a sense of joy and peace
both for the mother and her young. Pleasurably
anticipating these emotions, the white cow drew
near to the shelter where she had left her calf.


One in Ten Thousand
Then she slopped. Through a thin screen of
wattle she could see her offspring—but what
was that beside it?
Noiselessly, she went a step or two nearer.
Another calf! And sleeping peacefully in the
bed she had so carefully selected for hersl
Much puzzled, the white cow turned her
head from side to side, searching for a sight
of the intruder’s mother. Her ears twitched
nervously and pricked forward, listening for
the sound of another cropping grass. She raised
her head and sniffed the air for an alien scent.-
Finding no evidence of another beast’s pres-
ence, she hurried forward, a sudden panic at
her heart lest harm had been done to her off-
spring. Roused by the noise of her hurried
approach, the .white calf awoke and scrambled
to its feet. With a blat of pleasure it would
have pushed its exploring muzzle along the
white cow’s flank, but the mother’s doubts were
not at rest.
Gently, but insistently, she held it back with
her muzzle while she sniffed it over for signs
of hurt. There were none. She raised her head,
and the white calf trotted to his milk.
The little red calf also had awakened at the
white cow’s approach, and had risen to her
knees—then flopped back to the ground again.


She was hungry, but, worse than that, she was
tired and stiff-and, worse than that, she was
discouraged.
The red calf was only five days old, and
the last day of the five she had been knocked
down once and kicked twice; she had been
sorely bewildered by her old mother’s desertion,
and had travelled several miles on a very empty
stomach.
At the loud, eager noises made by the white
calf, she raised her head to look. She made a
movement to rise, but the muscular contrac-
tion caused a twinge of pain in one of the
places where she had been kicked by a jealous
cow the afternoon before. Sharply reminded,
she dropped her head again.
Her doubts and fears concerning the welfare
of her calf now at rest, the white cow’s curi-
osity regarding the interloper was unsatisfied.
She was unable lightly to dismiss this mystery
of an unattended calf. For a cow to return to
the spot where she had that morning planted
her young one, and to find two calves lying
where but one calf lay before was entirely out-
side her experience!
Still wondering, she lowered her head to
sniff at the foundling, that being a cow s least
infallible method of investigation. No other cow
had, in affection, licked this calf; at least, not


One in Ten Thousand
recently. Her sense of smell told her that.
Softly she pushed it with her muzzle—a kindly
push. The red calf opened her eyes, and saw
something in the gentle old head that reminded
her sharply of the red cow. So sharply that she
gave voice to a short husky blat—very faint.
At the sound of that feeble, baby voice the
white cow’s acquisitive instinct rose up and
overwhelmed that instinctive dislike for an-
other beast’s offspring which is near to being
a fundamental law in cowdom. On a moment’s
impulse she decided to adopt the red calf.
Again she gently pushed it with her muzzle.
Her intention communicated itself to the red
calf; for, almost instantly, the latter rose to
her legs. They were very unsteady legs, and
wobbled under her to such an extent that she
was near to falling. She made no further move,
although she could hear the white calf on the
other side of the cow greedily drinking. She
needed encouragement.
The white cow spoke—just a low reassuring
croon. It broke on the red calf’s ears like an
echo—a twenty-four-hour-old echo.
Unsteadily and fearfully she sidled along the
white cow’s side, her small stomach rumbling
at the thought of milk and her eye fixed fear-
fully on the white cow’s hoofs. The hoof did


not rise to kick her. Instead, with a thrill, she
felt the cow’s broad rough tongue caressing her,
and, with a little run, she rushed to the place
where the milk was waiting.
Bracing herself against the pulling and but-
ting of a calf on either side, the white cow stood
quietly. Her mind, freed now from the prob-
lem which had engrossed it, permitted physical
nature to function normally. Her cud slid up
into her mouth; automatically her jaws com-
menced to work; and there she stood, a happy
calf on either side of her; she in a condition
of mind ruminative and contented.
Half an hour later, she bedded them down
in a fresh place and went down to the water-
hole to drink.
Chapter IV
The Outlaw
Because she and her foster brother, the white
calf, were too young to endure travelling with
the mob, the red calf escaped the sting of the
branding irons during her first year. That, no


doubt, had a good deal to do with the character
she developed and the events which resulted.
It happened in this way.
The annual muster was on. That is, the sta-
tion cattle were being collected and driven
in to the yards so that, among other things,
the calves which had been dropped early in
the year could be drafted and branded, after
which they would be turned out again to run
with the stock and grow into beef.
The grazing of stock for the production of
beef is an industry conducted for profit, but
the business of stock-raising produces things
other than beef and profit. It produces horses
that can leap from a standstill to a gallop, and
turn on a sixpence. It produces men who can
stick on the wildest bundle of horsehide and
dynamite that ever tried to pass itself off as a
buckjumper. It produces blue- and red-speckled
prick-eared dogs, called “heelers”, who, in their
own environment, can do anything but speak.
But these are only sidelines and residuals of
the great main product—Beef.
Beef means beef killed and dressed and
hung in the cooling-chambers.
Beef on the hoof is live-stock—living on the
waterholes of the western creeks and rivers
foraging through the clumpy brigalow, wading
knee-deep in blue and Mitchell grasses, camped


0 Man-Shy
at night on the lee ot the ridges under the dry
and starry skies ot the west. But ee on
hoof is not profit.
The day comes when the bullocks an co ,
as fat as seals, are bustled away from the peace
and contentment ot their wide-flung paddock ,
and pushed and prodded and yelped up the
loading shute into the trucks. Then, for a
couple of days, bewildered and moaning am g
themselves, they are bumped and banged an
shunted about on their way to the city.
In the city sale-yards they come under the
hammer of the auctioneers. The butchers an
the buyers for the big meat works are grouped
around the pens. They are not concerned with
the deep-shadowed waterholes of the western
creeks; the sweeping miles of blue grass rolling
away under Queensland skies are not in t ei
thoughts; neither are the quiet, contented
camps, when a hundred head he drowsing
in the tepid,starlit night. These fellows are
out to realize beef for profit. They can see it,
too-see it right under the hide.
A pen of steers' Rough stuff! All head
and horns! All bone and brisket! Fit only
for the small-goods manufacturer-they pass it
Another pen! Prime light-weight! Well-
bred, light-boned! Reef where the beef ought


to be—where the high-priced cuts come from.
Fine-grained, marbled beef —to look well on
the slab and tempt the purse of the shopper!
It matters little to the beast, scrubber or
pure-bred, when the sale is over. Bedevilled
and bewildered and aching for the lost free-
dom of the western country, they are driven
to the slaughter-house. The smell of the blood
strikes terror into them, and their bellowing
voices their fear.
The finish comes quickly. A blow that
crashes consciousness into darkness; a body
still quivering with life, that falls on the
blood-slippery floor of the killing-pen! In a
short while, beef-on-the-hoof, gone for ever
from the wide runs of the back country, is beef-
on-the-hook—beef for profit! And that is the
destiny of every beast that roams the cattle
country—with occasional exceptions.
The first intimation that the mob, camped
at noon in the shade of the brigalows by the
Washpool, had that the muster was in pro-
gress came down to them on the quivering
midday air. A faint shuffling murmur from
higher up the creek—the sound of many
hoofs. Over the murmuring, there brooded
a troubled lowing, and its continuity was


pierced at intervals by the crack of a whip, and
again by a shrill whistle.
The more nervous members of the mob in
the brigalows lurched quickly to their feet,
and, facing up-creek, with heads lifted, stood
uneasily sniffing the air.
The heavy timber that clothed the cieek
flats in their upper reaches, ended at the
Washpool. Behind the brigalows, a treeless
plain spread out. The shuffling murmur up-
creek swelled to a low rumble, like far-dis-
tant thunder, as the man-herded cattle drew
closer. The nervous bellow of a beast lost from
its mate rang out very near. Then the timber,
sparse near at hand, yet dense in perspective,
yielded them, three hundred head or more—
a shifting crazy-quilt of cattle-colours, tight-
packed and moving forward beneath the
sliding, undulating tree-shadows.
A minute passed —then, a hundred yards
away, with the leaders breaking into a trot,
they poured out on the plain, close-held by
horsemen and dogs at flank and rear; a
kaleidoscope of weaving colour seen through a
dazzle of sunlight and a film of dust.
With the first sight of the driven stock,
the mob in the shadow of the brigalows was
at once afoot. Half-wild, they were held to
their ground by curiosity. Voices were lifted


The Outlaw
in question. Those that were travelling heard,
and, across the space of plain, beast answered
to beast.
“Yirripl Yirripl”
A hundred heads swung around as one.
Out of the creek bed at their backs a horse-
man scrambled —out-flanking them. There was
a panicky movement to scatter and bolt. Obedi-
ent to his whistle, two heelers ran out from
behind the horseman and made for either
flank. The whip volleyed an accompaniment
to the man’s cry. Then the Washpool mob,
as the stockman expected, trotted out from
the brigalows and across the plain to join the
others.
As he closed up behind them, the stockman
noted the white cow in trouble with her two
calves—the red one and the white one. It was
hard enough for the cows with only one crazy
scampering calf apiece to maintain contact
with their offspring, but, with two excited
fleet-footed babies to care for, the white cow
was distraught.
For a moment the trio dropped to the rear
of the trotting mob, and, touching his spurs
to his horse, the stockman shot forward in-
tending to cut them off. “Those little fellows
couldn’t stand the journey to the yards, any-


how. Knock up in a mile. Best cut em out
till next year.” But at that moment the red
calf saw the rider from the tail of her eye.
She skittered away to the flank like a dragon-
fly on a pool, and, darting forward, disappeared
into the big mob.
The stockman dropped to the tail of the
herd, making a mental note to keep an eye
open for the white cow and her two calves.
They would come to the rear presently—
and he wanted to see the three together. A
calf lost from its mother was a calf lost from
the pockets of its owners—of whom he was
one. Five or ten bob now, but five or ten
quid in a few years, when it had grown to
beef. The stockman was not concerned with the
fate of the calf from the calf’s viewpoint. He
was interested in beef for profit—beef in a
slaughter-pen—beef on the hook!
It was hot in the centre of the mob. Those
shuffling, hurrying beast-bodies generated a
heat that was well-nigh overpowering. And
the dust swirling around their legs, just at
the height at which a young calf would get
the full effect of it, was choking; furthermore,
the grass was tussocky, and, although a young
calf can leap with sprightly ease over a two-
foot log—once—drive it for thirty minutes over


a ttd
rear of
The Outlaw
six-inch tufts of glass and watch it begin to
stumblel
In less than half an hour the red cait
the white one had percolated to the
X
the mob. They appeared together—on their
legs, but no more than that. Their tails were
dangling as limp as ribbons; their sides working
like small bellows; their eyes dilated; the »
froth thick around their gaping mouths; the
sweat dripping from their tongues; their whole
attention concentrated on keeping afoot. Very
different were they from the perky youngsters
that had scampered across the plain a while back.
With a faint grin at the distressed babies,
and a glance of respect at the white cow who
had so skilfully gathered them both to her
in the travelling mob, the stockman drew his
horse aside and let them fall back. The white
cow immediately stood still in the sun, and the
two calves flopped on the ground in the shadow
of her body.
As soon as the little ones were able to
move, the old cow, with the instinct of the
wild and the half-wild, took and hid them.
She planted them in a patch of scrubby san-
dalwood and kept them close. She grazed
near at hand, and her visits to the waterhole
were brief and hurried. These periodical
upheavals in the mob-life on the Washpool


IMUii-ony
were disturbing! The empty plain and un-
tenanted bush made her uneasy. The silent
waterhole, the brigalow clump, with its e
dences of occupation and its eerie absence of
occupants, made it a thing to avoid. Once,
after drinking, and before quitting the vicinity
of the Washpool, she lifted her head an
voiced her unease. Though she listened long,
only the echoes answered. Shaking her head,
the white cow hurried back to the companion-
ship of her calves.
In a couple ot days, the Washpool mob
began to straggle back to their accustomed
haunts. They came in twos and threes, seeking
the comfort of familiar surroundings after
the unwelcome driving, the confinement of
the stockyards, and the hustling they a
received there. There were some who did not
return. They had gone on their way to the
slaughter-yards.
The calves which came back at the heels
of their mothers brought on their bodies the
unpleasant man-scent, and each had on its
rump a number and two alphabetical char-
acters burnt neatly into the pink skin with hot
irons.
The cruelty of that was more apparent than
real. The job was done quickly. By the time
the calf was back at its mother’s side the pain


was effaced. Y^-t
//tv
Chapter V
Man-Handling
was only a memory, and by the time the mob
had gathered at the Washpool even the memory
It is fortunate that certain of life’s experi-
ences occur very early, when the memory is
too short to store up unpleasant occurrences
for future guidance. But with the red calf it
was different. She was fifteen months old—a
yearling, as stockmen count—when she received
her first man-handling.
The process of producing beef for profit
had swung in its twelve months’ cycle. Once
again the cattle along the creek were on the
move toward the stockyard. The red calf—
or yearling heifer, now—was present. The
stockman who had dropped her out the year
before spotted her when he picked up the
Washpool mob. She did not now run with
the white cow; another calf had taken her
place. No longer an appendage, she was an


individual. She was a young beasi, free to
come and go as she chose; a member of the
mob, with the plains and the bush and the
creeks to feed and range and grow upon
until she was ready to be killed. And the stoc
man, noting with the calculating eye of a
part-owner, her fine satiny skin, broad back
and deep body reckoned that, when her time
came she would be a profitable beast. That
is how he saw her—flayed and dressed—beef on
the hook. ,
Nothing was farther from the mind of the
red heifer as she went down the creek with
the mob. She was fretting against this un-
usual confusion. If a beast in the mob voiced
its trouble in a bellow, the red heifer in-
variably replied. Most of the cattle readily com-
posed themselves, and plodded quietly along in
obedience to the stockmen; but the red heifer
was one of the restless ones—the trouble-
makers.
With head upheld and eyes wild and
searching, she jostled her way through the
others from side to side of the mob. Finding
herself on the extreme flank, she attempted
to break away. No beast readily leaves its
fellows—but the red heifer was nervy. The
chafing contact of the cattle around irritated
her; their submission to being driven where


they had been accustomed to wander free dis-
turbed her.
She left them, and started to walk off across
the plain by herself. There was a swift patter of
paws behind her; something gripped her hind
heel and a pain shot up her leg. She bolted back
into the protection of the mob.
That was a new experience. She had never
felt the teeth of a heeler before.
For a while after that she remained with the
others. Her memory of the pain, however, was
less vivid than the insistent desire for the peace
and unrestraint of the open bush. Again she
wandered off by herself.
This time she was permitted to get well
out from the mob before a whistle from a
stockman sent a dog forward to fetch her
back.
To the whistle she paid no heed, but a
second later the same swift patter of feet
coming up behind her scared her, and she
swung half around to meet the inflicter of
pain; but the dog was too quick. His teeth
clamped on her heel for one agonizing second,
then he let go and dropped flat on the ground.
The vicious kick she aimed at him went over
his head.
Almost before she had drawn the kicking
hoof back to the ground he had again seized


it in his teeth, bitten it, and again dropped
to the ground. She lashed out with the other
leg, but the speckled heeler was crouching
below the trajectory of the hoof that flew back
with the will to crack his skull.
The red heifer again raced for the shelter
of the mob. Then the dog was after her-
first at one heel then at the other; he almost
brought her. dragging her hind legs, to the
ground. The red heifer bellowed her aban-
donment to terror. A sharp whistle recalled the
dog. With a trickle of blood on both hind heels
the heifer found herself back in the compara-
tive peace of the driven mob.
Although she continued restless, she did not
again venture out. Certain facts had been in-
delibly stamped on her understanding. Later,
they were to produce their effect.
It was the morning of the following day. The
calf-branding was in progress. In a yard built
of round rails, lashed with wire to posts as
high as a man’s head, a hundred or more calves
waited —among them the red heifer.
Among them-but not of them. Separated
from the others of her own age, for they had
been branded the year before, she tramped
restlessly round and round the yard, seeking
a means of escape. Here and there she paused


and thrust her muzzle between the rails,
now and again she lifted her head and
bellowed.
Sometimes a beast would answer from the
paddocks. Thereupon the red heiter would
race across the yard in the direction of the
voice, knocking the smaller calves from her
path. Coming to the rails on the opposite side
of the yard, she would run excitedly up an
down beside them, pushing, bellowing, seeking
a way out. Foot by foot, reaching upward with
her head, she tested the height of the top rail,
looking for a place where she might leap over.
But the yard had been built sufficiently high to
hold horses, let alone a yearling heifer.
Being confined to a small space was suffi-
cient to distress a beast of the heifer’s excitable
temperament. The drafting had been a
bewildering business. Three hundred hea
packed tight in the receiving yard. The
dust the confusion, and the heat! en
who’ shouted and drove the cattle forward
into the race! Dogs that bit! Gates that banged.
The crushing and the scraping of ribs on posts!
Cows, separated from their calves, bellowing
their rage and grief!
It had gone on until the last beast had
been drafted-the fats from the breeders;
cows from calves; bullocks from yearlings-


2 Man-Shy
until the yards were cleared. 1 hen the ied
heifer found herself alone with the calves.
In the yard next to where she stood, some-
thing was going on. Something that pioduced
dust and the smell of burning hair and skin
and now and again a choking cry of pain. At
intervals this ceased. The gate between the
two yards opened and men came into the big
yard where the red heifer was. Each time they
drove back ahead of them into the small yard
a dozen or so calves. The gate closed behind
them; then the scuffling and burning in the
small yard began again.
Whenever the men came into the big yard,
the red heifer ran into the farthest corner,
trampling over the smaller calves, and trying
vainly to escape.
As soon as the men returned to the small
yard, she resumed her restless pacing round
and round. Having found the top rail too
high to jump, she tried other methods. Drop-
ping on her knees, she pushed her head under-
neath the bottom rail, shoving and straining
with all her strength, until the hair was rub-
bed from the back of her neck and she bled.
With each successive visit of the men the
number of calves in the yard grew fewer.
Because she rushed into the corner, the red
heifer was with the last batch to go into the


branding-pen. The sight of men, the smell of
them, struck terror into her. When she saw
that they were determined to have her, she
raced from them and literally threw herself
at the rails. The pain she inflicted on herself
she did not feel.
The calves, like obedient children, trotted
quietly through the gate, but she would have
none of it. Like a mad thing she rushed back and
forth across the yard. Twice, with a force
that almost stunned her, she crashed into the
rails. Finally the three men forced her to the
gate entrance. She baulked. A stick descended
on her rump. She quivered, but she refused
to go forward. A wise old dog crept under
the rails. She felt a grip like red-hot nails
in one heel. She bounded forward through
the gate, skidded and fell, then scrambled to her
feet and dashed into the farthest corner of the
branding-pen.
Two of the men seized the nearest calf and
dragged it to the fire. A quick twist, and they
flopped it on its side on the ground and held
it down —one at its head and one at its hind
end. The third man took an iron from the
fire, and looked at it to see that its heat was
just right. Satisfied on that point, he placed
one foot on the calf to hold it steady, and
then pressed the iron to its rump. A little puff


of smoke and a smell of seared skin ascended.
The calf tried to kick, but found itself too
securely held. It bellowed. Two seconds, and
the iron was quickly withdrawn and placed
again in the fire; then a second and third iron
were used.
The brander subjected his work to a brief
but critical examination. He nodded his
head. The other men got up, stood the calf
on its feet, and pushed it through a small
gateway. Then they turned to catch the next
one.
The last calf was branded, and it was the
red heifer’s turn. The men exchanged a ques-
tioning glance. The boss nodded.
“Get the ropes. She’s too big to scruff, he
said.
While one of the men went for the ropes,
the other two squatted in the shade of the
rails, for the sun was warm and the work was
fast and sweaty.
"We’re going to have a little circus with
this onel” one of them commented. “I never
seen anything act so wild before.
“Here you are,” said a voice.
The ropes were thrown over the rails, and
the third man climbed over after them.
The longest of the ropes had a running
noose at one end. One of the men picked this


up. Another man took the free end of the
same rope and made a turn with it round
one of the posts near the fire. He with the
noose approached the heifer. Not knowing
what to expect, but convinced of some devil-
ment, she dashed wildly across the pen. The
noose flew out. The man at the post snatched
up the slack. The heifer felt the sudden choke
of the rope round her throat, and it tightened
with a jerk that threw her head over heels.
Then she went madl
In a paroxysm of terror she threw herself
violently about—down on her knees, pulling
back with all her strength, the breath roaring
through her throat, her eyes dilated, and her
tail thrashing her sides. Then up, and a wild
race to the full length of the rope, which
snapped taut and brought her upstanding on
her hind legs with her forefeet pawing the
3.ir.
A pull from behind fetched her over on
her back with a thump, and another quick
pull dragged her bodily along the ground
toward the post. Then she was up and away
on another crazy rush; but the rope was
shorter now, and the jerk at the end came
sooner than she expected. It caught her with
her head down, and the sudden jar threw
her over like the loose end of a flail, nearly


dislocating her neck. She scrambled to her
feet, and swinging round to face the pull
of the rope, spread out her hoofs and lay back
against the strain.
She had exploded her active energy in the
swift succession of violent evolutions, but she
was a long way from the point of tame sub-
mission. Every free instinct, inherited from
the wild life to which she had been born,
was outraged. The smell of fire, and of
burnt hair and flesh, was in her nostrils. So,
too, was the detested man-smell. The hard
man-voices were dinning in her ears. Never,
so long as she lived, would the red heifer
associate those voices of men with anything
but terror and pain. Her muscles were quivering,
her sleek sides were smeared with filth and
dust from her falls, her mouth was agape,
her tongue was hanging, choked out by the
tight rope, and her jaws were flaked with
froth.
Seeing that she had played herself out to
the point of stubborn but quiet resistance,
two men laid hold of the rope. At a word
they pulled together. With a shake of her head
the heifer lay back and dug her hoofs into
the dust but the men were fresh to the tug-of-
war. With strong brown arms they hauled her


toward them—she fighting and ploughing the
dirt every inch of the way.
In final protest, when the hands of the
nearest man were almost at her muzzle, she
flung herself on the ground. Immediately she
would have risen—but, too late! One man
knelt on her neck. He gripped her jaw by
thrusting his fingers in her mouth, and twisted
her head up so that she could not move her
fore-part. Before she could use her hind legs,
they were in the noose of a rope, and stretched
out and tied to a post.
There she was, trussed and tied, with two
men laying their full weight on her, fore and
aft. .
While the brander got his hot iron, one of
the men grinned through the sweat and dust
that smeared his face.
“She’s one out of the box, all right, he
said.
The other nodded.
“She’ll be a year older and a year worser
next time we have ’er in the yard,” he
agreed.
“One of those horning devils, that have a
man jumpin’ for the top rail half his time.
“Hang on!”
It was the warning word from the brander
before he applied the iron.


The two assistants took a fresh grip
tensed their muscles.
The red heifer did not know what happened
—or how long it would last. She felt the scorch
of the iron, and bellowed and wrenched her
body in one convulsive effort to free herself;
but the pull of the ropes and the weight of
the men had been applied in just such a
way as to cope with that. She was helpless.
To the touch of the second and third iron
she lay quiet, except for a painful quivering
of her muscles.
The ropes were slipped from neck and
heels. The weight of the men was lifted from
her body. Not realizing that she was now free,
the heifer lay still, stretched out.
One of the men slapped her with his hat.
“All over, now, Jemima!”
The heifer scrambled to her feet. A gate
opened before her. She jumped through it,
banging one hip against a post in her haste,
and found herself back among the calves in
another yard.
Usually, an animal finding itself released and
returned to its kind would settle quietly. But
not the red heifer! Her one idea was flight.
Not merely escape, but the satisfaction that


The men watched her go.


would come with putting distance between her-
self and her tormentors.
She went straight across the yard at a trot.
The men, looking through the rails, watched
her. The rails of the yard enclosing the heifer
were five feet high —that would hold her! It
would hold most horses.
The heifer went straight up to them and
stopped. Raising her head, and snuffing, she
tested the height of the top one. Then she
jumped—a standing cattle jump.
None of the stockmen quite knew how she
did it—but an involuntary shout went up from
them as she hung across the top rail, balanced,
like a beast in a sling. There followed a space
of convulsive kicking during which she edged
her body forward an inch or two. Then gravity
came to her assistance and she fell in a heap on
the outside of the yard. She untangled herself
and jumped to her feet.
The stockmen climbed the rails, laughing
to watch her go.
She went down the slope and out across the
flat, flying. Not with the lumbering, swag-
bellied trot of an old milker, but galloping
like a wild thing, her head out and her tail
up—the plume flying like a pennant on a
lance, and her limbs swinging long and free.


fSU&£
Chapter
She passed out of sight behind a clump of box-
trees—still travelling.
The men got down from the rails.
“There’ll be more fun with that one before
she’s turned into beef,’’ one of them prophesied.
The Red Heifer Wins
The red heifer was too worn out to keep up
such a hot pace for long. As the spur of
tear ceased its stabbing, her gallop slackened
to a swinging trot. Two ideas, as the result
of her experience, were firmly fixed in her
mind. The first was that those two-legged, ill-
smelling, raucous-voiced creatures, who some-
times appeared on horseback and sometimes
afoot, were evil—all evil! The second was that
they were not all-powerful! If you fought them
at every point of the game, sparing neither
bone nor hide in the battle, eventually you
would defeat them.
Not that the red heifer reasoned it out thus;
but two events had marked themselves deep
in her memory—and, even in the brute, memory


develops character and is the guide to future
conduct.
Her trot slackened to a walk. The soothing
influence of the familiar bush cooled the fever
of excitement through which she had passed.
She halted, suddenly conscious of the absence
of her kind. She was alone!
All cow-brutes abhor solitude. Pricking her
ears, the heifer listened and looked about her.
She heard the carol of a magpie, and, far away,
the echo of a jackass’ laugh, but no sight or
sound of a beast greeted her. Turning round,
she faced the way she had come. For a minute
she stood looking back. Twice she shook her
head as though dismissing the suggestion that
she should return in search of her mates. Or
perhaps it was in anger at the thought of recent
ill-treatment. Once she bellowed. No answer
came back. It was late afternoon, the shadows
were lengthening, and the wistfulness pecuHar
to evening was beginning to steal through the
bush.
Decisively, the heifer turned herself about
and stepped out quickly in the direction in
which she had at first been travelling. Her
objective was the Washpool. Denied the com-
pany of her kind, she sought the comfort of
the old stamping ground.
The heat of day gave way to the cool


The Red Heifer Wins
air of night. The sun went down, plunging
the world into darkness. Still the heifer, with
instinct as unerring as the flight of a bullet,
held to her course. She was weary, aching in
bone and limb, but the pull of the old camp
was strong. She was possessed of an unreasoning
belief that, although she had left the mo
behind her at the yards, she would find them
in the Washpool country when she reached
there. In her short experience they had always
been there—that was all!
Away on her right, the moon in her third
quarter came up from behind the black trees.
Pale limbs gleamed silvery in the light. The
bare earth was striped and patterned with long
shadows, and the stars were dimmed. The re
heifer could hear the small creatures of the
bush scuttling out of her way, or pausing to
watch her pass. A kangaroo rat leaped with
startled hiss from his nest in the tall grass. She
heard the flip-flop of wallabies at play; and a
couple of possums checked their quarrelling
to peer down at her passing swiftly on her
journey. ,
The shadows shortened as the moon climbed,
then passed underfoot, and stretched out to the
east as the moon floated steadily down the
western sky. The green gates of dawn swung
wide in the east; the stars fled and the moon


dimmed. The light of the sun sprang to the tree-
tops —and day was at hand.
Her journey nearly at an end, the red heifer
climbed the low ridge overlooking the plain
by the Washpool. Her eyes were eager; her
pace increased. She reached the top and
halted.
The broad plain, ringed about with timbered
ridges, lay before her. No beast moved on its
deeply-grassed expanse. The heifer s eyes
searched the fringe of the timber, but there was
no sight of cattle. Her gaze, keen for the slight-
est movement of a beast, rested for a while on
the clump of brigalows over in the far corner
in front of the Washpool, but without rew T ard.
She raised her head and bellowed her disap-
pointment. Down the ridge she went, in a direct
line across the plain to the Washpool. Reach-
ing there, she halted in the shade of the briga-
low clump. The old camp was quite deserted.
For a while she walked around snuffing the
ground. Then, at last, convinced that she was
alone, she went down to the waterhole to drink.
Having quenched her thirst, she climbed the
bank again. After a short time spent in moving
uneasily around, she lay down in the brigalows
to rest. It was late afternoon before she was
sufficiently recovered from her weariness to go
out to feed.


At nightfall she returned from the feeding-
ground to the camp in the brigalows. She might
have lain down on the open plain, but the
ground in the brigalows was strong with the
cattle-smell and so provided some measure o
companionship.
The moon came up behind the sprawling
gums that lined the creek, and rustlings in blade
and bough whispered that the night creatures
of the bush were passing on their affairs, i e
red heifer lay quite still, except for the rotary
movement of her jaw as she chewed her cud
Notwithstanding her physical quietness, her
ever-present feeling of solitude kept her very
much alert. At each minor sound disturbing t e
stillness of the night her jaws ceased to move
nor did they start again until that sound ha
been identified.
The moon was high, and the shadow of each
tree fell straight to the ground around its butt,
when a sound brought her standing to her feet.
It came from within the edge of the scrub-a
murmur undiscernible to the human ear-the
hoofs of a small mob of cattle approaching.
It ceased, and for a minute or more there was
complete silence. Then there came to her like
little troubled waves of sound on that lake of
stillness, faint lowing. Cattle had halte wit in


the margin of the scrub to reconnoitre before
crossing the open forest to the waterhole.
It was the scrubber band coming down from
the hills to drink.
The lowing ceased, and the faint padding of
hoofs commenced again. Then the heifer saw
them come threading their way in single hie
between the trees. There were ten of them, led
by an old cow and followed by a bull.
The red heifer left the brigalows and went
out to meet them. They were strangers, but
they were her own kind. At first sight of her the
line halted. Low voices were raised in question.
She answered.
The scrubbers were a mob—a community —
and the onus of establishing friendly relations
lay with the single beast. She went straight up
to the cow in the lead. Mutual investigations
commenced and were concluded within a
minute.
The leader of the scrubbers, resenting the
intrusion of another female, lowered her head
and butted the heifer out of the way. From the
end of the line there stepped a heifer of the
same age and weight as the red one. She gave
utterance to that peculiar cry with which female
cattle prelude their fights. Then she rushed.
The two met with a clout that suggested crack-
ing skulls. While the rest looked on, they


scuffled and grunted and fought, the dust half
enveloping them in a silvery cloud.
It ended with the red heifer by sheer force
of strength driving her antagonist backward,
forcing her through the line of onlookers. Her
opponent then abandoned the contest. The
bull, who up to then had not moved, came for-
ward to tender the catholic hospitality of the
male—and she was free to remain with the
scrubbers.
It was several days after the Washpool mob had
returned to their ground that the red heifer
rejoined them. During that interval she had
become an accepted member of the band that
had its home on the ranges. She had learned
their various camps; she knew their feeding-
grounds; she had begun to eat the prickly pear
and the saltbush; and she knew the .devious
pads, winding for miles under the tall scrubs,
by which they came down to water. More than
that, the quiet and the isolation they enjoyed ap-
pealed to her. Their secrecy and caution struck
within her a responsive chord. The fear and
wildness that her adventures in the stockyard
had awakened in her found a calming environ-
ment in the haunts of the scrubbers.
Yet it was a touch of homesickness that
brought her back to her old mates. A week of


quiet had temporarily dulled the sharpness ot
memory —and a week of absence had accentu
ated the pleasures of the old stamping ground.
Down there feed was plentiful and water
abundant, and there were old associations, o
At the end of one day, when the rest of the
scrubbers were moving up to the night camp,
the heifer, who in feeding had gone a little dis-
tance from the others, looked around, and
found herself alone. At that moment the mem-
ory of the Washpool and the cattle who made
their home there became poignant. It was the
old instinct that calls every beast back to the
locality of its birth. The red heifer heard, and
obeyed. Without so much as one look in the
direction that her new friends had taken, she
set off down the ridge to join up again with the
Washpool cattle.
For two years she divided her time between
the lower country and the range. At intervals
the call of one or the other would summon her,
and she would immediately turn and go. The
half-wild life of the open bush lived by her im-
mediate progenitors had done much to uproot
that dependence on man which a thousand
vears of custom had implanted in the domestic
breed from which she came. The things that
had befallen her during the few hours that she


herself had been in contact with man had still
further loosened the hold of inherited habit. It
needed yet one more experience to send her
back to the wilderness.
When the muster of the year following hex
branding took place, it happened that she was
away in the ranges with the scrubbers, but the
second year found her with the Washpool mob
when the stockmen came down the creek. She
had just returned to them.
Contrary to their habit, the scrubbers, after
drinking the night before, had not returned to
their usual camp in the range. Instead, they
had gone up on the ridge that ran parallel with
the creek, to an old camp. The weather
was very hot. The station cattle were drinking
twice a day, and it was with difficulty that the
wild ones made their nightly drink last them
for the twenty-four hours. The long march
down from the range, and the return journey,
would have been too much for them on such a
short ration of water. So, on the crown of the
ridge, where pear and saltbush were fairly
plentiful, and the dense scrub afforded them
good cover and an easy escape should they
be disturbed, thev temporarily remained.
Thoughts of the cool water in the creek, com-
ing to her when the heat of the morning grew
c


; the#!,
'neifet
intense, had caused the red heifer to
and go down to join the Washpool cati
The stockmen came, and the red
n
/
found herself once again a member of tHe V
driven mob on its way to the yards. The same
man who had allowed her, with the white cow
and the white calf, to drop out, and later had
helped to brand her, saw her grown almost to
the size of a mature beast. The wildness that
had started to develop two years before was
noticeable now in her bearing. She walked with
nervous mincing steps, her head held high
above the backs of those around her, her eye
watchful and startled.
Hating the press and heat in the centre of
the mob, she dropped back to the rear. Then,
finding nothing behind her, and panic-stricken
at the nearness of the man who was tailing the
mob, she rushed forward again, jostling and
disturbing the other cattle. Then she worked
her way to the flanks. Here, painful memories
of teeth that bit like hot nails flashed into her
brain, and she pushed and trampled her way
back to safety among the others.
The stockman noticed her fidgety behaviour.
He remembered that she had been missing the
previous year. He was aware of the existence of
the scrubbers, and therefore drew his own
conclusions. The best thing would be to send


her down to market with this year’s fat cattle.
She was a bit under size, but she was in prime
condition. Better to sell a beast a year too soon
and lose a little profit than to have her go wild
and lose her altogether. She would dress into
good beef, even if she was a bit on the young
side.
As far as the stockman was concerned, the
red heifer’s fate was decided then and there.
There was, however, another factor which the
stockman had not taken into consideration—
the emotional storm brewing in the heifer. Its ofy
elements were fear and distress. Her fear was
of the men and the dogs, and of the terrors
which experience told her to anticipate at the
end of the drive. Already she could feel herself
shut in those high-walled yards. The friction
of the beast-bodies all around her rubbed on
her raw nerves; the heat and the dust offended
her nostrils; the crack of the whip seemed to
shoot through her, causing her involuntarily
to jump forward, pressing on the heels of those
in front.
Worse than these things was the docility of
her companions—this tame submission to the
will of other creatures! This dull plodding
in whichever direction they were forced!
Occasional voices raised in anguish spoke of the


undercurrent of distress running through the
entire mob—but nothing happened! Beside her,
a beast lifted its head and bellowed its protest
to the skies—then relapsed into mute and fear-
ful obedience.
The sound of the muster, the whip-cracks, the
whistles and the calling of the cattle floated out
on the still, hot air until it reached the scrubbers
on the ridge. These, at the first sound of dis-
turbance below, were at once afoot and alert,
poised for instant flight. Cows with calves kept
their little ones close beside them. The mob
stood motionless, listening, ready at the first
sound of approaching hoof-beats to open out
like the ribs of a fan and scatter through the
scrub.
No horseman came to disturb them, however.
The sound of the turmoil below moved along;
the driven cattle were going down the creek.
Soft lowings passed from beast to beast among
the scrubbers. The danger was passing. They
began again to settle themselves in the cool
shade of the timber—except the bull. He stood
listening, with head thrown up and tail occa-
sionally flicking his flanks. Among the troubled
voices rising from the valley below he could
detect those of female cattle. He shook his great
head angrily, for the driving off of the females


of his kind always rouses the battle-wrath of the
male. Yet the bull was afraid. He knew those
horsemen below, with their dogs and hide-sear-
ing whips! And, because of his fear, his anger
increased.
Sharply he drew one forehoof back, scoring
the earth and throwing the dirt and gravel into
the air to fall in a shower about his head and
shoulders. He did this alternately with each
hoof until his fore-end was almost hidden in
the whirling dirt. It was the bull’s prelude to
combat.
Ceasing abruptly, he forsook his mob and set
off along the ridge, moving parallel to those in
the valley below, shaking his head and grunting
to himself the while. For a distance of a mile or
so he made his way along the crown of the ridge
and at last came out of the scrub on to a bare
knob, where the ridge ended in an abrupt fall
to the plain.
At that moment the driven stock, debouch-
ing from the valley, came into view below him,
like a ragged carpet of dusty colours creeping
forward with scarcely perceptible undulations.
Freed of the intervening timber, the voices rose
up to him with a clearer insistence, and above
all else was the calling of distressed and harried
females. The bull raised his head and, following


a loud intake of breath, trumpeted out his
answering call.
The red heifer heard it. Clear as a note from
an instrument of brass his trumpeting came
from the hill-top. It was repeated again and
again, with the noisy insuck of breath between
each blast.
Something in the heifer snapped the bond
of fear! Her voice rang out in reply, rising by
force of the passion within her clear above the
voices around her. It was the wild answering to
the wild.
With head high and eyes blazing she thrust
her way through the mob to the flank. Hei e she
broke into a trot and headed across the plain.
A whistle sounded! She heard a swift patter of
paws behind her, and she swung around to face
her assailant.
The dog was too quick—he shot under her
nose and gripped her heel. The pain of it
almost caused her to sink her hind quarters to
the ground. Before she could kick at him he
had gripped and bitten the other heel. Turning
again, she fled.
There would be no galloping back to the
shelter of the mob this time. She was headed
for freedom! With every second stride she felt
the grip of the dog’s teeth on her heels. He
wanted to make her turn and fight; then a


swift change of positions would enable him to
drive her back to the others; but the heifer held
to her course, for escape was within reach.
Out from the tail of the mob shot two figures.
One, a horseman, who lay flat to his horse’s
mane, and, swinging free the coils of his whip,
rode for the honour of his calling. The other
was a dog, who sped along the ground like
some low-flying bird—he raced for the sheer
joy of the battle!
The dog reached the heifer first. His impact
against her muzzle was like the blow of a sand-
bag; his teeth fastened in her snout, and his
body curled under her jaws like an enormous
grub. With a muffled cry of pain she stopped.
She lowered her head to the ground, vainly
endeavouring to reach him with her horns. The
dog behind gripped her heel and sent her
stumbling forward. She felt something snap
under one forefoot. She fell, scrambled to her
feet and raced on. Only one dog followed—the
other limped through the grass dragging a
broken leg.
Hoofs thundered up beside her! Something
hissed through the air and descended across her
head with a blinding pain. She skidded to a
halt. The horseman shot past. Again she felt
teeth clamped savagely on her heel, and, turn-


ing at a slight angle, she raced for the shelter of
the scrub on the side of the ridge.
She heard the horseman coming up beside
her again, and fear lent a spur to her flying
limbs. In a few seconds horse and heifer were
racing neck and flank. The whip, wielded with
the energy of a man who knows that other men
are standing in their stirrups to mark his success
or failure, descended again and again, coiling
itself about her head.
She kept on her way until the sheer unbear-
able pain of it caused her to rear back. The
rider passed her —and again she was away. This
time, the scrub was a little nearer! She heard the
hoof-beats gaining on her again. A tongue of
timber ran out from the bottom of the ridge.
She made for it. There she could dodge, and a
quick manoeuvre might send the horseman
crashing into a tree.
Sustaining her was the idea, dating back to
the battle in the stockyards, that her tormentors
were not all-powerful—if you fought them,
sparing neither hide nor bone, you might win
to freedom!
With an inward flinching she heard the hiss
of the whip. It came down across her eyes, bit-
ing like an acid! She raced on with head thrown
back, temporarily blinded, struggling to see


through red blinking lids and stabbing shafts
of sunlight.
At the edge of the timber her legs buckled
under her. She fell and lay still. Blown, panic-
stricken and bewildered, she sought refuge in
passivity. <■ • -
The stockman reined his horse and sat at
ease. The dog flung himself down in the shade.
They were waiting. It mostly ended like this,
when a beast had the obstinacy to fight to a
finish. Presently she would get to her feet and
they would drive her tamely back to the others,
thoroughly beaten. The man only regretted that
the sharp tussle had run a few pounds of beef
off her. That was dead loss! Fidgety brute!
Those nervous ones always lost weight in the
trucks, too, going down to the market; besides
upsetting the others in the same truck. He
cursed her mildly. Still, as the victor in the
struggle, he could afford to feel magnanimous.
The heifer’s sight returned—and most of her
strength. Her breathing was easier. The stock-
man flicked her lightly with the whip! The mob
was moving on. He had need to hurry.
The snap of the whip across her shoulders
roused the heifer. Before attempting to rise she
looked about her. At that moment, from the
hill-top, there sounded the trumpet blast of
the scrubber bull; his summons and challenge!


The light of renewed resolution flamed in the
heifer’s eyes. She lurched to her feet and swung
straight into a gallop toward the scrub.
With an ejaculation of surprise, the stock-
man jabbed the spurs into his horse, sending
him bounding after her. He came up with her
on the near side. The long lash swung up and
curled for its vicious descent across her head.
Before that could happen the heifer ran close
to a box-tree, grazing it with her near flank as
she passed and forcing the horseman to swerve
from his course to avoid crashing into it. An
angry oath sprang from his lips. With a turn of
the wrist as the tree swept past, he wrenched
his mount around on to the heifer’s tracks. An
ant-hill, unseen, was in his path. The horse
struck it with both forelegs. Unable to recover
he fell, throwing his rider to the ground.
The stockman jumped up, but it was too late
to mount and follow in pursuit, for the heifer
had gained the shelter of the scrub. His horse
rose, and he seized the bridle reins. Before he
mounted he paused to listen. From the side of
the ridge came down the sound of the crash of
undergrowth and the rattle of galloping hoofs.
The red heifer was racing up to life and free-
dom!


Ned Berry, the head stockman, entered the
men’s hut. It was after tea, and he had just
returned from a visit to the quarters of Black,
the manager. The stockmen—four—were play-
ing cards; the horse-breaker was mending his
shirt, and the cook, in his corner, was washing
up.
* The boss is goin’ to clear them scrubbers
out of the range soon as the musterin’s finished.”
Ned’s announcement was delivered with a
vocal inflection which may have been inter-
preted as saying, “And there’s going to be some
hard riding before it’s done.”
None of the four players replied, but there
was a scarcely noticeable pause in the game,
during which each man silently selected from
the half-dozen horses at his disposal the one
that could best be trusted to carry him at a flying
gallop through that thickly-timbered , boulder-
strewn range—a momentary and mental drama-
tization, as it were, of impending events. Then
the game went on.
“Joe!”


The breaker looked up from his shirt.
“Yeh.”
“You’ve got to go up to the range and find out
where the scrubbers are feedin’, and then meet
the rest of us at the head of Crooked Creek on
Thursday afternoon.”
To any but a bushman it would have sounded
like an order to go out and find a dozen dried
peas in a mountain of straw.
The breaker mentally substituted another
of his horses for the one he had just chosen.
“When do I start?” he asked.
“In the mornin’.”
“Righto!”
At peep of day Joe left the homestead. He was
riding a horse that could put five miles an hour
behind him without ever shifting his gait from
a shuffling walk. Joe’s pipe was alight. The in-
evitable speckled cattle-dog trailed at his horse’s
heels.
The job was one to Joe’s liking. Just a plea-
sant ride about, with no one to say; “Come
here!” or “Go there!” And withal there was a
chance for a bit of quiet showing-off of his
abilities as a bushman. To pick up a score of
beasts in a thirty thousand acre wilderness, a
good deal of it standing on end, is not easy.
Joe made midday camp at Blackboy’s
lagoon. He spent an hour sitting in the shade


yarning to his dog, while his horse grazed. Then
he saddled up and moved on. He reached the
Washpool at four o’clock, searched the country
on the upper side for fresh tracks of cattle com-
ing down from the range—and found none.
I hat was one probability disposed of.
He remained a short time at the Washpool
filling the water-bag that hung at his saddle and
dawdling at the water’s edge that his horse
might drink deeply, for he expected a dry
camp that night. Pushing on up the creek, he
found all the small waterholes above the Wash-
pool dried up, and at sundown reached the
head of the creek and made camp.
As “the bush” knows, the ringing of a horse-
bell signifies the presence of human kind. It
carries far on a still night—and wild cattle are
shy. If they were to hear it, they would at once
shift camp—and they might shift a long way.
A less cautious bushman would have brought
a bell and hobbles to put on his horse when he
turned it loose, lest it stray during the night,
or travel back to its mates at the homestead.
Instead, Joe had chosen a horse that was a good
camper. He knew that when morning came he
would find it still grazing within a hundred
yards of where he slept.
So Joe lay down to sleep that night secure in
the knowledge that, if he didn't know where


the scrubbers were, then neither had he made
them aware of his presence in their stamping
ground.
He breakfasted by starlight, and the first
streak of day found him threading his way up
the dividing ridge between his camp and
Crooked Creek. His horse would need a drink
before the day’s ride began. There was a small
waterhole on the head of Crooked Creek that
would serve his need. It was just a pot-hole
in the clay. He had seen it once by chance
some four or five years before—and, with the
western bushman, to see water anywhere in the
bush is to gauge its quantity and quality, to
notice if stock use it; to estimate how long after
each rain it will remain before soakage and
evaporation dry it up; to memorize its location
—and never to forget it!
As the sun looked over the horizon, Joe dropped
down the farther side of the Divide on to
Crooked Creek. He reined his horse and looked
sharply up and down the dry bed of the water-
course. Then, guided partly by memory, but
mostly by that less fallible instinct which life in
the west develops in a man, he turned his
horse’s head up-creek. Within a few minutes he
crossed two wallaby pads, both of which were
freshly and thickly marked as with the passing


of many wallabies to and fro on some definite
errand. Both headed up-creek, and both at last
converged upon a Moreton Bay ash, standing
straight and tall beside another, fallen to the
ground and spanning the deep water-way—and
the pot-hole gouged out of the clay.
Joe watered his horse and refilled his water-
bag. There were no cattle-tracks around the
pot-hole—a fact which told him that there was
still water somewhere on the range. He mounted
and rode on. It was two months since rain had
fallen—that cut the gilgais out of his reckon-
ing.
The weather was hot—that cut the prickly
pear belts out as well. Cattle at this season
would need more than pear to stay their thirst.
Somewhere on the range there was a watershed,
with a natural catchment. There, or in the
vicinity, he would find the cattle; there, and
nowhere else in all those miles of range, for
the waterholes of the western country are the
centres of life, both human and other
Leaving the vicinity of the pot-hole Joe
headed straight up the creek, and in a short
time reached the first of the gullies that marked
the end of the watercourse. First a gully run-
ning off to the right, then one to the left, and
the creek continuing, scarcely distinguishable in
size from its offshoots. Then came a point where


two gullies forked, one on either side of a bold
ridge, and the creek was no more.
Joe rode straight up the ridge and continued
along its level back until he reached a spot
where the timber fell away, giving him an un-
interrupted view of the surrounding country.
Taking out his pipe, he proceeded slowly to fill
it, studying the lay of the land the while.
He was now on the foothills of the range-
four or five miles away—which lay at right angles
to the way he was facing. On his right was a
broad basin-like valley, the ridge on which he
stood forming part of the rim. After one glance
at the billowing brigalow trees that filled it,
he dismissed it from his consideration. It was
the upper watershed of May’s Creek, and notori-
ously dry.
From where he was, the country swept up in
a curve to the base of a line of rocky cliffs, bare-
sided and topped with trees—the crest of the
range. There was no place between himself and
the bottom of those cliffs for water to lodge!
Farther to the right, the line of cliffs seemed
to bend back and away from him, and from
their feet a broad shelf ran out—or appeared to
from that distance. Joe looked at it dubi-
ously. It seemed high in the air to be counted a
likely spot to find water. Bearing it in mind,
but deciding to seek farther before going up


there, he rode off on a line parallel with the top
of the range and half-way down its side, his eyes
sharply alert for cattle-tracks.
In places the country was thick. Thin whip-
sticks, growing close together and as high as a
man’s head, covered large areas of ground; but
in many other places there were patches of
country clear and open, some of it grassed and
some eaten bare by the wallabies. He saw plenty
of cattle-tracks, and passed occasional camps,
but all of them were old and disused. For some
miles he threaded his way beneath belah and
brigalow scrubs, where the tree-tops interlocked
forty feet above his head and the undergrowth
was dense and luxuriant; then through open
bottle-tree country where the saltbush grew
like lucerne.
Again and again he halted before crossing
cattle-pads—narrow, deep-worn paths that came
snaking out of the thick shrubbery on the one
hand, and, passing his feet, went snaking into
the shrubbery on the other. These were the
pads along which the cattle went on their jour-
neys from one feeding-ground to another, or
from the ranges down to drink at the creeks—
secret paths along which they passed, moving,
one directly behind the other, reds and roans
and whites, a silent, mysterious company, under
the black interwoven heads of the tall timber


and through the vivid green of the bottom
growth.
A glance at each of the pads served to show
that they had not been used by cattle for many
weeks. Flattened and pitted by the previous
rain, they had not since then been trodden.
By the time he had held to his course for
about six miles, Joe had satisfied himself that
the scrubbers were higher up the range. Turn-
ing his horse, he headed for the shelf at the
foot of the cliffs. He could not see it from his
position in the depth of the scrub, but of its
exact situation he had no doubts. In that respect
Joe’s instinct was as reliable as that of the beasts
he sought.
For an hour his horse toiled diagonally up
the face of the range, and Joe was able to gauge
his progress by the increasing steepness of the
ascent. Near the top the scrub ended abruptly,
and for the first time in several hours he could
see more than a few yards around him. He
reined his horse within the shadow and cover of
the timber, and scanned the sunlit belt of
grassland that swept up from the margin of the
scrub to the low wall of rock marking the edge
of the shei£ on the side of the mountain. There
was no sign of the cattle.
Urging his horse forward, he crossed the clear-
ing, and, after scrambling up the rocky parapet,


found himself on a plateau timbered with box
and ironbark. Behind him, and to either side,
there rolled, outward and downward, a magni-
ficent vista of timbered slopes and distant
plains; but Joe was not interested in this. He
was alert for a sight of the quarry, and consci-
ous of just a little apprehension, for, if he failed
to locate them on the plateau, he would be at a
loss where to seek. He was due to meet the
other men down below at the head of Crooked
Creek on the following afternoon. It was well
past midday now.
He pressed forward, keeping within sight of
the rocky margin. The shelf was heavily tim-
bered, and thinly grassed with sour and in-
ferior grasses. He argued from this that the
scrubbers were feeding elsewhere, but, as the
shelf sloped back towards the cliff wall, he was
more than ever inclined to think that on it
their watering place would be found—some-
where on the inner edge near the cliffs.
He had gone scarcely a quarter of a mile when
he reined his horse with a grunt, the while a
pleased expression came over his face. The
scrubbers’ pad lay before him, a thin, brown,
trodden line winding across the grey floor of the
forest. The hoof-marks were new, and all
pointed out toward the shelf. Joe turned and
rode beside the track in the opposite direction.


8 Man-Shy
The cattle had drunk and gone out to feed—he
wished first to find their watering-place. He did
not allow his horse to tread on the pad, be-
cause the cattle coming in to drink next morn-
ing would notice the alien hoof-prints.
He found the water; a shallow, reedy pool,
half an acre or so in extent, studded on its outer
margin with grey swamp gums, and lying close
under the ironstone cliffs, which shot upwards
a hundred feet from its farther edge. He
drank, and watered his horse, being careful to
approach a part not used by the cattle.
For a little while he remained, looking about
him, lost in that fascination which strange water
has for him who comes upon it. It was a little
life-centre, known only to the bush animals and
the wild cattle. The marks of their coming and
going were plain on the earth around him.
Dingo, wallaby, native bear, kangaroo and ibis
—Joe’s quick eye noted their tracks in the dust,
and the prints of many small birds whose names
were not within the scope of his knowledge.
Even as he stood there, quite still, two small
brown ducks of the variety known to bushmen
as divers, whistled out of the sky and alighted
on the water. They saw him, and two widening
ripples marked where they had been. They did
not come to the surface again within his vision,
although he waited; but he knew that from


somewhere among the reeds opposite they were
watching him with bright and curious eyes.
A movement in the timber a furlong distant
drew his attention. A mob of six emus stalked,
across the bush like figures in a stately frieze.,
With a brisk recollection of the work yet to
do he mounted and rode back along the scrub-
bexs’ pad the way he had come. He followed it
over the edge of the little rocky wall, across the
open land and down through an expanse of
clump brigalow. Then, above some low-grow-
ing bushes, he saw the red back of a beast a
hundred yards distant. He went forward cauti-
ously, and soon saw that he was nearing the
edge of a small plain. He dismounted. Leaving
his horse tied to a sapling, he advanced on foot.
At the edge of the open ground, screened
shoulder-high by some shrubs, he halted. The
scrubbers were in full view, heads down, spread
out and feeding in the open as quietly and con-
tentedly as a herd of milch cows in a dairyman’s
paddock.
He counted them. There were twenty-three:
four bailey bullocks—they would be on the
station books—that had gone bush since brand-
ing; six cows of mixed colours and ages; four
heifers, two young bulls, six calves and year-
lings, and one old roan bull. Among the cows
was one, young and blood-red, which Joe rightly


guessed to be the identical heifer that had fur-
nished the station with a story of an epic leap
from the stockyard, and had later escaped from
the mustering.
Joe had been too long in the cattle business
to have any sentiment to spare for the scrubbers.
He felt no regret at the prospect of bursting
into their contented solitude; of stampeding
them away from their beloved ranges; of
desolating the waterhole with the loss of its
people who would never come again; of send-
ing them at last on the rattling, bumping rail-
way trucks, bewildered and forlorn, on their
way to the markets and the shambles. It was
just work, for which he received three pounds
a week and his tucker. Dangerous work it would
be, too; the sort of danger that a man looks
forward to with nervous eagerness and back
upon with joy. Joe’s feelings were those of the
hunter who has caught up with the game.
Next day Joe was camped at the appointed
rendezvous when his mates arrived, and had
complete and satisfactory answers for every
question fired at him while they off-saddled
and turned their horses loose. Every question
was asked except the one which might have
been most expected, “What was the country
like between the scrubbers’ hang-out and the
foot of the range?’’ No horseman worthy of his


damper would ask that I He would prefer for
the sake of his dignity to wait and find out for
himself—and then to take it as it came.o -
Chapter VIII
The Round-Up
They moved off at daylight, Joe guiding them
along the route which, during his descent of
the range the previous evening, he had chosen
as being the best along which they could bring
the scrubbers —provided they could keep them
in hand.
“You’ll have to hold ’em close together,”
the head stockman warned. “They’re not like
ordinary stock; they’ll split up if you give ’em
half a chance.”
“Barney,” he added, “you and Splinter had
better take one wing. Joe and Bill, you take
the other. Me and Long ’Un will push ’em
along behind. And don’t let ’em get a spread
!» t
They found the scrubbers on the little plain
where Joe had seen them the day before. For


2 Man-Shy
a minute or so the six horsemen halted in the
shelter of the scrub—a sort of breath-taking
pause; then, on a word from the head stock-
man, they rode out.
At the noise of their hoof-beats, the heads of
the grazing cattle were swiftly lifted in startled
unison. One or two made a panicky rush for-
ward, then halted. The entire mob turned to
face the approaching horsemen, for, so long had
they been undisturbed in their ranges that their
first reaction to an uncommon sight was
curiosity. Then, alarmed by the purposeful
advance of the riders, they turned with one
accord and raced for the timber, spreading out
as they went.
The horses leaped to a gallop, the long whips
swung out of their coils, and the ground shook
as each of the six men raced to his job. Splinter’s
horse seemed Ito fly as he sped along the flank of
the cattle to turn the lead before they gained
the shelter of the timber. His weird wild yell
woke for the first time the echoes of those hills,
and his writhing lash snarled an accompani-
ment.
The young red cow was at the head of the
mob, and she was making for cover with a fury
of determination. Splinter’s whip was chopping
at her head, and his dog snapping at her heels
before she turned. As she checked her pace, the


rest of the mob, forced by the whips of the men
on the outer wing,''gathered up to her. Then
they wheeled, and away along the open ground
they went, the red cow in the lead, the mob
close packed behind her, and the horsemen
holding them in; for each man knew that the
cattle had to be held together until the pace
brought them to a standstill.
They raced them up through the clumpy
brigalow—a foretaste of what was to come. The
open spaces between the clumps were few and
narrow, and the spindly trees in the clumps
grew less than a yard apart. The men were
forced to open out to make a passage for the
stock, some of which, quick to see their advant-
age attempted a dash for liberty. The riders
forestalled them. It was over in half a minute,
and they were on the sweep of grassland that
encircled the margin of the plateau, the men
riding hard at the cattle and jamming them
again into a compact mass.
They swept around the strip of open land,
the earth trembling beneath them, the dust
billowing up in their wake, and loose stones
rattling downhill from under their spurning
hoofs. Every beast in the mob, jarred out of
tranquillity into terror, was spending its
strength in flight, and each man, keyed up to
his highest pitch, with no fear in his heart but


the fear of failure, was riding to hold them.
There was no thought of the bone-breaking
crash that a stumbling hoof might cause —their
safety was with the gods and the good steeds that
laboured beneath them. Scarce a look was given
to the path they rode—that was the horses’ care.
Each man’s attention was for the section of the
mob that raced beside him—to mark the beast
that was going to break out, to leap at it with
lash and cry, and drive it back to the ranks of
its mates.
There were two that fell back in that race
along the open. Two calves, their baby strength
used up in the first rush of speed. The tornado
of racing bodies swept on and left them,
bleating and forlorn, to their fate.
The timber at the end of the open country
came into view, and the cattle, when they
saw it, as if thinking that escape was within
reach, redoubled their speed.
It was the leading flank riders to whom
the others looked. Splinter and Joe, on either
flank, had gravitated to that position. It was
Splinter’s turn again. With Barney and Long
’Un creeping up to help him, he swung his
whip, and, yelling like a fiend, rode straight
at the leading beasts. It was a dangerous man-
oeuvre. A collision at the pace thev were going


would have sent man and horse to the ground
under the hoots of the herd.
Shrinking from his attack, the leaders headed
round, the mob followed, and away they
went down the range like a small avalanche.
The pace slackened when they hit the big
scrubs —neither beast nor horseman could
face it at a gallop. They plunged into the
sea of undergrowth, and for a time were
swallowed. But the men, riding, could see
each other. Here, a man ducking,, to escape
a low-hung branch; there, another, with a
short stretch of clear ground before him,
leaping forward to gain the distance he had
lost and would lose again in the next patch of
jungle he encountered; another diving his
face into his horse’s mane as the animal
cleared a log beneath a swooping bough; and
yet another reining to check a beast trying
to break away. Here and there, among it all,
the back and head of a beast flashed into view
and was gone, and over all sounded the crash
and swish of undergrowth and the pounding
of hoofs.
It was in that thick scrub that the dogs
paid their way. The low bushes offered no
hindrance to their speed. Where a compact
mass of shrubs turned a horseman from his
course, the dog slid through them and


straight at the beast that was trying to leave
the mob.
They passed through the scrub and out on
to a belt of park-like country dotted with gum-
topped box. As men and beasts burst from
the cover, there was a quick readjustment of
positions —one man found himself in the lead
of the cattle, and one in the centre. While
the men scrambled to get back into place
the cattle opened out. The flank men on each
side went forward, (fuming each beast in as
they came up with it, and forming them again
into a close-packed mass.
The stockmen had the mob in hand again
when they left the open and( entered a net
of boulder-strewn gullies pitching sharply
downward. The cattle were rolling as they
ran, the froth was flying from their jaws,
and the sides of the horses were streaked with
sweat.
It was bad travelling over the rocky country
—sharp little ledges with a four or five foot
fall. The scrubbers knew the easy passages,
but for the horsemen it was a case of making
a detour or of jumping—each according to his
mettle.
The way they rattled down that steep and
broken incline was a revelation of nerve
and agility. According to every reasonable


The Round-Up
expectation, half of them should have fallen
in the first hundred yards, but the cattle
were fear-crazy, the horses throbbing with
the wild excitement that the thunder of run-
ning hoofs awakens in them, and every man
was under bond to himself to be present at
the finish. /
During that swift downward rush one beast
escaped—the old bull. A loose slab of rock
sent him sprawling among the stones and
dumped him, with a thump and a grunt, in
the bottom of a wash-out. He never knew that
Long ’Un’s horse .cleared him in its stride as
it pelted along behind the mob. Neither time
nor man could be spared to stop and gather
him in.
At exactly the right minute, Joe, his eyes
blazing and his throat swelling with the exult-
ant yell of a man who rides Red Danger with
bit and spur, flung himself at the left side of
the lead. Slipping and scrambling, the leaders
swung off to the right, and the stream of heads,
horns, and toiling backs swerved after them in
a scattering of dust and gravel.
The boulder-strewn gullies were passed, and
they were racing along the even slope of a
timbered ridge. It was easier now for the stock-
men—straight-out timber riding, needing only


a quick eye, a light hand on the rein, and a
foreknowledge of beast tactics.
The older and weaker members of the
hunted mob were tiring. A beast here and
there dropped from a gallop to a trot; finding
itself losing ground, it went into a gallop again,
then back to a trot. These began to filter to the
rear.
It was then that the whips of the head
stockman and Long ’Un, released from their
coils, came into play. The stragglers had to
be kept up until the stronger ones tired. The
long lashes began to snarl across the dusty
labouring backs, scourging them on.
The fine free gallop of the mob degener-
ated into a heavy rolling canter. The sucking
of breath was audible above the trampling
of their hoofs. Mouths were agape, and the
spume from their jaws was dropping in the
dust. The horses, too, were feeling the pace;
each uptossed head sent the froth flying from
the bit. With a shrewd distinction between
the lash that urges and the punishment that
exhausts, the two men in the rear plied their
whips.
One by one the leaders began breaking
from a canter, and then into a canter again.
Within a short time the gliding undulations
of that phalanx of backs had passed to the


f'/'rn
' - - ——> ' - ■ • ' ' ~ ■< --—- - > ~
JK
staccato bobbing of a trot. The tension re-
lieved, the men, rising in their saddles and
leaning forward on the withers to ease their
horses, began shouting congratulatory jokes
to one another. The battle was practically
over.
They were less than half-way down the
ranges, and there was still a lot of bad ground
to cover before they reached the out-station
yards where they would spend the night, but
they had run the cattle to the ground. All
that remained was to keep the mob travelling
—keep them working at it so that they would
be too much occupied with their physical
weariness to have energy for studying means
of escape. They were well in hand.
Chapter IX
Inside the Fence
Through the glory of green and gold that
marks the hour of sunset, a dusty stockman
on a travel-stained horse cantered in through
the bush to the sliprails of a small paddock
near the Mirramilla homestead. With a glance


at the welcome gleam of the homestead roof
half a mile distant, among the pepper trees, he
dismounted. Pulling out the rails, he threw
them well out of the way so as to offer no
hindrance to the cattle. Then, mounting again,
he rode off about a hundred yards and waited.
The last was merely a matter of form; he did
not expect any trouble with the scrubbers
when they reached the rails.
It was a worn and dejected little mob that
came ambling along the dusty track, herded
by the rest of the stockmen. It needed neither
the crack of a whip nor the snap of a heeler
to turn them this way or that. The near
approach of one of the riders on either flank
was sufficient to send them stumbling and jost-
ling away from him. Their pace had become a
dragging walk.
Black, the manager, on his pony hack, can-
tered across from the homestead as they
approached. He watched them with a calcu-
lating eye, as, after a little sniffing and milling,
they poured through the rails into the paddock.
There was some good stuff there—the best part
of a hundred pounds worth—and some of them
would be ready for the meat works inside a
month. Already he was anticipating a pleasant
growth in his bank account.
“Get ’em all?” he asked.


“All except three—two calves and an old
roan bull.’’ It was the head stockman who
answered, as he dropped from his horse to
put the rails up.
“Many clearskins in the lot?”
“All except five—them bailey bullocks and
that red cow.”
“Righto!” Black dismounted. “You’d better
get up to the homestead; the cook’s got your
tucker waiting. I’m going to tie these rails.”
The men departed.
Black set to work with some short lengths
of fencing-wire which he had brought with
him and tied the rails securely to the posts.
There was no telling, otherwise, that a beast,
poking about, might not get them down during
the night.
His job finished, he paused a while to study
again with calculating eye the meat-works value
of the scrubber mob. Then he swung into the
saddle and cantered back to the homestead.
Finding themselves no longer urged for-
ward, the cattle had halted in the paddock
a couple of chains from the sliprails. The
wearier animals immediately sank to the
ground. The remainder continued to stand
in a group, turning this way and that, sur-
veying their new surroundings with wonder
and distrust. A few, the very young ones,


were cropping the feed that grew tall about
them. One beast, of those who stood, voiced
its uneasiness in a low moan, which passed
from one to another. Here and there one whose
spirit was sufficiently sturdy to harbour resent-
ment, shook its head angrily. Just a little band
of exiles were they, stampeded from their native
freedom and driven with dogs and whips into
captivity.
The sun went down behind the range,
drawing the light after him. The black mass
of the ranges stood in bold silhouette against
a lemon sky. The shades of night came
welling out of the east, pouring through the
bush, filling the world with darkness, until
only the sky remained luminous with the fast-
receding light of day. Lights showed in the
windows of the homestead, and the evening
star burned like a bright silver lamp above
the head of Crooked Creek.
One by one the scrubbers lay down to rest.
There was no rhythmic swing of jaws on the
cud, and there were no deep-breathed sighs of
contentment—just quietness. They lay still
throughout the night. The evening star went
down behind the range, leading the other stars
in their march across the skies. The cattle saw
the lights in the homestead windows go out,
and felt the deep silence of midnight settle


on the bush. Little puffs of wind came flut-
tering along the earth, rustling the heavy seed-
heads of the glasses. With the cooling of the
ground the earth gave up a fragrance, and far
away through the timber a night-bird called
mournfully.
Later, a pale sliver of moon came up in the
east, throwing scarcely discernible shadows.
Shortly, her light was quenched by the dawn.
Trees and fence-posts began to take form in
the half-light, and each beast saw clearly the
black bulk of its neighbour.
First one and then another of the scrub-
ber mob rose stiffly to its feet, hollowed its
back, and stretched. Presently they were all
afoot. The light was growing stronger. From
the bush beyond the fence there came a scuf-
fling of wings and the voices of the earliest
birds put forth tentatively into the waking
day. A beam of light leaped the pale vault of
the skies; the palisades of the range, up-
thrusting, intercepted it, and were touched
with living gold. It was day on the mountain!
One beast, more articulate than the rest,
pointed its muzzle to the range, and, drawing
a deep breath, voiced its longing for those
sunlit heights in a loud call that pealed through
the bush like the trumpet notes of reveille.
But the others were silent.


Smoke ascended from the chimneys of the
homestead. Voices were heard shouting back
and forth; a dog barked, and the figures of
men were seen moving about. TL he sun came
up, and the crispness of dawn wilted in the
searching warmth of the morning.
The scrubbers did not move, d hey turned
their heads to listen when calves, away through
the timber, blatted as they ran beside their
grazing mothers. Other cattle came wandering
along outside the fence, cropping the grass as
they moved, and one or another of the scrub-
bers called to them, asking in those wordless
animal tones for reassurance. Those outside the
fence, at peace in their domestic subservience to
man, raised their heads to stare a while at the
strangers; then, not understanding, contentedly
resumed their feeding.
Again and again a scrubber beast bellowed
its protest and drew from its mates low mean-
ings of understanding. That, and occasional
shaking of the head, or impatient stamping
of the hoof, were the outward signs of their
troubled spirits. One by one three of the four
bailey bullocks left the mob. The green grass
grew tall about them, and that to them was more
than the freedom of the ranges. They moved
off, grazing as they went, in the direction of
the creek which ran through the bottom of


the paddock, and one by one the younger
members of the scrubbers followed.
These, at mid-morning, having drunk from
the shaded waters of the creek, gathered be-
neath one of the groups of trees that dotted
the paddock, and lay down to chew the cud
until the cool of the afternoon. They had
accepted the bondage of domestication.
Of the little mob that remained near the
sliprails, with heads ever turning to the range,
there was one, at last, that made a move. She was
the young red cow. She was not a clearskin; the
Mirramilla brand was on her rump, but she
had passed through the branding-yard at a
later age than most beasts. The memory of it
was not lost in the mists of her calfhood. She
had put up a fight against the ropes and the
irons and the men who used them, and in
the end she had escaped. Now that memory
came back to her, and it found her with the
will to make use of it.
As she left the others and went forward
toward the rails they watched her, a soft
questioning lowing passing from one to an-
other. Her decisive movements were a relief
to their own suffering and inaction.
She walked straight up to the rails and stood
for a minute sniffing the height of the top
one. It was lower, much lower, than the top


rail of die yard she had jumped long ago.
She hesitated a moment, gathered her feet
under her and humped her back. I hen,
raising her fore-end from the ground, she
leaped. She landed her forefeet on the opposite
side, her hind legs still hanging over the top
rail. A kick or two, the loss of a little skin
and hair, and she was free.
She turned and looked back into the pad-
dock, “speaking” to those inside. Wondering,
for understanding comes slowly to the brute
mind, they answered; then, mindful of the
nearness of men, the red cow walked off through
the timber and was soon lost in the perspec-
tive of bush. She was headed back to the range.
One by one, the beasts in the paddock moved
forward until all were grouped at the rails.
This was where their mate had got out. There
were two or three who realized that the way
of escape lay over the top. These, after sniffing
at the rails, gathered their feet together, and
teetered a moment, tentatively: but they lacked
that indefinable quality of spirit which had
enabled the red cow for the second time in
her life to do something of which beasts as a
rule are incapable.
Others put their heads between the rails,
and pushed and , twisted, hoping that the
obstacle would somehow disappear. There were


others who stood at the back passively waiting
for something to happen. One, more excitable
than the rest, finding she could not escape,
ran along the fence, looking toward the point
where the red cow had disappeared, and bel-
lowing wildly.
She was answered. The red cow’s reply came
from the distant thickness of the bush. The
cow in the paddock called again. And again
the red cow answered—her second call sounding
with an equal loudness, suggesting that she had
halted in the interval to listen. That was the
last they heard from her; she had gone on to
safety.
Dragged now out of the inaction that had
gripped them in the early hours of their cap-
tivity, the scrubbers set off in single file along
the fence. The beast that had called to the
red cow led the way. She would run a short
distance, bellowing wildly, and thrashing her
sides with her tail; then, stopping, she would
push her head between the wires and try vainly
to walk through them. When the others had
almost reached her she would withdraw her
head and run on.
They crossed the creek that watered the pad-
dock, and, reaching the corner of the fence,
stood a while. In all their lives they had never


met a fence, and a corner, as such, was a thing
far beyond their understanding. I hen they
started off along the second fence line. In this
manner they completed the circuit of the pad-
dock and arrived back at the sliprails.
Midday had come. Throughout the bush
cattle were camped in the shade of the trees
away from the heat, but for the scrubbers
there was no rest; there was not even any heat
as far as their physical consciousness of it was
concerned. They gathered together in a for-
lorn little company on the ground where they
had camped the previous night. The sun beat
upon their backs; the bush simmered around
them; their shadows were like grey blurs be-
neath them, and their heads were turned
always to the ranges, rising blue-veiled and
sun-drenched into the sky.
In the middle of the afternoon they resumed
their march round the fence, and kept it up,
circling the boundary of the paddock again
and again. They were creatures of the wild,
and an enclosure—a fence—returning ever to
its starting point—was as far removed from
their power of understanding as the idea of
infinity is removed from the human grasp.
Perhaps they hoped that, somehow, the fence
would eventually disappear. Perhaps their end-
less march relieved their longing to be going


back to their home in the ranges—a monotony
of movement that soothed, though it could not
cure.
Late in the afternoon, when the sun had
passed behind the ranges, they came to rest
again near the sliprails. Here they stood with
eyes fixed on their home, now fading from
their sight.
Black and Splinter, returning from work,
halted their horses just outside the fence.
“Hollow, ain’t they?” It was Splinter who
spoke.
Black nodded. “Still, they’ve been in to
drink,” he said, glancing at the half-dried mud
on the cattle’s hoofs. “I expect they’ll start
feeding soon. They’ll settle down as soon as
they get properly hungry.” Notwithstanding
his assurance of voice, he looked doubtfully at
them as he turned away. Their bodies were
indeed tucked up and empty.
Black was wrong in thinking the green feed
would wean the scrubbers from their longing
for their home. During the days that followed
they ate nothing. They drank a little. Hour
after hour they passed stumbling in weary pro-
cession round the fence line, and hour after
hour they stood with heads toward and eyes
on the distant ranges. The flesh wasted from
their frames, their hair grew harsh and stood on


end, and their bones were painfully apparent.
The light that was the ever-present longing
for the wildness and freedom of the hills con-
tinued to burn in their eyes. The only physical
thing of which they were conscious was the
fence that encircled the paddock.
Their ceaseless travelling round and round
inside the wire boundaries of their prison had
worn away the grass and made a thin dusty track.
But now their journeyings had ended. They
no longer had the energy to spare. For two
days they did not move from their camp near
the sliprails. At night, when darkness covered
the ranges, they lay down to rest, but at dawn
they rose and resumed their watch. All their
consciousness of living had passed into a
yearning for their hills.
Their condition aroused, at first, specula-
tion and, later, sympathetic profanity.
“Why don’t he let the poor devils go!” the
men said, speaking of Black.
Conscious of the resentment which his
callousness was arousing among the men, Black
was frequent in his assurances that the scrub-
bers, as hunger pressed upon them, would settle
down in the paddock. There was good water and
grass, and, after all, a beast was only a stomach
on four legs. They would soon forget.


He was wrong in that. The scrubbers were
dyings / ~ 7~~lr\o> ,
Chapter X
The Old Bull
It was Splinter who brought matters to a head.
He had left the homestead at day-break on a
job at the opposite side of the run. The
scrubbers were rising as he rode across the
ground between the yards and their camp.
Half of them were up, and the others, seeing
him approaching, got to their legs. There were
two, however, whose weakness put the task
almost beyond the bounds of possibility. With
great difficulty, and after several efforts, they
managed to get upon their hind legs, and there,
on their knees, they stuck, puffing and panting,
and swaying unsteadily from side to side until
they could get sufficient strength to rise fully.
Splinter drew rein and sat for a minute
watching them, the while an angry flush
mounted his neck and face. Throwing under a
tree the wire-strainer he was carrying, he turned
and cantered back to the homestead.


Black was crossing the yard as the stockman
rode in and slipped from his horse.
“Here!” said Splinter, prefacing his demand
with neither name nor “mister”, “What are
you going to do about those cattle?”
Black was disappointed at not being able
to cash in on the scrubbers as he had expected.
In his consequent rage at their dumb obstinacy,
he would have put them from his mind and
allowed them to stand in the paddock until
they died and all that was left of them was
a rotting heap of hide and bone; but in the
hard, unprefixed challenge of Splinter’s voice
he heard danger. The stockman had thrown
off the discipline of industry, and was prepared
to have it out, man to man.
“I'll shoot ’em to-morrow. I’ll shoot ’em for
their hides; that’s all they’re worth now.”
Splinter’s ethics were satisfied. He mounted
and rode out again. Cattle were born and bred
to be killed. If the boss wanted to shoot and
skin this lot, that was his business. The man
who owned cattle gave them their lives, you
might say, and when the time came he had
a right to kill ’em or send ’em to be killed.
That was just ordinary stock-breeding. Without
further thought Splinter went on to his day’s
work.


The men had been assigned their jobs for the
day, so Black postponed the killing until the
following morning. The thought of the few
pounds he would get for their hides in compari-
son with the many pounds he had hoped to get
for their flesh did not greatly increase his good
humour.
At about four o’clock that afternoon he was
sitting on the veranda at work on his accounts
when he heard the bellowing of a strange bull
down by the paddock where the scrubbers were
standing. It was not that he knew the call of
every bull on Mirramilla, but any man familiar
with cattle can detect that peculiar note in the
voice of a beast which greets its mates after an
enforced absence.
Looking up, he saw an old roan bull
emerging from the timber and moving slowly
towards the scrubbers with characteristic heavy
rolling gait. The bull stopped and again
roared his gladness at seeing his old friends.
Black heard faintly their answering calls.
“That’s a queer one!’’ he murmured.
“Found his way down from the ranges. Got
lonely, I expect.”
He sat watching the animal, which had
now resumed his advance, his great head lolling
from side to side with each rolling step.
Jamming on his hat, Black left his writing


and hurried away. In a lew minutes he appeared
from behind the sheds, riding his pemy hack
and trailing a stockwhip. At a gentle jog-tiot he
rode down toward the sliprails of the scrubbeis
paddock. There was within him a certain grim
satisfaction. T he bull had come in search of his
friends. Well, he had found them. 1 o-morrow
he would get a bullet between the eyes. The
station would get his hide, and the crows could
have the rest.
The bull’s hide in that way would be a
throw-in. Clack was almost elated as he dis
mounted at the sliprails and untied the
wire.
The bull was too secure in his strength to be
very much afraid of one horseman. He with-
drew a little distance and stood, with lowered
head, watching. Black, as soon as the rails were
down, jumped on the pony, scampered round
behind the bull and drove him up the fence
to the opening and through it. Then, after
fastening the rails again, he cantered back to
the homestead. That was two or three pounds
for two or three minutes’ work! The men
would do the shooting and skinning in the
morning. It would be all profit!
The scrubbers were pathetically glad to
see the old bull again, as one is glad to meet


a compatriot in a far country. His presence
was full of suggestion of those wild hills which
were their home; and he, after days of lone-
liness, was glad to see them. In his journey
down he had met many different mobs of
cattle, staying with them a short while, fighting
the bulls which ran with them, and then push-
ing on in search of his own. His sight of
them had ended a period of loneliness.
Now, as he moved around and among them,
snuffing and grumbling, he was well content—
and to such a degree that he was compelled
to roar his contentment to the skies. That
he was now a prisoner himself had not occurred
to him.
Evening came, trees, fences, and hills be-
gan to fade into the shadows. The evening
star came to burn with a cool blue flame above
the head of Crooked Creek. The scrubbers,
while yet there was a light in the western sky,
continued to stand facing toward the range.
The bull was settling for the night. After
suspiciously snuffing the dust on which he
proposed to lie, he lowered his great fore-
quarters gently on to his knees, and then with
much grunting dropped the rest of his body
to the ground. A sound that was half-groan
and half-sigh escaped him. The cud slid up


to his mouth, his jaws began to rotate, and
his whole vast bulk was comfortably settled.
He had been lying there several minutes
before the realization was borne in upon him
that something was wrong. Why did not the
others lie down? The familiar and happy
routine of making camp to which he was
accustomed on the ranges was not taking place.
His jaws ceased their movement. For a
while he did nothing. The distance between
feeling, thought, and action seems to be very
far in a bull. At last, with much grunting,
he lurched to his feet.
Grumbling, he moved among the mob. He
snuffed here and there, and shook his big
curly head in wonderment. The response to
his investigations was very slight. The old bull
began to roar. He was troubled, he knew not
why, but he told the world about it in a voice
that made the ground vibrate.
Then he knew what was wrong. He could
smell Death! It was the offensive odour given off
by the bodies of beasts who are poverty-stricken
to the point of death. He had not noticed it in
the first joy of re-union, but smelled it now. He
shook his head. Death was in the air, and it
played upon his instincts as the wind plays
upon the leaves of a tree. This was no place for
a healthy old bull!


L~— - : -~ Kf.\ «*.
The scrubbers came through the opening.


He started away, grumbling to himself,
and his rolling steps carried him to the slip-
rails. He halted and stood snuffing the rails;
they had not been there when he entered be-
tween the two posts. At the end of a minute
or so without premeditation and just because
it had occurred to him to do so, he heaved
his fore-end off the ground with a fat and
lazy motion and tried to jump the rails. It
was an absurd thing for a beast of his tonnage
to attempt. He got his forelegs over the rail and
his chest on to it, and there he hung, the rail
bowing beneath his weight.
It would not have been difficult for him to
have slid back to the inside. But he did not
want that—he wanted to get out; so he began
to push and shove.
The rails were strong. They had been
carefully chosen by some honest workman
from among the group of young ironbarks
that grew a short distance away. They were
reasonably thick. They had been barked to pre-
vent their being weakened by the ravages of
borers. In a word, they had been fitted with
a view to meeting every probable contingency.
That, however, did not include sustaining a
ton of bull beef, shoving and straining.
The top rail gave a warning crack, then
exploded like a gunshot, dumping the bull


on the second rail with a suddenness that
eliminated the possibility ol it standing up to
its job. it smashed, and the third rail gave
way even quicker.
The old bull, surprised at the turn of
events, got up, sorting his legs out from the
splintered timbers that entangled them. He
moved off, intending to put some distance
behind him.
A soft lowing, as of creatures scarcely
credulous of what had occurred, caused him
to turn. The little knot of cattle had begun
to move. One by one they advanced, until
the knot unravelled into a string, and the
scrubbers came through the opening in single
file, stepping gingerly over the broken rails.
They set off through the depths of the tim-
ber, towards the evening star burning above
the head of Crooked Creek. Their pace was
slow. They rocked a little as they walked,
and the tips of their hind hoofs dragged the
dust; but sustaining them was the promised
sanctuary of their home.
Splinter, returning late from work, entered
the lighted humpy and sat down to his tea.
He said nothing—at least, nothing about the
shadowy procession he had seen, from a short


distance, wending its way towards the safety
and seclusion of the ranges.
Chapter XI
Bulls in Battle
Trouble was in the making. The young red-
and-white bull stood whetting his horns on
an ironbark tree. His head was lowered
almost to the ground, his muscles were strained
against the resistance of the tree, his tail
switched briskly from side to side, and, as
he swung his head, wiping each horn alternately
against the tree bole, he grumbled to himself
in a throaty bass.
Even the beasts are troubled by those nat-
ural discontents that urge us all along the
road of life, and the young red-and-white bull,
as he stood sharpening his horns, while the
rest of the scrubbers gazed contentedly along
the spur, was giving outward evidence of that
which disturbed his spirit.
The young bull was nearing maturity. He
was finding his subordinate position in the
mob irksome, and with the passing of the


days, the will to dispute the lordship of the
herd with the old roan bull was growing with-
in him. There was not room for both.
For years the old bull had defended against
all comers his right to roam the ranges at the
tail of the scrubbers. There had been a success-
ion of challengers—roving blades from the
station herds on the plains below. Each, at
some time, had crossed the tracks of the
scrubbers leading back to the ranges from one
of their water-holes and, abandoning for a
while his own herd, had followed the path
of adventure into the hills.
One and all, they had gone back to the
plains after having been given cause to re-
flect on the folly of intrusion. This one
with an eye missing; that with a horn
dangling from a blood-blackened poll; another,
with a gash from jowl to shoulder. The old
roan bull bore his scars also—many of them—
but his were the badges of the victor.
Some day defeat must overtake him. The
cattle country has among its population many
old bulls whom the years have shorn of their
glory. Waning vigour has delivered them
victims to the youth of some challenger.
Ousted from their herd, and no longer under
compelling need to win lordship elsewhere,
they live a life apart. There are some who gather


lo themselves, or attach themselves to, a small
group of calves and yearlings, giving patriar-
chal recognition, mayhap, in return for an
agreeable companionship that imposes no
duties. Others of the old bulls, unable to
reconcile themselves to mortal fate, graze and
lie, aloof and morose.
The young red-and-white bull turned from
the whetting of his horns to test them on a box
sapling. With lowered head he thrashed the
bush from side to side and roared a challenge
to the world at large. The sapling was springy,
it gave and returned to his thrusting. He
met it as it rebounded, and shook it with well-
simulated fury. He bent it until it cracked at
the butt and, falling, lay between his horns
and across his hump like a victor’s garlands.
From the ruin of the sapling he proceeded
to the demolition of an ant-heap. The dust
mounted, the clods flew. The bulls fore-end
was lost to view in the welter of his own making.
He pawed the ground with swift, hard
strokes, throwing the dirt high above him,
and the sound of his bellowing shook the
hillsides. Thus did he sharpen his courage
for the impending fray, and demonstrate to
his brave but untried soul the force with which
he would drive an opponent from his path.
For a year past, he had been making oc-


Bulls in Battle
casions to engage the old bull in mimic battle.
He was privileged in regard to that. He had
been born in—and had grown up in—the
herd. In all amiability the old roan had always
displayed a willingness to engage at any time
in a good game of buffeting, with much
roaring and pawing—and no harm done.
The old bull found in the game a satisfying
testing of a strength that had long served
him in good stead, and the young one found
in it a measure of a strength that was increas-
ing.
The young bull could start the game when
the mood seized him, and could quit with-
out loss of esteem when he felt himself being
overpowered. The old roan was tolerant.
Doubtless, being accustomed to the young
bull as one of the family, he continued to
regard him as a member of the younger
group—a mere lad among bulls, and not to
be taken as a serious challenger like those
free-booters who came up from the plains.
But of late good-will had become a dimin-
ishing quantity in these mock engagements,
and, in the last bout, for a few moments
blood had been intended. They had drawn
apart a short distance, eyeing each other in
doubt, each questioning himself with troubled
rumblings. It was the young bull’s doing.


Mounting strength urged him at each en-
counter to attempt a little viciousness, while
old habit prevented him from applying his
ferocity with enough force to be effective.
It was old habit, also, that prevented the
roan from reading the signs aright. He re-
turned to his grazing, and in a very short
time the impression that insurrection was
brewing faded from his far from deeply reason-
ing mind.
The young red-and-white bull turned from
the ant-heap, smothered in dust, and grazed
down the ridge away from the rest of the mob.
Two courses of action were open to him.
He could, if the spirit so moved him, quit the
mob to which he belonged and go adventuring
down the plains. Somewhere down there he
would find a place for himself. Or he could
stay and fight a decisive battle with the old
one. The latter course was the more natural.
He belonged to the scrubber band, and had
no wish to leave them.
For three days he kept away from the mob.
While they grazed along one side of a ridge,
he grazed alone along the other side. When
they camped at night on a spur, he camped
farther back on the main ridge. He spent long
hours standing, if not deep in thought, at


least physically quiescent, while the yeast of
disturbing desires within him worked them-
selves to a head of resolution.
On the morning of the fourth day, while
the gullies were still in shadow, he came
toward the scrubbers intent on battle. His
roar reverberated through the timber—and
it was no longer the bellow of a youngster
testing the quality of his lungs, but of a bull
aware of his maturity and driven by need
to assert himself. The roan heard him—and
answered; and there was no amiable qualifi-
cation in the reply. The old bull went forward
to meet him. They came within full view
of each other—and paused.
Prelude to battle was observed with due
Eyeing each other from a distance
of about forty yards, each roared his contempt
of the other. Each stroked the ground with
a challenging forefoot, flinging the dust back
along his flanks. They walked a few paces
toward each other, and paused. Their battle-
cry was a succession of throaty grumbles, each
pitched about a tone higher than the one
preceding; each followed by a sobbing intake
of the breath, and the last one ending in a
blast that threatened annihilation.
With short, measured steps, they again
moved towards each other, heads lowering to


engage. 1 heir eyes gleamed wickedly, the
young bull slavered in his rage. I hey met
and locked, like wrestlers seeking a hold;
snout to snout and poll to poll, thick dusty
curls matted one within the other, horn grind-
ing against horn. Both breathed deeply, and
for a space both paused as if waiting on the
other’s intentions.
With a bloody bay the young bull drove
forward, the muscles under his satiny hide
swelling with the effort. Tf he old bull was wise
in war, and within the space of thirty feet
he had steadied himself and brought his
opponent to a halt. Then, while the young
bull was still mentally engaged in that forward
thrust, he slipped from the horn-lock and
passed by the other’s flank—leaving a red
furrow from neck to shoulder.
Both stopped, and stood side by side, head
to tail, at a distance of about ten feet apart.
A fight of bulls is a slow-motion battle, and
for a space of some minutes there was no in-
dication, other than the drip of blood, that
these two were not drowsing companionably in
the sunshine.
Then, with a rumble, the young bull turned
to engage again, and the old one turned to
meet him. They locked again, and for a while
stood motionless, except for the switching of


a tail. They might have been at play; but a
quick eye would have seen the deep wrinkling
of the hide over the hump, and the tenseness
of the muscles in the haunches. Ihe quick
shifting of a hoof gave indication of the strain
that was being given and taken. Presently
there was a rising and falling of the flanks
as deep breaths were taken. Sweat dripped from
gaping jaws.
A trembling in the forelegs told that the
drive was downward as well as back. The red-
and-white bull began to give way. The old
bull bellowed, and the young one bellowed
in reply. The old one drove forward, and the
young one was forced back; but he contested
every inch. A rise in the ground behind him
at last gave him a little advantage and he was
able to check his opponent.
The young bull found the old one crafty
in battle. A lessening of the resistance offered
was but a moment’s wary relaxation, as he
found when, thinking to take an advantage,
he drove forward. The old bull’s sinews
tightened to meet him, and checked him with-
out the shifting of a hoof. He tried to slip
from the horn-lock to gore the old one’s flanks;
but the roan turned and held him.
They had the scene of battle to themselves.
The remainder of the herd had grazed out


of sight. A fight between bulls excites no par-
tisan feeling among female cattle. d hey know
that, whichever wins, there will be one remain-
ing—and that the victor never fails to assume
the duties of the vanquished.
For two hours the bulls fought back and
forth, the advantage going first to one and
then to the other. What the young bull lacked
in guile he made up in the quick recovery
of his young strength after each heart-bursting
bout. There was an epic quality in that battle.
It was an inevitable occurrence in the herd life.
The bull held his place by right of strength and
courage. Year after year the test was put upon
him. When he weakened, he went out —remorse
having no part in the order of nature.
Once only did the young bull draw blood from
the roan. Unwittingly he drove him back on
to a dead and fire-hardened stake that pro-
truded from the ground. The point of it went
into the old bull's hind leg to the depth of
a hand’s breadth. The spasm of pain forced
him to his knees, and the young one ripped
his hump from poll to wither.
They faced each other, bloody and soiled;
both were weary to the point of exhaustion,
but both were still undaunted. At a distance
of two feet they stood, with lowered heads.


facing one another, each waiting until re-
covery of strength would urge him into battle
afresh.
From the old bull’s thigh hung the stake
that had gored him, the top of it still fast
in the wound. A trickle of blood ran down his
leg and pattered in the dust. A movement of
the foot set the stake swinging, and the con-
sequent pain which he suffered he attributed
to his opponent. With a bay of rage he met
the young bull head to head. He drove furiously
on and made the young bull give ground. Nor
did the winning of a few feet satisfy him. Back
and back, across a hundred yards of bush,
colliding with trees and saplings, he forced
him.
The red-and-white bull resisted gamely.
Grunting and baying, he fought it out foot
by foot. He struggled for a hoof-hold which
would enable him to brace himself against
the roan bull’s thrust. At last he went down
on his knees. He bellowed. It was the bellow
of defeat! He remained on his knees. He was
beaten! The old roan bull gored him—and
then backed away and stood looking at him.
The young bull got to his feet, facing his
opponent; but there was no fight left in him.
The roan knew it. Victory once again was
his! Twice he bellowed his triumph to the


2O Man-Shy
surrounding bush. Then he turned and lumb-
ered away after the herd, switching his tail.
The stake still dangled from his thigh.
Left alone, the red-and-white bull stood
motionless, with drooping head. He rocked
from side to side a little, for he was exhausted,
and dizzy from loss of blood. After a time,
some small measure of returning sense sug-
gested rest. He folded his knees under him
and lowered his bulk to the ground. He was a
very sick bull!
Time hastens to heal the hurts of those -who
are young and vigorous. Within a week the red-
and-white bull had recovered his good health
—and his self-esteem to boot. His wounds were
in a fair way towards being healed. The scrub-
bers did not see him again. He lived solitarily
in the seclusion of the big scrubs. During the
first three days following his fight he ate little
and moped much; but, as he made new blood
and strength returned to him, he ceased mop-
ing. At the end of the seventh day he bellowed.
It was his first bellow in a week. It was a
good bellow. A real bull-bellow, that drowned
the voice of every other living thing within
a mile. He stood listening to its dying echoes
with the deepest satisfaction. There was no
answering voice. He was far from any cattle. He


did not like that, and he stamped the ground
with one forehoof in accent of his displeasure.
As night was falling, he set off down the
ranges to the plains, and, as he lumbered along,
his great curly head lolling in time to his
rolling gait, he mumbled and grumbled to
himself. At intervals he paused to bellow and
listen. His cry split the stillness—preceding him
like a fanfare of trumpets. There was nothing
hesitant in the manner of his proposed advent
among the cattle of the plains. Here was one
good bull coming down from the ranges, and
if anv other bull did not like it, there would
J
be trouble! //
LL~L /
Chapter XII
The Tides of Change
The herd life of cattle is pleasing to observe.
On a certain morning, when the sun shone
brightly out of that fathomless blue which
Queensland knows so well, the scrubbers
were grazing along an ironbark siding. All
were moving in the same general direction,
as cattle do when feeding. There was no


haste, for haste is a thing unusual among
stock. Thirty or more in number, they were
spread out through the timber, scattered over
a couple of acres of ground. Their heads were
down to the feed, unhurriedly busy. Here a
beast, and there a beast, having cropped the
grass at its feet, would move on to the next
tuft, a pace or two distant; there it would
halt a few seconds, stripping the herbage with
quick and vigorous motions of the head. Now
and again one would look up and stare slowly
around the bush—a semi-dormant instinct of
caution stirring uneasily—then, reassured by
the serene stillness of the ridges rising beyond
the nearer tree-tops, it would resume its
feeding. Another, feeling the skin tightening
over its ribs—for the grass was green and fat-
tening—would swing its head round and once
or twice apply the counter-irritant of its broad
rough tongue to the place that smarted. The
hair would be wetted and turned back in little
rippling curves—always a sign of well-being
among cattle.
The colours of the mob ran white and roan
and red. They were of various ages, from
sleek half-grown calves running beside their
mothers to very old cows who held their tenure
of life only at the sufferance of the season.


The Tides of Change
There was an aged bull, huge and battle-
scarred; and a young bull, a yearling.
There was a cow who moved slightly ahead
of the rest. She had attained to a time of
life which would be termed middle-aged
among humans. She was the leader of the
herd, for, in spite of romantic tale-tellers, it
is the females among the wild horse and cattle
mobs who provide the leaders, the males being
occupied with duels among themselves and
with the propagation of the species.
In addition to those mentioned there were
four heifers in their second year—dainty
deer-like creatures, clean and glossy; these
grazed in company—an affinity of youth. There
was a bullock—he had wandered up from the
plains a year before—neither cow nor bull, a
placid loon with no cares but those of his
stomach and at peace with all cotv-kind.
Noticeable above all was a young cow, with
her first calf at foot. The splendid physique
of this beast, coupled with her fierce solicitude
for her offspring, singled her out from the
others. She was blood-red in colour, with
ivory-white horns tipped with ebony. Her coat
was fine and satiny, her back straight and
broad, with a thin heavily-plumed tail dropping
straight from rump to hocks. Her eyes were
large, liquid and bold. She moved quickly and
E


nervously, and, after every second bite, half
raised her head in anxious quest of her calf.
This morning was the little one’s first walk
abroad with the herd. Hitherto the red cow
had exercised the intense secretiveness of all
wild mothers, and had kept him planted in
the scrub a little distance from the spot where
he had been born. But when, as had happened
twice, she returned from her journeys to feed
and water with the mob, and found him wan-
dering inquisitively about the bush instead of
being curled up in sleep as she had left him,
she concluded that it was time for her to take
him with her.
This decision had not been quickly arrived
at. She had stood over him for an hour or
more in vacillating doubt. She had put him
to sleep and gone grazing a short distance
from his camp, then returned and found him
watching her approach in broad wakefulness.
She had waited, and watched him get up and
wander round the vicinity, much interested in
the world in which he found himself. There
had been much subdued lowing and hoof-
stamping and tail-switching—indicative of a
spirit perturbed—the while she waited for the
infallible voice of instinct to speak. It spoke
for unfolding life, and so the calf was with


The Tides of Change
her as the herd grazed their way up the
ridge.
The hour was nearing noon, and the scrub-
bers had almost reached the top of the ridge.
Within a few minutes the leader would cease
feeding, and, passing over the crown of the
ridge, they would go down to water at the
creek on the farther side. Then would begin
the long midday rest in the shade of the creek
gums until mid-afternoon, when they would rise
and go out to feed again.
It happened, though, that at that moment,
unknown to the scrubbers, a horseman leading
a pack animal and carrying a rifle slung across
his shoulders, was coming up the opposite ridge.
From his alert scrutiny of the bush as he pro-
gressed it was obvious that he was in search
of something. His attention was divided be-
tween the surface of the ground as it passed
beneath his horse’s feet and the distance where
the sparse bush merged into a solid wall of
timber. Near at hand it was possible that he
would see cattle tracks; in the distance, it was
possible that he would catch sight of cattle. He
was sufficient of a bushman to be confident
that neither would escape his observation. It
was the former which he saw first —a faint cres-
cent-shaped bruise on the hard soil.


He drew rein and, without dismounting,
looked about him. More and more of the faint
semi-circular bruises revealed themselves, all
pointing in the same direction. The mob had
passed that way, and within the last few hours,
judging by the freshness of the tracks.
The horseman turned. At a brisk walking
pace he ran the tracks to the top of the ridge.
He halted and scanned the farther hill. A
patch of white, no bigger at that distance than
his hand, moved, and was instantly lost to view
behind some bushes. He remained still; it was
the old trick of waiting for the other fellow
to detach himself from the cover of his sur-
roundings.
A darkish object that might have been a
tree stump moved a couple of paces, paused
as long as a beast would pause to bite the top
of a grass tuft, moved again, and passed from
view.
The horseman turned and dropped back
behind the cover of the crown of his ridge,
then headed for the place where his ridge
and the one on which the cattle grazed met
at the head of the gully.
In a short time he reached his objective.
He dismounted behind a clump of scrub, and
left his horses to graze—he was a professional
shooter, and his nags were broken to gun-fire


—then he stole forward in the direction of
the scrubbers.
The bullock was the best. At a hundred
yards’ distance the shooter could see the crease
in the hide where his beefy quarters hung
above his hocks. He slipped a cartridge into
the breech and closed the bolt, dhe new settlers
on the plain were beef hungry. He could
sell at fivepence a pound all that his packhorse
could carry away—and, get, say, forty or fifty
shillings for the hide. He took aiin—the hist
shot in a campaign that was to bring about the
end of the scrubbers.
The wild cattle heard the report of the
gun. It brought every head swinging upward;
then they saw one of their number fall and
lie struggling in his death throes. The smell
of his blood tainted the air. Mad with feat,
they wheeled and raced through the bush,
scattering in twos and threes as they went. The
bush swallowed them, and the sound of their
going grew fainter and fainter. The ridge
where they had had but a few seconds before
been contentedly grazing was empty, except
for the carcass of the dead beast.
Until the evening of the following day the
scrubbers remained scattered, hiding in the
dense scrub of the mountain-side. And when


at last they reassembled, there was a touch
of uncanniness in the way they found each
other. The aged bull, who was alone, found
his dislike of solitude overriding his fear. He
had reached one of the old camps near to the
crown of the range, and, after standing lonely
and sullen for some hours, he began to bellow.
His first roar was answered by the thin
screech of an old cow in the scrub, surpris-
ingly close at hand, and from the valley below
the four young heifers replied in a chorus.
From then until nightfall the scrubbers
straggled into camp in twos and threes.
An uneasy spirit brooded over the wild
cattle that night; and during the succeeding days
they kept to the thick brigalow and belah
scrubs, going out to water furtively and hur-
riedly. They moved to the higher parts of the
range, for experience had taught them that
men rarely penetrated so far.
Water does not lie long after rain in the
hills, and very soon they were forced to
abandon their hiding place for the more open
country below. There was dense scrub on the
ridges, but the distance across the open forest
to the waterholes was greater than in the hills.
Two of them fell victims to the rifle in one
week.
They shifted ground, travelling many miles


to the vicinity of another waterhole. During the
day they browsed on the prickly pear and the
tips of the wilga bushes in the scrub, and went
out to drink only at night. Even then they
were not entirely safe, for once, when they lay
at rest in the very thickest part of the scrub,
they heard the hoofs of a horse pass by close at
hand. Not a cud moved until the hoof-beats
passed on, for the bush had taught them the
concealment of stillness when danger was at
hand.
They were not wrong in thinking that death
by the rifle had almost stumbled on their
camp. The shooter was finding the fresh-beef
business good for his pocket.
With the passing of the month the waxing
of the moon betrayed the fourth of their
number to her death. The shooter had seen
their tracks by day, leading to the waterhole.
When the moon was at her full he lay in wait
in the shadows of a tree near their pad. He
picked off the leader.
So close was he that the explosion of his
rifle seemed to take place in each of their
hearts. They turned and raced wildly through
the moonlit bush. Here and there one sent up
a panicky cry as it crashed blindly into tree or
sapling. They were thirsty with the heat of


the long day, but for hours after their pace
had fallen to a hurried walk fear kept them
going.
During the days that followed it was
hardest on the cows suckling calves. Scarcity
of water meant scarcity of milk for the little
ones. The calves spent half their time butting
at dry udders, and when their thirst and hunger
were not appeased they dropped disconsolately
on the ground. The long marches were hard
on them, and there were times when solitary
cows with calves failed to rejoin the herd for
days.
With the death of their leader that office
fell upon the blood-red cow. She possessed
in the fullest degree to which animals are given
the power of taking the initiative against un-
toward circumstances. When the others clung
together, suffering thirst and hunger in passive
misery, she, with her calf trotting at her heels,
started away toward some place of feed and
water as yet unvisited by the terror which pur-
sued them. The rest followed her. She would
have gone her way even had they not. That
probably, is why they chose to follow. And that,
very likely, is the essence of all leadership.
All through the ranges the waterholes dried
up. This was an ordinary condition which


always obtained a few weeks after rain. There
were no big catchments in the hills. Had it
been winter, the scrubbers could have found
sufficient moisture in the succulent prickly
pear to satisfy their need; but the season was
summer, and though they ate pear to the point
of gorging, thirst remained with them. They
dreaded to go down to the waterholes in the
creeks below the range, because that meant a
nearer approach to the world of men. And
the shyness that had made them choose the
hills for their home, had, since the shooting
commenced, awakened to fear. They were shyer
and wilder now than the wallabies and the
dingoes that had shunned the presence of men
since life began.
Privation at length drove them to face the
dangers of the lower country. In single file
they went down at night along the narrow
tracks that wound and twisted through the
scrubs. Except for the soft padding of their
hoofs in the dust, they moved like a company
of ghosts. The red cow led the way; her ears
pricked forward, her sight strained against the
dark, and her sense of smell alert to detect the
presence of any odour foreign to the bush.
The others followed, much in the order of
their strength of spirit—those in the rear be-


between the posts,
hi .
/
2 Man-Shy
cause they feared most to be left behind.
Forested creeks and gullies penetrated the
lower hills of the range like the fingers of a
hand, but the wild cattle avoided these, keeping
to the scrub-clad ridges between.
For several days all went well; until one
night, when they had arrived at the extreme
edge of the scrub, where they must leave its
shelter and cross the open bush to the water,
the red cow halted. The man-taint was in the
air. She waited, every nerve a-quiver; then
her sense of smell informed her that the odour
was several hours old. She went slowly forward,
distrustfully alert. Then plainly, even in the
darkness, she saw on the ground a row of
patches of raw yellow clay twice her own length
apart. In the centre of each stood a post. She
smelled closely at one. The hated smell of
human hands was strongly mingled with the
odour of the green wood. She shook an angry
and troubled head.
She went cautiously forward, expecting to
meet the resistance of wires, but they had not
yet been run. She passed
and the others followed. /
b


Chapter XIII
Brief Peace
The station on whose boundary the scrubbers
had their home had been resumed and sur-
veyed into grazing farms and selections. All
over the two hundred square miles of run the
rows of fencing-posts were being erected. The
station and all appertaining to it had ceased
to be. The day of wide plain and forest across
which a man might ride from dawn to dusk
without seeing a gate, had passed away. Each
settler was fencing off his land from his neigh-
bour’s, and the lines of posts ran across the
undulations of the country with geometrical
exactitude. They met and turned with the pre-
cision of the threads in a spider’s web, and
covered the bush with a net as impenetrable
and as inescapable.
The day of wide freedom was gone, and
gone with it was that upon which the wild
cattle depended—free access to water. The
potholes in the ranges were soon exhausted, and
the settlers on the plains below were enclosing
the permanent water within their fences.
Two nights later the scrubbers, going down


to drink, found that the wire had been run
through the posts and strained. They halted
for some time, lost in a fog of stupid won-
dering. Something was which previously was
not! It took their limited understanding some
time to encompass it. Then the red cow led the
way along the fence line. It was as yet incom-
plete; they found the end, and, passing around
it, got to the water—and returned—leaving their
tracks to show that they had passed that way.
Because they were but brutes, without wit
to match against the wit of men, they did
not pause in the succeeding nights to wonder
why that fence remained uncompleted.
For some reason best known to himself the
shooter had ceased to pursue them. Almost
a month had passed since any of their num-
ber had fallen victim to his rifle. The peace-
ful routine of their days had re-established
itself. They had adapted themselves to changed
conditions.
With the help of the pear they could man-
age well on one drink in twenty-four hours.
It was a good drink; they waded far into the
dark cool waters and drank all that their skins
could hold. They drank in long sucking gulps,
and paused and drank again.
When their thirst was quenched they splashed


Brief
their way out, and, one behind the other,
went back to the security of the ridges. All
day they browsed and rested in the shadowed
depths of the brigalow scrubs. They were con-
tented, the calves thrived, the herd life ran its
gentle course from day to day. No foreboding
troubled them. The days of peace had returned.
The moon was again at its broadest, and the
scrubbers came down for their nightly drink.
They passed in single hie beneath the black
branches of the trees, across a forest floor criss-
crossed with dark shadows. The moonlit night
was still and warm. The day had been hot, but
a deep cool drink lay a short distance ahead,
and that to every beast was a pleasurable
anticipation.
With the contentment which the simple
minds of cattle seem to And in moving head
to tail they plodded on. The unseen night-
life of the bush passed them on either hand.
Faint rustlings in the trees overheads walla-
bies flip-flopping out of their way) and, once,
the baby-cry of a koala. To these things they
paid no heed, for the scrubbers were as much
part of the old and gentle Australian bush as
were the creatures who had made it their home
ten thousand years before the coming of horned
cattle.


The moon-shot dust rose about their knees
in an ethereal foam. They were close to the
water, and a faint breeze stirred the air. The
red cow stopped with a suddenness that caused
those behind to stumble on to her heels. The
man-smell was strong and close at hand. A
questioning murmur ran through the company.
They huddled together and waited for the
leader to act.
A rifle shot split the stillness, and, as if it
were a signal, a fusillade of firing startled the
night. The cattle were close together, and the
bullets tore through them, bringing half the
mob to the ground. Man voices rose in shouts
of exultation—and cattle voices in mortal pain.
Those that were still standing wheeled and
fled through the bush. Calves blatted their
shrill fear) and beasts, struggling against their
wounds to rise, yearning toward that wild flight
to safety, bellowed their distress.
Harried and bewildered and completely failing
to understand the fate that was overtaking
them, those that were left of the scrubbers
clung to the shelter of their hills. The red
cow led them a long march to the eastward,
to the vicinity of water which, among men—
was known as the Washpool. Here in times past
they had found water in abundance and had


Brief
known peace and contentment. But now,
though they were camped less than an hour
from the waterhole, they feared to go down to
drink.
For three days they held to the shelter of
the scrubs. The little ones—there were but two
remaining—languished, and the grown cattle
became lean and hollow-sided. One old cow
who had escaped wounded from the slaughter
lay down, not to rise again. The old bull had
fallen, and those that were left were but a
cowed and dazed remnant.
The agonies of thirst at last overcame their
fear. Reassured by the hours of darkness be-
tween nightfall and moonrise, they stole forth
—a pitiable company, creeping with fear and
caution along the familiar tracks which they
had been wont to travel without thought of
molestation. No longer did they drink with
leisure and delight, standing belly-deep in the
cooling water, but hurriedly and nervously,
from the edge, ready to bolt at the snapping
of a stick.
Like man, animals are sensible to the de-
pressing effects of constant physical and nervous
strain. The need for continual wariness des-
troys the spontaneity of life, and mopiness
prevents thrift. Towards the close of each hot
day the desire for water grew very great, and


the hours that stretched ahead until they could
go down to drink seemed long indeed.
Desultory nibbling at the herbage provided
a slight palliative, and the cattle remained at
this occupation as long as they could, pulling
and picking, but eating very little. One by one
they would give up to the insistence of thirst
and stand languidly, with drooping heads.
The red cow was always the last to surrender
to the pangs of her body. She was what men
of the cattle country call a “good doer . What-
ever hardships or difficulties she encountered
she accepted as a condition of life. The scant
feed, the long march, the hurried drink, and
the constant fear of being surprised in hiding,
were things which she endured with less distress
than did her mates. In the heat and thirst of
afternoon and early evening her spirits never
sank as low as those of her companions. While
they stood or lay in attitudes of utter dejection,
she chewed stolidly on her cud and waited for
the hours to pass.
There was more than one beast that would
have remained in the scrub and died. They do
that sometimes in the droughts. Weak-spirited
animals give up the struggle and wait passively
for death to overtake them. The red cow was
one of those who can weather the worst of
droughts, marching at night to water and


pushing out into the farthermost corners of
the paddock by day, finding the occasional bite
of feed for lack of which less enterprising
cattle die. When darkness came her spirits were
the first to revive, and, lowing softly to her
calf to follow, she would set off through the
scrub. The others would struggle to their feet,
drawn by the strength of one.
So furtively did the wild cattle maintain their
existence that the rumour spread in the settle-
ment that they had gone from the range. “They
must have been scared away after the Burtons
shot them down,” it was said. It was conjec-
tured that they had crossed the range and had
made their way to the stations on the other
side. The runs were fenced, but it was always
possible that a tree fallen across the wires
had given them access, or that they had found
an opening where the fences crossed a creek
bed.
Among the settlers whose land lay at the
foot of the range there was mild rejoicing
over the supposed departure of the scrubbers,
for wild cattle are a nuisance to stock-owners.
They are apt to lead away any beast that
escapes from the paddocks, and in times of
drought, when it would be convenient to the
stock-owners to turn a few head out to graze


on the range, the presence of wild cattle would
increase the chances of loss.
The Washpool, where the scrubbers were
watering, was in a remote corner of what
had been the old station. That part had been
surveyed into a grazing farm, but the new owner
had not yet appeared on his property. When
he came, fencing would begin, and the last
of the waterholes would be enclosed.
The scrubbers lived through three months
without misadventure; then, one night as they
came down to drink, they heard, faintly at
first, the sound of horse-bells ringing. That
told of the presence of humans, but they were
very thirsty, and, encouraged by the security
of night, they pushed on after a brief halt.
The sound of bells grew louder and louder
as they approached the Washpool. Some among
the cattle would have refused to face the pos-
sible dangers ahead were it not for the deter-
mination of their leader; but the red cow
pushed on. A hundred yards from the water-
hole even she halted. A square luminous patch
—a tent that was lighted within—had appeared
among the timber on the farther bank of the
creek in which the Washpool lay.
Every bit of distrust that was in the red
cow was aroused by the sight of this unusual


object. She raised her muzzle toward it, and,
in the absence of better means of acquainting
herself with its nature, suspiciously smelled the
air. From the patch of light came the sound
of men’s voices. The red cow shook an angry
head, and from the others came a low murmur
of dismay.
Even the red cow feared to advance straight
toward the lighted tent. For more than two
hours she and her band stood motionless in
the night, waiting and wondering. A dis-
possessed remnant, timid and in need in the
land of their vanishing tribe.
The light in the tent went out, and still
they waited; then, as nothing had happened,
the red cow went slowly forward. Having gone
a short distance she turned, and, finding her-
self alone, called very quietly to the others.
There were several answers, but none moved
to go with her. Her calf rubbed against her
side. Finding her courage warmed by the con-
tact of even the young one, she went forward
again.
She and the calf drank together, and, re-
turning to the other cattle, led them back to
the range. The following night, increased
thirst, and the fact that the red cow had re-
turned safely, lent the others sufficient courage
to go down with her to drink.


But their visits were known to the men who
occupied the tent. The black waxy mud round
the edge of the water showed every hoof-mark
plainly. One of the men —he who was the boss
of the grazing selection that was to take its
shape in the corner of the old station—was
interested in these nightly visitors whom he
had never seen. He had heard that a mob of
wild cattle had inhabited the range at whose
foot he was making his home; he had heard
also that they had gone—and it had seemed to
him a matter for sorrow equally with joy.
He had a sympathetic interest in all wild
creatures, and a love of wild land. Xo him,
the ranges that rose rugged and free within his
sight were as much a part of his domain as the
tame and fertile lands on which his cattle
would graze. Xhat the needs of men should
have deprived the wild herd of their stamping
ground, and should have plundered the range
of its people, was to him a regrettable, though
unavoidable, thing. It was to him an unpleasant
necessity that he would eventually have to
fence off the last of the water. That, however,
would be a short while yet, and in the mean-
time it gratified him to be able to extend them
a little hospitality.
“I heard the cattle come in to drink last
night,” he would sometimes say to his mate


of a morning. It was so, and if it chanced that
they came during the few minutes between the
turning out of the light and his falling asleep,
he would lie listening, alertly interpreting the
stealthy sounds that came from the night—the
faint splash, the snapping of a twig, the unwary
grunt of thirst completely slaked, the slipping
of a hoof on the steep bank; then silence—and
the knowledge that the little procession, con-
tented, and provisioned for another day, was
going back to the security of the ranges.
The scrubbers, had they known it, need have
had no fear just then in coming to the Wash-
pool to drink.
Chapter XIV
The Last of the Scrubbers
The fence of the grazing selection along the
boundary nearest to the range was complete,
with the exception—at the point where the
scrubbers’ pad came down from the range—
of a few posts through which the wires had
not been run. “What are you going to do
about it?” The man put the question to the


boss. He was rather amused, the former, at
the latter’s concern for the scrubbers.
“If I thought it was any good, I’d tighten
up the wires after they came in at night, and
just let them have the run of the paddock along
with the cattle I’m buying.”
“Well, it isn’t any good, I can tell you that.
Put ’em in a paddock and they’ll stand in one
place and starve to death.”
“And if I tighten up the wire and shut them
out, they’ll die of thirst in the ranges.”
“That’s it.”
The boss was silent for a while. He had
before him the choice of two things, neither of
which appealed to his humane instincts. He
chose that which would be the kindest for
the cattle —although the least pleasant to him-
self.
“We’ll run up a bit of a yard to-morrow
among that nearest belt of box saplings. To-
morrow night I’ll close the fence after they
come in; and the following morning we’ll run
them into the yard and deal with them there.”
“Shoot them?”
“The full-grown ones, anyway. I see by their
tracks that there are two calves and a couple
of yearlings: the youngsters will settle down
in the paddock, I suppose. We’ll try them,
anyway.”


The following night the red cow led the
scrubbers down the range for the last time.
The boss and his man were mounted and
out early next morning. They found the scrub-
bers standing in a huddled group inside the
fence. They had not moved since, returning
from water, they had found their homeward
pad barred by four wires, barbed, and tightly
strained. They turned to watch the approaching
horsemen. The sight of them to the boss, to
whom they had been a vivid but invisible
reality, was like the materialization of a com-
pany of spirits. There were ten. Two calves,
two yearling heifers, a splendid young bull, and
five cows, among whom the blood-red leader
stood out like a chieftainess.
A whistle and a whip-crack started them
moving; they trotted off, hugging the fence in
the hope of finding an opening through which
they could escape. A dog ran under the wires.
Racing up beside them, he turned them from
the fence and headed them across the paddock.
The boss pricked his horse forward and slipped
round behind them. In a minute he had them
headed for the scrub-yard and moving at a
gallop.
It was work for skilled riders, to keep pace
with them and hold them together through the


timber. Their wildness was apparent. They
were as sensitive to the near approach of a
horseman as they would have been to the
touch of a hand.
The yard was an easy trap for them. The
rails were saplings with the bark still on, tied
horizontally to other saplings growing at con-
venient spaces. It was irregular in shape, and
its situation in the heart of a sapling thicket
made it almost invisible. They were between
the wings before they knew it; and horses and
dogs were hard on their heels.
“Look out!” The hoarse yell rang out as
the red cow propped and wheeled. She was
running in the centre of the mob, but, in a
stride before it was too late, her eye had
glimpsed the horizontal rails. She knew what
yards were; she had been through them twice!
Her skin crawled and her fighting blood rose at
the thought.
With a bellow for her calf she swung around
and raced back under the flying lash of the
horseman; a dog that ran to head her she
trampled; then she was round the wing and
away. Her calf slipped under a panel of the
wing and joined her.
“Put up the rails!” the boss called, as he
turned his horse. The rest of the scrubbers
were in the yard. He drove in the spurs and


raced after the cow. He came up with her,
and, leaving the saddle at a gallop, dropped
on the calf. It was in his mind to drag the calf
to the yard and shut it in. The cow would
come back for it, and he would shoot her just
as conveniently outside the yard as inside it.
The calf blatted in fear as it was borne to
the ground beneath the man’s weight. Its
mother turned in her stride and came back
with the speed at which she had been going.
Her horns were levelled like lances ready to
engage, and the foam flew from her jaws.
Barely in time to save himself, the boss re-
leased the calf and leaped out of her way. She
turned and was off again, the calf racing beside
her. The boss ran to his horse. He swung into
the saddle, and made after her. As he came up
with her a second time, she was close to the
fence.
Panic had entered the heart of the calf.
When he had come to the ground, with the
man sprawling on top of him, the gallop, which
he had suspected of being a joke, had become
a matter of terror. He heard now the beat of
horse-hoofs at his heels, and expected any
moment to have a man fall on him. Fear lent
speed to his heels and shut his eyes to the
fence. He banged into it at full tilt; the prod
of the barbs choked a cry out of him; the wires


twanged like banjo strings, and he fell through
on the other side.
Fear lest the cow should attempt to follow
him —she would murder herself on the barbed
wire—caused the horseman to bear upon his
reins. Too latel Two fence posts canted over
under the impact of her weight; two wires
snapped, and she fell with the barbs writhing
and hooking into her hide. Then she was up,
and, kicking herself free, disappeared into the
scrub after her calf.
The boss closed his mouth—having inad-
vertently allowed it to open —“I m damned!
he said.
Having found her calf, the red cow stood in
the scrub looking back the way she had come.
She was expectant of further harm. She saw
the man turn and ride away through the
timber. So long as he was in sight she stood in
silence, alternately switching her tail and
shaking her head angrily.
The calf, badly winded after his gallop,
flopped on the ground beside her. At the
noise of his lying down she was recalled to
consideration of his welfare. She smelled him
over in search of injury. No harm had come
to him. She hurriedly licked him in token of
her affection, then raised her head to look for


the horseman. The bush was empty of him—
and it was likewise empty of any sign of cattle-
life.
She drew a deep breath and threw her voice
across the distance, calling for her mates. An
answer came back; a far chorus. Again she
called, and again they answered. She waited,
watching intently for them to emerge from
the timber.
A noise rang out, not unlike a loud whip-
crack in the distance, yet it was not a whip-
crack. The red cow listened, trying to identify
it. She fidgeted and looked about her uneasily.
It was repeated, twice in quick succession; and
then twice at a short interval. Silence followed.
The red cow again sent her trumpeting call
across the bush, three times, with a loud intake
of breath between. There was no answer.
All day she hung about the margin of the
scrub, watching and waiting. In the afternoon
the men came back and mended the fence.
She stood and watched them straighten the
posts and tighten the wires. They talked a
good deal and laughed a little, and several
times glanced in her direction; but, standing
motionless behind a screen of branches, she
knew that they would not see her.


Finishing their work, they picked up their
tools and departed, still talking. She shook her
head angrily after them.
A great stillness settled on the bush as the
sun went down—a silence that began to invade
the red cow’s consciousness. She felt alone, and
a great longing for the company of her kind
came over her. The scrubbers were gone, but
that was a fact which had not yet leached her
understanding. In her mind they still lived. The
ability to correlate diverse facts, is a faculty
given to animals in only a very limited degree,
even to the most intelligent of them. Because
the presence of her mates was fresh in her
memory, the red cow never questioned their
continued existence. The sun went down, and
the red cow called and called again into the
gathering night. As each cry died away in faint
echoes, the silence seemed to deepen.
As her sense of loneliness increased, the
remembrance of her mates grew more vivid
and actual. Not only those with whom she
had parted company a few hours ago, but
every beast who had been a member of the
mob that morning when the bullock had fallen
to the shooter’s rifle, came trooping back in
memory. She turned and faced toward the
ranges with muzzle out-thrust and ears bent


forward as if from the star-crowned heights she
heard a call, faint and far.
With her calf following closely she started to
climb the ridge through the leafy darkness of
the scrub.
For hours she pushed steadily on. She found
one of the old pads and followed it, winding
and mounting upwards. Late moonrise found
her arriving at the first of the old camps. She
emerged from the scrub and stood on the high
bare knoll, in the faint light that came across
a level sea of ridges.
It was an old camp, littered with disks of
dung, all of them dry and bleached; even the
cattle smell had grown faint in the months
that had passed since the mob had rested there.
For a minute she seemed to see them, lying at
ease, warm and breathing, and to hear the
comforting sound of their cuds. Her sense of
loneliness overwhelmed her like a wave, and
her longing to regain the quiet pleasures and
companionships of the herd life became a pain
almost physical. She called loudly and passion-
ately to the creatures that lived only in her
memory, and her cry pealed out across the
ghostly ridges; but the only answer was the
dying echo.
There were other camps. She turned and


plunged again into the shadows of the scrubs.
The moon, riding high, saw her passing below
the woven heads of the brigalows, a silent beast,
plodding intently on, attended only by her
trusting calf. She visited camp after camp,
smelled the dry and hoofless dust, and turned
again on her quest.
The grey dawn found her passing the boulder-
strewn foot of rock-walled ridges, and day,
breaking warmly, found her trudging steadily
across the hill-tops. She paused a little whde
to let her calf suckle, and then went on. All
day she travelled, passing from one old camp
to another. Sometimes in her marches she stood
still, extending that uncanny sense by which
beasts become aware of each other while still
beyond reach of the senses known to man. She
found no traces of her mates.
The sun went down and the earth wheeled
through the hours of night. The dawn came up
hot and dry out of the east and found the
red cow, hollow and travel-worn, standing on
the little plateau below the palisades of the
range. Her calf lay on the ground beside her,
panting and exhausted. There was no milk for
him.


She had reached the last and highest of the
camps. The reedy pool from which she and
her mates used to drink when camped high
on the mountain was now dry—its bed criss-
crossed with a thousand cracks. Fenced out
from all other water, the end was not far off.
From the plateau where she stood the range
fell away, fold on fold of green, to the level
lands below. Behind her the ironstone cliffs
rose sheer to the blue. Over her head the scant
leaves of the box-trees turned in the faint air,
with dry rustlings.
The sun rose higher and beat more hotly
down as the hours passed, but the red cow did
not move.
Gaunt and solitary, she stood, waiting to
join the shadowy company of her kind—the
wild herd that had passed from the ranges
forever.


S «w<.km b——3 i^V
rk* bra *0! •** j C
Tog itr«4.fc«K» ( clmfj. 1/ \
tW«_ roundim Hp o-f + strM^ t4 ( c 7
)k oW bull is ya^od
TU €Scap€ f**® t>rci ncl i * V 1 **!* j
'tKe. *£
Tht escape c U«f*t <*j
YWe 9 u«||>t ol4 fcnH C -* */
f 1
c^ t W -
1 *4e y>* w 6^
R«.WUi o<**
».., ■>• fee


p
■


DUSTY
A Dog of the Sheep Country
FRANK DALBY DAVISON
Winner of the Melbourne Argus £5OO novel com-
petition, 1946, Dusty was commended by the judges
as follows: “We think this novel is clearly the best
of those submitted. It has a good deal of human in-
terest, and the human characters are well drawn
and real. As a work dealing with the non-human
being we think it is excellent and perhaps out-
standing among works of this kind wheret er written.
The story is well constructed and the interest is
maintained throughout. The prose is good, and at
times, beautiful. There is an admirable restraint
about it which does not detract from but rather
enhances its effect.”
Written with the intuitive understanding that
made Man-Shy a classic, perfect of its kind, this
story of a dog of the sheep country has achieved
similar unity and truth on a larger scale. Whde
the author avoids humanizing Dusty, the unfold-
ing of the inner conflict of his nature has the
quality of universal drama.
With its quiet dignity of style and sympathetic
irony this is a book for lovers of animals and lovers
of literature.


\
' *
