

MANDATES IN
AFRICA
No. 81
BOOK 5
of a series of Text Books specially
prepared for Study
Circles
LEAGUE OF NATIONS UNION
15 GROSVENOR CRESCENT, S.W.I
EIGHTPFNCE




MANDATES
IN AFRICA
BOOK 5
of a series of Text Books specially
prepared for Study
Circles
LEAGUE OF NATIONS UNION
15 GROSVENOR CRESCENT, S.W.I




PREFACE.
THE application of the theory of the mandate for
international purposes was indeed an intellectual
achievement of a high constructive order. The
term “mandate,” more familiar on the continent than in
England, is derived from old Roman law, where it properly
meant a special kind of agency, in which the mandatory under-
took a commission or truSt without consideration received
therefor, though he was entitled to his expenses and in-
demnified against loss in the honest performance of his
duties. “We muSt know,” say the old writers, “that a mandate,
unless gratuitous, ceases to be a mandate, and passes into a
business of another kind.” General Smuts borrowed this
idea and applied it in the problem of administering the ex-
German territories. “The Mandatory State,” he wrote,
“should look upon its position as a great honour and truSt,
not as an office of profit, or a position of private advantage for
it or its nationals It muSt be part of this suggested
scheme of Mandatory control that the Mandatory shall in no
case adopt an economic or military policy which will lead to
its special national advantage.”
Article 22 has been regarded from two very different points
of view. To some it represents the very higheSt expression of
the idealism of the Covenant. They feel that the sincerity of
the League will be teSted by the extent to which the princi-
ples embodied in the Article are carried out in practice.
Others hold that Article 22 is the only part of the Covenant
in which a false note is Struck, that its high-sounding phrases
are designed to conceal the simple annexation by the victori-
ous Powers of the conquered territories and that under
cover of the Mandate syStem the Powers are pursuing the
same policy as heretofore.
The truth lies somewhere between these extreme points of
view.
As a matter of faCt, the Allies were confronted with
a very real difficulty in dealing with the ex-enemy depen


dencies outside of Europe. They had no right of possession
save the right of conquest, a right which they had frequently
and ostentatiously disclaimed, which, indeed, they declared
they had gone to war to oppose; on the other hand, to restore
these territories to their owners was at the time unthinkable.
In these circumstances the suggestion of the Mandate
syStem was welcomed and adopted as a way out of the imme-
diate difficulty without any adequate examination of the
factors which would have to be taken into account when the
proposed syStem began to take practical shape.
This does not mean that Article 22 was all unreal senti-
ment —far from it. Although it was not the work of the Com-
mittee which drafted the reSt of the Covenant, but came
Straight from the Supreme Council to be included in the
Covenant, the idealism behind it w r as very real to many who
were engaged in Paris on the task of reconstructing the
world.
Along with a practical idealism founded on long and wide
experience, there was probably in the minds of the drafters a
very definite appreciation of the difficulties involved in
carrying their ideas into complete and immediate effeCt. The
language of the Article is advisory rather than Statutory 7 . It
would have been impossible to have achieved the Standard of
altruism otherwise. Whatever disappointment may have
been felt in the inability to make the principles embodied
obligatory was, no doubt, mitigated by the faCt that before
the Covenant was signed, possibly before Article 22 was
finally drafted, the Allied Powers had agreed to the Mandate
syStem and some, at leaSt, of the Mandates were in draft.
It was probably wiser to sacrifice precision to generalities,
for in the long run the only real force behind the Mandate
syStem is public opinion. Article 22 gives the public a
criterion by which to judge the practice of the Mandatory
Powers. The public is little concerned with words, but it
takes hold readily of ideas. The real sanction behind the
IVlandate syStem is not the legal interpretation of the pro-
visions of Article 22, but the popular interpretation of its


spirit. No legal enactment, however clear and emphatic,
could have brought about a change in the attitude of the
“civilised” rulers of backward populations; nothing will
accomplish that except the organised and persistent expres-
sion of an intelligent and high-minded public opinion. The
great achievement of Article 22 is that it Stands an unassail-
able guide to that public opinion—a Standard to which the
performance of the Mandatories muSt measure if they are to
escape the pillory of world criticism.
The obje<st of this volume is descriptive rather than critical.
It aims at provoking discussion, and does not profess to give
a judicial examination of the work so far accomplished by the
Mandatory Powers.




MANDATES IN AFRICA.
GENERAL POSITION OF MANDATES.
IN December, 1920, the“C” Mandates were submitted
to the Council of the League of Nations by the Manda-
tories concerned, and approved.
The following territories have therefore been under ad-
ministration by Mandate for a year: —
Pacific Islands. North of Equator. Japan.
f> South of Equator. Australia.
Nauru Island. British Empire.
Samoa. New Zealand.
German New Guinea. Australia.
S.W. Africa. S. Africa.
The “A” Mandates have been submitted to the Council by
the Mandatories, but until the ratification of the Treaty of
Sevres, which alone defines the status of the territories con-
quered from the Turk, it is not possible to institute the Man-
date system technically. In theory, however, and to a large
extent in practice, these territories are being administered as
if the Mandates were in force. At the Second Assembly the
representatives of the Mandatory Powers concerned agreed
that reports on the administration of all territories deStined
for Mandates should be submitted to the Permanent Man-
dates Commission, and that these reports should be examined
in the light of the draft Mandates.
This declaration was of particular value in regard to the
African Mandates, as the approval by the Council of these has
now been held up for over a year in deference to objections
by the United States. These objections have never been
publicly formulated, but continue to be the subjeCt of nego-
tiations between the United States of America and the Princi-
pal Allied Powers.
To all intents and purposes, however, the “B” Mandates
are in force.


In October, 1921, the Permanent Mandates Commission
held its meeting in Geneva. Its main business was the
drawingupof questionnaires, which have been approved by
the Council and sent to the Mandatory Powers.
On these questionnaires the annual reports from the
Mandatories will be drawn up and submitted to the Per-
manent Mandates Commission at its next meeting in June,
1922.
GERMAN WEST AFRICA (TOGOLAND AND THE
CAMEROONS).
Physical Features.
The WeSt African CoaSt presents for many hundreds of
miles the aspe<st of an almoSt unbroken line of surf hindering
the approach to a low-lying shore, whence a luxuriant
vegetation spreads inland through a belt of fever-haunted
mangrove swamps, interspersed with small but fertile
alluvial plains, to a region of dense tropical foreSts abounding
in valuable vroods and wild rubber. The country rises gradu-
ally until it reaches the tablelands, 2,000 feet and more
above the sea, which occupy the greater portion of the in-
terior of the Cameroons and provide large areas suitable
for agriculture and cattle-raising. There are mountain
groups of considerable size in this region, and the Cameroons
Mountains themselves, an isolated mass near the coa£t,
attain an elevation of over 13,000 feet.
The climate is nowhere salubrious, not even in the high-
lands of the Cameroons, but it is by no means as bad as is
generally believed. The humidity of the coa£t and the lack
of climatic variation inland favour unhealthy conditions,
and such diseases as malaria and sleeping sickness are very
prevalent. But it is in the power of modern science to do
much to modify this £late of affairs, and, although We£l
Africa will never be a favourite place of domicile for Euro-
peans, many of its dangers are in process of elimination,
and there is no reason why the native inhabitants should not
flourish there.


Ethnology.
Everything in the nature of such countries as we are dealing
with emphasises their dependence on the native inhabitants,
who alone are capable of gathering their wealth. The popu-
lation of WeSt Africa consists mainly of Sudan negroes, the
Bantu negro, who forms the other great division of the
negro race in Africa, predominating in South and EaSt Africa.
Unlike the Bantus, who are linguistically homogeneous, the
Sudan negroes speak an extraordinary diversity of tongues,
differing almost from village to village. Their physical and
intelleStual characteristics are, however, generally similar,
being such as typifies the popular conception of the black
portion of humanity. They are capable of much hard
manual labour, and, though subjeCt to frenzies of fierce ex-
citement, are usually docile and easily lead. Their mentality
is childlike, for their intelligence is very primitive, but they
are distinguished by an amazing knowledge of nature fre-
quently surpassing anything attained by the white man.
The inhabitants of the swamps and foreSts of the WeSt
African CoaSt are almoSt exclusively negroes of this type,
but further inland there have arisen peoples of mixed blood,
who have established themselves as ruling caStes over wide
areas within which a comparatively high degree of social and
political development has been attained. From time im-
memorial there has been communication from WeSt and
Central Africa across the Sahara and along the great lakes to
Barbary, Egypt and Abyssinia. Considerable migrations,
even, have taken place from the North and North-EaSl, and
peoples of Hamitic Stock built up considerable empires in the
Niger Basin, Stretching over the tablelands of the Cameroons
and beyond. Of these peoples the Fula and Hausa are of
particular importance in the Cameroons. Although the
period of their higheSt achievements is paSt, they are said to
provide “excellent rulers, Stern, but juSt and patient” They
are endowed with considerable intelligence and Strength of
character, and are looked upon as promising material from
which much is to be expected some day. The Hausa are
B


much more decidedly negroid; they form the middle class
of the Fula sultanates, are for the moSt part peaceful agricul-
turists, and are born traders; they excel in physical Strength,
and whether as porters or as merchants, have spread their
language far and wide over districts where diversity of speech
might well be an insuperable bar to commerce. Whereas the
religion of the negroes in the foreSts and on the coaSt does
not go beyond a primitive fetishism, the Fula, Hausa and
their subjedt peoples have been Moslems this thousand
years, a fadt of great importance in considering their social
and political development.
Pro duds.
The great and varied wealth of WeSt Africa is shared by
Togoland and the Cameroons. In the foreSfs there is ebony
mahogany and African teak in abundance. Rubber grows
wild in profusion, and, above all, there is the palm, from which
Africans have for countless ages drawn sustenance and which
provides the basis of their commerce. As long ago as the
days of the Pharaohs the oil and other produdts of the WeSt
African palm found their way to Egypt for use in em-
balming the dead, and to this day palm oil and kernels are
one of the chief articles of export.
These natural resources are capable of extensive develop-
ment under good syStems of forestry and plantation culture.
Rubber and cocoa are thus cultivated under European
management on an ever-increasing scale. The lack of trans-
port facilities is, however, a great handicap to economic ex-
ploitation, since, although the rivers provide good natural
communications, and a beginning had been made by the
Germans in railway construction, the swamps and foreSts
of the lowlands make the penetration of Togoland and the
Cameroons a difficult problem.
No very important mineral deposits have so far been dis-
covered in the ex-German possessions, but that unknown
riches of this nature should come to light in the future seems
not improbable. Similar mines to those of the Gold CoaSt


and Nigeria may well be exploited some day in Togoland
and the Cameroons, when these countries have been more
thoroughly prospected.
Area and Population.
At the outbreak of war the Cameroons had an area of
290,000 square miles (nearly one and a-half times the size
of the German Empire), and a population of about 2J mil-
lions, of whom under 2,000 were Europeans, including about
1,600 Germans. The Colony was bounded on the north-weSt
by British Nigeria, on the weSt by the sea, and on the eaSt
and south by French Equatorial Africa.
Togoland has an area of 33,700 square miles and a popu-
lation of about a million, among whom there were in 1914
under 700 Europeans, including rather over 300 Germans.
The colony was bounded on the weSt by the British Gold
CoaSt, on the north by French Upper Senegal and Niger, on
the eaSt by French Dahomey and on the south by the sea.
German AdminiHra tion .
In the Cameroons the Imperial Governor was assisted by a
Chancellor or Finance Minister and a local council of three
prominent European commercial residents. The country
was divided into civil and military districts, the former
being those where the moSt settled conditions prevailed, the
latter those less effectively subdued where a continuance of
martial law was thought necessary. There were also two
Residencies, embracing approximately the northern half of
the colony where the Germans were satisfied with exercising
supervision over the comparatively well-organised native
States under Fula domination. In the civil di&riCts there was
a fairly regular administrative code. In the military districts
the chief aim was “pacification.” In the Residencies the
Resident was supposed to leave the natives alone, but both
in these and in the military districts the general instructions
to further the spread of German “Kultur” gave opportunity
for considerable latitude of interpretation, resulting in
numerous abuses. These abuses were principally the conse-


quence of the general German attitude towards the native as
reflected in their judicial and labour policies.
The administration of Togoland was, generally speaking,
similar to that of the Cameroons. Conditions in the greater
part of Togoland, however, more nearly approximated to
those parts of the Cameroons near the coaSt where fairly
settled conditions prevailed, there being no such vaSt areas
of hinterland in Togoland as exiSt in the Cameroons.
German Economic and Native Policy.
Germany’s conception of her role in the Cameroons and
Togoland consisted in a belief in her right to pursue an
economic policy of purely selfish exploitation and an ad-
ministrative policy based on the wholesale importation and,
if necessary, forcible application of German ideals of culture.
A vaSt scheme, well enough thought out in its mechanical
details, was evolved, particularly in relation to the Came-
roons, according to which the economic exploitation of the
country was assumed to be essentially a field for European
enterprise. In this scheme, the native was regarded as a
purely passive inSlrument deStined to be a source of manual
labour and a purchaser of German goods. It also appears to
have been taken for granted that the native would adopt
German cultural ideas without difficulty in face of a suffi-
ciently positive display of force. Quite apart, however, from
the moral aspetf: of such principles, the unsoundness of these
premises made the scheme praaically unworkable. The
Government attracted numerous companies and individuals,
who found great difficulty in obtaining the necessary labour.
This the administration undertook to find, taxing the em-
ployer by a charge per head. Thus arose the syStem which
more than anything else has brought discredit on the
German colonial method. Men were commandeered and
brought great distances to work for European planters and
contractors, with the result that the whole of native life was
dislocated, agriculture impeded, and tribes and families
broken up. In addition, the administration compelled


natives to work on Government constructions, such as roads
and railways, for which work no wages and only the bareSt
sustenance was given. The disaffection produced by this
complete disregard of native interests was the cause of the
harshness with which the judicial system was applied. This
system had fundamental defects which provided occasions
for continual abuses and oppression. The chief of these was
the infliction of corporal punishment, which, although it
would perhaps have been better if it had not been allowed,
is not necessarily brutal, but which became so in the hands of
tyrannical officials. It is unnecessary here to go into the un-
pleasant details of the many well-subStantiated cases of
cruelty caused by an utter want of humanitarian feeling
among an all too great proportion of Germans in responsible
positions. Suffice it to mention the name “land of twrenty-
five,” by which the Cameroons came to be known from the
number of lashes it was usual to infliCt, though it may be as
well to point out that it was not the aCtual number of lashes
which was so impressive as the method of inflicting them.
Togoland was, perhaps, more fortunate than the Cameroons,
in that favourable circumstances lessened the need for such
draStic measures. The supply of labour was more plentiful
in Togoland, the distances less great, conditions generally
more prosperous —for of all the German colonies in Africa,
Togoland alone was self-supporting and received no financial
aid from the fatherland.
There were not wanting signs that the fundamental Ger-
man error, both from the moral point of view and from that of
their own interests, namely, the failure to realise that the
hopes of prosperity for the colony lay in the conciliation,
elevation and co-operation of the native, and not in the im-
portation of European taskmasters and European administra-
tive ideas, was coming to be realised by the Germans them-
selves in the years before the war. Although it is easy to
frame an indictment of German colonial methods, it is not
clear that they were so vaStly more iniquitous than those of
certain other Powers as it is perhaps natural to make out.


We see very clearly the errors of our enemies and are ap-
plauded for exposing them, but we avert our eyes from those
of our allies (and yet how short a while ago were the Belgian
atrocities in the Congo set before us) and are apt to be com-
pletely blind to our own. The fa<st is that the imperialist
syStem which grew up in the laSt century was founded on a
purely selfish basis. That the British, and to some extent the
French, have become at all events partially conscious that
the pursuit of interest does not lead to the attainment of
prosperity unless conducted in accordance with moral
principles is the result of bitter experience. That Germans —
having regard especially to the domineering tendency of the
national character, aggravated by the systematic militarist
training of several generations —should have missed this
lesson is hardly surprising, though it is neither compli-
mentary to them nor to those other nations whose practice
provided an example and whose motives could thus be inter-
preted. It is noteworthy that whereas in 1913 only four
official schools existed in the Cameroons, the education of
the native having previously been left almoSt entirely in the
hands of missionaries, there was in existence in 19 1 4 a
scheme for a considerable extension of native instruction.
At the same time a beginning was being made, in response
largely to public feeling in Germany, towards the modifica-
tion of the economic syStem.
The War.
Such was the situation at the outbreak of war. The old
German policy had proved a failure, the new one was hardly
born. When, therefore, British columns from the Gold
CoaSt and French columns from Dahomey invaded 1 ogo-
land, the natives made no attempt to Stand by their maSters.
Three w r eeks sufficed to round up all the elements of German
resistance without causing excessive disturbance of affairs in
the country, and by the beginning of September, 1914, the
country was completely in Allied hands.
In the Cameroons things did not go so smoothly, as, although
the natives lent but little assistance, the small but efficient


local colonial force of 200 Germans and 1,500 voluntarily
recruited natives stoutly opposed the British and French
invasions from Nigeria and Equatorial Africa. It was not till
the spring of 1916 that the operations, prolonged by the
difficult nature of the country, were brought to a close and
the conquest finally completed. An agreement was thereupon
come to between the British and French Governments
for the provisional administration of the colony in
two 7/)nes,and this arrangement continued until, as a result
of the decision of the Supreme Council in May, 1919, Great
Britain and France undertook to make joint recommenda-
tions to the League regarding their ultimate fate. An Agree-
ment was signed on July 10, 1919, determining more defi-
nitely the boundary between the French and British zones.
The delimitation of these boundaries is now proceeding,
subjedt to such modifications as will avoid certain incon-
venience and dissatisfaction, which might be caused to
the inhabitants and their tribal rulers by the division of
ethnographical areas. The French zone in the Cameroons
embraces the greater part of the colony, the British zone
consisting only of a Strip some seventy miles wide, about equal
in area to Scotland, along the Nigerian frontier, to which
colony the diStriCt ethnographically belongs. In Togoland
the division also follows ethnographical lines, about two-
thirds of the country being properly part of French Dahomey
and one-third part of the British Gold CoaSt.
French Administration in the Cameroons.
An excellent report, giving a very comprehensive account
of the administration of the French zone in the Cameroons
up to July 1, 1921, was published by the French Govern-
ment on September 7, 1921. A summary will give an idea of
what is being done there as well as in Togoland.* The
* A similar though somewhat less detailed report on the ad-
ministration of the French zone in Togoland was published by
the French Government on August 25, 1921, but as, except for
the fact that the country has been linked up with French West
Africa, instead of French Equatorial Africa, it reflects an almost
identical policy, it is unnecessary to reproduce the substance here.


authorities at firSt had very great difficulties to contend with.
Not only had the military operations seriously disorganised
the social and economic life of the country, causing
a serious outbreak of old tribal feuds and a general in-
crease in crime and the destruction of many plantations, but
the Germans had destroyed or concealed a great part of their
administrative archives. The restoration of order and Stable
'government was, however, achieved with remarkable
rapidity. While the war was in progress, it was necessary,
not only for convenience, but because of the terms of The
Hague Convention of 1907, to proceed on the basis of the
German syStem. Considerable modifications have, however,
been introduced little by little, all tending towards the
establishment of a regime according with French colonial
ideas, and particularly directed towards assimilation with
the methods in vogue in French Equatorial Africa.
The territories ceded to Germany in 1911, comprising
something like one-third of the French zone, were at an
early Stage placed under the direCt administration of French
Equatorial Africa, and the report, consequently, does not
apply to this area. It is apparently the contention of the
French Government that this part of the colony should be
unconditionally restored to France, though this does not
appear in the Joint Recommendation of December 17,1920.
It is open to question whether this contention can be upheld,
and, seeing that the establishment of the mandatory syStem is
not merely meant to provide a convenient way of distributing
responsibility for the future development of the ex-German
colonies, but is clearly intended to establish a new principle
for the government of the less civilised races, it would be
highly regrettable if it were to be upheld.
The administration of the remainder of the French zone
is in the hands of a Commissioner, who is subordinate to the
Governor-General of French Equatorial Africa, though the
country which it is intended should be administered under
the Mandate is in no sense regarded as part of the French
dependency. In accordance with Article 22 of the Cove-


nant, the “open door” has been maintained by the appli-
cation to the Cameroons of the Customs regime of the
Congo Basin, the principles of which were set forth in the
General Aft of Berlin of February 26,1885. It is also pleasing
to observe the measures taken in harmony with the moral
and social obligations enumerated in Article 22 with regard
to justice, the liquor traffic, education, and other matters in
which changes have been made. Corporal punishment has
been abolished. The sale of liquor to natives, out of which the
Germans made a large revenue, was at firSt totally prohibited,
and is now only allowed in exceptional cases under a very
StriSt licensing system, though the difficulty of enforcing
Prohibition exists in Africa as elsewhere. Provision has been
made for a very wide extension of educational facilities. The
f our official schools which existed in the days before the war
have been increased to thirty. French writing, elementary
arithmetic, geography and history are taught, and instruction
is given in sanitation and general matters of health. Two
professional schools for carpenters, joiners, locksmiths and
persons interested in kindred occupations have been
established. Special efforts are being made to get people into
the schools at a young age, for it is said that the negro, pre-
cocious and impressionable as he is in youth, becomes re-
fraStory when he reaches maturer years, and can then only
with difficulty be made to absorb new ideas. The Admin-
istration claims that care is being taken that interests of
native communities do not suffer in the alienation of land.
This is a matter over which constant watchfulness muSt be
exercised. The abuses which had arisen regarding labour
are Stated, perhaps over-confidently, to have been eliminated.
The principle of Government control of recruitment has
been retained for its use in supervising contrasts with
European employers, but its application in the provision of
forced labour has disappeared. Where the Government
needs labour for public services, such as the maintenance of
tracks, dikes and rivers, etc., a limit of ten days a year has
been established for obligatory service and compensation at
c


the rate of a franc a day is paid when persons are thus called
out. It is further claimed that taxation now aClually weighs
less heavily on the native than before the war. A German
scheme to put a tax on women, varying according to whether
they have children or not, has also been adopted, not only
because of its fiscal value, but in order to check polygamy,
which attains proportions mo£t harmful to the social welfare
of the people.
No reports have as yet been published on the Admin-
istration of the British zones in Togoland and the Came-
roons.*
GERMAN EAST AFRICA (TANGANYIKA AND
RUANDA AND URUNDI).
Physical Features.
The geographical characteristics of German EaSt Africa are
generally similar to those of British EaSt Africa and Uganda,
with which it forms the tropical portion of that great area of
mountains and tablelands embracing the whole eaStern and
southern portions of the continent from Abyssinia to the
Cape of Good Hope. The interior of the country consists of
plateaux averaging some thousand feet above the sea,
bounded on the eaSt by heights falling Steeply to the great
lakes in the bottom of the Rift Valley. The lesser Rift runs
through the centre of these plateaux forming the eaStern
face of mountain ranges which fall abruptly in the south and
more gradually in the north through a series of lower
plateaux to the coaStal plain.
The coaSt is coral formed with a low shelving shore,
sometimes bare and sandy, sometimes alluvial and covered
with dense mangrove swamps. A series of islands, the chief
of which is the British Protectorate of Zanzibar, lies some
miles out to sea in the north, and as a general rule the approach
to the mainland is defended and made somewhat dangerous
by reefs and bars. The coastal plains begin at the top of
* Clifford’s Nigerian Report includes Cameroons.


coral cliffs some 30-80 feet high. They are narrow in the
north, but broaden very much in the south. The climate of
this region is tropical, moid, warm and subjed to the
monsoon type of weather, charaderidic of the influence of
the Indian Ocean. The land is fertile and suitable to tro-
pical cultivation.
As the ground rises inland the climate becomes dryer and
hotter. The vegetation of the lower plateaux consists
mainly of bush and tall grasses, but on the eadern slopes of
the Rand mountains there is again more moisture and the
slopes are covered with dense forests. It is in the highland
regions above these foreds, at heights between six and ten
thousand feet, that the mod suitable country for Europeans is
to be found. The didrids of Usambara, Meru and Kili-
manjaro, in the north-ead of the colony, are cool, moid and
midy, and it is here that permanent European settlements
are mofl possible. Elsewhere German Ead Africa is not a
white man’s country and mud always depend on native
effort for economic development. There is an alpine region
above the 10,000 ft. level into which the highest peaks rise
with Kilimanjaro itself, the highest mountain in Africa,
overtopping them all with its 19,391 feet.
The central plateaux are again dry and warm. They are
open, dotted with bush, but not incapable of cultivation.
The Germans had a scheme for irrigating over half a
million acres of land south-east of Lake Victoria Nyanza,
which was reported suitable for cotton.
Produds.
Generally speaking, the chief products of the'country come
from the regions within access of the coad. Sisal hemp,
rubber, cotton and coffee are the mod important crops for
export. Plantations of coco-nut palms produce a good output
of copra, and there is a future for other produds such as
palm oil, cocoa, sesame and flosses such as kapok. There is
valuable timber in the forests, and the padoral tribes, especi-
ally the Masai, own great herds of cattle whose hides are one


of the principal articles of export. The mineral resources of
the country are varied but little known and exploited.
Ethnology.
There are few physical obstacles to communications in
EaSt Africa, and the vaSt open plateaux have offered a free
field for the migration of peoples. As in the reSt of Central
Africa, the Bushman and Pygmy were the aboriginal in-
habitants; but they have now practically disappeared, having
been obliterated by very early invasions of Bantus, who
now form the basis of the population. As in WeSt Africa,
however, subsequent invasions of Hamitic peoples took
place, resulting in the establishment of Strong political
organisations, which particularly in the States of Ruanda and
Urundi in the north-weSt have given a much-needed
cohesion to the country. The Masai, a paStoral Hamitic
people of warlike character, are established in the northern
Steppes, and in the south Zulu invaders introduced a syStem
of government based on military organisation.
But the moSt important foreign element in EaSt Africa is
the Arab. The impetus which carried the Arabian tribes to
North Africa and Europe in the early days of Islam also
brought them to EaSt Africa. Their power was eclipsed for a
time by the Portuguese in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, but they later once more established their supre-
macy. In the nineteenth century a Strong Arab dynaSty,
with its headquarters on the island of Zanzibar, ruled the
whole coaSt of the mainland, and its influence penetrated
far into the interior. The political power of the Sultans of
Zanzibar rapidly declined, and was finally overthrown with
the advent of the British and the Germans half a century or
more ago. But through all this long period Arab culture had
been permeating the EaSt African tribes. On the coaSt a long
process of cross breeding created a mixed race, the Swahili,
“people of the coaSt.” Their language, which is Bantu in
Structure, but modified by the extensive incorporation of
Arabic and other foreign words and forms, remains the


“lingua franca’’ of the whole EaSt CoaSt of Central Africa.
The Swahilis are handsome, powerfully-built people, in-
clined to obesity, and varying greatly in colour and physique
according to the proportion of Semitic and negro blood.
Their superior civilisation causes them to be looked up to by
the natives much as they themselves look up to the Euro-
peans who now dominate them. They have always been the
traders of the country, and though their political authority
has vanished, they are Still an important fadtor in the
administration.
Distribution of Population.
The population of the coaStal diStridts is naturally fairly
dense owing to the existence of comparatively large com-
mercial towns —Dar-es-Salaam (population2s, l ooo), Tanga,
Lindi and Bagamayo —and the existence of plantations which
draw labour from the interior. The largeSt town in the
country, Tabora (40,000), is, however, situated in its very
centre and owes its importance to being on the great trade
route from the Congo to the coaSt at a place where lines of
communication break off to the north and south. Some
districts of the interior are too barren to support a large
population, but generally speaking the ravages of war are
chiefly responsible for the sparse distribution of the inhabi-
tants over the greater part of the country. Where Strong
political organisations, such as those of the Bahima States in
Ruanda and Urundi, have been able to maintain themselves
more or less undisturbed, the density of the population is
considerably greater. These small diStridts contain at the
present day nearly half the total population of the whole
country. Not only have tribal wars caused great devastation
elsewhere, but the suppression of native risings by the Ger-
mans has been accompanied by enormous loss of life and dis-
ruption of tribal organisation. The Masai have, moreover,
been greatly reduced in numbers by the adtion of rinderpeSt
among the cattle, which are their sole means of livelihood.
The majority of the inhabitants are Still pagans, but the


Swahili are, of course, Moslems, and a number of the tribes
with whom they have been in contact have, in greater or less
degree, been converted, nominally at lea£t, to Islam.
Area and Population.
German Ea£l Africa had an area of about 385,000 square
miles, and was nearly twice the size of Germany itself. It
was bounded on the north by British Ea£t Africa and Uganda,
on the we£t by the Belgian Congo and the British pro-
tectorates of Nyassaland and Northern Rhodesia, on the
south by Portuguese Eat Africa, and on the eat by the
Indian Ocean. The chain of great lakes, Vitoria Nyanza,
Tanganyika, and Nyassa, through which a great part of the
northern and we tern frontiers passed, gave the colony what
was almot a second coatline. The total population in 1913
was etimated at about seven and a half millions, including
about one million Swahilis, some 15,000 Indians and other
coloured non-natives and about 5,500 whites, of whom 4,000
were Germans.
German Administration.
The administration was in the hands of a German
Governor, who, though assited by an advisory Council of
unofficial German residents which met twice a year at
Dar-es-Salaam, the capital, and by a commander of the Pro-
tectorate troops, was, in fat, the supreme civil and military
authority. The country was divided into twenty-four
ditrits, of which nineteen were under civil adminitration,
two under military adminitration, and three were tyled
Residencies. The civil and military adminitrators were
diretly responsible for the government of their ditrits.
The tribes were organised under “Akidas,” paid native
officials, usually Moslems, either Arabs or Swahilis, who
colleted taxes, had limited judicial powers and partially
controlled the labour in their areas. This sytem was a
development of that initiated during the rule of the Sultans
of Zanzibar. Its chief drawback was the uncertain quality of
the Akidas, whose tendencies towards oppression and cor-


mption could not be adequately checked by the very small
number of German officials, seventy-nine all told. The
village headmen, or “Jumbes,” were mostly under the Akidas,
who were thus possessed of considerable power, the German
officials too often not troubling to intervene on behalf of the
natives so long as the quota of taxes and labour was forth-
coming. An analogy might be drawn between this syClem
and that of the employment of Egyptians in the Anglo-
Egyptian Sudan, where, if the outlook of the British adminis-
trator had not contracted markedly with that of the German
administrator, similar results might have ensued. The
duties of the Residents were of a more supervisory nature.
Strongly organised native States existed in their diCtriCts of
Ruanda, Urundi and Bukoba, and nothing more than a
general control was considered necessary in existing cir-
cumstances.
German Economic and Native Policy.
In pursuance of the policy which a German author has
defined in the Statement that “colonisation consists in the
utilisation of the soil, its products and its men, for the
economic profit of the colonising nation,” it is scarcely sur-
prising to find that problems were not habitually approached
from the native point of view. As in WeSt Africa, the Germans
conceived extensive plans for the rapid commercial develop-
ment of the country at the hands of numerous European
companies and individuals, who were encouraged to take up
land by the offer of large concessions on very easy terms.
The rate of progress depended primarily on the supply of
native labour, and therefore the methods by which this was
obtained were not likely to take much account of native
interests. The tribes of the interior differ much in character,
but nearly all are capable of maintaining themselves without
working for wages, to which they consequently strongly
object. Left to themselves, it was clear that the natives would
not supply the demand created by German policy, so that,
although “forced” labour was never legally sanctioned,


various forms of pressure giving much the same result were
resorted to. The authorities hit upon the expedient of
taxing the native so highly that he was obliged to work for
wages in order to pay his taxes. Licensed “recruiters” were
allowed to establish themselves in the interior, and, although
their adivities were controlled by Government regulations,
there is no doubt that, by taking advantage of the venality of
the Akidas and Jumbes, considerable abuses were practised.
The continual clamour of the planters for more labour made
a drid observance of any protective legislation all the more
difficult to enforce, though there came a time when public
opinion in Germany was roused to the unsatisfadory date
of affairs, and the “labour markets,” which used to be held at
Dar-es-Salaam, and savoured perhaps too much of the slave
market, were suppressed in deference to this feeling. A
further dimulation was given to the native to engage in
plantation work by exempting him from the pradically
compulsory Government labour on public works and porter-
age if he did so.
Such an attitude towards the native’s place in the general
scheme of things in the colony inevitably involved a dis-
torted view in matters of judice. There were five high courts
under a European judge, assided by four European assessors,
to deal with cases in which Europeans were concerned, and
although 107 employers were convided in 1912 —thirteen
for assaulting their labourers —it is dated in the Report on
the British Adminidration of Tanganyika that “this is no
criterion of the number of cases of assault committed, for
natives were punished if they brought charges againd their
employers which they were unable to prove, and therefore
usually suffered in silence.” Corporal punishment was,
moreover, legally recognised, and its exercise, there seems
no doubt, was frequently abused in the attempt to drive the
native into fulfilling duties for which he had no inclination.
The British report quoted above dates that “it is not quite
clear whether the German education policy was designed
definitely to develop the African and improve his lot or


merely to train him as an integral part of an efficient adminis*
trative machine.” It would seem, however, to be the generally
accepted opinion that the latter was, in fa<st, the result
achieved. Apart from mission schools, there were in 1914
ninety-nine Government schools in the colony, a number
which testifies to the importance attached by the German
authorities in EaSt Africa to the question i There was much
greater educational activity here than in WeSt Africa, one of
the principal reasons being, perhaps, the realisation of the
desirability of increasing the number of literate natives,
where so many native officials were employed.
An interesting commentary on the effect of the German
“get-rich-quick” policy as regards land is contained in the
Report on the British Administration of Tanganyika, which
States that “as a result considerable unreSt was aroused and
such a<stion muSt be considered a contributory cause to the
numerous native risings with which the Germans had to
deal. Restricted tribal lands meant a discontented and de-
creasing population, with labour shortage as a result; this
entailed regulations to remedy shortage by compulsion with
the inevitable outbreak as a logical conclusion. This was
apparently recognised at laSt by the German Administration
who were in the laSt few years before the war consequently
growing far more cautious in the matter of land grants, and,
as previously Stated, they appear to have been trying in
certain areas to remedy the harm already done. ... It is,
nevertheless, undeniable that in many cases land has been
alienated in utter disregard of native rights, and we are left
in certain portions of the Territory with an unfortunate
legacy in the shape of an overcrowded and discontented
native community on the one hand, and with large and valu-
able properties handicapped for lack of sufficient labour on
the other.”
The War.
At the outbreak of war in 1914, German authority was
more universally established in EaSt Africa than in any
D


other of her possessions, partly because the former domina-
tion of Zanzibar had created something of a basis for a
general administration of great parts of the country and
partly owing to the expenditure of considerable military
effort. Necessity for the latter arose at the very inception of
German rule, when an Arab Swahili insurrection broke out,
apparently in proteSt at the termination of the somewhat lax
authority of Zanzibar. Subsequent native risings—extending
from 1891 to 1906 —involved the continual employment of
considerable forces, firSt againSt individual tribes and finally
againSt a concerted movement in the south, which was sup-
pressed with a severity which led to the depopulation of a
vaSt area. Following an investigation of the causes and an
amelioration of the conditions which had led to these dis-
turbances, the colony entered upon a period of peace; but the
Germans retained a military organisation based on a native
force, about 2,500 Strong, which was partly trained with a
view to the possibility of the part it might have to play in the
defence of the colony in the event of a European war. When
account is taken of the police force of about 2,000, and the
number of discharged soldiers who might be recalled to the
colours, it will be seen that the Germans were relatively in a
Strong position. They were in any case able to take the ini-
tiative by invading British EaSt Africa, and for some months
they may be said to have carried off the honours of the cam-
paign. An ina<stive period followed, but early in 1916 General
Smuts arrived with South African reinforcements and took
the offensive. Sweeping the country from north to south, he
gradually drove the German forces before him until by the
end of 1917 the remnants had to quit the colony and flee
into Portuguese territory. Here they remained until they
surrendered after the armistice. Belgian troops from the
Congo had assisted in these operations and remained in
occupation of the diStrids of Ruanda and Urundi in the
north-we St. The remainder of the country was placed under
British administration. This was a provisional arrangement,
and it laSted until after the ratification of the Peace Treaty


with Germany, when, in accordance with the decision of the
Council of the Allied and Associated Powers taken in May,
1919, a Mandate for German EaSt Africa was allocated to
Great Britain, excepting for the districts of Ruanda and
Urundi, for which Belgium was appointed Mandatory. An
insignificant adjustment of territory was also made in favour
of Portugal, whereby the eaStern extremity of the southern
boundary was modified in a northerly direction so as to in-
clude the delta of the river Rovuma in Portuguese territory,
to which it economically belongs.
British Administration in Tanganyika.
The British sphere has been renamed Tanganyika Terri-
tory. It comprises the great bulk of the area which was
formerly German EaSt Africa, but contains only about
53 per cent, of the population or about four million persons.
A full and able report of the administration up to the end of
1920 has been published by the British Government, and
in accordance with the terms of Article 22 of the Covenant
has been submitted to the Council of the League of Nations.
The following is a summary of the principal contents.
The administration is in the hands of a Governor, who is
also Commander-in-Chief and who takes his instructions
from the Colonial Office. He is assisted by an Executive
Council. There is a Staff of 108 administrative officers (as
compared with seventy-nine under German rule), all of
whom have been selected with the greatest care. The task
they have had to undertake is a very difficult one. On the
ruins of the German syStem it has been necessary to build up a
regime which will, in the words of the report, “develop the
people on their own lines and in accordance with their own
ideas and cuStoms, purified where necessary.” The syStem of
Akidas has been preserved, but “their Status has been radi-
cally altered. Their privileges have been curtailed; their
powers of punishment have been taken away, and they are
being closely supervised. When vacancies occur, the wishes
of the people as to a successor are ascertained, and, if possible,
a local man of influence is selected in preference to an alien.”


It may come as a surprise to some to learn that although
the slave trade has long been suppressed by the Germans,
slave-owning Still persists and was legally countenanced by
the German authorities. This should not, however, be made
a subject for accusation against the German Government,
since it was clearly their intention that the practice should
gradually disappear. They evidently feared that to en-
franchise all slaves at once would cause too great a social
upheaval. They decided that all slaves born after 1905 should
be free, and gave various facilities to slaves for obtaining
their freedom. It was thought that domestic servitude,
which it muSt be remembered need not, under proper super-
vision, entail any practical hardships, would be extinct by
1930 or 1940. This is, nevertheless, a subject which re-
quires urgent attention, since it is contrary to all enlightened
principles that the flatus of slave should exiSt under any form
of European domination. It is, therefore, satisfactory to note
that the draft British mandate provides for the eventual
emancipation of all slaves, and as speedy an elimination of
domestic and other slavery as social conditions allow. The
Governor of Tanganyika has been asked by the Colonial
Office to submit a report on the measures necessary to give
effect to this provision.
The disorganisation caused by the war has been a great
hindrance to the development of education, which muSt be
one of the principal factors in the policy of native enlighten-
ment which the Covenant emphasises as the principal duty
of the Mandatory. Only twenty Government schools had
been reopened in the autumn of 1920, but it is satisfactory to
note that a Director of Education has been appointed, and
that at the time when the report was written he was “engaged
in framing a comprehensive scheme of native education,
which it is hoped will shortly be productive not only of a
regular supply of native Africans suitable to the administra-
tive needs of the Territory, but equally a more useful type
whose elementary education has, in addition to giving him a
working knowledge of the three R’s,’ done something to fit


him to take an active part in the economic development of
the country.”
As regards justice, it was found impra&icable to retain the
German Code, and the tendency has been to bring the legal
system of the Territory into line with that of the neighbouring
British Dependencies. Legislation has up till now princi-
pally been by Ordinances, which have dealt, amongst other
matters, with the authority of native chiefs and the control of
the trade in firearms. The Indian Penal and Criminal Pro-
cedure Codes have been adopted whenever suitable, and
with the establishment of courts subordinate to the High
Court, together with the appointment of Judges and
Magistrates, “the normal exercise of civil jurisdiction will be
possible.”
The CuStoms Tariff of British EaSt Africa has been intro-
duced.
Belgian Administration m Ruanda and Urundi.
The Belgian mandate in EaSt Africa extends over the
north-we Stern districts of Ruanda and Hrundi. It is a
mountainous area with a temperate climate in many
places, plenty of rainfall and a decidedly favourable prospeCt
of having a brilliant agricultural future. The districts com-
prise a very small portion of the area of the former German
colony, but as has been observed already, peaceful conditions
under Strong native Governments have favoured a relative
density of population so that the inhabitants number nearly
half the total for the whole of German EaSt Africa. The
dominant race is of Hamitic origin, and is known as Bahima
or Watusi. They number about 15 percent., and the Wahutu
Bantus, who compose the mass of the people, about 75 per
cent, of the population. The remainder are primitive negroes,
who may be the remains of the aboriginal inhabitants. The
kingdoms of Ruanda and Urundi are each governed by an
hereditary sultan under a syStem very similar to the feudal
organisation of mediaeval Europe. Although the power of the
sultan is absolute, the great chiefs are autonomous in their


own territories, and these are again sub-divided into lesser
fiefs dependent on the greater. Stock-raising being the chief
industry of the country, cattle are the moSt general and
valuable form of property. The loan of Stock in return for
service is one of the fundamental institutions of the social
syStem.
The Germans contented themselves with the appointment
of Residents in these diStridts, interfering but little with the
internal administration, and collecting taxes irregularly.
They did not feel Strong enough to take decisive adtion to
bring these States within the orbit of the central administra-
tion and they consequently escaped the unpopularity which
their methods brought them elsewhere. They, moreover,
took occasion to discredit the neighbouring British and
Belgian administrations in Uganda and the Congo, with the
result that the Allied occupation was received with scarcely
veiled hostility. The conqueSt of Ruanda and Urundi, to-
gether with other eaStern portions of German EaSl Africa,
was accomplished by Belgian troops, and throughout the
war the provisional administration was Belgian.
A report has been presented to the Belgian Parliament by
the Minister for the Colonies, covering the period up to the
summer of 192 1 ,on the administration of Ruanda andUrundi.
It is an excellently written document and contains much in-
teresting information about the country and the people.
Most of the measures described in it are purely administra-
tive, but it is important to note that the Territory has been
brought into CuStoms union with the Belgian Congo. The
general policy has been to maintain the syStem of indirect
government, and the following extracts from the conclu-
sions of the report will give a sufficient idea of the trend of the
Mandatory’s projefts for the future. “Without,” it Slates,
“doing violence to the established organisation, the native
of the subject race knows that he has a Stronger protection
againSt abuses of arbitrary power than the Watusi chiefs.
These in their turn observe that our administrators have no
intention of taking their places, and that they respeCt their


prestige and prerogatives. . . . The royal power can, in the
slow evolution we have to bring about, be a powerful and
precious instrument. We are upholding it and Strengthening
it. . . . We are convinced that to respeCt the political and
social organisation which the population had developed, to
improve it by eliminating barbarous practices and abuses, to
prevent the oppression of the poor and weak, without trying
to import among primitive peoples in tropical regions our
European conceptions of equality, on the contrary to en-
courage one of the moSt interesting portions of black
humanity to evolve according to its own nature, in its own
environment, according to its traditions, by its own resources,
while doing everything possible to set free its own originality
is a wise and juSt policy which will gradually develop a Strong
and fecund African race. . . . Parliament will approve
us in considering that our firSt duty is the amelioration to our
utmoSt of the conditions of native life. It is our mandate
and our interest.”
Let us hope that these admirable sentiments will bear
fruit at an early time.
GERMAN SOUTH-WEST AFRICA.
Physical Features .
German South-WeSt Africa is an altogether poorer terri-
tory than any of the former German possessions we have been
discussing. Geographically, it is inseparable from the reSt
of South Africa. The northern third of it alone has the tropical
characteristics of warmth and moiSture which together pro-
duce the luxuriance of great parts of Togoland, the Came-
roons and Tanganyika. Conditions in the remainder more
nearly approach those in the temperate zone, but although
the dangers from disease are thereby minimised, South -
WeSt Africa does not, from all accounts, appear in a very
attractive light. The coaStal area, varying from thirty to
eighty miles in depth, is moStly a desolate wilderness of
reddish grey sand dunes. Under the influence of extreme


dryness and of violent changes of temperature, causing a
process of disintegration such that “it is said that on a cold
night, following on a hot day, the splitting of the rocks sounds
like the rattle of musketry,”* the surface of the land has
crumbled away. “The mountains are so deeply buried that
only their summits rise above the surface, for the masses of
detritus, which in other lands are washed down to the sea
by rains, have collected in the desert regions for thousands of
years, and serve to veil the original formation of the country.”!
The centre of the country is occupied by tablelands reaching
a maximum elevation of about 5,000 feet. Extensive grass
plains are a feature of this region, but except in the north they
are poorly watered. There are no proper rivers. Sporadic
downpours of rain are carried off by ill-defined channels,
but the water quickly filters through the porous surface of the
land and is held in sink-holes and subterranean caves. On
these, together with springs, the country depends for
moisture. In places there exiCt small areas of cultivatable
soil; but any extensive agricultural exploitation mu£t depend
on irrigation, which is practicable but not yet e&ablished on a
large scale. The grass lands, however, afford good pasture
for sheep and cattle, and it is in this direction that develop-
ment has moStiy extended. Out of these central highlands
rise isolated groups of mountains, the highest reaching
nearly 9,000 feet. To the eaSt, the ground sinks into the
Kalahari region, maintaining somewhat similar conditions,
though the desert areas become more frequent.
Produds.
In these circumstances it is not surprising to find that all
agricultural produce is consumed on the spot. Hides and
wool are exported in considerable quantities, but the chief
commercial assets of the country are its minerals, especially
diamonds, the output of which in 1913 amounted in value to
20 per cent, of that of the whole world. Copper is also found
* Calvert, German African Empire , p. 34.
t Op. cit.


in large quantities, and there are valuable deposits of lead,
tin, coal, and marble. Difficulty of transport is, however, a
serious obstacle to exploitation.
Ethnology.
The general charader of the country, as will have been
seen, is not favourable to the maintenance of a large popula-
tion. The total in 1913 has been given as under a quarter of a
million, which gives an average density of less than one to
the square mile; but this figure has been controverted, and a
recent estimate puts the figure as low as 40,000. More than
half the inhabitants are concentrated in the fertile northern
didrids, comprising only about a twentieth of the country,
and with another large fradion absorbed by the principal
towns, Windhoek (the capital), Swakopmund and Liideritz-
bucht (the chief ports), it will be realised how sparsely
populated is the greater part of the total area.
South-Wed Africa is in an earlier dage of racial and social
development than the parts of the continent with which we
have been dealing. The results of the Bantu-negro invasions
are incomplete in these parts, the absorption and annihilation
of the more primitive peoples having been arrested by the
advent of the colonising European Powers. The aboriginal
Bushmen, one of the lowed races in the human scale, have
almost disappeared in Central Africa, but Still exid in some
numbers scattered, particularly, over the eastern portions of
South-Wed Africa. The Hottentots, who compose the bulk
of the population, represent a cross between Bushmen and
Bantus, as is indicated by their appearance—a medium build,
a leathery coloured skin, negroid features such as woolly hair,
broad flat noses and thick lips, but with special charader-
idics as prominent cheek bones and pointed chins, which
give a somewhat triangular shape to the face. They are
generally indolent of charader, but gentle and hospitable,
while their social organisation is primarily padoral and
patriarchal. The Namaquas,who occupythe southern third of
the country, are the chief Hottentot tribe.


In the centre of the country, purer types of Bantu form the
ruling classes. Their physique is finer and their organisation
more advanced than that of the Hottentots, but they are
everywhere much mixed racially. Sometimes their language
is Bantu and sometimes Hottentot. These peoples are
differentiated according to whether they live in the hills or
the plains. The hill dwellers are the Berg-Damaras, the
plain dwellers the Hereros, “merry people,” paboral nomads
of warlike character whose strong military organisation
proved a great bumbling-block to German penetration.
In the north, where tropical conditions and greater
fertility prevail, the dominant tribe is the Ovamba, an
agricultural Bantu people whom the Germans had not had
opportunity of interfering with seriously. Here there is
something like a cohesive native political and social organi-
sation such as was destroyed in the centre and south
(Damaraland and Namaqualand) as the result of years of
continuous warfare following the great Herero and Hottentot
rebellion of 1904, which was suppressed by the Germans with
the prabical extermination of the insurgent tribes. There
remain to be mentioned the Babards, a mob interebing
race resulting from the cross-breeding of Dutch and Hotten-
tots, who mobly live in the dibribs bordering on Cape
Colony. They had their own republic under the Germans,
and were British subjebs. They maintained their neutrality
in the war until attacked by the Germans, and were only
saved from extermination by the unexpebed arrival of the
British flying column.
The bulk of the population is pagan, but missionary
abivity has had considerable results in a country where
Islam has not had to be competed againb. A number of
tribes have been converted, but it mub be admitted that
so far their Christianity is scarcely more than nominal.
Area and Population.
The area of German South-Web Africa is about 322,000
square miles. It is bounded on the north by Portuguese


Angola and British Northern Rhodesia, on the eaSt by
British Bechuanaland, on the south by Cape Colony, and
on the weSt by the sea. It is somewhat smaller than German
EaSt Africa, but contains only a thirtieth of the population.
On the other hand, the white population comprises a far
more important proportion of the whole, amounting to about
6 per cent, as compared with something like .07 per cent, in
German EaSt Africa.
German Administration.
The Imperial Governor was the supreme authority under
the German administration, but doubtless on account of the
relative importance of the white community, the Advisory
Council had more extended powers than in the other German
colonies in Africa. Part of it was nominated, but part was
elected by the German settlers in the thirteen districts into
which the country was divided. The seed of self-govern-
ment may, therefore, be said to have been planted. Gener-
ally speaking, the administrative syStem corresponded to that
in vogue elsewhere. The number of German officials was,
however, relatively high, a circumstance which was the
ground of much complaint, because it resulted in bureau-
cratic methods far too complicated for such a sparsely-
populated and little developed country.
German Economic and Native Policy.
It has been Stated that “the policy followed by the Germans
between 1900 and 1908 in their treatment of moSt of the
native races of the Protectorate may fairly be described as a
policy of extermination.”* It was only after the disastrous
results of the Herero war, mentioned above, became apparent
that it was realised that such a decimation of the population
would end in the impossibility of finding labour for European
enterprises. These were mainly connected either with agri-
culture or mining. For the former, Hottentots, Hereros and
Berg-Damaras were usually employed, but although such
* Peace Handbooks, South-West Africa , p. 42.


farmers as treated their men well seem to have been able to
meet their requirements, there was always difficulty in
competing with the high wages offered in the mines. It was,
however, the policy of the mines and railways to draw the
bulk of their labour from among the Ovambos of the north,
so as to avoid depleting the resources of the farmers. It was
the general policy of the administration “to make every
native dependent for a living upon employment by Euro-
peans.”* The notorious “Rules for the Control of the
Natives,” issued by the Governor in 1907, show this clearly,
for their terms, in faCt, established the principle that “if
any native tried to live otherwise he was treated practically
as a vagabond.”*
The War.
The long Struggle againSt the natives in the firSt decade of
this century naturally led to the maintenance of consider-
able military forces in the country. German military policy,
however, does not seem to have been exclusively concerned
with internal order. There appears to be no doubt that the
scheme of railway projection was at leaSt in part influenced
by Strategic considerations, having in view an attack on
British South Africa. The accumulation of stores and the
multiplication of depots seem also to have been greatly in
excess of ordinary requirements. When the war broke out in
1914, the Germans had a force in South-WeSt Africa vari-
ously estimated at anything between five and ten thousand
men. Nevertheless, they were unable to take the offensive,
and the resistance made to the attack of the British Imperial
forces from the Union of South Africa was not prolonged.
Maritz’s rebellion delayed the aCtion of the South African
Government till the beginning of 1915, but by June of that
year the enemy had been successfully rounded up and the
campaign brought to a victorious conclusion.
South African Administration.
Since this time South-WeSt Africa has been administered
* Op. cit.


by the Government of the Union of South Africa, at firSt
under a provisional system necessarily based on martial law
but since the end of 1920 by virtue of the mandate conferred
by the Council of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
The type of mandate allocated allows of the administration of
the country as an integral part of the Mandatory’s territory.
The greater part of the Administrators’ report for the South
African Government for the year 1920, which was published
some months ago, deals with measures taken for the re-
eStablishment of civil government on lines in conformity with
the syStems in force in the various States of the Union. Sub-
ject to necessary adaptations, South African legal codes have
been introduced, the CuStoms and Excise tariffs have been
made uniform with those of the Union, theUnionLand Settle-
ment Land A6t of 1912 has been adopted, as have the pro-
visions of the Cape Law regarding the control of intoxicating
liquor, including a special provision prohibiting the supply of
liquor to natives and coloured persons. An advisory council
has been set up consisting of six members nominated by the
Administrator.
The comparatively small portions of the Administrator’s
reports for 1919 and 1920 under the heading “Native Affairs”
deal principally with the labour problem. It is clear that the
supply of labour is inadequate, especially for the farmers, and
considerable pressure seems to have been brought to bear on
the Administration for the institution of energetic methods of
recruitment. It is, of course, out of the question that the
Administration should countenance anything resembling a
return to the German methods of virtual compulsion, but the
attitude of European employers, presumably moStly Ger-
mans, is indicated by the Administrator when he remarks
that “the favourite solution offered is ‘ greater powers to the
police,’ which is merely a euphemism for ‘ powers of punish-
ment to be veSted in the police.’” A Commission has been
sitting to consider the whole question and it would be inter-
esting to have its report. Although it would be unjuSt to doubt
the good intentions of the South African Government,


there does seem to be a danger that the native may be
looked at too exclusively from the point of view of his econo-
mic functions and too little in the light of the provisions of
Article 22 of the Covenant and the terms of the Mandate.
At a conference of magistrates the Administrator spoke of
their duties in terms which are here reproduced as reported
in the document already quoted: “I impressed upon them how
much they could contribute to making or marring the country;
their duties were not circumscribed and could not be de-
fined ; they were the chief agents of the Administrator and
every phase of official life should be within their attention—
in other words, they were the eyes of the Administration and
were there to diredt and cheer the would-be settler, and to
assiSt and protect him once he had anchored himself; it was
equally their duty to protedt the native as to punish idleness
and vagrancy, and to see that all available labour was utilised;
they were, in fa<st, the golden bridge between the farmer and
the native labourer.” Here again we have the feeling that the
native is being looked at primarily from an economic angle.
Native education Still seems to be in the hands of the vari-
ous missions, the Administration’s attention having been
concentrated up to the present on the reorganisation of the
schools for Europeans. It is to be hoped that this question
will soon be taken up, although there are evident difficulties
to be overcome in a country of great distances with such a
scattered population.


THE COVENANT OF THE LEAGUE OF
NATIONS.
ARTICLE XXII.
To those colonies and territories which as a consequence
of the late war have ceased to be under the sovereignty of the
States which formerly governed them and which are in-
habited by peoples not yet able to Stand by themselves under
the strenuous conditions of the modern world, there should
be applied the principle that the, well-being and develop-
ment of such peoples form a sacred
that securities for the performance of this truSt should be
embodied in this Covenant.
The beSt method of giving practical effedt to this principle
is that the tutelage of such peoples should be entrusted to
advanced nations who by reason of their resources, their
experience or their geographical position can beSt under-
take this responsibility, and who are willing to accept it, and
that this tutelage should be exercised by them as Mandatories
on behalf of the League.
The character of the mandate muSt differ according to the
Stage of the development of the the geographical
situation of the territoryTlfS economic conditions_andr other
similar^circumstances.
Certain communities formerly belonging to the Turkish
Empire have reached a Stage of development where their
existence as Jmiependent nations can be provisional
cognised subjedt to the adyice'
and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are
able to Stand alone. The wishes of these communities muSt
be a principal consideration in the seledtion of the Manda-
tory.
Other peoples, especially those of Central Africa, are at
such a Stage that the
administration of the territory under conditions which will
guarantee freedom of conscience and religion, subjedt only
A


to the maintenance of public order and morals, the pro-
hibition of abuses such as the slave trade, the arms traffic and
the licjuor traffic, and the prevention of the establishment of
fortifications or military and naval bases and of military
training of the natives .for other than police purposes and the
defence of territory, and will also serniyeqnfll oppprtniUdpg
There are territories, such as South-WeSt Africa and cer-
tain of the South Pacific Islands, which, owing to the
sparseness of .their population, or their small size, or their
remoteness from the centres of geo-
graphical contigußy-to the territory of the Mandatory, and
<sfher circumstances, can be beSt administered under the
laws_of-th£_Alandatory aaqiifcegral portions of its territory,
subject to the safeguards abpye-msntiaafcd iruhe iniereSts of
the indigenous population
In every case of mandate, the Mandatory shall render to
the Council an annual report in reference to the territory
committed to its charge.
The degree of authority, control or administration to be
exercised by the Mandatory shall, if not previously agreed
upon by the Members of the League, be explicitly defined in
each case by the Council.
A permanent Commission shall be constituted to receive
and examine the annual reports of the Mandatories and to
advise the Council on all matters relating to the observance
of the mandates.
ARTICLE XXII
Les principes suivants s’appliquent aux colonies et terri-
toires qui, a la suite de la guerre, ont cesse d’etre sous la
souverainete des Etats qui les gouvernaient precedemment
et qui sont habites par des peuples non encore capables de se
diriger eux-memes dans les conditions particulierement
difficiles du monde moderne. Le bien-etre et le developpe-
ment de ces peuples forment une mission sacree de civilisa-
tion, et il convient d’incorporer dans le present Pa6te des
garanties pour l’accomplissement de cette mission.


La meilleure methode de realiser pratiquement ce principe
eSt de confier la tutelle de ces peuples aux nations developpees
qui, en raison de leurs ressources, de leur experience ou de
leur position geographique, sont le mieux a meme d’assumer
cette responsabilite et qui consentent a l’accepter: elles
exerceraient cette tutelle en qualite de Mandataires et au
nom de la Societe.
Le caradtere du mandat doit differer suivant le degre de
developpement du peuple, la situation geographique du
territorie, ses conditions economiques et toutes autres cir-
constances analogues.
Certaines communautes, qui appartenaient autrefois a
l’Empire ottoman, ont atteint un degre de developpement tel
que leur existence comme nations independantes peut etre
reconnue provisoirement, a la condition que les conseils et
l’aide d’un Mandataire guident leur administration jusqu’au
moment ou elles seront capables de se conduire seules. Les
vceux de ces communautes doivent etre pris d’abord en con-
sideration pour le choix du Mandataire.
Le degre de developpement ou se trouvent d’autres
peuples, specialement ceux de l’Afrique centrale, exige que
le Mandataire y assume EadminiStration du territoire a des
conditions qui, avec la prohibition d’abus, tel que la traite des
esclaves, le trafic des armes et celui de l’alcool, garantiront la
liberte de conscience et de religion, sans autres limitations
que celles que peut imposer le maintien de l’ordre public et
des bonnes mceurs, et l’interdiCtion d’etablir des fortifica-
tions ou des bases militaires ou navales et de donner aux
indigenes une instruction militaire, si ce n’eSt pour la police
ou la defense du territoire et qui assureront egalement aux
autres Membres de la Societe des conditions d’egalite pour
les echanges et le commerce.
Enfin il y a des territoires, tels que le Sud-OueSt africain et
certaines lies du Pacifique auStral, qui, par suite de la faible
densite de leur population, de leur superficie reSlreinte, de
leur eloignement des centres de civilisation, de leur contiguite
geographique au territoire du Mandataire, ou d’autres cir-


Constances, ne sauraient etre mieux adminiStres que sous les
lois du Mandataire, comme une partie integrante de son
territoire, sous reserve des garanties prevues plus haut dans
I’interet de la population indigene.
Dans tousles cas le Mandataire doit envoyer au Conseil un
rapport annuel concernant les territoires dont il a charge.
Si le degre d’autorite, de controle ou d’administration a
exercer par le Mandataire n’a pas fait l’objet d’une conven-
tion anterieure entre les Membres de la Societe, il sera ex-
pressement Statue sur ces points par le Conseil.
line Commission permanente sera chargee de recevoir et
d’examiner les rapports annuels des Mandataires et de
donner au Conseil son avis sur toutes questions relatives a
l’execution des mandats.
Note the advisory character of the language in all but the
laSt three paragraphs. The French version should be com-
pared with the English.
The temporary nature of the mandate syStem is implied in
such phrases as “not yet able to Stand by themselves,”
“according to the Stage of development,” “until such time as
they are able to Stand alone,” but it is nowhere clearly laid
down that the great duty of the mandatory is to train the
mandated peoples for self-government.
Three classes of mandated territory are indicated, which
have come to be designated “A,” “B,” “C.”
In the case of “A” mandates, there is a declaration that “the
wishes of these communities mu SI be a principal considera-
tion in the sele&ion of the mandatory,” but this declaration
does not apply to “B” and “C.”
In the case of “B”mandates, it is suggeSled that there should
be equal opportunities for the trade and commerce of other
members of the League, but this suggestion is not made in
regard to “A” or “C.”
It is clear that the territories formerly belonging to
the Turkish Empire are to receive “A” mandates and


South-West Africa and the Pacific Islands “C” mandates, but
the position is not made clear in the Article as to the territories
to receive “B” mandates. “Other peoples, especially those
of Central Africa,” is vague.
There is no indication of the authority competent to
appoint the Mandatories nor of any power of the League to
revoke the appointments. The penultimate paragraph is
highly obscure. It is generally taken to mean that if the Mem-
bers of the League who have been appointed as Mandatories
do not produce draft mandates it will be the duty of the
Council to do so. Draft mandates have been prepared by the
Powers concerned and submitted to the Council.
Permission is given to “C” Mandatories to administer their
mandated territory as an integral part of their own posses-
sions, but this privilege is not specifically denied to “B” or
even to “A” Mandatories. The question has not arisen in
regard to the “A” territories, but it has arisen in regard to the
“B.”
The phrase “prohibition of abuses, such as the slave trade,
the arms traffic and the liquor traffic,” has given rise to much
controversy in respe6t of the liquor trade. Does Article 22
imply that the trade in intoxicating liquors is itself an abuse,
or is it the traffic in spirits with the natives that is referred to,
which is admittedly an abuse ?
MANDATE FOR GERMAN SOUTH-WEST AFRICA.
The Council of the League of Nations:
WHEREAS by article 119 of the Treaty of Peace with
Germany signed at Versailles on the 28th June, 1919,
Germany renounced in favour of the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers all her rights over her overseas posses-
sions, including therein German Africa; and
Whereas the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
agreed that, in accordance with article 22, part I (Covenant
of the League of Nations), of the said treaty, a mandate
should be conferred upon His Britannic Majesty, to be
exercised on his behalf by the Government of the Union of


South Africa, to administer the territory aforementioned,
and have proposed that the mandate should be formulated in
the following terms; and
Whereas His Britannic Maje Sty, for and on behalf of the
Government of the Union of South Africa, has agreed to
accept the mandate in respedt of the said territory and has
undertaken to exercise it on behalf of the League of Nations
in accordance with the following provisions; and
Whereas, by the aforementioned article 22, paragraph 8,
it is provided that the degree of authority, control or ad-
ministration to be exercised by the mandatory, not having
been previously agreed upon by the members of the League,
shall be explicitly defined by the Council of the League of
Nations:
Confirming the said mandate, defines its terms as
follows:
Article i.
The territory over which a mandate is conferred upon His
Britannic Maje Sty for and on behalf of the Government of
the Union of South Africa (hereinafter called the mandatory)
comprises the territory which formerly constituted the
German Protectorate of South-WeSt Africa.
Article 2.
The mandatory shall have_fulLpower of adminifl-ratinn
and legislation over the territory subjedt to the present mrm-
portion of the
may applyTße'lawsflf the TTniorLof Souih-A&ica to the teilL-
tory, subjedt to such local modifications as rirniroSbmres
may require.
The mandatory shall promote to the utmoSt the material
and moral well-being and the social progress of the inhabi-
tants of the territory subjedt to the present mandate.
Article 3.
The mandatory shall see that the slave trade is prohibited,
and that no forced labour is permitted, except for essential


public works and services, and then only for adequate re-
muneration.
The mandatory shall also see that the traffic in arms and
ammunition is controlled in accordance with principles
analogous to those laid down in the convention relating to
the control of the arms traffic, signed on the ioth September,
1919, or in any convention amending the same.
The supply of intoxicating spirits and beverages to the
natives shall be prohibited.
Article 4.
The military training of the natives, otherwise than for
purposes of internal police and the local defence of the terri-
tory, shall be prohibited. Furthermore, no military or naval
bases shall be established or fortifications erected in the
territory.
Article 5.
Subject to the provisions of any local law for the mainten-
ance of public order and public morals, the mandatory shall
ensure in the territory freedom of conscience and the free
exercise of all forms of worship, and shall allow all mission-
aries, nationals of any State member of the League of
Nations, to enter into, travel and reside in the territory for
the purpose of prosecuting their calling.
Article 6.
The mandatory shall make to the Council of the League of
Nations an annual report to the satisfaction of the Council,
containing full information with regard to the territory, and
indicating the measures taken to carry out the obligations
assumed under articles 2, 3,4 and 5.
Article 7.
The consent of the Council of the League of Nations is
required for any modification of the terms of the present
mandate.


The mandatory agrees that, if any dispute whatever should
arise between the mandatory and another member of the
League of Nations relating to the interpretation or the appli-
cation of the provisions of the mandate, such dispute, if it
cannot be settled by negotiation, shall be submitted to the
Permanent Court of International Justice provided for by
article 14 of the Covenant of the League of Nations.
The present declaration shall be deposited in the archives
of the League of Nations. Certified copies shall be forwarded
by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations to all
Powers signatories of the Treaty of Peace with Germany.
Made at Geneva the 17th day of December, 1920.
DRAFT MANDATE FOR EAST AFRICA (BRITISH)
(IN THE FORM IN WHICH THE COUNCIL OF
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS WILL BE INVITED
TO APPROVE IT).
The Council of the League of Nations:
WHEREAS by article 119 of the Treaty of Peace with Ger-
many signed at Versailles on the 28th June, 1919, Germany
renounced in favour of the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers all her rights over her oversea possessions, including
therein German EaSt Africa; and whereas, in accordance
with the treaty of the nth June, 1891, between Her Britannic
Majesty and His Maje Sty the King of Portugal, the River
Rovuma is recognised as forming the northern boundary of
the Portuguese possessions in EaSt Africa from its mouth up
to the confluence of the River M’Sinje; and
Whereas the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
agreed that in accordance with article 22, Part 1 (Covenant of
the League of Nations), of the said treaty a mandate should
be conferred upon His Britannic Majesty to administer part
of the former colony of German EaSt Africa, and have pro-
posed that the mandate should be formulated in the following
terms; and


Whereas His Britannic Maje Sly has agreed to accept the
mandate in respeCl of the said territory, and has undertaken
to exercise it on behalf of the League of Nations in accord-
ance with the following provisions;
Hereby approves the terms of the mandate as follows: —
Article i.
The territory over which a mandate is conferred upon His
Britannic Majesty (hereinafter called the mandatory) com-
prises that part of the territory of the former colony of
German EaSt Africa situated to the eaSt of the following
line:—
From the point where the frontier between the Uganda
Protectorate and German EaSl Africa cuts the River Ma-
vumba a straight line in a south-easterly direction to point
1640, about 15 kilom. south-south-weSl of Mount Gabiro;
Thence a Straight line in a southerly direction to the north
shore of Lake Mohazi, where it terminates at the confluence
of a river situated about 2J kilom. weSt of the confluence of
the River Msilala;
If the trad of the railway on the weSt of the River Kagera
between Bugufi and Uganda approaches within 16 kilom. of
the line defined above, the boundary v/ill be carried to the
weSl, following a minimum distance of 16 kilom. from the
trad , without, however, passing to the weSt of the Straight
line joining the terminal point on Lake Mohazi and the top
of Mount Kivisa (point 2100), situated on the Uganda-
German EaSt Africa frontier about 5 kilom. south-weSt of
the point where the River Mavumba cuts this frontier;
Thence a line south-eaStwards to meet the southern shore
of Lake Mohazi;
Thence the watershed between the Taruka and the
Mkarange and continuing southwards to the north-eaSlern
end of Lake Mugesera;
Thence the median line of this lake and continuing south-
wards across Lake Sake to meet the Kagera;


Thence the course of the Kagera downstream to meet the
weStern boundary of Bugufi;
Thence this boundary to its junction with the eaStern
boundary of Urundi;
Thence the eaStern and southern boundary of Urundi to
Lake Tanganyika.
The line described above is shown on the attached
British i: 1,000,000 map,* G.S.G.S. 2932, sheet Ruanda
and Urundi.
Article 2.
Boundary Commissioners shall be appointed by His
Britannic Maje Sty and His Maje Sty the King of the Belgians
to trace on the spot the line described in article 1 above.
In case any dispute should arise in connection with the
work of these Commissioners, the question shall be referred
to the Council of the League of Nations, whose decision shall
be final.
The final report by the Commissioners shall give the
definite description of this boundary as it has been actually
demarcated on the ground; the necessary maps shall be an-
nexed thereto and signed by the Commissioners. The report,
with its annexes, shall be made in triplicate; one copy shall
be deposited in the archives of the League of Nations, one
shall be kept by the Government of His Maje Sty the King of
the Belgians, and one by the Government of His Britannic
Maje Sty.
Article 3.
The mandatory shall be responsible for the peace, order
and good government of the territory, and shall undertake to
promote to the utmost the material and moral well-being and
the social progress of its inhabitants. The mandatory shall
have full powers of legislation and administration.
Article 4.
Xhe mandatory_shall not eSfablish3ny
b&segjiqr ereCt any fortifications, nor organise any native
* Not reproduced.


military force in the territory except for local police purposes
and for the clefence of the territory.
Article 5.
The mandatory —
(i). Shall provide for the eventual emancipation of all
slaves, and for as speedy an elimination of domestic
and other slavery as social conditions will allow;
(ii) Shall suppress all forms of slave trade;
(iii) . Shall prohibit all forms of forced or compulsory labour,
except for essential public works and services, and
then only in return for adequate remuneration;
(iv) Shall protedl the natives from abuse and measures of
fraud and force by the careful supervision of labour
contra<sfs and the recruiting of labour;
(v) Shall exercise a £tri<ft control over the traffic in arms
and ammunition and the sale of spirituous liquors.
Article 6.
The mandatory shall in the framing of laws relating to the
holding or transference of land take into consideration native
laws and customs, and shah
t h edTftereJbToft K(Tna tivep op illation.
No native land may be transferred, except between natives,
without the previous consent of the public authorities, and
no real rights over native land in favour of non-natives may
be created except with the same consent.
The mandatory will promulgate £lrid: regulations against
usury. .
Article 7. ™
The mandatory shall secure to all nationals of States
Members of the League of Nations the same rights
enjoyed in the territory by his own nationals in respect to
entry InTO and residence Tn the territory, ffie__prate<2ion
afforded to their person and property, the acquisition of
property, movable aild immovable, and the exercise of their


profession or trade, subject only to the requirements of
public and on condition of compliance with the local
law.
Further, the mandatory shall ensure to all nationals of
States Members of the League of Nations, oiLthe same foot-
ing as to his own nationalsfreedom of translf ahdmavTgatlorr.
and complete economic, commercial and industrial equality;
provided that tiieTnandaiory shall be free to organisVessen-
tial public works and services on such terms and conditions
as he thinks ju£t.
Concessions for the_development of the natural resources
o I lirWmTof y shall begranted by the mandatory without
di&in<sfion_on grounds of nationality between the nationals
of of Nation^ _ but on'sXlch
ogßdlfions~as will m3mtainJnta<sf the authority of the local
Government.
The rights conferred by this article extend equally to
companies and associationsorganisedinaccordance-with the
law of any of the Members of the League of Nations, subject
onlyiro the requirements of public order, and on condition of
compliance with the local law.
Article 8.
The mandatory shall ensure complete freedom of con-
science, and the free exercise of all forms of worship which
are consonant with public order and morality.
Missionaries of all such religions shall be free to enter the
territory, and to travel and reside therein, to acquire and
possess property, to ere<st religious buildings, and to open
schools throughout the territory.
The mandatory shall, however, have the right to exercise
such control as may be necessary for the maintenance of
public order and good government, and to take all measures
required for such control.
Article 9.
The mandatory shall apply to the territory any general in-
ternational conventions already existing, or which may be


concluded hereafter, with the approval of the League of
Nations respecting the slave trade, the traffic in arms and
ammunition, the liquor traffic, and the traffic in drugs, cTr?
relating to commercial equality, freedom of transit and!
navigation, aerial navigation, railways, postal,
and wireless communication, and industrial, literary
artiStic property.
The mandatory shall co-operate in the execution of any
common policy adopted by the League of Nations for pre-
venting and combating disease, including diseases of plants
and animals.
Article io.
The mandatory shall be authorised to constitute the terri-
torv into a cuStoms. fiscal and administrative uniprt 0 r
tion, with the adjacent territories under his own sovereignty
or control; provided always that the measures adopted to that
end do not infringe the provisions of this mandate.
Article ii.
The mandatory shall make to the Council of the League of
Nations an annual report to the satisfaction of the Council,
containing full information concerning the measures taken
to apply the provisions of this mandate.
A copy of all laws and regulations made in the course of the
year and affecting property, commerce, navigation or the
moral and material well-being of the natives shall be annexed
to this report.
Article 12.
The consent of the Council of the League of Nations is
required for any modification of the terms of this mandate;
provided that in the case of any modification proposed by the
mandatory such consent may be given by a majority.
Article 13.
If any dispute whatever should arise between the Members
of the League of Nations relating to the interpretation or
application of the present mandate, which cannot be settled


by negotiations, this dispute shall be submitted to the
Permanent Court of International Justice provided for by
article 14 of the Covenant of the League of Nations.
States Members of the League of Nations may likewise
bring any claims on behalf of their nationals for infractions
of their rights under this mandate before the said court for
decision.
The present copy shall be deposited in the archives of the
League of Nations. Certified copies shall be forwarded by
the Secretary-General of the League of Nations to all Powers
signatories of the Treaty of Peace with Germany.
DRAFT MANDATE FOR THE CAMEROONS
(BRITISH) (IN THE FORM IN WHICH THE
COUNCIL OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
WILL BE INVITED TO APPROVE IT).
The Council of the League of Nations:
WHEREAS by article 119 of the Treaty of Peace with
Germany signed at Versailles on the 28th June, 1919,
Germany renounced in favour of the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers all her rights over her oversea possessions,
including therein the Cameroons; and
Whereas the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
agreed that the Governments of France and Great Britain
should make a joint recommendation to the League of
Nations as to the future of the said territory; and
Whereas the Governments of France and Great Britain
have made a joint recommendation to the Council of the
League of Nations that a mandate to administer in accord-
ance with article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations
that part of the Cameroons lying to the weSt of the line
agreed upon in the Declaration of the 10th July, 1919,
annexed hereto, should be conferred upon His Britannic
Maje Sty; and
Whereas by the terms of the said joint recommendation
the Governments of France and Great Britain have proposed


that the mandate should be formulated in the following
terms; and
Whereas His Britannic Majesty has agreed to accept the
mandate in respedt of the said territory, and has undertaken
to exercise it on behalf of the League of Nations in accordance
with the following provisions;
Hereby approves the terms of the said mandate as
follows: —
Article i.
The territory over which a mandate is conferred upon His
Britannic comprises that part of the former colony of
the Cameroons which lies to the we£t of the line laid down in
the Declaration, signed on the ioth July, 1919, °f w hich a
copy is annexed hereto.
The delimitation on the spot of this line shall be carried
out in accordance with the provision of the said declaration.
The final report of the Mixed Commission shall give the
exadf description of the boundary line as traced on the spot;
maps signed by the Commissioners shall be annexed to the
report. This report with its annexes shall be drawn up in
triplicate, one of these shall be deposited in the archives of
the League of Nations, one shall be kept by His Britannic
Majesty’s Government, and one by the Government of the
French Republic.
Article 2.
The mandatory shall be responsible for the peace, order
and good government of the territory, and for the promotion
to the utmost of the material and moral well-being and the
social progress of its inhabitants.
Article 3.
The mandatory shall not establish in the territory any
military or naval bases, not eredl any fortifications, nor
organise any native military force except for local police
purposes and for the defence of the territory.


Article 4.
The mandatory—
(i) Will provide for the eventual emancipation of all
slaves, and for as speedy an elimination of domestic
and other slavery as social conditions will allow.
(ii) Will suppress all forms of slave trade.
(iii) Will prohibit all forms of forced or compulsory
labour, except for essential public works and services,
and then only in return for adequate remuneration.
(iv) Will protect the natives from abuse and measures of
fraud and force by the careful supervision of labour
contracts and the recruiting of labour.
(v) Will exercise a &ri<st control over the traffic in arms and
ammunition and the sale of spirituous liquors.
Article 5.
In the framing ol laws relating to the holding or transfer-
ence of land, the mandatory will take into consideration native
laws and customs, and will respeCt the rights and safeguard
the interests of the native population.
No native land may be transferred, except between natives,
without the previous consent of the public authorities, and no
real rights over native land in favour of non-natives may be
created except with the same consent.
The mandatory will promulgate 6triCt regulations against
usury.
Article 6.
The mandatory will secure to all nationals of States,
Members of the League of Nations, the same rights as are
enjoyed in the territory by his own nationals in respect to
entry into and residence in the territory, the protection
afforded to their person and property, and acquisition of
property, movable and immovable, and the exercise of their
profession or trade, subjeCt only to the requirements of
public order, and on condition of compliance with the local
law.


Further, the mandatory will ensure to all nationals of
States, Members of the League of Nations, on the same
footing as to his own nationals, freedom of transit and naviga-
tion, and complete economic, commercial and industrial
equality; provided that the mandatory shall be free to organise
essential public works and services on such terms and con-
ditions as he thinks juSt.
Concessions for the development of the natural resources
of the territory shall be granted by the mandatory without
distinction on grounds of nationality between the nationals
of all States, Members of the League of Nations, but on such
conditions as will maintain intaCt the authority of the local
Government.
The rights conferred by this article extend equally to com-
panies and associations organised in accordance with the law
of any of the Members of the League of Nations, subjeCt
only to the requirements of public order, and on condition of
compliance with the local law.
Article 7.
SubjeCl to the provisions of any local law for the main-
tenance of public order and public morals, the mandatory
shall ensure in the territory freedom of conscience and the
free exercise of all forms of worship, and shall allow all mis-
sionaries, nationals of any State, Member of the League of
Nations, to enter into, travel and reside in the territory for the
purpose of prosecuting their calling.
Article 8.
The mandatory shall apply to the territory any general
international conventions applicable to his contiguous
territory.
Article 9.
The mandatory shall have full powers of administration
and legislation in the area subjeCt to the mandate. This area
shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the
mandatory as an integral part of his territory and subjeCt to
the above provisions.


The mandatory shall therefore be at liberty to apply his
laws to the territory under the mandate subjedt to the modi-
fications required by local conditions, and to constitute the
territory into a customs, fiscal or administrative union or
federation with the adjacent possessions under his sovereignty
or control.
Article io.
The mandatory shall make to the Council of the League of
Nations an annual report to the satisfaction of the Council,
containing full information concerning the measures taken
to apply the provisions of the present mandate.
Article ii.
The consent of the Council of the League of Nations is
required for any modification of the terms of the present
mandate, provided that in the case of any modification pro-
posed by the mandatory such consent may be given by a
majority of the Council.
Article 12.
If any dispute whatever should arise between the Members
of the League of Nations relating to the interpretation or
application of this mandate which cannot be settled by nego-
tiations, this dispute shall be submitted to the Permanent
Court of International Justice provided for by article 14 of
the Covenant of the League of Nations.
The present copy shall be deposited in the archives of the
League of Nations. Certified copies shall be forwarded by the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations to all Members
of the League.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS.
THE MANDATE FOR SOUTH - WEST AFRICA
(“C” MANDATE).
Compare with Article 22.
Slave Trade. Note total prohibition, but no provision as in
Tanganyika Mandate for emancipation of existing slaves and
abolition of domestic slavery. It is presumed that these do
not exi£t and that consequently no provision is required.
Forced Labour. This is permitted for essential public works
and services. With proper safeguards, is this in itself a bad
thing? Is it worse than military conscription? Do any
European countries employ it ? Is it economically sound ?
Traffic in Arms and Ammunition. The Convention referred
to is the Convention of St. Germain. What is the present
position in regard to this Convention ?—see reports on Limi-
tation of Armaments presented to the Second Assembly,
obtainable from League of Nations Union offices.
Intoxicating Liquor. Prohibited to natives. Does this fulfil
the provisions of Article 22 ? What is the significance of the
word abuse in this connection ? Should there be any dis-
crimination between white and black ?
Freedom of Religion. Note “Missionaries, Nationals of any
State Member of the League of Nations.” Does this neces-
sarily exclude American missionaries or German mission-
aries ?
Equal Opportunities for Trade and Commerce. Note, no
provision in Mandate for this. In this connection observe the
importance of the word “also” at the end of paragraph 5 of
Article 22. Compare with “subjeCt to the safeguards above-
mentioned” in paragraph 6.
Nationality of Inhabitants. This is an important omission
in the Mandate.
A sub-committee of the Permanent Mandates Commission
has been engaged in an inquiry into this matter and will
shortly issue a report. It is essential that the national Status


of these people should be clearly defined and recognised.
Compare the national status of subjects of native States in
India (a) in the native States ( b ) in British India ( c ) outside
India.
THE MANDATE FOR TANGANYIKA (“B” MAN-
DATE).
Slavery. Total suppression of slave trade but no time limit
for the emancipation of domestic and other slaves. The
League of Nations Union has suggested a time limit of one
year.
Forced Labour. See remarks on Mandate for S.W. Africa.
Recruiting of Labour. Should the Mandatory assiSt in the
recruiting of labour for private contractors (a) within
(b) outside the mandated area ? The recruiting of labour for
work on the plantations in Africa is one of the moSt difficult
problems of administration and lends itself to the graveSt
abuses. The following questions are worth discussion.
(a) The right of the world in general to participate in
the natural produdts of any part of it.
(b) The right of the inhabitants of a country to main-
tain their own ways of living and resist the advance of
so-called civilisation.
(c) The difficulty of securing capital for the develop-
ment of the country unless a supply of labour is guaran-
teed.
(d) How elaSfic is the definition “essential public
works and services” ?
Land. No queSlion is more important to the African than
that of the land. In his present Stage of development it is
essential to the African to be able to own or at leaSt have
secure tenure of as much land as he can work. The indigenous
ownership of all land in S. Rhodesia has been alienated from
the native inhabitants.
No land syStem which does not guarantee the land and the
right to virgin foreSt produce to the native population should


be tolerated in a mandated area. A system whereby the land
is owned or leased by Europeans for whom the natives work
may conceivably assist the immediate development of the
country, but may be fatal to the development of the popula-
tion.
The clauses in regard to land in this mandated area are
designed to protect the interests of the native, but they might
have been worded more definitely in these interests. Com-
pare system in Northern Nigeria.
Equal Opportunities for Trade and Commerce. The article
in the Mandate seems to be entirely in the spirit of Article 22;
there is one omission, probably accidental, which may or
may not create difficulty. Thenghtto_prospe6ffor minerals
is not mentioned. It is not difficult to see how unfairly the
would work as regards concessions.
It is presumed that the rights granted to Nationals of
States Members of the League are accorded to the States
themselves.
A difficulty has arisen in regard to the rights of the United
States and citizens of the U.S.A. under this article. The same
difficulty applies to all non-members of the League. Should
non-members be excluded ?
Missions. Note that no restriction is put upon the nation-
ality of missionaries. This may be due to the faCt that there is
a large Moslem population. Why ?
International Conventions. Any omissions from Article 9
are not likely to be designed, but it is a pity to make a liSt
which is not complete — e.g ., no mention is made of the
traffic in women and children.
Relation of Mandated Area to Adjacent Territories. It was
no doubt for reasons of economy that this article was intro-
duced, but the permission to constitute such a federation
raises certain questions in the mind — e.g. —
(a). If protection is in force in the “adjacent territory”
what will happen to “equal opportunities” in the man-
dated area ?


(b) Will the revenues and expenditure of the terri-
tories be kept distindt ?
(c) Will troops raised and maintained in the mandated
area be used in the other ?
Eventual Self-Government. There is no hint in the Man-
date of any expectation of the territory achieving self-
government, no definite encouragement to the development
of self-governing institutions.
MANDATES FOR TOGO AND CAMEROONS
(BRITISH).
This is identical with the Mandate for Tanganyika, with
some exceptions.
Article 2. The la£t clause of Article 3 of the Tanganyika
Mandate is omitted. See Article 9.
What is the difference between this article and Article 8
of the Tanganyika Mandate?
Why are privileges accorded to missionaries only coming
from States Members of the League ?
Article 8. Compare with Article 9 of Tanganyika Mandate.
This implies that the Mandatory need not apply to the
mandated territory a convention which he has not accepted
for application to his own adjacent territory, even if that con-
vention has been approved by the League of Nations. It is
difficult to resist a suspicion that an undesirable loophole is
left by this article. What sort of situation might arise as a
result of it ?
Article 9. Compare with Article 10 of Tanganyika Man-
date.
In this article the Draft Mandate very definitely goes out-
side the provisions of Article 22. It is clear from that article
that it was not contemplated that the areas in Central Africa
should be administered as integral parts of the territory of the
Mandatory. The principal reason for this departure is no
doubt economy, but if these Draft Mandates are eventually
accepted by the Council of the League, great care will have to


be exercised that the sanction of this change in principle is not
abused.
Note particularly the absence of the saving clause “provided
always that the measures adopted to that end do not infringe
the provisions of this Mandate” except in a modified form.
Article io. The laSt clause of Article 11 of the Tanganyika
Mandate is omitted. Again it is difficult to avoid asking the
question “Why ?” It may be noted, however, that the report
of the French Government submitted to the Permanent
Mandates Commission in October, 1921, contained in an
annex all the regulations which had been applied to the
territory of the Cameroons under their administration.
DRAFT MANDATES FOR TOGO AND THE CAME-
ROONS (FRENCH).
These are identical with the British Mandates for Togo
and the Cameroons, except in one or two minor points of
drafting and in one moSt important point.
To Article 3 a paragraph is attached as follows: —
“It is understood, however, that the troops thus raised
may, in the event of a general war, be utilised to repulse an
attack or for defence offSeterritory outside that over which
the Mandate is administered.”
This means, briefly, that if the need arises, the French
may employ in Europe or elsewhere black troops recruited in
mandated areas.
For this no possible justification can be found in the
Covenant—it is, indeed, direStly contrary to the spirit of
Article 22; but this arrangement was made between France
and the other Allied and Associated Powers before the
Covenant was signed.
We have here an instance, which will give food for thought,
of the open diplomacy of the League being hampered by the
secret diplomacy of the Supreme Council.
The Draft Mandate for Belgian E. Africa does not contain
this provision: it is pra6tically identical otherwise with the
French Mandates for Togoland.


CONCLUSION.
The real advance brought about by the Mandate system is
that the responsibility for good administration in certain
backward territories is shared to some extent by all the
Members of the League, and to some extent also by the
general public in all countries.
Not very many years ago the people of Great Britain were
shocked by the atrocities in the Congo. They were rightly
shocked, and perhaps more readily shocked than they would
have been by tales of atrocities in British EaSt Africa, but
they could do nothing except raise their voices on high. Now
something can be done. If the British administration in
Togoland does not conform to the Mandate, the people of
Haiti or Finland or Siam have the right not only to feel
shocked, but to take action in the matter through their repre-
sentatives on the League of Nations.
What is essential to the success of the Mandate syStem is the
courageous and persistent exercise of this right of vigilance
and criticism. Article 22 does not do away with the necessity
of constant watchfulness over the interests of the populations
concerned by those outside gifted with a sense of responsi-
bility for right and juStice, it increases that necessity all the
more that it provides the means for useful and definite
a<stion.
The successful application of the Mandate syStem will
have an enormous effe<st in raising the Standard of administra-
tion in all territories similar to those under Mandate. A
Government in a mandated area really inspired by the princi-
ples of Article 22 will form a criterion by which other Govern-
ments can be judged.
Only, however, by the determined and untiring effort of
those on whom the sense of responsibility is laid will this
“sacred truSt of civilisation” be discharged.


PUBLICATIONS OF THE LEAGUE OF
NATIONS UNION
Headway: The Journal of the League of Nations Union
(Monthly) ° 3
BOOKS AND PAMPHLETS
No. 7 The Covenant: Text. 7 s. 6 d. per 100 o 1
No. 8 Peace Treaty of Versailles —Part XIII. Labour.
7 s. 6 d. per 100 0 1
No. 34 The Covenant Explained, with introduction by
Professor Gilbert Murray 1 0
No. 16 The League of Nations: Its Achievements and
Machinery, 7 s. 6 d. per 100 o 1
No. 17 The League of Nations Union : What it has done
and is doing, 7 s. 6 d. per 100 01
The First Assembly (postage 3d.) 3 &
No. 56 Geneva, 1921, by H. Wilson Harris o 6
A Plan for Government by Mandate in Africa,
by Norman Leys, M. 8., D.P.H. 0 7
No. 32 Christianity and the League of Nations, by
Dr. Maxwell Garnett 0 6
No. 30 Armaments Can be Reduced: Opinions of famous
sailors and soldiers, with foreword by General Smuts o 3
No. 64 The Question of Upper Silesia o 3
No. 66 An Insurance Against War 06
No. 72 League of Nations and the Schools, by Dr.
Maxwell Garnett 0 3
No. 73 What Should Germany Pay? o 3
No. 76 A League of Nations Policy, Speech by Lord
Robert Cecil 0 3
No. 74 The First Fruits of the League of Nations:
7 s. 6 d. per 100 01
No. 75 Two Years’ Work of the League of Nations
(notes for speakers) 1 0
No. 58 British Business and the League of Nations,
155. per 100 0 2
No. 61 The Study and Teaching of International
Relations: by Dr. J. F. Unstead. 7 s. 6 d. per 100 o 1
FOR STUDY CIRCLES
No. 14 Hints to Study Circle Leaders o 3.
No. 77 Constitution of the League o 6
No. 78 Guarantees of the League. (In preparation )
No. 79 Auxiliary Organisations of the League. (In
preparation)
No. 80 Treaty Obligations of the League. (Inprepar-
ation)
No. 81 Mandates in Africa 0 8
No. 82 Humanitarian Activities of the League. (In the
press)


No. 83 Political Activities of the League. (In prepara- s. d.
tion)
No. 84 Economic Functions of the League {lnprepara-
tion)
No. 85 International Labour Organisation. {ln
preparation)
FOR CHILDREN
No. 35 Peggy and the League of Nations: by Mrs. F. S.
Hallowes t 5
No. 24 The Wonderful League: by F. J. Gould o 3
LEAFLETS
No. 11 Driving Power: Application Form
In bulk only. 2 s. 6 d. per 100; 22 5. 6 d. per 1,000.
No. 20 A Vital Question
In bulk only. 2 s. 6 d. per 100; 225. 6 d. per 1,000
No. 21 What Happened in the Great War
In bulk only. is. 6 d. per 100; 12s. 6 d. per 1,000
No. 25 The Christ of the Andes
In bulk only. 6d. per doz.; 35. gd. per 100; 355. per 1,000
No. 31 The Burden of Armaments
In bulk only. 45. per 100; 355. per 1,000
No. 36 Litany and Prayers
2s. 6 d. per 100; 225. 6 d. per 1,000
No. 37 Hymns
25. 9 d. per 100; 255. per 1,000
No. 55 Your Children
3 s. 6 d. per 100; 325. 6 d. per 1,000
Notes for Teachers, by F. J. Gould.
12s. 6 d. per 100
History and the League, by F. S. Marvin.
125. 6 d. per 100
BOOKS NOT PUBLISHED BY THE LEAGUE OF
NATIONS UNION
x ° uniV7iN s. d.
The Second Year of the League, by H. W. V. Temperley
(Hutchinson) 6 o
Handbook to the League of Nations, by Sir Geofrey
Butler (Longmans) 5 o
The Truth about the Treaty, by A. Tardieu. (Hodder &
Stoughton) 25 o
The Peace Negotiations: A Personal Narrative , by R.
Lansing (Constable & Co.) 16 o
What Really Happened at Paris: Edited by Edward
Mandel House and Charles Seymour. (Hodder
& Stoughton) 25 o
The League of Nations Starts: An Outline, by its Or-
ganisers. (Macmillan) 10 6
Printed at the Pelican Press, 3 Carmelite Street, E.C.
March 1923




