

MANIFESTO
of the
Communist Party
of Australia
The New South Wales State elec-
tions take place at a time when the
working class of Australia is facing
the concentrated fire of the triple alli-
ance of the capitalist class, the gov-
ernment, and the reactionary officials
at the head of the trade union move-
ment. The offensive against wages,
hours and conditions of labor is being
carried to a new high stage by the
Federal Labor Government, willingly
backed up by the various Labor and
Nationalist governments in control of
the political machinery of the vari-
ous states of the Commonwealth.
The economic crisis grows deeper
week by week. In glaring contrast
to the promises of the Federal Labor
Party that If placed in office the un-
employed crisis would be overcome,
the number of unemployed has con-
stantly Increased, until to-day there
are some 400,000 Jobless men, women
and youth In the Commonwealth.
FEROCIOUS ATTACKS OF CAPI-
TALISM ON ALL SECTIONS OF
THE WORKERS
One section after another of the
working class falls victim of the ra-
pacious attacks of the capitalist class.
The alliance of capitalist class, gov-
ernment and reactionary trade union
bureaucracy has successively launch-
ed ferocious attacks against the water-
side workers, the timber workers, the
miners, the metal workers, the rail
and tramway workers, the meat work-
ers, the pastoral workers, and every
day sees new and vicious attacks in-
itiated thiough the Federal Arbitration
Courts.
The Scullin Federal Labor Govern-
ment is directly responsible for the
present intensification of the drive
against the working class that was in-
itiated under its tory predecessor, the
Bruce government. The Lang forces
in New South Wales try to create illu-
sions among the workers to the effect
that conditions in this State are due
to the existence of the Bavin Nation-
alist Government. The workers must
understand that the State machine of
the capitalist class is an organic
whole, and that the various State gov-
ernments are merely so many adjuncts
that strengthen the oppressive politi-
cal power of the capitalist class. The
same monstrous oppression that char-
acterises the Bavin Government In
New South Wales is operative in all
States where a State Labor Govern-
ment Is in control. The recent his-
tory of Labor in office is one of or-
ganised murder, batoning, gaoling,
scab herding and strike breaking. In
these attacks against the workers the
State Labor Governments receive the
enthusiastic support of the Nation-
alists.
VUE HfTEWESTS Of NATION ALFBT
PARTY
The Nationalist Party represents the
Interests of those bankers, insurance
concerns, Federal and State bond-
holders, shipping corporations and
others connected exclusively with the
exploitation of the primary producers
in Australia. They maintain strong
ties with British imperialism and
strive to mantaln the. old system of
furnishing raw material t') British in-
dustries and keeping Australia as a
market for the finished products of
British industry. At the same time
a section of the nationalists tend to
defend the interests of those Austra.
liau bankers, industrialists, and bond
holders whose policy is to develop
“home industry,” and become a self-
sustaining capitalist country, thereby
coming into conflict with the policy
of British imperialism.
THE INTERESTS OF THE A.L.P.
The Australian Labor Party is the
Party of those capitalist elements who
fight for the building up of a self-suffi-
cient industrial machine in Australia.
The high tariff policy of the Federal
Labor government is in the interest
of that section of the capitalist class,
and is designed to shut out overseas
competition on the “home market,”
thereby enabling it to charge mono-
polistic prices for its products here.
But, also, like the Nationalist Party,
there are elements in the ranks of the
Australian Labor Party that defend
the interests of the “primary indus-
tries” as against those of the “se-
condary industries.” „ •
Hence, both parties are parties of
capitalism, the difference being that
the leading elements of one Party re-
present one section of the capitalist
class while the leading elements of the
other represent another section of the
capitalist class.
Certain capitalist elements, having
investments in both “primary” and
“secondary” industry, flounder back
and forth between the Nationalist,
Country and Labor Parties, on© time
believing that the solution of their
difficulties lies in developing “home
industries,” another time thinking that
everything should be sacrificed for the
“primary industries” and strengthen-
ing of “Empire ties.” And in the
election campaigns each capitalist
party tries to persuade all the capi-
talist class that it alone represent*
the interests of all of society, tha>
mythical entity, called “the people.”
If the Lang forces mention the work
ing class as a class it is only in order
to carry on their deceptive policy of
class collaboration by telling the work-
ers that their Interests are bound up
with the interests of the industrial
capitalist group and its high tariff
policy
PARTY IN POWER REPRESENTS
ENTIRE CAPITALIST CLASS
When in power, both parties (Na-
tionalist-Country and Labor), regard


less of the special capitalist interests
they serve, represent the entire capi-
talist class in its fight against the
working class. The conflict between
“primary” and “secondary” industries,
about which the economists of the
university chairs talk so much, fades
into insignificance before the united
efforts of the v'hole caiptalist class to
place the burden of its crisis upon the
backs of the workers and the poor
and middle farmers.
The Labor Party is able to function
as a better agent of capitalism than
the Nationalist Party precisely be-
cause it is able, through the mobilisa-
tion in its support of the Social Fas-
cist trade union bureaucracy, to tie
the official machinery of the unions to
its policy of treachery and betrayal.
Thus it has formerly been able to tie
a considerable section of the working
class to the political party that actu-
ally has as its basis the bankers,
bondholders and industrialists whose
Interests lie in the development of
Australian industry, a class that is
more and more striving toward an im-
perialist policy of its own.
The Labor Party has utilised its
traditional machinery of Arbitration
and industrial peace to enforce its
wage cuts and lengthening of hours
upon the working class. The compul-
sory Arbitration Courts served as in-
struments of social reformism in pre-
vious periods. In former times, when
workers through strike action could
have obtained large increases in
«D, 6 es, reductions of hours and im-
provement of working conditions,
these courts acted as a brake upon the
movement, by granting slight in-
creases in wages and reductions in
hours. At that time the social re-
formists of the world praised the Aus-
tralian policy of “avoiding strikes,”
through compulsory Arbitration. Now,
however, in this period of capitalist
decline, these courts still serve the
Interests of the capitalist class against
the working class, no longer granting
even trivial Increases, but as the initi-
ators of wage cuts, lengthening of
hours, and the whole program of ra
tionalisation with its resultant, mass
unemployment.
In New South Wales, as in all other
States, the Labor bureaucracy that
now pretends to fight the Nationalists
in this campaign, aids in the attacks
upon the. workers by fighting every
effort on the part of the Communists
and the rank and file to resist the
capitalist offensive.
LANG DIFFERENTIATES HIMSELF
FROM SCULLIN
So utterly discredited is the Scullia
Government that Lang, the leader of
the Labor Party in New South Wales,
realises that he will be repudiated in
the State elections unless he differen-
tiates himself from Scullin.
But this same Lang, who now tries
to create the illusion that the Labor
Party itself is all right, but that some
ol Its leaders in the Federal Cabinet
are no good, has consistently defended
the Scullin Government up until the
very eve of the election, in a speech
in the Legislative Assembly on April
9th, Jiang denied that there were any
serious difficulties in the inner struc-
ture of Australian capitalism and made
the astonishing declaration that the
Federal Labor Government, through
its tariff policy, had solved all the
outer conflicts that affect Australian
economy. Said this mountebank on
that occasion:
“The only difficulties that exist-
ed —and they were real difficul-
ties —were between Australia and
the outside world, and, as we have
seen, the Labor Prime Minister
has overcome them.”
The above is nothing more or less
than a denial of the class struggle in
Australia; a denial that the misery,
poverty and suffering of the masses is
due to the fact that the Australian
capitalist class, through its vicious
class oppression of the workers, is
responsible for conditions that exist
to-day. It is an attempt to conceal
from the workers the fact that their
mortal enemy is here on Australian soil
—the Australian capitalist class that
not only carries on a relentless cam-
paign with the aid of the government
and the trade union bureaucracy to
impose slave conditions upon the
workers, but that is definitely embark-
ing upon an imperialist policy of its
own and already exercises a League
of Nations mandate over a large sec-
tion of New Guinea where, with ap-
proved imperialist methods, it exploits
the inhabitants, of that unfortunate
land.
SOCIALISATION OF INDUSTRY
Among the most deceptive methods
of the left Social Fascists in their ef-
forts to elect Lang to office so that
he can become an official part of the
machinery for suppressing the work-
ing class is the propaganda for “so-
cialisation of industry” and the selec-
tion of a committee to attain that aim
within the confines of the capitalist
system. This is the worst kort of re-
actionary deception, inasmuch as it
creates the illusion that socialisation
of industry can be achieved without
the revolutionary destruction of the
capitalist state and the establishment
of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
It is an attemtp to impose a dirty
swindle upon the radicalised workers
who are moving toward the revolu-
tionary position of the Communist
Party by making a phrase-mongering
trrresty of revolutionary slogans.
Lang’s energetic support of the
plans for winning oil from coal is an
attempt to foster barren illusions that
the industry can again be made pros-
perous and at the same time to ad-
vance the preparations for using Aus-
tralia as a base of supplies for im-
perialism's next war.


The “White Australia- policy of the
A.L.P. is nothing more or less than
service to imperialism in its campaign
of armed terror against the native
workers of colonies and semi-colonies
(mandated territories) in the Pacific.
It is also one of the articles of faith
In the war program of British imperial-
ism inasmuch as it is designed to di-
vide the exploited masses of the Paci-
fic on racial and color lines, thereby
preventing class unity against the
common enemy.
RAOICALISATION OF MASSES DES-
PITE A.L.P. DENIAL OF CLASS
STRUGGLE
In spite of the A.L.P. denial of the
class struggle; in spite of its attempts
to deceive the working masses who
have formerly followed its policies,
the working class is showing in action
that it will resist the capitalist offen-
sive. Every day brings forth new
struggles that indicate the rapid radi-
callsation of the working masses. This
radicalisation expressed itself yester-
day in the heroic struggles of the
watersiders, the timber workers, the
miners, the unemployed demonstra-
. tions (especially Darwin), and is to-
day evident in the fight of the shearers
and the militant fight of the water-
side workers at Adelaide. The unem-
ployed, the shearers, the Adelaide
waterside workers rejected their re-
actionary trade union leadership and
came to the Communist Party for a
militant lead. The strike strategy and
the revolutionary determination of
the Communist Party revealed in re-
cent strikes has raised the prestige of
our Party enormously among the lab’»r
ing masses. Thousands of workers
recognise in the Communist Party the
one Party of the working class and
follow our lead in economic struggles,
all of which from the first assume a de-
finite political character in this period.
Just as our activity in the strike
struggles has been solely directed to-
ward strengthening the power of the
working class in its resistance to the
capitalist offensive, so our participa-
tion in the election campaign is for
the purpose of mobilising the masses
for a still more determined struggle
to turn the defensive fight into a
counter offensive against capitalism.
Against the open capitalist program
of the Nationalist Party and its
Country Party twin, and the anti-
working class Labor Party, we enter
the fight on a program of Class against
Class:
1. Work or full maintenance for the
unemployed. A fund to be raised by
special taxation upon the capitalists,
and administered by workers’ com-
mittees. Full wages for all relief
work (building workers’ dwellings,
hospitals, etc.),
2. No eviction of unemployed and
no furniture seizures. No foreclosures
on workers’ homes.
2. The seven-hour day and the five-
ifay tfeek; the six-hour day and fir©*
day week in all hazardous industries
(mining, etc.).
4. A living wage on the basis of an
Increased standard of living.
5. Equal pay to women and youth
for equal work.
6. The unrestricted right to organise
and strike.
7. The abolition of compulsory arbi-
tration and all forms of class collabo-
ration.
8. Abolition of child labor.
9. Abolition of night work for
women. Vacation with pay two
months before and two months after
child birth.
19. Pull wages during periods of
disability of any kind.
11. Abolition of all wage taxes and
all income taxes on incomes under
£4OO.
12. Increase of old age pensions to
trade union rates to apply to workers
past fifty.
13. Prohibition of foreclosures on
farm mortgages.
14. Agricultural laborers and all
noor and middle farmers to receive
the basic industrial wage.
15. Special grants of money for
strike funds and for relief of strikers
and their dependants.
1(5. Fight against all Fascist attacks
on workers. Organise proletarian
self-defence corps against police and
shock troops of capitalism. In office
the Communists will attempt to dis-
arm police and capitalists and organise
an armed workers’ militia.
17. Fight in defence of the Soviet
Union.
Wage mass drives in defence of
the Soviet Union, Hands off India cam-
paigns. in defence of the Chinese re-
volution.
19. Fight against imperialist war by
utilising positions in legislative coun-
cil to mobilise the workers for mass
struggles in all campaigns against
imperialism.
20. Utilise public auditoriums for
workers’ meetings and as centres to
which soldiers, sailors and other mem-
bers of the armed forces may con-
gregate for educational purposes in
connection with the fight against im-
perialist war, in defence of the Soviet
Union, the Indian, Chinese and other
colonial and semi-colonial countries.
21. Immediate and complete inde-
pendence for New Guinea and all
mandated, colonial and semi-colonial
territories.
22. Fight the “White Australia”
policy and abolish immigration re
strlctions against other races.


23. Increase all taxes of the proper-
tied classes, particularly the wealthier
stratum to finance measures for
strengthening fighting capacity of the
working class; especially for support
of workers’ mass organisations, edu-
cational, cultural, sport organisations,
Workers’ International Relief, Inter-
national Class War Prisoners’ Aid, etc.
24. Repudiation of all war debts,
whether abroad or in Australia.
COMMUNIST PARTY LAUNCHES
COUNTER OFFENSIVE
In this election campaign the Com-
munist Party, the vanguard of the
working class, continues the policy it
has followed in the everyday economic
struggles—mobilisation of the-working
class for the purpose of generating
sufficient power to launch a counter
offensive against capitalism. We par-
ticipate in this campaign in order to
prove to the workers the fact that
they can never attain their emanci-
pation from wage slavery through acts
of parliament, or through the parlia-
mentary form of government, which is
a special class institution that enables
the capitalist class to impose its will
by force and violence upon the work-
ing class. We utilise this campaign
in order to win the masses of workers
away from the treacherous Australian
Labor Party, which is to-day the leader
of the capitalist offensive, and enlist
them in the ranks of the revolution-
ary party of the working class.
During the campaign and after the
campaign, just as before this election
campaign started, the Communist
Party will continue to organise the
workers in Industry, on the basis of
factory committees, committees of ac-
tion. and during strikes will set up
rank and file strike committees as the
machinery through which the econo-
mic struggles can be carried on and
developed into political struggles
against the capitalist class. As these
mass struggles reach higher stages
our partial demands and slogans will,
be replaced by ever more revolution-
ary demands.
When elected to parliamentary
office the Communist legislators will in
no sense endeavor to uphold the laws
of the State or the Commonwealth,
but will utilise such positions to ex-
pose and ridicule such laws. Instead
of speaking to the servile lackeys of
capitalism representing the National-
ists, the Country Party and the Aus-
tralian Labor Party inside parliament
we will use our positions in parliament
to speak over their heads to the mass-
es outside in order to discredit parlia-
ment and all organs of the capitalist
state, and mobilise the workers for its
destruction.
COMMUNISTS RESPONSIBLE ONLY
TO THE WORKING CLASS
Comunists in parliament are the
direct representatives of the working
class and responsible only to the work-
ing class. That responsibility is main-
tained through living, constant contact
with the masses In Industry. Workers
in all big industrial (metal, railway,
mining, water transport, electrical
power, public service, etc.) arwi in the
Unemployed Workers’ Movement will
be requested co elect delegates as ad-
visors to Communist members of legis-
lative bodies; delegates who will pre-
sent to the representatives of the
working class in parliament, the every-
day problems of the workers as they
arise in the factories, the mines, on
the railroads, and in every other in-
dustry, and who will report back to
the masses of workers the activity of
their parliamentary representatives.
The Communist members of parlia-
ment will, in turn, become connect-
ed with workers’ committees in the
industries, and aside from their ser-
vices m parliament will actively aid
in carying on the everyday struggle
in the industries against the bosses.
In the same way will contact be
ouilt up through the Communist legis-
lators and the rank and file of the
army, navy, and all branches of the
so-called defence forces, so that these
workers in uniform may be mobilised
as a part of the working class struggle
against capitalism.
In this campaign as in all others,
the Communist Party fights as the im-
placable foe of capitalism and all its
agents. We hold aloft the banner of
revolution—the crimson emblem of
Class against Classl
The Communist Party calls upon the
workers and farmers to rally to the
one Party that serves their class in-
terests in this campaign. Only by
treading the revolutionary path of the
Communist Party will the workers and
poor farmers, in the growing economic
and political struggles, be able to de-
stroy the state power of capitalism and
establish in its place a workers and
farmers’ government, on the basis of
the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.
Vote Class against Class!
Yota Communist I
WORKERS OF
GLEBE
VOTE THUS:
B HUGGETT, H. J.
and the irest of the candidates
in any order.
You MUST vote for all
candidates.
Vote COMMUNIST First
Authorised by
PAT DREW
Campaign Director,
396 Sussex Street, Sydney,
Wricht k. Baker, IS DtStOn St., City.
