

aNI FE S T o^-^
—OF THE
ilonists’ Anti-Convention Bill League
TO THE ELECTORS OF NEW SOUTH WALES
the course of the next few weeks you will
be called upon to say “Yes” or “No” to the
uestion whether you approve of the terms
inch it is proposed Australia shall federate,
r ' occasion marks a grave crisis in the affairs
o* only of the people of New South Wales, but
if ud Australia. Great care and deep considera-
Ui should, therefore, precede the vote of every
Being in favor of he union of the Aus-
. colonies is not in itself sufficient to justify
i v in favor of the present Bill. One may be
-<tly in favor of the federation of Australia
ill be emphatically opposed to the condi-
orescribed by the Convention Bill. That,
a, is the position of those who here take the
of addressing you.
The Union Desired.
nat there is in New South Wales a widespread
-e for the union of the Australian colonies is
'Hifc'ide the region of doubt. The form of union
dc. ed we believe to be one which, while leaving
•.he States in a position of perfect independence
in regard to many questions of local concern,
v ould permit matters of common interest to all
ralians — i.e. , the affairs of the nation at
■e —to be dealt with according to the will of
majority of Australian people.
*he Death-Knell of Majority Rule.
The fatal and unchangeable defect of the Con-
tention Bill is that it does not provide for this.
It proposes that the Federal Legislature shall
consist of two Houses—the House of Representa-
tives in which the people of the various States
are represented according to their numbers (ex-
cept that Tasmania and West Australia are to
have five instead of their due number, three), and
the Senate—or States House—in which each
State, large or small, is represented by six (6)
Senators. That is to say, New South Wales
with 1,323,000, Victoria with 1,176,000, South
Australia with 363,000, Tasmania with 171,000,
and Western Australia with 161,000 persons are
all placed upon a precisely equal footing. The
effect of constituting the Senate in this way is to
impose an insuperable obstacle in the way of
majority rule, and to implant in the Constitution
the seeds of inevitable discord. Seven hundred
thousand (700,000) people in the three smaller
States will possess between them 18 Senators,
whilst two millions and a half (2,500,000) in the
two larger States will be represented by only 12
Senators. This would give a minority of people
50 per cent, more power in the Senate than was
possessed by 3J times their number; and as in
every essential regard the Senate would wield
powers co-equal with those possessed by the
House of Representatives, it is plain that the
representatives of about one-fourth of the total
population could keep the rest of the nation at
bay until it agreed to the terms which the
minority were pleased to dictate.
The Birth of Minority Rule in
Australia.
The meaning and effects of this are obvious,.
It two and a half millions of people desire a.
policy of Protection, they cannot have it unless a
mere fraction of the population agree to give it
to them. If an overwhelming majority of the
nation demand direct taxation they must wait the
minority’s pleasure before they can have it.
Should the preference of the nation, speak-
ing with majority-voice, be for a “ freetrade
tariff,” this cannot be secured without the
assent of the same small, but all-powerial,
minority. To a handful of people is given the
power to mould the franchise of federated
Australia. In the same quarter is vested the
power of determining what measure of restriction
shall be adopted towards alien races and un-
desirable immigrants. It is for the minority, too,
to say what shall be the scope and character of
the laws establishing uniformity of procedure in
regard to marriage and divorce over all Australia.
It must be borne in mind that whatever consti-
tution may be adopted, it is not for a day, or for
a year, but for all time. The day may come
when Federated Australia will have the right
(by England’s invitation) to support or dis-
countenance treaties with other nations.
The answer to such questions must be de-
cided upon in accordance with the will of the


securely-entrenched minority, so that, even in
questions involving peace or war, the power of
arbitrament would rest with them.
The Government of postal and telegraph
services, the regulation of the currency, bank-
ruptcy laws, laws relating to invalid and old age
pensions, the determination of industrial disputes,
military naval arrangements, and a score of
other questions stand in the same position.
If three map-divisions (called States) con-
taining one-fourth of the population say
“ no ” to two map-divisions embracing the other
three-fourths, the former prevail. The question
to be determined by your vote is whether
Felerated Australia shall be governed by men or
by localities. Moreover the mischief is put out
of the reach of being healed by time, because the
■Convention Bill provides tha no State sha ever
lose its equal representation in the Senate, with-
out the consent of a majority of its own electors.
The Constitution of the Senate in short rings
the death-knell of majority rule. It takes out
of the hands of the majority of Australian people
the supreme power of the purse—the most
dearly-bought and dearly-prized political privi-
lege of British peoples—and thus keeps alive in
their most dangerous form the elements of friction
and provincial disunity which the avowed object
of Federation is to blot out.
The Deadlock Fraud.
You will be told that the Constitution Bill
contains a provision for the solution of deadlocks
in cases where the representatives of a minority
veto the demands of a majority. The effective
value of the provision is laid bare by the follow-
ing statement: —In order to be carried by means
of the “ deadlock device,” a Bill must run the
gauntlet of the following process: (1) It must be
debated and passed in the House, and debated
and rejected in the Senate ; (2) all efforts at
settlement, by conference of the Houses or other-
wise, must fail; (3) a rigid interval of three
months in all cases, however urgent, must then
elapse; (4) the first step must be repeated;
(5) both Houses must be dissolved and a double
set of elections—to the House and to the Senate
—must be held ; (6) the Bill must be passed by
the new House and piesente for a fresh
“notice of dishonor” to the Senate; and then
(7) a combined sitting of the two Houses must be
held, and there must be three-fifths of those
present in its favor. It is a fact that in no case
whatever could the majority have its way unless
it numbered 42 out of 64 votes in the representa-
tive Chamber. Moreover, the “ quota ” principle
of a fixed ratio between House and Senate makes
this 2 to 1 majority necessary for ever, whilst, if
the voting followed approximately the lines of
State division, it would be possible for the re-
presentatives of 860,000 people to outvote the
representatives of 2,340,000 people.
The Dangers Involved.
Such is the process for, and the prospect of,
victory for the majority of Australians over the
minority. And as the Senate is clothed with full
power to reject all measures, including tariff
aws and supply bills, it could, by opposing the
former, derange business almost to the point of
paralysis, and, by opposing the latter, render the
Government incapable of paying the Civil
Service, while in either case a state of chaos
would exist which could only end in the voluntary
submission of the minority, or the enforced sub-
mission of the majority of the people. How is it
possible that Australians can ever become one
if, after they have come together in name, they
are thus kept apart in fact ?
The Lesson of Experience.
In its most objectionable feature, the Consti-
tution which is now before you is a slavish copy
of a Constitution —that of the United States of
America which was framed more than a
hundred years ago at. time of intense pressure
from without and danger from within, and
when political liberty, as we know it, was hardly
in its dawning. Of necessity that Constitution
takes no account of the progress of political
thought during the most remarkable century in
the world’s history. The United States Consti-
tution, framed as it was by the ablest political
intellects of the day, was, like the Convention
Bill, recommended by its framers as a model of
constitutional wisdom tempered by necessity.
Within 60 years after its adoption America was
split asunder by the great Civil War, which
spilled the blood of a million men and cost two
thousand million pounds of public money, apart
from property destroyed. The direct cause of
that war was the constitutional provision for
State Sovereignty and State Bight, which we
here indict as the basis of the Senate of the
Convention Bill.
Canada and Germany.
Our kinsmen in Canada saw the mischief
worked at their doors by the American Constitu-
tion, and profited by the lesson we are expected
to ignore. Their Senate, accordingly, represents
the nation at large; it is not based on equal
representation of States, and does not possess the
power of the purse. Feeling then, as we must
feel now, that no man can tell what disputes
still lie in embryo within the womb of time, the
Canadians took care that there could be no
doubt that every dispute that should arise
was to be decided by the ballots, not by the
bullets, of the majority The German Federa-
tion also discarded the equal representation of
States as a fraud upon union and justice, as
well as upon common-sense.
The Financial Load upon N.S.W.
The Constitution contains other defects,
numerous or few, grave n their nature, or
minor, according to the point of view. Opposi-
tion to it, however, is in this appeal confined
to matters in regard to which men of all
shades of political opinion may unite. To
the supreme objection that the proposed Constitu-
tion kills at once and for ever the right of con-
stitutional majority-rule, there is to be added
another common ground of objection—in which
every man, woman, and child in New South
Wales is deeply and directly concerned. We
allude to the financial clauses of the Convention
BiU. The Bill provides that during the first five
years each State shall get back the amount of its
own customs contributions, less a proportion of
the cost of the Federal Government. A tariff
yielding £4,000,000 would suffice under this
provision for the needs of New South Wale;
To meet the requirements of Tasmania am.
Western Australia ihe tariff, however, would r r
quire to yield £9,000,000. At the expiration of
five years the Federal Parliament is empowered
to distribute the surplus on such basis as it may
“ deem fair.” A £6,000,000 tariff would pro-
vide money enough for the aggregate needs of the
Commonwealth and States. But such a tariff
would leave New South Wales with a surplus o*
about £1,000,000, and the other States with an
aggregate deficiency of the same amount.
Under such a tariff, therefore, if the governme
of the Commonwealth is to proceed, and all the
States to be kept solvent—which in the interests
of the union would be imperatively necessary—
New South Wales would be forced to contribut
in taxation one million pounds more than her c
share in order to make good the deficits of tn„
other States.
A £7,000,000 tariff would permit of the
finances of Western Australia and Tasmania
being guaranteed, and a distribution of the
residue of the surplus on a per capita basis between
New South Wales, Victoria, and South Aus-
tralia. Under such conditions, the people of
New South Wales would contribute from
£1,200,000 to £1,500,000 per annum more than
their needs demanded, of which sum from
£250,000 to £500,000 would be absorbed in
making good the deficiencies of the weaker
States. Should the Federal Parliament decid
that the surplus should be distributed per hea
of population the tariff would be required to
raise no less a sum than £22,000,000 to secure


;he finances of Western Australia. This is three
imes higher than the highest possible tariff, so
hat it intercolonial freetrade is to be secured,
and Western Australia kept solvent, she will
require to be heavily subsidised. Tasmania is in
similar position. The only State finances
rhich can afford that assistance are those of
lew South Wales.
A £7,000,000 tariff appears to be the most
likely of acceptance. Leaving out of considera-
tion narcotics and stimulants, to raise this sum
an ad valorem duty of 16 per cent, on all other
imports would be necessary. Under such a tariff
the volume of imports by a variety of causes
must be diminished. Should the value of im-
ports drop from £24,000,000 to £18,000,000,
the advalorem rate would have to be increased
‘to 22 per cent, on all imports, which is higher
■than any tariff in the civilized world.
When the Customs tariff fails to yield the
requisite amount of revenue, recourse must be
#d to direct taxation, under which system
he property and incomes of the wealthier States
-puld contribute to the support of the weaker
~;ates.
, tinder Clause 87 (called the Braddon Blot) the
Treasurer must return to the States three-fourths
of the revenue from customs and excise. After
the five years’ period this return is to be such as
he Federal Parliament deems fair. The amount
to be returned to New South Wales must there-
fore be approved by the Senate, in which body
lie four financially weak colonies could outvote
New South Wales by 24 to 6, although she com-
•ises 41 per cent, of the population. Strong as
s colony is, she cannot afford to fight in a
straight-jacket for a due consideration of her
rights.
* The Federal Capital.
b
view of the fact that the Convention de-
finitely refused to provide that the Federal
capital should be in New South Wales’ territory,
it can now be hardly doubted that the Federal
■city would, under the Bill, be in the extreme
south of the continent. This, therefore, must
be added to the long list of sacrifices that we are
called upon to make.
Reason of the Convention’s Failure.
The fatal error of the present movement
has now become obvious to all. It has
ain in our agreeing to meet in the Con-
tention the colonies of Tasmania and West
ustralia, neither of which is necessary to an
ffective Federation. In the Convention these
c
two colonies, numbering but 330,000 souls, had
MANIFESTO.
(as was proper in mere negotiations which bound
nobody) as many votes as New South Wales and
Victoria, both necessary to Federation, both
ardent in the effort, and containing 2,500,000
inhabitants. With the help of South Australia,
which desires Federation, but is not indispensable
to it, the smallest and least necessary colonies of
the group have coloured the Convention Bill
throughout with the principle of minority rule.
Again, our northern neighbour, Queensland, is
necessary to Federation (more particularly since
our great northern and north-western districts
will otherwise gain no advantages from Interco-
lonial Freetrade), and would probably welcome
a Constitution which did not mean an abnormal
share of power for the extreme South and West
of Australia.
Federation of Eastern Australia.
The failure, therefore, of 1898 points the way
to the success of 1899 or 1900. The union of
Australia may well be gradual, like that of
Canada, and begin with the eastern colonies,
Queensland, New South Wales—and without
New South Wales no Federation will be or
can be formed—and Victoria, all of whom
might be expected to give population its
due weight in the government of the nation.
The remaining colonies must come in before
long and would receive terms of the fullest
liberality, short of the sacrifice of majority rule.
For while not expecting theoretical perfection
in an Australian Constitution, we deman that
it shall be perfect where our own is perfect —in
the fundamental rule that the majority
must ultimately be permitted to prevail.
It cannot be doubted that if we clasped Victoria
with one hand and Queensland with the other,
we could consolidate at once nine-tenths of the
strength of Australia, we could keep the balance
of power where the balance of wealth and terri-
tory and population is, and secure a Constitution
acceptable and suitable to Australia. So far as
the Convention Bill is concerned we feel it im-
possible, with the destiny of millions, told and
untold, put in pledge by its acceptance, to be
dazzled into accepting a measure which only
offers a wider country in which to exercise a
narrower freedom.
Effect of our Votes.
Before recording your vote we ask you to
weigh well the matter before you —the most
momentous upon which you have ever been
asked to decide. To vote for the Bill is to plunge
into a troublous sea, in your subsequent efforts
to save yourselves from whose breakers you will
find that your hands are tied behind your bac
yn 90
/ r
' n-s ni
And this Bill differs in one supreme feature from
any other upon which you have ever pronounced.
You can never repeal it. Its acceptance means
that it passes for ever out of your control.
To vote against the Bill on idle other hand is
not to leave things as they are, but to prepare
the way for a Federation into which we may
with gladness and confidence enter.
Rigidity of the Constitution.
Nor can you seoure its amendment in a single
line or letter or comma, as you can now do with
every feature of every Act of Parliament that you
have agreed to. No amendment of the Con-
vention Bill is possible unless (1) the amendment
is carried by an absolute majority in both House
and Senate, and (2) is afterwards ratified not
only by a majority of the people, but also by a
majority of the separate geographical divisions
called States in which the people happen to
reside. If, for example, the House and the
Senate both agreed to a proposed amendment,
and the people by a large majority adopted it,
yet if the three smallest States voted against it,
it would be lost. Again, whilst New South
Wales and Victoria together (numbering
2.500.000 people) could not amend the Constitu-
tion, it might be amended by Victoria, South
Australia, and Tasmania (numbering only
1.700.000 people).
In the American Constitution (which is little
more rigid than .the Convention Bill) only three
amendments have been made which register any
important change, and these could never have
been secured except for the Civil War.
Majority Rule must be Maintained.
Feeling as we do that majority rule is not only
the most just, but the only safe and enduring basis
of national government, we hold the opinion that
the acceptance of the proposed Constitution would
be fraught with danger, not only to the people
of New South Wales, but to those of all Aus-
tralia. Its rejection, in the name of the basic
principles of majority rule and the rights of self-
taxation, would be a declaration to the English-
speaking world that the men of New South
Wales, at all events, treasure too highly the
principle of equal political rights and the power
of the purse to part with it in the face of any
temptation, no matter how specious its guise.
Co-operative Printing Works, Castlereagh-st., Sydney.


