

CRITICISM.
“ Nulli negabimus, nulli difFeremus justitiam.”
The Present Picture of New mountains, in the year 1807, accon-
. South Wales; illustrated with, panied by an European and three ru-
four large coloured Views, from fives; but after mounting the step
Drawings taken on the spot, of acclivities for four days, until I fouid
Sydney, the seat of Government;
with a Plan of the Colony. Taken
from actual survey by public au-
thority. Including, the present
my stock of provisions sensibly d-
minishing, I thought il most prudent
to retrace my way to the habitaile
part of the settlement, and to leye
the task of exploring them to sone
state of Agriculture and Trade, the task of exploring them to sone
Prices of Provisions and Labour, person more qualified mentally as
Internal, Regulations, State of So - well as physically, for the ardunw
ciety and Manners, late Discoveries undertaking. In fine, fro in the s?e-
in Natural History, and other in- cimen 1 had acquired, during his
teresting subjects', with Hints for journey, of the difficulties which sur-
teresting subjects ; with Hints for
the further Improvement of the
Settlement.
years Resident in several official
Situations. Dedicated, with per-
mission, to Admiral John Hunter,
late his Majesty's Captain-General
and Governor-in- Chiffi of New
South JVdles and its Dependencies.
1 vol. quarto, p. Q(J, price Si. 13s. dd.
1810..
expensive volume may be
> JL justly considered as of singular
importance, b6ing a supplement to
all the various works which have
preceded it. Exclusive of the value
of the plates, the'contents of the work
are certainly a counterpart to the title
page. We shall present our readers
with some of ..the author’s judicious-
and pertinent remarks, previously in-
-1 troducing the following as a specimen
of.his style and manner:—
The author, in page 31, speaking
of the Blue mountains, the principal
boundary of the settlement, says,
“ They have never yet been passed,
so that beyond those tremendous
barriers, the country yet remains un-
explored and unknown. Various at-
tempts have, at different periods been
made, to exceed this boundary of the
settlement, but none of them have
been attended with the wished for
effect. M. Barralier, a French gen-
tleman, late an ensign in the New
South Wales corps has been further
across than any other individual; but
he was compelled to return unsatis-
fied, before he had obtained any
knowledge of the transmontaneous
• territory which he longed to behold.
1 myself made an excursion to these
round this task, I think that ifter
travelling a few miles over th;m,
their appearance, although arnazirgly
grand, is sufficiently terrific to cker
any man of common persevennee
from proceeding in his design.
In the progress of my undertaking,
I ascended about four or five stu-
pendous acclivities, whose perpeidi-
cuiar sides scarcely permitted me to
gain the ascent. No sooner hid I
attained to the summit of one of these
cliffs, flattering myself I should there
find the termination of my toil, than
my eye was appalled by the sight o£
another, and so on to the end of my
journey ; when, after mounting with
the utmost difficulty, the fifth ot these
mountainous heights, I beheld my-
self apparently as remote from my
ultimate object, as at the first hour
of my quitting the level country be-
neath. Some of these ridges "pre-
sented to the eye a brilliant verdure
of the most imposing nature, while
others had the appearance of un-
changing sterility relieved by the in-
terposition of pools of stagnant water,
and running streams; there shrubs
and trees enlivened £he scene, and en-
circled the space as far as my eye could
reach. On my return, in sliding
down the steep declivities, I so com-
pletely lacerated my clothes that lhey
scarcely contained sufficient power to
cover me. I saw no other animals
or reptiles during this excursion than
those which are common throughout
the country.”
In thy commencement of ] SOS, a
new market was established on a part
called the Old Parade, near to the
■ yfovutikoA* rA - 9is&f /§u
vr 7s^^
V..-


Orphan House, and every exertion
vas made to expedite the building of
tie shops. The market days are
Vednesdays and Saturdays, when a
onsiderable number of farmers from
tie districts between Sydney and
Eramalta, as well as from other
’(Barters attend with the produce of
tleir lands ; they also bring poultry,
ygetables, fruit, &c; and to prevent
a; much as possible the too frequent
inpositions practised; a clerk of the
market has been appointed to weigh
al things that may be required.
Over the south Creek at Hawkes-
btry, a floating bridge has been erect-
ed which has proved greatly bene-
fical to the public j since, previous
to ts completion, every person who
hat occasion to go to that settlement,
am in many cases from one farm to
ancther, was obliged to pass to and
fro in a boat. As this bridge was
constructed by an individual, (Mr.
An Ire w Thompson, a settler) at his
owi expence, the following tolls are
allowed to be demanded : —For every
foo: passenger fourpence, or ten shil-
lings per annum; for each horse,
single or in draught, two shillings
andsixpence, or two pounds ten shil-
lingi per annum; for waggons, or
other four wheel carriages, with not
mors than half a ton lading, one shil-
ling and sixpence, or one pound ten
shil ings per annum; for carts or
carriages with two wheels, laden or
not, each one shilling and sixpence,
or one pound ten per annum ; for
sheep, under a score, tw'opence each,
and by the score, two shillings and
sixpence, or two pounds ten per
annum; swine and goats, the same
as sheep. Passengers, horses, carts,
and carriages are allowed to pass
during the same day, with one ticket,
and a considerable income is derived
from this toll.
Of late years a number of vessels
have been seized and carried away by
the convicts. Lately the Venus, a
brig belonging to Messrs. Robert
Campbell and Co. laden with a quan-
tity of provisions and stores to supply
the settlements to the southward, and
a very handsome brig, called the
Harrington, from Madras, were seized
and taken off. The former, when
she had reached the place of her des-
tination., after corning to an anchor.
and landing the master with dispatches
for the Lieutenant-Governor, was
seized by some convicts who had
been placed on board under confine-
ment, aided by part of the crew, and
was carried beyond the reach of re-
capture. The latter was cut out of
Farm Cove, and was carried out to
sea, before any information was re-
ceived on the subject. This transac-
tion was planned in a very secret
manner; so that all the convicts
boarded her about twelve o’clock at
night; and although the vessel lay in
sight of some part of the town, and
within the fire of two batteries, yet
nothing was discovered of the cir-
cumstance till the following morning.
Upon representation being made to
Col. Johnston, that officer ordered
several boats to be manned imme-
diately, and a party of the New South
Wales, with a number of inhabitants
who had volunteered their services, to
use every means to retake the vessel,
put to sea; but after rowing and sail-
ing for several hours, they were
obliged to return without ever "coming
in sight of the Harrington. Other
means were subsequently tried for thei
recovery of the vessel, but all to no
effect; the convicts had managed their
matters with such secresy, prompti-
tude, and skill, as totally prevented
every endeavour to counteract their
intention.
The natives and our countrymen
are now somewhat sociable, and there
are not many outrages committed by :
either party. Some years previous to
1800, so many atrocious deeds were
committed by one of the leaders of
the former at Hawkesbury, that Go-
vernor King found it necessary to
issue an order offering a reward to any
person who should kill him and bring
in his head. This was soon accomplish-
ed by artifice, the man received the re-
ward, and the head was sent to Eng-
land in spirits, by the Speedy. But
when thus speaking of the general
good understanding which exists be-
tween the Europeans and natives, I
must be understood to confine my
meaning to the vicinity of the prin-
cipal settlements, for about the re-
moter coasts they are still savages.
The author goes on to relate that,
just before he quitted the settlement,
a complete range of storehouses was


completed on the banks of the Para-
matta river, and another had been
commenced close by the wharf at
Sydney. The necessity for some new
buildings of this description had been
evident for some time, as a chief part
of the king’s storehouses previously
erected were too remote from the
water side, which made the unlading
of ships extremely burdensome and
expensive. These inconveniences are
now completely remedied, and the
port rendered more commodious than
ever. Some short time also before
he left the settlement, two murders
were committed by men named
Brown and Kenny ; the former of
whom had killed many men at the
southward, and was brought from
thence to Port Jackson, fur trial,
where he was convicted, executed,
and subsequently hung in chains on
Pinch-gut, a small island in the centre
of the harbour leading to Sydney
Cove. The latter |tvas arraigned for
the murder of a woman named Smith,
who, after he had perpetrated the
deed, endeavoured to consume the
body of his victim, by thrusting it in
the fire. He was executed and hung
in chains at Paramatta.
From this gentleman’s narrative it
further appears that our spring is the
autumn of the year in that distant
quarter. He sailed for England, it
appears, <f at the close of the autumn
of 1809,’’ in March.
The destruction of the playhouse is
mentioned as a benefit to this infant
colony, because, “ when the inha-
bitants were engaged in this enjoy-
ment, their property was left un-
watched. It was also a common
practice to give provisions to obtain
entrance, if money was scarce; and
thus many of tH'e convicts were unable
to pursue their labour with proper
energy and activity. Other abuses,
which also resulted from the esta-
blishment of the theatre, induced the
Governor to recall the permission
given for the performances, and the
playhouse was soon after levelled
with the ground.
Since this period, cricket, cards,
water-parties, shooting, fishing, and
hunting the kangaroo, have been more
attended to. Tne officers have a pri-
vate subscription billiard room; but
still, among the convicts, gaming is
Universal Mag. Vol. XV.
carried on to the most deplorable
excesses. Under the head of religion
and morals, it is observed that some
of the Missionary Society preach at
the out settlements, but the choice of
these men, and the abuses practised
under the cloak-of religion, arc much
regretted. The small number of
‘ who are men of strict
fidelity, and whose hearts are engaged
in the task they have undertaken,’ are
far out-balanced by those of an oppo-
site description. Among the super-
stitious customs still remaining with,
the natives, is one when a mother
dies while suckling a child, the infant
is then thrown alive into the grave of
the parent, and the father having cast
a stone upon it. the grave is filled up.
After all, it is. admitted that the morals
of the colony are by no means so, de-
bauched as have been frequently
asserted; on the contrary, virtuous
characters are not rare, and honour-
able principles are not less prevalent
here than in other communities of
equal extent and limited growth.
There are many among the prisoners
themselves, who are now striking
examples of probity, industry, tem-
perance, and virtue, and some have
obtained a remission of their punish-
ment in consequence of the singular
and radical change in their inclinations
and behaviour. Those prisoners who
are guilty of theft, have latterly been
transported to some remote settle-
ment, which system of punishment
has been found more efficacious than
castigation, or any other corporal
punishment, since they feel an un-
conquerable repugnance to the idea
of a separation from their connections
and companions, and entertain a sen-
sible dread of solitude.
The Rocks, a part of the town of
Sydney, is the general promenade for
the dashing Belles of the settlement;
and the European women, it is ob-
served, spare no expense in ornament-
ing their persons. The shops, where
most of their decorations are pur-
chased, are set out with much taste;
and articles of female ornament and
apparel are greedily purchased. By
a very recent census, there were
nine thousand three hundred and fifty-
six inhabitants, in the settlement,
out of which, six thousand support
themselves.


As instances of the irregularities
practiced by some of those in ma-
gisterial capacities, Mr. D. D. Mann,
observes, “ I need repeat none others
than that I have known men without
trial to be sentenced to transportation,
by a single magistrate at his own bar-
rack ; and free men, after having
been acquitted by a court of justice,
to be banished to one or other of the
dependent settlements. And I have
heard a magistrate tell a prisoner who
was then being examined for a capital
offence, and had some things found
upon him which were supposed to
have been stolen, and for which he
would not account, that, where he
not going to be hanged so soon, he
(the magistrate) would be d—n—d if
he would not make him say from
whence he got them. Nor do I be-
lieve it not less true, that records of
an examination, wherein a respect-
able young man was innocently en-
gaged, have been destroyed by that
same magistrate, before whom the
depositions were taken.”
To remedy these inconveniencies,
the author wishes that gentlemen of
small fortunes, and consequently of
some education, might be appointed,
with a respectable salary attached to
their office, “ so as to make their
interest wholly unconnected with
those pursuits which have led so many
to sacrifice their principles, and to
neglect their duty for the sake of
pursuing the search after independ-
ence.”
To complete and improve the le-
gislature in the New Colony, the
author proposes, that the Govrenor
should be assisted bp nine or ten of
the principal officers in the settlement,
who should form a council to assist
him in all kinds of difficulties ; in ad-
dition to which, he considers it essen-
tially necessary that a barrister should
be appointed to assist the Governor
when he is referred to in matters of a
doubtful nature, which at present
frequently reduces him to an unplea-
sant dilemma. Having no adviser,
excepting the Judge Advocate, this
officer, previously giving his opinion
in the court below, cannot of course
be again consulted on the same sub-
ject. The Governor’s opinion there-
fore may, or may not, be according
The legislative code of the colony
requires a careful revisal, since the
numerous residents who have arrived
in the settlement, and their respect-
ability and opulence, render such a
measure necessary. That system
which would suit the original esta-
blishment, composed only of two
classes, the officers of government and
the convicts, will scarcely be expected
to adapt itself to the wants and wishes
of a community advanced in civiliza-
tion. The security of property now
being the principal object that should
be attended to ; the present system is
found to be liable to much abuse, and
to have drawn great complaints from
the number of traders that visit the
colony. And the author thinks the
admission of the bankrupt laws into
the colony wmuld tend still more to
the perfecting of the system of juris-
prudence. A chief justice, this en-
lightened author still thinks, would
also be requisite ■, and that the prac-
tice of not taking down the evidence
given before magistrates there, is a
very great over-sight, as this is some-
times enlarged or diminished when
the business comes before a superior
court.
Instead of employing missionaries,
&c. he thinks the best interests of the
colony, would be greatly forwarded,
if government were to select some
clergymen of unequivocal piety and
zeal. Much good cannot be derived
from the efforts of men, who are
chiefly engaged in farming and traffic,
and who will sell a bottle of spirits,
or oblige some of those very persons
with it, to whom they have been
preaching the duty of temperance.
The education of youth, at present,
he thinks is much neglected for want
of four or five schoolmasters of a suf-
ficent capacity. At present there are
but very few persons who cannot
afford to pay for a respectable edu-
cation.
A different arrangement with re-
spect to the grants and leases of land
is much wanting. Whenever any of
these deeds have been under the hand
and seal of the Governor, or of the
colonial seal, they ought to be con-
sidered as secured to the grantee or
lessee, their heirs, &c. and under no
pretence whatever, except a failure
to the laws of the mother country. of the fulfilment of the conditions.


ought the Governor, or any succeed-
ing Governor, to retain the power
of taking that land away. The exist-
ence, and the effect of such a power,
is totally destructive of the spirit of
improvement. A man, just as he
has impoverished himself with the
hope of reaping a future recompense,
may by the sudden whims or caprice
of an individual be deprived of the
means of gaining future subsistence,
and plundered of every thing he may
have done with a view to his own
benefit and the bettering of the state !
Among other causes that operate
against the prosperity of the Colony,
the author reckons “ the establish-
ment of a most injurious monopoly
amongst the inhabitants, which has
tended to the ruin of fair trade.
The commencement of this system
is traced back to the administration
of Governor Philip.’’ He observes,
that “ the inferior .officers of the
settlement, and the non-commissioned
officers and privates of the regiment,
have since been infected with the itch
for dealing, and many of the settlers
themselves, have disposed of their
Harms, or deserted them to devote
themselves toa species ofdealing which
never failed to turn to good account.
The consequence of this universal in-
clination to one object, chiefly the
sale of spirits, soon became obvious
in the desertion of those farms pre-
viously tilled to so much advantage.
The immense profits made by this
pursuit served as a new stimulus. One
dealer was known to have cleared
twelve hundred pounds sterling in
four weeks; and aq inhabitant of the
lowest order, who commenced deal-
' ing with five pounds, has been known
to realize five hundred in the course
of six months. It must naturally be
inferred that the most base imposition
must have been practised to render
this business so extremely lucrative ;
and the article itself must have been
diluted away to excessive weakness.
From this traffic many of the convicts
are in possession of horses, carriages,
and servants, with a sufficiency to
secure independence for life. The
author thinks that allowing a servant
to enter into traffic is fraught with
serious mischief, as it enables him to
become gradually independent in his
feelings and opinions, and substitutes
insolence of conduct for the respect
which ought to mark his behaviour.
The Duke of Northumberland has
sent over some Teeswater sheep, aqd
one stallion very recently to Colonel
Johnston, which have greatly im-
proved the respective breeds. Some
Merino sheep from the King’s flock
have also been taken over, which have
throve well and produced very fine
wool. Several or the deer in the
colony having made their escape from
a park belonging (o a Mr. Harris,
surgeon of the regiment, are under-
stood to be breeding and running
wild in the woods.
The children born in the colony
from European parents are very ro-
bust, comely, and well made; re-
markably quick of apprehension, and
ready at learning. In manners and
morals also, they greatly improve.
W. H.
M ad-Houses.—Observations on
the Act for regulating Mad-
Houses, and a Correction of the
Statements on the Case of Benjamin
Elliott, convicted of illegally con-
fining Mary Daintree ; with Re-
marks addressed to the Friends of
Insane Persons. By James Par-
kinson. 1811.
r | ’'HERE are some very sensible
a ‘ and judicious observations in this
pamphlet, upon the subject of private
rnad-houses and the nature of lunacy.
Its primary object seems to have been
to vindicate Mr, Parkinson himself
from some insinuations which had
found their way into the public prints,
arising from a mistatement of his evi-
dence on the trial which
in the title. This vindication we con-
sider as complete : but. as he has
availed himself of the opportunity to
blend some remarks upon topics con-
nected with it, we shall pay a little
more attention to the pamphlet.
Insanity is one of those awful visi-
tations of providence, to which, as we
are all exposed, we are all interested-in
whatever concerns its nature, pro-
gress, and cure. The establishment
of private houses for the reception of
individuals labouring under this me-
lancholy affliction, has been loudly
censured by some, and as loudly ap-
plauded by others. Great abuses did
