

lu*
Y
zo.
AntlX
3.
: 4
HM
-
P 7Vt;
. 1
* yt*# £
’■%b.
ffl}
L W.- "W ; .
p.f:
U: f '
* * \\ y ' , J t
H 1
kr - —•
I R. Fnedlaqder
y|
W-
/K
b ?>
| & Sohn.
BerKn
VL \
it
, L
x. rx~
- j.. r.x
—
if
OV//, w
&)
M -
r
v
*® )
■Wg4 J 5t
*=
"*“ f
gBBBB
\
I ,
jluf ' y/\
s.
VlSlPlIl 1
v»/
ux.
r trf\
«s
m
Qi
|y
i {j
K£>
f
. *
*
>a
1
(
*
5
1
(
f
% j
M
i
\
V
\
R R
/'J
lS
A
N
J
n
01
T
s
TO]
\i
[|
s
e
«
I
)
I
• -. v
f XI
■i ] ' ‘ V,c,,
f
i
;
;
¥
ill
I
1 -
l!
Xi J
LJ -X_fy
kj
IJL
JL,*
J
L/
Vy i
lJ
«JL \y j
Lr J
L r
o'
'1
!
I
5
7)
<
»
I
i
i
1
i
R ‘
' '1, „ >
. xi,
» 3 * ?.
fc V -‘»
'■-•*• * i
ip ; ■
j
I
%
)
}
i
i ■ t
i ■;
T : - - v t
-»
■ y-. *
1
OF
THE
■
& : A
\ %
i
I
£
. £
1
1
*
5
.1
■*.
' V
}
J
i
[
1
\
V , r '*
f
i 9
y.
vi,
f
|4
i
«.
“ \
S
{ I
!
-
j
i
j
\ , >
i.
i
i I '
s
r
rp
A —
k ; f \
y I"
\ X
\l
- «
% T 4
\ a
r
»
,
1 1 ~
VI
s
J
■ #
_J_ \ x >
u
1 1 \
i j
I 11
LI
LI XJ
L .
HL- —
I. f J
L i
k_7 #
1
L y
, • ,)f; :
• V
>
%
1
»
!
H
j
1
MT-V y* „
- :J
»>
g»
r*
i
a
ij
j
- *‘ b T
" - Wt
,>
r -
5'
|
#■ .
. ' *
i
I
f
!|
i - -
1 r
I
»
—
— 1 1v ■■
IJ
ai’N
«CV' _ :
r
‘ r
IX >
j
£
V,
;-
i
J
|
t!
-
- j
«ns>; • • *
■ f- [
i
a
1
a
:
J
■
<?
.
.. ' ’
j,
i
3
fi
y
■
%
*
J
Bi CM A t
iLI
LS WILHKLMI, 1
Lsq.
i
a
s
w . -
£
j
i . *
-> '•
11
1 ■
;' ..' •;
2k.- VX
s :
I
ij.
.#
!|
1
x 1
.
f?>i> v 4 '<*
< ■■
5 i*
QB
0 ■ .-v . •
-s
ft
\; 1 f |
i
1
I
1
fc’
»
4?
i
■ \
■<
l; | - ]
1
[
-
|
i
<
K '•
1 5
A;
Si
»
D •
■\
**
i-
1
>
i
—
•
!
1 r-L
J
f
1
«!
ft ■
f
|
I ;
1:
l
c
1
i
»
Of
|f eibcunxe
♦
1
T *
i
b f -.,
r
> gfcN. -
»*)
MASON
AND FIR’
L’H, PRINTERS,
51
AND 53 FLINDERS LAN]
B
WEST.
] & '
- >
W
/y?s\
a:
Fri\
b
(m]
XfXh
1 8 6
2.
, >*■ *~'l-. .. J
r «
5 ■■V.'
1 if
‘>~ix
r¥?k
*~jt***)a*> K.
sse»CXC^
W-
p \
f7>. * \ ® !
i jI
c
ir.v^
ITS* 7 4
>
p
<=,= - _ “ 1 ,atrr '
111
■“ ■“ ■"' ■
5 >
\
jyi' v y \
1
tseJ**’ *
I ** * V • t
:• : /*■•■
• i .; -* ■ *
■<
1
v ' ♦. 7
' •>. > ••’»■'
’■ *
.
N-X 6 -’
I
‘
-L
f • ; ■ ,
f - ‘ .. '■<
' ,v > - 71
Vvrf V.
i.L
A#y?
•» ■ . .
-e|
i;
•^ri’
IS
'-’W
‘ V ■'-. "if..
i
l 4
. V; &sbsw*
1,, - .*•••*«£
f ,
•V'* :f ~W§0tok$~
*
-
• \
4 ■■
» */ W . ■ V
4jftl
*
V' 1 . X
i wm
♦ X jjPw*.


■ ■ - ■■■-'. ■ —
m
■
1
!
I?
' v II
v ' Vw ' 1 OOft- i
/ 1
•
V
& :. ■ • ■ r: > . > ...
/ •*
7- .'
■
✓ V
' ■■ ■' • '
'
»• ‘I
.
>
•
•
) \
' x ' |
*
0
1 ' , ' ’ I
’
'
4
■>
V
•
s -
'J 4
i
9
•
/
3
Ik
/ '
\
V X
■
•
T
' ' 1
- X .
♦
*
\ 1
X
■s
•
.
'
/
\
A
t
i
4
t ►
*
*
V
✓
ft ■
w
1
f
\ ' - \ . j
'
• . •
•V
f'
%
\
’-:*S V
:. \, -<
• ,'■•••■•*■•
«7? ■!''•<■■ > T*
s.
V


,
, '-'''Lc J i c- t?-{-f: si £ Ur -
t'SVf.
J - v . »■
'
f r ■«
By CHARLES WILHELMI, Esq.
t
I •
»
*
:-4& '
||tslbownu:
MANNERS AND CUSTOMS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIVES.
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, 51 AND 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
1 8 62,


a nc" c/i- f3
,; uajz /^ r
-
I
<•
'
>
►
y
C'«. —


[Reprinted from the Royal Society's Transactions.]
MANNERS AND CUSTOMS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIVES.
CHARLES WILHELMI, Esq.
[Read before the Royal Society, October 29, 1860.]
Although Australia, for a considerable time already, is
known to the world in general, very little, comparatively
speaking, has as yet been made known respecting the habits
and customs of its aboriginal inhabitants; very few persons
indeed have given themselves the trouble to note down what
they may have seen or may have been told by these children
of nature, in order that those who have not had such oppor-
tunities may be enabled to form a correct idea respecting
them.
My various botanical journeys, since 1849, have necessarily
brought me in frequent contact with them, when it always
has been most interesting to me closely to watch the different
customs and habits of this race of mankind.
During my tw r o visits to Port Lincoln, I have had many
opportunities for making observations respecting the natives
there, which were the more interesting, as these people, at
that time, had as yet been so little interfered with by civili-
zation.


To the Rev. Mr. Schurmann, however, I am most particu-
larly indebted for his valuable communications on this subject.
This gentleman, in 1840, about twenty-one years ago, had
been appointed Protector of the aborigines of Port Lincoln,
and has occupied this office for nearly six years. After
bavin o, then removed to Adelaide and Encounter Pay, in
his capacity of missionary, he returned aftei a feu yeais
absence to his old post at Port Lincoln. Fully conversant
with their language, he easily obtained the most complete
information as to the living and occupation of the tribes of
that particular district. During my stay with him in 1.851,
twenty-four native children attended his school, and had then
made pretty considerable progress in reading, writing, &c.,
which was rendered the more easy to them by the advantage
that all information was by this most excellent man conveyed
to them in their own language.
It has been remarked that the population and general con-
dition of the natives of Australia greatly depend on the
nature of the locality they occupy; where the country is
sterile and unproductive, the natives are found to congregate
in small numbers, and to be in a miserable condition ; while,
on the contrary, in fertile districts they are comparatively
numerous, robust, and well made. The correctness of this
observation must have been apparent to every one who has
had the opportunity of comparing the natives of Port Lincoln
with those of the Adelaide and the Murray districts, in par-
ticular. The former are less in number, of smaller size,
weaker, and less expert, and not of so sociable a disposition
as the latter. A Port Lincoln black but very rarely exceeds
the height of a middle-sized European, and in reference
to bodily strength the comparison is more unfavorable still.
Among the [Murray tribes, on the contrary, jou will find
handsome, tall, and well-made men.
Striking peculiarities in the appearance of their body are


their miserably thin arms and legs, wide months, hollow deep
sunken eyes, and flat noses; if the latter are not naturally
so formed, they make them so by forcing a bone, a piece of
wood, or anything else through the sides of the nose, which
causes them to stretch. They generally have a well-arched
front, broad shoulders, and a particularly high chest.
The men possess a great deal of natural grace in the
carriage of their body, their gait is easy and erect, their
gestures are natural under all circumstances in their dances,
their fights, and while speaking, and they certainly surpass
the European in ease and rapidity of their movements.
With respect to the women we cannot speak so favourably
by a great deal; their bodies are generally disfigured by ex-
ceedingly thin arms and legs, large bellies, and low hanging
breasts, a condition sufficiently accounted for by their early
marriages, their insufficient nourishment, their carrying of
heavy burdens, and the length of time they suckle their
children, for it is by no means uncommon for children to
take the breast for three or four years, or even longer.
Although a superficial observer will scarcely be able, on
account of the apparently great similarity prevailing among
them, to detect any difference in them, a closer intimacy
with them will easily trace very considerable varieties,
not of countenances and forms of body only, but also of
colours and skins even; while the skin of the tribes of the
north, which inhabit a rather scrubby country, is darker and
drier in appearance, that of the tribes of the south and the
westward, in many instances, approaches to what is termed
the copper colour. Whether this is attributable to the influ-
ence of the climate or the difference of the food, it is difficult to
decide. My valued friend, the Rev. Mr. Schurmann, however,
is inclined towards the opinion, that upon the whole the best
fed and most robust natives are of the lighter colours.
In reference to this subject, Dr. Livingstone makes the


following remark in liis “ Missionary Travels and Researches
in South Africa ” (page 78) “ Heat alone does not produce
blackness,, but heat with moisture seems to insure the deepest
hue.” He found that tribes living in the desert of Africa
were of a lighter colour than those near the rivers.
The covering they generally wear consists of one or two
kangaroo skins only, and seldom of rugs made of skins of
the wallaby, opossum, and similar animals, and which for
this purpose are prepared in the following manner: —The
skin, directly after being flayed, is spread —the flesh side
upwards —on an even smooth piece of ground, and fastened
by small wooden pegs, driven in along the ridges; when dried
the small fleshy fibres adhering to the skins are scraped off
with a sharp angular piece of quartz, and afterwards the
skins are well rubbed over with a coarse-grained stone, for
the purpose of making them soft and pliable. Thus prepared,
the skins are then sewed together with the sinews of the
tail of the kangaroo, a small sharp-pointed bone answering
admirably for the purpose. As these skins are never tanned,
the natives are required to be very careful in guarding the
flesh side against the wet, as it would make them hard .and
stiff; on this account it is that during the rain the hairy side
is turned outside. The best rugs generally belong to the
women, and more particularly so if they have young children,
as they make them serve for covering both of them, while they
carry them on their backs, or while resting they have them
on their laps. Those children old enough to walk are
decidedly the worst off as regards covering, for they have to
run about quite naked, or be satisfied with the remnant of
some old used-up rug.
More for ornament than for any imaginable comfort, the
men wear a band of yarn round their heads, tying it round
several times, so as to leave the crown only uncovered by it.
They spin this yarn of human hair, or of that of the opossum,


using’ for the purpose a kind of spindle, about two feet long,
and not tliicker tlian a goose quill, with a cross piece at one
end; on which, they wind up the yarn spun. They turn or
roll this spindle on their legs, with their hands spread out
flat. If desirous to appear particularly decorated, they will
add to the above ornament a bunch of emu feathers, stuck
in their hair in front.
The Murray tribes, in the neighbourhood of Swan Hill, in
a similar way spin the fibres of the roots of the club rushes
(Typha Shuttleworthii) to any lengths, and employ it for
making their nets.
On occasions of rejoicings and of ceremonies, as, for
instance, at the meeting of two different tribes, they add two
small pieces of green wood, decorated from one end to the
other with very thin shavings, and which have the appearance
of a white plume of feathers, and these they stick behind
their ears through the above-mentioned band, in such a
manner that the upper ends can be joined in front, and thus,
at a distance, they have the appearance of two long horns.
Mr. Schurmann has seen this latter ornament only with one
tribe of the north-west, and it may perhaps be confined to it.
This ornament, together with their white and red painted
chest and arms, are said to produce quite the impression of
untamed savages.
Frequently they attach to the end of their pointed beards
the tip of the tail of a wild dog, or a wallaby. A very par-
ticular ornament, however, they consider it to wind the
entire tail of a wild dog round their head, just above the
front.
The natives who come in frequent contact with Europeans,
instead of the latter ornament, make use of a rag of white or
red cloth, or else of even a piece of paper.
The men always wear round the waist a cord, generally
made of their own hair, being first spun, and then twisted


into a cord of about a quarter of an inch thick, and which at
times is interwoven with emu feathers. If they cannot have
one of this description, they will take any kind of cord
rather than do without one altogether. They always wear it
tight, but tighter if hungry, as they say, in order to allay the
painful sensation of hunger. I have seen these cords tied so
tightly, that in front they were perfectly hidden from obser-
vation.
The means which the natives, both males and females,
mostly use and prefer to all others for beautifying themselves,
is fat; if well supplied, they rub their entire body over with
it; but if short of it, they confine themselves to anointing their
faces only. There can be no doubt that this custom has its
origin in some sound reasonable motive, and produces with
them a feeling of comfort, in hot weather particularly, when
the mosquitos and flies are exceedingly troublesome. They
will ask for a little fat as pitifully as for a piece of bread.
They compare this custom to that of Europeans washing
themselves; they never appear in better humour than when
the fat is actually dripping from the entire body, from head
to foot.
Dr. Livingstone, in his Travels in Africa, page 108, in
alluding to the custom of the Griquas and Bechuanas
rubbing their bodies with fat or oil, states, that probably
this is done “in order to assist in protecting the pores of the
skin from the influence of the sun by day, and of the cold by
night.”
They use three colours in painting themselves, viz.—black,
red, and white. The black and red colours are the produce
of a soft stone which they draw from a great distance in the
north; by rubbing or scraping it they obtain a powder, which
they rub into the fat which they have before put on their
faces, arms, and breasts; the colors then assume quite a
metallic lustre. The white colour is prepared of a soft clay
or chalk. It is applied on particular occasions oidy, among
others for dancing, and when in mourning. I shall, here-
after have the opportunity of stating more fully, how, for
dancing, they paint themselves with this color. For indicating
mourning, the women paint their whole front, a ring round
each eye, and a perpendicular line about the stomach; but
the men paint the breast by making drawn or punctured
streaks down from the shoulders, all verging towards and
joining at the navel. The difference in the design of the
painting indicates the nearer or more remote degree of the


relationship with the deceased. The black colour, in some
parts, is also used for mourning, according to what Mr.
Schurmann has been able to ascertain, at the death of a
relation by marriage, while the white is used at the death of
blood relations. It thus becomes evident that the natives
do not paint themselves in one and the same manner, but
differently, according to the degrees of relationship between
them and the deceased, which is expressed by the various
designs •
The weapons of the natives of Port Lincoln are by no
means so handsome and respectable looking as those ot the
Adelaide and Murray tribes, but are quite as efficient.
The spears are made of the stems of the young Lepto-
spermi (better known as the tea tree), which, hardened in
hot ashes, they bend and sharpen. Their usual length is seven
feet and upwards, the thickness at the end of the root about
that of the thumb; in the upper end they bore with the tooth
of the kangaroo a perpendicular hole, in which, for throwing
it, they fit the hook of the wooden lever, called “middla;” and
in order to protect the edge of the hole against breaking or
splitting, they take the precaution to tie it well round with a
fine sinew of the kangaroo. Among the number of spears
which every adult native carries with him, they generally
have two or three of them ready provided with the “barb,”
and for the others they always have about them sufficient to
serve in case of need, and can fasten them on in an instant.
These “ barbs ” are simply a small piece of wood, of about
two inches long, and having a knee in the middle, so that in
putting one side flat on the spear, the other will project from
it in an acute angle; and although it is fastened on with
sinews of the kangaroo only, it is so firmly fixed as never to
slip off, so that it is quite impossible to draw such a spear out
of the body of a person or an animal, and it can only be
broken off. On this account it is considered unfair and
highly blameable to employ this weapon in any fight or in
warfare. Besides this kind of spear, which is always thrown
with the so-called “ middla,” they make use of the “ winna,”
about five feet long, thick and clumsy, but only for the pur-
pose of spearing fish.
The “ middla ” is a kind of lever, by means of which an
increased power is created for propelling the spear with
greater force than could be done with the arm by itself. It
is about two feet long, two inches broad; the inward side on
which the spear rests is scooped out a little, while the outward


part is rounded, both sides being usually notched, in
order to give a firmer hold. To the upper tapering end is
attached, with sinews of the kangaroo and a little gum, a hook
or a tooth of the kangaroo, which, when throwing, is placed
in the opening at the flat or blunt end of the spear. It is
generally made out of a piece of the casuarina or she-oak. In
using the “ middla,” it is held with three fingers, while the
thumb and first finger remain disengaged, for holding the
spear, and giving it the proper direction.
Another weapon, called wirra,” is made of the stem of
young trees, about one and a-half feet long, and barely an inch
thick. The thin end, which serves for the handle, is gene-
rally notched, while towards the thicker end it is a little bent,
somewhat in the shape of a sword. The “wirra” of the
Adelaide and Murray tribes have generally a stout knob at
the lower end, which adds considerably to their propelling
power. This weapon the natives use for killing kangaroo
rats and other small animals, and also at the commencement
of their fights or battles, until they can afterwards employ
their spears.
The “ katta ” is a cudgel or stick, four or five feet long,
and one or two inches thick, the lower end of which, when
hardened by fire, is sharpened something in the shape of a
chisel. This tool is used for digging up roots; and as this is
one of the occupations of the women chiefly, they constantly
carry them along with them. The Murray tribes also em-
ploy the “katta ” for loosening the bark off the eucalypti,
which operation they perform remarkably quick.
This bark serves for the building of their canoes, and for
their protection against rain. The Murray tribes generally
have in their camps a piece of this bark, drying upon it
the skins of the smaller animals, the opossums, wallabies, and
others required for their rugs, as described above.
The “wadna ” is a kind of weapon about three feet long,
with a knee in the middle. It is never used as a weapon for
fighting, but only for killing large fish; on this account they
are but seldom seen with the natives, and then only when
they happen to be engaged in fishing.
The most extraordinary tool in use among the Port Lincoln
tribes, and (according to Mr. Schurmamr’s opinion, as it has
never been mentioned among any others) confined to them, is
the “ yuta,” being a piece of bark, about 4 to 5 feet long and
Bor 10 inches broad, in the shape of a small trough. It
is used for separating a large species of eatable ants. When


they open the ant-hills, they find among the refuse the large
white maggots and eggs, which alone are eaten; in order to
save themselves the trouble of picking them with the hand,
they employ the “ yuta,” as a kind of fan or sieve, the larger
and eatable particles remaining back in it. As these maggots
are already alive, the natives wrap them in a bunch of dry
grass, which they chew and suck until they have extracted all
substance. The season of these ants is in September and
October, and at this season only of the year will you meet
with the £f yuta ”in their hands.
In confirmation of the above, Mr. Blandowski mentions
that the Goulbnrn tribe also avail themselves of ants’ eggs,
and clean them in the following manner : —“ They throw ants
and eggs, &c., into a kangaroo skin, which they shake
roughly, by which the eggs, on account of their greater
specific gravity, are precipitated to the bottom, and the ants,
particles of wood, and other impurities on the surface, being
then removed, the eggs are eaten raw, and resemble sago,
and possess a very peculiar aroma.”
All their weapons and tools, together with various other
articles, they collect in their knapsacks, which they carry by
means of strings tied over their left shoulder and under the
left arm. It consists either of a kangaroo skin only, drawn
together with a cord, or of a coarse matting made of the
fibres of a certain kind of rush. The articles contained in
almost every knapsack are —a small flat shell for drinking,
a round flinty stone for bruising the bones of the game,
pieces of one or more kinds of colours, a small wooden shovel,
which they use for roasting roots, a few pieces of quartz, and
the entire skin of some small animal, which answers the pur-
pose of a bag, into which they put the smaller objects they
require, such as sinews of kangaroo and pointed bones of
various sizes, which answer the purpose of thread and needle,
also some bones with sharp edges, for scraping the roots,
some spearhooks, &c.
To prevent anything from dropping through the large
meshes of the network, they line it with dry grass. In addi-
tion to the articles mentioned, they put into their knapsacks,
called “nurti,” a stock of roots and game, and then on the top
they place their weapons, which are kept fast by being twisted
between the strings, so that they cannot slip off. The bags of
the women, called Aiudla,” differ from those of the men in
being of a larger size, and, if filled and heavy, are carried on
the back by means of crossbelts.


I have to mention another instrument, quite different from
any of those above, viz.:—the (C a. piece of wood 18
inches long, 4 inches broad, £ inch thick, which, tied to a long-
string, they swing round above their heads, and thus produce
a low rumbling sound at intervals, ceasing and returning with
increased power. To the women and children the “witarna”
is carefully hidden, as its sound indicates that the men are
engaged in some of their secret ceremonies, and that they are
to keep aloof from them.
It has been asserted that the natives eat anything without any
distinction whatsoever; this statement, probably, is owing to
the fact that they certainly eat many things which to Europeans
are disgusting, as, for instance, maggots of various kinds, rotten
eggs, the entrails of animals; but, on the other hand, the
white people eat many things which to the natives are equally
disgusting, such as certain kinds of fish, oysters, shellfish,
muscles of all kinds, the common mushroom, the other de-
scription of which latter however they are very fond of them-
selves.
The natives divide all their articles of food into two classes
—the “paru” and “mai,” the former including all animal,
and the latter all vegetable articles of food; of these are the
various descriptions of roots —such as the ngamba, ngarruru,
and others, all of about the size of a small carrot, and
of its shape, of a more or less acrid taste, and which are first
roasted in hot ashes, and then peeled for eating. Of the grass-
tree, xanthorraea, they eat the lower part of the stem not yet
grown above the surface of the ground; it is by no means
tasteless, but certainly cannot contain much nourishment;
besides these they also eat various kinds of fungi.
Although to Europeans the country offers scarcely any kind
of eatable fruit, it yields a pretty good variety of such as
affords valuable food to the blacks. The most important and
abundant fruit is that of a mesembrianthemum, to which the
Europeans have given the somewhat vulgar name of pigfaces,
but the natives the more euphonical one of karkalla. Pressing
the fruit between their fingers, they drop the luscious j nice into
the mouth. During the karkalla season, which lasts from
January till the end of the summer, the natives lead a compara-
tively easy life; they are free from any anxiety of hunger, as the
plant grows in all parts of the country, and most abundantly on
the sandy hills near the sea. The men generally gather only
as much as they want for the moment, but the women collect
large quantities for eating after supper. The Port Lincoln


blacks eat only the fruit of tins plant, but those living be-
tween the Grampians and the Victoria Ranges, as a substitute
for salt with their meat, eat also the leaves of this saline
plant. All other edible fruit grow in pods, or in the shape of
berries on small bushes. Some of these they allow to ripen,
as, for instance, the fruit of the santalum and that of a species
of epacris, which, growing on the sea-shore, bears small red
sweet berries called “ wadnirriV Another plant, “
also growing on the sea-shore, is the Nitraria billardierii .*
Other fruits they collect before they are ripe, and roast
them in hot ashes, such as the berries of the pulbullu,
and the pods of the menka, and the nundo. The last-men-
tioned fruits, highly valued by the natives, are of the acacias,
growing abundantly on the sandy downs of Sheaford and Cof-
fin's Bay, and by attracting thither a numerous company of
blacks, they frequently give occasion for dissension and quar-
rels. As a proof of the value or consideration attached to this
fruit, it may be mentioned that, in order to annoy their
adversaries, the Kukata tribe of the north-west, famous for
their atrocity and witchcraft, often threaten to burn or other-
wise destroy the nundo bushes.
As only few gum-trees grow in Port Lincoln, they have but
little of the edible gums upon which the Adelaide tribes live
almost exclusively during the summer months; what they get
they collect from the acacia trees, which, however, grow but
sparingly, yielding very little gum.
Any kind of game, from the kangaroo down to the smallest
species of the genus of the marsupials, and every description
of birds, without distinction, are welcome as food to the Port
Lincoln blacks, nor are snakes and lizards by any means de-
spised by them —the former of which they eat only if killed by
* The Nitraria billardierii belongs to the order of Malpighiacem, grows
in large quantities on high sandhills along the western sea-coast of Port
Lincoln, has a fruit in form and size resembling an olive, is of a dark red
color, has a very pleasant taste, and is exceedingly cooling. In December
and January the bushes are so full of fruit, that the natives lie down on
their backs under them, strip off the fruit with both hands, and do not
rise until the whole bush has been cleared of its load. At the time above
mentioned I travelled with five natives, who carried my collection of plants
and blankets on a very hot day through this arid country ; all at once they
threw off their loads, ran as quickly as they were able to one of the high
sandhills, and disappeared amongst the bushes. Not knowing the meaning
of all this, I followed them, and found the whole five, as above described,
lying on their backs under the bushes. I could not do better than do so
likewise, and when we had refreshed ourselves we continued our journey,


themselves. They are also very fond of lizard eggs, which;
dug fresh out of the ground; taste exactly like soft-boiled hen’s
eggs- .
Their usual method of hunting is unobservedly to approach
the animal as near as they can, and to spear it. On these oc-
casions they resort to various manoeuvres, as for instance—
one of the blacks places himself at some distance in an open
space of ground or behind some bushes, and makes a slight
noise by breaking off some branches, or in any other way,
while another black stealthily approaches to within a spear’s
throw from the opposite side, where, of course, the animal
does not suspect the least danger. This is the usual manner for
killing kangaroos, emus, wild dogs, &c. If, however, there be
assembled a number of natives, and aware of several kangaroos
being in the neighbourhood, then they will surround the dis-
trict, gradually narrowing the circle; the best spearsmen being
placed at certain favourable spots, and the others driving the
game regularly towards them. If such a chase happens to take
dace near the sea, the kangaroos will try to escape into it,
but to little purpose only, as their pursuers follow them
there even, and while swimming surround them. Smaller ani-
mals, such as wallabies, kangaroo rats, &c., which live in the
lower scrub, they kill by throwing at them (when started)
clubs called “ wirra.” At times, having set on fire entire
districts of country, they place themselves before the fire in
order to kill the scared animals which try to escape in that
direction. The blacks are very expert in the use of this very
simple weapon, and practise it from the earliest age, by roll-
ing on the ground, instead of the animal, a dry sponge, throw-
ing the wirra after it. I have frequently seen little boys seven
and eight years old, bringing down, in this manner, parrots off
the casuarina trees, and the little girls even know well how to
handle this tool.
:; ¥
%
id'’
wi
it*
1:
When hunting in the lower scrub, they attach a bunch of
feathers to the blunt end of the spear, and on discovering an
animal, fix it in the ground as a signal for the others to come
near, and surround it to secure the prey. In addition to
this they have a variety of signs, unaccompanied by sound, for
indicating the different animals they discover; for instance,
they stretch out the first finger, moving it as in imitation of
the leaping of a kangaroo when not suspecting an enemy, to
indicate that such an animal is in sight; again, three fingers
stretched out, the second finger a little lower than the others,
is for an emu; the thumb alone is raised for an opposum; the
tr
Hi


whole hand stretched out horizontally for fish,, and similar
signs for every kind of game.
The opposum and wild cat they hunt when the sky is
slightly clouded, saying that with a clear sky the animals can
see them, and will escape before they can approach them.
When they discover kangaroo rats in the holes of rocks,
or under heavy stones, and find that they cannot drive them
out with their hands or a stick, they will light a fire at the
hole in order to smoke them out.
Having no fish-hooks, they are, with respect to fishing, be-
hind the other tribes of Australia. The larger fish they spear,
but the small ones they catch in the following manner : —As
they move in swarms, a body of natives, armed with branches
of trees, go into the water, regularly surround and draw them
together, and then with these branches push them on the shore.
When engaged in this occupation they allow no stranger to
be near, on account of the idea they have that the fishes would
smell them and disappear.
Some fishes are in the night attracted to light, and then
easily killed; the blacks, provided with torches, made of long
strips of bark, go into the water, and catch them with the
hand, striking them or spearing them.
There are great rejoicings with them if they have had good
luck in their hunting or fishing expeditions. Quite excited,
slapping their stomachs with both hands, every one exclaims—
“ Ngaitye paru, ngaitye paru/’ which means “my food, my
food/’ and most liberally bestow their praise upon those whom
they are indebted to for the great treat.
They roast all their meat on the fire. The Igrge animals,
such as kangaroos and emus, are cut up before cooking, and
the former are skinned; but the smaller ones, excepting those
of which they want to preserve the skins, are put on the fire
with their skins on. They first singe off the hair, and having
taken out the entrails, which are generally given to the women
and children, they close up the opening with some small
wooden pegs, and, thus prepared, place it on the fire for roast-
ing. If connected with more cleanliness, this method of pre-
paring the food might be strongly recommended, for the meat
gains a most inviting flavour, and retains all its strength and
juice; but the filthiness of these natives is so excessive, that
they do not even take the pains to cleanse and wash the en-
trails, but, having squeezed out their contents only, they roast
and eat them.
The superstitious simplicity of these natives is strikingly


• -
apparent in their manner of hunting and dividing the game.
There have been transmitted to them, by their early ancestors,
several short rhymes of two lines, which now are known to
the adults only, and these, on pursuing an animal, or when
on the point of spearing it, they constantly repeat with great
rapidity. The literal meaning of these cabalistic rhymes is
totally unknown to them, and they are quite unable to give
| an explanation of them, but their object, and the power which
they faithfully believe them to possess, is either to strike with
blindness the animal which they are pursuing, or to create in it
such a feeling of security and carelessness, that it cannot perceive
its enemies, or so to weaken it that it cannot effect its escape.
The general principle, with regard to the division of the
game, is, that the men eat the males, the women the females,
and the children the small animals; but since there is no rule
without its exception, so also in this case the men claim
the right also to eat the females and small animals, "while the
■women and children must abide by the established rules; the
common kangaroo rat, however, they are all, without any
distinction, allowed to eat.
As a fixed prohibition, the wallaby, in the Parnkalla lan-
guage called “yarridni,” and the two species of bandicoot,
“kurkulli” and “yartini,” dare not, on any account, be eaten by
young lads or girls, as, according to their opinion they would,
with the latter, cause premature puberty, and with regard to
the former give to their beards a brownish appearance, in-
stead of its becoming a jet-black colour, as it ought to do.
Mr. Schurmann has had frequent opportunities to satisfy him-
self of the strict observance of this law. Lizards are considered
the proper food for young girls whose puberty they wish to
hasten on, and snakes for women to make them bear children.
I
II
c
A huntsman’s life, under any circumstances, is a migratory
one, but it becomes the more so in this country where Nature’s
products are obtainable only according to the season, and in
districts far off one from the other.
On this account the Port Lincoln blacks are obliged at
times to resort to the seacoast for catching fish, at others to
rove over hill and dale in pursuit of game and roots, and dur-
ing the unproductive months they are forced, for the smaller
kinds of game, to roam through the whole country, some parts
of which are covered with an almost impenetrable small scrub,
and other parts complete deserts, all the time having to
contend against a dreadful heat, rendered almost insup-
portable by the reflection of the rays of the sun, and of the


surrounding burning scrub; and being, in addition to all this,
deprived of a sufficiency of water. In order then to allay
their thirst, they resort to the strange trick of covering their
stomachs with earth, in order to cool them, and which, they
say, has the desired effect.
The average distance which the blacks travel in a day is 15
to 20 miles; but on one occasion myself, with three natives,
and a woman carrying a child, walked 35 miles on an
exceedingly hot day.
On their journey the men generally ramble about, but the
women and children, under charge of one or two men, proceed
in a direct course to their place of rendezvous.
In the morning they are never in a hurry to make a start,
and at times it requires a great deal of coaxing and persuasion,
on the part of some of the older men, to get them into a re-
gular move.
On arrival at their camp or place of rest, generally a little
before sunset, the first thing they do is to kindle a fire for
roasting the small game which the men have secured during
the day. The larger game they roast on the spot where it has
been killed, which renders it anything but desirable to fall in
with emus or kangaroos when travelling in company of blacks,
if anxious to reach any fixed place at a certain time. The
remnants of a large roast they hang upon sticks, and thus
carry it to the camp.
After eating their meat, the women hand round the roots
and fruits which they have gathered during the day; and after
having done with these also, they chat and sing; and if as-
sembled in large numbers, they dance until tired, then lie
down for sleep. If there should happen to be a large supply
of meat beyond that required for supper, they stay up the
whole night to finish it; but if, after all, anything should re-
main over, they put it into a bag, which they make serve
them as a pillow, and, on opening their eyes in the morning,
their first move is towards the bag for its contents.
As patiently as they bear up against the cravings of hunger
and thirst at times of want, as immoderate also are they when
in abundance, when they overload their stomachs almost to
bursting, and will not stir from the camp until their stock is
exhausted, and hunger almost forces them to move.
The only cases in which they evince any forethought of the
future is in their great care for birds’ nests, and for water, to
secure and protect which against animals they cautiously cover
all their springs with stones or branches of trees.


Their habitations are of a very simple and primitive con-
struction. In the summer, and in dry fine weather, they
heap up some branches of trees, in the form of a horseshoe,
for protection against the winds; in the winter, and in wet
weather, however, they make a kind of hnt or bower with
the branches of the casuarina, in the shape of a deep niche,
and erect them as perpendicularly as they can, thereby to
facilitate the dripping otf of the rain. In those parts of the
country where they have gum trees (eucalypti) they peel off
the bark, and fix it so well together as to make the roof quite
waterproof. In front of these huts they always burn a fire
during the night for warming their feet, and in the cold
weather every fine lies between a small heap of burning coals
in front and at the back, for keeping warm the upper part of
their body. As the slightest motion must bring them into
contact with these burning coals, it naturally occurs that they
at times seriously burn themselves.
The time they remain in one spot altogether depends on the
locality, and the supply of food obtainable.
In several parts of Port Lincoln there are isolated wells or
holes in large rocks, containing a supply of water, while not
anywhere else, within 30 miles, a drop of it is to be found;
the natives, as long as they remain in that neighbourhood, are,
in consequence, obliged to return every night to the same camp.
In places favourably situated for fishing they will extend their
stay in the same camp for twelve or fourteen days, but never
longer.
The habit of constantly changing their places of rest is so
great that they cannot overcome it, even if staying where all
their wants can be abundantly supplied. A certain longing
to revisit this or that spot, for which they have taken a par-
ticular fancy, seizes them, and neither promises nor persua-
sion can induce them to resist it for any time; only in time
and by degrees is this feeling likely to give way. As they
travel greater distances during the summer months than
during winter, they then also more frequently change their
places of rest.
Each family has its distinct place, where they live together;
and all unmarried men have to sleep by themselves.
All the aborigines in the Port Lincoln district are divided
into two separate classes, viz., the “ Matteri ” and the
“ Karraru.”
This division seems to have been introduced since time
immemorial, and with a view to regulate their marriages, as


no one is allowed to intermarry in their own castes, but only
into the other one —that is, if the man is a matteri, he can
choose as his wife a karraru only, and vice versa. This dis-
tinction is kept up by the arrangement that the children
belong to the caste of the mother. There are no instances
of two karrarus or two matteris having been married toge-
ther, and yet connexions of a less virtuous character which
take place between members of the same caste do not appear
to be considered incestuous. In addition to this general
rule, there are certain degress of relationship within which
intermarrying is prohibited; yet from the indefinite degree
of their relationship by blood, arising from the plurality of
wives, and their being cast off at pleasure, &c., it be-
comes very difficult to trace them exactly. Besides this,
friendship among the natives leads to the adoption of forms
and names strictly in use among relatives only; thus it be-
comes totally impossible to make out what are real relations
or apparently so.
Marriages among the Port Lincoln blacks are made up in
the most simple manner imaginable.
The girls, when young, are betrothed by their parents to a
friend of theirs, young or old, married or unmarried, as the
case may be, and when grown up for marriage are simply
ordered to follow their husband, without any further ceremo-
nies, and without the least regard for their own individual
inclinations. To their good luck, however, it does not very
seldom occur that an old, jealous matron strongly opposes
herself against such a division of her husband’s affections be-
tween herself and her young rival, and forces him to renounce
all claims upon her in favor of some young fellow, who is but
too willing to take charge of her. Sometimes, also, a young
man, urged on by his passions, or under the idea of a well-
founded claim, will, by force, abduct the wife of another, and,
if he cannot otherwise gain his object, even kill him without
the least compunction.
The marriages of the Goulburn tribe seem nearly to cor-
respond with those in Port Lincoln, as may be seen from an
extract from Mr. Blandowski’s “Personal Observations in
Victoria” :
“ The young man who wishes to marry, has first to look
ont for a wife amongst the girls or lubras of some neighbour-
ing tribe, and having fixed his choice, his next care is to ob-
tain her consent. This being managed, the happy couple
straightway elope., and remain together in the bush for tw r o
n 2


nights and one day, in order to elude the pretended search
of the tribe to whom the female belonged. This concludes the
ceremony, and the young man then returns with his wife to
his own tribe. He is, however, laid under this peculiar injunc-
tion —that he must not see his mother-in-law any more; and
t J J
the following circumstance, connected with this fact, has
been related to me by Mr. Grant, an eye-witness. A mother-
in-law having been descried approaching, a number of lubras
formed a circle around the young man, and he himself
covered his face with his hands. This, while it screened the
old lady from his sight, served as a warning to her not to
approach, as she must never be informed by a third party of
the presence of her son-in-lawA
The most abominable views and the still more shameless
conduct of the natives, with respect to marriages, if the term
can be applied to their manner of living together, undoubt-
edly presents the worst feature of their character.
Although the men are apt to become passionately jealous
if they detect their wives transgressing without their consent,
vet of their own accord they offer them and send them to
«/ V
other men, or make an exchange for a night with some one
of their friends. Of relatives, brothers in particular, it may
be said that they possess their wives jointly.
While the former custom of lending their wives out for a
night appears to be considered by the blacks themselves as
indecorous, yet the other one is an acknowledged custom,
which they do not see the least occasion to be ashamed of.
%/
These extraordinary connections have given rise to strange
appellations among them. The woman honors the brother
of the man to whom she is married with the title also of
husband, while the men call their own wives yungaras, and
those of their brothers, kartetis.
Although they are married so very young, the women, ac-
cording to Mr. SchurmaniTs observations, generally have no
children before the age at which they get them in Europe.
The number of children in a family varies considerably;
but, upon the whole, it is limited —seldom exceeding four.
If, as it but seldom occurs, children are born in a family
quick one after another, the youngest is generally destroyed
in some out of the way place, by some woman, accompanied
for this purpose by the mother herself. From the excess of
male adults alive, it may fairly be presumed that aby far
greater number of girls than of boys are done away with in this
manner. As an apology for this barbarous custom, the wo-


men plead that they cannot suckle and carry two children
together. The men clear themselves of all guilt, saying—
that they are never present when these deeds are committed,
and that therefore all blame rests with the women.
Both sexes are very fond of their children, but yet the
mothers are most careless with them, and let them burn
themselves dreadfully at times, at their fires, as a conse-
quence of which you seldom meet with a native who has not
a trace, more or less disfiguring, of having been so burnt.
In the naming of the children a fixed and very simple rule
is followed, according to the number of children born.
Bor instance, the first-born is called Piri, if a boy; and Kar-
tanye, if a girl. The second one is called W arid, or Warrunya.
The third one is called Kunni or Kunta; and so on, accord-
ing to its sex. They have seven or eight such names for each
sex. In addition to these names used in familiar inter-
course, and answering our Christian names, the child also
takes the name of the place of its birth. Both these names
they preserve during life, and the males, on attaining the age
of manhood, get a third one, under strict observance of many
mysterious formalisms which will be described hereafter.
Although living in a salubrious climate and on healthy
food, the natives are subject to many diseases. Among those
which they suffer most from are sores, diarrhoea, colds, and
headache. Bor removing these, or partially curing them for
the time, they apply outward remedies, some of which
appear to be effective. The chief ones are —rubbing, press-
ing, and treading even upon the afflicted parts of the body,
in particular the belly and the back; tightening of the belt,
and also of the band which they usually wear round the head;
bandaging the diseased part; sprinkling or washing it with
cold water in case of fever or inflammation. Sores or wounds
are generally left to take their course, or the utmost done is
to tie something tight round it, or, if inflammation has en-
sued, to sprinkle cold water upon it. Bleeding of the lower
arm they apply in cases of headache. A most extraordi-
nary remedy against headache I saw applied in 1849, in the
case of a woman, who submitted to having her head so cut
up by another woman with pieces of broken glass, that the
blood actually dropped through her thick bushy hair.
The cure by bleeding is confined to the males only, and is
frequently applied during the hot season.
They do not allow the blood to run on the ground, but
upon the body of some other man, directing the arm in such


22 Manners and Customs of the Australian Natives,
y
a manner that the stream forms a number of small cross-
lines, in consequence of which the body assumes the appear-
ance of being covered with a tight-fitting network of very
small meshes. The object of this custom partly is, as stated
above, to act as a cure for headache and inflammation, and
partly also to promote the growth of the young people, and
to preserve the strength and vigour of the aged ones.
Many proofs might be given of the very slight conception
they can form of the relative bearing of cause and effect.
For instance, an elderly fellow, who had been kept for two
years in jail in Adelaide, had the idea that his beard, having
turned grey, had been dyed by the soap with which he had
been obliged to wash himself there.
The women may be present at the operation of bleeding.
Whenever engaged in this or certain other operations, the
“witarna,” as above stated, is put in motion, to prevent
young unmarried people from unwittingly surprising them.
The natives have also their regular doctors, called min-
tapas, who pretend to be able to remove, by sucking, sickness
out of the body. They put their lips to the pit of the stomach
in case of general disease, and to the suffering part where
confined to any fixed spot, and, after having sucked for some
time, pull out of their mouths a small piece of wood or bone,
pretending that this is the body of the disease, which had
been communicated by some evil-disposed person, and had
now been extracted bv them.
V
So superstitious are these ignorant children of nature, that
they have the fidlest faith in these absurdities, and passion-
ately defend them against any one expressing the least doubt
respecting them, or hinting even that the mintapa might
have put the piece of wood or bone into his mouth previously.
They further appear to attribute to these mintapas super-
natural powers, and to consider them almost as beings of a
superior class, to whom they assign after death a place of
residence different to that whereto other people are removed,
and which they call Pandarri Kurto (heaven’s cavern). The
souls of these mintapas are supposed to be at full liberty to
enter and leave this place, and are said often to appear in the
evening in human forms to these natives, bringing with
them new songs, and then disappear again.
It is well ascertained that they have among them poets as
well as doctors, as has been proved in the case of Maltalla,
an old man, who shortly before his death made two songs,
which are now recited bv his tribe.
*


The names of common blacks, when dead, are not men-
tioned for a considerable time, but in the case of Maltalla,
and probably all mintapas, they make an exception of this
rule.
The dignity of mintapa seem to be hereditary, for, as the
blacks used to say, Maltalla’s eldest son, although he had
not then given any proofs of his aptitude for the office, would
assume the functions of a mintapa.
Among the blacks in the immediate neighbourhood of
Port Lincoln there are few of these sorcerers, but among the
savage Kukata tribes they are said to be numerous.
The natives show strong feelings of commisseration in cases
of illness, the women particularly so, who, under an abun-
dance of tears, prove their interest and attention by frequently
rubbing and pressing the affected parts ; but the sick them-
selves, in desperate cases even, submit to their sufferings with
a surprising stoicism and resignation.
A very peculiar circumstance, not to be met with perhaps
in any other uncivilized community, is that these natives have
no chief or individual of acknowledged authority among them.
All the adult men are quite equal one to the other, a fact so
well understood among them, that no one would ever presume
to adopt a tone of command to another one, but, by asking
and persuasion only, tries to obtain what he wants. The
young people, however, show great respect towards the old
ones, a tribute to advanced age or to greater experience per-
haps ; but this, no doubt, is increased and preserved by-a
superstitious and dreadful horror of certain secret rites known
to the grown-up men only, into the knowledge of which the
young lads are initiated by degrees.
The three degrees which they have to pass through, con-
stitute three distinct epochs in their lives; during the interval
between the rise from one degree to the other, the name of
that particular degree last attained serves them for their
usual name.
At the age of 14 or 15 years they enter the first degree,
which procures them the distinguished name of Warrara.
Mr. Schurmann has never witnessed the performance of
these ceremonies, as the natives, apprehensive lest these secrets
might be communicated to their wives and children, do not
admit any strangers at them, but he has been told a
description of it ; while closing the eyes of the lads,
they pronounce certain mysterious formulas, calling
out “ Herri, herri, herri,” and making a rattling noise


with the “ pullakalli,” an instrument resembling the
“ witarna,” but smaller in size. Two or three months after
this ceremony, the lad has to paint his face black, dares not
speak aloud, but must express in whispers all his wishes and
wants. Any infringement of these laws subjects them to
severe reprimands from their seniors, and even more talking
than is absolutely necessary is considered highly reproachable.
A few years after this first ceremony the young men
advance to the second degree, when they are called Pardnapas,
and have to undergo the operation of circumcision. Mr.
Edward John Eyre, the well-known explorer, mentions this
strange custom in vol. I. p. 312 as follows : —“ This extraor-
dinary and inexplicable custom must have a great tendency
to prevent the rapid increase of the population; and its
adoption may perhaps be a wise ordination of Providence for
that purpose, in a country of so desert and arid a character
as that which these people occupy.” The hair, which while
the lad was a Warrara in the first degree had been allowed
to grow, is then plaited in a coil, and in the shape of a plate
fastened on the crown of the head in a net made of the spun
hair of the opossum; his penis is also covered with a kind of
fringe or tassel made of the same material. These sacred
marks of distinction are worn for several months; and after
removal of the net the hair is not cropped, but made to
hang down in curls. During this period, without any
peculiar ceremony, the operation of the painful mutilating
circumcision is performed, the particular object of which Mr.
Schurmann has never been able to ascertain; the blacks
themselves cannot assign any other reason for it, but that
their forefathers had observed the custom, and that they
must do the same. To the women and children they pretend
that “ Midhalla,” an imaginary being, and said to be inhabit-
ing some island, is the cause of this cruel mutilation.
The last and most important ceremony takes place at the
age of 18 or 30 years, after which the young men are called
“ Wilyalkinyes.” Mr. Schurmann having twice had the
opportunity of witnessing its performance, is thereby enabled
to give a detailed description of it.
As an introductory step for the grand festivity, the so-
called “ Indanyanas,” a kind of sponsors, are chosen, their
duty being to carry out the old established custom relating
thereto. Some one clasps his arms, from behind, around the
sponsor whom they have fixed upon, and draws him backwards
on his lap, after which others collect around him, urging him to


accept tlie office of Indanyana, an honor which he pretends
to accept of most reluctantly. (All festivities of the blacks
take place during the summer season, when a great number
of them are always collected together; and since no one
among them possesses any authority of command, it requires
no little mutual persuasion and exhortation to move on a
large idle body of them; the natural consequence is, the
greater part of the day passes on in going through ceremo-
nies for which an hour would be amply sufficient.)
They commence by closing the eyes of the “Wilyalkinyes,”
and by fetching out of their camps, apparently much against
their will, the women, who raise up a general lamentation,
far, however, from sincere; in the meantime, the lads have
been removed by their sponsors, and are kept at a short dis-
tance from the place of encampment. These, then, having-
placed themselves in a circle, holding for about an hour the
eyes of the lads closed with both hands, utter from time
to time a long, protracted, melancholy, monotonous tone,
sounding somewhat like “ Je —e —ch.” Then leading the
lads a further distance off, they lay them fiat on the
ground, and cover them up with rugs; after an interval
of another hour, two men fetch several green boughs of
trees, and the lads having been raised up again, the whole
body of those present join together and form a large semi-
circle round them. The two bearers of the green boughs
now step forward, place themselves in the centre of the open-
ing of the circle, vehemently stamp their right feet, and
under various gestures of anger and wrath throw the boughs
over the heads of the young men, while at the same
time the other company make a clatter by striking their various
war instruments together, and utter a volley of short, strong,
loud sounds, the last of which they prolong each time that any
of the boughs fall to the ground —similar, we might say, to
“ Je-je-je-jeh,” while the young initiated are then laid on the
carefully-spread boughs, and again covered with rugs. The
others quite leisurely set to work preparing the small pieces
of quartz for the tattooing operation, and engage in finding-
out some new names to bestow on them for life hereafter.
The latter becomes a rather difficult task, since the name has
not only to correspond with their taste and notions of euphony,
but also must be quite new, and not have been borne by any
other individual alive or dead even. These names generally
are derived from the roots of verbs, to which they attach as
end-syllables —“alta,” “ilti,” or “nlta” —according to the last


syllable of the word itself. Whether these changes affect
the meaning of the word we cannot say,, as they are made
use of in connection with proper names only. The
natives by no means despise any suggestion from the whites
in reference to any new name, but yet in the choice of any
one proposed they are very particular that it should be quite
new and well-suited.
Everything being properly prepared, several of the men
open a vein in their lower arm, and make the lads, after
having lifted them again, swallow the first drops of this
blood; they then make them kneel down and support them-
selves on their hands, and their backs, thus getting into an
horizontal position, are covered over with a thick coating of
the blood, and when this has sufficiently congealed, one of
the men with his thumb marks out the spots where the in-
cisions are to be made. One is made in the centre of the
neck, and a row of them at distances of one-third of an inch,
and running from each shoulder down to the hips. These
incisions—about an inch long, and in course of time forming
a kind of swelling—are called “Manka/’ and are always con-
sidered wdth great respect, being never alluded to in the pre-
sence of the women or children. The other incisions,
however, which at an early age are made on the breast and
the arms, are merely for ornament, and have no sacred mean-
ing. The more or less decided character of these swellings
affords a certain indication of the probable age of a native.
During the vigorous age of manhood they are strong and well
defined, but get gradually reduced with the advance of age,
until, when very old, they can be traced like scars only.
Although each incision made with the blunt rough quartz
has to be repeated several times, in order to make them suf-
ficiently deep, and afterwards the flesh has to be drawn
asunder carefully, the sufferers, notwithstanding the dreadful
pain of such an operation, do not utter a groan, or move a
muscle even, in consequence. Mr. Schurmann, however,
has seen some of their friends so moved by compassion for
their sufferings as to shed tears, and make some attempts —
although unsuccessfully, of course —at putting a stop to this
cruel process. During the operation as many men as can
approach press round the lads, rapidly repeating in a sub-
dued tone the following formula :
Kannaka kanya, marra marra,
Karndo kanya, marra marra,
Pilberri kanya, marra marra.


The object of this formula, handed down to them from their
forefathers, and, as it appears, void of any meaning or sense
soever, is to deaden the pain, and to prevent any dangerous
effects of this dreadful laceration. The operation being con-
cluded, the young men are raised up and their eyes opened,
when the first object they perceive are two men, who, stamp-
ing their feet and biting their beards, run towards them
hurling the “ witarna” with great vehemence, and apparently
intending to throw it at their heads, but who, when sufficiently
near, satisfy themselves with putting the cord of the instru -
ment round the necks of one after the other.
In commemoration of their having passed through this
trial, the Wilyalkinyes are honored with various marks of
distinction, as, for instance, they are presented with a belt
spun of human hair; they wear a tight bandage round each
of their upper arms, also a cord of opossum hair round their
neck, the ends dropping down on their back, to be fastened
to the belt; further, a bunch of green leaves fastened above
their part virilis, and at last they blacken their faces, arms,
and breasts.
As a wind up, all present press once more around them in
order to give their last good advice for their future conduct,
the chief drift of which, as far as Mr. Schurmann has
been able to make out, consists in the following—to avoid
quarrels and disputes, not to indulge in talking loud, and to
keep off from the women. The two last of these injunctions
are strictly followed, and for this purpose they live day and
night separated from the other blacks, and talk in a subdued
tone only until after the expiration of four or five months, when
they are relieved from this constraint. This absolution is
effected by tearing off from the necks of the Wilyalkinyes
the opossum cord, the symbol of taciturnity, and sprinkling
the upper body with blood in the manner which has been
described above. They are henceforth considered as initiated
into all the secrets, and fit to be admitted to the enjoyment
of all the privileges of grown-up men.
William von Blandowski, late curator of the Melbourne
Museum of Natural History, mentions in his “ Personal
Observations of Victoria/'’ p. 23, a custom of the Goulburn
tribe which is interesting enough to give in full. Upon a
youth arriving at manhood, he is conducted by three of the
leaders of his tribe into the recesses of the woods, where he
remains two days and one night. Being furnished with a
piece of wood, he knocks out two of the teeth of his upper


front jaw, and on returning to the camp carefully consigns
them to his mother ;the youth then again retires into the
forest, and remains absent two nights and one day, during
which his mother, having selected a young gum tree, inserts
the teeth in the bark in the front of two of the topmost
branches. This tree is made known only to certain persons
of the tribe, and is strictly kept from the knowledge of the
youth himself. In case the person to whom the tree is thus
dedicated dies, the foot of it is stripped of its bark, and it is
killed by the application of fire, thus becoming a monument
of the deceased. Hence, we need no longer be surprised at
so frequently finding groups of dead trees in healthy and ver-
dant forests, and surrounded by luxuriant vegetation.”
A similar custom Hr. Livingstone found in the Babimpe
tribe in Africa, they knocking out both upper and lower front-
ing teeth as a distinction.
As stated above, the women and children are not allowed
to attend any of these ceremonies. Their camps even on
these occasions are then so placed that their view is fully
obstructed by bush or hills. If, however, any woman’s or child’s
business —to fetch water or wood, for instance —should lead
them within sight of the place of these ceremonies, they are
required to cover their heads with their rug, and to move on
in a stooping position. Any improper curiosity, according to
ancient custom, is liable to be punished with death.
As a proof of the significance they attach to these strange
rites and customs, it may be instanced that it is considered
insulting if one of a higher degree taunts his adversary with
the lower degree he still occupies; thus—“Warrara purro,”
meaning a warrara only (still in the first degree), and
f<r Pardnapa purro” (a pardnapa only), or still in the second
degree, are used as offensive terms.
The views of the natives in reference to supernatural beings
. ~ JL i
or influences are very peculiar and remarkable. They have
as clear a conception of the unsubstantiality and immortality
of the soul as might be expected of them. In order to ex-
press the former quality, they represent the soul as being so
small that it might pass through a chink; and in reference to
the latter, they state that after the death of the body the soul
retires to an island as so small an atom as to be able to dis-
pense with further nourishment of any kind. Some represent
that island as being in the east, others in the ivest; there-
fore, either not agreeing as to the exact locality, or believing
in the existence of several such islands whereto the departed


souls resort. On its journey to this island the soul is accom-
panied by a redbill, a kind of sea-bird, notorious for its
piercing shrill voice, audible during the night. It appears
that since they have found out the existence of the race of
white people, they have adopted the notion that their souls will
hereafter appear in the bodies of such white people. Whatever
be the cause, at present this is their belief, and they look upon
the whites as being only the embodied souls of "their fore-
fathers. It may be instanced as a proof of how firmly they
do believe, or rather have believed this, that in the idea they
had recognised in some of the settlers natives long ago de-
parted from life, they actually gave them the names which
these had gone by when alive. This notion is not confined
to the Port Lincoln blacks, but prevails also with those of
Adelaide and Victoria. To Mr. Blandowski, one of our
Australian travellers, it has occurred that an old lubra (black
woman), supposing him to be her former husband resuscitated,
has most tenderly embraced and kissed him.
The last words of a young Port Lincoln native, hanged in
Adelaide a few years ago, were to the effect that in course of
time he would become a white man, and yet this man had by
Europeans been taught more correct views.
These apparently conflicting two ideas—one, that an island
is the receptacle of the soul; the other, that they re-appear
in bodies of white people —may, perhaps, be reconciled by
the assumption of the natives that the island is the place of
residence for a certain period only. This is the more probable,
as they decidedly believe in a change of the souls, and assign
to them this island as an intermediate place of residence.
We can scarcely assume that the natives have originally
had any conception of future reward or punishment for good
or evil acts committed in this life, but yet they seem to think
that the fate of man depends on his own conduct, as may be
illustrated by the following anecdote :
It had been reported that in the neighborhood of Streaky
Bay a blackfellow had been shot by the crew of a whaler,
because he had speared one of their dogs which had furiously
attacked him. Some time afterwards the crew of a
stranded whaler landed in the neighborhood, and on express-
ing a supposition that they might be the same men who had
killed the blackfellow', their misfortune was ascribed as the
consequence of their former cruel deed.
Among the superstitious notions of the Port Lincoln blacks,
their belief in the existence of a demon monster is most


remarkable. It is called “Marralye,” and is represented as a
man of the Kukata tribe, assuming, in order to fly through
the air, the form of a bird. It is dreaded at night time par-
ticularly, during which it attacks its victims while asleep,
implanting in them the germ of death, or inflicting on them
some other grievous harm. It, however, takes good care not
to leave behind any visible traces of its misdeeds, so that his
nightly visits can only be discovered by their pernicious
effects, such as pain, disease, &c. To him the death of chil-
dren and loss of eyes are attributed, if no other obvious
cause for them can be made out.
It is to be mentioned that the Marralye does not exist
substantially, but that it is only a mask assumed by wicked
men to enable them to carry out their depraved designs.
The Purkabidnies are another species of fabulous beings,
whose number is without limit. They are depicted as men
of a gigantic size, who, destitute of all clothing, roam through
the country, armed solely with clubs. Although thirsting
for blood, and giving themselves up to murder, still they are
by no means so dangerous as the Marralye, as by science of
arms and courage they are to be resisted, and even overcome.
The aborigines never think of leaving their camp during the
night time without taking a spear in their hand to protect
themselves against these assassins, who might be lurking in
the neighbourhood. Some of the natives go so far as to boast
that they have killed Purkabidnies, but it is to be presumed
that in their superstitious fright they have mistaken black
stumps of trees, or even other aborigines, for these terrible
monsters. Mr. Schurmann tells us that two natives whom he
had with him once showed him, in the middle of a thickly
s «/
wooded region, at a distance of not more than a hundred
jaces, a dark object, which certainly bore resemblance to a
black man in a stooping position. They were convinced that
it was a Purkabidnie, and not only did they refuse to accom-
pany Mr, Schurmann, but they even endeavoured to dissuade
him from attempting to examine the object in question.
Upon Mr. Schurmann approaching the object, he found it to
be a charred stump of a tree, and when he laid his hand
upon it, the natives burst into a loud laugh, and for this once
acknowledged that they were in error, but, nevertheless, they
remained steadfastly convinced that there were such spectral
beings, and that they had without doubt seen them upon other
occasions. That isolated natives, who have wandered too far
into the territory of a strange tribe, are taken for Punkabid-


n ies, is not improbable,, and the following circumstance gives
a tint of truth to this belief. Two young blacks of the Mur-
rumbidgee tribe, who left Mr. Eyre in the middle of his
journey from Adelaide to King George’s Sound, after mur-
dering his overseer, were, in their turn, while proceeding
homewards, killed by a western tribe, in the belief that they
were the redoubted Punkabidnies. The worst kind of super-
stition, and which in proportion causes as much mischief
among the native tribes as the belief in witchcraft formerly
did in Europe, is the notion that any one, out of hatred or
other motives, can kill any person inimical to him during his
sleep, and that this is done by boring the enemy with the
lingers in the side in a peculiar way. The consequences of
this proceeding are said to be gradual loss of health, and
finally death. The guilty wretch is generally discovered by
the evidence of the dying person. The aborigines have habi-
tuated themselves to the belief that in all cases of death
which cannot be accounted for, as proceeding from old age,
wounds, and other palpable causes, knavish and malicious
means have been resorted to. They are not content even
when the cause of death is sufficiently clear, but seek to find
a hidden cause, as the following event relative to the point
will show. A woman, while clearing out a well, was bitten
in the thumb by a black snake. It began to swell imme-
diately, and in the short space of twenty-four hours the
woman was a corpse. Still it was asserted that it was not
an accident, but that the deceased had pointed out a certain
aborigine as her murderer. Upon this evidence, which was
heightened by the circumstance that no blood flowed from
the wound, the woman’s husband and his friends challenged
the accused and his friends to combat. Peace, however, in
the meantime was made, and upon the offensive side it was
acknowledged that the woman was in error with regard to
the guilty person. But still not satisfied that the snake bite
should have been the cause of the death, another individual
was suddenly discovered, and accused of being the author of
the mishap. Thereupon war was declared upon him and his
party, but at last the affair was borne with and forgotten.
Prom this and other similar cases, it seems to stand forth
clearly as much revenge as superstition is at the bottom of
these infamous accusations. Considering that the aborigines
are unacquainted with Him in whose hands are life and death,
that they are little given to reflection, ready to sacrifice their
friends in obedience to a blind fate, capable, however, of deep


grief, and being superstitious at the same time; considering
all these points, it is not so much to be wondered at that
they should seek for the cause without the region of human
influences. The aborigines have many other superstitious
ideas, and although not possessing such a dangerous tendency
as the one above quoted, still such take hold of the imagina-
tion with a pernicious and undue strength. It is asserted
that far distant tribes, viz., Kukatas, have the power to pro-
duce strong rain, intolerable heat, and barrenness, in conse-
quence of which famine arises, and causes the other tribes to
be snatched from this life en masse. It is worthy of remark
that from the north-west, where the Kukatas camp, come
in winter the most severe rain and in summer the terrible
hot winds which make the ground arid and dries up all
vegetation, A comet, or any other atmospheric meteor, is
looked upon as a sure sign of death. Upon the appearance
of the great comet in 1843 they were so overcome by fright
and consternation, that they sought refuge in caves. The
inhabitants of Port Lincoln have a mass of superstitions, in-
herited from their forefathers, in the highest degree impro-
bable and monstrous, as we shall perceive from a few cases
before us.
Pulyalanna was a great man, who died many years ago,
and who had benefited his successors by having given names
to the southern and western parts of the land, names they
still retain at the present time. It happened unfortunately
for him, however, that his two wives ran away from him, a
circumstance that in no wise improved his temper. After a
long and fruitless search he discovered their trail, and, fol-
lowing it up, he overtook them near Cape Catastrophe, and
murdered them both, together with their children. They
were then transformed into stone, and are to be seen at the
present time in the middle of the sea, in the shape of islands
and rocks. Their sighs can also be heard in a hollow rock
through which the waves sometimes beat. Pulyalanna him-
self was, later on, taken near Point Isaac into the air, or into
heaven, where he still remains in an angry mood. When
he is excited, he raves and storms in the clouds, and produces
thunder. ITc has been depicted as armed with clubs, with
which he especially hits the pardnapas, and often with so
true an aim, that he severs them in twain, and legs and
bodies fly in different directions. Some of the old aborigines
once prayed him to spare the pardnapas, and to destroy in-
stead the she-oaks, which to this day bear the marks of his


clubs and thunderbolts. They go so far as to say that light-
ning is the creation of Pulyalanna, caused by his stretching
his legs Avidely apart during one of his fits of rage.
The large red species of kangaroo, AA r hich is often seen
in the north, is not found in the Port Lincoln district, and
to judge from the following fable, one of these animals must
have Avandered to this place. Kupirri, so this animal vras
named, is said to have been of such enormous size, that lie
sAvalloAved each and all avlio endeavoured to kill him with
their spears. His aspect alone filled the natives Avith such
fright, that they lost all presence of mind, and flung the
wooden sling, middla, as Avell as the spear, which of course
caused the latter to lose its effect.
At last two expert hunters were found equal to combat this
monster. They Avcrc called Pilla and Idnya, Avho discovered
his track in the ranges running north of Port Lincoln. They
traced them for about thirty miles from Port Lincoln, came up
to him at Mount KilaAvo ; finding the beast asleep, they
immediately attacked it, but before they AA r ere aAvare of it,
their spears became blunted, Avhich difficulty must have been
most inopportune for them. They fell into a violent dispute,
and Pilla Avounded his antagonist in several parts of the body
Avith the blunted spear, receiving at the same time a cut across
the nose from his adversary’s middla. They soon, hoAvever,
made peace and killed the Kupirri, and great was their
astonishment, upon opening the animal, to find in his belly
several of their swalloAved comrades ; but being as expert
doctors as hunters, they brought the unfortunate natives to
life again, and all made preparations to broil and eat the
monster. After the meal AA r as finished, and after they had
smeared themselves with the fat of the animal, they set out to
communicate to the sorroAving Avives the happy issue of their
adventure. The two heroes AA r ere later transformed into tAvo
species of animal, the opossum and the Avild cat, which haA r e
not alone their origin from them, but which bear at the pre-
sentdaythe names and the marks of the AA r ounds they had given
each other, by the opossum, in the shape of a furrow running
from the head to the tip of the nose, and the wild cat in the
form of spots oA T er the Avhole of the skin.
BetAveen Coffin and Sleaford bays I remarked an immense
quantity of sandhills of great size, which on Capt. Blinders
map Avere falsely represented as white cliff s. These mountains
of drift-sand have been heaped up by the west winds, and con-
stantly change their shape and position. According to the tradi-


tion of the aborigines they were raised by two of their ancestors,
named Marnpi and Jadda. A large fire proceeding from the
sea spread itself far and near along the coast, seeming about
to envelope the whole land in flames; during the consultation
how to meet such a misfortune, these two persons suddenly
thought that the best means to extinguish the fire was bv
heaping earth on it. They set, therefore, to work, and raised
the sandhills as a lasting monument of the same.
An aboriginal named Welu, celebrated for being a
furious warrior, as also a great woman lover, made the
horrible resolution of exterminating the whole tribe of
Nauos or Nawos. He succeeded in killing all the males,
by throwing one spear through ail of them as they
stood in a single file. Two young men, however, escaped,
having sought refuge in the top of a tree; Welu followed
them to kill them likewise, but a lucky stratagem saved
them from his ire; they broke the branch upon which their
enemy had climbed, he fell to the ground, and was attacked
and torn to pieces by a tame dog. Thereupon Welu was
changed into a bird, called in English the “ Curlew,” and
the youths who had escaped his wrath were transformed
into little lizards, the male of which is called Ibirri, and the
female Waka; this is said to have occasioned the distinction
between the human sex. This procedure did not seem to have
been approved of by the aborigines, as each sex formed a
fruitless hatred against the opposite sex of this little animal,
the men amidst jokes and laughter striving to kill the Waka,
and the women the Ibirri.
Ghost stories are not wanting amongst the aborigines. They
say there is a rock on the south side of Port -Lincoln full of
deep holes, an occurrence not uncommon in the limestone
formations of this region, inhabited by a race of dead men,
who come out in the night to eat ants-’ eggs (this is a favourite
food of the aborigines), but who during the day remained
concealed in the above-mentioned holes. No one seems to
have seen these night birds, but the natives say they have
sometimes heard them calling to one another, whereupon the
former are filled with horror, and take to their heels. They
possess a number of such like tales, but these which have been
already mentioned serve but to show the foolishness, impro-
bability, and the monstrosity of the same.
Singing and dancing are the favorite and almost the sole
amusements of the aborigines of this region. They are in
the possession of a number of songs, each one consisting of


two, or at most three lines, of one such songs the following is
a specimen:—
La pirra mirrana. lyura tyurra tyurraru
lyindo Katutyala. Palta palta paltarni
Kauwirra wirrana. Ninna kutyu nyang-kali.
In the singing of this and other songs of the same kind, each
verse is repeated twice, and when the last line is finished
they begin again at the first. They do not seem to give much
attention to the meaning of the words, so long as the neces-
sary measure and the proper number of the accented syllables
are observed. The greater number of these kind of songs
would seem to belong to other far removed tribes, for they
are not acquainted with the meaning of any of the words, nor
do they think it worth while to make any investigation re-
garding them. Every question as to the origin of such verses
or words is replied to by the convenient and simple answer
that it is a kuri, or song. Their songs are in different mea-.
sures, some being slow and serious, others quick and lively.
These songs, however, do not offend the ear, but they are
monotonous, and require that the voice should be raised and
lowered with regularity. The natives are exceedingly accu-
rate as regards the time, and, to prevent any mistake in this
respect, they beat the time with their clubs. The end of the
song is indicated by singing the last line in a low tone, sink-
ing the voice gradually so that the last note is scarcely audible.
The aborigines generally choose the mild summer evenings
for their dancing. If there should be a moon, so much the bet-
ter ; but should her silver light be wanting, they make up for it
by bright burning fires. Any one wishing to take part in the
dance adorns himself beforehand in the following manner.
From each shoulder are drawn two white parallel lines down
to the waist, in such a manner however that the four lines
meet at the. waist. They paint a white ring round each eye,
a broad stripe down the nose, and about six or eight whitish
lines, two and two, on the upper part of the arm; and, to put
the finishing touch to their ball costume, they bind a tuft of
green leaves round the legs above the knee. Should they be
possessors of white birds’ down, they make a wreath to go
round the head, beginning at one ear and encircling the brow,
close to the roots of the hair, to the other ear, so that it has
some slight resemblance to a lady’s nightcap. They have
different kinds of dances, but the favorite and most practised
consists in a number of jumps from side to side, and also for-
c 2


wards and backwards, holding the one hand to the side to
which they jump, while the other hangs down by the body.
The dancers place themselves in an irregular line, and at such
a distance from each other as to leave sufficient room. They
advance slowly until they stand before the singers, and then
step again to the background. A dance, as the rule, lasts
scarcely more than eight or ten minutes, for the movements
of the body are so violent, and require so much exertion, that
the dancers even in this short time are fully exhausted.
Although the women are prominent in the singing, they take
but little part in the dance; and, when they do, never more
than two or three at a time. Still even this small amount of
interest on the side of the women never fails to excite the
men to greater exertions. At the end of the dance the men
sit down forty or fifty paces from the singers. Being rested
for about a minute, they come forward dancing one after
the other, and one of the female dancers meets them half-
way, and accompanies them in step up to the singers. At
that point where the woman meets them they make a pause,
and, later on, they repeat it two or three times, stamping
with the feet on the ground, perhaps as a sort of ball-room
courtesy towards the lady.
These evening amusements often last till long past mid-
night, especially should the number of dancers be great, or
should two different tribes grace this aboriginal ball. Then
they do their best to amuse each other by the number
and different kinds of dances; on these occasions joy and
cheerfulness are depicted on each countenance, and it can
scarcely be credited that these good-natured faces could
assume the distorted traits of deep and powerful anger, and
that the wild gestures incident to the dance should change
into wilder passions.
This, alas, happens but too often, especially during the hot
portion of the year, when they disclose an amount of irrita-
bility of which in the cooler periods of the year they could
not be supposed capable.
Their wars can be divided into two classes, viz., the one
beginning suddenly, and arising from some paltry cause;
the other being the fruit of deep premeditation, and proceed-
ing from an earnest, sometimes from a true, and still oftener
from an imaginary cause. Although the behaviour of the
aborigines towards each other is generally characterised by
good-nature, mildness, and even politeness, still it often hap-
pens that friends engage in sanguinary strife with quondam


friends. The most common motives of discord are attri-
butable to the facts, firstly, that the women do not always
deport themselves as is becoming to their sex; and, secondly,
that the children quarrel among themselves, and do each other
bodily injury, which involves the parents and relations in
sometimes a bitter contest; or again, that one or other of
the men is neglected or forgotten in the distribution of the
necessaries of life.
The custom of dividing their food amongst each other is so
common, that he who fails to observe this rule is branded
as a sort of miser. An angry word, or an offensive action in
respect of any of the before-named cases, acts like an electric
spark. Each one springs up, grasps his weapons, and is ready
to retaliate upon any verbal or actual insult offered to himself
or to his friends. Although abuse made use of by the
women seldom carries any bad effect along with it, still
should it drop from the mouths of males, a fight is sure to be
the result. The friends of the insulted person often endea-
vour to appease him, and even have resort to force in order
to hold him back, but they generally fail in their object.
Clubs are first thrown, and then they rush upon each other
like tigers, beating each other with the middla, which
instrument inflicts such severe wounds that the blood flows
in streams, and the injured person falls senseless to the
ground. Should the fight become still more furious, they
have recourse to their spears; thereupon the women and
children take to flight, and watch at a distance the terrible
play of the men’s fierce passions. They give vent to their
feelings in a sort of monotonous song, drawing the last
syllable of each word out to a great lengh, and suffering the
voice to sink at the end of each sentence; they do this with
a view perhaps of making themselves heard amid the confused
noise and clatter, perhaps in order to give more force and
energy to their invectives. Should one of the combatants
fall dangerously wounded, the groans and lamentations
in which his friends and the women indulge put an end
to the predominant noise, and gradually to the fight as
well. After peace has been restored, each one seems
sorry for having caused the momentary interruption; and
should any one have wounded his antagonist severely,
he feels for him as truly and as sincerely as any of the others.
Should loss of life or serious hurt be the result of the combat,
it often happens that these must be expiated by again renew-
ing the contest. On the other hand, if little damage has


been done nothing more is said about it, and the parties that
yesterday fell upon each other with rage and fury are to-day
the best possible friends. Those wars which are the fruit of
premeditation and deliberation are known to the natives
weeks, and even months, before they take place. A suitable
place is pitched upon by the one side, and they then send
leralds to the enemy to invite them to the contest. The
causes of such a war are seduction, murder, or an attempt of
the same. The last of these has for its ground the super-
stitious idea which prevails, that any one who has died within
a short period has been deprived of life by wicked means.
The next of kin to the murdered or dead man chooses some
of his friends, and with them traverses the country, with the
firm resolution to kill the suspected person wherever they
may discover him. In earlier years two fights took place
here, one on account of a murder committed, the other on
account of an attempt to take away life. In the first case the
murderer and the brother of the murdered man were aided
and seconded by their respective friends. They were unani-
mous that the last-named person, as the avenger of the foul
deed, should throw two spears at the perpetrator, and that if
he should fail to hit his mark the quarrel should be forgotten.
To judge from the violent and wild gestures of the warriors,
the running about, the jumping, the biting of the beards and
the weapons, the noise and the grimaces, a sanguinary combat
was expected. But such was not the case. The antagonists
trod from their own side into the foreground, and the avenger
threw a spear most skilfully, but which was parried as ably as
it was thrown. Whereupon this combat was brought to a
close. The second fight, on account of attempted murder,
took place in Port Lincoln, and the party about to be attacked
were invited by heralds to attend the combat. The natives
upon their arrival were painted with a white colour, and wore
little peeled sticks which looked like plumes in their hair.
They marched in long line, three deep, making now and then
a halt, and with one voice poured forth loud cries. s soon
as they had completed these evolutions, the other party, who
were rather surprised, set to work to answer the salutation.
After having hastily painted themselves, and arranging them-
selves in single file, they marched in a regular quick short step
towards the enemy, who had in the meantime formed a camp.
After they had thus once or twice marched round the enemy’s
camp, they formed themselves into a dense mass, bowed their
heads, and uttered a piercing cry. They repeated these move-


ments two or three times, and then returned to their own camp
in the same order they had observed upon leaving it. That even-
ing and the greater part of the night were spent in singing and
dancing, but with sunrise of the next day the fight com-
menced. Eight men advanced from each side, making use of
mimical gestures, although the most profound silence was
observed. They formed into a row, two deep, about twenty
paces from each other, so that they came to stand two to two.
Each warrior stretched his legs apart, and planted his feet
firmly on the ground, holding a spear and sling in the right
hand, and their katta, or grubbing-stick, together with other
spears, in the left. They pushed forward their chests, and
moved their bodies from side to side, as a sort of challenge.
Each one fixed his eyes upon his especial antagonist, and
seemed to have no concern about any of the others, as if he
had nothing to fear at their hands. Not a sound was audible.
Many spears were thrown on either side, and were avoided
by moving the upper part of the body to one side, or were
parried by giving the spears a blow with the katta or other
spears held in the left hand. Thus the spears of the oppo-
nents failed to reach their mark. At length some of the
party who sent the challenge went over into the ranks of the
enemy, to show that they wished to put an end to the combat.
One quarrelsome old man, who had struck the first blow, did
not seem to be content to stay his arm without having
spilled a drop of blood. He stood opposed to a young man
of not more than twenty years of age, and he threw several
spears at him after the youth had ceased fighting. The old
rascal made use of the most insulting and provoking lan-
guage, and was paid back however in his own coin. At
length some of the old man’s friends interposed, and sought
to intimidate him, but finding they could not succeed in this,
they made a point of striking up his throwing-stick as often
as he placed a spear on it, thus causing the weapon to fall
useless on the ground.
The skilful manner in which the aborigines avoid or parry
the spears is truly astonishing. Air. Schurmann, who was an
eve-witness of the last-mentioned affair, tells us that the old
man, who was renowned as a good marksman, took such good
aim that it seemed almost a certainty that he would hit his
adversary; nevertheless, each spear was met, and glided
off the young man’s katta, and shot over his shoulder,
passing in close proximity to his ear. This can only be
accomplished by a sure eye and a firm glance, which


are amongst tire aborigines looked upon as the highest
virtues of which they can boast, and of which they are
the most proud. It has been said that the aborigines of
the country are possessed of a cowardly disposition, and it
may be that, when opposed to the whites, who are better
armed and generally mounted, they have been found wanting
in courage. But it is impossible for any one who has been
an eye-witness to one of their own fights, to form such an
opinion; on the contrary, he will be forced to confess that,
when stirred up by passion, they will brave any danger.
They are extremely sensitive upon this point, and look upon
being called a coward as the greatest insult that can be
offered. That little blood is spilled in these aboriginal con-
tests, is to be ascribed either to their skill, or to the fact that
they are by no means bloodthirsty. Although, on the one
side, they possess a fierce and hostile spirit, still, on the
other, it must be observed that they are capable of the more
noble feelings of pity and compassion. This is called forth
by a dangerous wound, as also by a severe sickness, but still
clearer is it observed at and after the death of a friend. On
such occasions they are accustomed, and particularly the
female sex, to assemble and to weep bitterly. The loud la-
mentations to which they give vent upon the death of a rela-
tion or friend may perhaps be a custom inherited from their
forefathers, for they always weep together, and at the same
time. They also employ foreign means to produce tears.
They rub the eyes and scratch the nose, if their own frame
of mind should not be sufficiently sorrowful, or if the example
of others should fail to produce genuine tears. Their Aveep-
ing and groans at the commencement of a lamentation seem
to be somewhat formal and forced, and thus the suspicion
arises that they seem more sorrowful than is warranted by
their true feelings. Nevertheless, the lleA r . Mr. Schurmann
believes that the aborigines feel deeply and mourn heartily
the death of a friend, upon the folioAving grounds, viz.:—
Bor weeks and months they bemoan their deaths, especially
at eventime, when they are assembled for rest, and when
their hearts and minds are open to the influences of sorrow
and grief for the departed friend. One of them is accustomed
to break out suddenly into a long, protracted, plaintive tone,
and gradually his example is folloAved by the others. After
this lamentation, a profound silence is observed, and in truth
their behaviour is such as belongs to persons oppressed by
great grief. For years after the death of a friend, on no occa-


sion whatever do they pronounce his name. This, as one
might suppose, does not proceed from superstition, hut from
the simple reason that they do not wish again to awake their
slumbering feelings, or, to use their own expression, that they
do not wish to weep so much. Should it he absolutely neces-
sary to name a deceased person, it is done in the following
manner : —I am a widow, fatherless, brotherless, &c., as the
case may be, instead of saying my father or my brother is
dead. The last ground on which Mr. Schurmann bases the
sincerity of their grief is, that they risk their lives to revenge
their deceased friend, if suspecting their death to have been
caused by foul means.
Although at the interment of the dead certain rites and
customs are generally observed, these are at times dispensed
with, as was instanced in the case of an old man. After
having dug a hole five feet deep and four feet long, and
spread some dry grass in the bottom, they lowered the corpse
into it, with the legs bent upwards, as the hole was too short
to receive it in its proper position. The head, as is invariably
done, was placed at the west end, from the notion that the
departed souls all reside in an island situated eastward. The
body was then covered with a kangaroo skin, and sticks
having been driven immediately above it lengthwise into the
sides of the grave, leaving a vacant space above it, the whole
was then filled up with earth. As the last of this simple
proceeding, some branches or bushes are collected round the
grave, with the view, as I should think, of preventing stray
cattle and horses from trampling upon it.
In the immediate neighbourhood only of European settle-
ments, where they can obtain the necessary tools, are they
able to dig such deep graves. Further up in the interior,
however, where they are confined to the yam sticks for the
operation of digging, the graves are made only sufficiently
deep to admit the body, the sticks being driven in immedi-
ately above it. This custom is always observed, very pro-
bably in order to prevent the wild dogs from scraping up the
body.
During my stay, in 1851, of a few weeks at a station forty
or fifty miles north of Port Lincoln, I had the opportunity of
witnessing a rather premature act of these natives. A woman
had fallen ill, and one of the men on the second day having
called at the station for the loan of a spade to dig the grave
with, I went on the following day to see where she had been
buried, when, to my astonishment, I found her recovered,


and quite well. The sight of the grave, however, which was
prepared for her, cannot, at all events, have been accompanied
with pleasing impressions.
_ The natives inhabiting the triangular peninsula of Port
Lincoln are divided into several tribes, two of which are in
daily intercourse with the Europeans, viz.—the Nauo or
Nawo, and the Parnkalla. In addition to these, the natives
mention three other tribes, as known to them, viz.—the
Pukunnas, in the N.E.; the Kukatas, in the N.W.; and the
Ngannityddis, in the N.; the latter occupying the territory
between those of the two other tribes, some of which do oc-
casionally visit the European settlements.
All these tribes seem upon the whole to entertain a friendly
intercourse with each other ; at least, apparently, there is not
so much quarrelling going on among them as among the
natives living more to the eastward.
The natives, in coming in contact with others of a different
tribe, are very shy at their first meeting. They try to avoid
each other, and do not speak together, unless unavoidably
obliged to do so, or induced by a mutual friend.
Every attempt at estimating the number of these natives
is made at a hazard, as all the members of a tribe never meet
together. The general opinion is that an estimate at an
average of 300 individuals for each tribe is by far below the
actual number.
The chief difference of the various tribes consists in their
language and dialects. This, however, causes no great in-
convenience to those living on the borders of their territories,
as each native understands, at least, the language of the ad-
joining district; thus, they frequently keep up their conver-
sations in two different languages, in the same manner as if
a German and Englishman were to talk together, each in his
own language, but both understanding that of the other
party. This peculiarity frequently occurs in families inter-
marrying in the neighbouring tribe, for none of the members
ever think of attempting to speak the language of the other
party.
In conclusion, I would state that every opportunity should
be taken by every one coming in contact with our aborigines
to collect as much knowledge as possible of their manners
and customs before it is too late; and I may quote Mr.
Moffat’s words, which, although referring to the Africans,
apply also to our aborigines.
He writes : —I have traversed those regions in which.


according to the testimony of the farmers, thousands once
dwelt, drinking at their own fountains, and killing their own
game; hut now, alas, scarcely is a family to he seen ! It is
impossible to look over those now uninhabited plains and
mountain glens without feeling the deepest melancholy, whilst
the winds moaning in the vale seem to echo hack the sound,
“ Where are they V*
[While the foregoing sheets were going through the press, intelligence
having reached Melbourne of the value, as an edible seed, of the Marsilece
kirsuta (or Nardo), as found so useful in the Victorian Expedition, and
which was the means of saving the lives of King, the sole survivor of
Burke’s party, as well as those of Lyons and McPherson, who had been sent
with despatches to Mr. Burke, it has occurred to me that it would be well
to mention that I found the same plant growing in Dumby Bay, Port
Lincoln; but I did not observe that the natives had ever made any use of it
ns an article of food.]
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


\ >
c
♦ I
«
%
„-dl
j;
V
J •
.


k.
✓ ,
■
%
#
j
.
j
' - x ■1
»
. V ’ • :
/ »
*
.
.
* • , ' - •■•'■•
1 •
}
*
*
,- ■ — V .
A
>• «
*
*
✓ *
* '
.
X' ■• '
1 '. ■- ) . -
- • - " ' •
*
,
I
-
a *
1 ■ —
■
'
h ■»• —
' -
rj —
Jr -n
/ j
*
*
y
* ,
;
\
*
. - ■ ■>
i
.
I - -
'
'
/
~ > /
'
*
| j
■ . ■


r # l l
-
*
** N , -v ■ v jfl
j
({ - „ V ; 1 '•< * •
, • : ;
■
, v 4
i . v i
»
I
I
| • |
i
r * -•’■ ;if . ts # '
jft.
f ,
k ■ * y ...‘ -■ ,? • ■ v
- ‘-L i‘ * - *' -• ■•
> *? , ’••■' . • /’V. ■ . - '■. V r ,t *'•' {H
ft
[a . I
.. i j * il? ,-
