

MANUAL
J"hE jSuPPER,
INTENDED CHIEFLY FOR
Y OUNG CO M M UNI CA NTS,
Rev. JAMES NISH,
SANDHURST.
(Prepared at the request of the Presbytery of Castlemaine.)
FIFTH THOUSAND, CAREFULLY REVISED.
URUwnmw:
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
PRESBYTERIAN BOOK DEPOT, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
1 8 8 0.




MANUAL
ON
JSuPPER,
INTENDED CHIEFLY FOB
YOUNG COMMUNICANTS,
Key. JAMES NISH,
SANDHURST.
(Prepared at the request of the Presbytery of Castlemaine.)
FIFTH THOUSAND, CAKEFULLY REVISED.
UJtlbmmw t
M. L, HUTCHINSON,
PRESBYTERIAN BOOK DEPOT, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
1 8 8 0.
V~ l*^VO^


ALEX. m'KINLEY AND CO.,
PRINTERS,
QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.


yM P 1 3, l| .o
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION.
Gratified to hear that a Fourth Thousand of this
little hlanual has leen called for, the Author has
subjected it anew to a careful revisal, Pleased with
the approval which it has already received from so
many of his brethren , he trusts that the additional
changes now introduced mill be found to have con-
tributed to its clearness, its usefulness, and its
simplicity.
Sandhurst, 30th March , 1878,


PREFATORY NOTE TO FIRST EDITION.
It is not without considerable diffidence that the
Author has agreed to commit this Manual to the Press.
Its only recommendations—if such they can he termed —
are its simplicity and brevity. Through the opinions
expressed by his co-presbyters he has been led to believe
that it may in some measure supply a felt want in
our Colonial Church, and should it serve this purpose
he will consider himself fully repaid for the labour
bestowed on its preparation. For the notes he has been
indebted wholly to kindred but more copious Manuals,
especially to an admirable little treatise, entitled “The
Lord's Supper Explainedby the Pev. William Grant,
of the Free Church , Ayr,


MANUAL FOR COMMUNICANTS.
PART I.
The Ordinance : Its Symbols and their
Meaning.
1. Repeat the definition of a Sacrament con-
tained in our Shorter Catechism.
A Sacrament is a holy ordinance instituted
by Christ, wherein, by sensible signs, Christ,
and the benefits of the New Covenant, are
represented, sealed, and applied to believers.
2. How many Sacraments have been instituted
by Christ 1
Two, and two only—Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper.
3. Why do you say “ two only ?”
Because Romanists affirm that there are
seven Sacraments—two instituted by Christ, and
other five by the authority of the Church.
4. What are the five so-called Sacraments
which the Church of Rome has instituted ?
Confirmation, Matrimony, Holy Ordinance,
Penance, and Extreme Unction.


5. Have they any right to he called Sacraments?
None what ever. They want all the essential
elements of a Sacrament already described.
6. Why is the second of the two Sacraments
called the Lord's Supper 1
Because it was instituted by Him, while He
was partaking of the Passover-supper with His
disciples. Lev. xxiii. 5 ; Luke xxii. 14.
7. What other terms and phrases are applied
to this ordinance in the Scriptures ?
The Communion, the Feast, the Breaking of
Bread, the Lord’s Table.
8. Repeat the texts in which these terms and
phrases occur 1
1 Cor, x. 16; 1 Cor. v. 8 ; Acts ii. 42; 1 Cor.
x. 21.
9. Why is it called the Communion?
Because in it we have communion, i.e., fellow-
ship with Christ, and with one another, as His
professed friends and followers.
“ The Lord’s table is a visible representation of the
Apostle’s doctrine—‘ There is one body and one Spirit,
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling ;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.”
How complete is such union 1 It is as complete as that
which binds together the members of the same body.
It is as if one soul animated all. It is as if one object


were pursued by all. It is as if all obeyed one Master,
were governed by one principle, and made one profes-
sion. It is as though all were members of one family,
loving their common parent with intense affection, and
for that reason, and in the measure of that affection,
loving one another. This is the view of the Church
and its unity presented in the ordinance of the Supper.
‘ We, being many, are one body in Christ, and every
one members one of another.’ ”
“ One Christ we feed upon, one living Christ,
Who once was dead, but lives for ever now ;
One is the cup of blessing which we bless,
True symbol of the blood which from the cross
did flow.”
10. Why is it called the Feast ?
Because it was appointed to take the place of
the Passover, which was the great Feast of the
Jewish Church, and to celebrate the finished
work of our redemption.
“It is also frequently called the ‘ Eucharist.’ This is
a Greek word, which signifies ‘thanksgiving,’ and is
derived from the term employed to denote the act of
our Lord in giving thanks after he had taken the bread
and before distributing it to His disciples.”
11. When was this ordinance instituted ?
On the night in which our Lord was betrayed.
12. Enumerate the 'passages in which we have
an account of its institution.
Matt. xxvi. 26, &c. ; Mark xiv, 22, &c. ; Luke
xxii. 19, &c. ; 1 Cor, xi. 23, &c.


13.-4 Sacrament is an ordinance , wherein
BY SENSIBLE SIGNS &c. . . . What is the
meaning of sensible signs ?
Signs which can be taken knowledge of by our
bodily senses—viz., sight, touch, hearing, &c.
14. What are the sensible signs made use of in
this ordinance 1
The bread and wine (commonly called the ele-
ments of the ordinance), and also the various
actions connected with the elements—viz., the
taking of the bread and the cup ; the breaking of
the bread and the pouring out of the wine ; the
giving and receiving of the bread and wine.
15. What is denoted by the bread and 7vinel
The body and blood of Christ; i.e, they re-
mind us that, being the Eternal Son of God, He
on coming into the world as our Redeemer was
made in the likeness of sinful flesh.
16. What is denoted by the breaking of the
bread and the pouring out of the wine ?
They are intended to show forth the death of
Christ.
17. Is it simply the fact of his death which
they shew forth ?
No ; but likewise the it—its design
and its efficacy.


18. What do they set forth in regard to the
manner of it ?
That it was a violent, ignominous and accursed
form of death. Isa. liii. 5. Gal. iii 13.
19. What do they imply in regard to the design
of His death 1
That it was endured in our stead and for the
removal of our guilt. 2 Cor. v. 20 : Romans iv,
25.
20, On what do you rest this view of their
import ?
Because in Breaking the bread our Lord said
to His disciples, This is my body broken for you
— i.e., not for our benefit alone, but in our stead.
And again, in taking the cup, He said, “This
cup is the Hew Testament in my blood, shed for
many for the remission of sins.”
21. What do they set forth in regard to the
efficacy of His death ?
That by the shedding of His blood He com-
pleted the work of our redemption.
22. How is this shown 1
Because in this ordinance His death is com-
memorated as a sacrfice offered once for all—a
sacrifice which, by reason of its perfection, did
not need to be repeated. Heb. x. 11, 12.


23. What is denoted by the giving 0/ the bread
and wine ?
(1) That He is the Father’s gift; (2) That
He loved us and gave Himself for us ; and (3)
That all the blessings of salvation are offered to
us without money and without price. John iii
16 ; Eph. v. 2 ; Rev. xxii. 17.
24. What is signified by our receiving the
bread and wine ?
It is intended to be significant of our faith ;
or, in other words, we are to be held as declar-
ing that, like as we take the symbols of His
broken body and shed blood into our hands, so
do we through faith receive Him into our
hearts ; and that, resting on His surety-work
as our only plea for pardon and peace with God,
we also feed on Him as the bread of life for our
spiritual nourishment.
“ There are two aspects in which the body and blood
of Christ are to our view in the Supper.
(1) As brohen and shed for the remission of sins. (2)
As bread and wine to strengthen us for serving God.
In the Supper these are so conjoined in the same
symbols that they cannot be separated. The communi-
cant cannot take the one apart from the other. He
cannot take the emblems of the brohen body and shed
blood without receiving them as bread and wine; nor
can he partake of the bread and wine without receiving
them as brohen and poured out. Even so we cannot
draw near to Christ for the pardon of sin without also
receiving purification ; nor can we draw near to Christ


for the purifying, unless we receive it as the result of
pardon.
“ Therefore, 0 intending communicant, it is not
enough for thee to go to the table in token of thy desire
to find forgiveness through the broken body and shed
blood of Christ : thou must also go in token of thy de-
sire to find bread and wine to strengthen thee for the
service of God. Nor is it enough to go in token of thy
desire to find this strength ; thou must go seeking it
through the atoning death of Jesus,”
25. In the definition ofi a Sacrament , already
given, it is said to be a holy ordinance,
wherein by sensible signs, Christ and the
benefits of the New Covenant are represented.
What does this mean ?
It means that the facts recorded by the
Evangelist relative to His death are pictorially
exhibited through the symbols of this ordinance ;
or in other words, that its symbols have the same
relation to the narratives of the Gospel which
a picture has to the historical incident which it
represents.
26. Is this the only purpose for which sensible
signs are made rise of in the Sacraments ?
No ; Christ and the benefits of the New
Covenant are not only represented but sealed
to believers, and hence the Sacraments are called
SEALING ORDINANCES.
27. What does this mean ?
Seals appended to a written contract are con-


firmations of the agreement embodied or detailed
in the contract. Hence circumcision is said to
have been “ a seal of the righteousness of the
faith which Abraham had yet being uncircum-
cised.”
28. Is there anything specially notable in this
declaration relative to Abraham ?
Yes ; that his circumcision was a seal not of
his faith but “ of the righteousness of his faith.”
29. What is the lesson which you hence deduce ?
That his circumcision did not make him a
believer or was not of itself a separate and con-
clusive evidence of his being a believer. It was
a confirmation (1) of the promises made to him,
and (2) of the engagements or obligations resting
on him, by reason of the “ faith which he had
being yet uncircumcised.”
In like manner, the Lord’s Supper when intelligently-
administered and observed is (1) a testimony—a sealed
testimony from God —that “ whosoever believeth in
the Lord Jesus Christ shall be saved and (2) It is a
declaration—a sealed declaration on the part of worthy
communicants of their acceptance of the Gospel, and
their engagement in the help of grace to live and
act consistently with this declaration.
30. It is said yet further, that by these signs
Christ and the benefits of the New Covenant are
applied to believers. What does this mean 'I
That through the worthy participation of


this ordinance the faith of believers is so in-
creased and established that they are enabled to
draw largely out of the fulness which is in Christ.
31. Does this increase of faith follow from
the mere bodily participation of the sacramental
elements f
No ; their power consists in the impressions
which are made by them—-or rather which are
made by the truths which they represent and
confirm—on the hearts of worthy communicants,
and in the obligations which they involve and
seal.
32. What, in this connection, are the statements
of our Shorter Catechism relative to the Sacra-
ments as means of grace ?
They are among the outward and ordinary
means whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of redemption ; and they are made
effectual to salvation, not from any virtue in
them or in him that doth administer them, but
only through the blessing of Christ and the
working of His Spirit in them that by faith
receive them.
33. On what, according to this statement, does
their efficacy depend 1
On the blessing of Christ upon the ordinance
and the working of His spirit in believing
recipients.


34. And hence Christ and the benefits of the
New Covenant are applied through means of
them ; —To whom ?
Only to believers.
“ Still it is not the quantity of faith that saves,, A
drop of water is as true water as the whole ocean—and
so a little faith is as true faith as the greatest. A child
eight days old is as really a member of the human family
as a man of sixty, A spark of fire is as true fire as a
great flame ; a sickly man is as truly alive as a man in
health. It is not, then, the measure of thy faith that
saves. The weak hand of a child that leads the spoon
to the mouth will feed as well as the strong arm of a
giant; for it is not the hand that feeds but the meal.
Grip Christ ever so weakly and He will not let thee
perish.”
35. Yet without faith no benefit can be derived
from any means of grace, and why ?
“ Look at the locomotive as it snorts like a giant war-
horse to take its place at the head of the train. Boiler
tubes, pistons, fire, steam—all are in perfect order ;
carriage after carriage is filled, the hour has struck,
and the bell rung, yet there is no departure, nor would
be till “the crack of doom,” until one want has been
supplied. The hooks which connect the engine to the
train must be brought into effective action. Yet no
one supposes that the hook or coupling draws the train.
The veriest child perceives that it is drawn by the
engine. Yet, nevertheless, apart from the hook the
power of the engine would be of no avail,"
Such is the relation or office of faith. Devoid
in itself of any inherent saving power, it
unites, and it alone can unite us to Him by whom


we are saved, lienee no man can warrantably
call Christ his Saviour except in the exercise of
faith.
PAET 11.
Reasons for Observing the Ordinance, and
the Preparation required for Observing
it Worthily.
36. May not various reasons he assigned for
observing this ordinance ?
Yes ; several strong and important reasons.
37. Mention the chief of these reasons.
Because it has been commanded by Christ as
King of Zion, and Head of the Church. (See
Question 46.)
38. Can you give a second reason ?
Because the appeal, “ Do this in remembrance
of Me,” is the dying appeal of our best and
greatest friend • and of all appeals, the last
appeal of a beloved friend is the most touching
—the appeal with which we are most ready to
comply.
39. Can you give a third reason 1
Because it is, so to speak, a monument set up
for Christ—an appointed means of perpetuating
the remembrance of Him in the world ■ and He,


above all others, deserves to be held in grateful
remembrance.
40. Gan you give a fourth reason ?
Because it affords an excellent opportunity of
declaring ourselves, in a solemn and public
manner, to be His disciples.
41. Can you give yet another reason ?
Because when rightly observed it is an effective
means of grace.
“ Long, it may be, have you listened to the offers and
invitations of the Word; long, perhaps, have you
hesitated about acceptance, halting between two opi-
nions, almost, but not altogether, persuaded, delaying
your decision till a more convenient season ; and thus,
perhaps, might you still go on postponing your decision
from year to year, resolving, and re-resolving, but
never acting; but by the public announcement of the
first Communion, the Lord Himself will bring you to
the point of decision. He sets a time within which
you must make up your minds, and give a solemn and
public answer to His invitation. In the first Commu-
nion He will draw a line in front of all the hearers of
His Word, and then shall say, “Whosoever has made
up his mind, whosoever is persuaded, whosoever Accepts,
My offer, whosoever is on the Lord’s side, let him step
across this line, and at the table let him make a good
profession before many witnesses ; let him take the
outward symbols of the Supper in token of his inward
and unreserved acceptance of Me and My salvation.”
Now, then, and without delay, make up your minds.
To neglect this offer of Christ may be as fatal as to
reject it, for it may never again be renewed. Another


opportunity you may never have. A more convenient
season you cannot have.’’
42. Specify two objections frequently urged by
professing Christians as reasons for not observing
this ordinance.
(1) That they have not the attainments and
qualifications which would warrant their coming
to the table of the Lord, and (2) that sacra-
mental vows are often broken.
43. What is the duty of those who profess to be
kept back by the first reason 1
It is their duty to be diligent and earnest in
endeavouring to acquire the necessary qualifica-
tions ; and thereupon to embrace the first op-
portunity of communicating which occurs.
44. May we not fail in obtaining the quali-
fications 1
Not if we seek them earnestly and prayerfully.
Hence a continued plea of unfitness is an ac-
knowledgment of wilful unbelief and unconcern.
45. Is there any greater force or propriety in
the second reason 1
No ; it might as well be affirmed that no
promise should ever be given because promises
are often unfulfilled, or that no bargains should
be made because bargains are often broken.


46. Mention a consideration which makes this
plea specially inadmissible.
The observing of the ordinance is a com-
manded duty—a duty as binding on all who
call themselves Christians as any duty pre-
scribed in the moral law. It cannot be neg-
lected without slighting the authority of Him
whose name we bear.
47. Quote some texts confirmatory of the reasons
assigned for observing this ordinance.
Our Lord hath said, “If ye love Me Keep
My commandments.” And again —“ Whosoever
shall confess Me before men, him will I confess
also before My Father which is in heaven. But
whosoever shall be ashamed of Me and of My
words in this sinful and adulterous generation,
of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed
when He cometh in the glory of His Father
with the holy angels.” Very solemn also is the
warning contained in the last verse of Ist
Corinthians —“ If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be [or he shall be] Ana-
thema maranatha”— i.e., accursed of the Lord at
His coming.
48. What d.uty is specially enjoined on intend-
ing communicants ?
Self-examination. “ Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that bread and
drink of that cup.”


49. What more particularly are the qualifi-
cations in regard to which we should examine
ourselves 1
Knowledge to discern the Lord’s body, faith,
repentance and love.
50. What do you mean by knowledge to
“discern the Lord’s body%
It means having a correct knowledge (1) of
the nature and design of the institution, (2) of
the profession which we make in observing it,
and (3) of the obligations connected with its
observance.
51. Why is such knowledge necessary 1
Because without it the ordinance cannot be
observed with proper aims and motives, nor can
the cavils of gainsayers be answered.
52. What do you mean by faith ?
Trust in Christ as our Saviour, or, as described
in our Shorter Catechism—“ It is a saving grace
whereby we receive and rest on Christ alone for
salvation, as He is offered to us in the Gospel.”
53. What is needed to our so receiving and
resting on Christ 1
(1) A proper sense of our guilt before God,
and of our inability to give or do what would
merit His pardon and favour; (2) a clear


persuasion that Christ has been Divinely ap-
pointed to act as our Redeemer ; and (3) a con-
fidence in His ability and willingness to save us.
In other words. We must have an awakening sense
of our need of salvation. And next we must have con-
vincing evidence that the Lord Jesus Christ has been
Divinely commissioned, and is possessed of personal fit-
ness to be our Saviour. Or more simply, we must have
a persuasive conviction (1) That we are lost. (2) That
Christ has been sent to save us. (3) That He is able to
save to the uttermost.
54. Why is faith in Christ necessary as a
qualification ?
Because without it we cannot honestly make
the profession implied in handling and feasting
on the emblems of His love, nor derive from the
ordinance any spiritual refreshing.
55. Give a brief and simple definition of re-
pentance 1
Turning from sin to God,
36. Is sorrow for sin in itself a sure evidence
of repentance 1
No. There can indeed be no repentance with-
out sorrow for sin, but there is a sorrow for sin
which worketh death.
57. Mention an instance of such sorrow ?
The sorrow of Judas, who, being grieved for,
and ashamed of, his sin in betraying his Master,
went and hanged himself.


58. What is the main element in repentance h
Turning not only from sin hut to God, with
an earnest desire through the help of grace to
walk in the way of His commandments.
59. Why is repentance necessary 1
Because the Lord’s Supper is a memorial of
His “ suffering for sin,” and to celebrate it
without an abhorrence of sin, and a determina-
tion to forsake iniquity, would be to insult His
sufferings and “ crucify Him afresh.”
60. What is the next qualification with respect
to which we should examine ourselves ?
Love to Christ and to one another as His
disciples.
61. Why is such Love necessary 1
(I) Because the commemoration of His love
should constrain us to admire Him as the
“ chief among ten thousand and altogether
lovely.” And (2) He hath enjoined us to “ show
that we are His disciples, by loving one another.’’
“It is peculiarly unbecoming to go to the Lord’s
table with a spirit of revenge. So that if I bring my
gift to the altar, and there remember that I have a
quarrel with my brother (that is with any person what-
ever), I should leave my gift before the altar, and go
my way ; first be reconciled to my brother, and then
come and offer my gift. ”


62. What is the 'practical result of faith , repen-
tance, and love ?
They have their practical issue in new obedi-
ence, or, as it is expi'essed by the apostle, in “pre-
senting our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, accept-
able to God, which is our reasonable service.”
63. Why is this called new obedience h
(1) Because it proceeds from our having
become new creatures in Christ; (2) Because it
is prompted by new motives; and (3) Because
it manifests itself in a new manner of life.
PART 111.
Benefits derived from the Ordinance, &c.
64. What are the advantages enjoyed by those
who partake oj this ordinance ivorthily 1
The worthy receivers of it are, not after a
corporal or carnal manner, but by faith, made
partakers of the body and blood of Christ, with
all His benefits, to their spiritual nourishment
and growth in grace.
65. What is meant by being “ made partakers
of the body and blood of Christ T
It is a figurative expression, made use of by
our Lord in John vi. 51, &c., and by Paul in
1 Cor. x. 16, * and denotes (1) the intimacy of
* The expressions made use of in these passages are not literally
but substantially the same, and the metaphor contained in them,
though forcible, gives no countenance to the Popish doctrine of
transubstantiation.


the fellowship with Christ, which is enjoyed hy
worthy communicants, and (2) the special fitness
of this ordinance to quicken and sustain the
exercise of appropriating faith.
Thy flesh is meat indeed, my God and Lord,
Thy blood is drink indeed for evermore ;
On Thee alone I feed —of Thee I drink.
That into this sick soul the heavenly health may pour,
Thou with us and Thou in us—this is life ;
All that the Father is, in Thee we see.
0 Christ of God, what art Thou not to us ?
And what of wealth is there, we may not find in Thee ?
“ There is, however, a kind of experience that some
people look for at the Lord’s table, which we have no
reason to expect. We have no reason, e.g., to expect any
sudden impulse on our understanding, or any violent
affection of our heart and feelings. For, though there
is nothing to hinder the Spirit of God from operating
in this way, yet His ordinary method is calm and
secret; and the sacrament of the Supper is one of those
means by which, in a rational manner, He works on our
mind and dispositions. We have, accordingly, ground
to expect that we shall feel that comfort and pleasure
which a believing contemplation of the memorials of
Christ’s sacrifice is naturally fitted to inspire ; that we
shall experience a more heartfelt sorrow for sin when
we see all that Jesus suffered on account of it ; that
our love to Him shall grow more warm and ardent
when we behold the great price that He generously
paid for our redemption ; that all resentment towards
others shall die away in our breasts, when we have such
a striking proof of the great mercy of God towards us ;
and, in short, that we shall receive more lively and
lasting impressions of those infinitely important truths
which are built upon the death of Christ, and essen-
tially connected with the salvation of souls.”


66. What is meant by saying that they are not
made partakers of His body and blood after a
corporal and carnal manner 1
It means that the bread and wine are not
changed, as the Church of Home affirms, into
the very body and blood of Christ; but that
worthy communicants feed upon Him-u., ap-
prehend their personal interest in Him, and
derive spiritual nourishment from Him, through
faith.
“ The Word—the Supper—the Minister—are only
finger-posts that points on to Jesus. It is with Himself
thou must communicate if thou wouldst find a blessing.
This is the only, the true, the saving presence of Jesus
in the Supper, A corporeal presence— the presence of
His human body in the signs—is not needed and would
not benefit us. It is an idle figment that has given
rise to frightful superstitions, withdrawing our thoughts
from his spiritual presence, which alone can bless.
‘ God is a spirit, and they who would worship Him
must worship Him in spirit,’ If not ‘in spirit,’ not in
truth,”
67. What is the sin said to he committed by
those who communicate unworthily 'I
They are “ guilty of tlie body and blood of
the Lord.”
68. What does this mean ?
It means that they exhibit, though in a dif-
ferent form, and under different circumstances,
the spirit of those by whom He was rejected
and crucified; that, making light of His love


and His personal claims, they say in effect,
“We will not have this man to reign over us,”
69. What is the punishment annexed to this
offence ?
“He that eateth or drinketh unworthily
drinketh damnation to himself ” —or rather, as
it should be rendered— judgment or chastening.
The punishment to which this expression refers
is present chastisement rather than future punish-
ment. —1 Cor. xi, 29.
70, How can you establish the correctness of
this opinion 1
The particular judgments to which the apostle
alludes are specified in the following verse—
“ For this cause many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep.” And further, the
design of these judgments or chastenings is ex-
plained in verse 32—When we are judged we
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with the world.”
71. May one who doubts of his being in
Christ or of his due preparation, come to the
Lord's table? (Larger Catechism, 172.)
Yes, if deeply affected with his apprehension
of the want of it, and unfeignedly desirous to be
found in Christ, and to depart from iniquity.
“ The more we feel our want of merit, the more are


we meet for the feast of grace. The more we feehour
worthlessness, by reason of our sins, the more are we
enabled worthily to partake of the Saviour’s pardoning
mercy and purifying grace.
72. How long is this ordinance to he observed
by the Church 1
Until our Lord’s second coming. “As often
as ye eat this bread and drink this cup ye do
show the Lord’s death until He. come.”
73. May not a farther inference be drawn
Jrom this phrase, “ until He come?”
Yes j it reminds us that in observing this
ordinance we should contemplate Him not only
as having died for our offences, but as having
risen again, and been crowned Lord of all; and
that we should hold ourselves in readiness, and
look forward with lively hope to meet Him at
His re-appearing.
‘‘ The Lord’s Supper, as it looks back on the past
points to the salvation which Jesus died to win ; as it
loots around on the present, it points to the salvation
which Jesus lives to give ; and as it looks on the future,
it points to Jesus coming to reap the harvest which He
sowed in blood, and is now watering by His Spirit—
coming to gather in the fruit of His past and present
work.”
74. What is to be expected of those who have
sat down at the table of the Lord ?
They should endeavour through grace to walk


consistently with their profession—to walk so
that all men may know them to be His true
disciples, hating iniquity, and careful to abound
in good works.
“ Communicants come under engagements at the
Lord’s table which reach to every relation and condi-
tion of life. They engage ‘to adorn the doctrine of
God their Saviour in all things,’ and, therefore, if they
have been sincere in their profession, they will study
to be more humble in prosperity and more patient in
tribulation, more resolute in withstanding temptation,
more diligent in their improvement of the means and
ordinances of grace, and more dutiful as husbands and
as wives, as parents and as children, as masters and as
servants, as magistrates and as subjects, as neighbours
and as friends.”
75. What are the effects of open and habitual
inconsistency on the part of those who have been
at the table 1
(1) It greatly aggravates their guilt, and
exerts a hardening influence on their hearts and
a deadening influence on their consciences. (2)
It is very injurious to religion, inasmuch as it
gives the careless and unbelieving a handle to
vilify the Gospel, and to ridicule its ordinances.
76. Bo not those, however, who, having arrived
at the years of discretion, continue to be non-
communicants, also pursue a course which is
highly blameworthy and dangerous 1
Yes; a course which, for various reasons,
is most blameworthy and hurtful.


77. Mention one of these reasons.
They cast contempt on the authority, the
wisdom, and the love of Christ, and deprive
themselves of the benefits which this ordinance
has been appointed to confer.
“ Do men go to school because they know so much,
or because they know so little ? Do men go to a
physician because they are sick, or do they wait till
they are well and then go ? To hear people speak of
uniting with the Church, and the hindrances by which
they are kept back, one would suppose they thought it
was their duty to stay out till they were perfect, and
then join it as ornaments. They who are weak, but
who wish strength—who are ignorant, but hunger for
knowledge—who are unable to go alone, and need
sympathy and society to hold them up—who are lame,
and need crutches—in short, who know the plague and
infirmity of a selfish neart, a worldly nature, a sinful
life, and who desire, above all things, to be lifted up
above them—have preparation for becoming members
of the Church. If you could w r alk without limping,
why use a crutch at all ? If you are already good
enough, what need have you of the Church and its
ordinances ? But if you are so lame that a staff is help-
ful, so infirm that company and ordinances will give
you aid, then have you a right to the fellowship of the
Church. To be enrolled in her membership is not to
declare yourself perfect, or of distinguished excellence :
it is rather a public recognition of your weakness and
your spiritual necessities. The Church is not a gallery
for the better exhibition of eminent Christians, but a
school for the education of imperfect Christians—a
nursery for the care of weak Christians—a hospital
for the better healing of those who need assiduous
tendance. ”


78. Can you give another reason 1
If unprepared to meet and hold communion
with the Lord at His table on earth, they must
be still more unprepared to meet Him at death,
or to be admitted to His table in heaven.
79. Can you give a third reasonl
If all men were to imitate their example, the
world .would be deprived of one of the principal
means of its instruction and improvement.
“ Let no man plead this or that excuse for not
coming to the Lord’s table, but resolve hereafter
carefully to perform so necessary a duty. Let the
sinner quit his state of sin and death, and so come and
eat of the bread of life. Let the ignorant come into
the school of Christ, and proceed till they rise to the
highest form. Let those that are at enmity with their
neighbours also come, only let them first go and be
reconciled to their brethren, and so let them offer their
gift. Let those that have a multitude of worldly
employments come, only let them leave them, as
Abraham did his asses, at the bottom of the mount,
and so let them ascend to heaven in their thoughts,
and converse with God. Let the weak come, that they
may grow in strength; and let the strong come,'that
they may not grow weak. Let them who have fears
come, that their hearts may be settled by the acts of a
more lively faith ; and let them come who have hopes
that they may rise to greater degrees of humble confi-
dence. Let those who have leisure accept the invitation,
because they have no excuse ; and let those who have
but little leisure entertain it also, that they may the
more sanctify their business and their employments


Let the sad. and sorrowful approach, that their hearts
maybe filled with the joy of the Lord ; and let those
that ‘ rejoice in the Lord alway’ approach, that their
joy may be full.”
80. Should 7iot cur preparation for enccm-
pdssing the table of the Lord he accompanied by
prayer 'I
Yes. (1) We should pray for grace to direct
us in the work of self-examination, and to make
us acceptable guests at the sacred feast; (2) we
should pray for an abundant blessing on the
Word preached —pray for the wisdom so greatly
needed by those who have been appointed to
divide unto us the Word, and to break for us
the bread of life; and (3) we should pray for a
rich unction from the Holy One on ourselves
and our fellow-communicants, that so we may
not only in the bond of true brotherly love “ all
eat of the same bread and drink of the same
cup,” but may unitedly have lively and hallowed
“ fellowship with the Father and the Son through
the Spirit.”
81. Is it not equally 7iecessary that we give
ourselves unto prayer after we have beeii at the
table 1
Yes ; it is our duty to continue in prayer—to
pray always, and not faint; to be jealous over
ourselves, moreover, with a godly jealousy, lest,


through unwatchfulness’and self-confidence, we
bring dishonour on our profession, and “make
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience.”
82. What, in effect, is the invitation or appeal
addressed by the Master of the Feast to all who
take their seats at His table 1
“ If any man will come after Me let him deny
himself and take up his cross and follow Me,”
They follow to the Cross
They follow to the Crown,
Planting their footsteps upon His—
Making His path their own.
Their cross at once they take,
And follow Him their Lord ;
Confessing true discipleship,
And listening to his word.
Content to sow in hope,
In patience and in pain,
Sure of the harvest yet to come,
And labour not in vain.
Forgetting all behind,
They press on to the prize,
Keeping the Crown that fadeth not
Ever before their eyes,


Come, approach the sacred board,
’Tis the Sapper of the Lord ;
There the choicest things of heaven
From his loving heart are given.
He who, leaving throne and crown,
To our fallen world came down ;
All our wants and woes to share,
All our sins and griefs to bear —■
He who journeyed weary years,
In the land of toil and tears,
Onward to the cross and grave,
Hastening the lost to save—
He devised this feast of love,
Thus the coldest heart to move,
Thus to bring Himself more near,
Thus to make Himself more dear.
On the sacred symbols feasting,
All the love of Jesus tasting,
All the Spirit’s grace and power
Oh, the sweetness of the hour 1
Lord, may grace imparted here
In our future lives appear ;
“ These have been,” let others sa’
“ At the gates of heaven to-day.”
FINIS
V& '
M‘Kinley & Co, Printers, Queen-street, Swlßourne,




