

OWNER’S MANUAL
1942
Pederick
GAS PRODUCER
Priced from £48-10-0
PLUS FITTING.
OFFICIALLY APPROVED AND PRODUCED UNDER
CONTRACT WITH COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT,
ENSURING MANUFACTURE TO RIGID SPECIFICA-
TIONS, EFFICIENT INSTRUCTION AND SERVICE
FOR OWNERS AND SAFETY OF OPERATION.
Sole Distributors for Victoria & Riverina:
S. A. CHENEY PTY. LTD.
22 Fiaders Street, Melbourne, C.I. Phone: Central 8991 (II lines)


Pederick
GAS PRODUCER


1. Water Drip Tap.
2. Manual Water Control.
3. Air Inlets.
4. Flame Traps.
5. Lighting Plug.
6. Bottom Lid and Clamp.
7. Filling Lid and Clamp.
8. Cleaning Plug.
9. Gas Outlet.
10. Primary Cleaning Port and Cap.
11. Gas Line.
12. Gas Elbow Cleaning Port and Plug.
13. Oil Reservoir.
14. Cleaning Port and Cover.
15. Oil Level Tap.
16. Sisal Support Disc.
17. Sisal Holding Down Disc.
18. Lid and Clamp.
1. Gas Line.
2. Air Inlet Manual Valve.
3. Air Inlet Automatic Valve.
4. Gas Throttle, Foot Controlled.
5. Gas Cut-off Valve, Hand Controlled.
6. Gas Inlet Manifold Tee Piece.
7. Carburettor.
8. Air Cleaner.
19. Self-Draining Elbow.
20. Sisal Support Disc.
21. Cleaning Port and Cover.
22. Sisal.
23. 7½ in. Diameter Hessian and Felt.
24. Wood Wool.
25. 9½ in. Diameter Hessian and Felt.
26. Holding Down Clips.
27. Sisal and Wood Wool.
28. Air Space.
29. Security Filter Cage and Felt Sock.
30. Holding Down Screws.
31. Lid Clamp.
The operation of a Pederick Gas Producer is tar more
simple than the average motorist imagines. Assuming
the Producer is filled with charcoal and the Cleaners are
in order, this is all there is to do to start and run the
vehicle on gas.
you will feel the gas coming
through. You then drive on gas
only, ad|usting the air valve to
get best mixture. If out of the
city you can turn petrol right
off, by special tap if fitted, and
adjust water drip to about 50
drops per minute for continuous
running.
8. When stopping there will be
no need to light the charcoal
again unless the engine is
stopped for more than about
four hours In re-starting after
a stop, do so on petrol, and
again use both accelerators, and
gas will come through again in
anything from 100 yards to
about half a mile, depending
upon how long the engine has
been stopped.
This is all there is to do other than to fill up with charcoal as
required. Do not let the fuel in the fire box get below the halfway
mark or overheating may result. Systematically attend to the
cleaners as outlined in the Pederick Manual.
1. Start the motor on petrol
and let it idle.
2. Pull out the gas valve on
the dash.
3. Unscrew lighting plug from
Generator.
4. Remove lighting taper from
small can attached to unit (it is
part of the cap). Light it and
hold it to the charcoal through
the opening made by removing
the plug, and the suction from
the engine draws the flame in
and lights the charcoal instantly,
5. Replace plug and drive
away on petrol.
6. Open the air valve slightly.
7. Place your foot on both
petrol and gas accelerators to-
gether, and in about one mile
GAS PRODUCER




Manual on
Pederick
GAS PRODUCER
PRICE:
ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE


FOREWORD
It should be clearly understood by operators,
accustomed to driving on petrol, that they must learn
to drive on an entirely new fuel. If they approach
the task with an open mind and take the trouble to
learn the construction and function of the various
components of the unit, then the extra controls will be
clear to them, also various symptoms will be recognised
and understood.


THE two main components of the "Pederick" Gas
Producer are: —
A.—The Generator in which the Charcoal is burned
to produce the Gas, and
B.—The Cleaners for filtering the Gas.
GENERATOR
This is a large cylinder, sometimes described as the
hopper, which holds the Charcoal. It has a large hinged
lid at the top for filling, and a smaller door at the
bottom for cleaning purposes. At the bottom, on one
side, cut under, is the "Pederick" patent fire plate,
through which there is a hole to admit the air to the
fire (this patent fire plate is used in the "Pederick"
instead of a costly water cooled "tuyere" of limited
life). There is also a compartment alongside this fire
plate into which the air is first drawn through the two
pipes seen on either side this is done by the suction
of the engine. The air, passing the fire plate (which gets
almost red hot in operation), is pre-heated before it
enters the Generator, and at the same time cools the
fire plate as it passes right across its face and thus
prevents its destruction.


A removable plug, inserted on the outer side of the
air compartment, in line with the hole through the fire
plate, is removed to insert the lighting taper, and is
replaced when the Charcoal lights up.
WATER TANK
Attached to one side of the Generator is a circular
water tank, water being used to enrich the gas. This
water is fed by drip feed into one of the air intake
pipes on the side of the Generator and, when it reaches
the air compartment beside the fire plate, this compart-
ment already being heated by the fire plate, the water
is turned into steam or vapor before it enters the
Generator and reaches the fire.
THE CLEANING SYSTEM
The Cleaning and Filtering of the Gas is done In
five stages;—
I. The Primary Cleaner, a cylinder fitted to the
Generator opposite the water tank.
2& 3. The Oil Cleaner and the Sisal Cleaner are
contained in another cylinder, placed in front of
the vehicle or grouped with the Generator.
4& 5. The Woodwool Cleaner and the Final Felt
Cleaner are contained in another cylinder also
fitted to the front of the vehicle or grouped with
the Generator. These Cleaners form a pair and


are placed in exposed positions in order to cool
the gas, thus dispensing with the necessity of
any other cooling system. These are described
below;—
No. 1 PRIMARY CLEANER
A round cylinder fitted to the Generator on the
opposite side from the water tank. This Cleaner, which
is a "Pederick" patent, is remarkably efficient and traps
between 80% and 90% of the dust content of the gas.
The gas is drawn from the Generator through a short
pipe, and entering the side of the Cleaner takes a
centrifugal and downward course: then about one-third
way down the Cleaner the gas is deflected upwards
again and out through the top, whilst the dust goes to
the bottom and settles there. The dust is removed by
unscrewing the cap at the bottom. This Cleaner should
be cleaned out every day or at least every 100 miles.
No. 2 and 3 OIL and SISAL CLEANERS
Situated in front of the car. This Cleaner should be
kept filled to the level of the drain tap fitted on the
side about 6 inches from the bottom, with a cheap, thin
oil (sump oil will do, provided it Is strained and clean).
The gas enters at this level and Impinges on the oil
which arrests nearly all the dust or lampblack which
has passed the Primary Cleaner, and settles it to
the bottom of the oil. Above the oil bath is a


baffle to keep the oil down, but the gas is allowed to
pass upwards through a specially formed opening about
2i inches in diameter in the baffle; a wire gauze disc
placed on this baffle supports a Sisal pack. Any oil
which passes upwards with the gas meets the Sisal pack
and falls back into the Oil Bath, washing back with it
any oil-saturated dust that may have reached this point.
The Sisal must not reach the top of this Cleaner—a wire
cage holds it down—as space above it is required to
allow the gas to bank up. The gas then passes to the
next Cleaner. Do not pack Sisal too tightly. 500-mile
service instructions are described under maintenance.
No. 4 and 5 WOODWOOL and FINAL
FELT CLEANERS
Situated in front of the car, this cylinder is packed
with Sisal and Woodwool up to the level of a felt disc
held in place by strong clips which engage with indenta-
tions on the side of the Cleaner approximately 15 inches
from the top. A wire gauze disc rests on the bottom
of the Cleaner and forms a space in which water may
accumulate. A self-draining elbow, which ‘should be
cleaned when the unit is serviced, is screwed into the
bottom.
The final Felt Security Felt is mounted on a galvanised
wire cage which in turn is held by three screws on to a
ring welded approximately 4 inches from the top of the
Cleaner.


Care is needed to ensure that the ■felt forms a seal
between the cage and this ring. No dust or dirt can
get through this final Cleaner, and if the other Cleaners
have been neglected and dust or dirt does get this far,
it will simply block up the felt and in time prevent the
flow of gas—the symptoms of which would be loss of
power followed by actual stoppage of the engine.
Should this trouble occur it can be remedied by
removing the cage and choked felt and cleaning it
thoroughly—or renewing if necessary. No harmful
impurities can possibly get through this filter to the
engine.
HOW CAS REACHES ENGINE
The passage of the gas from the Final Cleaner
to the engine is through a gas pipe attached to a
special tee piece which is inserted between the
carburettor and its manifold. This necessitates raising
the carburettor about 2 inches. Fitted in the gas
line, near the carburettor, is a Change-Over Valve,
which is a positive sliding type and opens the way
for the gas to enter the manifold, or completely
cuts off the gas when closed. This is controlled from the
dashboard by a special Bowden which is pulled out to
admit the gas or pushed in to shut off the gas. Another
Bowden control on the dash operates an air valve, which
admits air to mix with the gas to form an explosive
mixture. Air is drawn through this separate air pipe


which may be connected with the existing air cleaner.
A throttle is incorporated in the Change-Over Valve,
and is controlled by a second accelerator pedal placed
beside the petrol accelerator pedal to control the speed
and power of the engine in the ordinary way.
STARTING
Petrol is required to start, and the better the engine
is tuned to run on petrol the better it will run on gas.
TO START
1. See the Generator is full —or has plenty of
Charcoal. See the Generator lid is closed tightly.
When closing the lid see that no particles of
Charcoal are on the surface of the lid joint,
which would prevent the lid closing properly.
This would cause leaks and loss of power.
2. Start the motor and let it idle.
3. Pull out Gas Valve about one inch. This will
cause the engine to draw air into the Generator
through the two pipes leading into the air
compartment beside the fire plate, through the
fire plate orifice, and right through the Generator
and all the filtering system and into the engine.
4. Remove plug from fire plate orifice.
5. A lighting taper is part of the cap of a small
tank containing lighting fluid attached to the


unit. Keep tank filled with a mixture of petrol
and kerosene or methylated spirits.
Light the taper and hold it to the fire plate
orifice—and the suction of the engine will draw
the flame into the Generator and set the Char-
coal alight; this you will be able to see by looking
into the orifice. When the Charcoal is alight
replace the plug and drive away on petrol.
(If you wish you can run the engine while the
vehicle is stationary, and in about one minute the
burning Charcoal will be making gas. It is better,
however, to drive away on petrol, as idling of a
motor when cold is never a good practice.)
After driving a short distance pull Gas Valve right
out. As speed is gained, partially open the gas throttle,
by pressing gas accelerator pedal simultaneously with the
petrol accelerator; after about a mile gas should come
fhrough, and power can then be maintained by using gas
accelerator pedal only in place of petrol accelerator.
Always remember to admit air by pulling out air
control slightly as soon as gas comes through, as gas
alone will not give any power. When the Producer has
warmed up and the gas is coming through in proper
volume, the best setting for the air valve will soon be
found, and very little adjustment will be required from
then on because of the automatic idling control fitted to
the air valve. The petrol throttle hand control should be


adjusted to enable the driver to keep his engine idling
in traffic or to shut off completely when on long runs;
by this means very little petrol is used and a great con-
venience is experienced by having petrol power always
instantly available. If a petrol tap is fitted by an owner
he must remember to always turn on the petrol before
stopping the engine to ensure easy restarting.
Petrol can be used on a hill, or anywhere, at will, and
if used only for city traffic and boosting speed on a hill,
very little is required.
As producer gas is a slower burning fuel than petrol
it will take a much earlier spark. A spark control may be
fitted to the dash and used when speed is required.
(This is not part of the standard equipment; it is not
absolutely essential, but will considerably improve the
performance if properly used.)
RUNNING
After the engine has warmed up and is running on
gas, water is turned on to drip slowly (about 50 drops
per minute). Where vehicles are equipped with auto-
matic water control, very little adjustment is necessary,
but it is essential that it be checked to see that the
proper drip rate is maintained, tor, if no water is used
and high speed is maintained for long periods, serious
damage to the producer may result. When a "Pederick"
Gas Producer is installed It is advisable to take careful


speedo readings to find out just how far it will run before
refuelling. Remember, the Generator should not be burnt
lower than half way before refuelling. Check every 50
miles, otherwise power will fall off and overheating take
place. The heating takes place because the fire spreads
when the charcoal is too low in the Generator. The amount
used will be found to alter under varying conditions, but it
is better to be on the safe side, and keep the Generator
as full as possible. Trucks do about one mile to one
pound of charcoal; cars about one and a half miles to
the pound. The standard Generator holds about 70 lbs.,
and the larger ones about 100 lbs. When stopping
to replenish the Generator, or at any time for
that matter, let engine idle for a minute, or slow down
for awhile before stopping. This eases the fire down,
and prevents a large accumulation of gas being
generated and wasted, also unburnt gas may find its way
out through the air intake and ignite when it comes in
contact with the air. If the gas does light up at the air
intake pipes, which are protected by flame traps, it can
be extinguished by starting the engine, or by opening
the Generator lid.
FILLING THE GENERATOR WITH
CHARCOAL
Open top lid of Generator and stand clear, as ignition
will occur when the unburnt gas in the Generator comes
in contact with the air. If this ignition does not occur,


throw a lighted match into the open Generator, other-
wise ignition may take place unexpectedly. It is then
safe to fill with charcoal. After filling, clamp down the
lid. It will be found necessary to drive for a hundred
yards or so on petrol to again draw the gas through.
Normally the fire will remain alight for several hours;
experience will teach when it Is necessary to relight.
After short stoppages (say 5 to 10 minutes duration)
the engine should restart on gas, although many prefer to
always start off on petrol. It is not harmful to allow the
engine to idle on gas for short stops. Expert operators
always stop to refuel on the down slope of a hill so as
to start without using petrol.
Every 100 miles clean primary. Check water drip teed.
Check oil level.
MAINTENANCE
The owner will realise on taking delivery of a
"Roderick" Gas Producer that, as all "Rodericks" are
built to a standard, he has a similar unit to those which
are being used successfully by large numbers of other
operators, and the degree of success he derives from it
will depend almost entirely on how it is maintained.
Maintenance is chiefly confined to keeping the
Generator and Filters clean, and to do this the following
procedure is recommended:—


GENERATOR
A. —Empty the Generator completely every 500
miles by dropping bottom lid to remove ash
and clinker. Replace lid and screw up securely
so that no leaks are possible. Be careful not
to damage gasket.
B. —Place a couple of inches of fine ash in bottom
of Generator and then refill with fresh Char-
coal.
WATER TANK
See that water tank is kept filled. The tank holds
two gallons, enough for about 500 miles. It is advisable
each 500 miles to disconnect outlet pipe and tap and
clean out thoroughly.
No. 1 PRIMARY CLEANER
Remove bottom cap of Cleaner every day, or at least
every 100 miles, and clean out the accumulation of
Charcoal dust, also knock the sides of the Cleaner to see
that ail the dust comes away.
Should wet Charcoal be encountered, part of this
Cleaner may become blocked through the dust being
wet and not passing through freely.
Provision is made for cleaning and Inspection by
removing plate near the top, and this should be done
every 500 miles. When replacing plate be sure that the
gasket is not left off or there is any chance of air leaks.


No. 2 and 3 OIL and SISAL CLEANERS
Situated-at front of the car. The lid comes off the top
and there is an opening on the side of this Cleaner
at the bottom for cleaning purposes. Remove the lid,
take out Sisal, take off plate from bottom opening
and let oil run out, then scrape out any accumulation of
sludge which has been formed by the Charcoal dust
arrested by the oil. On the gas pipe, just above where it
enters this Cleaner, there is a removable plug. Remove
this, and scrape out gas pipe upwards and downwards,
as Charcoal dust coming into contact with the oil will
become coated on the gas pipe. If the Sisal is very
black, replace with fresh Sisal. There is a tap on the side
of this Cleaner. Refill with fresh oil to the level of this
tap, pouring the oil down through the Sisal if new Sisal
has been used, so as to saturate it with oil.
When closing, see that the lid of Cleaner is gas-proof,
as leaks at any of these joints will, of course, prevent the
engine from drawing all the gas through, and there would
either be loss of power, or if leaks were too great, there
would be no power.
Complete service as above should be done every 500
miles, but the oil level should be checked more frequently
and kept consistently correct. Service stations will do
this work for a nominal sum in the same way as you have
your car greased regularly.


No. 4 and 5 WOODWOOL and FINAL
FELT CLEANERS
Situated at the front. The lid of this Cleaner Is
removable. Take out the Security Felt Filter and Cage,
which comes out easily through the top by unscrewing
three screws. Remove the felt, wash to remove the
accumulation of dust and replace after drying, or install
a clean spare. (A new felt can be kept on hand and
used, and the one removed can be washed and ready
to replace next time the cleaning is done. This will save
time.) Before replacing cage and security felt, renew
the Sisal and Woodwool in the lower halt of the cleaners
and the felt disc under the retaining clips. A supply of
Sisal and Woodwool should be on hand and one or two
spare felt discs.
Be sure and drain away any water that has accumulated
in the bottom of this Cleaner. Remove and blow out
self-draining plug.
This operation should be done at 500 miles.
All these cleaning operations can be done by the
handy man, but service stations are now equipped to
do this work quickly for a nominal charge.


General Hints
CHARCOAL
It is essential that screened Charcoal is used: a
careful operator sieves each bag before using, as the
handling and friction of Charcoal in transit causes it
to disintegrate and become dusty again, and, it used
without sieving, means more frequent cleaning of the
filters.
Size of charcoal is important, and no pieces should
be larger than will pass through I-inch mesh. Hardwood,
particularly Red Gum timber, gives the most power and
the longest range per bag.
It should be well burnt otherwise it may contain tar,
which is difficult to remove, and causes sticking valves.
The Charcoal should also be dry. If it is wet, the moisture
in it will be converted into steam in the Generator and
pass to the Filters, interfering first with the Primary
Cleaner by making the dust wet, then by condensing in
the oil cleaner and overfilling it, then getting Into the
Wood-wool and preventing it acting as a cleaner and
drier, and finally saturating the final felt cleaner and
preventing the gas from passing through the felt.
If this happens, clean everything out properly and
refill with fresh Charcoal.


OVERHEATING
Causes: —
1. Charcoal too low in Generator.
2. Not enough water being used.
3. Charcoal too big, allowing fire to spread.
4. Improper air mixture.
5. Clinker formed in Generator.
6. Generator lid gaskets leaking.
IGNITION
The ignition system of the engine is of major
importance when using producer gas. Troubles, such as
loss of power, difficult starting, inability to use proper
amount of water, etc., have been traced to weak ignition.
If these symptoms occur, have spark plugs tested, set
spark plug gaps at about 15 thousandths, advance octane
selector to full advance.
BACKFIRING IN ENGINE
If popping occurs in engine the cause is most likely
to be, either too much water from tank, wet Charcoal,
or a hot spot. Reduce water supply, and retard spark.


FIRE SLOW TO LIGHT
This is due to no draught, or not strong enough
draught.
Causes: —
1. Gas throttle not sufficiently open.
2. Clinker or ash in Generator preventing draught
from getting through. To remedy—open lid at
bottom of Generator, remove clinker and dust,
replace with fresh Charcoal.
3. Bad leak somewhere —possibly Generator lid not
shut properly.
4. Sometimes when refilling Generator with Char-
coal a cavity may have formed near lighting
orifice so that taper does not contact with the
Charcoal. Remedy—poke Charcoal down with
iron spike.
LOSS OF POWER
If you find air valve must be closed more than usual,
and power is falling off, the cause will most likely be
dirty Security Filter or Charcoal getting low. If not, then
look for air leaks around lids and rubber joints in gas
pipe, or a blockage of the gas pipe where it enters the
oil cleaner. Oil level may be too high.


COMPLETE STOPPAGE
If not caused by reasons mentioned in preceding
paragraph, it is most likely due to blocked Primary
Cleaner. Take off inspection plate located near top of
Cleaner and see that opening around baffle is free from
any blockage.
ENGINE NOT USING NORMAL QUANTITY
OF OIL
As Charcoal, unlike petrol, is a dry gas, it may be
found that the engine uses less than the normal quantity
of oil; in such cases it is advisable to use a lighter grade
of oil. New engines or rebored engines should have an
upper cylinder lubricator fitted for the first 2,000 miles.
REMEMBER
50 miles—Check Charcoal.
100 miles—Clean primary:
Check water feed;
Check oil level.
500 miles—Service unit completely.
When unit is being serviced, insist on these points
being attended to:


9. Never allow heated charcoal to fall on to bitumen road surfaces or to lie in the vicinity of
dry grass when cleaning the hopper. In brief, see that no cools drop out that might cause a fire.
Clean the hopper in safe positions, and only when cold. Even then care should bo taken to see
there is not an odd piece of hot charcoal which may bo fanned into flame. It, in an emergency,
it is found necessary to clean the hopper when hot, live coals, hot ash and the like should bo
discharged from the hopper directly into a metal container, and immediately salinated with water
or placed in a hole sufficiently big to bury the charcoal, and covered with at least 6 in. of earth.
The danger of live ash blowing on to dry grass, etc., whilst thus cleaning the hopper must also bo
guarded against. Immediately the fire in the hopper is lighted, the cover of the lighting-up
opening should be placed in position. Never at any time operate the vehicle on the road with the
cover of the lighting-up opening not in position.
10. Do not take a Gas Producer Unit into situations where inflammable materials are stored
or used, as under such conditions added risk of explosion am! tire exists.
11. In rural areas extreme care should be taken to see that units do not cause fires in crops
or dry grass. This risk will be accentuated, of course, in hot weather.
12. Outside roar-view mirrors should be fitted to cars when the Gas Producer Unit is so placed
that it partially or totally obscures the view of the driver through the roar window.
13. Under certain conditions of operation, minor explosions may occur ot the air intake and
tuyere opening, and care should be taken to avoid personal injury by flame from such openings.
The fitting of metal gauze over the air intake will minimise this risk.
See that the flame trap or wire gauze on the air intake is in place and intact.
Once a month, every Gas Producer Unit should bo overhauled, and all connections thoroughly
tightened, and core should be taken to see that all joints and seals are in good order and condition,
so as to ovoid any leakage ot goses. Any worn or partially worn gaskets should be replaced
immediately, and the whole unit kept in a thoroughly sound mechanical condition.
All Pederick Models are officially approved and produced under con-
tract with the Commonwealth Government, ensuring manufacture to
rigid specification, efficient instruction and service for owners, and safety
of operation. Therefore, some of the items as shown above do not apply
to Pederick, but it was inadvisable to alter the Government memorandum.
If there is any further information required to enable you to obtain the
best performance from your Pederick, communicate with us immediately.
Do you realise how much you can help the National War Effort by
advising your friends to equip their vehicles with Pederick? 1942 Models
are now available for immediate delivery, priced from £4B/10/-, plus
fitting.
S.A.C. Pty. Ltd.


SUMMER FIRE SISKS
Government Authorities have requested us to convey to all Pederick
Owners the necessity for care in operating Producer Gas Plants during
the summer months, and a copy of full details, as set out by the authorities,
is given below.
S. A. CHENEY PTY. LTD.
Reproduced by courtesy of
NATIONAL SAFETY COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA.
SAFETY HINTS IN RELATION TO GAS PRODUCER UNITS
Gas Producer Units of proper design and construction can be used with confidence it reasonable
precautions are taken at all times. However, it should always bo kept in mind that they generate
carbon monoxide gas, which is poisonous and inflammable. The general adoption or use of Gas
Producer Units has prompted this Council to issue this sot of hints, so that car and truck drivers
shall be conversant with methods to be adopted tor their safe use.
Carbon monoxide gas is an insidious and deadly poison, odourless, and tasteless, and gives no
initial warning of its presence or deadly action. THERE IS NO WARNING AT ALL OF ITS
PRESENCE IN THE ATMOSPHERE, and oven a small percentage in the air can bo fatal. It is
essential, therefore, to guard against leakage of even a small quantity of such gas, and its collection
in any confined space... Special-xara-is-neceiioty, ot course, in garages, dosed cats, and truck cabins,
1. Any garage for a car fitted with a Gas Producer Unit must have permanent and adequate
ventilation from the open air.
2. After use with a Gas Production Unit the vehicle should be allowed to stand In the open
air for one hour, or if placed in a garage the doors should be left wide open. Never leave a car
in a closed garage when the generator is heated, as it will still generate gas. If the hopper lid is not
tightly closed, the fire will not die down, and gas will be emitted.
B. Never open the hopper lid when in the vicinity of a petrol pump or an open container of
petrol, nor fill a car petrol tank while hopper is alight.
4. When opening the hopper lid of a heated unit, stand to windward and keep face clear of
the hopper opening. If the gas docs not ignite when the lid is opened, throw in a lighted match or a
piece of burning paper to burn off inflammable gas in the hopper before refilling with charcoal.
5. Do not open the hopper in the vicinity of easily ignited matter, as the flame from the hopper
may travel several feet.
6. Keep any gas pipes and that part of the hopper which normally becomes hot at least 3 in. from
any wooden or canvas bodywork, which should also be protected by an asbestos sheet.
7. Moke sure that the hopper is properly protected so that no portion of the load on any vehicle
can come into contact, or near contact, with the hopper, oven if the hopper is not open.
8. If is preferable fa have the unit mounted with the ilghting-up opening on the opposite side
of the car to the petrol filler cap when a rear mounting is used. Make sure the seal on the petrol
tank is effective, so that no petrol vapour escapes.
S.A.O. Service Sheet No. 102


NOTE; CERTAIN REPLACEMENT PARTS WILL NOT BE MADE AVAILABLE UNLESS ORIGINAL PART ACCOMPANIES ORDER.
GENERATOR
£ s. d.
Generator (Prices on Application)
Top Lid, Plain 5 ; 0
„ „ Chrome Plated 13 ; 6 P
Clomp Handle, Top Lid, Plain 3 ; 6
„ „ Chrome Plated 7: 6P
Clomp Assembly, Plain, Top Lid 15 : 0
„ „ Plated, Top lid 1 : 2 : 6 P
Lower Lid, Plain 4 ; 6
Lower Lid and Clamp Assembly 19 ; 6
Filter 5:6
Flame Trap 3:6
Water Inlet Tube 2 : 0
Gasket, Top Lid 4 ; 0
„ Lower Lid 3 : 4
Firebox Plug, Plain 4:0
„ „ Plated 8; OP
WATER TANK
Tank Assembly, Galvanised 1 : 19 : 6
Cap, Plain .... .. 3 : 0
„ Plated 6 ; 0 P
Tap 3:6
Pipe, Copper 1 : 0
PRIMARY CLEANER
Primary Cleaner Assembly 4: 0: 0
Cop 3:0
Gasket, Cap 3
Cleaning Portcover Plate 1:0
Gasket, Portcover Plate 3
Nut, Portcover Plate 1
OIL CLEANER
Oil Cleaner Assembly 4: 0: 0
Body 3 : 5 ; 0
Lid, Plain 3:3
„ Plated 10 : 0 P
Clamp Bor, Lid, Plain 1:4
„ „ „ Plated 4;6P
Nut, Bor, Lid, Plain 10
„ „ „ Plated I : 6 P
Rubber Gasket, Plain 1:0
„ „ Full Circle 2:9
Wire Disc, Lower 4:6
„ „ Upper 3:6
Sisal Separator 6:6
Gas Elbow 6:6
Oil Level Sachet and Plug 6
Cleaning Portcover Plate 1:9
Gasket Portcover Plate 6
Nut Portcover Plate 10
WOODWOOL CLEANER
Body 3 : 5 : 0
Lid, Plain 3:3
„ Plated 10 : 0 P
Clamp Bar, Lid, Plain 1:4
„ „ „ Plated 4 ; 6 P
Nut Bar, Lid, Plain 10
Plated 1 : 6 P
Rubber Gasket, Plain 1:0
„ „ ITdl Circle 2:9
Wire Disc 2:6
Hessian Pod 1
Felt Pad, 71" 6
„ „ 9]" 6
Spring Clip 9
Cage , Security Filter 15 : 0
Felt, Security Filter 6:0
Screw, Security Filter 1
All Prices Subject to Alteration Without Notice
£ s. d.
Auto. Woter Drainer 2 : 0
Cleaning Portcover Plate . . 1 : 9
Gasket Portcover Plato 6
Nut Portcover Plate 10
ENGINE PARTS
Intake T. Piece 12 : 6
Gas Valve 3: 9: 6
Throttle Stop 2 : 6
Air Valve 6:0
Air Cleaner 7:9
Large Actuating Arm 1:3
Small Actuating Arm 1:0
Bracket, Accelerator 1:0
Pedal, Accelerator 1:6
Spring, Accelerator 9
Rod, Accelerator 6
Cross Shaft, Accelerator I : 3
Petrol Tap 5:0
CONTROLS
Gas Control 10 ; 6
Air Control .. .. 10 : 6
Spark Control 10 : 6
Control Escutcheon 5 ; 0
GAS LINE FITTINGS
Elbow, Zi" 2:6
„ 2" 2:6
Steel Tubing, Z\" per ft. 2 : 10
„ „ 2" per ft. ■ 2:8
„ „ U" per ft. 1:8
Gas Producer Hose, 2" per tt. 4 : 3 P
„ 2*" per ft. 4 ; 9 P
Radiator Hose, Z\" per ft. 2 : 6 P
„ „ 2" per ft. 2 : 6 P
„ „ li" per ft. 2 : 0 P
Hose Clips, Zi" 1 : 0
„ „ 21" 1:0
STANDARD EXTRAS
Lighter Fluid Can and Torch 5:0
Nome Plate, Large 4 : 0
„ „ Small 1 : 0
Woodwool Refill 6
Sisal Refill 9
Point, Black Nett 1 : 6
„ Grey Nett 3 ; 0
Filter Oil (1 gall.) Nett 4 : 6
Service Manual Nett 1 ; 6
Lighter Torch 2:0
ALTERNATIVE PARTS
Generator Screen 9 ; 0
Manual Water Control 7:6
DE LUXE PARTS
Auto. Water Control 15 : 0
Auto. Woter Lever 2 : 0
Auto. Woter Spring 10
Auto. Water Tube, Copper 4 : 0
Auto. Water Diaphragm 8
Petrol Control Knob 2:6
Petrol Control Rod 1:0
Rear Shield Dc Luxe (unpainted) 3 ; 10 : 0
“P” opposite prices is a code symbol for dealers' information
Sole Distributors Victoria and Hiverina:
S. A. CHENEY PTY. LTD. 22 Flinders St., Melbourne, C.l. ~ Phone: Cent. 8991 (II lines)
PedericK
GAS PRODUCER
PARTS PRICE LIST
(EFFECTIVE 1/11/1941)


A.—lnspection and cleaning of primary.
B. —Emptying and refilling of generator.
C. —Cleaning and renewing oil in oil cleaner.
D. —Cleaning gas pipe at entry to oil cleaner.
E. —Cleaning out woodwool cleaner; replacing
woodwool and felts.
F. —Testing general running of car by a short run
on PETROL with gas valve closed. A car must
run well on petrol to run well on producer gas.


OWNER’S MANUAL
1942
Pederick
GAS PRODUCER
Priced from £4B-10-0
PLUS FITTING.
OFFICIALLY APPROVED AND PRODUCED UNDER
CONTRACT WITH COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT,
ENSURING MANUFACTURE TO RIGID SPECIFICA-
TIONS, EFFICIENT INSTRUCTION AND SERVICE
FOR OWNERS AND SAFETY OF OPERATION.
