

MANUAL OF RESCUE
AND DEMOLITION
CIVIL DEFENCE
HANDBOOK
No. 2
ISSUED BY DEPARTMENT OF HOME SECURITY
CANBERRA - JULY 1942 - AUSTRALIA






THIS COPY OF CIVIL DEFENCE
HANDBOOK No. 2 IS AN UN-
REVISED, IMPOSED PROOF OF
THE PUBLICATION ISSUED
SPECIALLY FOR THE INFORMA-
TION OF PERSONNEL ATTENDING
THE COMMONWEALTH RESCUE AND
DEMOLITION SCHOOL IN SYDNEY
23RD TO 28TH NOVEMBER, 1942.
THIS COPY IS ISSUED ON THE
UNDERSTANDING THAT THE CONTENTS
ARE SUBJECT TO FINAL REVISION.


Preface.
This ** Manual of Rescue and Demolition ’* has been
compiled by the Commonwealth Department of Home
Security in collaboration with the New South Wales
Department of National Emergency Services and the
Victorian State Emergency Services.
Manuals of First Aid and General A.R.P. Training are
being prepared and personnel of squads are earnestly
recommended to study these publications when published^
Acknowledgment is hereby made for information taken
from the following sources
Military Handbooks.
British Rescue Manuals.
London County Council Rescue Handbook.
C.S.I.R. Timber Handbook.
N.S.W. Rescue Training Manuals.
Victorian Rescue and Demolition Training Manual.




CHAPTER 1.
BOMBS AND THEIR EFFECTS.
EXPLOSIVE BOMBS.
1. Explosive bombs resemble artillery projectiles in general
effects, but, as they do not need to withstand any shock of
discharge, from io to 75 per cent, of the total weight may
consist of high explosive. High explosives have a shattering
effect.
2. Explosive bombs are of two main kinds—fragmentation
bombs and demolition bombs.
3. Fragmentation bombs are arranged to explode immediately
on impact so as to give as big a range as possible to their
destructive blast and splinter effects.
4. Demolition bombs are fitted with delayed-action fuses,
in order that considerable penetration may take place before
explosion. They may weigh as much as 5,c00 lb., and their
destructive effect is increased by the resistance of the material
into which they penetrate.
5. The armour-piercing and semi-armour-piercing bombs
may not carry more than 10 per cent, explosive, and the
fragmentation effect is reduced by penetration. As these
bombs are designed for attacking highly resistant targets,
the use of a lighter case bomb may be expected against civilian
structures, but the semi-armour-piercing bomb may be
occasionally used as well.
6. A 500-lb. bomb fitted with an instantaneous fuse would,
on falling upon a building, detonate on the roof or just below it.
A medium case bomb with a delay fuse will probably penetrate
three, four or five floors before detonating and cause more
destruction than the instantaneous fuse bomb. A similar
size bomb with an armour-piercing or semi-armour-piercing
nose would probably penetrate even to the basement of a tall
building.
7. Fragmentation is the distribution of fragments or splinters
from a bomb when it detonates on the surface. These are
projected at all angles from the horizontal up to 60 degrees,
*27820—A


and for high explosive bombs of 25 lb. and upwards number
from 2.000 to 6,000, the size of the fragments increasing with
the weight of the bomb.
8. The average range of fragments is about 500 feet, but
if the bomb is detonated above ground in the open the maximum
range may be from seven to ten times this distance. If
uninterrupted, splinters may cause fatal injuries at a distance
of half a mile from the explosion.
9. Blast is a shock transmitted through the air when an
explosion occurs, and is caused by the sudden generation
and expansion of the gases formed by the detonation of the
explosive in the bomb. This blast wave consists of a pressure
impulse which tends to blow things away from the bomb,
followed by a weaker suction impulse which lasts longer and
tends to suck things towards the bomb. The human frame
is not highly resistant to sudden pressure changes and, near a
bomb explosion, the rate of change and the magnitude of the
blast pressure may be sufficient to cause serious injury or
death.
10. To avoid the dangers of splinters and blast it is necessary
to get under or behind cover.
EARTH SHOCK.
11. When a bomb bursts at or below the surface level of
the ground, the surrounding earth receives a shock which is
similar to that caused by an earthquake. The severity of this
earth shock will depend on the size of the charge contained
in the bomb, the depth at which the explosion takes place
and the nature of the ground. A large portion of the damage
to buildings and services is caused by this effect.
FLIGHT OF BOMBS.
12. Bombs dropped by aircraft seldom, if ever, approach
the earth in a truly vertical line. The bombs fall through a
curved path owing to the forward speed of the plane on release
and the acceleration due to gravity, the path becoming more
vertical as the height increases. At lower points of release the
bombs will be affected more by the horizontal speed of the
aircraft than by the acceleration due to gravity, and at a few
hundred feet will strike almost horizontally with the same
speed as the aircraft.


13. Released from a plane flying at 230 m.p.h., at a height
of 20,000 feet, a heavy case bomb will hit the ground about
2 miles from the point of release, at an angle of 12 degrees
from the vertical, with a velocity of about 710 m.p.h. A
similar bomb released from a plane flying at the same speed,
230 m.p.h., but at 1,000 feet, will hit the ground about three-
eighths of a mile from the point of release at an angle of 46
degrees from the vertical, with a velocity of 280 m.p.h.
14. A plane seen 5 miles away, flying in a direction at 200
m.p.h., will be over an object in 90 seconds. A person should
not worry about the plane over him at a good height, but
watch for bombs from others some distance behind.
CRATERS.
15. Craters up to 50 feet in diameter and about 15 feet deep
can be expected on the detonation of the heavier types of
bombs, but will vary in size according to the kind of earth,
type, and penetration of the bomb. A 500-lb. demolition
bomb in ordinary earth w r ill make a crater about 10 feet deep
and 30 feet in diameter at ordinary ground level, throwing
up a mound all round it from 500 to 900 times its own weight.
16. When a bomb hits a building the mound may not be
circular, but there may be two large mounds, with every kind
of material in the demolished building mixed in them 15 to
25 feet high on the sides of the crater. There may be persons
to be rescued in these mounds. Heavy rain will make the
debris more difficult to handle, and there may be town gas
present.
CAMOUFLETS.
17. When a bomb explodes beneath the surface of the earth
and the force of the explosion is not sufficient to disperse
the soil above the bomb, a subterranean cavity, called a
camouflet, is formed which is filled with gases caused by the
explosion. A large amount of carbon monoxide, a highly
toxic gas, is present and may form a danger to any rescue
party. This gas also forms an explosive mixture with air
so that naked lights may constitute an extra hazard. Camouflets
may be indicated by one or more of the following signs :
(а) Raising of the soil round the hole of entry accompanied
by blackening of the sides.
(б) Slight humping of the surface, accompanied bv
radial cracks.


(<:) Formation of a mound of loose earth over the hole
of entry or in a shallow crater.
( d ) Cracking of neighbouring walls, or buildings, etc.,
but with no signs of blast damage.
18. Camouflets should be reported at once to the Police and
to Control Centres and should be roped off, as, although the
surface of a camouflet may stand for some time and even bear
weight there is the danger that it may give way at any time and
personnel be engulfed. Carbon monoxide gives no warning
of its action; its effect is cumulative and accelerated by
physical exertion and shortage of oxygen. The official
respirators are not proof against carbon monoxide and special
apparatus is required to work in it.
THERMIT INCENDIARY BOMBS.
19. The incendiary bomb is designed to have a relatively
low power of penetration and its striking velocity will be not
greater than about 400 feet per second. It may penetrate
any ordinary roof of tiles, slates, corrugated iron, asbestos
sheeting, etc., but will be arrested by a reinforced concrete
roof of 5-in. thickness. In the case of ordinary span roof
construction, the bomb may be expected to reach the top floor,
which it will probably burn through if no special protection is
provided. It may also start a fire in the roof timbers before
falling through to the top floor.
20. The weight of an incendiary bomb may be anything
from 1 kilogram (2J lb.) to 60 lb., but the kilo bomb has been
mostly used by the Germans. Since about December, 1940,
they have used a percentage of this size containing a small
explosive charge. This charge is arranged to explode within
2 minutes of the bomb starting to burn, scattering the burning
casing material at great velocity in all directions. At close
quarters, even the very small fragments may inflict wounds.
All incendiary bombs should be assumed to contain an explosive
charge. It is advisable, however, to attack the resultant fire
immediately, with stirrup pump or hose, from behind some form
of protection as overturned furniture or a partly opened door.
The risk that the bomb may be of the explosive type may have
to be accepted, especially where there is a danger of serious
fire, and the bomb itself should then be attacked at once with
sand mats and water.


21. An incendiary bomb is usually in the form of a small
magnesium alloy cylinder-shaped casing filled with thermite.
Thermite is a mixture of aluminium and iron oxide which
burns at a temperature of about 2,500 deg. C. In comparison
the temperature of a bright coal fire (dark-red colour) is 630
deg. C., and the melting temperature of steel is 1,600 deg. C.
Timber ignites at about 320 deg. C., it chars at about 270 deg.
C., and is scorched at about 230 deg. C.
22. The bomb has a percussion ignition device which rray
be situated either in its nose or tail. It functions on impact.
Excepting those fitted with an explosive charge, the bomb does
not explode, and although the fumes generated are unpleasant,
they are not dangerous. Whilst the igniting compound is
burning, the bomb gives a dazzling light (equivalent to about
50,000 candle power) and burning sparks are thrown off. This
goes on for about 40 to 50 seconds.
23. With the exception of the tail and the ignition device, the
whole of the bomb is incendiary material. The great heat of
the priming composition —thermite —melts and ignites the
casing, which is the main incendiary agent. The casing
burns for 10 to 20 minutes, at about 1,300 deg. C. During
the first 50 seconds or so, the bomb is extremely violent. Jets
of flame are emitted and molten slag from vent holes in the
casing may be thrown as far as 50 feet. After the first minute,
the bomb becomes less active because the casing melts and the
pressure within is released.
24. As the thermite composition contains its own oxygen,
it cannot be extinguished by smothering, but the burning of
the casing which must get its oxygen from the air or surrounding
materials in order to burn, can be controlled by sand or water
spray.
25. In dealing with this type of bomb of any size, there
are four sequences of operations :
(a) Preliminary fire extinguishing and cooling down.
(&) Controlling the burning power of the bomb.
(c) Removing the bomb.
(d) Extinguishing the resulting fire.
26. The operations for dealing with a kilo bomb are explained
in various Government publications to which reference should
be made.


OTHER TYPES OF INCENDIARY BOMBS.
27. Japanese Incendiary Bombs :
(a) 50 Kg. Incendiary—3 feet 6 inches long. Contains
four electron containers filled with thermite. On
impact electron containers are ignited and an explosive
charge bursts the casing and throws the ignited
containers in all directions. The resultant major
fire is mainly a Fire Brigade responsibility.
(b) 50 Kg. H.E. and Incendiary—3 feet 4| inches long.
Containing 475 rubber bungs impregnated with
phosphorus dissolved in carbon disulphide. On
impact the explosive in the nose bursts the bomb and
the bungs are scattered over an area up to 50 yards.
They ignite on exposure to air. Fragmentation from
the bomb casing will extend up to 80 yards. Burgs
should be gathered up at once and plunged and kept
submerged in water. A bung will reunite upon
drying out and should not be touched by hand.
(c) 60 Kg. Incendiary —3 feet 6\ inches long, painted
grey with red band around end of tail fin. This
bomb consists of a steel outer casing and a steel inner
container which has a central tube filled with thermite.
Around the central tube there are six steel compart-
ments filled with paraffin wax mixed with kerosene.
The whole is enclosed in a steel cylinder. A charge
of black powder is contained in an aluminium
container at the nose. After impact a fire is started,
with the thermite and paraffin burning in a compact
mass. This will be a major fire and so a Fire Brigade
responsibility.
GAS ATTACKS.
28. Gas attacks may be made by means of bombs from
aircraft, shells from artillery, cylinders on the ground, or spray
from aircraft. If bombs are used, the gas will be liberated
where the bombs explode, whereas the gas discharged by spray
from aircraft will descend in the form of a fire shower of liquid,
which may travel with the wind some distance before reaching
the ground. About 50 per cent, of the total weight of gas
bombs will be gas in a concentrated form with a small explosive
charge and detonator in the bomb so as to disperse the contents
over the surface of the ground or building hit. When they
burst, the gas comes out in a deadly concentration, generally


in liquid form. It may lie about in wet weather for several
days. In dry weather it will evaporate more quickly. A
gas bomb, 50 lb. in weight will contaminate an area of about
1,600 square yards, though the whole of that area will not be
badly contaminated.
29. The division of gas into two groups is important as a
guide to action in and after an attack. If a gas is non-persistent,
wind and rain may disperse it quickly ; but if the gas is
persistent, steps must be taken to neutralize or destroy it.
30. The presence of gas may be detected in a number of
ways :
(a) By the smell. ( b) By immediate irritant elfects.
(c) By visible signs. ( d ) By chemical testing.
31. Most gases hitherto used in warfare have either a
distinctive smell or a characteristic irritant effect on the eyes,
nose, or throat. In many cases, also, there will be visible
indications of gas, such as the presence of a cloud or of liquid
splashes on the ground.
32. To a large extent, therefore, reliance can be placed on the
senses, particularly the sense of smell, but chemical tests will
be available in addition, for the identification of particular gases.
33. Persistent gases , such as mustard gas—a liquid gas of
the blister type —will evaporate very slowly in cold weather
and may freeze on the ground, being liberated weeks afterwards
when thawed and warmed by the heat of the sun. These gases
are most dangerous when released as spray, as the drops of
condensed “ gas ” may remain unsuspected on objects which
may come into contact with the human body. Because of
the dangerous effect these gases have on contact with the
human skin, decontamination of ground or objects splashed
by them is essential before rescue work is undertaken.
33A. Non-persistent gases , such as phosgene and chlorine,
which are lung-irritant gases, form clouds of gas or smoke,
not necessarily visible, which drift with the wind, gradually
mixing with larger quantities of air and so becoming less
dangerous.
DECONTAMINATION.
34. Workers should not approach contaminated areas unless
equipped with protective clothing, that is, anti-gas suits.
They should not handle contaminated articles unless wearing
oilskin gloves (in emergency, woollen gloves well impregnated
with bleaching powder might be used).


35- Bleaching powder is the most satisfactory decon-
taminating material. For mustard gas liquid, the bleaching
powder should be mixed with three times its bulk of earth
and spread over the contaminated area to a depth of at least
i inch. Walls should be hosed.
36. Blisters caused by mustard gas should be preserved
unbroken until handed over to qualified medical aid. Eyes
damaged during gas attack should not be bandaged.
37. Respirators have been designed to protect eyes, nose,
mouth, and lungs against all known war gases. If maintained
in good order, they give 100 per cent, protection against them,
but are useless against gas arising from industrial processes
and carbon monoxide gas formed in a camouflet.
MINES.
38. Mines have been used. They are dropped frcm planes
by parachute and may destroy whole blocks of buildings at
once. Their approach cannot be heard, and unless actually
seen, the fust indications of their arrival are the blast and the
noise of the explosion.
MACHINE GUN FIRE.
39. Machine gun fire from low flying aircraft can cause many
casualties. An attacking plane with multiple machine guns,
flying at 200 miles per hour might fire bullets at very close
intervals.
METHODS OF ATTACK.
40. Aerial attack may take the form of bombardment with
high explosive bombs, incendiary bombs, or gas bombs, perhaps
with ail types of attack simultaneously or in succession. The
effect of a direct hit by a high explosive bomb is devastating
and final, and the destruction of buildings and plant will
inevitably result. These bombs cause fires as well as incendiary
bombs, the use of which would start more numerous fires. The
subsequent employment of gas would be more demoralizing
and would also render the task of rescuing and treating casualties
more difficult and dangerous.
41. People should not stay in the open to watch a raid,
but should take cover as fragments of anti-aircraft shells
may fall miles from where they are fired.


CHAPTER 2.
RESCUE AND DEMOLITION SQUADS.
CONTROL AND COMPOSITION OF SQUADS.
42. The organisation is planned so that the rescue work
will be performed by a self-contained unit in each Municipality
or Shire under the supervision of a leader for that area (Area
Leader). The support and co-operation of the local Council
in the training of suitable men from amongst its employees
are .invaluable in securing efficient functioning.
43. The squads in each area should be where possible under
the control of the Council Engineer as, by his training, he
understands most of the necessary phases of the work. Where,
for some reason, the Municipal Engineer is absent or there is
no Engineer, the squads can be controlled by some other
suitable officer of the Council who is used to practical work
of this nature.
44. The men should be divided into squads of from six to
ten men with a skilled leader. For large centres there should
be one man (the most skilled practical man of the Council) in
charge of the training of all the squads. He should act as an
Overseer for all squads in time of emergency. He will travel
from place to place during a bombing raid to advise the leaders
how to work and to see that supplies of materials are kept up
to them, and that everything is well ordered.
45. The types of men who are suitable are those who have
had experience as carpenters, riggers, builders’ labourers,
bricklayers, tilers, mechanics, plumbers, drainers, acetylene
cutters, motor lorry drivers, and men with any building
knowledge, as well as good labourers and, in fact, any men
likely by means of their training to have an aptitude for the work.
46. As the Council may not be able to supply sufficient men
from its staffs for the work in times of emergency, it is necessary
that as many outside tradesmen as possible be enlisted and
trained for the squads while conditions are still normal. It
should be remembered that there is no need for all men to be
highly skilled, as much of the work will not be of a highly
technical nature and can be performed by strong able-bodied
men, especially where they are working in conjunction with and
under the supervision of trained men.


47* In the event of an emergency occurring, rescue from
buildings and houses will be one of the principal tasks for
Rescue Squads. It is impossible to predict what the actual
problems will be, and the leaders will need to show a great
deal of resource in handling the problems in a decisive manner
when they arise.
WORK INVOLVED IN RESCUE OPERATIONS.
48. Rescue may necessitate :
(a) Clearing away wreckage to release trapped persons.
(, b ) Tunnelling through debris to release trapped persons.
(c) Shoring up walls and propping up floors for the
protection of trapped persons and others.
(d) Rescuing trapped and injured persons from heights
and depths by means of ladders, ropes, and other
improvised means.
49. Where the trapped are understood to be in the lower part
of a building, it may be possible to strip the site of debris using
derricks and other spars to remove heavy articles, but the
greatest care will have to be exercised to prevent the parts
that are holding up portions of the debris, from being disturbed
and thus causing sliding of material that will crush the very
people whom it is desired to save.
50. In searching for trapped victims, each floor of a building
must be carefully examined, commencing from the lowest
floor level. Search must not be abandoned until every part
of the building or debris has been thoroughly examined,
including a search of adjacent buildings. Reconnaissance
shon’d not be confined to badly damaged premises, and
adjoining premises should be searched in case occupants may
have been injured.
PRECAUTIONS.
51. The leader of the Rescue Squad with the support of all
other members, and of the police and wardens, must prevent
unskilled, excitable, and impatient people from interfering
with the work except under the direction of the leader.
52. It will not be possible for all rescues to be effected as
rapidly as bystanders (and relatives of the victims) would wish
but it should be understood that it is wiser to hasten slowly
and cautiously than to take undue risks. Leaders must be


very firm and remember the principles of their training and not
take advice from nervy bystanders, but only from leaders of
the organisations.
53. In directing the work of his men, the leader will need to
utilize his knowledge of planning, construction, and materials
to the utmost, in the interests of speed and safety. Advantage
must be taken of every wall or opening that is likely to afford
some degree of security for exploring the wreckage, and to
provide an avenue of approach to the trapped persons. Wrecked
buildings must be entered cautiously, walking across the
damaged floors as close as possible to the wall, noting which
way the floor joists run, and using the supported ends of the
joists to avoid undue strain. When it is considered that it is
unsafe for other persons to be present, the leader should order
such persons to leave the dangerous part of the building until
steps have been taken to render it safe.
54. Men must be posted to watch all dangerous structures
that are likely to collapse and injure those working and those
who are trapped. Save where otherwise practicable, all debris
in the vicinity of the trapped will have to be moved by hand,
and must be deposited clear of the site of rescue in order to
avoid the possibility of burying other victims. It is important
that in so doing the roadway is not obstructed.
55. Parts of a building which are in a state highly dangerous
to the public or are impeding rescue operations should be
removed or secured, but care should be taken with debris
which is supporting any part of the structure. Any suitable
material at hand, as dislodged timbers and girders, should be
used to give support, where necessary, for safety. If a smell
of town gas is detected, all doors and windows should be
opened.
56. If fire is present, doors and windows must be kept
closed to restrict the supply of fresh air to the fire. To avoid
smoke and heat, one should lie down and crawl with the head
low.
57. Passages and stairways wdiich are burnt or burning
should not be used if rescue can be effected through a window.
58. If the door of a burning room opens outwards, a person
should stand behind it and control it so that it may be opened
steadily and used to shield the body against heat and smoke.


59- To move an insensible person, the rescuer si ou d place
him face uppermost, kneel astride of him, tie his wrists together
and place them round the neck and crawl. To move him
downstairs, the rescuer should support his head and shoulders,
etc., and crawl down backwards, easing bis legs and body
down the stairs as gently as possible. If he has broken legs
or back or other severe injury, some other method will have
to be substituted.
60. Before deciding which of the badly injured victims
should first be rescued, the nature of the injuries, position of
the victim, and work involved in rescue should all be considered.
It would seem very desirable to attach a label to each casualty
stating where he was found, in case he dies unidentified.
61. The rescue party will be expected to move injured persons
from difficult positions on upper floors, basements, over
obstacles or rough ground, and make every effort to get them
into a place of safety where they will receive attention or be
taken to the first aid post or hospital. The Stretcher Party
will take over from the Rescue Party when the casualties have
been safely delivered to them.
TRANSPORT.
62. The shafts of all tools, the ends of the timbers, and,
in fact, some part of all equipment, should be painted white
so that they can be seen easily in the dark.
63. In order that Rescue Squads and their equipment will
arrive at incidents in the shortest possible time, it is important
that proper provision be made for transport. All available
lorries should be listed to form a transport pool, and preferably
as much equipment as possible should be stored in a trailer at
the Depot, so that it will merely be a matter of attaching the
lorry and proceeding to the incident. The use of a trailer
will enable the leader of a squad, on arrival at the scene of
activity, to unload his lorry and send it back to the Depot for
extra supplies that may be needed, and the lorry may be
allowed to proceed to some other incident.
64. The lorry should carry an extension ladder in a suitable
position and should be so arranged that it can carry the whole
of the Rescue Squad together with certain articles of equipment.
The trailer, which is fitted with adjustable legs and tail board,
has handles on the sides and ropes also fitted to the sides for
manual towing. The unit can thus be drawn well away from


the scene of operations, avoiding congestion of traffic, and the
squad can manhandle the trailer across debris and craters,
going into action like a gun team. In practice with a squad
of ten men, the driver remains with the lorry, three men carry
the ladder and seven men handle the trailer; one man steers
with the towing bar, one man pulls on each rope, and one
man pulls or pushes by means of a handle grip on each corner
of the trailer. Where fewer men are used, this procedure
will need modification.
65. A routine of trailer drill will be found most useful in
the training of Rescue Squads, giving the necessary discipline
and speed of action necessary for efficiency.
66. The men are lined up facing the loaded trailer, and each
man has a place and number in the line. The men spring to
attention and, starting with the last two, proceed to the trailer,
lift the article allotted to them and place it in its proper position
on the ground alongside the trailer and preferably on the
foot-path, returning to their places in the line by running
round the trailer in an anti-clockwise direction. The men
perform the whole operation at the double except when
carrying the kit, but in practice do not leave the line until
the preceding men have actually picked up their allotted
article from the trailer. The anti-clockwise movement
prevents them getting in each other’s way. The whole
operation of loading or unloading can be performed in
minutes, and every article when on the ground can be picked
in a moment from its proper place.


CHAPTER 3.
LIFTING GEAR AND TACKLE.
1. Cordage.
67. Types and Uses. —The term rope is used for both
fibre and wire ropes, while the term cordage is used to denote
fibre ropes only.
68. Cordage stretches very considerably under load; the
stretch in a new rope, when subjected to its working stress,
is about one-twentieth of its length. This is normally a
disadvantage, but in certain classes of work this elasticity may
be an advantage.
69. The size of a rope is denoted by its circumference in
inches and its length is measured in fathoms. The diameters
corresponding to different circumferences are as given below :
Diameter. Circumference. Diameter. Circumference,
in. in. in* in*
ilr 1 w 2 |
* If i 2l
i n 1 3
a if 4
1- 2 it 5
I 2f 2 6
70. Cordage is made from the fibres of manila, hemp, sisal,
and the coconut husk (called coir).
(i) Manila is the type most commonly used. It stands
exposure to weather and damp better than hemp and
sisal, and is not so liable to kink. It is softer and
more pliable than other types ; the best quality is
stronger than any other fibre rope.
(ii) Hemp is harder and less pliable than manila. It is
often tarred to preserve it from the weather. Italian
hemp is about equal in strength to the best quality
manila, but is little used on account of its cost.
European and Indian hemps correspond to a second-
grade manila.
(iii) Sisal is an Empire product and is coming increasingly
into use. It is coarse and rough to handle and equal
to a low-grade manila in strength.


(iv) Coir is very much weaker than other fibre ropes,
but is also much lighter. It will float in water.
(v) Spun yarn is made of from three to nine yarns, any
type of fibre being used. It is not a laid line, and
therefore has a tendency to untwist. It is issued in
coils of 56-lb. weight; 5 fathoms of nine-yarn or
11 yards of three-strand spun yarn weigh about 1 lb.
It is used chiefly for seizing and mousing.
71. Construction. —Several fibres twisted together form
a yarn, several yarns twisted together form a strand, and three
or more strands twisted together form a rope.
72. The system on which the strands forming a rope are
twisted together is called the lay ; the angle of lay is the angle
between the direction of each strand and the direction of the
centre line of the rope.
73. Increasing the angle of lay makes the rope weaker and
less supple, but more durable against wear. The types of
lay are :
Type of Lay.
Normal Angle of Lay.
Three-strand plain or hawser laid..
Four-strand shroud laid
Nine-strand cable (or water) laid ..
37 degrees, right hand.
39 degrees, right hand.
37 degrees, right hand for the
strands, and 31 degrees left hand
for the three ropes.
74- In the trade, plain or hawser laid ropes are also called
shroud laid.
75. Cable laid ropes are not generally used in sizes less than
5 inches.
76. Tarred rope is about 10 per cent, heavier than white
rope of the same size; care must, however, be taken that the
tar used contains no chemicals that will rot the rope. If
white cordage receives proper care and storage, it should not
deteriorate.
77. To identify a piece of cordage, the material, lay, whether
tarred or white, the size, and breaking load must be specified.


78. The weight of cordage varies with the lay, but is
approximately :
Tarred hemp .. .. .. 0-19 C 2 lb. a fm.
White manila .. .. .. 0-15 C 2 lb. a fm.
Sisal .. .. .. .. 0-15 C 2 lb. a fm.
Coir .. .. .. .. o-ii C 2 lb. a fm.
■Where C = circumference in inches.
79. Care of Ropes. —The following precautions should
be observed when working with cordage :
(i) To uncoil a rope, lay the coil flat with the inside end
at the bottom, and uncoil by pulling the inside end up
through the centre of the coil.
(ii) Sudden or snapping stresses should be avoided.
(iii) Cordage should be kept from chafing against sharp
edges by interposing wood packing or rollers.
(iv) Cordage, unavoidably exposed to chafing, should be
“ parcelled ” by wrapping it in canvas well daubed
with tar and bound with spun yarn.
(v) Cordage that has been thoroughly saturated should
not be subjected to a stress greater than two-thirds
of its normal working stress.
(vi) Cordage should never be returned to store wet or
coiled down in a wet condition.
(vii) Cordage shrinks when wet; this shrinkage may cause
guys, etc., to snap unless they are slackened off in wet
weather.
STRENGTH AND SAFE LOADS.
80. A factor of safety of 6 should normally be allowed, and
in any case more than one-third of the breaking load should
never be put on a rope.
81. For work-in the field it may be assumed that the strength
of all types of cordage, with the exception of coir, is equal to
C 2 cwt. where C = the circumference of the rope in inches.
This may be increased for good cordage in sound condition up
to a maximum of 2C 2 cwt. for “ special ” quality manila rope
in “j st ~ c l ass condition. The safe load on coir may be taken
as cwt.
4


82. The strength of cordage when taken round any sharp
bend, such as the hook of a block, or when tied in a knot, is
decreased by about one-third, owing to the fibres being unevenly
stressed.
83. The safe calculated load for a piece of cordage must*
therefore, be multiplied by two-thirds if there are any sharp
bends.
84. A further allowance must be made when calculating the
strength of a lashing to allow for the uneven distribution of
stress between the turns ; the actual strength should be taken
as four-fifths of the calculated strength. It will normally be
necessary to make these two allowances in conjunction.
Therefore, if N = No. of returns (double number of turns);
L = reduction factor for bending of rope = §;
S = reduction factor for uneven distribution of
stress between turns = \ ;
C = circumference.
Strength of lashing in cuts =N X.L X S X C 2,
= N X | X { X C 2.
For 2-inch cordage with lashing of four turns (eight returns).
Strength of lashing = f X f X | X y = 17*1 cwt.
2, Wire Ropes.
85. Description and Uses. —Wire rope is normally made
of steel wire laid up in a similar manner to cordage. There is
no standard length for a coil of wire rope, but it is usually
issued in coils of 100 fathoms.
86. Several wires twisted together form a strand and several
strands twisted together form a rope. A 6/7 rope denotes one
of six strands of seven wires. For winch or tackle falls use
6/19 or 6/24.
87. Wire rope is stronger and less liable to stretch than
cordage, but it is less flexible and, therefore, more difficult to
handle. For bridging work it should be used in preference to
cordage, whenever the stresses involved would necessitate the
use of cordage larger than 3-in., or if stretch under load would
be disadvantageous.
88. Wire rope is difficult to grip, and if power has to be
applied by hand, cordage tackles or falls on which the men can
haul should be attached to the wire rope.


89. The weight varies with the construction of the rope,
but may be taken as C 2 lb. a fathom, where C is the
circumference of the rope in inches.
90. Care of Wire Ropes :
(i) Uncoiling.—Small ropes are generally made up in
coils, and large ropes are wound on reels. A coil
of wire rope should be mounted on some form of
improvised reel before being unwound. The reel
should be mounted horizontally on a bar through its
centre, supported at either end on two pickets.
It is most important to avoid kinks while unwinding,
as they are difficult to remove and always damage the
rope. They cannot be removed by a straight pull.
Bars should be lashed firmly on either side; the
kink should then be gradually straightened by beating
it with a mallet, at the same time twisting the rope by
means of the bars to preserve its proper form.
(ii) Coiling.—Wire rope should normally be coiled on
reels. If a reel or drum is not available, the rope
should be coiled round pickets driven into the ground ;
the coil when complete should be secured at three
or more points with spun-yarn, twine, etc. They
should be coiled in a clock-wise direction.
Large ropes should be coiled similarly with the
use of pickets, but in the shape of a figure of eight.
(iii) Storage.—Ropes should be stored under cover, and
raised a few inches from the ground.
(iv) Avoidance of sharp bends.—All sharp bends must be
avoided (see also paragraph 94, bdow) rnd the rope
should oe protected from chafing.
91. As a rough rule, the diameter of a sheave should not be
less than six times, or the diameter of a holdfast not less than
four times, the circumference of the rope.
92. The correct size of sheave designed for the rope must
always be used; otherwise excessive wear will result.
93. When under tension the turns on a holdfast or drum
should never be allowed to override one another.


94- Methods of Joining and Securing Wire Ropes. —The
following methods may be used either to join two ropes., or to
secure a rope to a load or holdfast: —
(i) Ordinary knots. —In the field suitable wire rope
fittings will not always be available. The ordinary
cordage knots must then be used, but the following
precautions must always be taken :
(1) Very sharp turns must be avoided; a round
piece of wood, of a diameter not less than four
times the circumference of the rope, should be
inserted in the knot and the turns made round it.
(2) The strands of the rope must be protected from
being cut through by friction. Sacking should
be inserted in the bights of knots and either
sacking or sheet iron should be wrapped round a
holdfast under the rope.
(3) The running or free end should be seized to
the fixed or standing part of the rope.
Two ropes may be joined by a hawser bend, two
half-hitches being used.
(ii) Splicing.—Wire ropes can also be joined together by
splicing in a manner similar to that for cordage; but
the splicing of steel wire rope is very specialized work,
and a rigger skilled in this work should, if possible,
undertake it.
(iii) Thimbles are normally heart-shaped. The rope is
passed round the thimble and secured to itself either
with an eye splice or with bull-dog clips or double-
throated clamps. The first clip should be as close to
the thimble as possible.
Thimbles should always be used when fastening a
wire rope to the becket of a block, to a shackle or round
the hook of a block.
(iv) Bull-dog clips and double-throated clamps are the
most convenient form of fastening for work in the
field. The double-throated clamp is stronger than
the bull-dog clip and damages the rope less ; it has
four nuts and takes longer to secure, but should be
used whenever possible. Double-throated clamps
weaken the rope by about 5 per cent., whereas
bull-dog clips weaken it by about 25 per cent.


The clips must fit the rope and it is essential that
the correct size is used. They are marked with the
size of the rope for which they are intended, some
makers giving the diameter of the rope and others
the circumference; the diameters corresponding to
the circumferences of the normal sizes of rope can
be determined by using 7/22 as a multiplier.
Three clips should normally be used, but for ropes
larger than 3-in., four or more may be necessary. If
the rope is not fully stressed, two will be sufficient.
The distance between clips should be at least three
times the width of the clip.
95. The Strength of a Wire Rope depends on the size of
the rope, on the breaking stress of the wire, and on the con-
struction. For the same size of rope, a variation of either of
the last two factors may greatly alter die safe load for the rope.
96. Thus the safe load for a 6/12-2! in.—Bo tons a sq. in.
rope is about if tons, while that for a 6/7-2! in.—loo tons a
sq. in. rope is about 3-f tons. Any formula that merely takes
into account the size of the rope must be regarded as only
approximate.
97. The breaking strength of the common sizes of wire is
given in most manufacturers’ handbooks, or may be found
experimentally. The construction of the wire can be seen by
inspection of the end of the rope. The factor of safety allowed
is six; for temporary work in the field this may be reduced to
four, provided the breaking strength of the wire is accurately
known and that the rope is in good condition and fairly treated.
98. For hasty work in the field the safe load may be taken as
from 9 C 2 cwt. for ordinary rope to 12 C 2 cwt. for good quality
rope, where C = the circumference of the rope in inches.
99- As in the case of cordage, the safe calculated load must
be multiplied by 2/3, if the rope is taken round any sharp
bend.
100. An allowance, greater than in the case of cordage, is
also necessary for uneven distribution of stress in the returns of
a lashing, since S.W.R. is less pliable; the actual strength
should be taken as 3/sths of the calculated strength.


101. For example, the safe strength of a lashing of five turns
(ten returns) of i|-in. S.W.R. is—
If N = No. of returns (double number of turns);
L = reduction factor for bending of rope = § ;
S = reduction factor for uneven distribution of stress
between turns = f in case of wire ;
C = circumference.
Strength of lashing in cwts. = N X L X S X 9c 2 ,
= N X f X | X 9c 2 .
For 17-inch circumference wire rope lashing of five turns
(ten returns)
-V° X | X £ X 1 X | X | = 81 cwt.
3. Knots and Lashings.
102. Knots are used to join two ropes, to form a loop in a
rope, or to make a stop on a rope, as follows :
Thumb knot. —To make a stop on a rope, to prevent the
end from fraying, or to prevent it slipping through
a block.
Figure of 8 knot.—As for a thumb knot, but easier to
untie.
Reef knot. —To bend or join two dry ropes of the same size.
Single-sheet bend. —To join two ropes of the same size.
Double-sheet bend. —To join two ropes with great
security, or two ropes of different sizes.
Hawser bend. —To join large cables.
Running knot.—To form a loop that will draw taut round
an object.
Bowline.—To form a loop or bight on a rope that will
not slip.
Running bowline. —A bowline in which the standing end
passes through the loop of the bowline.
Bowline on a bight.—To form a double loop in the middle
of a rope —made with the rope doubled.
Bowline in the centre of the rope.—To raise a heavy
spar, as a loop for a pulley hook, and for tightening
a rope.
Chair knot. —For lowering a victim from a height.
Sheepshank.—For shortening a rope.


103. Hitches are used to secure the ends of ropes to spars,
to the hooks of blocks, to another rope, etc., as follows :
Clove hitch.—Consists of two half-hitches. Used to
secure the end of a rope to a spar, etc.
Timber hitch.—For holding timber, etc., where the weight
will keep the hitch taut. Used with a half hitch is
called a killick hitch.
Two half-hitches.—For making fast the running end of a
rope on to its standing part.
Round turn and two half-hitches.—For making fast a
rope so that the strain on the rope shall not jam the
hitches. Used for making fast a rope to a bollard or
anchorage. If the running end is inconveniently
long, a bight should be used to form the half-hitches.
Fisherman’s bend.—For making fast when there is a give-
and-take motion, e.g., for bending a cable to an
anchor.
Lever hitch. —For fixing the rounds of a rope ladder 5
fixing bars to drag ropes, withdrawing pickets, etc.
Scaffold hitch.—For firmly tying a rope to a scaffolding
pole.
Man harness hitch. —To form a loop on a drag-rope that
will not draw tight.
Catspaw.—To secure the centre of a rope to a hook.
Single blackwall hitch.—To secure the end of a rope to
a hook.
Double blackwall hitch. —More secure than a singl e
blackwall hitch.
Draw hitch.—To secure a boat’s painter, etc., to a post,
ring or rope so that it can be instantly released, or to
secure horses to an endless rope when swimming
them across a river. This hitch will stand a give-
and-take motion, and can be instantly released by a
jerk on the running end.
Stopper hitch.—To transfer the strain from one rope to
another.


Magnus hitch. —To make fast to round spars when much
friction is necessary to prevent slipping. More
secure than clove hitch.
Rolling hitch.—To make fast a rope end round an object,
or secure a rope to a hook, when a very secure
fastening is required.
LASHINGS.
104.
(i) Lashings are used to join one object to another,
such as a spar to a spar or a block to a spar. Cordage
lashings soon become loose and require frequent
adjustment. When possible, wire should be used.
If no staples are available, the wire should be finished
off round a set of returns and jammed between them
and the timber; otherwise wire lashings should be
made in a similar manner to cordage lashings.
Wooden wedges with well-blunted points should be
used to tighten lashings ; they should be driven in at
the top of the lashing.
Frapping turns are turns of a lashing taken round
other turns of the same lashing in order to make them
tight.
(ii) To whip a rope is to tie a piece of twine round the
end to prevent it untwisting and fraying.
(iii) A square lashing is used to lash one spar at right
angles to another.
For convenience a vertical spar is referred to as the
leg, and a horizontal spar as the cross piece. Make a
clove hitch on the leg on the opposite side of the cross
piece to the load, then take the rope over the cross
piece on the side of the leg on which the lashing is
to be finished. Now take it below the leg on the
opposite side of the cross piece to the clove hitch
and up above the cross piece again on the opposite
side of the leg to the first turn over the cross piece,
then down under the leg above the clove hitch and
up above the cross piece again, on the outside of
the first turn. Continue this process until four
complete turns are made, keeping outside the previous


turns on the cross piece and inside the previous
turns on the leg, so as not to ride over the turns
already made. When the four complete turns have
been made take an extra turn round the cross piece
on the side on which the lashing is to finish and
take a couple of frapping turns between the spars
round the lashing, bending the whole firmly together.
Finish with two half hitches on the side of the cross
piece on which it had originally been decided to
finish. The lashing must be well beaten with a
stick to tighten it up while the frapping turns are
being put on, and the frapping turns can be tightened
by making lever hitches in the rope and inserting
a pick handle to strain in the rope tightly during
the process. The two half hitches which end the
lashing can be placed on the cross piece on either
side of the leg whichever is the more convenient
side. Any spare end of rope should then be twisted
round the cross piece and secured.
The clove hitch should always be placed at the
end of the lashing away from the line of thrust, so
that it will act as a support for the lashing against
the thrust.
In the lashing of trestles erected in muddy places,
care must be taken to prevent the lashings from
slipping on the leg, as the mud acts as a lubricant.
It is well to drive nails or spikes into all timbers
against lashings that are likely to slip.
The clove hitch should always be on the opposite
side of the spar to that on which the weight will
come, e.g., on the leg below the transom, and on
the leg above the ledger of a lashed trestle.
(iv) A diagonal lashing is used to lash two spars together
that tend to spring apart.
To make a diagonal lashing, begin with a timber
hitch or running bowline round both spars and
draw them together; take three or four turns
across each fork; finish with frapping turns and
two half-hitches. When the spars are not horizontal,
the lashing should be finished off above the junction.
(v) A rack lashing is used for fastening down ribbands
at the edge of the roadway of bridges. It consists


of a 6-foot length of 2-inch rope with a pointed
stick about 2 inches long at one end.
To make the lashing, holding the stick in one hand
pass the rope through the hole in the chess inside
the ribband and take it under the road bearce and
bring it up outside the road bearce and chess tying
a thumb knot above the ribband. Put the stick
through the back of the loop thus formed and twist
in an anti-clockwise direction till all is taut then jam
the stick in between the lashing and the outside of
the ribband.
(vi) To lash a block to a spar. Lay the back of the hook
against the spar, take a clove hitch round the spar
above the hook ; take several turns round the hook
and spar; finish off with two half-hitches round
the spar under the shell of the block.
RACK LASHING
jLJEcaGzcn TfiMS'ri.s.
ROADWAY FOR
BRIDGING
RACKING A
TACKLE
LASHING A
BLOCK TO A
SPAR


(vii) To mouse the hook of a block, /.<?., to close the mouth
of the hook with spun yarn so that the sling eye, etc.,
must remain in the hook, begin with a clove hitch
near the centre of the spun yarn on the back of the
hook; take several turns across the mouth of the
hook; finish with one or two frapping turns, both
ends starting from the back of the hook, and a reef
knot.
(viii) To seize the end of a rope to the standing part with
spun yarn, twine, or string, in order to make the
fastening secure, make a clove hitch round the
standing part with the spun yarn near its centre ;
take each part round both ropes in opposite directions,
leaving one end long enough to make two frapping
turns between the ropes ; tie the two ends with a
reef knot.
(ix) To fish spars, i.e., to strengthen them by lashing other
spars parallel to them, lay the fishing spars against
the one to be fished so as to take off as much strain
and be in as close contact as possible; make fast
the lashing or lashings, if necessary, by layir g o le end
along the spars and taking the returns r uii this
end ; pass the lashing round and round all the spars ;
make fast the end by making the last four or five
returns rather slack, passing the end backwards
under them, tightening up the returns and hauling
the slack through; tighten the lashings by driving
in wedges. Either one continuous lashing or several
separate ones can be used.


THUMB
KNOT
FIGURE
OF
EIGHT
REEF KNOT
SINGLE
SHEET
BEND
no t-J & z.aS
sr*E:£L-r-
n
HAWSER BEND
CLOVE HITCH
TIMBER
HITCH
KILLICK HITCH
ROUND TURN
AND TWO
HALF HITCHES
FISHERMANS
BEND
urj As/ / f>/ C7
/< r^o~r
jL&VEJ:*. Hi-TCH


MAN
HARNESS
£>«A W H/TCM
STQ/>/ ! £-« s-f/~rc/~f
SCAFFOLD
HITCH
BOWLINE
t/^v/v/v'vo
BOWLINE


BOWLINE IN CENTRE OF ROPE
CHAIR KNOT


ROLLING
/-//TTC/V
SINGLE
BLACKWALL
DOUBLE
BLACKWALL
CATSPAW
Figure A
SHEEPSHANK
Figure C
Figure B
SEIZING
Figure D
MOUSING
SAILMAKERS WHIPPINO


LIFTING
BARREL
SPJ-rr
CX-OVE S//TCH
SQUARE
LASHING
DIAGONAL
LASHING
CYN
LASHING
SHEER LEGS
LASHING


4. Chains.
105. Normal chains fall into three main classes—Short
Link, Studded Link,, and Long Link.
106. Short Link. —The links of short-link chain should not
exceed in length more than five times nor in width three and a
half times the diameter of the iron or mild steel of which they
are made.
107. Studded. —Studded chain follows the design of short-
link chain with the addition of a welded bar of equal section
across the minor axis of its links. Studded chain is 50 per
cent, stronger than short-link chain of equal section.
108. Long Link. —Long-link chain is so classified when the
length of its links exceeds five times the diameter of the metal
of which it is made and finds its particular application where
the strength is not important as in barriers, ornamentation, or
some special feature. Generally it has to be specially ordered.
109. Weight. —The approximate weight of chain is 60 d 2
lb. per fathom for short link, 65 d 2 lb. per fathom for studded
link, and 55 d 2 lb. per fathom for long link.
no. Strength. —For use in the field the following rules
may be used to give a safe working load with a factor of safety
of approximately 5
short-linked chain .. .. 6d 2 tons;
studded chain .. .. jd 2 tons ;
long-link chain .. .. 5 d 2 tons;
where d is the diameter of wrought iron or mild steel used*
in. Chains subject to repeated high working stresses should
be annealed periodically.
5. Miscellaneous Tackle.
SLINGS.
112. Slings may be made of wire rope, cordage, or chain.
Where much lifting has to be done a selection of slings saves
time in tying and untying knots. Slings should be adjusted
so that the splice is not round any edges nor over the hook.
They should not be left to adjust themselves but should be
so arranged that the stress will be equally divided between
the returns. The sling should be protected from all sharp
edges by sacking, etc. Slings in continuous use should be
inspected at frequent intervals.


113. Cordage Slings consist of a length of cordage with
the two ends spliced together. They should be used for light
work and for articles that would be damaged by a wire rope
or chain bearing on them. The sling is passed round the
article to be lifted, the bight formed by one end being passed
through the bight formed by the other and then over the hook
of the lifting tackle.
114. Wire Rope Slings are made and used in a similar
manner to cordage slings but for heavier loads. The rope
is normally protected by spun yarn or some other whipping
material wrapped round it. Double wire rope slings, i.e .,
with two bights, are sometimes made; they are convenient
for lifting certain types of load.
Safe Loads for Lifting Gear.
Single Sling
Chain and
Double Manila
Single Wire
Double Wire
Similar
Rope Slings.
Rope Slings.
Rope Slings.
Chains.
Size of Chain.
Safe Load.
Circ. of Rope.
Diam. of Rope.
Safe Load.
Circ. of Rope.
Diam. of Rope.
Safe Load.
Circ. of Rope.
Diam. of Rope.
Safe Load.
in.
ton cwt.
in.
in.
tons cwt.
in.
in.
tons cwt.
in.
in.
ton cwt.
i
0
IO
ii
1
0
5
3
4'
1
4
o
7
3
¥
1
4
0
15
"nr
0
15
2
5
8
o
IO
i
5
16
o
12
i
5
Tf7
i
5
3
8
i
0
2i
13
T6
o
15
ii
13
32
i
0
ii
Ul
32
2
0
T6
i
5
3
it
i
o
ii
i
i
IO
ii
i
3
o
i
i
15
3i
ii
i
IO
1 4-
•ft-
2
0
is
4
o
Iff
2
5
4
ii
2
o
2
2
15
2
5
8
5
IO
&
2
15
4i
i iff
2
IO
2i
I Tfi
3
IO
2i
11
16
7
o
3
4
4
o
5
if
3
0
2i
is
4
5
2i
it
8
10
i
5
IO
52
ii
4
0
2f
*
5
0
2~f
7
8
10
0
i
7
o
6
5
o
3
it
6
0
3
it
12
IO
ii
9
o
7
2i
6
0
3i
ii
8
IO
3i
ii
17
o
ii
ii
0
8
2 i
IO
0
4
ii
Ii
0
4
ii
22
0
115. Chain Slings are not as easy to handle or lap round
the load as wire rope or cordage slings, but they are more
durable. They are heavier than wire slings of equal strength.
* 27820—8


116. Slings with two or more legs are often convenient.
For example, large plates may be lifted by a four-legged sling,
the hooks being passed through eyebolts inserted in suitable
holes in the plate.
117. The angle between the legs of a slug should not exceed
60 degrees, since the stress in each leg increases rapidly as the
legs are spread apart. The connexion at the top of a chain
or wire rope sling usually consists of a ring. The chain
portion is connected to this by a long link, while a wire rope
has a thimble spliced on in the usual manner. The connexion
at the lower end of the leg is similar, except that a hook takes
the place of the ring.
118. When calculating the strength of slings, allowance
must be made for the angle of the legs. If the angles between
the legs are 60 degrees, the stress in each leg will be 1-15 times
what it would be if they were parallel to the pull. The
proportion becomes less as the angle decreases. Thus, if a
four-legged sling, in which each leg makes an angle of 30
degrees with the vertical, supports a load of 8 tons, the stress
in each leg is—
-8
1-15 X - = 2-30 tons.
4
119. In short slings, provided the angle is not greater than
80 degrees, the pull in each arm may be taken as §W.
STROPS.
120. Strops are lengths of wire rope with a thimble spliced
in each end and with the rope itself wrapped with some material
to protect it from damage.
121. They are very useful for attaching blocks of tackles
to anchorages, and for forming the standing part of a guy.
122. The sizes of thimble used are not standardized, and the
thimble at one end is often made small enough to pass through
the thimble at the other end. In selecting strops, care must
be taken that the thimble is large enough to take the hook
of the block, etc., for which it is intended.
SHACKLES.
123. Chains are generally connected by shackles. The
best pattern is the screw shackle, and is that generally used
with chain whenever it is desired to connect or disconnect
quickly. All screw shackles should be tightly screwed up


with a marline spike, and if intended to remain for any length
of time, should be wired, that is, the eye of the pin should
be lashed to the bow with a few turns of wire. Another
pattern has a plain pin with a slot and a split pin. The strength
of an ordinary shackle is about three-quarters of the strength
of short-link chain made from the same diameter iron. It
will be seen that the shackles used for any chain must, for
equal strength be of larger diameter metal than the chain,
and thus will not fit easily in the end link. It is, therefore,
usual to fit each end of a chain with a special large link, called
a “ long link,” into which the shackle can be fastened. To
get equal strength, the metal in the long link should be one-
sixth stronger than that used in the rest of the chain. This
is done in practice by making the long link of metal t-inch
thicker than that used in the chain. Thus chain
should have long links of |-inch metal and f-inch shackles.
EYEBOLTS.
124. Eyebolts are about six-sevenths and triangular and
circular ring bolts are about one-third as strong as short-link
chain of the same diameter iron. For field use the safe working
loads may be taken as follows :
Eyebolts, 5 d 2 tons ;
Triangular and ring bolts, 2d 2 tons;
where d is the diameter of the iron.
RINGS.
125. Metal rings for the attachment of a number of strop-
can be assessed at half the strength of chain of similar crosss
section.
HOOKS.
126. Hooks are about one-ninth as strong as short-link
chain of the same diameter iron. They are seldom, however,
made of the same diameter iron throughout, but are specially
shaped to have more metal at the point where the stress is
greatest, that is, at the back of the hook. It is this larger
diameter that must be considered when calculating the strength.
For field purposes the working load on hooks can be taken as
o-'jd' 2 tons in the case of a plain hook, and 0-5 t 2 tons in the
case of a shaped hook, where t is the greatest dimension at
the back of the hook; d is, of course, the usual diameter of
the iron.


WIRE LASHINGS.
127. The safe load in lb., using a factor of safety of four
for single iron wire used as lashing, can be taken as 60 per
cent, of the weight in lb. per mile of the wire used.
128. Single steel wire can be taken as twice the strength
of iron wire.
129. This includes an allowance for uneven distribution of
stress in the individual wires of a lashing. Determination of
the number of “ returns ” is the same as for rope as shown
for cordage.
SELVAGEES.
130. Selvagees are used for slinging shells, but, when passed
round an object, form a convenient means of attachment for
the hooks of tackles. They should always be used double,
and are only suitable when the strain to be taken is small.
6. Blocks and Tackles.
131. Blocks are used for the purpose of changing the
direction of ropes and of gaining power at the expense of time.
They consist of the following parts :
(i) The strap, which holds the pin on which the sheave
revolves, and to which a shackle or hook is attached
at one end for carrying the weight and a becket at
its other end for attaching the fall.
(ii) The shell, the principal use of which is to prevent
the rope slipping off the block.
132. The sheaves of metal blocks are grooved and are made
of malleable cast-iron or steel. The diameter of the sheave
is dependent on the size of the rope to be used; if the sheave
is too small, the strength of the rope, especially wire rope, is
seriously diminished, and a proportion of the power is lost.
On the other hand, the smaller the sheave the lighter the block.
For wire ropes the diameter of the sheave should be at least
six times the circumference of the rope.
133. Blocks are called single, double, or treble according
to the number of sheaves in the frame.
134. Snatch-blocks are single blocks with an opening in
one side of the shell, so that a rope can be inserted without
passing the end through. This opening is closed by a hinged
strap.
135. As a rule, the safe load is stamped on the block.


136. Tackles are composed of one or more blocks rove
with a rope or fall. Those most commonly used are shown
in the “ Block and Tackle ” drawing.
137. Tne fall is the term used for the rope connecting the
blocks.
138. Reeving is the operation of passing the fall round
the sheaves of the blocks.
139. The standing end is the end of the fall made fast to
one of the blocks. Blocks are fitted with a becket or eye
to which the fall should be attached.
140. The running end is the loose end of the fall to which
the power is applied.
141. The returns are the parts of the fall between the blocks.
142. To overhaul a tackle is to separate the blocks. With
heavy tackles, the block from which the running end comes
off should be secured to a holdfast and a handspike should be
placed in the hook of the other block with a drag-rope made
fast to it ; the handspike and drag-rope should be manned,
while one or two men overhaul the returns from the standing
block. The handspike is intended to keep the tackle out
of the dirt which would otherwise clog the sheaves.
143. To round in a tackle is to bring the blocks closer
together. With heavy tackles the reverse process to that
for overhauling should be employed, the men on the handspike
and drag-rope hanging back while a few men heave on the
running end.
144. When the blocks are as close as they will go they are
said to be choc-a-block.
145. To rack a tackle, any two opposite returns should be
fastened together with a seizing so that the blocks will retain
their relative position even if the running end is let go.
146. A lifting tackle is one in which the running end of the
fall comes olf the fixed block; it is normally used vertically.
147. A runner tackle is one in which the running end of
the fall comes off the movable block; it is normally used
horizontally.
148. A leading block is used to change the direction of
the running end in order that the power may be favourably
applied ; as a rule, leading blocks are required for lifting tackles
and not for runner tackles. They should be made fast to a


holdfast close to the ground, placed so as to give a good lead
to the fall which runs through it. Snatch-blocks are normally
used.
149. The power is applied to the running end by a winch
or capstan, or by men pulling directly on the fall. Aden cannot
grip wire rope sufficiently well to apply power equal to the
strength of the rope.
150. Reeving a Tackle. —A tackle is rove by two men
standing back to back, 6 feet apart. The blocks are placed
on their sides between the men’s feet, hooks to their front,
and the coil of rope to the right of that block at which there
is to be the greater number of returns. Beginning with
the lowest sheave of this block, the end of the fall which is
to be the standing end is passed successively through the
sheaves from right to left and then made fast to the becket
with two half-hitches and seizing. The half-hitches should
be as close up as possible, and very little spare end left for
seizing, so that the blocks may not become choc-a-block
unnecessarily soon.
151. All tackles should be rove in this manner, except
that in the case of long, heavy tackles it is better to reeve
the blocks the working distance apart, to save overhauling
after reeving.
152. Care must be taken to prevent mud and grit getting
into the sheaves.
153. Anti-twisters. —All tackles are liable to twist when
the power is applied. This is due to the lay of the rope and
not to the method of reeving the tackle ; no method of reeving
so that the running end comes off the centre sheave will make
any practical difference to the tendency to twist. The longer
the tackle the greater the liability to twist.
154. New ropes are more liable to twist than old ones.
They should be well stretched before use by making one end
fast to a swivel and applying power to the other; the rope
can then unlay as it is tautened.
155. The running end of the fall must be taken off so that
it does not press against the shell or twist the blocks.
156. If the tackle is allowed to twist one complete turn
the power required is increased by over 40 per cent.
157. In all cases in which the tackle cannot be reached by
hand after erection, anti-twisters must be secured before
erection to the block that will be out of reach.


BLOCK & TACKLE SYSTEMS


158. The most suitable type of anti-twister at a moving
block consists of a crowbar passed through the loop of the
first half hitch of the standing end on the becket, and projecting
at least 6 inches above the returns of the tackle. It should
be firmly secured with spun yarn as follows :
Make a split clove hitch round the head of the crowbar ;
pass the double end of the spun yarn up the bar and
secure it to the bar with two half hitches ; take a round
turn through the becket and one turn of a square lashing
with the double spun yarn round the crowbar and the
loop of the standing end of the fall where attached to the
becket.
159. The tackle is prevented from twisting by the suspended
weight of the crowbar. In long tackles, or if the crowbar is
too light, an additional weight must be secured to the bottom.
160. A light piece of wood, such as a picket or handspike,
similarly secured, but passed half-way through the loop
may be used; light lashings should be attached as reins to
either end and secured in such a way that they cannot slip off.
161. Care in Handling Tackles :
(i) The blocks should be well oiled and free from grit
and di t. No block in good working order should
“ complain,” that is, make a noise.
(ii) Care must be taken that all fastenings are secure.
(iii) The fall must be free from kinks and twists, and
must run freely over the sheaves.
(iv) Tackles should be carried and not dragged along the
ground.
(v) When the fall is taut, it should not be jarred by being
struck or by men treading on it.
(vi) The returns near the blocks should not be touched
when moving unless absolutely necessary, and then
only those moving away from the block.
(vii) A suspended weight should be eased off uniformly
and not by jerks.
(viii) In all cases when working near the safe limit of a
tackle, before leaving it with the strain on, the tackle
should be eased off slightly in order to distribute
the stress equally between the returns.
(ix) Men should be trained to pull together. The fall
should be double-banked in order to keep the pull
in a straight line.


LEVERAGE


HEAVY LIFTS.
162. For heavy lifts differential tackles consisting of two
unequal pulleys, keyed on to the same shaft and revolving
together may be used. An endless chain is passed round
both pulleys, with two bights hanging down. One of these
bights carries the weight hooked to a small pulley travelling
on the chain, while the motive power is applied either to the
other bight, or in the case of the larger sizes, to a separate
chain in passing round another pulley geared to the main
pulleys. The theoretical gain of these tackles is considerable,
that of the j-ton tackle being about 16 to 1 and of the ij-ton
tackle about 34; while that of the larger sizes with the extra
pulley is even greater. To allow for friction, the theoretical
power required should be increased by about one-third in
the case of the simple form and by about one-half in the case
of the form with the extra pulley.
163. Chain or yale lift blocks have the lift stamped on them
by the maker and can be used for reasonable lifts in rescue
work but a detail of the principles of design is unnecessary.
164. Rollers of wood or iron can be used for moving weights ;
they give no mechanical advantage but substitute resistance to
rolling in place of friction. The power required to move a
weight on a level planked roadway on hardwood rollers varies
from one-sixteenth of the weight to start it to one-twenty-fifth
to keep it moving. The direction of a weight moving on rollers
can be altered by adjusting the rollers.
MANPOWER.
165. Army experiments have shown that squads of men,
up to 60 in number, can exert about half their weight on a
horizontal fall. This pull for men of average weight is usually
taken as 80 lb. or f cwt., according to the unit employed. A
smaller fall than 3 inches is difficult to haul on, and wire rope
is more difficult to haul than cordage. Two or three men,
pulling upwards or downwards, can each pull more than the
f cwt., but more cannot work together in this fashion.
166. Advantage Gained by Tackles. —In any two-block
tackle, if there were no loss of energy, the power necessary
to overcome a force would be that force divided by the number
of returns of the fall at the movable block, including the


standing end of the fall if made fast to that block. In practice
the loss of energy may seriously diminish this theoretical
mechanical advantage; this loss may be due to —
(i) the friction of the parts of the rope against each
other or against the shell of the block. The loss
from this cause may vary from nothing up to any
amount, as it is possible if the tackle is twisted
sufficiently to stop all movement; but by keeping
the returns parallel and preventing the blocks from
twisting, the loss may be kept down to a small
quantity;
(ii) the friction between the sheaves and the pin. If
the blocks are kept clean and well lubricated, the
loss due to this cause will be very small;
(iii) the power required to bend the fall round the
sheave. The loss of energy due to this cause depends
on the stiffness of the rope, and is therefore greater
with wire rope than with cordage and with tarred
cordage than with white.
167. To allow for the loss of energy due to all causes, the
following formula should be used :
W
p = x C 1 X / N )*
Where—
P = the power required on the running end of the fall;
W = the weight being moved, in the same units as P;
A = the theoretical advantage, or number of returns at
the movable block;
N = the total number of sheaves, including any leading
blocks;
/ = the coefficient of friction which is taken as one-tenth
for selected cordage or wire and one-fifth for
unselected cordage or wire.
168. For the purpose of this handbook / has been taken as
an approximate mean value of | in the tables which follow.
169. The pull on the beam or anchorage to which the fixed
block is secured is—
for lifting tackles .. .. .. W-f P;
for runner tackles .. .. .. W— P.
170. The following tables indicate the loads that can be
lifted or pulled by means of the different types of tackles.


171. The average value of / = has been used for friction
in all cases, as previously noted.
172. Wire rope blocks must be used in conjunction with
wire rope in all cases.
Two Treble Blocks.
Diameter.
Circum-
ference.
Lifting Tackles.
Runner Tackles.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
f«
i
3 -2
28-8
4-0
360
b
i*
7-2
64-8
90
810
t
2
12-8
II5‘2
160
1440
it
2b
20
25-0
. .
i
3
28-8
. .
360
1 nr
4
51-2
•.
640
if
5
8o
• •
ioo-o
Treble and Double Blocks.
Lifting Tackles.
Runner Tackles.
Diameter.
Circum-
ference.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
X
2-86
25-74
3'7
3330
i
ii
6-44
57-96
8-32
74-88
t
2
n-44
102-96
14-80
133-20
J3
16
2h
17-88
23-12
..
i
3
25-74
3330
• •
i w
4
45'7
..
59-20
• •
if
5
71-4
* *
92-50
* *


Whip on Whip.
One Fixed and Two Movable Blocks in case of Lifting Tackles.
Two Single Blocks in case of Runner Tackles.
Diameter.
Circum-
ference.
Lifting Tackles.
Runner Tackles.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
i
2-66
23-94
3-20
28-80
*
ii
5-98
53-86
7-20
64-80
5
8
2
1064
9576
12-80
113-20
ft
2i
1662
20-00
. .
i
3
2394
28-80
i ft
4
42-56
• .
51-20
..
if
5
665
8o-oo
Two Double Blocks.
*
Circum-
Lifting Tackles.
Runner Tackles,
Diameter.
ference.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire,
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
ik
i
246
22-14
333
29-97
i
ii
5-52
49-68
7’49
67-41
t
2
983
88-47
13-32
119-88
it
2i
1539
20-81
• .
i
3
2118
29-97
. .
T 4r
1 16
4
39-38
53-28
. •
T 5
* 8
5
6i'5
83-25
* *


Double and Single Blocks.
Lifting Tackles.
Runner Tackles.
Circum-
Diameter.
ference.
Unselected
Wire.
Unselected
Wire.
Manila.
Manila.
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
5
16
i
2
18
291
2619
i
4-50
40-5
6-55
58-95
5
'8
2
8
72
11-64
104-76
13
16
2%
12-50
18-19
i
3
18
. .
2619
. .
I US
4
32
46-56
..
It
5
50
72-75
Two Single Blocks.
Lifting Tackles.
Runner Tackles.
Circum-
Diameter.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
ference.
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
i
i-45
13-05
2-40
21-60
i
ii
326
2936
5-40
48-60
5
2
5-80
52-20
960
8640
13
16
906
..
15-00
..
i
3
13-05
2160
..
i k
4
23-2
38-40
..
5
36-25
6o-oo
One Single Block.
With Leading Block in Case of Lifting Tackles.
Lifting Tackles.
Runner Tackles.
Circum-
ference.
Diameter.
Unselected
Wire.
Unselected
Wire.
Manila.
Manila.
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
i
o-8
7-2
i-77
1593
i
I 2
1-8
i6-2
398
35-82
5
8
2
3‘2
28-8
7-08
63-72
13
16
2i
5-o
1x06
i
3
7-2
• .
1593
• .
i ,'V
4
12-8
28-32
..
if
5
20
44-25


* Single Fixed Block.
Without Leading Block.
For Lifting Only.
Diameter.
Circum-
ference.
Unselected
Manila.
Wire.
in.
in.
cwt.
cwt.
ik
i
•88
7-92
i
i i
2-00
t
2
352
WINCHES.
173. Winches can also be used for pulling and lifting,
either directly or in conjunction with tackles. They are
mounted on frames, which must be secured to the ground
and have a horizontal barrel, round which the turns of the
fall are taken in the same way as in a capstan. The power
is applied to a handle at each end, and further mechanical
advantage is gained by the power being transmitted through
toothed wheels. The system of gearing is generally such that
there is a slow and a quick purchase, the weight to be lifted
determining which is to be used.
174. The theoretical advantage depends upon the gearing,
but unless these machines are kept well lubricated a lot of
power is lost.
175. When lowering light weights the brake may be
employed, but it must be done slowly, the pawl kept in hand
in rear, and the handles should be removed.
176. When lowering heavy weights the brake may be used
to assist, but the handles must be manned and the weight
kept well under control.
177. They can be obtained in sizes suitable for lifts up to
4 tons direct from the barrel, and up to 20 tons when used
in conjunction with tackles.
* This Apparatus is only suitable for use by 4 men pulling vertically.


JACKS.
178. Jacks are generally of the screw or bottle type or
hydraulic type.
179. With the former, the slower or flatter the pitch of the
screw the greater the weight that can be lifted. Rapid lifting
jacks have a very quick pitch or thread, but do not as a rule
lift heavy weights. A 9-inch jack with a i-inch screw will
lift about 2 tons. Larger sizes will make greater lifts.
180. Hydraulic jacks are much more convenient to use.
The pressure per square inch on a small area of a plunger
worked by a hand lever will be the same as the pressure per
square inch on a large area, which consequently raises the
weight. They are first sealed by screwing up the tap at the
bottom of the jack, and the jack is then raised quickly by
pumping up with the handle. To release, the taps at the
bottom are unscrewed carefully to avoid a sudden drop and
the weight lowered steadily by this means. Where two jacks
are used care must be taken to see that the pressure in both
is released evenly.
181. Jacks must be kept free from grit and dirt.
182. For lifting weights jacks are usually used in pairs,
and it is very important to follow up the weight with packing
underneath, which must be carefully arranged.
183. Jacks may also be used to exert a thrust in other
directions than the vertical.
184. The Trewhella Jack works on the principle of lever and
ratchet, and the load can be taken either at the foot of or top
of the jack.
185. Australian made Trewhella jacks would be very
valuable equipment. They are made in varying sizes; the
single purchase type can lift up to 2\ tons, and a double
purchase size is made capable of lifting from 4 to 6 tons.
186. The operation of these jacks is simple and rapid and
the general principles applying to all work with jacks must
also be conformed with when using these types. Illustrations
of single purchase and double purchase jacks of this type are
shown below.


TREWHELLE
"WALLABY" JACKS
SINGLE PLIRCHASE
MODEL "A"
TO LIFT 2/2 TONS
WEIGHT 53LBS
DOUBLE PURCHASE
MODEL "B"
TO LIFT 4 TONS
WEICHT 65LBS.


7. Holdfasts and Anchors
187. The Engineer Service of the Army provides the best
information based on actual tests of the holding power of
ground. This, in conjunction with engineering experience
of the bearing quality of ground, forms the basis of this subject.
188. Holdfast is the name applied by the Army to a surface
anchor for tackles of a more or less temporary nature, while
the term “ anchor ” refers generally to permanent fixing
usually of buried logs, concrete, or masonry.
HOLDING POWER OF SINGLE 3-INCH DIAMETER
HARDWOOD PICKET.
189. In tests carried out in the field a hardwood picket
5 feet long and 3 inches in diameter driven 3 feet into
undisturbed loam at a slope of 2-1 began to yield with a pull
of 14 cwt. applied at ground surface at a slope of 2-1.
190. When the pull increased to 20 cwt. the picket broke
at ground level by bending. Under similar conditions, pickets
driven 2 feet and 1 foot drew from the ground at 11 cwt. and
9! cwt. respectively.
191. Using a factor of safety of three, 6 to 7 cwt. appears
as a safe load on a single picket driven 3 feet into firm
undisturbed loam or clay. Any loose surface soil should be
removed and firm ground exposed before driving the picket.
The holding power is reduced in soft or wet soils and there is
practically no holding power in dry sand or dry loose sandy
soil.
HOLDING POWER OF I]-INCH HEXAGONAL STEEL
GROUND PIN.
192. These pins are made 3 feet to 5 feet long to suit local
conditions and are pointed at one end, with a pan head for
driving on the other. They have less bearing area in the
ground than 3-inch wooden pickets, but have the advantage
that they do not fail suddenly in bending as shown by the
wooden picket test.
193. In hard, dry ground, driven under the same conditions
as 3-inch wooden pickets, the ground pins mentioned above
can be considered at least of equal strength.


STRENGTH OF PICKET GROUND PIN HOLDFASTS.
194. Single picket or ground pin holdfasts should only be
used for side or back guys where loading does not exceed 6
to 7 cwt.
195. 2-1 Anchors driven to standard methods can be safely
taken to approximately 20 cwt.
196. Multiple picket or pin anchors are laid out in the
line of pull and “ rack lashed ” or “ backed up ” from the
head of the front pins to ground level of the succeeding pins,
taking care to see that the lashing is at right angles to the
line of the pin.
197. When using ground pins in multiple anchors instead
of pickets, it is usual to arrange the pins on the “ cross,” and
in poor holding ground to set them in front of a suitable log
not less than 8 inches diameter to which the tackle has been
attached.
198. 3-2-1 Anchors , without the addition of the log
mentioned above, can be stressed safely to 40 cwt. and with
the log added to approximately 60 cwt.
199. Place the greatest number of pickets nearest to the
load and the next line at the full length of the picket back
from the first line, the lashing then makes an approximate
right angle with the first line of pickets.
2)0. Commence the lashing with a clove hitch round the
head of the first line of pickets and take the rope to the foot
of the second line aid back to the head of the first line above
the clove hitch round about 3 times, straining it up tightly.
Then bring the end of the rope behind the head of the pickets
and round the rope, straining it up tightly. Wind off the rest
of the rope tightly round the lashing and finish with two half-
hitches.
201. Ground Chain Anchors can sometimes be employed,
but should be used only by experienced men.
HEAVY ANCHORS.
202. Anchors in this class are usually sunk in the ground
and depend for their strength on their depth, the bearing
value of the soil, and other factors.


203. Rock Anchors. —ln sound rock, holes can be drilled
or jumped at right angles to the line of pull, crowbars driven
in and rack lashed in the normal manner. Crowbars used
should have a diameter not less than that of the wire rope
used to take loading stress.
HOLDING POWER OF BURIED ANCHORS.
204. The following results as to the relative holding power
of earths will be found useful:—
Nature of Soil.
Angle of
Repose.
Weight of a
Cubic Foot.
Relative
Holding
Power.
lb.
Compact loam, rammed (dry)
33°
82
1
Hard compact gravel, rammed (dry)
Wet river clay (below subsoil water
38°
118
09
level), rammed
Incoherent river sand, not rammed
15°
83
05
(damp)
33°
114
0-5
205. The holding power in materials of low cohesive value
will be small and in sand is almost negligible at shallow depths.
Back filling should always be compacted as much as possible.
It has been found that —
(a) the holding power, with round and half-round beams
of a diameter equal to the side of the square one, is
almost the same as with the latter;
( b ) when the face of the anchorage is of multiple logs
and is several feet deep, the resistance is not less
than the sum of the resistance of each foot in depth
as given for dry loam in the table below.
The following information, taken from “ Military
Engineering (Part Ilia) —Military Bridging—General
Principles and Materials —General Staff, War Office
1913,” is inserted as a guide to the holding power of
common earth on the assumptions mentioned.
Weight of earth, 90 lb, per cubic foot; angle
repose, 30°; 5 feet standing height when freshlj
cut; factor of safety, 3.


Table of the Holding Power of Dry Loam Earth.
Mean
Inclination of the force drawing the anchorage (in a
direction perpendicular to its face), and corresponding
safe resistance in lbs. per square foot of anchor-face.
race ot
Anchorage
Slopes Vertical over Horizontal.
below
Surface.
1
1
1
1
Vertical.
—
—
—
—
1
2
3
4
ft. in.
I o
70
no
150
160
175
i 6
150
250
320
360
390
2 0
290
410
580
650
700
3 o
600
950
1,300
1,450
1,500
4 o
1,050
i,750
2,200
2,600
2,700
5 o
1,700
2,800
3,600
4,000
4,100
6 0
2,400
3,800
5,100
5,800
6,000
7 o
3,200
5,100
7,000
8,000
8,400
206. After the soil became wet the holding power was
observed to be somewhat lessened.
207. The following example will show the method of use
of this table :
How deep must a log 18 feet by 15 inches be buried
in good ground in order to safely resist a tension of
63,000 lb. ?
208. The effective length of the log in resisting this pull
will be that portion which bears against the face of the
excavation and the length of timber which lies across the
grooves for the cables must be deducted from the total length
of the timber. These grooves will probably be 1 foot 6 inches
wide each, so that the effective length of the log is 15 feet.
209. The area of the face of this log is therefore
15 x - square feet, and the pulling force per square foot
4
63000 x 4 ,1,
is _2 ? 3 360 lb.
15 x 5


210. Assuming that the cables slope at we find on referring
to the table that a mean depth of 5 feet is required, giving a
safe resistance of 3,600 lb.
211. If the slope of the pull was the approximate
resistance per square foot to a tension of this slope could be
obtained from the table by taking the mean between the figures
given under \ and £.
212. This table may also be used to determine the ultimate
resistance of an anchorage. The holding power of eac h
horizontal log should be ascertained separately, and the sum
of these values will represent the total holding power of the
anchorage.
213. When shallow soil overlies disintegrated rock there
may be insufficient holding ground for pickets, or for a sunken
beam holdfast constructed in the usual manner, and the
underlying rock, although too shaly or split to hold crowbars,
may yet be too hard to admit of excavation.
214. In such cases the difficulty may be met by sinking a
long and strong beam as far as practicable—say, its own
depth—in the surface soil, and keeping it from rising by laying
a platform of planks over it and weighting it down with
sandbags, earth, rocks or any available material.
215. In securing a cable to a holdfast, from which it may be
necessary to ease off, at least one complete turn must be taken
before making fast, otherwise when the stress is on it is difficult
to cast off.
216. Many natural anchors may be found during rescue
operations, such as posts, trees, openings in buildings, etc.,
but each must be carefully examined before it is trusted to
take a heavy load. Haldfasts can be made by placing baulks
across openings in masonry; in such cases the stress should
be distributed over a large area by placing planks for the
baulks to bear against. Slings round piers of arches may
be used, but all corners should be protected by wood, or the
rope itself parcelled to prevent chafing or cutting.


HOLDFASTS AND ANCHORS
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 5
Fig. 4
Fig. 6
Fig. 7
Fig. 8
Fig. 9
Fig 10


BEARING VALUES ON VARIOUS MATERIALS.
217. Engineering practice rarely loads foundations higher
than 2,000 lb. per square foot, and in light silty soil may go
as low as 500 lb. or less to the square foot.
218. The vertical settlement of poles, derricks, shear legs,
etc., under working conditions varies considerably. The
values of bearing pressure given in the table below are taken
from the S.A.A. Code for Structural Steel in Building, No
C.A.—1.— 1933
Table A—IV. Allowable Intensity of Bearing on Various
Materials.
Tons per
sq. ft.
Alluvial soil, made ground, very wet sand
i
Soft clay or loam
I
Ordinary clay and dry sand mixed with clay
2
Dry sand and dry clay
3
Hard clay and firm coarse sand
4
Firm coarse sand and gravel..
6
Shale rock
8
Soft sandstone
12
Medium sandstone
20
Hard sandstone
Igneous rock ..
40


CHAPTER 4.
SPAR WORK.
DERRICKS.
219. A standing derrick is a single spar with the butt in
the ground, and the tip held steadily in the air by four ropes
or guys, placed at right angles to each other in plan. These
guys are attached to the derrick near the tip of the spar (but
not less than 3 feet from the tip) by clove hitches, and anchored
to four sets of holdfasts which are set out at right angles to
the butt of the spar, at a distance equal to twice the effective
length of the spar from the base, on even ground.
220. When the ground is not level the position of the
holdfasts should be so chosen that the slope of the guys
remains at 1-2. The effective length of a derrick is the
distance between the centre of the clove hitches, attaching
the guys, and the ground.
221. Derricks are used for lifting and transferring loads
and when erected may be inclined forward (or backward),
the safe limit of the incline is 3-1 but, when first raised,
derricks should not be at a flatter slope than 5-1, as when the
guys stretch the slope will become the limit of safe work,
viz., 3-1.
SLOPE OF GUYS WITH DERRICK
VERTICAL
SAFE SLOPE
OF DERRICK
222. Loads may be transferred laterally (sideways) by
inclining the derrick not more than 6 feet to each side, giving
a lateral movement for the load of about 12 feet; but this


operation must be carried out with caution, especially with
heavy loads, as the guys can easily be overstressed in this
operation.
223. “ Running guys ” (those on which most of the weight
will come during the lifting of a load) are distinguished from
those which are necessary only for the stability of the machine.
The back and fore guys are usually the running guys, especially
the back guy. In the case of heavy lifts, running guys are
better of steel wire rope, as this does not stretch so much
under a stress as cordage of the same strength.
224. For the purpose of lifting a load, the block of a tackle
may be either lashed to the derrick or suspended by a sling
passing through a slot in the head of the derrick; the sling
must be of sufficient strength to carry the load. As a downward
pull can be exerted by only about three men (each man can
pull about 80 lb.), the fall from the tackle is usually passed
through a leading block lashed to the derrick near the ground
to enable a horizontal pull to be taken by a greater number
of men who can each exert about half their weight in this
direction.
225. The block at the top of the derrick must be lashed as
near to the point of attachment of the guys as possible and
the guys should be secured to the head of the derrick as nearly
opposite one another as possible to avoid transverse stresses
in the derrick. For the same reason the leading block of the
tackle should be as near the foot of the spar as possible.
226. To lash a block to a derrick or spar, place the back
of the hook against the spar, a clove hitch is then made on
the spar above the hook and several turns taken round the
hook and spar, finishing off with two half-hitches below the
hook.
DERRICK ERECTED


227. Light derricks miy be erected by hand or with pikes
(pointed poles), a hole about 12 inches deep being dug in
front of the butt. The four guys having been made fast
to the tip and passed to their holdfasts, the tip is lifted as
1 igh as possible by hand and if necessary supported after each
life by a light frame or pikes, which are moved gradually from
the tip towards the centre of the spar. The fore guy is then
hauled on (with runner tackle if necessary) and the back guy
let out, until the derrick is in the desired position. The
side guys will have to be watched and adjusted ; but if the
lines joining the side holdfasts with the butt are exactly at
right angles to the line joining those of the fore and back
guys, the side guys will never need to be shifted.
228. If a derrick is too heavy to be lifted by hand to the
height at which the guys can be effectively used, a “ lever
spar ” must be used.
229. With heavier types of derricks, the butt must always
be anchored with strong footropes attached to the derrick
by means of a clove hitch and to holdfast anchorages driven
into the ground back from the butt of the derrick (towards
the tip) and at an angle of about 45 degrees, to prevent the
butt from sliding forward or kicking in the early stages of
erection. It may be necessary for men to stand to these
anchorages and gradually ease the ropes slightly until the
butt of the derrick has slid forward into the hole provided for
it.
230. The best size of lever is from one-third to one-half
the height of the derrick to be erected. A tall lever makes
an easy lift but is difficult to erect in itself.
231. The lever spar should be laid alongside the derrick
with its butt one-fifth to one-eighth times the length of the
derrick from the butt of the derrick. The distance varies
in accordance with the length of the lever spar that is available.
232. The four guys are then attached to the derrick and
the holdfast anchorages driven in position. The lever spar
must also be provided with side guys to prevent it from falling
sideways and when very long should have a back guy to prevent
it from falling and smashing when thrown out of use.
233. The lever spar must first be raised to an angle of 60
degrees with the horizontal so that any tendency for the lever
to slip on the guy is overcome. If this precaution is not


taken the derrick may get out of control during erection. Two
nails are usually driven in the top of the lever spar for the guy
DERRICK AND LEVER SPAR
READY FOR ERECTION
to run through (and to prevent it from slipping off the head
of the lever), and puddings of spun yarn are sometimes placed
on the guy on each side of the lever spar.
L EVER SPAR RAISED READY TO COMMENCE
LIFTING OF DERRICK
234. As the tip of the derrick is raised, the lever helps by
easing the initial pull required and the stress on the lever
is gradually reduced until it automatically falls out when it
is no longer required (that is, as the derrick rises towards the
vertical position). The back guy is let out and the fore guy
hauled on until the derrick is raised to the required position
when all guys are made fast to the holdfasts.
235. There should be a set of tackle in both back and fore
guys, but as scarcity of tackle will seldom permit this, it is
sufficient to use it in the fore guy (guy on which the pull is
taken). If the hooks of the blocks are connected to the fore
guy by means of bowlines made in the guy, then the tackle
can easily be removed and a rope substituted when the initial
lilt has been completed. The tackle is thus freed for further
use elsewhere.


236. Derricks can be erected in one place and moved or
“ walked ” to another, the guys being carefully adjusted and
the foot moved if necessary with foot tackles and checked
by other foot ropes.
237. For still heavier derricks, a light derrick or pair of
sheers must first be erected near its tip as it lies on the ground.
238. For very long poles, such as a composite mast, the
point of attachment of guys should be at an intermediate point
about two-thirds the length of the pole from the ground, but
with ordinary derricks where the lifting guy can become a
working guy and the lift is comparatively small, this does
not matter and the earlier rules can be adopted.
239. Unless this rule is applied with very long poles they
will be bent with the strain.
SHEERS.
240. Sheers consist of two spars with their butts apart
on the ground and their tips lashed together and held steady-
in the air by a fore and back guy. A load lifted by sheers
can be swung through between the legs by letting out the
fore guy and hauling on the back guy, the fore guy being
let out very cautiously as the sheers become nearly vertical.
The fore guy may sometimes be dispensed with when necessary,
as when loading a boat at a wharf or pier; but in this case
the sheers must always have a distinct lean outwards. Sheers
are simpler to use than standing derricks, only requiring
two holdfasts and guys, and do not require such heavy spars,
but they can move a weight in a straight line only.
241. To make sheers, two spars are laid with their butts
flush together on the ground, but supported on a baulk near
their tips. A clove hitch is then made round one spar about
3 feet from the tip, and the rope is taken loosely six or eight
times round both spars above the clove hitch (towards the tips),
without riding. The lashing is then frapped two turns
and the end of the rope is made fast to the other spar by two
half-hitches just above the lashing, spare rope being got rid
of by afterwards winding it round one of the spars. The
butts of the spars are then opened out till their distance apart
is about one-third the length of the spars from butt to lashing,
and a sling is passed over the fork. A wedge about one-quarter
of the diameter of the tips of the spars should be inserted


temporarily below the lashing and between the spars until
they are lashed. This wedge can then be removed and the
lashing will be at the correct tension when the legs of the sheers
are opened out.
242. With large spars the feet should be separated to nearly
their full extent before lashing, as otherwise the lashing is
tautened too much.
243. If the tackle is heavy it need not be hooked into the
sling at first, but a whip must be secured near the tip of one
of the spars, by which it can be raised. In securing the rope
of the whip to the block of the main tackle for this purpose
it should be bent on the eye and not to the hook. The hook
will then be free to be hooked into the two parts of the sling
when raised, which would not be the case if the whip were
made fast to the block itself. With large sheers, cleats for
getting up to the top should be nailed to one leg. The legs
should be prevented from splaying by tying them together,
preferably by a ledger lashed near their feet, and footings
must be prepared. The guys are made fast near their tips
by clove hitches in such a way that they will draw the spars
together when the stress comes on them (that is, the fore
guy to the rear spar and the back guy to the front spar). With
very heavy spars it is sometimes advisable to put the guys
right round the lashing.
LAYOUT OF SHEERS
244- Sheers are raised in the same way as derricks. Up to
35 feet in length they can be raised by a lever, but heavy
sheers are best raised by means of a derrick between the legs.
245. Sheers can be walked after erection in a similar manner
to derricks, the same precautions being adopted. The limit
of this working slope is also the same 3-1, with the same,
restriction to a slope of 5-1 when first erected.


246. The distance between the butts of the sheer legs
should be one-third of the height of the crutch from the
ground. The process of lifting with a lever spar is the same
RAISING SHEERS WITH LEVER SPAR
as for a derrick, use a spar one-third to one-half of the height
of sheers and place its butt one-fifth to one-eighth the height
of sheers (to crutch) from the line of the butts of the two
sheers (AB).
247. The slope of the guys should be the same as in the
case of a derrick 1-2. If properly erected there should be no
possibility of sheer legs slipping, but if one of the legs slips
the other must be eased out or the head of the sheers will
shift a great deal.
248. Foot ropes should be attached with clove hitches
close to the butts and firmly anchored in the same way as
the foot of a derrick. The foot ropes should be taken in as
lowering is carried out. The size and length of foot ropes
depends on the load; they should not be too long or too
short, for a 2-inch rope double 6 feet is about the length
required.
249. To Erect a Pair of Sheers for Transporting a Weight
across a Gap (see Fig. ). —Lash up both pairs of sheer
legs one on each side of the gap and put in both anchorages.
Erect one pair of sheer legs in the usual way, with its fore
guy attached to the back anchorage of the other pair of sheer
legs.
250. Now attach the lifting block of the tackle on this pair
of sheers to the head of the second pair and pull the second
pair of sheer legs into position with the first pair, attaching
the fore guy to the back anchorage of the first pair.
251. It will be necessary for a man to be raised to release
the forward block of the tackle of the first pair of sheer legs
from the second pair when the latter have been secured, but
this is a very easy operation.


252. The sheer legs are now erected and ready to transport
anything across the gap.
RAISING SHEER LEGS FOR
TRANSPORTING WEIGHT
ACROSS GAP
2 53-|T° dismantle the machine reverse the process.
GYNS.
254. A gyn consists of three spars lashed together at the
tips, the butts forming an equilateral triangle on the ground.
It requires no guys, but can only be used for a vertical lift.
255. To make a gyn, the spars are first laid with butts
flush and then marked at the place where the centre of the
lashing will be. The two outer spars are then left where
they are, rather farther apart than their own
diameter, while the third spar is laid between
them so that the marks on the three spars are
in line, tips resting on a baulk, with its butt
in the opposite direction. Wedges about
three-quarters of the diameter of the tips of
the spars should be inserted temporarily be-
low the lashing (on the two legs) and between
the spars until they are lashed. These wedges
can then be removed and the lashing will be
at the correct tension when the gyn is erected.
It is advisable to place a nail or spike below
C'r' J S/
the lashing on the centre spar to prevent this spar from pushing
through the lashing while the lashing is still loose during
the erection of the gyn.


256. A clove hitch is made on one of the outside spars and
ti e lashing taken over and under the three spars loosely six
o-r eight times, after which a couple of frapping turns are
taken round the lashing between each pair of spars in succession
and finished off with two half-hitches on the other outside spar.
The head is slightly raised and the two outer spars are then
crossed till the butts are at a distance apart equal to about half
the length of the leg, and a ledger or light spar is lashed across
these two spars about 1 foot from the butts.
257. The distance between butts of gyn legs should be
one-half height to crutch of gyn.
258. A gyn may be raised by a lever spar for the initial lift,
the lever being from one-third to one-half the length of the
spars in from a line joining the butts of the two spars when
opened.
259. It may be lifted by means of a derrick erected in a
suitable position to lift the crutch of the spars without
interfering with the gyn when erected.
260. These methods apply only to heavy gyns, lighter
ones can be pushed into position by man-power or the use
of pulleys.
261. To raise the gyn, the head is lifted as far as possible
by hand, and the centre spar or lever brought in towards
the centre of the ledger already fixed, either by a handspike
lashed across it or by tackle. If the other end of the tackle
is attached to the ledger first fixed, this must be allowed for
in determining the necessary diameter of this spar. When
the butts form an equilateral triangle two or more ledgers are
fixed on, so as to prevent the legs from shifting. A sling
can now be passed over the lashing at the head if it has not
been put on during the process of lifting. If the lashing
at the head has a tendency to slip down the legs of the gyn
during its erection, a stout nail driven temporarily into the
leg will prevent its doing so.
262. In erecting a gyn the single leg is inclined to wander
out of line, especially on sloping ground, and if unattended
may upset the gyn. If a short spar is lashed at right angles
across it about 3 feet from the butt before erection, two men
can man this spar during erection and control the line of
travel of this leg as the gyn is being raised by a lever spar.
(See Fig. .)
*27820—C


ERECTION
OF GYN
SWINGING DERRICKS.
263. A swinging derrick consists of a standing derrick
with a swinging arm attached to it near its foot. The tip
of this swinging arm is connected to the upright spar by a
connecting tackle, and the main or lifting tackle is attached
PLAN OF SWINGING DERRICK


to the tip of the swinging arm or jib. The upright arm is
practically the same as a standing derrick, with the exception
that as it will frequently be erected at the edge of a gap or
place where it is not convenient to use a fore guy, a strut or
struts must be used instead. A good method is to use two
struts, each about half as long again as the upright spar, lashing
the three together as a gyn and then erect it so that the standing
derrick is vertical and the two struts at right angles in plan
and situated symmetrically in respect to the edge of the gap.
Two guys can also be used, one over each strut in plan, but
secured to holdfasts at the customary distance, or three guys
can be used, one back guy and two side guys, but set back about
20 degrees from the edge of the gap to allow room for loads
to be landed. It is important that these guys should not
stretch too much, so that the upright spar may remain vertical.
It is better, therefore, to make them of wire rope, and in any
case tackle should be included in them to take up any slack.
The stress in these guys is much greater than that in guys for
a standing derrick to deal with the same weight.
264. The jib is most conveniently formed of two spars,
lashed together at their tip, and separated at their butts to a
distance about equal to the diameter of the upright spar.
They are lashed about 1 foot or 18 inches from their butts
to a stout cross piece, and the end thus formed encircles the
butt of the upright.
265. The jib is supported by a length of chain secured at
its centre by a clove hitch round the upright and prevented
JIB
from descending by a collar of rope, and each end secured
to one of the arms of the jib. The latter is enabled to swing
under the control of two side guys or reins attached to its


tip. The length of the jib may be of the same length as the
upright. The inclination of the jib can be altered by the
connecting tackle, and the radius of its circle of operation
is thus determined. The weight can be lifted or lowered by
the main tackle and the jib swung by the reins. The jib can
only be swung right over the edge of the gap on that side of
the upright on which are the leading blocks of the main and
connecting tackles. If it is necessary to swing both ways,
duplicate leading blocks for the falls of these tackles must
be provided. A single spar boom has a bad swing and should
not be used.
266. It must be noted that the weight must be allowed
to hang vertically from the tip of the jib. If it is hauled
towards the butt of the standing spar, the thrust on the jib
is greatly increased ; and if it is hauled away from this butt,
the stresses in the back guy and connecting tackle are largely
increased. If the weight has to be brought in otherwise than
by swinging to a flank, it should be done by raising the head
of the jib by means of the connecting tackle.
267. To Erect a Swinging Derrick. (See Fig. .) —Lash up
the spars with the heads towards the edge of the bank. The
positions of the guys, struts and anchorages can be conveniently
set out on a piece of cardboard placed with its centre in the
final position of the butt of the centre spar.
SWINGING DERRICK
268. Raise the machine by means of lever spar and blocks
and tackle in the back guy, until the two struts are standing
and the centre pole is hanging from them (by this time the
lever spar will have dropped out). Now attach a rope to


the centre spar and pull its base forward towards its permanent
vertical position (a hole having been dug to receive it in this
position) and at the same time ease the back guy very carefully
to bring the figure forward to its final position when the centre
spar is dropped into its permanent footing. The boom which
has previously been lashed together can now be attached and
the machine is complete.
269. To lower the machine reverse the process.
ERECTING SWINGING DERRICK
LEVER SHEERS.
270. Lever sheers can be used when only a vertical lift is
required and when no fore guy can be used. They are formed
by a crutch supporting a stout spar, which is anchored at the
foot.
271. Two pairs of sheers may be used for transporting a
weight across a gap, as shown below.
272. To Erect the Lever Sheers. (See Fig. .) —Lash a pair
of sheer legs with their tips as near to the edge of the cliff as
circumstances will permit. In some cases the tips can be placed
over the cliff and lashed in that position provided that the sheer
legs are safely balanced on the edge of the cliff. Open out the


ERECTION OF LEVER SHEERS


legs so that the distance between the butts of the sheer legs is
wider than in ordinary cases (say, \ height from base to crutch
and not the usual J). This is necessary in order that the
top of the crutch may be wide enough for the long spar to
rest in. Lash up the sheer legs in the usual way with a ledger
across the legs and anchor the butts of the legs in the usual
way with a ledger across the legs and anchor the butts of the
legs with foot ropes but do not dig holes for them to drop in.
273. Drive in a strong anchorage (3-2-1 holdfast for heavy
spars) in a line from the crutch of the sheers through the centre
of the base and produced so that the back guy will have a slope
of about 1-3.
274. Now raise the sheer legs by means of a lever spar
and block and tackle fastened to the anchorage until they
are leaning forward at a 1-5 slope.
275. Drive in a single or two picket anchorage in front of
the centre of the sheer legs on the edge of the cliff and attach
a “ lazy ” guy from the head of the sheers to this anchorage
for safety in case of the sheers being toppled backwards.
276. Now by detaching the foot ropes and gradually easing
the back guy, and moving the butts of the sheer legs
alternatively forward the sheers may be “ walked ” to
prepared holes on the edge of the cliff, until the sheer legs
are in their proper position but still leaning forward at about
1-5 slope.
277. Note. —Short stout sheer legs from 15 to 18 feet long
are all that are required for this machine.
278. Next pTce the long pole or derrick in such a position
that its butt is in a direct line between the anchorage and the
centre of the crutch of the sheer legs, and its head as near to
the foot of the sheer legs as possible on one side. The long
spar or derrick must be so placed that it will project the
required distance through the crutch of the sheer legs when
erected (i.e., a 40-foot spar that is to project 10 feet through
the crutch will have to be laid out with about 14 feet of
projection beyond the base of the sheer legs as the 4 feet is
lost in the slope of the spar when erected).
279. Now attach a back guy with a block and tackle from
the long pole or derrick to the anchorage, and lash on the
necessary block and tackle to the end of this spar for lifting
purposes, also attach long ropes or reins for pulling its head
sideways.


280. Erect a lever spar in the usual manner on the side
of the derrick away from the sheers and raise the derrick until
it is on a level slightly above the heads of the sheers, by this
time the lever spar will probably have dropped out, and by
means of the reins the derrick can be guided to a position
just above the crutch of the sheers.
281. Just before dropping the derrick on to the crutch of
the sheers, pull the sheers back to the vertical position, as
the derrick will now prevent them from toppling backwards.
Now drop the weight of the derrick on to the crutch of the
sheers and the machine is completed, except for weighting
the butt of the derrick, which can be done by building up a
platform on top of it, so that it can be loaded with stones or
sandbags. It does not take much weight at the long end
to counterbalance a heavy weight at the short end or tip of
the derrick.
282. To take down the machine reverse the procedure.
ERECTING LEVER SHEERS


283. The following tables are attached :
(a) Sizes of timber for standing derricks up to 35 feet
high to carry various loads up to 3 tons in hardwood
and softwood.
(b) Sizes of guys for standing derricks loaded up to
3 tons.
(c) Stresses and necessary anchorages for guys for
standing derricks.
( d ) Working strength of ropes.
( e ) Sizes of timber for sheerlegs up to 35 feet in height
to carry loads up to 3 tons in hardwood and softwood.
(/) Sizes of back guys for sheerlegs.
(, g ) Stresses and necessary anchorages for guys for
sheerlegs.
( h ) Sizes of timber for gyns up to 35 feet high to carry
various loads up to 3 tons.
(;) Sizes of timber for swinging derrick up to 35 feet
high to carry various loads up to 3 tons.
(k) Sizes of guys for swinging derricks loaded up to
3 tons.
Necessary anchorages for guys for swinging derricks.
Weights on connecting tackles for swinging derricks.
(a) Standing Derrick.
Sizes of Timber (Mean Diameter ).
Hardwood. —Crushing strength, 2,000 lb. per square inch.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Length of Derrick.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 feet.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5
5
5t
6*
7
10
6i
7
8
Si
20
7i
8
81
9i
30
7i
si
9i
ioi
40
Si
9i
ioi
ni
50
9
10
11
12
6o
9l
1 of
iif
I2i


Standing Derrick.
Sizes of Timber (Mean Diameter).
Softwood. —Crushing strength, 1,000 lb. per square inch.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Length of Derrick.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 feet.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5
6
6f
7^
8
10
l\
8*
9
9i
20
10J
Hi
30
9 t
11
12
12^
40
ioi
11J
12J
i3i
50
io|
I2i
I3i
i4i
6o
Hi
12 J
14
15
(, b ) Guys for Standing Derrick.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Running Guys.
Other Guys.
Selected.
Unselected.
Wire.
Selected.
Unselected.
Wire.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5
ii
2
i
i
ii
i
10
2
2k
i
It
2
i
20
2k
3k
ii
2
2k
i
30
3
4
i|
2k
3
i
40
3k
5
i|
2b
3k
ii
5o
4
5
2
3
4
i£
6o
4
2
3
5
ik
(c) Standing Derrick.
Weights on Guys and Anchorages.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Running Guys.
Other Guys.
Weight on
Guy.
Anchorage.
Weight on
Guy.
Anchorage.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
5
2-50
1
1-50
1
10
5 00
1
3-00
1
20
io-oo
i-l
600
1
30
15-00
21
900
i-i
40
20-00
21
1200
i-i
50
25-00
3-21
15-00
21
6o
30-00
3-2-1
18-00
2-1
Weight of derrick taken into account.


(d) Safe Working Strength of Ropes.
Circumference.
Selected.
(2C 2 ).
Unselected.
(C 2 ).
Wire.
(9C 2 ).
in.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
i
2
i
9
4‘50
2-25
20-25
2
8oo
400
3600
3
i8-oo
900
81 00
4
32-00
16-00
144-00
5
50-00
25-00
255-00
(e) Sheers.
Sizes of Timber (.Mean Diameter).
Hardwood. —Crushing strength, 2,000 lb. per square inch
A —Leg with leading block ; B—Other legs.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Length of Sheers.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 f eet.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5 A ..
44
5
54
64
B ..
4
44
5
6i
io A
5t
6
64
7
B ..
5i
5l
6i
64
20 A
6i
7?
8
84
B ..
6
7*
8
30 A ..
7i
8
8f
9i
B ..
64
74
8*
8f
40 A
7t
84
9i
IO
B ..
7i
8i
9
94
50 A
8
8|
9t
104
B ..
7i
84
9i
10
60 A
84
9i
io{-
11
B ..
8
8|
9l
104


Sheers.
Sizes of Timber (.Mean Diameter).
Softwood.—Crushing strength, 1,000 lb. per square inch.
A—Leg with leading block ; B —Other legs.
Weight to
Length of Sheers.
be Lifted.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 feet.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5 A ..
4i
5l
6k
7
B ..
4l
5i
61-
6|
io A
6*
7r
7t
8*
B ..
6
6|
7k
8
20 A
7i
8|
9
9f
9f
B ..
7
8
8*
30 A ..
9k
iol
11
B ..
7i
n
9^
ioi
40 A
9i
ioi
Hr
12
B ..
9 2
I Of
Hr
50 A
9i
iof
iif
!2f
B
9
10
11
12
60 A
10
Hi
12%
I3i
B ..
9i
10 i
ni
I2f
(/)Back Guy for Sheers.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Selected
Rope.
Unselected
Rope.
Wire
Rope.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
5
2
3
1
IO
3
4
ii
20
4
2/3*
2
30
5
2/5
2*
40
2/3*
3/5
2*
50
2/5
4/4
3
60
2/5
4/5
3
( g ) Sheers.
Weight to Weight on Weight to Weight on
be Lifted. Back Guy. Anchorage, b e Lifted. Back Guy.
Anchorage.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
cwt.
5
6-50
I
20
2600
3-2-1
IO
13-00
II
50
65-00
6-i-i &log
15
19-50
21
60
78-00
8-11 & log


(h) Gyns.
Sizes of Timber (Mean Diameter).
Hardwood.—Crushing strength, 2,000 lb. per square inch.
A—Leg with leading block ; B —Other legs.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Length of Legs.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 feet.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5 A ..
4
4i
5
B ..
3l
4i
5
6£
io A
4i
5t
6
B ..
4i
4t
5i
6J
20 A
5i
6i
7
7h
B ..
5
5i
6
7
30 A ..
7
8
8i
B ..
Sh
5i
6i
7i
40 A
7
71
H
9
B ..
6
6f
7\
8
50 A
7\
9
B ..
7i
8
60 A
7l
H
9i
10
B ..
7
7i
H
9
Gyns.
Sizes of Timber (Mean Diameter ).
Softwood. —Crushing strength, 1,000 lb. per square inch.
A —Leg with leading block ; B —Other legs.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Length of Legs.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 feet.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5
A ..
4i
5h
6
6£
B ..
4i
4f
5t
6i
10
A ..
5l
6|
7t
7l
B ..
5i
5t
6i
6i
20
A ..
6f
7l
8i
8|
B ..
5i
6i
6|
71
30
A ..
7\
8i
9i
9i
B ..
6|
7t
7i
8f
40
A ..
8i
9i
10
io|
B ..
7i
8i
9
9t
50
A ..
8|
9i
ioi
Hi
B ..
8
8f
9i
ioi
6o
A ..
9
10
11
Hi
B ..
8i
9i
10
I of


(t) Swinging Derrick.
Sizes of Timber {Mean Diameter).
Hardwood. —Crushing strength, 2,000 lb. per square inch.
A—Upright spar ; B—Swinging arm (single spar); C —Swinging arm
(two spars) ; D—Struts.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Length of Upright Spar and Swinging Arm.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 feet-
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5 A ..
5*
6
61
7i
B ..
4 1
5l
6
61
C ..
4
4i
5
5i
D ..
4i
5
5i
6
io A
6!
7i
8
81
B ..
6
6f
7i
8
C ..
4r
Si
6
61
D ..
5s
6
61
7i
15 A ..
7l
7 i
81
9l
B ..
61
7 1
71
81
C .,
Si
6
61
7!
D ..
6
6i
7l
71
20 A
3
7 i
si
9l
iol
B ..
7
7 1
81
9i
C ..
6
61
7l
8
D ..
61
7i
8
81
30 A ..
Si
9s
10!
Hi
B ..
7i
Si
9i
iol
C ..
6}
7i
71
81
D ..
7i
7i
81
9i
40 A
9i
ioi
ill
i2i
B ..
81
9i
10
iof
C ..
7
7i
81
91
D ..
7i
81
91
iol
50 A
9f
10J
ill
I2f
B ..
Si
9l
iol
Hi
C ..
7l
81
9
91
D ..
8
9
10
11
60 A
ioi
Hi
12I
I3i
B ..
9l
iol
ni
I2i
C ..
7l
81
9l
iol
D ..
Si
9l
iol
Hi


(/) Swinging Derrick.
Sizes of Timber (Mean Diameter).
Softwood.—Crushing strength, i,ooo lb. per square inch.
A —Upright spar ; B —Swinging arm (single spar); C —Swinging arm
(two spars); D —Struts.
Weight to
be Lifted.
Length of Upright Spar and Swinging Arm.
20 feet.
25 feet.
30 feet.
35 feet.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
in.
5 A ..
6*
7i
8
8i
B ..
6
6i
7i
7i
C ..
5
5k
6
6i
D ..
5k
6
6f
7i
io A
8
8|
9k
ioi
B ..
7i
8
8i
9i
C ..
6
6i
7k
7i
D ..
6}
7k
8
8i
20 A
9k
10J
ni
I2i
B ..
8jr
9i
10
ioi
C ..
61
7k
8i
8i
D ..
71
u
9k
ioi
30 A ..
ioi
II k
12i
I3i
B ..
9k
ioi
ni
I2i
C ..
7k
8 k
9k
10
D ..
8 k
9k
ioi
ni
40 A
Hi
I2|-
13 i
I4i
B ..
10
11
12
13
C ..
8i
9i
10
ioi
D ..
9i
ioi
ni
I2i
50 A ..
ni
i3i
I4i
I5i
B ..
ioi
nf
I2f
I3i
C ..
8|
9k
ioi
11 k
D ..
9i
11
II|
I2f
60 A
12J
14
15
i6i
B ..
11
i2i
i3i
I4i
C ..
9i
ioi
ni
12
D ..
ioi
Hi
12J
I3i


(k) Swinging Derrick.
Weight
to be
Lifted.
Weight
Size of Guys.
Anchor-
ages for
Guys.
Weight on
Connecting
Tackle.
on
Guys.
Unselected.
Selected.
Wire.
cwt.
cwt.
in.
in.
in.
cwt.
5
7-50
3
2
1
i-i
8-5
IO
1500
4
3
ii
21
17-0
20
3000
2-4
4
2
3-2-1
34-o
30
45-00
2-5
5
2i
2—3-2-1
& log.
5i-o
40
6000
3-5
2-4
3
2-3-2-I
& log.
68-0
50
75-00
3-5
2-5
3
2-3-2-I
& log.
85-0
69
90-00
4-5
2-5
3i
2-1-I
2-3-2-1
& log.
102-0


CHAPTER 5.
RESCUE FROM BUILDINGS.
LADDERS.
284. A 25 to 35 foot extension ladder is the most suitable
for rescue parties to carry with their equipment. These
ladders can be made suitable for use with the sliding stretcher,
as follows :
(a) The iron at the top of the lower section is bent down
inside the runners of the upper section to prevent it
from obstructing the inside runners of the ladder
stretcher as it passes over the joint.
(b) The runners of the upper section are tapered for
about 3 feet so that the ladder stretcher will run
easily on to the lower section and there will be no
sudden bump tending to throw the patient and
stretcher off the ladder.
(c) The trip must be placed inside the runners so that
it does not project and obstruct the stretcher in its
descent. (See Fig. g.)
ERECTING A LADDER.
285. To erect a ladder against a wall, lay it on the ground
at right angles to the base of the wall with its foot against
the wall and the upper or climbing side downwards. If
the ladder is not extended, one man can lift it to shoulder
height and (in the case of a light ladder) raise it by walking
towards the wall and raising it by grasping the rungs in his
hands as he proceeds, and gradually working down the rungs
hand by hand towards the foot. The base of the wall thus
becomes a fulcrum and he is really raising the ladder by the
principles of leverage. In the case of a heavy extension ladder
it will be easier for two men, one on each side of the ladder,
to raise it, grasping the rungs with the inside hand and the
runners with the outside hand and working together towards
the base. A third man can help for the heavier part of the
lift by following the other two, if necessary.
286. When the ladder has been raised to the vertical position
the foot is moved out to the required distance for climbing.
To lower the ladder reverse the procedure.


LADDER ST RETCHER
ALTERATIONS NECESSARY
ON EXTENSION LADDER
FOR USE WITH LADDER
STRETCHER


ERECTING LADDER


RESCUING COLLAPSED PATIENT


HALVING A LADDER.
287. It is sometimes necessary to make use of the two
portions of an extension ladder separately, and for this purpose
it must be halved. Halving involves the untying of the
hauling rope, releasing of the trip, and disconnecting the
upper portion of the ladder from the lower section. This
should be practised by all parties who have extension ladders,
to make the men familiar with the operation.
RESCUE METHODS.
288. A patient who can sit up but has to be carried for
some distance may be carried by the “ three handed ” and four
handed seat methods shown in first aid manuals, but a method
that is easier still where the patient is heavy and the distance
long, or the path difficult, is to form a grommet with a piece
of rope or cord. The grommet is formed by making about
METHODS OF GARRYING
PATIENTS
three loops in a piece of rope one on top of the other, and
passing the end through the centre of the ring thus formed
and winding it round and round the ring. The grommet
should be from 8 to io inches in diameter. Two men then
take hold of the grommet, grasping it one with the right hand


and the other with the left, both hands back up. The patient
is then sat in the seat formed by the grommet, and places
his arms round the shoulders of the carriers. This is a very
easy method of carrying a patient, but he must be capable
of sitting up and holding on to his carriers. (See Fig. g.)
LADDER STRETCHER RESCUE. (See Fig. fi )
289. The ladder stretcher is shown in Fig. g. It can be used
as an auxiliary ladder or as a sliding stretcher. As ladders
differ in width, the width of the stretcher must be made to fit
the particular ladder upon which it is to be used. It should
LADDER STRETCHER RESCUE
be fitted with rope slings of i|-inch manila rope coming from
each end, and these slings should be so arranged that they
do not foul the runners of the stretcher on the underside.
A board can also be arranged to fit into the foot end of the
stretcher to take the weight of the patient.
290. The patient is strapped into the stretcher by means
of the webbing straps on the side, the straps being altered
to suit the size of the patient and the nature of his injuries.


FIREMANS LIFT


291. A rope line is then attached to the upper sling of the
stretcher by means of a double sheet bend or bowline, and the
stretcher is slid down the ladder and taken off by men waiting
at the foot of the ladder.
292. As the type of patient that will be rescued in this
manner can be moved, he must then be transferred to the
First Aid Party on an ordinary stretcher and the ladder stretcher
retained for further rescues, if necessary.
293. In any position where the ladder has to be rather
vertical a second rope line may be attached to the sling at the
foot of the ladder in a similar manner to the one at the top,
and thrown down to the men on the ground so that they can
guide it safely over the joint in the ladder. This is a precaution
that would seldom be necessary.
294. This rescue may also be made with an ordinary
stretcher, but it will be much more uncomfortable for the
patient and will have to be done more slowly, with a man
walking down the ladder in front of the stretcher to guide it,
as it has no runners to keep it safely on the ladder.
FIREMAN’S LIFT. (See Fig. g.)
295. A casualty who has collapsed may be carried up and
down a ladder by means of the Firemen’s Lift, but this is
not easy to do, especially if the patient is heavy, and it requires
a considerable amount of practice on the part of the rescuers.
296. Members should practise this exercise by going a
few feet up and down the ladder until they get used to the
balance and method of climbing.
HORIZONTAL RESCUE. (See Fig. g.)
297. If a person’s injuries will not permit him to be lowered
vertically (as in the case of a broken back or pelvis) and a jib
or pole can be firmly lashed, well above the window or opening
from which he is to be taken, with a block and tackle lashed to
its end, he can be lowered in the horizontal position.
298. It is well to use a double and single block tackle for
this rescue, the men on the ground controlling the fall.


HORIZONTAL RESCUE
52


299- When the jib has been firmly secured by lashings
the single block is lowered and drawn in to the window and
the two slings attached to the hook, in which case there will
be no need to mouse the hook. Should the rope slings on
the stretcher be too short to permit this, they must be passed
through an independent rope sling, which is passed over
the hook, and the hook must be moused.
300. Guide-ropes must be attached to both ends of the
stretcher and thrown to the men on the ground, so that they
can guide the stretcher away from parapets and obstructions
on the building as it descends.
301. In this case the patient’s life may be endangered by
moving him, so the sliding stretchers should be fitted with
a light wooden or steel frame or canvas sheet, which can be
fastened to stretcher for the descent and removed bodily
by the First Aid Party, so that the stretcher is not lost for
further rescues. Each party should have a number of these
frames ready for an emergency.
302. An endeavour should be made to balance the stretcher
so that it will remain horizontal; in most cases, if the patient
is strapped nearer to the foot than the head of the stretcher,
a balance will be obtained. This can be tried out in practice.
VERTICAL RESCUE. (See Fig. |.)
303. In certain positions where space is restricted, as down
a lift-well, a patient may have to be lowered vertically without
a ladder.
304. If it is possible to erect a jib securely, well above the
position from w T hich the stretcher is to be lowered, with a
tackle lashed to its end, then a double and single block tackle
should be used, the double block being lashed to the jib and
the single block lowered to the stretcher. The upper or
head sling of the stretcher is then placed over the hook of
the block, tvhich must be firmly moused, and a rope attached
to the foot-sling of the stretcher and thrown to the men below,
so that they can guide it away from projections and dangerous
places. A double sheet bend or bowline can be used for this
connexion. The patient is then lowered to the men below.
305. If it is impossible to erect the jib and block and tackle,
the rope may be attached to the head sling by means of a
double sheet bend or bowline and a round turn taken round
some solid object in the building, and the stretcher lowered
steadily by easing this round turn.


VERTICAL RESCUS


BOATSWAIN’S CHAIR.
306. Patients who are merely shocked or nervous may
be lowered in a boatswain’s chair, which is shown in Fig. £.
The hook of a double block of a tackle is lashed to a jib or
passed through the sling placed on a ladder well above the
position from which the patient is to descend. The sling
BOATSWAINS CHAIR
is passed round the outside of the runners, behind the ladder,
and the two ends are dropped down above and behind the
nearest rung and the hook passed through both loops of the
sling and firmly moused. The single block is then hooked
through the ropes on the boatswain’s chair and firmly moused.


Guide-ropes are attached to the bottom of the chair and
thrown to the men below, so that the patient may be held
under control and guided away from projections and building.
307. If a snatch block only is used for this operation the
connection will be as shown in Fig. gg.
CHAIR KNOT
CHAIR KNOT.
308. A patient who is uninjured or slightly injured can
be lowered by means of a chair knot, which is shown in
Fig. gg.


309. The connexions of blocks and tackle to jib or ladder
are the same as in the previous rescue, and the lower rope
of the chair knot is carried up and tied with a bowline in the
centre of a line to the hook of the single block, which is moused.
The upper rope of the chair knot is thrown down to the men
below so that the patient may be guided away from the wall
projections in his descent. By using the ropes as described
the knot is drawn together and secured.
LIFE LINE RESCUE (see Fig. Jg).
310. This is used where there is a crater outside the
building from which the rescue has to be made and a ladder
cannot be erected.
311. The life line should be of at least 2|-inch manila rope
in good order, and should be firmly attached to some solid
portion of the building, above the patient, by whatever knot
is suitable to the occasion. An anchorage of at least three
pickets (to allow for straining of the line) is driven into the
ground below and properly lashed {see Holdfasts).
312. A single-pulley block is then passed over the life line
so that the line runs through the sheave with the hook down.
The stretcher is attached to the hook of the block as shown in
Fig. H§ and a line attached to the stretcher and thrown up to
the window from which the rescue is to be made.
313. The life line is tightened by tying a “ bowline in the
centre of a line ” at a convenient place, and passing the end
of the line round the anchorage and through the two loops of
the bowline and hauling as taut as possible with a number of
men, before making fast to the anchorage.
314. The stretcher is now hauled up the line to the place
where the rescue is to be carried out. The patient is strapped
on to the stretcher which is connected to the hook as before
and lowered down the life line by means of a long rope attached
to the head of the stretcher and controlled by the men in the
building.
315. The men on the ground receive the patient when he
comes down.


LIFE LINE RESCUE
GENERAL.
316. In all the above types of rescue, common sense comes
into play. There must, of course, be sufficient rope to reach
the ground for each type of line or tackle. Where tackles
and jibs cannot be used it may be possible to take a round
turn round some solid article or spar. Do not take a round
turn round a square article or brick, or something that will
•


cut the rope. If this has to be done, put in some padding to
save the rope. If one type of knot cannot be used, tie the
next best. In lashing be sure that a jib is secure, and make
the projecting end as short as possible, and the tail as long
as possible to balance leverage. See that it bears on something
solid at the edge of the building and that it is lashed to
something that will not give.
317. Secure a life line to some portion of the building
that will not give. See that the foot of the ladder is secure,
and if the head is unsteady, lash it to something inside the
window, especially if “ amateurs ” may have to climb down
it. Never secure a sling to the rung of a ladder without
passing it round the runners, as the rung may break if it is
a faulty one. Be sure that all knots tied to stretcher slings
and hooks are firm and secure, and that all mousings are
properly put on. Always leave sufficient “ tail ” on a knot
to be sure that it cannot slip out, and above all be sure that
ropes and lines are sound before they are used.
LOWERING A MAN BY A CHAIR KNOT WITHOUT TACKLE.
(See Fig. gg.)
318. One man ties a chair knot and steps into it, another
man takes the end of the rope in his hands and passes it around
a floor joist, near the inside of the wall. The first man now
climbs out of the window and the second man lowers him,
paying the rope out gently by hand. The second man has
two points of control, under the joist and over the window
sill, and so can control the first man’s descent easily.
SELF LOWERING. (See Fig. gj.)
319. When the first man has been lowered to the ground,
the second man can haul up the rope and tie himself in a
chair knot, then pass the rope round some substantial article
such as a bed dragged to the window, or some heavy piece
of furniture, or a beam that has been exposed by air raid
damage. He then holds the slack of the rope in his hand
and climbs out of the window, taking the slack with him,
and gripping this firmly lowers himself down by paying out
the slack in his hands. He can use his feet to “ walk ” down
the wall, if he sits back in the chair knot. It is essential that
there shall be enough rope to reach from the ground to the
place of rescue and back again to the ground, otherwise the
man will not be able to reach the ground.


LOWERING MAN IN CHAIR KNOT.
*27820 —2}


SCALING LADDERS.
320. There are several types of scaling ladders of which
(a) is the sectional ladder and (b) is the horned ladder.
321. These ladders should only be used in a vertical
direction owing to the lightness of their construction.
SELF LOWERING
ROPE LADDERS.
322. A rope ladder is a very convenient item of equipment
for climbing down from a height to some inaccessible position.
323. This type of ladder can easily be made up with two
ii-inch ropes and a number of wooden slats, by tying the
ropes on to the slats by means of lever hitches or marlin spike
hitches which are “ knitted ” on to the ends of the slats.


SCALING LADDERS


324. These can be made still more secure by drilling holes
through the outside of the slats and lashing them to the hitches
with twine.
325. A rope ladder that hangs near a wall should be climbed
sideways, that is, with one foot inside the ladder and one
foot on the outside to keep it away from the wall. If it is
clear of any obstruction it may be climbed in the ordinary
way. It will swing, but the climber should remember that
if he will allow himself to swing with the ladder, and hang
on, he will eventually arrive at his destination.
FIREMAN’S ESCAPE KNOT.
326. A fireman’s escape knot can be made by tying a series
of thumb knots in a rope, which makes it easier to climb
down.
327. To form these knots, make a series of underhand
turns in the rope, forming rings about 4 inches in diameter,
and then pull one end of the rope through the rings. A
series of thumb knots at convenient distances apart to facilitate
climbing down the rope will be obtained, and if one end is
attached to some suitable object in a building the descent can
be made.
GUYED STANDARD LADDER.
328. A standard ladder may be erected with four guys
attached to its head and to anchorages at right angles to each
other— (or better 2j-inch) manila ropes will do for
this purpose. If a round turn is taken round each anchorage
and there is plenty of length to the guys it can be extended
by paying out the guys evenly as it goes up. If the ladder
has spikes into the ground it will be secure, but otherwise
its feet will need to be anchored.
329. In this form it can be used to lift a patient over a
wall by means of a sling, and blocks and tackle, with a stretcher,
chair knot, or boatswain’s chair attached.
330. It can also be erected a short distance from a wall
if there is a crater just outside the wall, and planks can be
placed across from one of the rungs of the ladder to the wall
to bridge across the crater.


SHEER LEGS WITH BALANCED
JIB
DETAILS OF BALANCED JIB


331- In an emergency, when a ladder of sound construction
falls two or three feet short of a desired window, two men
can mount the ladder one behind the other; near the top
the upper man places his feet on the shoulders of the lower
man who continues to ascend slowly with the first man on
his shoulders, until he can reach the sill easily and climb
through the window. Descending is done by reversing the
process.
332. When a ladder is laid at a smaller slope to the
horizontal than 60 degrees, its carrying capacity decreases
rapidly.
SHEER LEGS WITH BALANCED JIB.
333. This apparatus is shown in Fig. . It is very
convenient for transporting casualties over obstacles and,
where circumstances permit, for raising or lowering from a
height.
JIB -FOR RESCUE PURPOSES.
334. A jib is a strong, reliable pole, one end projecting
over or from a support sufficiently to allow of hoisting or
lowering on the purchase or tackle attached to it, the other
end tailed down or otherwise securely fastened.
335. Under varying conditions the actual support and
arrangement of the jib will vary, but the principles of simple
mechanics and the rules of commonsense will apply to all
methods. A jib may be projected over a sill or coping,
supported on knife rests or short trestles at a window opening,
or slung from sheer legs, but in all cases the conditions of
safety must be observed, not only of the jib itself, but the
ground, walls, floors or roof from which the apparatus derives
its support.
336. The tail should be lashed down according to facilities
available. If necessary, floor boards should be ripped up to
allow of lashing to joists. On concrete floors, place a timber
over the tail and strut down either side from the concrete
ceiling above. Wedge and brace to hold the whole in
position; elsewhere it may be lashed to a picket. The jib
should never be allowed to rock. The butt end only should
be used for the tackle and, where the strength of the pole
is in doubt, two poles should be lashed together, end to butt.


Natural support should be suspected, particularly where
buildings have been damaged. Sound copings and sills do
not mean that there is necessarily a sound wall underneath.
337. The projection of the butt over or from the support
should be the minimum required, as every inch more increases
the leverage on the projecting arm taking the weight.
338. Whenever possible, the jib should be erected on the
floor or stage above the one from which the rescue has to
be made. This reduces the crowding and gives better
conditions for the successful raising or lowering of the load
and controlled manipulation in transit.
SIGN DRILL.
339. The purpose of this drill is to enable personnel to
communicate with each other at a distance or when speech
is impracticable by reason of the wearing of respirators.
340. In order to develop efficiency in war-time, it should
be perfected by practice in peace-time.
341. The following signs are used by the London County
Council and are recommended for use in this State, where
applicable :
Acetylene cutting plant .. Action of lighting gas and cutting with
burner.
Acetylene flare (small) .. Action of striking match and putting to gas.
Acetylene flare (large) .. Action of turning on gas, strike and
apply match and take hand quickly
away.
Axe (heavy) .. .. Action of using big axe (as felling tree).
Axe (small) .. .. Action of “ draw from belt and chop.”
Basket .. .. .. Action of throwing weight on shoulder
and carrying.
Brace and bit .. .. Action of using brace.
Carpenter’s stool .. .. Action of sitting.
Claw hammer .. .. For all hammers place one fist on top
of the other, thumbs uppermost, and
for claw add action of levering out nail.
Club hammer (chisels would Action of fists as above.
come with hammer).
Corrugated iron .. .. Make waves with hand in horizontal
position (imitating waves of material).
Cross-cut saw .. .. Left leg forward, and action of using saw.
Crow-bar .. .. .. Action, push in and prise up.
Dead shore .. .. Hands to form outline of shore (letter
“ T ”).
Deals (timbers) .. .. Touch head, full hand—s dimensions,
hold up hand for 5 plus downward
stroke x horizontal strokes. Touch
foot for number of feet.


Dog and bitches .. .. Pat back of hand (as head of dog).
Fire devil or brazier .. Action of warming hands at fire.
Flying shore .. .. Flap arms and hands as wings,
Hack saw .. .. .. Action of sawing with both hands on saw.
Hand saw .. .. .. Action of sawing.
Hurricane lamp .. .. Touch eyes, wave hand horizontally for
number.
Iron shod levers .. .. Action push in and push down.
Jacks .. .. .. Action of pumping jack.
Ladder .. .. .. Action of ascending ladder (hands and
feet).
Lashing lines .. .. With one hand round the other.
Leader .. .. .. To call leader place right hand on left
arm.
Lifting tackle, Yale .. Action of turning key in door and working
lever.
Mallet and chisel .. .. Touch head and place fists together as
hammer.
Nails .. .. .. Tap finger nails together.
Pick-axe . . . . .. Action of picking up road.
Pincers and pliers .. Open and shut hand as gripping pincers.
Pipe wrench .. .. Action of holding pipe with left hand and
working wrench with right.
Raking shore .. .. Hands to form shore.
Rope tackle.. .. .. Action of pulling rope.
Sheave blocks .. .. 3 sheaves —three waves of hand vertically.
2 sheaves—two waves of hand hori-
zontally.
i sheave —one wave of hand vertically.
Scaffolder’s hammer .. Action of making figure 8 and pulling
cord tight.
Screw driver .. .. Action of turning screw.
Shear legs .. .. .. Cross hands over head.
Shovel .. .. .. Action of using shovel and throwing
earth over shoulder.
6-foot sling chain .. .. Point to watch chain.
Sledge hammer .. .. Fists together as before, and swing sledge.
Stretcher .. .. .. Hands and legs outstretched.
Tarpaulin .. .. .. Action of folding up sheet over hand.
2-foot rule .. .. .. Stand with feet together and point to
same.
Warden .. .. .. Slide one hand along the other, palms
together.
Wheelbarrow .. .. Action of picking up handles and walking.
Wire bonds.. .. .. Form figure 8 with hand.
Wrecking bar .. .. Push in and push down as for iron shod
lever, but lever at higher level.
342. Besides these signs, the use of other aids, such as a
board attached to a cord, so that it can be rapidly raised or
lowered with instructions written upon it, should be developed.


CHAPTER 6.
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS.
FIRST DUTY OF LEADER.
343. The first duty of the Leader is to ascertain if any
persons are trapped in the building, and demolition must
not be commenced until rescue operations have been
completed unless such is imperative to enable rescue to be
carried out, and then only so much as is absolutely necessary
for this purpose, adequate steps being taken to support the
dangerous portions until the victims are released.
344. The principles involved in demolition work in normal
times can well be applied to buildings which have suffered
bomb damage or been gutted by fire.
345. The unstable portions and debris which may constitute
a menace to public safety, or obstruction to street traffic, must
be shored up or entirely removed, and damaged utility mains
placed under safe control.
346. The Rescue and Demolition Squads, therefore, should
know the methods normally used and how to apply them to
the particular problems met in war-time.
347. The control centre should be notified through the
appropriate officer where electrical, water, and gas service
mains are affected.
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS.
348. The Leader must then make a survey to find out
the extent of the damage.
349. The following points should be determined—
(a) if the damaged part is leaning into the building or
towards the street;
( b ) if it is likely to fall into the street or on to some
undamaged building;
(c) if it is possible that a high wind or vibrations will
affect its stability ;


(d) if it is possible to defer work to a more favourable
time. This especially applies to night work., when
the use of artificial light, except under adequate
screening, will be prohibited, and when it will not
be feasible to make a complete survey;
(e) if it is likely that further bombing near the already
damaged building will cause further collapse.
An explosion below the ground, even at some
distance, may transmit waves similar to an earthquake
in effect, tending to cause final collapse of the
building.
350. The method of procedure must be considered, giving
regard to the safety of the squad personnel. Undue haste
should be avoided.
351. A little forethought may save lives, hours of
unnecessary work, and help reduce the risks of injury and
failure.
352. It must be determined if it is safe to commence work
at once or if parts of the ruins require shoring.
353. The supporting or simple shoring of the structure
may enable work of demolition to start. Lives should not
be endangered.
METHODS OF DEMOLITION.
354. The methods used in the demolition of buildings
are—
(a) by mechanical means ;
(b) by the use of explosives.
Demolition by Mechanical Means.
355. Demolition by mechanical means should, if practicable,
be employed, and should be carefully planned and supervised.
The use of simple gear and equipment, such as trucks and
tractors, will considerably facilitate operations.
356. It may be found on inspection that, despite
appearances, leaning walls may not be as unstable as at first
presumed. If the wall has cross walls, running back at right
angles from it at frequent intervals, such as for internal rooms,
it may be necessary to demolish only a portion for the time
being.


357- Where a wall to be demolished stands against a wall
of another occupancy, it is often advisable to reduce the wall
piecemeal. In buildings of arched construction the centres
of the arches should be suitably supported before commencing
demolition.
358. If it becomes necessary to cut away the joists of a
floor before demolishing other portions, it is essential that
the saw cuts be made so that the cut section will fall away.
A rope passed around the joist to be cut and attached to its
neighbour will permit of the joist being lowered harmlessly
and undamaged.
359. Work on multi-storied and high structures requires
the experience of expert wrecking gangs, and their services
should be obtained to undertake this work. Technical
knowledge is essential also in the cases of steel-framed and
reinforced concrete buildings. In these types light panel
walls of brick, terra-cotta, etc., generally comprise the in-filling
between the beam and column structural members. These
“ curtain ” walls probably would be the only portions
damaged from say, a “ near-miss,” and the work to be done
would be chiefly removal of debris. In the case of a direct
hit a beam or column, or a group of such, may be destroyed,
and the services of a structural engineer should be obtained
to advise and direct operations. Squads are advised to tom
up such damaged portions, as far as possible, to prevent
collapse, pending expert guidance.
360. In demolition work care should be taken to see that
gear is not buried or damaged.
Demolition by Explosives.
361. Contents :
(A) Types and Pro perties of Common Explosive
available for Demolition Work.
(B) Practice and Instructions.
(C) Calculation of Charges.
(D) Notes on Demolition carried out in a large manu-
facturing town after a recent air raid. (Extract
from Royal Engineers' Journal —June, 1941.)


tA TYPES AND PROPERTIES OF COMMON EXPLOSIVES
USED IN DEMOLITIONS.
362. General. —The demolition of buildings by means of
explosives should only be resorted to in cases where demolition
by mechanical means is impracticable.
363. A commercial explosive may be defined as a solid or
liquid substance or mixture of substances which is liable,
on the application of heat or a blow to a small portion of the
mass, to be converted in a very short interval of time into
other more stable substances largely or entirely gaseous.
364. As the result of the very fast evolution of gas, pressure
is exerted on surrounding bodies and if the force exerted is
of sufficient magnitude, they are cracked, shattered or sheared.
The manufacture and use of explosives is now very strictly
controlled by law, and, if instructions are closely followed, the
handling and use of explosives is not dangerous. If, however,
those handling explosives become careless through familiarity
or negligence, then a real danger will arise. The explosives
in common use are solids requiring heat or a shock to fire
them and the chemical change that takes place is propagated
either by deflagration or detonation.
365. The effect of an explosion will depend largely on the
quantity of gas evolved, its temperature, pressure and the
rate of evolution, i.e ., its velocity of detonation.
366. Explosives suitable for demolition work may be
classified as —
(i) commercial explosives ;
(ii) military explosives.
367. The use of certain commercial explosives has been
discontinued at least for the duration of the war for economical
reasons and owing to considerations affecting supplies of
basic ingredients. These include the chlorate explosives
such as Rendrock, Rack-a-rock, Nihilite and Lethyte.
(i) Commercial Explosives.
368. Gunpowder. —Gunpowder is defined by State laws as
“ exclusively consisting of Potassium Nitrate, Sulphur and
Charcoal.” For blasting purposes it is supplied in
comparatively large-sized grains, and is packed in cases each
containing 50 lb.


369. Blasting Powder or N.S. (i.e., Nitrate of Soda )
Gunpowder). —The following is a list of commercial high
explosives which normally are available in Australia :
G. * Blasting Gelatine.
G. * Gelatine Dynamite, N.S. or P.N.
G. .. Gelignite, 60 per cent., 50 per cent.,
40 per cent., N.S. or P.N.
G. A.N. Gelatine Dynamite, “ 75.”
G. A.N. Gelignite, “60,” “50,” “40.”
G. ..
G. P. Saxonite.
G. ..
P. A 2 Monobel.
Quarry Monobel.
Liquid Dynamite, 40 per cent., 25
per cent.
A.N. Lig. Dynamite, “40,” “25.”
Ajax.
Thames Powder.
Dynob :1 No. 2.
* Denotes that the manufacture of these explosives has been
discontinued for the duration of the war.
Not being made. New explosives are Ajax, Thames Powder,
Dynobel No. 2.
P. Denotes that these are “ Permitted Explosives ” and their particular
use is in gassy coal mines since they will not ignite mine gas when used
as prescribed.
G. Denotes that the explosive is gelatinous in appearance. Other
explosives named are powders.
N.S. means nitrate of soda or sodium nitrate.
P.N. means potassium nitrate or nitrate of potassium.
A.N* means ammonium nitrate.
370. The designation 60 per cent., 50 per cent., etc., refers
to the percentage of Nitro-glycerine by weight in the explosive.
371. The symbol “ 60,” “ 50,” etc., after A.N. explosives
indicates that the explosive has the equivalent strength, in
confined charges, of explosives of the corresponding (60 per
■cent., 50 per cent., etc.) nitro-glycerine content. A number
of commercial explosives is made for use in cold climates.
The word “ Polar ” is added to the usual name, Polar
A.N. Gelignite “ 50,” etc. Physical characteristics are not
varied but they possess the added advantage of freezing only
at a much lower temperature.


372. Properties of the above explosives are tabulated for
reference in Table (A). ( See Paragraph 394.)
373. Commercial explosives have a much lower velocity
of detonation than guncotton and therefore two to three
times the quantities are required for cutting charges. It is
essential that the paper coverings be removed from the plugs,
the explosive moulded into one mass and secured tightly
against the metal or object to be cut.
374. In addition either guncotton primers should be used
to initiate the detonation, or “ Cordtex ” detonating fuse
liberally dispersed through the plastic mass of explosive.
By this means the velocity of detonation will be greatly
increased.
(ii) Military Explosives.
375. The use of military explosives for use by N.E.S.
heavy demolition squads is subject to the permission of the
Military Authorities.
376. A military field engineering pamphlet—“ Demolition
with Australian-made commercial explosives ” is being prepared
by the Military and State and Commercial Authorities. This
publication will be supplementary to information available
in the Military Engineering (Vol. 4) Demolitions, 1936.
Chapter VI of R.E. pocket-book and Demolitions, Field
Engineering Pamphlet No. 7, 1940.
377. It presents a description of commercial explosives
and their accessories available in Australia, also their application
to military purposes.
Commercial Fuses and Detonators.
COMMERCIAL SAFETY FUSE.
378. Commercial safety fuse consists of a core of gunpowder
enclosed by threads to form “ raw fuse.” Water-proofing
material covers the “ raw fuse ” and an outer covering of
either threads or tape, suitably coloured, completes the safety
fuse. All safety fuse burns at a rate of 80-100 seconds per
yard. To ensure that this uniform rate of burning remains
constant care should be taken that the fuse is not exposed to
extremes of temperature, and is not subjected to excessive
pressure, bending or twisting.
379. Commercial safety fuse is sold under descriptive
trade names of “ Blue Sump,” “ White Sump,” “ Double
Tape,” etc. It is obtainable in coils of 24 feet, hand reels
of 360 feet and large reels of 1,800 feet.


COMMERCIAL DETONATORS.
380. Commercial detonators are of two kinds :
(a) Ordinary.
( b ) Electric.
381. Electric detonators will be described at a later stage.
The former are now made in Australia, and consist of an
aluminium tube containing a charge of tetryl with a primer
of lead styphnate, lead azide and aluminium. The usual
size known as a No. 6 measures if inches long with an internal
diameter of -23 inch.
METHODS OF FIRING CHARGES.
382. There are three methods for firing charges of
commercial explosives, viz.:—
(a) With detonator and safety fuse.
( b ) With electric detonator.
(c) With detonating fuse.
383. (a) Firing with Detonators and Safety Fuse. —This
method is fully described in Military Engineering (Vol. IV),
pp. 31 and 32, and Demolitions F.E. Pamphlet No. 7, p. 16.
384. Commercial accessories for use with safety fuse are:—
(i) Multiple Fuse Lighters are similar in appearance
to a 12-inch gauge shotgun cartridge. The inner
bottom surface is coated with fine grain gunpowder.
A number of safety fuses may be led into the lighter
with the ends in contact with coated surface. One
safety fuse is used as a master fuse. A cellophane
cover on the open end prevents damage by water.
(ii) Fuse Igniters are in the form of a thin tube about
9 inches long and burn for approximately three
minutes with a hot reasonably smokeless flame.
Their use is to ensure ready ignition of the safety
fuse.
It should be noted that the frequent practice of
igniting fuses with a burning piece of gelignite, etc.,
on the end of a stick is a dangerous practice and
must, under no circumstances, be used.


(iii) Fuse Cutters and Crimpers. —(i) For hand use is a
tool resembling a pair of pliers, which is provided
with cutters to cut the safety fuse and jaws to crimp
or fasten the detonator to the fuse. (2) For bench
use, a machine to bolt to the bench is available.
A fuse cutter and detonator crimper are built into the
machine, and it is useful where a large number of
capped fuses are required. The crimp is watertight
for all practical purposes.
(iv) Waterproofittg Solution. —This liquid is black in colour
and is useful for waterproofing the junction between
detonator and safety fuse. It may also be used to
insulate joints with wires of electric detonators.
385. ( b ) With Electric Detonators. —The commercial electric
detonator is also now made in Australia. It consists of a
copper tube containing a similar charge to the ordinary
aluminium detonator, and, as an integral part, has an electric
firing portion. It differs from service detonators in that it
is always fitted with long wire leads, supplied in lengths usually
54 inches, 72 inches or 96 inches, and as required up to
480 inches. ( See Table on page .)
386. Charges may be fired electrically—
(i) singly;
(ii) by a circuit connected in series ;
(iii) by a circuit connected in parallel.
(i) To fire a charge with a single electric detonator ,
the procedure is to connect the wire leads to a
shot firing cable, which is commercially a twin
flex of 4.25 S.W.G., and to a firing machine.
Before connecting the detonator it is essential to
test it by means of a galvanometer for continuity
of circuit, and again to test the completed circuit
before firing. The former test should be carried
oat with a shield between the detonator and
operator. The commercial galvanometer is a
small instrument and may be described as a
simplified “Q ” and “I ” detector. It is similar
in appearance, but is fitted with only two terminals.
Completion of a circuit between these terminals
causes the pointer needle to deflect.


Galvanometers. —The galvanometer contains a
small dry cell which supplies current at a potential
too low to explode the ordinary electric detonator.
The detonators should always be tested by touching
the bare ends of the lead wires on to the two
terminals ; if the needle moves it may be assumed
that the detonator is satisfactory electrically. As,
however, detonator bridge-wires may vary con-
siderably in resistance and some may even be
sensitive enough to be exploded by the current
from the galvanometer cell, it is important that,
before touching the lead wires on to the terminals,
the detonator should be placed inside a length of
iron pipe or be covered by other means so that
should it fire, neither the operator nor any one
nearby will be injured.
It is important to note that a detonator should
never be tested after the primer has been made
up or when in the charge of the borehole. The
reasons for this are obvious. Before using a
galvanometer, it is advisable to lay a short bare piece
of copper wire across the terminals. If the needle
then deflects to the end of the graduation, it may
be assumed that the cell is in order.
If, however, the deflection is a small one, either
the cell needs replacing or there is some defect in
the galvanometer itself.
If there is no result of an attempt to fire the
charges the failure may be due to —
(1) faulty blasting machine;
(2) too great a resistance in the circuit (i.e., leads
too long or too many detonators or both) ;
(3) leakage of current due to damp ground and
faulty insulation;
(4) insecure jointing of cables and wires;
(5) broken wires;
(6) detonators faulty as a result of ignition tempera-
ture of flashing compound being altered by
moisture or age.


(i) May be tested by means of a rheostat and
galvanometer as indicated in Fig. (5) below. Loca-
tion of failure due to (3), (4) and (5) may be made
by examination and testing various portions of
the circuit with a galvanometer, but it is vitally
important that the current from the galvanometer
cell should not be passed through any detonator
in the charged holes. If the trouble does not
appear to be due to (1), (3), (4) and (5) either the
length of circuit or the number of detonators
included should be cut down if possible, and
another attempt made to fire. If this also is a
failure, detailed examination must be made and,
finally, the shots may have to be fired in small
groups or singly.
(ii) To Fire a Charge by Series Circuits. —Series firing
means that the circuit commences from one lead of
the firing cable, through each detonator in turn
and is completed by connection to the second
lead of the cable.
The current requirement for a series circuit is
one and one-half amperes with one and one-half
volts for every ohm of the total resistance of the
circuit. An increase in the number of detonators
in a circuit does not require an increase in the
amperage, but as the resistance is increased, there
must be an increase in voltage. Therefore, a
series circuit is characterised by relatively high
voltage, and low amperage requirement.
Exploders. —With circuits intended for use with
blasting machines, the number of detonators
connected in the series circuit must not exceed
the number for which the exploder is rated, and
it is recommended that no more than 50 detonators
be fired, regardless of the source of power. Inci-
dentally, when an exploder is used to provide
the firing current, the circuit must be connected
in series.
Exploders for low tension electric firing are
obtainable in sizes for firing a number of shots
varying from one to one hundred simultaneously.
These machines contain small dynamos or magnetos


which are actuated by the downward thrust of a
rack bar or by twisting a handle (in the smaller
types); the circuit being closed at the end of the
stroke or twist when the electrical potential is
of sufficient magnitude. When operating a push-
down machine, it should be set squarely on a firm
dry level place, and the handle thrust down as
hard as possible. Towards the end of the stroke,
the rack becomes stiffer due to the building up of
the magnetic field in the dynamo, but the speed
of the thrust should not be allowed to diminish.
The exploder, when not in use, should be stored
away from dust or damp, and the moving parts,
with the exception of the brushes bearing on the
copper commutator ring, should always be kept
lightly oiled. The commutator brushes must be
kept clean and bearing firmly on the commutator.
The latter should be occasionally lubricated with
fine graphite.
Commercial Blasting Machines. —Commercial
blasting machines are similar in appearance and
operation to Service types, but are made in various
sizes from one shot capacity upwards ; the capacity
being clearly marked on the case.
Rheostats. —The efficiency and capacity of a
blasting machine is determined by a Rheostat.
This instrument is of the rotary switch-arm type,
and consists of a small box in which are a number
of coils, connected in series, and brought to a
number of numbered studs. The outward features
of a rheostat are illustrated in Fig. g. To ascertain
if the exploder is capable of firing, say, twenty
detonators, connect as shown in the diagram, and
place the two detonators in an iron pipe or other
place where they can do no damage when fired.
If they explode when the exploder is operated, it
can be assumed that the latter is capable of firing
twenty detonators in series with an average resis-
tance of cable and connecting wires. If the
latter, however, are unusually long an allowance
for additional resistance must be made. The
object of using two detonators is to obviate the
possibility which would arise when one detonator


Rheostat and method of connection


only was used, of the single detonator being a very
sensitive one and firing in spite of the output of
the exploder not being up to standard. With two
detonators in the circuit both should fire.
Note. —The Service Testing and Jointing Box
takes the place of the Rheostat and Galvanometer.
D.C. Power Mains. —Determination of the
number of detonators which can be fired from a
power main involves the use of Ohm’s law. This
may be stated as volts equals resistance multiplied
by current; or as current equals voltage divided
, _ E
by resistance, or C = -•
J R
The total resistance of a series circuit is the sum
of the resistance of all the elements comprising the
circuit cable, connecting wires and detonators.
The greater the voltage, the greater will be the
amperage if resistance remains the same; or less
will be the amperage if resistance is increased and
voltage remains the same; or the greater will be
the amperage if resistance is reduced and voltage
remains the same.
Example of Series Circuits. —The resistance of
an electric detonator with 30 feet copper wires
may be taken as 275 ohms and for a type of cable
generally used is 5 ohms per 100 yards. Con-
necting wire has a low resistance. Thus the
ordinary type used for dry work has a resistance
of 8 ohms per 100 yards.
Thus, if one considers a round of thirty detonators
connected in series, 50 yards of connecting wire
and 100 yards of shot-firing cable, the total resis-
ance will be (275 X 30) + 5 + 4 = 91 ohms.
The voltage necessary to pass the required
amperage of I*s in this case would be 91 X 1-5 =
136-5 volts.
To determine whether sufficient current is
available to fire any given number of detonators,
divide the voltage of the power available by the


total resistance of the circuit, and the resultant
current available should exceed 1-5 amperes in
o:der to ensure successful firing of the circuit.
A.C. Power Mains. —In the case of alternating
current the problem is a more complicated one,
since the duration of the current in firing a circuit
is small, viz., in the order of 0-003 seconds and
the switch may be closed at an instant when the
current is passing through its zero position.
Obviously this difficulty is greatest where the
number of cycles per second is small. Nothing
under a 40-cycle supply should be employed, as
misfires may occur when using less.
(iii) To Fire a Charge hy Parallel Circuits.
D.C. Power Mains. —A parallel circuit is one in
which the detonators are connected to two common
points. Each detonator in a connection of this
kind offers a path for the electric current inde-
pendent of all the other detonators in the circuit,
therefore, variations in sensitiveness, as a factor
affecting the success of the round, can be dis-
regarded.
The several current paths which characterise a
parallel circuit call for a higher amperage require-
ment than a series connection, in which there is
but one path. The recommendation is 0-7 ampere
for each detonator. The total current requirement
of a parallel circuit is 0-7 multiplied by the number
of detonators in parallel.
As each detonator offers an additional current
path, the total resistance is comparatively small
and is equal to the sum of the resistance of the
leading and connecting wires plus the resistance
of a single detonator divided by the number of
detonators connected in parallel. A parallel circuit
is characterised by low voltage and high amperage.


Example. —Taking into consideration a round of
30 detonators with 30-feet copper wires, the
combined resistance will be —
—= 0-09 ohms.
30
Total resistance = 0-09 -f 5 (100 yards cable)
= 5-09 ohms.
Total current required 0-07 x 30
= 21 amps.
Voltage = current x resistance
= 21 X 5 09
= 106 volts.
Parallel Circuit A.C. Mains. —In parallel firing
from A.C. Mains the effects of the periodicity of
the cycle are less since the firing of the first detonator
does not break the circuit. It is the usual custom
to use the highest available voltage up to 440 A.C.
50 cycle.
Table of Resistance in Ohms of Electrical Detonators.
Length of
Detonator
Wires.
Electric
Detonators.
Iron Wires.
Electric
Detonators.
All types,
Copper Wires.
Submarine
Detonators.
Inches.
Ohms.
Ohms.
Ohms.
54
1-25
136
60
219
1-40
139
72
2-39
1-45
1 42
84
2-59
1-50
1-45
96
2-80
1-55
1-48
120
322
1-65
i-54
144
175
i-6o
216
2-05
1-78
240
2-15
1 84
288
2-35
1 96
300
2-40
199
336
2-55
2-08
480
3-15
2-44
387. The resistance of the cable in common use is 5 ohms
per 100 yards, and the connecting wire 8 ohms per 100 yards.


388. Delay Action Detonators are used where it is necessary
to fire shots with a definite delay between each shot or group
of shots. The detonators are made in two types —
(1) safety fuse type; and
(2) gasless all-metal type.
389. Type (1) consists of an electric fuse head, similar to
that used in a commercial electric detonator, a length of safety
fuse and an ordinary detonator. The length of time elapsing
after ignition electrically and thus forming the delay, depends
on the length of safety fuse interposed between the fixing
head and detonator.
390. Type (2) consists of an aluminium tube in which are
sealed the fuse head, delay element and detonating composition.
The delay in seconds is stamped on a small metal tag attached
to the wire leads. It should be noted that there is some
difficulty at the present time in obtaining supplies of the
all-metal gasless type.
391. (c) Method of Firing with Detonating Fuse. —Com-
mercially, the older form of detonating fuse, i.e. s Cordeaux
Bickford, known in the Service as F.1.D., has been superseded
by a later form known as “ Cordtex.” Cordtex is a textile
fuse, with a gutta-percha finish, filled with a composition
referred to as P.E.T.N. It has a velocity of detonation of
6,000 metres per second and may be substituted in all respects
for F.I.D. The fuse is very safe to handle and store. It
requires a detonator for initiation and cannot be detonated
by flame, ordinary friction, or shock. Cordtex is obtainable
in two types, either plain or countered, the latter having a
higher resistance to abrasion and greater tensile strength.
It also has good water resisting properties, and will fire
satisfactorily after sixteen to twenty-four hours’ immersion in
water under 30 lb. per square inch pressure.
391 A. When using Cordtex a detonator is not required to
explode (except that used to detonate the Cordtex). It is
sufficient to insert the end of the Cordtex into the explosive
or to tie it alongside the charge. It is important to remember
that the branch line should take off from the main line in the
direction in which the wave of detonation is proceeding from
the detonator. VCh’re it is necessary to have the wave of
detonation travelling from both ends of a main line, the branch
iines should be connected to the main line by means of a clove


hitch or 3-lap joint. When connecting main lines together or
making extensions, two ends of plain Cordtex may be laid
together with about 3 inches overlap and tied with either string
or twine.
Tamping.
392. (a) Sand is the most efficient tamping material.
393. (b) Sand and clay in the proportion of three of the
former to one of the latter make a tamping material almost
as efficient as sand.
394. (c) Clay is a relatively inefficient material for tamping.
Properties of explosives in common use —Military Engineering (Vol. IV)
Demolitions and Mining, 1934 —pages 17-19- Notes used in
that volume are applicable.
Properties of Commercial High Explosives Table (A).
Name.
Group.
Velocity of Detonation
metres per sec.
Relative expansion in
lead block.
Colour.
Form in which
Supplied.
Chief Uses.
Keeping properties in
hot climates.
If liable to freeze.
If causes headache.
If damaged by moisture.
Sensitiveness to shock.
How detonated.
If normally forms C.O.
A.N. Gelatin Dy-
namite “ 75 .
N.G.
3,800
149 Buff to
Gelati-
Blast-
Poor
Yes
Yes
Yes
A.R.
D.
No
S.N Gelignite 60%
2,400
H9
brown.
nous.
mg.
J5
33
J3
33
S.N Gelignite 50%
„
2,900
103
„
,,
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
S.N Gelignite 40%
2,500
87
33
„
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
A.N Gelignite“6o”
,,
4,100
107
„
,,
,,
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
A.N Gelignite“5o”
A.N Gelignite“40”
„
2,900
100
„
,,
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
2,400
81
White
„
5,
33
33
33
33
'33
33
33
Samsonite No. 3.
2,300
70
,,
,,
33
33
33
,3
33
33
33
Saxonite . .
3,000
67
Buff
,,
33
No
,3
,3
33
33
33
Polar Ajax
2,400
84
Powder
„
3,
,,
33
33
,,
33
A.2 Monobel
2,600
82
,,
,3
Ves
,,
,,
•33
,,
33
Stonobel . .
2,900
80
„
,,
33
„
,,
,,
33
,,
33
Quarry Monobel
2,700
108
33
„
,,
33
33
33
33
33
93
33
Lig. Dyn. 40% .
,,
2,900
88
33
,,
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
Lig. Dyn. 25% .
2,500
67
33
,,
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
A.N. Lig. Dyn
“40” ..
2,900
86
White
J5
33
33
33
3)
33
A.N. Lig. Dyn
“25” ..
»
2,500
69
”
”
”
”
”
”
»
”
»
33
The figures given above for velocity of detonation are the average on
samples tested over a period of three years. It is important to note
that—
(a) commercial explosives gradually decrease in both velocity of
detonation and sensitiveness with age;
( b ) the velocity of detonation will vary with confinement of the
charge, so that a maximum is reached when the charge is well
tamped.


Demolition with Explosives.
(B) PRACTICE AND EXPLOSION.
395- Scope and Application. —The following instructions
are to be understood by every squad leader or his deputy
supervising work involving explosives and by all members
of the demolition squad.
396. Before any squad leader undertakes the responsibility
of handling explosives it is imperative that the following
information and instructions be read and understood.
397. Each squad leader is morally responsible for the
safety of the public and his squad ; and it will be necessary
for him to limit the handling of explosives to those members
of his squad who have read and understood the sections of
these instructions relative to the duties entrusted to them.
398. No person shall smoke whilst carrying, handling, or
using explosives, or when near to any person so doing. Every
person employed on or about a work shall take all due
precautions for the pievention of accidents by fire or explosion
on the work, and for the prevention of unauthorised persons
from having access to any explosives, and shall not do any act
whatever tending to cause an accident by fire or explosion.
399- the event of any situation arising where danger is
involved, and which cannot be dealt with under these
instructions, immediate steps are to be taken to ensure the
safety of all concerned, and the matter reported without delay
to the Officer-in-Charge.
400. No explosives shall be issued from the magazine in
excess of the quantity necessary for immediate use.
Provision of Magazine.
401 General.— At every place and on every work where
explosives are kept or used there shall be provided a magazine,
or magazines, situated, maintained, and licensed, in accordance
with the provisions of the Explosives Acts in the various States,
as set out in the Form of Application for a Licence to keep
explosives. No explosives shall be kept elsewhere than in
such magazine, and no explosives shall be removed from any
such magazine except for immediate use, or for transport to
another magazine. Rack-a-rock and similar compounds shall
not be made or kept on any work except by the authority and


subject to the conditions of a licence under the Explosives
Act, 1905. (See also Australian Standards Spec. No. (E)
ASO1 —1940 Emergency Standard for Magazines for the
Storage of Explosives.)
402 Cover for Magazine. —Every magazine shall be provided
with adequate cover to protect it against falling debris, and
the cover shall consist of a layer of earth or sandbags, at
least 1 foot thick, supported on wooden planks or an iron
plate or framework of sufficient strength to carry the weight
of the earth without risk of failure, and in such a way as to
prevent the possibility of earth or debris falling on or into
the magazine. When the magazine is placed in an excavation
in the ground the cover is required on top only, but where
the magazine is not so placed, cover is to be provided at the
sides and back as well as on the top. The magazine is to be
placed on timber sills and adequate precautions taken to drain
the excavation. In any case, the cover is to be so arranged
that it is not possible for debris projected from the blast or
from any other source, to strike the magazine direct, and so
that clear space is provided for the free opening of the door
or lid. The opening of the magazine is to face in a direction
away from the site of blasting.
403 Detonators. —These instructions apply equally to
magazines for the keeping of detonators, which are not to be
placed in the same magazine as other explosives.
Precautions.
404. General. —No other person, except the squad leader
or his deputy authorised, shall be allowed access to any
magazine or explosive.
405. Lighting. —No naked light shall be permitted in the
magazine. Any electric light lamps shall be placed in recesses
and adjustable only from the exterior of the magazine. All
electric wiring and conduit shall be external.
406. Precautions in Thunderstorms. —On the approach of
a thunderstorm the magazine shall be closed and every
person in and about it shall be withdrawn therefrom for its
duration.
407. Reporting of Theft or Losses.—Ml losses, shortage
of stock and thefts of explosives shall be reported without
delay.


408. Articles and Materials Prohibited. —No iron, steel,
or any substance or article likely to cause fire or explosion
shall be taken into or within a distance of 15 feet of the magazine.
409. Inflammable Material to be Kept Away.— The ground
within 60 feet of magazines must be kept free from dry grass,
rubbish, or anything likely to carry or to cause fire.
. 4 1 ?- No Smoking. —No person shall smoke in or in the
vicinity of any magazine, nor shall pipes, matches, or any other
means of striking a light be taken into the magazine.
411. Intoxicated Persons. —No intoxicated person shall
be permitted to enter or remain in the magazine, and no
intoxicating liquor shall be taken into the magazine.
412. Dampness. Care should be taken to protect explosive
materials from the effects of moisture.
413. Maintenance of Magazines. —Magazines must be kept
in thorough repair and in a weathertight and watertight
condition. As far as practicable all explosives shall be removed
from the magazine before any repairs are carried out.
414. Cleanliness. —Empty packages and loose papers are
not to be left in the magazine. The floor is to be kept
thoroughly swept.
415. Opening of Ca es. —Cases containing explosives shall
not be opened in a magazine but shall be removed well clear
therefrom one at a time.
416. Steel or iron tools shall not be used for the opening
of cases, but they shall be opened by means of wood or soft
metal wedges or chisels and wooden mallets.
417. Locking of Magazine. —All magazines are to be kept
securely locked when not being used, and the safe custody of
the keys in the responsibility of the ganger in charge. No
workman, other than the powderman, is to be entrusted with
keys.
Storage and Issue.
418. Detonators. —Detonators shall not be kept in the same
magazine with other explosives on any pretence whatever,
but shall be kept in a separate magazine or receptacle at least
25 feet from any other magazine.
419. Cartridges. —Cartridges must always be stored in a
horizontal position whether in loose packages or in cases.


420. Safety Fuse , etc. —Safety fuse, fuse lighters and
multiple fuse igniters shall be stored in a cool, dry place,
provided that fuse lighters or multiple fuse igniters shall not
be stored with other explosives.
421. Record Book—A stock book shall be kept for each
magazine showing the quantities on hand and the quantities,
dates and times at which the same are taken in and out and by
whom. The balance shown in the book shall be checked with
the stock at least once per day.
422. Issue in Rotation. —In all cases the oldest suitab e
explosives shall be used first.
Miscellaneous Precautions.
423. Traffic Protection. —While blasting is in progress in
the vicinity of a road, or street, all traffic in either direction is
to be stopped at 200 yards from the site. The road is to be
completely barricaded across and, where the sight distance in
approach to either barricade is less than 100 yards, the standard
advance warning sign is to be erected 100 yards from the
barricade. The advance warning sign is to display the words
“ Caution, Demolition in Progress,” and the standard sign
“ Stop, Demolition in Progress,” is to be hung from the
barricade itself. A man is to be placed on guard at the
barricade and not withdrawn till all the shots have been fired
and the signal given by the person in charge, when the notices
and barricades are also to be taken down. In the case of a
misfire, traffic is not to be allowed to pass within 100 yards of
the charge till the precautions specified in the section relating
to “ Misfire ” have been taken. While blasting is in progress,
a man is to be stationed on guard at a distance beyond the
possible line of flight of stones or debris. This employee
should normally be at least 100 yards from the blast, but the
distance will depend upon the amount of protection afforded
by the building and is to be increased at the discretion of the
ganger if he considers that stones or debris may be projected
morfe than 100 yards.
424. Where it is impracticable to observe these provisions,
the distances specified may be reduced with special approval.
425. Blasting Mats. —Where blasting is carried on in closely
populated areas or in close proximity to a road under traffic,
or in any other circumstances where risk of injury to persons


or of damage to property would be entailed under ordinary
conditions, each charge is to be covered with blasting mats
sufficiently to prevent debris from being projected from the
blast. Chtrg;s are to bs limiei in size where necessary to
e.:sure this, and in v.ry congested localities special attention
is to be given to this matter.
426. In the event of blasting mats being unprocurable, a
substitute may be made, consisting of sheets of iron covered
with bags of sand or errth, or branches of trees.
Destruction of Unused or Defective Explosives.
4 2 7- Approval is to be obtcirei from the Odficer-in-Charge
before any unused or defective explosives tre destroyed. The
Officer-in-Charge in giving approval will also indicate the
manner in which the explosives are to be destroyed.
Demolition by Explosives.
(C) CALCULATION OF CHARGES.
428. The formulae given below are those for calculating
the weight of guncotton (or an explosive of equivalent cutting
power) required for various objects of attack.
429. As guncotton, however, will probably be unobtainable
excepting for Military purposes the commercial explosives
referred to in paragraphs 368, and 369 and whose properties
are given in Table (page ) must be used.
430. For Cutting Steel. —Of these explosives only AN
gelignite “ 75 ” or “ 60 ” and NS gelignite 60 per cent, are
suitable for cutting steel and to be effective these must be
detonated with “ Cordtex ” detonating fuse ( see paragraph 391).
The charges as determined by the formulae below for cutting
steel must be multiplied by 3 to be effective when using AN
gelignite “ 75,” AN gelignite “ 60 ” or NS gelignite 60 per cent.
431. Formulae. —Summary of nomenclature unless otherwise
stated in the remarks column :
B = Width of object attacked, i.e., length of charge in feet.
b = Width of object attacked, i.e., length of charge in
inches.
T = Thickness of object attacked in feet.
t Thickness of object attacked in inches.
c Circumference of object attacked in inches.
d = Diameter of object attacked in inches.
L = Line of least resistance in feet.


Charges Untamped.
Object Attacked.
Charges
in lb.
Remarks.
Iron or steel rounds
W or f 6
Use AN gelignite “ 75,” AN gelig-
nite “60” and NS gelignite
60% and multiply result obtained
in formula by 3.
Iron or steel rectangles ..
i bt*
Use AN gelignite “ 75,” AN
gelignite “ 60 ” and NS gelignite
60% and multiply result obtained
in formula by 3.
Masonry walls ..
£BT 2
The length of breach B must not
be less than the height of the
wall. Two (2) slabs of guncotton
per foot run are sufficient for
walls 2 feet thick.
Masonry piers
fBT 2
If attacked from above.
Masonry archings
fBT 2
Reinforced concrete thin
slabs.
Timber hardwoods —
20BT 2
For other forms, bare the re-
inforcement and cut bars
separately.
Rectangular section ..
3BT 2
f Where D is diameter in feet; for
Circular section
3D 3
-{ soft woods those charges may
be halved.
Borehole Charges.
432. Explosive Used : —NS gelignite 60 per cent.
Charges Tamped.
Object Attacked.
Charges
in oz.
Remarks.
Masonry ..
L 3 X -
L measured to centre of charge
4
which must not occupy more
than two-thirds of borehole or
be within 8 inches of the surface.
Masonry long extended
As for augerhole charges when
charges.
conditions similar.
Timber ..
6D 2
D = diameter (or side) of baulk in
feet.


433- Borehole charges offer the most economical method
of cutting timber. A hole is bored into the timber with an
auger of i| or 2 inches diameter. The hole should be of
such a length that the centre of the charge lies in the centre
of the timber. Trees may be felled by borehole charges.
Concussion Charges.
434. Explosives Used. —The formulae given must be multi-
plied by 3 for AN gelignite “ 75,” AN gelignite “ 60 ” or NS
gelignite 60 per cent. Charges must be doubled if apertures
are not blocked.
Miscellaneous Demolitions.
Object Attacked.
Charges
in lb.
Remarks.
Masonry buildings
A is the area of internal floor space
in square feet. T is the thickness
of walls in feet. Values of K are
as follows :—Mud walls, interior
masonry, i ; good masonry 2 ;
v
reinforced concrete, 4-10.
Structures with thin walls
m —
V = volume of enclosed air space
IOO
in cubic feet. Values of m are
as follows :—Weak wooden
sheds, 1-2 ; corrugated iron
structure, 4-8 ; stout wooden
buildings, 6-12 ; strong steel
casing ( e.g ., armoured car or
tank), 20-30.
Object Attacked.
Details of Charge, etc.
Guns, modern, long
Use charge of d 2 slabs in breach or half that at
range.
muzzle where d is bore of gun in inches. For
older pieces charge may be reduced.
Howitzers
Half the charge for a gun. N.B.—In both the
above, when time is available for careful
preparation, 8 oz. of dynamite or i lb.
ammonal may be used instead of one slab
of guncotton.
Stockades
Earth and timber, 4 lb. per foot run. Steel
rails, 7 lb. per foot run.
Water tanks ..
Submerged charge of one slab per too cubic feet
of capacity.
High-explosive shell
One slab will detonate a shell. One shell
detonated in a pile will detonate the rest.


Note.— Steel or iron girders, etc., must be dealt with by the intelligent
application of the above two formulae to every portion of the section on
which it is decided to cut. In the case of a rolled steel joist for example,
it is necessary to calculate charges—(i) for the flanges taking b as the full
width of the flange, and (ii) for the web taking b as the full depth of the
joist. In the case of built up girders there are usually rivet heads and
angle irons (joining flange to web) to contend with; the angle irons do
not usually extend right across the flanges. In such cases in order to
avoid very detailed measurements or calculations the flanges are usually
taken as being of their maximum thickness ( i.e ., rivet head plate angle iron)
over their whole width; while the thickness of the web is measured at
its thinnest part, rivet heads and angle irons being neglected. The
results are sufficiently accurate for practical purposes for all ordinary
types of girders.
There are two methods normally used for placing charges to cut
girders, of which examples are given in Figs, j and g. The most econ-
omical is to place charges across both flanges and the web as in Fig. g.
The more convenient is usually that shown in Fig. ®. (See diagram
Figs, g and g, R.S.J’s.) —where only one charge has to be fired instead
of three, and there will probably be less difficulty in placing the charge
unhindered by the superstructure. But in this case, as they are not
continuous all over the full width of the flange, the flange charges must
be doubled—thus, for Fig. g :—ln the following example the charges
are calculated in lb. of guncotton (1 slab of guncotton weighs 1 lb.).
These weights must be multiplied by a factor if another type of explosive
is used, e.g., for AN gelignite “ 75,” AN gelignite “ 60,” or NS gelignite
60% multiply by 3, as shown.
435. Example—
(l) Top flange : Breadth b = 15 inches.
Maximum thickness t \ inch (flange plate) plus
\ inch (L iron) plus f inch (rivet) = i| inches.
Charge C = \bt 2 = | X 15 X r|- X i|
= 4-22 lb. of guncotton
= 3 x 4-22 = 12-66, say 13 lb. of
AN gelignite “ 75,” AN gelignite
“ 60 ” or NS gelignite 60 per cent.
(2) Bottom flange : Breadth b = 15 inches.
Maximum thickness t b inch (flange plate) plus f inch
(L iron) plus \ inch (rivet) if inches.
Charge C = \bt* = § X 15 X if X if
= 5-74 lb. of guncotton
= 3 X 5*74 = 17-22 lb. of AN
gelignite “ 75,” AN gelignite
“ 60 ” or NS gelignite 60 per cent.
*27820 —E


(3) Web : Breadth b = 33 inches.
Minimum thickness t = § inch.
One slab per 6 inches breadth insufficient.
Charge C = 33 -f 6, say 6 slabs = 6 lb. of guncotton.
Total (4-22 -f 574 + 6) = 15-96 lb. guncotton.
= 3 X 15-96 = 47-88, say
48 lb. of AN gelignite
“ 75,” AN gelignite
“60 ” or NS gelignite
60 per cent.
But for Fig. 2
(1) Top flange : Charge = 4-22 X 2 = 8-44 lb., say 9 "lb.
(2) Bottom flange : Charge = 574 x 2 = 11-48 lb., say
12 lb.
(3) Charge = 6 slabs (6 lb.) as before, say 6 lb.
TOTAL CHARGE = 27 lb. of guncotton = 3 x 27 =
81 lb. of AN gelignite “ 75,” AN gelignite “ 60 ” or
NS gelignite 60 per cent.
436. Cutting Charges. —It will be seen that the second method
involves the expenditure of some 10 lb. more of guncotton and
approximately 30 lb. more of the three substituted explosives
than required by the first method. It is often, however,
preferable to the first even when there is no difference in the
difficulty of placing the charge, unless the most rigid economy
in the use of explosives is called for.
437. Cutting Charges for Masonry and Reinforced Concrete. —
The following are the formulae to be used for masonry, which
here includes good brickwork or stonework in cement mortar
and also ordinary cement concrete. For inferior masonry
(brickwork loosely set in lime mortar, rubble walls without
mortar, etc.) the charge may be reduced by an amount not
exceeding one-half.
(a) Walls, —C = | BT 2 with the proviso that B must not
be less than the height of the wall to ensure that a
breach and not merely a hole is made in the wall.
(b) Piers. —C = f BT 2 . If time permits the effect will
be considerably increased by cutting a chase in the
pier to receive the charge. The charge required is
also considerably less as T may be taken as the
thickness after cutting the chase.


(c) Arch rings. —lf attacked from above—
C = f BT 2 .
Where in each case—
C = weight of charge of guncotton in lb.
(For other explosives see table.)
B = full breadth of wall, etc., in feet (measured over
parapets in the case of arch rings).
T = thickness of wall, etc., in feet.
Multiply the above weights by 3 for AN gelignite
“ 75,” AN gelignite “ 60,” or NS gelignite 60 per cent.
438. The minimum allowable charge of 2 slabs per foot of B
will therefore cut a wall 2 feet thick, a pier 1 foot 9 inches thick
or an arch ring of 1 foot 6 inches thick. The difference between
these three formulae is due to the extra stability given to piers
by the load they carry and to arch rings by their form.
439. In the case of retaining walls and of arch rings attacked
from below, the support given to the masonry by the filling
requires still larger charges to be used. The extent to which
the charges must be increased will depend on the type of filling
and may be allowed for by including in the figures taken for T
half the thickness of the filling in the case of a metalled road,
and one-quarter where the filling is not consolidated, but with
the maximum value for T of twice the thickness of the masonry
of the arch ring charges for walls, piers or the underside of arch
rings must usually be assembled on boards which are fastened
so that the charge is pressed firmly against the object to be
destroyed along its whole length.
440. When an arch ring is attacked from above a transverse
trench should be dug (if traffic permits) down to the masonry
of the arch in which the charge, which should be continuous
and in close contact with the masonry, should be placed. If
time permits the trench may be filled in, as this tamping will
increase the effect, but this is not essential.
441. Reinforced Concrete. —Since the explosive cannot be
placed in actual contact with the steel reinforcement, even if
its extent and position is known, a considerable proportion of
the shattering action on which the main effect of a cutting
charge depends is absorbed before the metal is reached. It is
therefore not practicable to cat any but thin slabs placed in the
usual way , and even then results are uncertain. For such slabs,
however, charges of 208T 2 may be used for guncotton and
608T 2 for AN gelignite “ 75,” AN gelignite “60 ” or NS
gelignite 60 per cent.




feD NOTES ON DEMOLITIONS CARRIED OUT IN A
LARGE MANUFACTURING TOWN AFTER A RECENT
AIR RAID.
(By “ Sap.”)
Extract from the Royal Engineers’ Journal, June, 1941.
442. Introduction. —After an air raid many buildings are
so damaged, especially those that have been burnt out, that
demolition of the remaining walls is essential if traffic is to use
in safety the street below. Municipal authorities require certain
routes to be re-opened as soon as possible and along these routes
R.E. units will be often asked to carry out demolition with
explosives.
443. Requests may also be made for demolition of buildings
to create fire-breaks. Fire brigades tend to be optimistic and
will frequently delay in asking for this until too late for meth-
odical attack. Hasty demolition in such a case means large
charges to avoid any possibility of even partial failure, and
there will rarely be time for more than intelligent guess-work.
444. ’The aim of this article is to describe methods found by
experience to be effective with the type of buildings encoun-
tered, in the hope that they may be of some interest and
assistance to other R.E. officers faced with a similar task.
445. Object. —ln every case but one, the object of the
demolition was to bring down a building already damaged,
and in a condition considered unsafe.
446. The one exception was the creation of a fire-break.
447. Considerations :
(a) Types of buildings (most demolitions were done in
one area of the city). Most were large warehouses
or office buildings. In almost all cases they were
shells ; the centre had either been gutted by fire or
destroyed by bombs. Some were steel framed;
often this was not obvious, and when met with, it
led to difficulty.


(b) Placing of charges : This was often complicated
by the following factors —
(i) access barred to the building, either by fires
burning inside, or by the inaccessibility of the
windows;
(ii) the state of the buildings considered too unstable
for the use of compressor tools ;
(iii) as little explosive as possible to be used, in order
to do as little damage as possible to surrounding
buildings;
(iv) as little debris as possible to be thrown up, to
reduce the work of clearing to a minimum.
Buildings had therefore to be collapsed into
their own area as far as possible.
(c) Speed in carrying out the demolition was important—
the sooner demolition work was done, the quicker
clearing could start.
448. Methods :
(a) Borehole charges in the main pillars of the structures.
( b ) Cutting charges, placed in the most suitable position
available. These might be the pillars, by the win-
dows and doors, or in any cracks already open in
the building.
(c) Concussion charges
(i) were used wherever possible ; obviously they are
the most satisfactory. They could not be used
when the building was in an unsafe condition cr
when fires were burning strongly inside and
showed signs of spreading before preparations
were complete;
(ii) and (iii) had to be used in cases where (i) was
barred; no hard and fast rules could be found
to deal with different situations —each case had
to be treated on its own merits;
(iii) were occasionally found very effective, but on a
steel-framed building were useless.


449- The following are examples of demolitions that were
carried out; they cover the main problems that were encoun-
tered. They were done in the space of four days by one
section of a Field Company, though two other sections were
employed for one day.
450. (a) State of Building (Fig. 3). —Large warehouse
completely gutted. There were seven pillars on the front,
with 2 feet thickness of masonry and 14 inches brick. The
walls were 14-inch brick and 9-inch stone facing.
451. Object of Demolition. —To bring down wall without
blocking street on the front of the building.
452. Method. —As shown in Fig. -. Three 24-inch boreholes
were made in each pier, twenty-two in all being bored. Holes
were staggered 18 inches apart. 12 oz. of gelignite were
placed in each hole.
453. Commercial detonators were used. It was found
unreliable to fire as many as twenty-two together, and therefore
firing was done in two halves.
454. Result. —The demolition was completely successful.
455. Explosives used : i6| lb. of gelignite.
456. (b) State of Buildings (Fig. 2). —Both buildings were
burnt out. The walls were of good brick in cement mortar,
but they had been shaken considerably by a landmine. The
communicating passage was a steel frame attached between the
two walls. It was impossible to enter the buildings, owing to
fire in the cellar.
457. Object of Demolition. —The corner A, the connection
passage, and the wall B were unsafe. They were to be
demolished in order to make the street running along the line
of “ road level,” as shown on the sketch safe fcr traffic. Also
the side street running under the connecting passage was to
be kept as free from debris as possible.
458. Method. —The corner A was to be demolished by three
small mined charges placed at the foot of the pillar. Bricks
were knocked out, the chambers filled and plugged up with
wet clay. The charges were fired electrically. 25 feet of
the wall at B was to be cut with G.C.; the inside was in-
accessible owing to a fire still burning in the cellar. The wall
was badly shaken and no other wall remained tying it in. It


Fig. 1(a)
Fig. 1(b)


Fig 2.


was therefore decided to use less than the two slabs per ft. run,
and thirty slabs were used. The charges at A and B were
connected in series, and fired electrically.
459. Result. —The demolition was successful.
460. Explosives Used. —30 lb. G.C., 14 lb. ammonal.
461. (c) State of Building (Figs. and ). —Warehouse
gutted, walls approximately 2 feet thick. The cornice was
in a very dangerous condition.
462. Object of Demolition. —To bring down the shell of the
building without blocking streets in front, or to the side of the
building.
463. Method. —Boreholes were not possible, owing to the
cornice. It was decided to attack the first storey windows
(see Fig. ); this would leave only the ground floor walls
standing, and the building would be safe enough to permit
traffic at the corner. Bricks were knocked out of the corners
of the windows, and charges of gelignite were placed in the
cavities so formed. The charges were then well tamped with
sandbags.
464. Result. —The building was almost completely flattened,
but part of the stonework of the ground was left standing, a
ragged edge remaining. At CC a dangerous overhanging
section was left. This was made safe by a charge of 2 lb. of
gelignite placed at X, which made a clean break AA (see Fig.
3 (*))•
465. Explosives Used. —13 lb. of gelignite for both
demolitions.
466. (d) State of Building (Fig. ). —The building was
completely gutted but the remaining shell was apparently
quite stable, except for a heavy masonry cornice considered
unsafe.
467. Object of Demolition. —To bring down the corner, and
make the road junction safe for traffic.
468. Method (i). —It was not realised that there was girder
reinforcement inside the masonry of the walls. It was decided
to demolish the building by charges of 5 lb. of G.C. over the
lintel, and 4 lb. tamped into a window, as shown at A in Fig.
469. Results (i).—This failed to demolish the building, but
succeeded in shaking the top. A crack opened in the wall, and
a 9 x 5 inch I-section steel R.S.J. was uncovered at the lintel.


Fig 3(a)
Fig 3(b)


Fig 4(a)
Fig. 4(b)


470- Method (ii). —The building was then attacked by placing
4 lb. in the crack opened at the first attempt, and 5 lb. well
tamped at the foot of the arch, as shown at B in Fig. g |||jj
471. Result (ii). —The second charges totally demolished the
building, which fell on to its own base, causing no obstruction
to the corner.
472. Explosives Used. —18 lb. of G.C.
473. (e) State of Building (Fig. g). —The building was
burnt out, but for a short distance from the front wall the
party walls and the floors still remained.
474. Object of Demolition. —To demolish the shell of the
building, as it was not considered safe as it stood.
475. Method (i). —Borehole charges were driven in the piers
and walls, as shown on the sketch. 12 oz. of gelignite were
fired in each borehole, by F.I.D. connected to eight 3-primer
junction boxes.
476. Result (i). —The front of the building was brought
down to first floor level; the party walls and the girder frame
inside the building held up the remainder.
477. Method (ii). —Charges of 15 lb. of ammonal were then
placed in the party walls ; 3-lb. charges were tied to the R.S.J’s.
and ammonal sausages on two case iron stanchions in the base-
ment. These charges were fired electrically.
478. Result (ii). —The demolition was successful.
479. Explosives Used. —19 lb. 8 oz. gelignite, 32 lb. ammonal,
6 lb. guncotton.
480. (/) State of Building (Fig. g).—Gutted warehouse,
the outside walls alone standing. These were of 18-inch
solid brickwork, still in good condition.
481. Object of Demolition. —To bring down the walls, as
they were not considered strong enough to stand the vibration
caused by heavy traffic passing.
482. Method. —Bricks were removed in the corners of
windows, and charges A, B, C, D, E were placed in the holes
so made, and well tamped. The charges were fired electrically.
483. The sizes of the charges were :
A, 10 lb. ammonal.
B, 10 lb. ammonal.
C, 5 lb. gelignite.
D, 10 lb. ammonal.
E, 10 lb. ammonal.


Fig 5(a)


Fig. 6.


484. Result. —Complete demolition of the front of the
building.
485. Explosives Used. —40 lb. ammonal, 6J lb. gelignite
(4-oz. cartridges of gelignite were used in lieu of primers).
486. ( g ) State of Building (Fig. |). —Warehouse, six stories,
60 feet-70 feet high, the roof and top four stories well on fire.
The walls were 18-inch brickwork, with 9-inch masonry facing.
Fig. 7 gives details of the surroundings.
487. Object of Demolition. —To prevent the fire already
burning in the building and behind it from spreading to the
intact buildings across the street.
488. Method. —lt was originally intended to place borehole
charges along the end and side walls of the warehouse, but
streets were so blocked with debris and fire hoses that com-
pressors could not be got there in time.
489. It was therefore decided to place concussion charges
near the two corners of the building, in the basement. Gun-
cotton charges were fixed to cut the iron grill over a basement
window, but before these were fired the roof and two upper
stories collapsed, and this method had to be abandoned. Access
was possible to the hall, but the staircase was on fire, and there
was not much time to spare. Further, a varying wind made
approach from more than one direction at a time extremely
difficult. A crate of ammonal of 63 lb. was placed in the
entrance hall and fired.
490. A second 63-lb. crate of ammonal was placed against
the remaining front corner and fired. There was no time to
tamp it.
491. Result. —25 feet run of the front wall and 15 feet of
the side wall on the S.E. corner collapsed. 25 feet run of the
front wall and 15 feet run of the side wall on the S.W. corner
collapsed, together with the whole of the central portion of the
building. 10 feet of the centre of the front wall remained
standing, but collapsed shortly afterwards. The fire was
dropped to ground level by the demolition, and was soon
under control.
492. Explosives Used. —126 lb. ammonal, 8 lb. G.C.


CHAPTER 7.
SHORING AND STRUTTING.
GENERAL.
495. Shoring and strutting in peace time are usually carried
out on undamaged buildings that have to be remodelled or
where the existing foundations are to be disturbed by excava-
tions for an adjoining structure. On account of the importance
of the work this class of construction is usually entrusted to
men possessed of unusual skill.
496. In war time the dangers associated with this class of
work are accentuated because the buildings have been damaged.
On this account the task demands additional skill and technical
knowledge on the part of those undertaking the work. The
responsibility for the safety of the shoring squad should not be
undertaken lightly and even in the event of an emergency,
the work should not be undertaken unless the squad contains
a member possessed of some practical experience in this class
of work.
497. The decision as to whether shoring is to be resorted to
may have to be made rapidly and without the careful examina-
tion that would be possible under peace conditions. Damaged
buildings should be “ roped off ” and should not be demolished
excepting when they are a public menace or when the danger
zone enclosed seriously disorganises one or more of the public
services or when they are a danger to adjoining property.
498. When a structure has been damaged by a heavy bomb
its stability and safety can be affected in so many diverse ways
that it is quite impossible to do other than supply general
information regarding the emergency work which can be carried
out in an effort to protect the public and the structure, and to
prevent additional debris from obstructing important defence
or public highways.
499. When walls have collar se I or moved out of position
and when columns, girders or beams have been seriously
damaged, the building should be evacuated, and a structural
engineer and builder’s foreman should be called to the site and
placed in charge of the emergency work.


SURVEY AND PROCEDURE.
500. When technical assistance is not available during an
extensive air raid, the following summary of points, which
should be given consideration, may help the Rescue Squad
leader in the carrying out of his responsibilities :
(a) Attention to casualties to be in accordance with A.R.P.
instructions.
(b) Buildings damaged during daylight should have the
electric light supply disconnected as soon as possible
and the power supply for lifts as soon as the occupants
have been evacuated. Buildings damaged during
night raids should not have light and power dis-
connected unless the building has inflammable liquids
stored therein.
(c) Inspect the area adjoining the building for fractured
or dangerously sagged live electric wires and notify
the Warden of the area, with a request that he arrange
with the appropriate authority for urgent attention.
(d) Disconnect gas supply.
(e) Do not disconnect the water supply unless the
occupants have been trapped in the basement and
flooding is indicated.
(/) Examine the elevation for partially collapsed sus-
pended awnings. If the building is of two storeys
only with a wood floor, the awnings should be
“ tommed ” up immediately, as a partially collapsed
awning has a particularly disturbing influence on
the stability of the external walls of this class of
building.
(g) Damaged walls supporting overhead water tanks
should be treated with special caution, and the
tanks should be emptied before any shoring is
attempted.
C h) Study carefully the layout of the building so as to
locate the position of the main supports, and the
effect which the explosion had upon the stability
of the building.
(i) When strutting has been decided upon calculate
approximately the weight which has to be carried
by strut and from table, select a suitable size of column


and if the appropriate size is not available proceed
to build up the requisite size of column from the
material available.
(j) Select, from the table, a sole plate of suitable size
for the load to be carried. Do not erect a strut on
fallen debris.
(, k ) If the load to be carried is not laterally supported
by a floor and roof system or cross wall, it will be
necessary to provide lateral side “ stays ” to the head
of the column and/or raking shores or ties to support
the top section of the wall which has to be supported.
(/) Before undertaking a dangerous underpinning job
it is advisable to erect light temporary supports and/or
shores to protect those undertaking the work from
injury through falling bricks or debris. Before
commencing any shoring work, all debris obstructing
a way of escape in the event of collapse should be
removed where practicable. For this class of work
younger men possessed of keen sight and hearing
should be employed and at all times the squad leader
should keep close watch for the development of addi-
tional fractures, the spalling of brick or stonework
and for noises which usually precede additional
failure of structural members. The fox wedges
under temporary supports should be tightened up
only lightly.
(m) It is advisable not to attempt to correct the deforma-
tion of a brick wall. Usually it is preferable to provide
sufficient lateral support to prevent further
deformation.
(n) Excepting at return corners, flying shores should not
be placed against n-inch or 16-inch cavity walls
unless wedges are first placed in the cavity.
(o) Reinforced concrete slabs in a well-designed rein-
forced concrete building which have been subjected
to the blast of a bomb and have sagged down 4 or 6
inches over spans of 10 to 16 feet need not necessarily
be dangerous to work under. Similarly, reinforced
concrete beams which have vertical cracks inch
to inch wide at or near their centre line may still


support considerable load, but exercise caution when
diagonal cracks are obvious in beams at points
adjacent to an internal column or an external wall
support.
{ p ) Exercise caution where it is observed that the bearing
of the shoes of roof trusses, floor joists or girders
on brick walls has been disturbed and reduced in
area.
(i q ) Exercise caution during heavy winds when shoring
damaged walls which project above roof level.
(r) Although the foregoing notes have been based mainly
on damage by high explosive bombs, it is more than
probable that the city and particularly the suburbs
will be affected by incendiary bombs. Should such
be the case, considerable shoring may have to be
resorted to in order to prevent the collapse of damaged
walls.
(5) When floors or roofs have been burned out, leaving
the walls standing, such a building is very dangerous
in a heavy wind, as the normal lateral supports of
the walls are missing. In this case flying shores
and/or diagonal rope ties are likely to be most suitable
for bracing the walls. See Figs. |j| and fjjf. Manila
rope should not be used for ties where exposed to
moisture.
TABLES FOR ESTIMATING LOADS, ETC.
501. The weights of a few of the materials used in con-
struction are as follows :
Brickwork \\ inches thick —50 lb. per square foot.
Brickwork 9 inches thick—loo lb. per square foot.
Brickwork 14 inches thick —150 lb. per square foot.
Sandstone —160 lb. per cubic foot.
Concrete slab 6 inches thick —75 lb. per square foot.
Wood flooring and joists—ls lb. per square foot.
Corrugated iron roof with purlins and roof trusses —10 lb.
per square foot.
Oregon timber—4o lb. per cubic foot.
Hardwood timber— 70 lb. per cubic foot.


502. The safe bearing value of some of the materials upon
which timber sole plates or timber grillages may have to
be placed can be obtained from the following table taken from
S.A.A. Code CA.I. 1933
Table A—IV. Allowable Intensity of Bearing on Various
Materials.
Alluvial soil, made ground, very wet sand
Tons per
sq. ft.
i
Soft clay or loam • •
I
Ordinary clay and dry sand mixed with clay ..
2
Dry sand and dry clay
3
Hard clay and firm coarse sand ..
4
Firm coarse sand and gravel
6
8
12
Shale rock
Soft sandstone
Medium sandstone ..
20
Hard sandstone
3°
Igneous rock ..
4°
503. The additional bearing values will be found of use
in this regard :
Concrete placed on rubble fill, as basement floors 4 tons
per square foot.
Brickwork with cement mortar—ls tons per square foot.
Brickwork with lime mortar—lo tons per square foot.
504. The values given for brickwork are for cases where
the height is not greater than 6 times the tnickness. For
higher ratios the stresses should be reduced as follow's :
Ratio of Height to Percentage Reduction
Thickness. in Stress.
8 20
10 4°
12 60
505. Safe loads on columns, struts, posts, and toms are
given in Table attached.
506. Safe loads on rolled steel joists used as beams and
column footings are given in Table attached.


507. Safe carrying capacity of hardwood sole plates is
given in Table attached.
508. Fig. shows the observed effect of high explosive
bombs on buildings. Study of this would indicate that where
the damage is not greater than indicated in Fig. —, shoring
may be resorted to.
METHODS OF SHORING.
509. Shoring is generally classified under three types :
(a) Raking Shores.
(1 b ) Flying Shores.
(c) Dead or Vertical Shores, Toms, or Struts.
510. (a) Raking Shores will be the most common type of
shore used for external walls and their main function is to
keep a damaged wall in the position in which it was found
and to prevent its collapse due to the gradual deterioration of
its component parts, through vibration or through some
external force, such as wind pressure. It is not usually advis-
able to attempt the rectification of a deformed wall by means
of raking shores. The main function of raking shores is to
prevent a damaged wall from moving outward or from buckling
at some point in its height. They do not materially support
the wall in a vertical direction, but unless they are so placed
that they will be subjected to some quota of the vertical load
they cannot effectively resist the rotation or buckling of the
wall.
511. Before commencing the shoring it will be necessary
to erect temporary shores for the safety of the rescue parties.
A good shore for a small building or for temporary protection
can be made with, say, three 9 in. x 3 in. x 12 ft. hardwood
timbers. One timber is used as a wall plate, one as the sole
plate, and one as a raker. The wall plate is fixed to the wall
near the top and bottom by means of cleats which are bolted
to the wall plate and inserted in holes in the wall or under a
window or door-head. A cleat should be bolted to the wall
plate near its junction with the sole piece to prevent the latter
from rising, another cleat should be bolted to the wall plate
for the head of the raker to butt against. A cleat should be
bolted to the end of the sole piece to support the foot of the
raker and a strong picket should be driven into the ground at
the end of the sole piece to prevent it from moving horizontally.


512. The end of a raking shore should be placed where
there is something such as a floor to resist the thrust, otherwise
the walls may be pushed inwards and the top of the building
may collapse.
513. Larger and more permanent raking shores consist of
two or more pieces of timber placed in an inclined position with
one end resting against the faces of defective walls, the other
upon the ground, the most convenient and best angle for
practical purposes being 60 degrees, though the width of a
footpath or contour of the ground may in some cases be the
deciding factor.
514. The horizontal distance between the systems in dead
or imperforated walls is usually not more than 8 feet; but on
walls pierced with windows they are placed on the intervening
piers.
515. Up to four rakers may be used. Two will generally
be sufficient for a two-storey building. The foot of the top
raker where more than one are used should, is possible, be
half its height from the wall.
516. A wall plate may consist of a 9 in. x 2 in. or 9 in. x 3 in.
timber, placed on the wall to receive the ends of the shores,
being fixed to the wall by means of wall hooks driven in the
joints of the brickwork.
517. Wall plates should be in one piece throughout the
system if possible, but if they have to be jointed they should
be halved and securely spiked, as shown in diagram —.
518. To form an abutment for the end of the shores, needles
consisting of pieces of, say, 4 in. x 3 in. cut as shown in Fig.
are passed through a mortice made in the wall plate and
projecting into the wall at least 4! inches, a half brick being
taken out to receive them. Full advantage should be taken
of existing openings such as ventilators or windows, as the
vibration caused in removing bricks may cause further serious
damage to the already weakened building.
519. As stated before, the end of a raking shore should only
be placed where there is something such as a floor or roof at the
back of the wall to resist the thrust, otherwise the walls are liable
to bulge inwards ; there is also a danger near the top of the
wall, of that part being pushed off if it be not sufficiently heavy,
so that the tops of shores should not be placed too high in
relation to the height of a building. The shore should be


notched out at its upper end to receive the needle, thus
obviating any tendency to lateral motion. The needle is also
further supported at its top side by a cleat nailed on the wall
plate as shown in Fig. —.
520. In erecting, the wall plate should be marked for the
rakers, allowing 1 foot to 3 feet above the top and below the
bottom rakers. If there is time the cleats should be slightly
notched as well as nailed into the wall plate.
521. In emergency the wall plate may be attached to the
wall by means of spikes or wall hooks instead of needles.
522. The feet of the shore rest upon a sole plate usually
embedded in the ground in an inclined position. A suitable
length of 12 in. x 3 in. hardwood is satisfactory for this plate.
On soft ground a small platform is made to spread the pressure.
The sole plate is better if it is not quite at right angles to the top
raker, but, say, J inch to the foot above a line at right angles
to the raker to allow the rakers to be tightened as they are
forced inwards.
523. The bottom raker is placed first with its head just
below the floor line of the first floor and tightened up by means
of a crowbar inserted in a slot made in the foot of the shore
as shown in Fig. —. It will form an angle of approximately
45 degrees. The middle raker is now placed with its head
just below the line of the next floor and the top raker (in the
case of three rakers) is placed either below the next floor line
or half way up the next storey, according to the height of the
building. The top raker will be in its best position when at
an angle of 60 degrees. Each of these rakers is in turn tight-
ened up in a similar manner to the bottom raker and when in
position they are secured to the sole piece by an iron dog and
a cleat is nailed on the sole piece in front of the shore. Where
more than one shore is used in a system, the bottom ends are
bound together either by hoop iron or pieces of boarding nailed
to the sides of the shores and the wall plate. These pieces
are called struts and have the effect of binding the whole of
the pieces together and stiffening the shores considerably.
524. Violent levering must be avoided and no attempt must
be made to straighten the wall, the object of shoring being
merely to prevent the wall from falling and render it tempor-
arily safe. Wedges should not be used to tighten the rakers,
as the vibration caused would be detrimental to the already
unstable building; the shore should only be forced tight,
but not enough to disturb the wall.


525. The heads of the shores are cut to a bevel allowing at
least 3 inch shoulder on the cleat and the bottom bevelled to
tighten as it slides along the sole piece.
526. In estimating the timber required, a rough rule is to
take each storey of a building as 10 feet. Suitable timbers
are 9 in. x 4 in. to 8 in. x 6 in., but smaller ones may be fastened
together, so long as only one joint occurs at any one plane.
527. (b) Flying or Horizontal Shores would be used where the
damaged building is close to another building. They should
not exceed 30 feet in span and the main strut should be placed
immediately below the point of biggest bulge.
528. First a wall plate is erected on each building ; these
plates are prevented from slipping by needles, hardwood
blocks driven through a hole in the wall plate, or even nailed
on its inner surface and fitting into the hole left when a brick
or ventilator is removed. A spike or wall hook will often act
as a temporary needle for a flying shore.
529. Needles are usually placed just below the place where
the straining piece is to fit. The wall plate may be jammed
against a window sill or other projection to keep it in position,
provided that any opening is strutted. Cleats, say pieces of
9 in. x 3 in., about 15 inches long, are fastened to the wall
plates before erection to catch the ends of the rakers.
530. The horizontal, usually 6 in. x 4 in. to 8 in. x 4 in.
timber, is now placed in position having a straining piece out
of about 4 in. x 2 in. nailed on the upper and lower sides. This
timber rests upon the needles and if there is any space between
the end of the shore and wall plate a pair of folding wedges is
inserted and driven up tightly.
531. The lower rakers are wedged against the straining piece
below the main strut by wedges and the upper rakers may
then be placed. The system must be tightened gradually,
so as not to bend the main strut unduly.
532. (c) Dead or Vertical Shores , Toms , or Struts. —Before
using a dead shore, investigation must be made to see that the
floor below is strong enough to carry the load. If not, the
floor below must be propped. Sole and head pieces are
required to spread the load. The props may be cut slightly
long and wedged into position with pinch bars or cut short
and held with fox wedges. Braces should be fitted. The
sizes of props, head and sole pieces may be selected from


Tables on pages —to ; braces may be 6 in. x i in. Doors
or windows should be strutted as shown in the sketches when
adjacent walls are being shored. The uprights must fit tightly
between sill and lintel and be held apart by struts, either cut
long and “ pinched ” into position or cut shorter and fitted
with fox wedges.
533. A nail should be driven at each joint in case further
movement causes slipping. The wedging of all shores is a
delicate operation and must be done carefully and under
supervision.
534. Typical dead shores are shown in Fig. —.
535. Iron dogs are very useful in temporary work under
emergency conditions. Some typical sizes are shown on
diagrams and —. The usual sizes are about 9 inches long
tvith 4| inch legs and f inch round or square. Wall hooks
are from inches to 6 inches long, with 2 inch returns.
536. Dogs are used mainly to connect the members of
scaffolding or any framing composed of heavy timbers, such
as stages and the feet of rakers. They can be used in place
of lashings and make a very sturdy job. The prongs are
usually on the same side, but are also made with prongs set
at right angles for special work.
537. Wall hooks are used for holding timbers to walls and
are smaller than dogs and have one small prong —usually
driven into mortar joints—for holding, for example, the wall
piece of a raking or flying shore to a wall.
538. The foregoing description, with diagrams to —,
covers the orthodox systems of shoring. In an emergency
temporary measures of an unorthodox nature, indicated by
diagrams to —, on pages to —, are justified, especially
where skilled labour is not readily available.
539. Deformed walls more than 45 feet from the ground
level cannot be conveniently supported by shores, but can be
tied back to some anchorage by hemp or wire ropes. These
improvised ties can be strained by means of a block and tackle,
Weston differential block, screw jack, Trewhella timber jack,
folding fox wedges, hardwood levers, or twisting twin ropes
with a pick handle.
540. Where ropes or steel cables are strained around a
rectangular brick pier or internal column, it is important that
several layers of jute sacking should be placed under the rope
or cable where it passes around the sharp corners of the piers
or columns.


• COLUMN
4? •
STRJJTS
POSTS •
AND • TOM?
• SAFE
LOAD • IN •
POUNDS
SIZ.E ■
• OR.EGON
■ (STANDARD ■ quality )
• HAP-DVOOD
( standard
B 0
OF
• LENGTH ■
OF ■
COLUMN ■
IN ■
FEET
• LE NGTH
OF ■
column ■
IN •
FEET
TIM8ERS.
<3
<3
10
12
14
I<S
IS
2o
G
s
O
12
14
IG
IS
20
4" x 2"
(GOO
2500
.
4 - 4’
83oo
6.200
4500
3300
13000
92 00
£700
Eooo
G 1 x 2*
2 Boo
3800
G 1 , 4‘
I2ooo
9.300
G700
4 900
19000
15000
loooo
75oo
G J « G B
25000
21.000
17000
14000
11000
9700
7500
6400
33000
26000
2looo
16000
13 OOO
llooo
9700
s' , 2"
3300
5100
S’ x 4'
16000
12.000
8900
(oSOO
26000
I8000
13000
loooo
S' „ G 1
34000
28.ooo
22ooo
I8000
I4000
12ooo
loooo
8600
44000
35ooo
27000
22ooo
I8000
15 000
12 000
S' « &
53000
4s.ooo
39000
33000
28000
24000
21000
ISOOO
63000
53000
44000
37000
31000
2 £000
1 cf « 2 1
4200
•
6400
fed. 4'
2oooo
15000
llooo
8400
33000
23000
I6000
12 000
lo' . G 1
43000
35.000
2?ooo
23000
19000
13000
12ooo
loooo
'^scjo'
55ooo
44ooo
34000
20ooo
23000
I9ooo
ISOOO
lo 1 , S'
ssooo
S7000
49000
42000
3GOOO
31000
2GOOO
22ooo
io£>€aC>o
SjSQp”
73000
GSOOO
56000
46000
39000
33ooo
lo" X lo"
83IOOO
81000
72000
<23000
57000
49000
44000
59000
IFgjecSS
(Fosxgo
loo 000
90000
7© OOO
GSOOO
£8000
12" . T
Sooo
7<S 00
l2< v 4“
24000
16000
13000
10,000
39000
270 OO
2oooo
15000
id. <s*
Flooo
42000
34000
28.000
23ooo
I9ooo
I5ooo
12000
66 000
53000
41000
330C0
2Sooo
2 3 000
1*3 OOO
12', S'
79000
£9000
K8000
5oooo
43000
37000
31 OOO
27000
t'TgjEXCSp
94000
79000
GGOOO
55ooo
47000
40000
!2"» id
100000
97000
86000
7GOOO
68000
59000
52ooo
4GOOO
ITSssacp
140000
120000
iogooo
92ooo
80000
69000
!2* , 12'
130000
I2QOOO
110.000
lOQOOO
95ooo
84090
75ooo
69000
2g£>^cp
iSOe<5p
isbscSo
ISO OOO
130000
110.000
100000
NcnT: WHERE lR T OHiDt timrefu is
,7K.! LIED
F\4?:ovFD ZiiS
sxfe
1
LOAOi* M A*y Sc
IKJ crp.EA.s 1
(NOTE. COLUMNS - .OF THE SICE SPECIFIED, WHEN LOADED WITH THE TABULAR. LOADS MARKED THUS UNLESS
' PROVIDED WITU STEEL BED fLATES of greater area than THE COLUMN, WILL CUT INTO THE FACES Of FOLDING
•HARDWOOD AT DOES OR- HAROWCDD CAfs And SOLE PLATES


FIGURE. (A).
TIMBER PLATFORM TO DISTRIBUTE
LOAD FROM R. S[?] TO SOIL FOUNDATION.
FIGURE. (B)
Size
of
fC-s J-
AS FIG ® ! SAFE CENTRAL
LOAP-’W 1 IN FOUNJDS
UNIFOP-MLY D!STfU6UTED
OVEFL LENGTH ■
As FIG <g)
lOAO’VA IF
VMICM CAN
C W EA grp A
SAFE CFLjTRAL
'J FOLINJOS
-J BE CAWLIED
NJ -
VALUE
Of
1 1
z.
4'
<S' o' 4 '
&! o' 1
to! o g
•F' 0'
e'o"
s'o*
tot.o*
2/', 7{'x 9a*
/6<7000
/fSJooo
l<SO <900
/<s/ooo
/ayooo
ls/o 00
152000
122 00 0
203 <S
HZ'. j‘, 75*
/5/coo
/57ooo
157000
tsjooo
15/000
152000
114000
92ooo
152-4
2o x S^l» CsS*'
123 ooo
/29ooo
-7aooo
/2&000
iz&ooo
122ooo
S2 000
74000
122-2,
«'*€', 5£*
f/2ooo>
//2ooo
//2ooo
H2<-> 0 0
//2ooo
34000
/oooo
5sooo
S3-£3
&“* s'* 75*
fSQooo
152ooo
/52 000
/^Sooo
/5“2ooo
12/000
31000
73ooo
121■ /
ie, '* (Z^tSc?
/03000
/q3000
/03000
92oco
/ 03000
7/000
S&ooo
4*0 <000
77-S’G
■>5 i ,e?*45*
54ooo
S^ooo
9^ooo
79000
S4<ooo
GGoco
■^9ooo
.39 OOO
G6-5S
i4‘* s'x
/So 000
/jbooo
/jbooo
/2cooo
/a’OOOO
/OOOOO
75000
GO OOO
100-3
J4'*Sp,4t?
65000
89ooo
Soooo
<5/000
54000
40000
52000
£3-8 7
J3'*5'<35*
80000
eooco
GGOOO
52*000
GGOOO
440CO
33000
20000
43 <22
.'2\s\gs*
104.000
104000
104000
9Sooo
/04000
s/000
G/000
43000
3/ -So
/2 **5'x3S*
70000
70000
52ooo
42000
72ooo
38ooq
SeOOO
2/000
sv -^9
’c‘*a‘ ,ss*
S/000
s/000
s/000
70000
Q/000
50000
43000
33000
57.24
Jo'*G , ,4c?
75000
73000
S 2.000
50000
G/ooo
4/000
3/00x0
25ooo
4oee
to'*4<& 25*
iBoco
4&cx=>o
5SOCO
3oooo
S/ooo
24000
/SOOO
/5boo
2447
f'. y.sd
73000
72-000
70000
54000
G9ooo
4.G000
35ooo
2/Ooo
4<3-<25
7'* 4'* 2/'
SSooo
3goco
20000
22oo>o
27000
/Qooo
14 000
//ooo
/S -03
e'<<G'’x35*
57000
57000
44000
34000
45000
QOocxd
22oo<=>
7000
<2870,
&’* 4", 15*
42000
28ooo
2/ooo
/7000
<2/000
! 4-ooo
/oooo
Sooo
13- 9/
7 '*3H’xJ5*
3oooo
2oooo
/(SOOO
/5ooo
/5ooo
/oooo
Sooo
Go 00
Jo-2cs
13
[I
jOOOO
30000
22 <000
/So 00
23000
/5ooo
//ooo
£?ooo
15-05-
&t 3, n*
2dooo
//CDO
/oooo
0OOO
/oooo
7000
5coo
40C00
C70


TOTAL SAFE CARRYING CAPACITY
IN POUNDS (W) OF HARDWOOD SOLE PLATES'
(standard grade - B group)
rsMENHON;
LENGTH
OF HARDWOOD SOLD PLATES
Op PLATE ~
B x D
3’-o’
4 -ol
5-of
6 -0.
**7 , i
2400
1800
1400
12 00
4" r 6
£■300
4000
3200
2700
4" * e*
7ooo
7000
5700
4-700
t\ 10'
8800
8 8 00
8800
7 400
» <
4 * /2
<4
105 00
1 0500
1 0500
1 05 00
r-. n
0 6 x 6
8000
6 000
4800
4000
' 6\ 8’
1 06 00
1 oeoo
8600
7000
Ci 6 *10
1 3 200
1 3200
13200
1 Ol 00
£*x r/
I 4 8 OO
1 5800
1 58 O O
15800
e f
6* 0
14100
14 100
1 1 4 00
9 4 00
* . -
' 8 x lo
1 7 600
1 7 600
1 76 OO
14800
8 > 12
2 1 1 OO
21 1 OO
21 1 OO
21 1 OO
1 n
lo* l&
2 2000
2 2 000
2 2 000
1 8 500
, if
lo* 12
264 00
264 OO
26400
264-00
*
31700
3 1 700
31700
3 1700
NOTE 0 TABULATED LOADS MAINLY CONTROLLED
BY SHEAR. IN THE SOLE FLATE.
@ ON EMERGENCY THE LOADS COULD EE
INCREASED 75%
0. OREGON SOLE fGATES ARE ONLY AEOUT
ONE HALF THE STRENGTH OF HARDWOOD
SOLE PLATES f
AOTUS-T VALUi'S /OR. OWiR CTAOLAS- cy .


• SAFE • CARRYING • CAPACITY • OF -
•BUILT-UP - TIMBER - COLUMNS •
ooo rc
•ooo OF
ooo? 7
OOC? dr
i o pv
ooooo
OOO ov
ooo Lj
00050
&
ooo 9£
00067
OOOSZ
ooo S9,
i° P*
oooLS
ooo vs
OOOSZ
ooo L£
»° , 8 -
OOQ ZJz
OOO IV
0006S
QOO It
ooo ec
OOO OV
,0 °>Z
OOO S£
ooo ov
ooo Vo
ooo vc
ooo /£
OOO 3 V
i ° \ vZ
OOOZfir
000Z5
000£l
O ooe>z
000?£
0006 ?
n O |
OOO £7
00005
000£Q
0006Z
000<3£
OOOLS
,o pi
0009?
OOO/O
OOO £6
OOOJf
OOOZ?
ocooLs
i° |8I
OOOS>£
ooozL-
00050/
(X>02>£
oooLv
000£3
,0 |9I
CX30Z2
000?9
OOO £//
oooo?
(DOOM'S
00003
i'o ,ri
OO OSS)
00069
OOOSZ /
000£f
OOOOS
ooozl
;o ,zi
oocLL
OOOOOI
OUOZZI
oool?
00013
00091
( °i 01
OOG39
OOO HI
OOOZVl
OOO IS
00013
00059
.°. Q
■sq N no4
*<3Nr»od
■jori.ood
•50 v.no j
- sarsr>od
a
•-prf
•O '3dAl
SiSjOr v 0 J
«*n *r
.•s 3d^i
s-w°r»T; ',71
°N •V
:V '3dA-L
p*3cUl
an°r„7 *01
"••pf r
-,.g 3d,*vi
.X
op T
* a V "3 dAl
•L33=i -N!
«noD =o
• hi-onst
• qooA\a^VH-
- N O O 3 ~'d
= —= i : =f=
o •
NJctte : THE- TOPS OF-ALL- COLUMNS
SHOULD- BE - PREVENTED FROM
MOVING - LATERALLY -
TV/S- TY/=£ C/- /& O£S-/C/v!to /-O/V, j/£V
tV»e/K£
/VO r- A^A/LAHAE


1
Bomb lands
2
Bomb bursts Blast
forces walls against
floors. Doors windows
and light walls are
blown in Fragmentation
scars walls etc
3
Air rushes back. First and
second floor walls are
being pushed out and
secound floor is allowed
to fall This wedges the
wall still further out
/7" /-S CA£AP THAT A ATHOUC H MOST OT~
THE OEBH/S //VS/E>E THE BL//L D/A/G
COHStDEHABAE A MOU MT HA LAS OUTS/DE
AATO THE EH ECT/OTJ OH SHEETS AA/O TACH.A C
GEHEHAAAT W/AA BE S EH/O US AT HAMBEHA D
4
The wedging action of the
first floor pushes the walls
out so that the upper
floors are released The
building may remain in
a condition like this
and require shoring
5
The walls are now
all wedged out and
the floors are
free to fall
6
The ground and
first floor walls
fall outwards
and those above
(to gether with the
floors) fall inside
the building
©©SERVED ossr
K . e:. B © Ew* 3
D/AcnA/vr i


TEMPORARY SHORE BUILT WITH
THREE PLANKS.


VERTICAL OR DEAD SHORES.
*27820 —F


EXAMPLES OF DEAD
SHORES & STRUTTING .


TYPICAL EXAMPLES OF RAKING SHORES
*78220—G


A DOUBLE FLYING SHORE.


Tl VO EXAMPLES OF FUSING SHORES.










CHAPTER 8.
TUNNELLING FOR RESCUE PURPOSES.
TYPES OF TIMBERS AND METHODS OF FORMING
PERMANENT AND FALSE SETS.
541. In considering this subject, the fact should be kept
clearly in mind that where it becomes necessary to tunnel
to rescue victims, time is the main factor, and nothing of
permanency in the structure is looked for in comparison with
civil jobs.
542. Anything overhead in the nature of water tanks and
unbroken beams, etc., should be looked to, an 4, if necessary,
tommed-up immediately. By tomming is meant the propping
up with one or more props with sole and head pieces. Many
beams, though down in one end and loaded with material,
if tommed or picked up in the position they are found in, or
even by inserting a needle (a piece of timber or H girder taken
through the underside of it) and this in turn supported by
props or toms may be rendered reasonably safe to work under.
This should be treated carefully and it should be remembered
that the job is to save any further fall or movement of debris
and thus protect the members of the rescue party and the
victims whom endeavours are being made lo relieve. This
calls for extreme vigilance on the part of the leader and those
working under his direction.
543. Many things will be found to hinder actual tunnelling,
but at the same time some things, if judiciously used will
assist greatly, viz.:—R.C. slabs over spans up to 10 feet which
have sagged may not be dangerous, and concrete beams showing
vertical cracks up to J inch wide at or near the centre will
support a considerable load, but beware of diagonal cracks in
a beam adjacent to an outer wall or inner column.
544. Before attempting any work all debris likely to interfere
with the workmen’s means of escape in the event of a move-
ment, which may be small or large, or a further collapse,
should be cleared away. On service abroad this was insisted
upon even though at the commencement of a job it meant
at times enduring further enemy attacks.


TUNNELLING INTO DEBRIS


545- Workmen should never forget that their mates’ lives are
valuable and the tunnel is for their protection while in the
act of attempting the rescue of others.
546. For ordinary tunnelling, timber is used in various
forms, round timber, hewn or sawn square baulks or planks
of various sizes (any reference to iron, steel, or masonry is
omitted), and the essential tools are single-pointed pick, saw,
axe, sledge hammer, hammer, nails of various sizes from 3
inches upwards, measuring rod, and level. Various other
tools will be required when dealing with obstacles. For the
work concerned, sawn planks if available should be used on
account of the ease in fitting ; round timber and light scaffold
poles, however, can be substituted.
547. The names of various supports vary in different
countries and classes of undertaking, but the following can be
taken as a general guide :
Prop. —Round or rectangular timber.
Lid or Head Board. —Sawn timber placed between the
prop and the material to be supported.
Sole or Footpiece. —Sawn timber placed under prop.
Pig Sly. —Round or sawn timber built by crossing timbers,
one layer upon the other. Useful if handy to a
wood stack or timber yard. /
548. The foregoing are called into use to meet various
emergencies, and if used effectively provide a means of getting
over many difficulties ; for instance, a prop and lid or head
board may hold up a girder and enable the wider tunnel to
pass under it and eventually take its weight.
549. A Tunnelling Set is made up of: —
Two legs—the sides of the frame.
One sill or footpiece—the bottom of the frame carrying
the legs.
One cap —the top of the frame, carried by the legs.
Two spreaders—pieces to keep sides from moving in.
Sheathing or runners for the top and sides ; these are
generally laths.
Bridges are pieces laid on top of cap or on outside of legs
and chocked out f;om them to allow of sheathing or
laths being driven outside the cap or legs.
Chocks are used as above and are of various sizes.
Wedges of wood —various sizes.


550. In addition, several lengths of 3 in. x i in. scantlings
up to 12 feet long, and pointed iron timber dogs, say half a
dozen, each of same sided and right angled, will be found
useful for holding timber in position.
551. Enough material should be cleared away from the toe
of the debris to erect two sets and thoroughly brace them.
552. The sill, then the legs and caps, are placed in position,
the spreaders having been nailed to the sill and cap (it is seldom
found necessary to insert the spreader on sill after placing it
in position, and the nailing of a spreader to the cap after it
has been placed in position is neither easy nor desirable).
553. The laths or sheathing pieces or poles are entered ready
for driving. On the second set a bridge is provided.
554. The sets are spaced according to weight of the material
and the size of the timber used as laths or sheathing, but
generally 4 feet to 5 feet.
555. When the sheathing is driven forward, say 2 feet or
2 feet 6 inches if the ground is loose, the weight which may
come on to it causes a bending and this will cause a tightening
up on the distance piece, a piece of timber placed under the
fixed sheathing and above that being driven, even if it does
not actually break the sheathing pieces. To overcome this
a false set is used.
556. Sometimes this false set has slightly longer legs and
wider cap and sill piece than the permanent sets in order to
continue the rake of the sheathing, but this is better attained
by nailing an extra piece on to the top of a cap which is being
used on a false set. The same can be done with the legs. This
latter method allows of all legs being cut to a standard length.
557. However, either method may be used. If there is a
scarcity of timber and the material being held up allows of it,
false sets may be removed and re-used as the work proceeds,
and with the legs the same length for permanent and false
sets, no time is lost sorting and measuring.
558. It is generally necessary for bridging to be fixed to
the sides or legs in order to drive laths or sheathing to secure
the sides of the tunnel. The sheathing may be driven forward
through clay or sand, but in dealing with broken bricks, etc.,
it will generally be found necessary to take these out piece by
piece, by hand or pick, by one man while his companion
drives the sheathing forward. These two men are called


facemen as their task is to keep the face or end of the tunnel
advancing and at the same time protecting themselves, particu-
larly by keeping the roof sheaths a distance ahead of the greater
part of the working face (this distance depends on the nature
of the material encountered), but although risks will have to
be taken at times, they should not take undue risks or throw
caution to the winds. A small run of material, if not checked,
may cause a mass movement, and such a happening may mean
a collapse of the tunnel, perhaps adding the workmen to the
roll of trapped or injured people. In any case a collapsed
tunnel means loss of timber of which there may not be an
abundant supply, and the added work of driving a new one.
Facemen should therefore remove material from the face and
throw it at least one full set clear. The smaller this heap
the safer it is for them, and therefore two men, termed muckers,
take charge of it, and deliver it to the mouth or outer end of
the tunnel. Sometimes these men handle the material in bags,
at other times in wheelbarrows, depending upon its nature.
Generally, a tunnel for rescue after a bombing raid will not
be of a length comparable with those met with in civil life, and
man handling as above will be found quickest. Barrows may
be available and the indicated distance to be tunnelled may in
exceptional cases warrant their use, but they tend to restrict
the traffic-way and in the event of a mishap may obstruct the
escape of men from the working face. Bags of any kind filled
to a handy weight passed right out or from one to another in
the tunnel would not, if dropped, at any time cause such an
obstruction. If bags are not available or their use too slow,
then before using wheelbarrows, it would be better to secure
a few small cases and get the timberman to knock up one or
two articles known as Cornish barrows. These consist of cases
or made boxes with short handles at both ends and are carried
by two men.
559. The muckers, two or more, will deliver the material
to the mouth of the tunnel, leaving its disposal to the spreaders,
or they may also complete its disposal. How excavated material
is finally disposed of depends on circumstances and need not
worry the tunnelling squad.
560. The timberman and his assistant take over the responsi-
bility of keeping up the supply of timber —no mean task at
times, particularly if the going is good —as the number of sets
required may be comparatively large. On the other hand,
props, head boards, wedges, etc., of a certain size may be


wanted immediately and it is well to give consideration to
having some spares ready if possible. In this way, when word
is passed out by muckers that certain things are needed, it is
possible to supply them in a very short space of time.
561. All members of the team should thoroughly understand
the job and thus be available to relieve each other. The area
of cross section of the gallery is only 5 ft. x 3 ft., and under the
best of circumstances with at least four men working hard in the
tunnel, the latter may become so affected that outside members
of the team should relieve their mates at intervals for a spell
of work outside. Accidents may occur and an injured member’s
place should be taken at once by one of his mates. The work
must go on. Speed commensurate with safe working is the
governing factor. Although the timberman should thoroughly
understand every phase of the job, he is generally the exception
to the above, and should stick closely to his own particular
work.
562. As previously stated, many obstacles will be met with
and it is impossible here to lay down methods of procedure
for overcoming every such case with a minimum of time and
effort and without taking undue risks.
563. Every care must be taken to avoid the timbering being
called upon to take undue loading by a mass movement, as
the frames, although of workable size, are not very strong
against an unbalanced thrust. To avoid this, cavities should
on no account be allowed over or around the sheathing; they
should, if small, be back filled with broken bricks partially
filled bags or even bags themselves or if larger by shoring
or other means. In other words, keep the outside of the
timbering well packed so that if a push comes from one direction
it is counteracted by the pressure of the material on the opposite
side of the frame. If an obstacle cannot be worked round
and has to be cut away it is wise to tom it up on each side of
the proposed cut.
564. The sheathing of the roof may be close together and
that of the sides spaced, according to the material encountered,
but even though larger gaps make erection of the timbers
easier and so expedites the work, it must be remembered that
while small pieces falling through the gaps will not do great
harm, care must be taken to remove the possibility of a mass
movement or run of debris.


565. In rescue work the keeping to line or level is unim-
portant. Either may be varied to suit circumstances by
altering the inclination of side or top sheathing. A change
of direction up to that of a right angle may be made by placing
a set against the side of the drive or tunnel (after boarding up
or otherwise securing the old face) and using short pieces
of sheathing for a small section, then continuing in the ordinary
way.
566. Always secure timbers either with dogs or nailing
with 3 in. x 1 in. or 3 in. x i| in. battens.
567. The workable size for a tunnel is 5 ft. x 3 ft., which
gives 4 ft. 9 in. x 3 ft. in the clear and for this—
legs 5 feet long of 9 in. x 3 in.;
caps and sills 3 feet 9 inches long of 9 in. x 3 in.;
spreaders 3 feet long of 7 in. x i| in.;
bridging 5 feet long of 7 in. x i\ in.;
chocks 9 inches long of 3 in. x 2 in.;
sheathing 5 feet long of 7 in. x in. or 6 in. xi| in.,
will be generally suitable but actually within practical limits
the timber sizes may be varied. For particularly severe debris
loading these sizes may have to be increased.
568. When using round timber for legs, caps and sills,
care must be taken by the timberman to cut the joggles correctly
to whatever style is fixed upon. Generally the cap and sill
are s carved to take the legs (even then it may be necessary in
some cases to use spreaders). Round timber sets may carry
sawn timber sheathing or small round poles.
569. Individual pieces in round timber should not be less
at the smaller end than 4 inches diameter (small end upward
in legs). Many combinations may be used; for instance,
the sill piece may be of sawn or hewn timber, but this depends
upon what is available.
570. Round timber sets may in places require struddles
to be placed between the caps and possibly the legs. These
are simply horizontal toms with or without end pieces.
SHAFT SINKING.
571. If a shaft has to be sunk through rubble or broken
bricks, etc., use the same size of set. The legs become sides
or wall plates and the sill and cap become end pieces. End
pieces are inserted between the wall plates which are placed in


position first and the end pieces driven to position with a
hammer, giving a size of 4 ft. 6 in. x 3 ft. 6 in. As the hole is
deepened, insert sets close together if necessary or with a
space between them, battening the lower set to the upper —
insert lagging if necessary after having previously spaced the
sets. In running ground, laths or sheaths are entered and
driven below the working set in the same manner as has been
described for tunnelling, but this will seldom have to be
resorted to in rescue work. In other words, the drive is made
vertically without roof weight instead of horizontally.
572. Usually it will be found easier and quicker to tunnel
where there is any considerable quantity of debris involved
and trained men are available.


CHAPTER 9.
PUBLIC UTILITY MAINS AND SERVICES.
DEFINITIONS.
573. Public utility mains and services comprise those
services supplied to the public by various authorities generally
constituted by an Act of Parliament. The services supplied
consist of water, sewerage, gas, electricity, telephone and
telegraph service, railways and tramways, and hydraulic
supply, now principally used for lift propulsion.
574. Mains can be defined as the channels (i.e., pipes,
cables, wires, etc.) through which the supplies of the utilities
are transmitted from their respective sources of supply.
575. Services can be defined as the connections made from
the mains to the sources of utilization in the factories, public
buildings, shops, residences, etc.
576. Since the locations of various mains differ consid-
erably in the States of the Commonwealth constituted A.R.P.
Authorities in each State should undertake the distribution
of the requisite information to Rescue and Demolition Squads.
PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED.
577. Under emergency conditions, it should be realized
that it is vital for all essential services to be maintained.
Demolition, rescue, and repair squads in carrying out their
respective duties should always ensure that no attempts are
made to cut, move, or otherwise disturb public utility mains
or services, even though underground mains or services are
exposed and may appear to be damaged so as to be of no*
further use. It is not the duty of any member of any party
to assume this, as the sole responsibility rests with the authority
concerned. It is most essential for these remarks to be
observed, as vital and essential supply to a considerable area
may be interrupted with serious consequences. Furthermore,
injury may be caused to the persons involved in the interference
of the mains. The position of underground mains should
be known to the Officer-in-Charge of the Squads, and members
of the Squads should be warned against commencing work
where danger of electrocution may be a possibility.


578. When demolition work is being carried out, or when
shoring is being erected, care should be taken that such
operations will not cause damage to overhead or underground
mains.
579. In all cases where it is essential that utility mains should
be moved or where it appears that they will receive damage
owing to the operations of the party, the authority controlling
the mains in question should be advised. Any further damage
to utility mains noticed by members of a party should be
passed on to the authority concerned.
580. Each public utility authority has organized repair and
maintenance squads to operate in an emergency. Such squads
will be available at all times. Close co-operation between the
A.R.P. organization and the public utility repair squads should
be arranged.
WATER, GAS, AND HYDRAULIC MAINS AND SERVICES.
581. As damage to these mains is obvious on account of the
evidence of escaping water or gas, the main duty of the party
leader will be to notify the utility concerned as detailed above.
In the case of escaping gas, however, every care should be
taken to prevent any one in the vicinity from using matches
or naked lights of any description. If the amount of gas
escaping is considerable, men should not be permitted to work
without respirators properly equipped with long tubes for
remote breathing until the flow of gas has been stopped and
the air has cleared. In addition, care should be taken to
avoid “ striking sparks ” by excavating tools, etc.
TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH MAINS.
582. As quick communication is essential during an
emergency, particular care should be taken not to interfere
in any way with such mains and services. It should be
particularly noted that in addition to the telephone and
telegraph mains, telephone cables are laid hard up against the
street alignment. These mains are laid in galvanised iron
pipes about 1 foot below the surface. Small pits
are provided to make the connections to adjoining premises.
Overhead wires should be treated with caution as often electric
and telephone wires occupy the same poles and there is danger
of serious shock.


ELECTRICITY SUPPLY MAINS (GENERAL SUPPLY AND
TRACTION).
583. As there is not generally any evidence visually or by
smell of an “ escape ” of electricity, particular care must be
taken before commencing work where electricity mains in
the vicinity have been damaged. Particular note should be
taken of any overhead wires that may be hanging from poles
and in contact with roofs, guttering, or any other metal,
concrete, or the ground generally. On no account should
such wires be handled, nor should the objects with which the
wires are in contact be handled or touched. Under such
circumstances the utility concerned should be notified of the
conditions without delay. Dry sand placed on fire at cable
will extinguish it.
584. Always remember that every electric main
or cable must be regarded as energized or “ alive ”
until you are informed by a representative of the
authority controlling the main or wire that it is
de-energized or “ dead.”
585. If it is absolutely essential to clear electric wires from
some part of a building or structure, such an operation should
only be carried out with the aid of a dry piece of timber at
least 6 feet long. The man doing the work should wear
rubber gloves (heavy electrical type) and, if possible, should
stand on dry timber. The same precautions should be observed
in releasing a man who is in contact with electric wires or
portion of a building or structure which is energized or
“ alive.” In this case, if rubber gloves are not available, dry
cloth or dry rope may be used. If a person is rendered
unconscious by contact with an electric wire or energized
structure, the Schafer method of resuscitation should be
applied immediately the person has been released from
contact. Resuscitation should be continued until the patient
recovers consciousness or until life is pronounced extinct by
a medical man.
586. If it is necessary to erect shores, struts, shears, stay
wires, etc., in the vicinity of overhead electric wires, take
particular care that they are not in contact with such wires.
Footings for shores, struts, etc., should not rest on electric
mains in footways, etc. Bars for holdfasts or other purposes
should not be driven where they can damage electric mains.
If it is necessary to attach ropes for staying or hauling to
public utility poles, the attachment should be made at ground
level only.


CHAPTER 10.
BRIDGING OF BOMB CRATERS.
587. Bomb or shell craters may be formed in streets or
other important thoroughfares, causing interruption to traffic.
Between the extremes of an explosive burst on the ground
surface and a buried explosion not breaking through to the
surface, is the condition in which the effect is strong enough
to break up the material and form a cone-shaped pit called a
crater. The size of the crater formed will depend on the
kind of earth, the depth to which the bomb penetrates before
bursting, the weight and characteristics of the high explosive
filling, and the amount of energy taken up in the bursting of
the case of the bomb. In general, increase in the friability
of the soil, and in the weight of the charge and its explosive
factor, will increase the size of the crater.
588. Where circumstances permit, backfilling the cavity
with debris, such as broken bricks or stone from damaged
buildings, is the most expeditious means of temporarily recon-
ditioning the road surface for traffic. In cases, however, where
it is inexpedient to fill the hole owing to the existence of broken
electric, water, or gas mains, or for other reasons, it may be
necessary to bridge over the crater.
589. The bridges to be referred to are designed to carry
the undermentioned maximum loads over cavities ranging
from 20 feet to 50 feet in width :
(a) Light traffic—s tons, including weight of vehicle.
(b) Pedestrian traffic.
590. Where structures or roads carrying trams and trains
have become damaged, the whole of the section of the street
should be blocked off and the tramways or railways authorities
should be immediately notified. These bodies will make
their own arrangements for the construction of any bridging
work required.


FRAME BRIDGES—LIGHT TRAFFIC TYPES.
591. Frame bridges, composed of two frames resting on the
sides of the gap and locking into one another, are used to
provide intermediate points of support for the road transoms
when the latter cannot be supported directly from the bottom.
They are, in fact, substitutes for an arch. The length of
the intervals between the transoms depends on the strength
of the road-bearers, while the width across the gap at the
footings of the frames and the depth of the latter below the
surface decide the number of transoms to be used, and
consequently the form of the bridge.
592. The forms of bridge suitable are :
For 1 transom or 2 bays .. Single lock.
For 3 transoms or 4 bays .. Single sling.
593- If the width at the top to be bridged is much wider
than the width between footings, trestles or other means may
be employed to bridge the additional distances between the
footings and the banks.
594. The slope of the frames should not be flatter than 2
to 1.
595. Before the bridge can be commenced, the probable
positions for the footings should be chosen. They should,
if possible, be exactly opposite to one another, and all four
footings should be on the same level.
596. A section of the gap should then be laid on the ground
full size, with tape and stakes. Successful locking of the
bridge will depend on the accuracy of this section.
597. If the width of the chasm on either side of the bridge
is not the same, or if the footings are not on the same level,
two sections must be taken, one for each side; and both
should be laid out on the same piece of ground. It can then
be seen whether the footings can be levelled by excavating,
or whether the frames will have to be unsymmetrical.
598. To allow for the stretching of rope lashings and slings,
the roadway should have a camber of one-sixtieth of the length
of the bridge, i.e., having stretched a tape (on the section)
from one shore transom to the other, the centre of the tape
should be raised by one-sixtieth of its length, and it will then
represent the roadway.


599- The distance between the footings, as shown on the
section, is then divided equally to agree with the number of
road transoms, and vertical lines raised from these points till
they meet the tape representing the roadway. If the slope
of either of the frames is flatter than 2 to i, the position of
the road transoms or footings must be shifted till that slope
of 2to lis arrived at. As soon, however, as it is certain that
the spars available and other conditions will allow of the
positions chosen for the road transoms, these positions should
be marked by stakes on the tape representing the roadway.
600. The frames are constructed in a similar manner to
trestles, except that their transoms are on the shore side of
the frames and the ledgers away from it, and that the legs slope
so that the butts are 2 feet further apart than the tips. The
marking of the spars is, therefore, the next step to take when
the type of bridge to be erected has been decided. The road
transoms should be represented on the section by pieces of
spar, or circles drawn on the ground; and the legs should
be laid on the section, and the positions of the frame transoms
and ledgers marked on them by chalk. When the frames
are unsymmetrical, the two legs on one side of the bridge
should be marked first and the other two afterwards, the
transoms remaining on the section all the time.
601. When one frame has to lock inside the other, the latter
is made 18 inches wider throughout than the former. The
distance between the marks on the road transom and ledger
of the narrow frame should be 18 inches greater than the clear
width of the roadway.
602. Besides the lashing marks on the road transom, their
centres must also be marked. The legs, having been marked,
are laid out with their butts towards the gap, and the transom
underneath and the ledger generally on the top of them.
603. The legs are then moved about until they are at the
proper distance apart, and the ledgers and frame transoms
marked; and the whole are lashed and squared, 2-inch rope
being used for the transoms lashings, which must be very
carefully made.
604. When the site is rocky, the ledgers should not touch the
ground, and should be 1 foot from the butts. On soft soil,
however, the ledgers should be near the butts, and a second


one, or a plank under the feet, may, if required, be added to
prevent settlement. In this case the ledgers must be nearly
as stout as the transoms.
SINGLE LOCK BRIDGE.
605. A single lock bridge is composed of two frames locking
into each other, forming two bays. The road-bearers rest on
a road transom placed in the forks made by the legs, and
generally called the “ fork transom.” This bridge is suitable
for spans (between footings) not exceeding about 30 feet, and
can be erected by two or three section leaders and twenty men
in about two hours, if the materials required are in their proper
places on each bank, and if the footings are easy to make.
The working party may be increased to about 30 men to
advantage. If the footings have to be cut in masonry, one
hour should be allowed for preparing them.
606. While the frames are being marked and lashed, the
footings for the butts of the frames can be prepared, and
holdfasts made for the foot and guy ropes ; the holdfasts for
the former should be about four paces from the bank and
about four paces on each side of the central line; those for
the guy ropes about twenty paces from the bank and about
ten paces on each side of the central line. The foot ropes
are secured by timber hitches to the butts of the frames, the
fore and back guys by clove hitches to the tips, and the fore
guys passed across to the opposite side. The guys of the
narrow frame should be inside the guys and legs of the wide
frame.
607. When all is ready the frame 3 are placed into position,
either one after the other or both at the same time, if there
are sufficient men. One man is required for each foot rope,
and one to each back guy to slack off as required, two turns
being taken with each of these ropes round their respective
holdfasts. The remaining men raise the frame and launch
it forward, being assisted by the men manning the fore guys
on the other side of the gap until the frame is balanced on the
edge of the bank; the butts must be gradually lowered into
the footings prepared for them, by slacking off the foot ropes,
the head of the frame hauled over till beyond the perpendicular,
and lowered nearly into its ultimate position by slacking off
the back guys, the men on the fore guys assisting to guide it.
It can be kept in this position by making fast the guys to their


holdfasts, until the other frame has been treated in a similar
manner. The two frames are then gradually lowered by means
of the back guys, and guided by the fore guys until the legs
of the narrow one rest on the transom of the other between
its legs ; both frames are then lowered until they lock,
their legs resting on each other’s transoms. The operations
thus far described should not occupy more than 60 minutes.
SINGLE SLING BRIDGE.
608. A single sling bridge consists of two frames locking
above the roadway as in a single lock bridge, and provides
three points of support for the road-bearers, viz., one road
transom lashed halfway up each frame, and one suspended
by slings from the fork transoms, thus forming four bays.
It can be used for spans (between footings) up to 50 feet, and
takes about 30 to 50 men about four hours to make.
609. In marking the spars the frame transoms are first
placed on the section not less than 9 feet above the roadway,
and when the frames have been lashed a single 8-inch snatch-
block, with falls rove and secured, should be hooked to a
rope at each of the tips of the legs of the narrow frame on its
underside.
610. The frames are then launched, narrow one first, and
placed into position as in the single lock bridge. A couple of
road-bearers are carried out to the road transoms, and two
men climb to the top to assist in getting into position the fork
transom D, which is raised by means of the blocks attached to
the tips of the legs ; one end is raised first and slewed into its
fork beyond its final position, and hauled back again when
the other end has been placed opposite its fork. (See Fig. —.)
611. Meanwhile, the slings may be made as follows:
Two groups of pickets are driven at the proper distance apart
to represent the fork and road transom and a 3-inch rope
wound round them four or five times, avoiding riding. Spun
yarn is then used to lash their ends and to secure the returns,
at intervals, in position. They are eventually passed up by
the block and tackle.
612. The suspended transom B is then, by means of the
blocks, swung into position a little above that it will finally
occupy, and supported by ropes. If the slings have not been
made beforehand they are placed as follows :—One 3-inch


rope (one of the guy-ropes) is sent up to the top on each side,
passed over the three transoms, down underneath the sus-
pended one, up again round the top ones, and so on until
there are four parts or more supporting the lower one, and
the ends are then secured together. Care must be taken
that the suspended transom bears equally on each bight of
rope, and also that the ropes do not ride over one another.
When the road-bearers have been laid down, the thick end
of a hand-spike is inserted in the space between the ropes
passing up and those passing downwards, and by turning
the handle round them several times with the thick end in
the centre, the ropes may be twisted and tightened to the
desired extent until the transom is raised sufficiently. The
handle of the handspike must be secured to one of the legs
of the frames, or to a road-bearer, by a lashing, and great care
must be taken that it be not let go in the operation of twisting.
613. It has been found from experiment that a Spanish
windlass sling twisted three complete turns is about one-eighth
weaker than if untwisted.
614. The operation of getting the frames into position will
require about three hours. Extra time should be allowed if
the footings have to be cut in masonry or brickwork.
615. In order to give the legs more support at the points of
loading, A and C, it is desirable to have long outer road-bearers
continuous from A to C, and to lash them at these points to
the legs, or better still, if spars of sufficient length can be
obtained, the legs can be strutted at A and C, as shown dotted.
The loads at A and C are thus supported by the resistance to
crushing of AG and AE, and of CE and CG, instead of the
cross-breaking resistance of the leg. To prevent buckling,
the struts should be lashed together where they cross, and it is
advisable to add a crosspiece, F.
L
616. The following tables show the spars and materials
required for building the bridges illustrated.
617. The minimum diameters and lengths of the spars
are shown. The diameters are calculated for a load of 560 lb.
per lineal foot, and best selected dry timber with modulus of
rupture about 12,000 and factor of safety for cross-breaking 2,
and for crushing 5. When ordinary unselected timber is used,
the diameters should be increased by one-half.




618. In most cases the lengths of the spars may be increased
by 1 or 2 feet with advantage.
Maximum Loading : 2-ton Lorry Loaded (5 tons Total Weight).
Nature of Bridge and Span
between Footings.
Single Lock— 30 Feet.
Single Sling—50 Feet.
Spars and Planks Required.
Number.
;
Length.
Number.
Diameter
Length.
Two Main Frames.
Legs (centre) ..
Transoms (through) ..
Ledgers (through)
Diagonals (through) ..
Miscellaneous.
Road and Fork Transoms
(through)
Shore Transoms (through) ..
Road-bearers (centre)f
Ribands (tip)f ..
Handrails, if of woodf
Handrail supports
Deck Planks, 12 in. x 2 in.nf..
Racks for slings and ties
4
2
2
4
1
2k
10
4
80
6
34
Inches.
l\a
5
4
3
H
6
5J
3
feet
3
Feet.
20
15
15
20
15
Z8 {
18 {
run
5
4
3
2
4
3
2k
10 d
2oe
4 d
Se
120
4
54
2
Inches.
9ia
5i
4
3
8
6
5 m
5
3
3
feet
3
3
Feet.
37
14
15
20
14
15
28
15
28
15
run
5
*6
Legend. — a Not less than 5 inches at tip.
d, e are alternatives.
k Not needed if abutments are level and hard
m Throughout, not centre.
j? T?u inches pontoon chesses are used.
T The numbers must be increased if the sides of the gap are not vertical.
Number and Sizes of Ropes Required for Making Frame Bridges.
Nature of Bridge
and Span between
Footings.
Circum-
Single Lock— 30 Feet.
Single Sling—50 Feet.
Rope required
for—
ference.
Number.
Length.
Number.
Length.
Two Main Frames.
Guys
Footropes
Transoms
Ledgers ..
Diagonals
Diagonals
Road-bearers
Diagonals
Miscellaneous* ..
Rock-lashings ..
Slings
Falls
Inches.
3
3
2
1 4
I 4
li
I
ii
1
3
2
8
4
4
4
{ i
\O-IO
/ 2
\20
l6
Feet.
120-168
54
1
36
36
36
36
8
4
4
4
4
8
{10-30
{it
32
2
2
Feet.
156-218
54
48
36
48
36
36
36
120-180
120
* Including handrail supports and wooden handrail.


CHAPTER 11.
OXY-ACETYLENE CUTTING.
EQUIPMENT NEEDED FOR DEMOLITION OR RESCUE
WORK.
619. Normally oxy-acetylene cutting is the function of a
specialist but State authorities should prepare a list of cutting
equipment and its location and circularize the information
to those concerned for use in an emergency. For the purpose
of training emergency operators, the following equipment is
needed :
Oxygen cylinder (100 cubic feet).
Acetylene cylinder (100 cubic feet).
Oxygen and acetylene regulators.
Cutting blowpipes and tips.
Cylinder key and §-inch spanner.
Two lengths of reinforced oxygen hose, each 50 feet or
more in length, with fittings.
Goggles, gloves, lighter and cylinder truck.
CONNECTING EQUIPMENT FOR USE.
620. When connecting equipment do not have greasy
or oily hands, and see that no oil or grease comes in contact
with the fittings.
621. Open each cylinder valve slightly to blow out any
dust or sediment before attaching regulators to cylinders.
622. Make sure that both regulator T screws are released
or screwed out in an anti-clockwise direction, and then open
each cylinder valve very slowly about 1 or i| turns maximum.
623. Open acetylene valve on blowpipe slightly and then
screw in regulator T screw until desired pressure is reached
on low pressure gauge. Close acetylene blowpipe valve and
repeat above operation with oxygen regulator.


624. Open acetylene valve marked A on blowpipe and
ignite escaping gas at tip. Increase acetylene flame in volume
until flame leaves tip, then decrease until flame just returns to
tip. Then open oxygen blowpipe valve marked O and increase
oxygen supply until feather disappears from flame and the
short blue inner flame becomes a sharply defined cone which
is known as the neutral flame.
CUTTING PROCEDURE.
625. See that the portion of metal to be cut is reasonably
clean and free from scale.
626. Apply tip of blowpipe to plate with the end of the
inner blue cone of flame about inch to inch from plate.
When plate directly beneath tip becomes heated to ignition
point (about 1,500 degrees Fah.) depress oxygen cutting lever
which releases a high velocity jet of oxygen through the centre
of the tip on to heated spot on plate. This jet of oxygen will
cut through the plate and by moving the blowpipe slowly
along the plate a continuous cut will be made.
627. A continuous shower of molten metal in the form of
sparks will denote that the cut is going right through the plate.
TURNING OFF EQUIPMENT.
628. Close acetylene blowpipe valve.
629. Close oxygen blowpipe valve.
630. Close both cylinder valves.
631. Open both blowpipe valves.
632. Release both regulator screws.
633. Close both blowpipe valves.
PRECAUTIONS WHEN CUTTING.
634. Keep cylinders in a cool place, fasten them in an upright
position and protect them from oil, grease, and sparks.
635. Protect hoses from sparks and falling debris, and have
an assistant to watch both cylinders and hoses while operator
is cutting.
636. Operator should always wear suitable goggles and
protective clothing, such as leather apron, gloves, and hat.
637. Remember always that oxygen cutting equipment is
both simple and safe to operate, but can become extremely
dangerous if proper precautions are not followed.


Hand Flame Cutting Table for Mild Steel Comwel
Blowpipe.
Thickness
of
Steel.
Blow-
pipe
Trip No.
Blow-
pipe
Oxygen.
Pres-
sures
Acety-
lene.
G
Consun
Oxygen.
as
nptions.
Acety-
lene.
Speed of
Cutting.
(Approxi-
mate.)
Inches.
lb./sq.in.
lb./sq.in.
c. ft./hr.
c. ft./hr.
linear ft./hr.
1
8
O-I
10
9
No. 0-22
No. 1-30
No. 0-8
No. i-ii
100-130
i
i
20
9
40
11
90-130
3
8
1-2
25
9
No. 1-40
No. 2-70
No. i-ii
No. 2-18
75-120
i
2
30
9
80
18
60-110
ft
2
30
9
80
16
60-100
3
4
2
35
9
90
18
60-95
i
2
40
9
105
18
45-90
3
40
9
150
26
45-80
2
3
5°
9
180
26
35-65
3
3
6o
9
220
26
20-50
4
4
45
9
350
30
20-40
5
4
55
9
425
30
17-32
6
5
55
9
520
42
15-27
8
5
75
9
654
42
13-22
IO
6
100
9
950
5i
10-16
12
6
no
9
1,025
51
7-13
638. For demolition work, which is usually done in awkward
positions and on dirty material, it is advisable to use a tip one
size larger than is shown on the above table for a given thickness
of plate.


CHAPTER 12.
FIRST AID IN RESCUE.
639. In rescue operations rescuers should concentrate
upon :
(a) Haemorrhage.
( b ) Treatment for shock.
(c) Artificial respiration.
640. Reconnaissance. —Examine the first casualty reached,
and, if the case can be safely left, quickly look for others. Deal
with all cases of haemorrhage first, e.g., fractures can be left,
providing they are made comfortable.
641. Pressure Points. —Knowledge of pressure points is
essential. Many of the party may have to be rendered im-
mobile, stopping haemorrhage until stretcher party arrives,
or other help is available. Save life before devising methods
for removal of casualties.
642. Stopping Haemorrhage. —Use methods in following
order :
( a ) Raising limb.
(b) Digital pressure.
(c) Pad and bandage.
(d) Pad and flexion.
(e) Tourniquet.
643. Tourniquet should only be used if other methods fail,
as constant attention is necessary for tourniquet. A tourniquet
is a painful and dangerous application, and should only be
used in cases of severe spurting arterial bleeding.
644. Shock. —Give warm drinks, but do not give any drink
when there is internal bleeding or injury to the abdomen.
645. Fractures. —Certain fractures must be dealt with on
the spot before the casualty can be moved. Make the damaged
part immobile before moving the casualty. Move to safety,
before rendering first aid, those casualties that can be moved
safely. Never allow a walking casualty unattended on a ladder ;
he will probably fall off. Put a life-line on him and guide
him down.
646. Unconscious Cases. —Open mouth, remove false teeth,
on side. Emphasise lying on back.
°47- Asphyxia. —Use artificial respiration immediately. Use
Schafer method if casualty can safely be placed face downwards.


648. Handling Casualties—C are and gentleness with
casualties must come before speed, particularly in moving
stretchers, in order to minimise shock.
649. Co-operation with Stretcher Parties. —Give every co-
operation to stretcher parties, explain injuries and treatment
given, and when stretcher party is present ascertain from
them what manner of rescue is necessary for patient. Make
conditions safe for stretcher party who have to enter dangerous
areas.
FIRST AID EQUIPMENT.
650. It is suggested that instead of buying the usual First
Aid kits which are marketed, the most suitable materials be
purchased, and a box of more suitable design than the usual
type be made by the local carpenter to fit on the lorry or trailer ;
if rope handles or some similar arrangement be fitted to the
box, it can be readily elevated to a high position on a building
if necessary.
651. The following items are considered suitable for rescue
work :
Twenty-four triangular bandages.
Twelve dressings (large packets).
Twelve dressings (medium packets).
Six roller bandages —3 inch.
Six roller bandages —2 inch.
One reel i-inch adhesive tape.
Six squares unmedicated lint, 8 in. x 2 in.
Two tourniquets.
Two tourniquet canes.
One bottle Dettol.
One bunch 50 safety pins.
Two tubes (| oz.) tannic acid jelly or “ Tanafax.”
Ten small packets cotton wool —4 oz.
Three small packets picric gauze —1 oz.
Six small packets plain gauze —1 oz.
One small measure glass.
One pair scissors.
One pair tweezers.
Six small towels.
One bottle sal volatile—2 oz.
One small bottle castor oil —4 oz.
One eye bath.
One book of 20 labels with pencil, for identification purposes.
One set wooden splints.


CHAPTER 13.
EQUIPMENT FOR RESCUE SQUADS.
652. The following list of equipment is recommended as
being suitable for use by rescue parties. It is realized that
each party may not be able to supply every article and that
there is room for variation with some articles, but in order
to facilitate co-operation between parties, the equipment
should be similar for all. This equipment will be carried
in a lorry (and trailer where available) :
Two iron-shod levers (one 10 feet and one 12 feet, made
to pattern available).
Fulcrum blocks for levers.
Jacks (at least two). Box, screw, hydraulic or Trewhella.
200 feet of Manila rope (not less than 2-inch circum-
ference).
Ten 40-feet lengths 1 \ Manila rope lashings.
120 feet of flexible |-inch diameter wire rope with thimbles
and shackles.
Twelve bulldog clips to suit wire rope.
Two 7-feet (| inch) wire rope slings (with thimble and
eye in each end).
One 6-feet chain (| inch) to lift 3 tons.
One 6-feet chain (f inch) to lift 15 cwt.
Two 3-sheave, two 2-sheave, two single-sheave blocks,
to suit Manila rope used.
One 3-sheave, one 2-sheave wire rope blocks to suit §-inch
wire rope.
Two snatch blocks to suit ropes used.
One 25-feet to 35-feet extension ladder with ladder stretcher
to fit.
One scaling ladder (Fire Brigade type).
One rope ladder (made up).
One 10 ft. x 10 ft. tarpaulin (for sheltering trapped persons
until released).
Two 9-feet sheets 24-gauge corrugated iron (for sheltering
trapped persons until released).
Three 9 ft. x 9 in. x 3 in. Oregon timbers or equivalent.
Assortment of fox wedges.
Four hurricane lamps.
One axe.
Six tomahawks or firemen’s axes.


One 2-handled cross-cut saw.
Three picks.
Two 6-feet crowbars.
Four short-handled shovels (round mouth).
Two long-handled shovels (square mouth).
Three sledge hammers (one 12 lb., two 7 lb.).
Two hand-saws, 7 teeth per inch (26 inches long).
One pair dust goggles.
Four pairs leather gloves for handling debris.
One boatswain’s chair seat (14 in. x 18 in.).
One acetylene cutting outfit.
One wheelbarrow (flat metal type).
First-aid box.
Two ordinary stretchers.
Two blankets per stretcher.
Assorted splints.
One stirrup pump and bucket.
Miscellaneous Items in Box.
Fifty f-inch and |-inch bolts in various lengths.
Nails—one packet 2-inch, one packet 4-inch, 2 packets
3-inch, one packet 6-inch.
Wall hooks —two doz. 6 inches long.
Dogs—two doz. (9 in. x 4J in.).
100 washers to suit bolts.
Miscellaneous Tools in Box.
Two claw hammers (heavy).
One wood chisel.
One 1-inch and one ij-inch mortice chisels.
One 66-feet tape.
One 3-feet rule.
One wrecking bar (pinch bar), 2 feet 6 inches long.
One pair 12-inch snips.
One set spanner (for wire rope clips).
One pair pincers (8-inch).
One wooden mallet.
One 12-inch hack saw and 12 spare blades.
Three cold chisels—B-inch, 12-inch, 18 in. x f in.
Ratchet brace and set of bits.
One 9-inch steel square.
One 14-inch Stillson wrench.
One short two-edged pruning saw.
One bolt cropper.


653- Note. —Some suitable arrangements should be provided,
such as a canvas, metal or wooden detachable cover, to fit
on the top of the ladder stretcher in order that a patient with
a broken back may be removed from this type of stretcher
when he arrives on the ground.
RESERVE EQUIPMENT.
654. This equipment is to be stored in depots ready for use
when required, but is not carried to the emergency job on the
lorry or trailer. It is to be used later as necessary :
One coil ij-inch (circumference) Manila rope.
One coil 2-inch to 2|-inch (circumference) Manila rope.
One wheelbarrow (shallow type).
Assortment of different sized fulcrum blocks for levers.
Assortment of fox wedges in various sizes.
Assortment of timber for shoring tunnelling, bridging
and rescue work.
Three 20 to 25 feet scaffold poles.
One 20-cwt. lifting tackle (differential block type).
Winches (where available).
One stirrup pump.
Three buckets.
One length (60 ft. x § in.) tube for remote breathing with
service respirator.
Twenty 5 ft. x 3 in. (diameter) timber holdfasts suitably
shod.
Twenty 3 feet to 5 feet ij-inch hexagonal steel holdfasts.
“ Cant ” hooks (whatever available) for twisting or rolling
round timber.
655. A tabulated list of other useful gear for lifting and
removing debris that is readily available in the district should
be kapt so that it can be obtained quickly in an emergency.
656. Copies of these lists should be returned to the central
committee so that the distribution of this gear will be known
to headquarters in the event of one of the areas being
disorganized in case of emergency.
Sydney: Alfred Henry Pettifer, Acting Government Printer—l 942.




