





MANUAL
ON THE
SACRAMENTS
I. —THE LORD’S SUPPER.
lI—BAPTISM.
PREPARED BY INSTRUCTION OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY OF THE PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH OF VICTORIA.
1883.
IMelbounu:
FERGUSSON & MOORE, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE EAST.


» t
I
*'
{
%


MANUAL FOR COMMUNICANTS.
PART I.
The Ordinance : Its Symbols and their Meaning.
FIL+VT
aUI-11
1. Repeat the definition of a Sacrament contained in
our Shorter Catechism.
“A Sacrament is a holy ordinance instituted by Christ ,
wherein, by sensible signs, Christ, and the benefits of
the New Covenant, are represented, sealed, and applied
to believers.”
2. How many Sacraments have been instituted by
Christ ?
Two, and two only—Baptism and the Lord’s Supper.
3. Why do you say “ two only /”
Because the Romanists affirm that there are seven
Sacraments —two instituted by Christ, and other five by
the authority of the Church.
4. What are the five so-called Sacraments which the
Church of Rome has institutedl
Confirmation, Matrimony, Holy Orders, Penance, and
Extreme Unction.
5, Have they any right to be called Sacramentsl
None whatever. Even as is admitted by Romanists —
they have not been instituted _ by Christ; —and the
authority to institute them claimed by the Church of
Rome has no Scriptural warrant.
6. Why is this Sacrament called the Lord’s Supper ?
Because it was instituted by Him on the night in
which He was betrayed, while partaking of the Passover-
supper with His disciples. Lev. xxiii. 5 ; Luke xxii. 14.


7. What other terms and phrases are applied to this
ordinance in the Scriptures ?
The Communion, the Feast, the Breaking of Bread,
the Lord’s Table,
8. Repeat the texts in which these terms and phrases
occur ?
1 Cor. x. 16 ; 1 Cor y. 8; Acts ii. 42; 1 Cor. x. 21.
9. Why is it called the Communion ?
Because in it we have communion, i.e., fellowship,
with Christ, and with one another, as His professed
friends and followers.
“ The Lord’s Table is a visible representation of the Apostle’s
doctrine —‘ There is one body and one Spirit, even as ye are called
in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, -who is above all, and through all, and
in you all.’ How complete is such union! It is as complete as that
which binds together the members of the same body. It is as if
one soul animated all. It is as if one object were pursued by all.
It is as if all obeyed one Master, were governed by one principle,
and made one profession. It is as though all were members of one
family, loving their common parent with intense affection, and for
that reason, and in the measure of that affection, loving one
another. This is the view of the Church and its unity presented in.
the ordinance of the Supper. * We, being many, are one body in
Christ, and every one members of one another.’ ’’
“ One Christ we feed upon, one living Christ,
Who once was dead, but lives for ever now;
One is the cup of blessing, which we bless,
True symbol of the blood which from the cross did flow.”
10. Why is it called, the Feast ?
Because it was appointed to take the place of the-
Passover, which was the great Feast of the Jewish
Church, and to celebrate the finished work of our
redemption.*
11. By what other name is the ordinance spoken of?
It is frequently called “ The Eucharist,” which is a
Greek term, signifying “thanksgiving,” and which is
founded on the act of our Lord in giving thanks after
He had taken the bread, and before distributing it to
His disciples.
12. Enumerate the passages in which we have an
account of its institution .
Matt. xxvi. 26, &c.; Mark xiv. 22, &c.; Luke xxii. 19,
&c.; 1 Cor. xi. 23, &c.
* The meaning of the other terms, viz., “Breaking of Bread,,
and the Lord’s Table,” does not require explanation.


13. A Sacrament is an ordinance , wherein by
sensible signs, dec. . . . What is the meaning of
sensible signs 1
Signs which can be taken knowledge of by our bodily
senses, viz.—sight, touch, taste, Ac.
14. What are the sensible signs made use of in this
ordinance ?
The bread and wine (commonly called the elements of
the ordinance,) and also the actions connected with the
elements, viz.—the breaking of the bread and the pouring
out of the wine; the giving and the receiving of the
bread and wine.
15. What is denoted by the bread and wine ?
They are the symbols of the body and blood of Christ,
and as such they remind us that being the Eternal Son
of God He became Man. —Heb. ii. 14. In other words,
they show forth His Incarnation.
16. What is denoted by the breaking of the bread and
the 'pouring out of the wine ?
They are intended to show forth His death.
17. But is it simply the fact of His death which they
shoiv forth ?
No ; but likewise the manner of it—its design and its
efficacy.
18. What do they set forth in regard to the manner of
His death 1
That it was a violent, ignominious, and accursed form
of death. Isa. liii. 5 ; Gal. iii. 13.
19. What do they teach in regard to the design of His
death ?
That it was endured in our stead and for the removal
of our guilt. 2 Cor. v. 20 ; Romans iv. 25.
20. On what do you rest this view of their teaching ?
In breaking the bread our Lord said to His disciples,
“ This is my body broken for you,.” And again, in taking
the cup, He said, “This cup is the New Testament in my
blood, shed for many for the remission of sins.”
21. What do they set forth in regard to the efficacy of
His death ?
That by it He completed the work of our redemption.


22. How is this shown 1
It is shown by the fact that this ordinance is Com-
memorative of His death as a sacrifice offered once for
all, —a sacrifice which, because of its perfection, did not
need to be repeated. Heb. x. 11, 12. v
23. What is denoted by the giving of the bread and wine 1
(1) That He is the Father’s gift; (2) That He loved
ns and gave Himself for us ; and (3) That all the bless-
ings of salvation are offered to us without money and
without price. John iii. 16 ; Eph. v. 2; Rev. xxii. 17.
24. What is signified by our receiving the bread and
wine ?
It is intended to be expressive of our faith. In other
words,—in and by receiving the bread and wine, we are
to be held as declaring that like as we receive these
symbols of His broken body and shed blood into our
hands and partake of them, so do we through faith
receive Him into our hearts, and feed on Him as the
bread of life for our spiritual nourishment.
“ There are two aspects in which the hody and blood of Christ
are presented to our view in the Supper. (1) As BROKEN and SHED
for the remission of sins. (2) As bread and WINE to strengthen us
for serving God. In the Supper these are so conjoined in the same
symbols that they cannot he separated. The communicant cannot
take the one apart from the other. He cannot take the emblems
of the BROKEN body and SHED blood without receiving them as
BREAD and WINE ; nor can he partake of the bread and WINE
without receiving them as broken and poured out. Even so we
cannot draw near to Christ for the pardon of sin without also
receiving purification ; nor can we draw near to Christ for the
purifying, unless we receive it as the result of pardon. ,
“Therefore, O intending communicant, it is not enough for thee
to go to the table in token of thy desire to find forgiveness through
the broken body and shed blood of Christ: thou must also go, in
token of thy desire to find bread and wine to strengthen thee for
the service of God. Nor is it enough to go, in token of thy desire
to find this strength : thou must go, seeking it through the ATONING
death oe Jesus.”
25. In the definition of a Sacrament already given ,
it is said to be a holy ordinance . . . wherein by
sensible signs , Christ and the benefits of the New Covenant
are eepeesented. What does this mean ?
It means that the facts recorded by the Evangelists
relative to His death are exhibited as in a picture through
the symbols of this ordinance ; or in other words, that
its symbols have the same relation to the narratives of
the Gospel which a picture has to the historical incident
which it represents.


26. Is this the only purpose for which sensible signs
are made use of in the Sacraments ?
No ; Christ and the benefits of the New Covenant are
not only represented but sealed to believers, and hence
the Sacraments are called sealing ordinances.
27. What does this mean ?
Seals appended to a written contract are confirmations
of the agreement embodied or detailed in the contract.
And accordingly circumcision is said to have been
“ a seal of the righteousness of the faith which Abraham
had, yet being uncircumcised.”
28. Of what is circumcision here said to have been the
seal I
Not of the faith of Abraham, but “of the righteous*
ness of his faith.”
29. What does this mean ?
That his circumcision did not make him a believer, or
was not of itself a separate and conclusive evidence of
his being a believer. It was simply a confirmation (1) of
the promises made to him, and (2) of the engagements
or obligations resting on him, by reason of the “ faith
which he had, being yet uncircumcised.”
And in like manner the Lord’s Supper, when intelligently admin-
istered and observed, is (I) A testimony—a sealed testimony from
God—that “ whosoever believeth in the Lord Jesus Christ shall be
saved;” and (2) It is a declaration—a sealed declaration on the
part of believing communicants of their acceptance of the Gospel,
and their engagement, in the help of grace, to live and act con-
sistently with this declaration.
30. It is said yet further , that by these signs Christ
and the benefits of the New Covenant are applied to
believers. What does this mean ?
That through partaking worthily of this ordinance,
the faith of believers is so increased and established,
that they are enabled to draw largely out of the fulness
which is in Christ.
31. Does this increase of faith follow from the mere
partaking of the sacramental elements ?
No ; the power of the ordinance consists in the impres-
sions which are made by it, on the hearts of believing
communicants through the truths which it represents
and confirms, and in the obligations which it involves
and seals.


32, What, in this connection , are the statements of our
Shorter Catechism relative to the Sacraments as means of
grace 1
“They are among the outward and ordinary means
whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits of
redemption ; and they are made effectual to salvation,
not from any virtue in them or in him that doth admin-
ister them, but only through the blessing of Christ and
the working of His Spirit in them that by faith receive
them.”
33. On what, according to this statement , does the
efficacy of the Sacraments depend ?
On the blessing of Christ, and the working of His
Spirit in believing recipients.
34. And hence Christ and the benefits of the New
Covenant are applied through means of them;—To
whom 1
To Believers only.
“ Still it is not the quantity of faith that saves. A drop of water
is as true water as the whole ocean —and so a little faith is as true
faith as the greatest. A child eight days old is as really a member
of the human family as a man of sixty. A spark of fire is as true
fire as a great flame ; a sickly man is as truly alive as a man in
health. It is not then the measure of thy faith that saves. The
weak hand of a child that leads the spoon to the mouth will feed as
well as the strong arm of a giant; for it is not the hand that feeds
but the meal. Grip Christ ever so weakly and He will not let thee
perish.”
35. Why can no benefit be derived from any means of
grace, except through faith ?
“ Look at the locomotive as it snorts like a giant war-horse to
take its place at the head of the train. Boiler, tubes, pistons, fire,
steam—all are in perfect order; carriage after carriage is filled, the
hour has struck, and the bell rung, yet there is no departure, nor
would be till “ the crack of doom,” until one want has been sup-
plied. The hooks which connect the engine to the train must be
brought into effective action. Yet no one supposes that the hook
or coupling draws the train. The veriest child perceives that it is
drawn by the engine. Yet, nevertheless, apart prom
HOOK THE POWER OF THE ENGINE WOULD BE OF NO AVAIL.”
Faith, in like manner, is the bond which unites us to
Christ, and unless we are by this bond united to Him,
we can derive no saving benefit either from or through
any of His Ordinances.


PART 11.
Reasons foe Observing the Ordinance, and
the Preparation required for Observing it
Worthily.
36. May not various reasons he assigned for observing
this ordinance ?
Yes ; several strong and important reasons.
37. Mention the chief of these reasons.
Because it has been commanded by Christ as King of
Zion, and Head of the Church. (See Question 46.)
38. Can you give a second reason ?
Because the appeal, “ Do this in remembrance of Me,”
is the dying appeal of our best and greatest Friend ; and
of all appeals, the last appeal of a beloved friend is
specially touching, and should be resistlessly effective in
moving us to comply with it.
39. Can you give a third reason ?
Because this ordinance is, so to speak, a monument set
up for Christ—an appointed means of perpetuating the
remembrance of Him in the world ; and He above all
others, deserves to be held in grateful remembrance.
7 •
40. Can you give a fourth reason ?
Because it affords an excellent opportunity of declaring
ourselves, in a solemn and public manner, to be His
disciples.
41. Gan you give yet another reason ?
Because when rightly observed it is an effective means
of grace.
“ Long, it may be, have you listened to the offers and invitations
of the Word ; long, perhaps, have you hesitated about acceptance,
halting between two opinions, almost, but not altogether, persuaded,
delaying your decision till a more convenient season ; and thus, per-
haps, might you still go on postponing your decision from year to
year, resolving and re-resolving, but never acting ; but by the public
announcement of the first Communion, the Lord Himself will bring
you to the point of decision, lie sets a time within which you must
make up your minds, and give a_ solemn and public answer to His
invitation. In the first Communion He will draw a line in front of
all the hearers of His Word, and then shall say, * Whosoever has


made up his mind, whosoever is persuaded, whosoever accepts My
offer, whosoever is on the Lord’s side, let him step acboss this
LINE, and at the table let him make a good profession before many
witnesses ; let him take the outward symbols of the Supper in to]; en
of his inward and unreserved acceptance of Me and My salvation.’
Now then, and without delay, make up your minds. To neglect
this offer of Christ may be as fatal as to reject it, for it may never
again be renewed. Another opportunity you may never have. A
more convenient season you cannot have.”
42. Specify two objections frequently urged by professing
Christians as reasons for not observing this Ordinance.
(1) That they have not the attainments and qualifica-
tions which would warrant their coming to the table
of the Lord, and (2) That sacramental vows are often
broken.
43. What is the duty of those who profess to be Tcept
bach by the first of these reasons I
It is their duty to be diligent and earnest in endea-
vouring to have the necessary qualifications; and then,
as thus prepared, to embrace the first opportunity of
communicating w T hich occurs.
44. May we not fail in obtaining the qualifications ?
Not if we seek them earnestly and prayerfully. Hence
a continued plea of unfitness is practically an acknow-
ledgment of wilful unbelief and unconcern.
45. Is there any greater force or propriety in the second
reason ?
No ; it might as well be affirmed that no promise
should ever be given, because promises are often unful-
filled, or that no bargain should be made, because
bargains are often broken.
46. Mention a consideration which males this plea
specially inadmissible.
The observance of the ordinance is a commanded duty
—a duty as binding on all who call themselves Christians
as any duty prescribed in the moral law. It cannot be
neglected without slighting the authority of our glorified
Kedeemer.
47. Quote some texts confirmatory of the reasons now
assigned for observing this Ordinance.
Our Lord hath said, “If ye love Me keep My com-
mandments.” And again—“ Whosoever shall confess
Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father
which is in heaven. But whosoever shall be ashamed of


Me and of My words in this sinful and adulterous
generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed
when He cometh in the glory of His Father with the
holy angels.” Very solemn also is the warning contained
in the last verse of Ist Corinthians —“ If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be [or he shall be]
Anathema Maranatha ” — i.e., accursed of the Lord at His
coming.
48. What duty is specially enjoined on intending com-
municants ?
Self-examination. “ Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.”
49. What more particularly are the qualifications in
regard to which we shoidd examine ourselves 1
Knowledge to discern the Lord’s body, faith, repent-
ance, and love.
50. What do you mean by hiowledge to “discern the
Lord's body ? ”
It means having a correct knowledge (1) of the nature
and design of the institution, (2) of the profession which
we make in observing it, and (3) of the obligations
connected with its observance.
51. Why is such hiowledge necessary ?
Because, without this knowledge, the ordinance cannot
be observed with proper aims and motives, nor can we
be able to answer the cavils of gain sayers in regard to it.
52, What do you mean by faith 1
Trust in Christ as our Saviour, or, as described in our
Shorter Catechism —“ Faith is a saving grace whereby we
receive and rest on Christ alone for salvation, as He is
offered to us in the Gospel.”
53. What is needed to our so receiving and resting on
Christ 1
(1) A proper sense of our guilt before God, and of our
inability to give or do what would merit His pardon and
favour ; (2) a clear persuasion that Christ has been
Divinely appointed to act as our Redeemer; and (3) a
confidence in His ability and willingness to save us.
In other words : —We must have an awakening sense of our need
of salvation ; and, next, we must be believingly convinced that the
Lord Jesus Christ has been Divinely commissioned, and is possessed
of personal fitness to be our Saviour. Or more simply, we must
have a persuasive conviction (1) That we are lost. (2) That Christ
has been sent to save us, (3) That He is able to save to the uttermost.


54. Why is faith in Christ necessary as a qualification %
Because without it, we cannot honestly make the pro-
fession implied in handling and feasting on the emblems
of His love, nor derive from the ordinance any spiritual
refreshing.
55. Give a brief and simple definition of repentance ?
Turning from sin to God.
56. Is sorrow for sin in itself a sure evidence of repent-
ance 2 •
No. There can indeed be no repentance without
sorrow for sin, but there is a sorrow for sin which
worketh death.
57. Mention an instance of such sorrow 2
The of Judas, who, being grieved for, and
ashamed of, his sin in betraying his Master, went and
hanged himself.
58. What is the main element in repentance 2
Turning not only from sin hut to God, with an earnest
desire through the help of grace to walk in the way of
His commandments.
59. Why is repentance necessary 2
Because the Lord’s Supper is a memorial of His
“suffering for sin,” and to celebrate it without an
abhorrence of sin, and a determination to forsake
iniquity, would be to heap insult on His sufferings and
“ crucify Him afresh.”
60. What is the next qualification with respect to which
we shoidd examine ourselves 2
Love to Christ and to one another as His disciples.
61. Why is such Love necessary 2
(1) Because the commemoration of His love should
constrain us to admire Him as the “ chief among ten
thousand and altogether lovely.” And (2) Because He
hath enjoined us to “show that we are His disciples, by
loving one another.”
“It is peculiarly unbecoming to go to the Lord’s table with a
spirit of revenge. So that if I bring my gift to the altar, and
there remember that I have a quarrel with my brother (that is
with any person whatever,) I should leave my gift before the altar,
and go my way ; first be reconciled to my brother, and then come
and offer my gift.”


62. What is the practical result of faith, repentance,
and love I
They have their practical issue in new obedience, or,
as it is expressed by the Apostle, in “presenting our
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which
is our reasonable service.”
63. Why is this called neiv obedience ?
(1) Because it proceeds from our having become new
creatures in Christ; (2) Because it is prompted by new
motives ; and (3) Because it manifests itself in a new
manner of life.
PAKT 111.
Benefits derived from the Ordinance, &c.
64. What are the advantages enjoyed by those who
partake of this ordinance worthily ?
“ The worthy receivers of it are, not after a corporal
or carnal manner, but by faith, made partakers of the
body and blood of Christ, with all His benefits, to their
spiritual nourishment and growth in grace.”
65. What is meant by being “ made partakers of the
body and blood of Christ I ”
It is a figurative expression, made use of by our Lord
in John vi. 51, &c., and by Paul in 1 Cor. x. 16,* and
denotes (1) the intimacy of the fellowship with Christ,
which is enjoyed by believing communicants, and (2) the
special fitness of this ordinance to quicken and sustain
the exercise of appropriating faith.
Thy flesh is meat indeed, my God and Lord,
Thy bloodds drink indeed for evermore ;
On Thee alone I feed—of Thee I drink,
That into this sick soul the heavenly health may pour.
Thou with us, and Thou in us -this is life ;
All that the Father is, in Thee we see-
O Christ of God, what art Thou not to us ?
And what of wealth is there, we may not find in Thee ?
* The expressions made use of in these passages are not literally but
substantially the same, and the metaphor contained in them, though
forcible, gives no countenance to the Popish doctrine of transub-
stantiation.


“ There is, however, a kind of experience that some people look
for at the Lord’s table, which we have no reason to expect. We
have no reason, e.g., to expect any sudden impulse on our under-
standing, or any violent affection of our heart and feelings. For,
though there is nothing to hinder the Spirit of God from operating
in this way, yet His ordinary method is calm and secret; and the
Sacrament of the Supper is one of those means by whi«hi, in a
rational manner, He works on our mind and dispositions. We have,
accordingly, ground to expect that we shall feel that comfort and
pleasure which a believing contemplation of the memorials of
Christ’s sacrifice is naturally fitted to inspire; that we shall
experience a more heartfelt sorrow for sin when we see all that
Jesus suffered on account of it; that our love to Him shall grow
more warm and ardent, when we behold the great price that He
generously paid for our redemption; that all resentment towards
others shall die away in our breasts, when we have such a striking
proof of the great mercy of God towards us; and, in short, that
we shall receive more lively and lasting impressions of those
infinitely important truths which are built upon the death of Christ,
and essentially connected with the salvation of souls.”
66. What is meant by saying that they are not made
'partakers of His body and blood after a corporal and
carnal mannerl
It means that the bread and wine are not changed, as
the Church of Rome affirms, into the very body and
blood of Christ; but that believing communicants feed
upon Him— i.e., apprehend their personal interest in
Him, and derive spiritual nourishment from Him, through
their faith.
“ The Word—the Supper—the Minister—are only finger-posts
that point on to Jesus. It is with Himself thou must communicate
if thou wouldst find a blessing. This is the only, the true, the
saving presence of Jesus in the Supper. A corporeal presence—
the presence of His human body in the signs—is not needed and
would not benefit us. It is an idle figment that has given rise to
frightful superstitions, withdrawing our thoughts from 11 is spiritual
presence, which alone can bless. ‘ God is a spirit, and they who
would worship Him must worship Him in spirit.’ If not ‘in
spirit,’ not in truth.”
“The Church of Rome holds that the bread and wine were changed
into Christ’s real body and blood. They rest this belief on the
words which He used when instituting the ordinance —“ This is My
body.” But the following, among other considerations, show the
utter falsity of this opinion. Ist. The natural meaning to be put
upon the word is—i.e., “ This represents My body.” The verb is,
frequently bears this meaning. Thus, the seven kine are seven
years— i.e., represent seven years. And so in many other instances.
2nd. Our senses bear witness that the elements remain unchanged.
To the eye, to the touch, to the smell, to the taste, the bread and
wine are bread and wine still. 3rd. Christ has but one body ; but
as the Supper is observed in a thousand different places (it may be)
at one time, it follows that Christ’s body must either be in a
thousand different places at one time, or He must have a thousand
different bodies. And surely this is enough to show the utter
absurdity of the dogma.”


67. What is the sin said to be committed by those who
communicate unworthily I
They are “guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.”
68. What does this mean 1
It means that they exhibit, though in a different form,
and under different circumstances, the spirit of those by
whom He was rejected and crucified ; that, making light
of His love and his personal claims, they say in effect,
“We will not have this man to reign over us.”
69. What is the punishment annexed to this offence ?
“ He that eateth or drinketh unworthily drinketh to
himself "—judgment or chastening. The punishment to
which this expression refers is present chastisement rather
than future condemnation. —1 Cor. xi. 29.
70. How can you establish the correctness of this inter-
pretation ?
The particular judgments to which the Apostle alludes
are specified in the following verse—“ For this cause
many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.”
And further, the design of these judgments or chasten-
ings is explained in verse 32 —“ When we are judged we
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be con-
demned with the world.”
71. '‘'‘May one who doubts of his being in Christ or of
His due preparation come to the Lord's table ? ” (Larger
Catechism, 172.)
Yes, if deeply affected with his apprehension of the
want of it, and unfeignedly desirous to be found in
Christ, and to depart from iniquity.
“ The more we feel our want of merit, the more are we meet for
the feast of love. The more we feel our worthlessness, by reason
of our sins, the more are we enabled worthily to partake of the
Saviour’s pardoning mercy and purifying grace.”
72. How long is this ordinance to be observed by the
Church ?
Until our Lord’s second coming. “As often as ye eat
this bread and drink this cup ye do show the Lord’s
death until He come.”
73. May not a further inference be drawn from the
words , “ until He come 1 ”
Yes; they remind us that in observing this ordinance
we should contemplate Him not only as having died


for our offences, but as having risen again, and been
crowned Lord of all; and that we shouldhold ourselves
in readiness, and look forward with a lively hope, to
meet Him at His re-appearing.
“ The Lord’s Supper, as it looks back on the past points to the
salvation which Jesus died to win; as it looks round on the PRESENT,
it points to the salvation which Jesus lives to give ; and as it looks
on the FUTURE, it points to Jesus coming to reap the harvest which
He sowed in blood, and is now watering by His Spirit—coming to
gather in the fruit of His past and present work.”
74. What is to be expected of those who have sat down
at the table of the Lord ?
They should endeavour through grace to walk con-
sistently Avith their profession—to walk so that all men
may knoAV them to be His true disciples, hating iniquity,
and careful to abound in good works.
“ Communicants come under engagements at the Lord’s table
which reach to every relation and condition of life. They engage
‘to adorn the doctrine of God their Saviour in all things,’ and r
therefore, if they have been sincere in their profession, they will
study to be more humble in prosperity, and more patient in tribu-
lation, more resolute in withstanding temptation, more diligent in
their improvement of the means and ordinances of grace, and more
dutiful as husbands and as wives, as parents and as children, as
masters and as servants, as magistrates and as subjects, as neigh-
bours and as friends.”
75. What are the effects of open and habitual incon-
sistency on the part of those who have been at the
table 1
(1) It greatly aggravates their guilt, and exerts a
hardening influence on their hearts, and a deadening
influence on their consciences. (2) It is very injurious
to religion, inasmuch as it gives the careless and
unbelieving a handle to vilify the Gospel, and to ridicule
its ordinances.
76. But do not those who, having arrived at the years
of discretion, continue to be non-communicants, also pursue
a course which is highly blameworthy and dangerous 1
Yes; a course which, for various reasons, is most
blameworthy and hurtful.
77. Mention some of these reasons.
They cast contempt on the authority, the wisdom, and
the love of Christ, and deprive themselves of the benefits
which, in His sovereignty, and love, and wisdom, He
hath appointed this ordinance to confer.


“ Do men go to school because they know so much, or because
they know so little ? Do men go to a physician because they are
sick, or do they wait till they are well and then go ? To hear
people speak of uniting with the Church, and the hindrances by
which they are kept back, one would suppose they thought it was
their duty to stay out till they were perfect, and then join it as
ornaments. They who are weak, but who wish strengthwho are
ignorant, but hunger for knowledge; —who are unable to go alone,
and need sympathy and society to hold them up;—who are lame,
and need crutchesin short, who know the plague and infirmity
of a selfish heart, a worldly nature, a sinful life, and who desire,
above all things, to be lifted up above them—have preparation for
becoming members of the Church. If you could walk without
limping, why use a crutch at all ? [f you are already good enough,
what need have you of the Church and its ordinances ? But if you
are so lame that a staff is helpful, so infirm that company and ordin-
ances will give you aid, then have you a right to the fellowship of
the Church. To be enrolled in her membership is not to declare
yourself perfect, or of distinguished excellence ; it is rather a public
recognition of your weakness and your spiritual necessities. The
Church is not a gallery for the better exhibition of eminent Chris-
tians, but a school for the education of imperfect Christians—a
nursery for the care of weak Christians —a hospital for the better
healing of those who need assiduous tendance.”
78. Can you give another reason ?
If unprepared to meet and hold communion with the
Lord at His table on earth, they must be still more
unprepared to meet Him at death, or to be admitted to
His table in Heaven.
79. Can you give a third reason ?
If all men were to imitate their example, the world
would be deprived of one of the principal means of its
instruction and improvement.
“ Let no man plead this or that excuse for not coming to the
Lord’s table, but resolve hereafter carefully to perform so neces-
sary a duty. Let the sinner quit his state of sin and death, and so
come and eat of the bread of life. Let the ignorant come into the
school of Christ, and proceed till they rise to the highest form.
Let those that are at enmity with their neighbours also come, only
let them first go and be reconciled to their brethren, and so let
them offer their gift. Let those that have a multitude of worldly
employments come, only let them leave them, as Abraham did his
asses, at the bottom of the mount, and so let them ascend to
heaven in their thoughts, and converse with God. Let the weak
come, that they may grow in strength ; and let the strong come,
that they may not grow weak. Let them who have fears come,
that their hearts may be settled by the acts of a more lively faith ;
and let them come who have hopes, that they may rise to greater
degrees of humble confidence. Let those who have leisure accept
the invitation, because they have no excuse; and let those who
have but little leisure entertain it also, that they may the more
sanctify their business and their employments. Let the sad and
sorrowful approach, that their hearts may be filled with the joy of
the Lord; and let those that ‘rejoice in the Lord alway’ approach,
that their joy may be full.”


80. Should not our preparation for encompassing the
table of the Lord be accompanied by prayer ?
Yes. (1) We should pray for grace to direct us in the
work of self-examination, and to make us acceptable
guests at the sacred feast; (2) we should pray for an
abundant blessing on the Word preached—pray for the
wisdom so greatly needed by those who have been
appointed to divide unto us the Word, and to break
for us the bread of life ; and (3) we should pray for a
rich unction from the Holy One on ourselves and our
fellow-communicants, that so we may not only in the
bond of true brotherly love “ all eat of the same bread
and drink of the same cup,” but may unitedly have
lively and hallowed “fellowship with the Father and
the Son through the Spirit.”
81. Is it not equcdly necessary that we give ourselves
unto prayer after we have been at the table ?
Yes, it is our duty to continue in prayer —to pray
always, and not faint; to be jealous over ourselves,
moreover, with a godly jealousy, lest, through unwatch-
fulness and self-confidence, we bring dishonour on our
profession, and “make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience.”
82. What, in effect , is the invitation or appeal addressed
by the Master of the Feast to all who take their seats at
His table ?
“ If any man will come after Me let him deny himself
and take up his cross and follow Me.”
GOING TO THE TABLE.
“ The heart may be usefully occupied after this manner in going
to the table:—Let me think what I am by nature —a sinner
before God, ruined, wretched, and hopeless. There is in me no
good thing—no, not one spot of moral beauty on my soul. I have
sinned every day, and in all things. Left to myself, lam therefore
hopeless. Under this feeling I would look up to the Holy
Spirit for help, and would depend on Jesus alone for my
salvation.
“ Let me think of the necessity of making sure as to the founda-
tion of my faith. My trust must be in Jesus alone. I know that
my repentance cannot save me, nor my prayers, nor my good
works, nor my tears, nor anything that I can by any possibility
perform. Christ, Christ alone can do it. Do I feel this as well as
know it ? Is it the language of my heart as well as of my lips ?
Ami dealing faithfully with myself in this matter? Ami looking
in simple and undoubting faith to the cross ? Am I indeed com-
mitting my soul and all its high interests to Jesus ? Is He the
‘ all and in all ’ of my salvation ? ,


“ Let me think of what I must he prepared for, if I would truly
follow the Saviour. I ‘ cannot serve God and mammon.’ I must
give up the world, its vain pleasures and fashionable follies. I
must deny myself. I must take up the cross. I must go wherever
Christ bids me. I must be ready to meet ‘the world’s dread
laugh.’ Have I counted the cost of all this ? and is it my intel-
ligent, firm, solemn purpose, in the Master’s promised strength, to
bear and brave it all ?
“ Let me look into the state of my heart. What are its reigning
feelings ? If lam a Christian indeed, then I am not my own, but
God’s, Is this the deepest feeling of my heart—the feeling of
consecration ? Is sin hateful to me ? Do I tremble at the thought
of committing it ? Do I watch and pray, and struggle hard against
it ? Do I see in holiness a divine excellence and beauty ? Am I
prayerfully and earnestly cultivating it ? Is is written like a law
upon my soul ? Is the image of the Saviour becoming more clearly
reflected in my heart ? Thus am I fulfilling the Divine injunction
—‘ Be ye holy, for I am holy ? ’
“ Let me think of the manner in which I am discharging my duty.
Duty I know should be paramount. In duty I should find my
pleasure. Everything should be made subservient to this. Is it so
with me ? Do I take the Bible as the man of my counsel, reading
it, and pondering it, and getting from it all needed light to guide
me through the perplexing labyrinths of earth? Do I make
conscience of secret prayer and take delight in it ? Do I sacredly
keep the Sabbath for God, and is it to me the very ‘ pearl of days’
—sweet emblem of the glad Sabbath of heaven ? Am I faithful
in my attendance on the sanctuary ? Am I walking in peace and
charity with all men as far as in me lies ? Ami contributing as
liberally as I can for the advancement of Christ’s cause and
kingdom? Ami placing my talents and influence at the disposal
of the Church so far as opportunity is afforded me ? Am I looking
with compassion on perishing souls, and in all earnestness seeking
their salvation ? Is it, in a word, my constant endeavour to know
my duty ? and, knowing it, do I try diligently and faithfully to
fulfil it?
“ Let me especially consider at this time how my heart is affected
towards Christ. At the communion table His death is showed
forth. The bread and wine there represent to me His body,
mangled and bruised for my sins. Am I deeply moved by this
thought? Is Christ, in consequence, the supreme object in my
heart ? Do my thoughts centre on Him ? Do I love Him with a
true and ardent affection ? Is He to me the chiefest among ten
thousand, fairer than all the sons of men ? Do I feel a true delight
in communion with Him ? In consequence, do I feel a desire to
sit down at His table, and remember His dying love? Am I
anxious, as a sinner redeemed, to be altogether His, and His
for ever ?
SITTING AT THE TABLE.
“ The communion service itself is generally brief. The mere act
of communicating embraces only a few minutes. And it is
important that the heart be suitably occupied. Its attention
should be undivided, its thoughts simple. Contemplation of the
dying Saviour, clinging to the blessed cross, should be its exercise.
Silent waiting by Calvary is its true position. Such passing
thoughts as these may occupy us :


Oh, the vastness and grandeur of that love which led Jesus to
die for me.
I am a great sinner, lut Thou, 0 Jesus, art a great Saviour.
Lord Jesus, I would now remember Thee,
In Thy blood I trust for cleansing, in Thy righteousness for
raiment, in Thy grace for justification.
Show unto me Thy mercy, 0 Jesus, and come and save me.
This bread which I now 'partake of is to me the emblem of Thy
body broken for my sins- of Thyself, the bread of heaven.
This cup, of which I drink, is to me the emblem of Thy blood shed
for my cleansing. Oh, wash me in it.
Lord Jesus, 1 thank Thee, I trust in Thee, I love Thee, 1 praise
Thee, I give myself unto Thee.
My hope is in Thine atoning blood, Thou sin-pardoning Saviour.
Blessed Jesus, I would take hold of the sublime assurance that
Thou art able to save, even unto the very uttermost.
Sun of Righteousness, illumine my soul, and let Thy glory eclipse
the loveliness of all created beams.
At Thy Table I would have sin mortified, every idol broken, every
evil thing put away.
0 Saviour, draw me nearer to Thee, and discover to me more
of Thy matchless beauty.
Whom have I in heaven but Thee ? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides Thee.
LEAVING THE TABLE.
“ The season immediately following communion is fraught with
peril. It is open to peculiar temptations. Satan is very ready to
take advantage of it. High religious excitement has a tendency
to throw the Christian off his guard, and when thrown off his
guard he is open to temptation. Many, alas! fall at such a time.
It was immediately after the first Communion that the disciples
fell asleep, and ere long they were overtaken with yet greater
sin. How are these perils to be avoided ?
ls<. Strive to retain the tender and sacred impressions received
at the communion table.
2nd. Avoid trifling reading and worldly companionship.
3rd. Remember vows made at that table.
Mh, Maintain a quiet, humble, serious frame.
sth. Watch and pray.
Do this, and the good Lord will keep your feet from falling.
Your walk will be humble, consistent, holy; and you will thus
honour Him whose death you have been commemorating.”


“ The Christian’s badge of honour here
Has ever been the Cross,
And when its hidden joys appear,
He counts it gain, not loss.
He bears it meekly as is best,
While struggling here with sin,
He wears it not upon his breast—
Ah ! no, it is within.
And if it bring him pain or shame
He takes it joyfully;
For well he knows from whom it came,
And what its end shall be.
Only a little while ’tis borne,
And as a pledge is given,
Of robes of triumph to be worn
For evermore in heaven,”
Come, approach the sacred board,
’Tis the Supper of the Lord;
There the choicest things of heaven
From His loving heart are given.
He who, leaving throne and crown,
To our fallen world came down ;
All our wants and woes to share,
All our sins and griefs to bear.
He who journeyed weary years,
In the land of toil and tears,
Onward to the cross and grave,
Hastening the lost to save—
He devised this feast of love,
Thus the coldest heart to move,
Thus to bring Himself more near,—
Thus to make Himself more dear.
On the sacred symbols feasting,
All the love of Jesus tasting,
All the Spirit’s grace and power,—
Oh, the sweetness of the hour!
Lord, may grace imparted here
In our future lives appear ;
“ These have been,” let others say,
“ At the gates of heaven to-day.”




PREFATORY ADDRESS.
To The General Header.— This catechism is not
meant for controversy. Its object is simple. All that
is contemplated by it is to direct the young in our
Churches in their endeavours to obtain what we believe
to be Scriptural views of a Divine Ordinance, and to
protect them against what we regard as erroneous and
hurtful.
And now let us address a word more specially to the
Inquirer. We have no wish to bias you unduly in your
judgment. You are free to think for yourself. There is
no faith like an intelligent faith. Besides, you are
responsible to God for what you believe. Our only
anxiety is that you should avoid any hasty conclusion.
To some ardent and impulsive minds there is a sort of
romantic charm in the mere idea of being publicly
immersed. We say so because it has been confessed.
The occasion is an exciting one, especially to young
people of strongly emotional nature ; hence the danger
of mere feeling taking the precedence of enlightened con-
viction. Against this we may be permitted to utter a
warning word. It is well that the heart should be
moved in all matters pertaining to religion, but at the
same time it is of the highest moment that the judgment
should also be convinced, for without this there will be
no stability. Feeling, when not based on conviction, is


changeful and evanescent. All we ask of you is that
you make up your mind intelligently. Take time to
consider. Consult the Word of God. Seek the Holy
Spirit’s guidance. Then, whatever be your decision,
you will be able to give a reason for the hope that is
in you.
And now, to the Christian parent we say : You are
invited to bring your little ones to God in baptism. The
religion of Jesus is considerate and generous in all its
provisions. It does not open the gate of the kingdom
to the believing parent, and then shut it again upon that
parent’s child, so that while the one is admitted the
other is kept out. Estimate aright the high and sacred
privilege. Take advantage of it.
Bring your child to Jesus in the observance of the holy
ordinance , and bring it early. At no future time can it
be a purer offering. In its present condition as a moral
being it is more nearly allied to goodness, to purity, and
to heaven than it is likely to be at any other stage of its
earthly career.
Cherish all becoming feelings at such a time. The
transaction is a solemn one. An immortal creature, that
has come into the world in all the affecting helplessness
of infancy, is to be given up in an intelligent dedication
unto God, the great Father of all, who made it ; to Christ
the Son, who shed His own blood to save it; and to the
blessed and Holy Spirit, whose influences alone can
meeten it for the home of the good on high : and is not
this, not only a deeply interesting sight, but an act than
which there can be none clothed with a more sacred awe,
or which brings with it more momentous obligations ?
In making this offering you engage to do your best to
train the little one for God and heaven.
Improve the ordinance by faithfully implementing its
obligations. Unless you endeavour to do this, you cannot


expect the desired results. And how is the ordinance
to be improved 1 In various ways. Instruct your child
with all diligence and earnestness in the way of life, in
the truths of God, and in the claims of duty. So soon
as it can learn, teach its infant lips to pray. So soon
as it is fit for going to God’s house, take it thither with
you. Train it to read the Bible and keep holy the
Sabbath.
Make your child the subject of prayer. “ The effectual,
fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.” And
surely that prayer, when offered up in all-trusting faith,
will not remain unheard.
Set before your child a blameless example. Without
this, teaching will fail. Strive to be Christ-like in your
daily deportment, for this will do more than anything
else to lead your little one in the footsteps of the
Saviour.
Ever look up to God for the blessing. He alone can
crown with efficacy the means you employ for your
child’s salvation. Lean, then, upon God. Make His
blessing all-important in seeking success to your endea-
vours. With that all shall be well; without it everything
else will fail.
Next, a word to the baptised youth. In infancy you
were given up to God, and initiated into the membership
of the visible Church. Your parents being in it, you
were naturally taken into it too, for the promise is to
the children as well as to the parents. But now that
you can think for yourself you are expected to complete
the work which they began. You are affectionately
counselled to confess Christ publicly. Thus you will
accept by your own deed the responsibilities of Church
membership. This, then, is your duty. Be entreated
to perform it. Let no worldly consideration deter you.
And perform it now. Delay is perilous. Do you say.


“I am not fit for such a solemn step ? ” This is a sad
confession. Your first duty surely must be to obtain
the fitness which you say you do not possess. Do you
ask, how you are to do this ? The answer is, simply by
accepting Jesus. Only helieve. Be honest \be earnest
in your desire and endeavour to believe \ look up and
breathe a fervent prayer for the Holy Spirit’s help, and
your heart will be opened, and you will welcome Christ
into it, and He will sprinkle you with His blood, and
number you among His disciples and brethren. You
will then esteem it the highest privilege you can enjoy
to confess Christ, and take upon you the obligations of
Church membership.


MANUAL ON BAPTISM.
Sec. I. Baptism : Its Nature and Design.
Give the definition of Baptism contained in our Shorter
Catechism.
Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the washing with
water in the name of the Father and the Son and the
Holy Ghost, doth signify and seal our ingrafting into
Christ and partaking of the benefits of the Covenant of
Grace, and our engagement to be the Lord’s.
Why is Baptism called a Sacrament 2
Mainly for two reasons ; (1) Because it is a symbolic
ordinance, instituted by Christ, and designed to be one
of the permanent ordinances of His Church ; and
(2) Because of the 'privileges on the one hand, and_ the
obligations or engagements on the other, of which it is
the appointed pledge and seal.
What do you mean by calling it a symbolic ordinance ?
It is so called, because the element made use of in its
administration is a symbol or representation of certain
spiritual privileges and blessings.
What is that element, and what does it symbolise ?
The element is water, and it symbolises or represents
the cleansing and purifying influences of the blood of
Christ, and of the work of the Holy Spirit.
By whom was the ordinance instituted, and when ?
It was instituted by our risen Redeemer immediately
before His ascension.


Quote the terms of its institution.
“And Jesus came and spake unto the disciples saying,
* All power is given unto Me in heaven and on earth.
Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them
in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost.’ ”
The revised version of this passage is more definite and literal.
“And Jesus came to the disciples and spake unto them saying—
* All authority hath been given unto Me in heaven and on earth.
Go ye, therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them
into the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost.’ ”
From what do you infer that water is to he used in the
administration of this ordinance ?
It is necessarily implied in the meaning of the word
“ baptise,” which signifies cleansing through the applica-
tion of water.
Was Baptism known to the Jews as a religious
ordinance until it had been instituted by Christ ?
Yes. John the Baptist, as our Lord’s forerunner, had
appeared in the wilderness of Judea preaching the
Baptism of repentance.
What was the purport or meaning of John's Baptism 1
John’s baptism—called the baptism of repentance,
was intended to denote that they who received it were
brought, through their faith in the expected coming of the
Messiah, into a relation to God, which specially called
for purity of nature and holiness of life ; and water as
an element of cleansing was fitly significant of this
truth.
The repentance of which this baptism was the pledge, consisted
in their change of mind with regard to the coming of the Messiah,
and especially with regard to the nearness of His coming.
But has not the water, made use of in the Baptism ,
instituted by Christ, a still further significance ?
Yes; it denotes, not only, as has been already said,
“ the washing of regeneration ” and “ the renewing of
the Holy Ghost,” but our being washed in “ the blood
of Jesus which cleanseth from all sin.”
Wall, in his history of Infant Baptism, says “It is evident
that the custom of the Jews before our Saviour’s time was to
baptise as well as circumcise any proselyte that came over to
them from the nations. . . . They reckoned all mankind to be
in an unclean state, and not capable of being entered into the
Covenant of the Israelites without a washing or baptism to denote
their purification from their uncleanness.” Later and more dis-
criminating investigations, however, have shown this view to be


untenable. It may almost be held fatal to it that both Philo and
Josephus who on so many occasions refer to the religious opinions
and practices of their countrymen never once allude to any such
initiatory baptisms. . . . There is no evidence of a Jewish
proselyte baptism till about the 4th century of the Christian
era. It probably sprung up thus. The admission of proselytes was
originally made by circumcision and sacrifice. But as usual a
lustration or washing preceded the sacrifice, and was performed
like legal washings generally by the persons themselves. By-and-
by, however, when sacrifices had ceased, the washing took the place
of the discontinued sacrifice, and at last grew into a sort or
initiatory rite humanly invented.
What is meant by being “ baptised into the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost ? ”
It has a threefold significance. (1.) To be baptised
into a person, or into his name, means to become his pro-
fessed disciples : to declare obedience to his authority ;
and to be recipients of the privileges or blessings which
he has power to confer. In this sense the Israelites are
said “to have been baptised into or unto Moses in the
cloud and in the sea.”—l Cor. x. 2. He was attested
hereby to be their Divinely appointed leader, and they
were placed under a solemn obligation to commit them-
selves to his guidance.
(2.) “ To be baptised into the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost ” implies, on the part
of baptised adults, an avowed believing reception of the
doctrine of the Trinity, or, in other words, an avowal of
faith in the Father as the Invisible God whom no man
hath seen or can see, faith in the Son as God manifested
in the flesh, and faith in the Holy Ghost as the indwel-
ling God who abides and acts in the hearts of His
people as their Regenerator and Sanctifier."
(3.) This phrase denotes that through the spiritual
baptism of the Holy Ghost, of which the outward
baptism with water is but the visible type, believers are
adopted into the family of God as their Heavenly
Father, are accepted in the Son as their Redeemer, and
are made “new creatures” through the inward and
effectual operations of the Spirit’s regenerating power.
Being adopted, accepted, and made new creatures, are the
appropriate practical issues of what is described in our Shorter
Catechism as “ being ingrafted Christ, and partaking of the
blessings of the Covenant of Grace.’’
But how can Baptism have any such significance as
administered to Infants ?
As administered to infants, baptism denotes (1) That
the promises of the Gospel are made to believing parents,


not only for themselves, but for their children Acts ii. 39 :
denotes (2) That children, through the professed faith
of their parents, are admitted into visible connection
with the people of God, and become entitled to share
in their religious privileges; denotes (3) That because
of this acknowledged right, baptised infants are to be
trained by their parents “in the nurture and admoni-
tion of the Lord,” and for His service; and denotes
(4) That through these privileges baptised children are
placed under a sacred obligation to hold fast the faith
and cultivate the holiness of life which the enjoyment
of such privileges naturally and graciously involves.
State, then, in general terms , your vieiv of the design
of Baptism.
(1.) In regard to adults, it is on the part of its Divine
Author a sealed pledge of the promises and privileges
which have been obtained for believers through His
mediation ; and on the part of the believing recipients
it is a sealed avowal of their faith in the Triune God,
and their solemn engagement to serve Him faithfully
and unblamably.
(2 ) In regard to infants it is, first, a sealed pledge of
the promises made to them, and the privileges conferred
on them through the faith of their parents, and of their
formal admission to the fellowship of the Church ; and
next, it is the sealed evidence of the obligation laid on
their parents to give them a faithful and prayerful
religious training, and of the corresponding obligation
Divinely, graciously, and rightfully imposed on the
children themselves, if spared, to live and act conformably
to the instructions which they receive and to their
Church connection and privileges.
Seeing that Baptism, whether as administered to adults
or to children, is the appointed ordinance of admission into
the fellowship of the Church, where and when may it be
most appropriately administered I
Though no definite rule has been laid down on this
point in Scripture, yet, obviously, it is in fullest accord-
ance with its design to have Baptism administered in
connection with the Sabbath services of the Sanctuary,
and in presence of the Congregation.
What are the special advantages of public Baptism as
administered to infants ?
The united prayers of the Congregation are offered up
alike for the parents and their children; the adult


members of the Church are reminded of their own
Baptism and its sacred obligations; and, like the Lord’s
Supper, the Sacrament of Baptism, as thus administered,
serves as a public memorial of the love of the Father,
of the redeeming work of the Son, and of the regenerat-
ing grafce of the Holy Ghost.
Sec. 11. The Proper Subjects of Baptism, or the
Persons to whom the Ordinance should be
Administered.
To whom should Baptism he administered ?
To all who make a credible profession of faith in
Christ, —and to their children.
Are the Office-hearers of the Church entitled to demand
from Applicants for Baptism such evidence of the sin-
cerity and' vitality of their faith or such statements of
their religious experience as may satisfactorily show that
the applicants are truly regenerate ?
No ; as Christ has not given His servants power to
search the heart, so neither has He imposed on them
duties which, in order to their effective fulfilment, would
require or imply the possession of such power.
What then do you mean hy a credible profession of
faith ?
Applicants ought to have an intelligent apprehension of
the nature and designs of the Ordinance, and of the
obligations connected with its administration; and,
further, they should be persons in whose lives—so far as
known to the Office-bearers of the Church—there is
nothing openly at variance with their profession.
Has the warrantableness of Infant Baptism been
denied ?
State what appear _ to you the most plausible of the
objections urged against it.
(1) That there is no express command in Scripture to
baptise infants. (2) That there is no example in the
New Testament of the infant of a believing parent having


teen baptised by the Apostles. (3) That when Jesus
took little children into His arms and blessed them, He
did not administer baptism to them or direct that they
should be baptised. (4) That Infant baptism was unknown
nnt.il the beginning of the fourth century of the Christian
era. And (5) That infants cannot exercise the faith or
cherish the feelings which should accompany the admin-
istration of baptism.
How do you meet the objection that there is no _ express
command in Scripture which enjoins or sanctions the
baptism of infants ?
Our answer is threefold(l) There are other
unquestionable duties and privileges in regard to
which no express direction has been given, e.g , the
observance of the first day of the week instead of the
seventh as the Christian Sabbath, or the admission of
women to the Lord’s table. (2) Infants were admitted
into connection with the Church under the Old Testament
dispensation through the rites of circumcision and
dedication ; and farther, “ the Kingdom of Heaven,” as
is evident from all the parables of our Lord, was the
phrase selected by Him to denote His Church on earth
under the present dispensation. Hence, in taking little
children into His arms, and saying, as He blessed them,
“ Of such is the kingdom of heaven,” He in effect said :
u Such are recognised subjects of the kingdom which I
have come into the world to establish,” (3) If, as the
result of His coming, infants were no longer to be
recognised as having a place in the Church, what would
have been obviously required for the introduction of
such a change was, the issuing either of an express
command forbidding their baptism, or of an Act to
repeal the arrangement which, by divine appointment,
had existed since the days of Abraham. And the absence
of any such command or Act clearly shows that the
position taken up by the opponents of infant baptism
is unsustainable.
How do you meet the second objection, that there is no
example in the New Testament of the Infant of a believing
parent having been baptised by the Apostles 1
Our answer is again threefold : —(1.) We have strong
presumptive evidence of the administration of baptism
to children in the recorded baptism of households.
These households obviously consisted of several mem-
bers, and, on the principles maintained by our opponents,
how could it be that, in connection with their no
mention is made except of the faith or the conversion


of the head of the household 2 (2.) The instances of the
baptism, whether of adults or children, recorded in the
Book of Acts, are so few and so special that even if the
inference deducible from these instances were much more
favourable to the views of our opponents, it could have
no legitimate weight as a disproof of infant baptism.
But (3,) It might much more reasonably be asked —
Why do we find no record either in later portions of
the Acts, or in the Epistles, of the baptism of men or
women who, at the time of their parents’ conversion,
were in a state of childhood 2
The households mentioned in Scripture as having been baptised
are the households of Lydia —Acts xvi. 14, 15; the household
of the Philippian Jailer mentioned in the same chapter, and the
household of Stephanas —I. Cor. i, 16, Now, in regard to Lydia, it
is specially to be noted that no reference is made to any of her
household being even present at the meeting in which she was led
to “give heed unto the things which were spoken by Paul.”
But in immediate connection with her heart being opened by
the Lord, it is stated that not she only, but her household were
baptised. In regard to the Jailer, the terms employed in the
original are strikingly significant, inasmuch as it is only the
rejoicing which is represented as being shared in by his household;
his bringing them into the house, and setting meat before them—
and very distinctively the believing —are ascribed to him alone. The
terms employed in each of these three connections are in the
singular number, and, therefore, grammatically applicable, not to
the members of his household, but to the Jailer only. In regard to
the household of Stephanas, an appeal has been made to the state-
ment concerning them in I. Cor. xvi. 15, 16, in proof that they
were all capable of doing service in the Church. But, first, this
Epistle was not written until at least from six to seven years after
their baptism, and when placed side by side with the cases of
Lydia and the Jailer, the inference is too indirect and far-fetched
to be of any weight; and still feebler does its force become when
viewed in connection with the unquestionable circumcision of house-
holds (including their youngest members) under the Old Testament
dispensation.
How do you meet the third objection that Jesus did not
baptise the children whom He took into His arms and
blessed ?
Our Lord did not in any case administer baptism,
whether to adults or children ; nor had the ordinance of
Christian baptism been instituted at that time. But in
declaring—that of such does His kingdom consist, did
He not in effect very expressively affirm the fitness of
children to become partakers of the privileges of which
baptism was afterwards appointed by Him to be the
pledge and seal 2
How do you meet the fourth objection—that Infant
Baptism was unknown until the fourth century ?


It is a simple misrepresentation of fact. The true state
of the case is that Infant baptism did not become a sub-
ject of controversy until the third century, and that the
ground of the opposition then raised was not that Infants
were unfit subjects of baptism, but that it was expedient
to defer the administration of the ordinance till old age
or sickness, so as thereby to secure the unforfeited
benefit of the saving grace which baptism had come to
be supposed to convey.
Justin Martyr, who wrote about forty years after the death of
the Apostle John, speaks of persons who had held fast their
integrity from the time that they were made disciples in childhood,
i.e., (accordantly with the express terms of the institution,) from the
time that they were baptised in childhood Go and make disciples
of all nations, baptising them.”
Clemens Alexandrinus, who laboured towards the close of the
second century, speaks of “an Apostle baptising infants,” as a
suitable subject for being engraved on signet rings. And one of
the topics discussed at the Council of Carthage, held a.d. 253, was,
•whether infants might he baptised before they were eight days old —
thus showing, also, that in the belief of this Council, baptism had
been instituted to take the place of circumcision.
How do you meet the fifth objection—that Infants cannot
exercise the faith or cherish the feelings which should
accompany the administration of baptism ?
This objection is a simple begging of the question at
issue. For, as we have already shown, the only faith
which requires to be exercised in connection with the
administration of baptism to infants is the professed
faith of their parents.
Can you adduce any considerations which more directly
establish the warrantableness of Infant Baptism ?
There are two considerations of this nature which admit
of being stated simply and briefly, and which, in our
opinion, render the adducing of any other kindred con-
siderations unnecessary.
What are they i
(1) Circumcision and dedication were the initiatory
ordinances of admission into the Old Testament
Church, and were expressly administered either to
or on behalf of all infants in the line of the chosen
seed. Baptism accordingly having been appointed
to take the place of these ordinances* may in like
* Baptism is called by Paul (Col. ii. 11, 12,) the circumcision of
Christ, or Christian circumcision—“ a circumcision made without
hands.”
Under the Old Testament dispensation, the children of Jewish
parents were “ holy ” in the ceremonial sense of being fit to be


manner be lawfully administered to the children of
professed believers. (2) The reasoning of Paul in
I. Cor. vii. 14, appears unintelligible except on this
principle. The terms “holy” and “unclean” made
use of by him with reference to children, in this
passage, were the terms applied respectively, in his day,
on the one hand to the Jews, who, having a right to be
admitted through circumcision into the membership of
the Church, were accounted “ holy; ” and, on the other
hand, applied to the Gentiles who, until their conver-
sion, being accounted “unclean,” were on this ground
excluded from the privileges of the Church.
In what relation do baptised children stand to the
Church ?
Baptised children are members of the Church, though
not in full membership. They have been fitly compared
to citizens under age, and have a claim to all the
privileges which they are capable of intelligently
exercising and improving.
What is the Church's responsibility in regard to
them?
Parents in presenting their children for baptism
solemnly engage to bring them up in the knowledge and
fear of the Lord; and it is the duty of the Church in
her corporate capacity, and through her office-bearers, to
take oversight of the manner in which these vows are
Eerformed, and to take such measures as, on the one
and, may aid and quicken parents in the discharge of
their duty, and, on the other, may serve to make up for
their want of parental faithfulness and diligence.
Does not a special obligation rest on all who have been
baptised in infancy to make a personal declaration of
their faith at the Lord's Table on arriving at the years of
discretion t
Unquestionably their delaying or hesitating to make
such a profession involves a wilful avowal of declension
and an aggravated forfeiture of their baptismal
privileges.
dedicated to God through the ordinance of circumcision ; and the
Apostle’s argument is that, under the Christian dispensation, the
thildren of all believing parents, whether they be Jews or Gentiles,
yea, even the children of one believing parent, are in the like
sense “ holy,” i.e., are fit to be presented to God in baptism.


Sec. 111. The Mode in which Baptism is to be
Administered.
How should the water which is made use of in Baptism
be applied 1
The statement of the Westminster Confession of Faith
on this point is brief, liberal, and comprehensive:
“ Dipping of the person into the water is not necessary;
but Baptism is rightly administered by pouring or
sprinkling water on the person.”
What are the principal allegations made in support
of the opinion that Immersion is the only legitimate
mode of Baptism ? «•
They are such as these : (1) That John administered
baptism in the river Jordan, and in Aenon, near to Salim,
“ because there was much water there! (2) That our Lord
was baptised by immersion. (3) That baptism was admin-
istered in like manner by Philip to the Ethiopian eunuch.
(4) That sprinkling does not fitly symbolise the meaning
or purpose of baptism. (5) That sprinkling cannot
appropriately represent or typify our “being buried
with Christ through baptism : and (6) The etymological
meaning of the Greek term “ baptizo.”
How do you meet the objections founded on the action
of John the Baptist ?
We answer—(l) That the impression intended to be
conveyed by this reference, even if correct, would have
no force, inasmuch as the meaning and purpose of John’s
baptism, which was only a temporary rite, and designed
exclusively for the Jews, were essentially different from
the purport and design of the permanent ordinance after-
wards instituted by Christ, and which is applicable alike
to Jew and Gentile. (2) There is no evidence that the
baptism of John was administered by immersion. In
fact the multitudes who flocked to his ministry render
this supposition in the highest degree improbable —
“Then went out to him Jerusalem ( i.e ., large numbers of-
the inhabitants of Jerusalem) and all Judea, and all the
region round about Jordan, and were baptised of him in
Jordan, confessing their sins” —Matthew hi. _5, 6. That
he baptised these multitudes while standing at the
river’s brink by sprinkling or pouring, is far more
accordant with reason and a just sense of propriety than


that they were immersed. (3) The reference to the des-
cription of Aenon given by the evangelist (John iii. 23)
is altogether misleading. The more literal rendering of
John’s statement is “ because there were many waters
or streams there? Hence, it was a place much more
fit for their assembling in crowds to wait on his preaching,
than for their coming to it that they might be immersed.
To use a familiar phrase, a place of many streams would be very
suitable as “ a camping ground,” or a place for prolonged open air
services. But there might not he in such a place —and we actually
know there were not in the neighbourhood of Salim— any pools
suitable for immersion. These many streams were merely rivulets,
near which the pasture was green, and in which there was abundant
water to drink.
How do you meet the argument founded on the Bap-
tism of our Lord ?
(1) Both in itself and in its accompaniments, Our
Lord’s baptism admitted of no parallel. (2) The preposi-
tions made use of by the Evangelists in describing His
baptism, and which have been rendered “in or into,”
“ from ” and “ out of,” have no such decisive and
unambiguous force as is attached to them by the advo-
cates of immersion. They do not necessarily mean more
than that He went down to the brink of the Jordan • or
that He might have been standing near the edge of the
river when He was baptised by John, The form or mode
of the baptism has been notably left unexplained, which
is in itself a highly significant fact.
The fact of His baptism is expressly stated, hut not a syllable is
recorded in regard to the mode of His baptism. If designed to be
strictly symbolic of the Spirit’s descent, it would have been
administered by pouring. But on this consideration we lay no
.stress.
How do you meet the argument drawn from the Baptism
of the Ethiopian Eunuch i
(1.) The place in which it occurred, which is expressly
called “ a desert,” and the evident surprise of the Eunuch
at discovering any water,* plainly show that in all proba-
bility there was no pool or stream in that neighbourhood
large enough or deep enough to admit of his immersion.
(2.) No suitable dresses had been prepared in anticipa-
tion of the baptism—the servants were waiting by ;
und immediately after the baptism the Eunuch pro-
ceeded straightway on his journey. How do these facts
consort with the belief of his immersion? (3.) If the
* “And the Eunuch saith —Behold (or lo!) here is water.”--
Jtevised Version.


phrases, “ went down into the water ” and “came up out
of the water,” are held as necessarily denoting immersion,
then not only the Eunuch, but Philip, must have been
immersed more than once, for these phrases are applied
equally to both and are applied to them in two separate
connections.
Strictly speaking this passage proves nothing in regard to the
mode of the baptism. As in the case of our Lord’s baptism all that
is said is—“ and he baptised Him.” Their going into the water,
or towards the water, and their coming out of the water or out
from the water proves nothing on this point. The one act preceded
and the other followed the baptism. And if either the one act or
the other is supposed to imply immersion then it wonld indicate
that in the instances so referred to they both immersed themselves.
For the same phrases are, in this respect, applied equally to both.
In fact, to lay any stress on these phrases is to violate the first
principles of sound interpretation and to lead on to conclusions
which are absurd.
How do you meet the objection that “ sprinkling ” cannot
he a proper symbol of washing or cleansing 1
(1.) It is surely possessed of as much fitness for this
purpose as a sudden act of immersion. No person or
thing which has been defiled can be made clean by being
simply dipped into a pool and then lifted out. But (2)
Sprinkling has been employed by inspired wisdom as
fitly significant of cleansing. “ Then will I sprinkle clean
water upon you and ye shall be clean —from all your
filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you.
Ezek. xxxvi. 25.
How do you meet the objection that Baptism by
sprinkling or pouring cannot fitly represent or typify our
being “ buried with Christ by baptism ? ”
(I.) The quotation which forms the groundwork of
this objection is defective. The Apostle in writing to
the Romans (vi. 3-4,) does not say that “we are buried
with Christ by, in, or through baptism.” His argument
is, first —that “being baptised into Christ” denotes
“ being baptised into His death ” — i.e., implies faith in
His death, and our being so united to Him by this faith—
that through our faith-formed union we, in Him, become
“dead to sin” —dead alike to its condemning and its
reigning power —dead to it so that “ we can no longer live
therein.” Next—he argues further that our being sa
“ baptised into His death ” implies our “ being buried
with Him ; ” —not as symbolised by the mode of our bap-
tism, but as actualised or made practically true through
our believing union with Christ as our living Head.
Hence, thirdly —he still further affirms that being both
dead and buried with Christ, through the faith-formed


■union of which our Baptism is not the figurative symbol
or visible similitude, but the covenanted pledge or seal,
we are raised with Him and “walk in newness of life.”
In short, it is the spiritual significance of baptism and
not the mode of its administration which forms the basis
of the Apostle’s argument.
For (2,) and in conclusive confirmation hereof, immer-
sion has no similitude to the manner of our Lord’s burial.
His body was not let down into the earth and afterwards
lifted out of it. The sepulchre prepared for Him was a
cave hewn out of the side of a rock, with a large stone
rolled to its mouth.
How do you meet the argument based on the alleged
etymological meaning of “ haptizo ? ”
We think it enough to cite the incontrovertible affirma-
tion of Dr. John Owen, that—“ no instance can be shown,
even in Scripture, in which this word necessarily signi-
fies either to dip or plunge.”
“ Baptize occurs in the New Testament about eighty times;
Baptisma, some twenty times ; and Baptismos, four times. Would
it be surprising if, in some of these numerous passages, the baptism
spoken of necessarily implied immersion ? It so happens, however,
or has heen so ordered, that there is no such passage in the whole of the
New Testament Such is the testimony of one of the most pains-
taking theologians of modern times —the late Dr. Chas. Hodge, of
Princeton.
Can you mention any other facts or considerations
which show it to be in the highest degree improbable that
Baptism by immersion was the Apostolic mode of its
administration ?
The circumstances connected with the baptism of the
3000 on the day of Pentecost, seem, to our mind,
unanswerably conclusive on this point. (1.) They were
a mixed multitude of men and women gathered from all
classes and from many lands. (2.) No preparations had
been made for the administration of the ordinance, and
a large proportion of the crowd were strangers in the
city. (3.) At that season of the year (in the month
of May) there was no abundant supply of water in
Jerusalem, and the Apostles had no right of access to
the limited supply which did exist. (4.) The profession
of faith in the Messiahship of Him, who, less than two
months before, had been crucified as a blasphemer and
malefactor, was specially obnoxious to the priests and
rulers; and it exceeds all reasonable belief that there
was any river, or pool, or bath in, or near Jerusalem, in
which the immersion of such a mixed crowd for such a
purpose would have been tolerated if known to the


authorities in the city, or could have been attempted
without detection, or was capable of being effected with
any prudent regard to health and comfort, or any
admissible show of decency and modesty.
There is in summer no running stream in the vicinity of Jerusalem
except the mere rill of Siloam, a few rods in length ; and the city
is and was supplied with water from its cisterns and public reser-
voirs ; which beyond all question the Apostles would not have been
allowed to use for the immersion of their converts.
It is, therefore, to the last degree improbable that the thousands
mentioned in the early chapters of the Acts were baptised by
immersion. And the same improbability exists as to the case of
the Centurion in Cesarea and the Jailer at Philippi. With regard
to the former, Peter said, “ Can any man forbid water naturally
implying that the water was to be brought to Cornelius, not that
he was to be taken to the water. As to the Jailer, it is said (Acts
xvi. 33) that “he and all his were baptised ’’ forthwith in the prison,
and, as the narrative clearly implies, at midnight. There is the same
improbability against the assumption that the Ethiopian Eunuch
was baptised by immersion. He was travelling through a desert
part of the country towards Gaza when Philip joined him, “ And
as they went on their way they came unto a certain water,”
literally, “ unto some water.” But in that region there is no known
stream of sufficient depth to have allowed of immersion. True, it
is said, “ They went down both into the water,” and ’* came up
out of the water.” But might not that have been said though the
water had not been deep enough to cover their ankles ?
Can you mention any other considerations corroborative
of the inexpediency of immersion ?
(1) In countries and districts where water is so scarce
that it can with difficulty be obtained for necessary
domestic purposes, —a sufficient supply for frequent
immersions could only be had at great cost and trouble,
and in many instances could not be had at all. (2) In
countries where throughout almost the entire year the
water is frost-bound, —immersion, as a general rule, would
be impracticable. (3) Even in countries where water is
abundant there are lengthened periods _ during _ which
immersion could not be practised without imperilling the
health and life both of the immerser and the immersed.
(4) In the case of women —even_ when all possible
prudence is exercised—there are minds whose sense of
propriety will not allow them to witness such immersions
without a shock to the best feelings of their nature.
In all these and similar cases immersion is difficult,
and in some of them impracticable ; while sprinkling or
pouring may, in every case, be observed with ease and
comfort. Let anyone, therefore, say which plan is most
accordant with the universal design of the Gospel, as
adapted for men in all circumstances and for men in
every clime.


Sec. IV. Misapprehensions in regard to the
Purpose and Efficacy of Baptism.
Is it right for ministers in dispensing this ordinance to
say —“ As the child cannot answer for itself, you (the
parent) profess and engage in its name and stead ? ”
No; the parent professes and engages in his own
name ; and alike in common sense and on Scriptual
grounds he cannot do otherwise. Yet every baptised
child is laid under solemn obligation to be the Lord’s.
It has been sometimes strongly objected that to bring an infant
all unconsciously to itself under baptismal obligations which it is
expected to discharge on arriving at years of discretion is an
unwarrantable interference with its liberty of thought and action.
Two considerations, we think, will serve to show the flimsiness of
this objection—(l) One of the grand objects contemplated by the
organisation of the Church is the godly upbringing of the young.
They are to be cared for—watched over, educated —trained so that
they “ may be a seed to serve the Lord.” Children are intended to
he scholars in Christ’s school even from their earliest days. The
objection accordingly assails one of the grandest ends for which the
Church exists. But, 2nd, this objection strikes at the root of all moral
training. If it mean anything it means that it is wrong to fill the
mind of a child with what is true and good, because by doing this
the child will be unfitted for making an unbiassed decision for itself
when it reaches the years of discretion. A child must not be told
not to lie or steal, because by so doing it would be prejudiced in
favour of truth and honesty, and thus hindered from making
untrammelled inquiry into these matters when it comes of age.
Surely such talk is worse than trifling.
What are the obligations which Baptism lays upon
children?
They are bound to be grateful to their parents for
dedicating them to the Lord, —bound to account them-
selves as His servants, —bound to devote themselves
willingly to Christ, publicly to recognise their connection
with His church, and to act consistently with that connec-
tion.
Is the naming of the child any part of Baptism ?
No; though it is customary and proper for the
minister to announce the name given by the parents to
their child, the omission of this form would not affect
the validity of the ordinance.
Is it proper to speak of Baptism as the christening of
a child?


Far from it. Baptism does not Christianise a child or
make it a Christian, on the contrary, the right of the
child to be connected with the Church and to receive
baptism rests on the professed faith of his parents.
Is Baptism essential to Salvation 1
No ; the baptism which saves is not baptism by water,
but the baptism of the Holy Ghost.
*
Is it wrong in parents to he anxions to have their
infants baptised when they appear to he dying 1
Certainly, if they think that the mere act of baptism
will secure, or is needed to secure their salvation.
We believe in the salvation of those who die in
infancy; not because they have been baptised, but
because Christ has died. At the same time such anxiety
is right and proper when it proceeds from a Scriptural
respect for Christ’s own ordinance.
The necessity for baptism rests simply on the necessity arising
from a divine precept. It is the condition of salvation in the same
sense in which confession of sin is, and in which circumcision was.
The uncircumcised child was cut off from among the people of
Israel. He forfeited his birthright, but he did not forfeit his salva-
tion. Paul taught that if an uncircumcised man kept the law “ his
uncircumcision was counted for circumcision.” To this the Jews
objected by asking, “ What profit then is there in circumcision ? ”
Paul answered, “Much every way.” Circumcision was not useless
because it was not essential. The same is true of baptism. Although
not a means of salvation or necessary to the attainment of salvation
its benefits are great and manifold.
But can the outward rite of itself impart any advantage
to the soul ?
None whatever. It is only the symbol of spiritual
blessings, and its administration is never accompanied
by these blessings—except when the Spirit is poured
forth on the ordinance, and on those to whom it is
administered.
It has been objected in this connection that multitudes who had
received baptism in infancy have, in after life, proved themselves
to be utterly callous about religion —openly ungodly, or it may be,
.avowed rejecters of Christ and His salvation. And such cases of
apostasy or declension doubtless supply matter of deep regret and
sorrow to every truly Christian mind. But who may say that their
baptism will prove finally in vain ? After long wanderings in folly
and sin, may not the thought of their solemn dedication to God in a
father’s arms be effective, under the Spirit’s power, in leading them
as penitents to the feet of Jesus? It has avowedly done so in
many a case—and may it not thus operate far more frequently than
we suppose ? But further, it is no valid argument against a Divine
institution—that it is or may be observed without profit. Do not
multitudes hear the Gospel without being made better by it—and


is the preaching of the Gospel, therefore, to be abolished ? Do not
multitudes attend the house of God, and yet lead wicked lives —and
is the sanctuary on this ground to be shut up ? Would not this
line of objection tell with equal force against adult baptism ? Is it
not undeniable that many who have been baptised on a public
profession of their faith in Christ, have afterwards made shipwreck
of their faith and gone back to the service of the world and the
devil; and is adult baptism, therefore, to be abolished ?
Is not Baptism , withal , an ordinance of vital moment ?
Yes ; the connection with the Church of which Baptism
is the pledge and seal, and the privileges and promises
therein involved, are unquestionably of the highest
moment, and should be held by all intelligent Christians
in highest esteem.
Membership in the visible Church is not only a great honour—it
is a great advantage. To the Church are committed the oracles of
God. It is the depository of that truth which is able to make men
wise unto salvation. It is the divinely appointed instrumentality
for preserving and communicating that truth. Every one admits
that it is a blessing to be born in a Christian land instead of in a
heathen land. It is no less obviously true that it is a blessing to
be within the pale of the Church and not cast out into the world.
It is good to have the vows of God upon us ; it is good to be under
the watch and care of the people of God; it is good to have a
special claim on their prayers and on their efforts to bring us
into or keep us in the paths of salvation ; and, above all, it is good
to be of the number of those to whom God has made a special
promise of peace and salvation. They therefore sin against God
and their own souls who neglect the command to be baptised in
the name of the Lord; and those parents sin grievously against the
souls of their children who neglect to consecrate them to God in
the ordinance of Baptism. Do let the little ones have their names
written in the register of the Church, even if they should after-
wards choose to erase them. Their enrolment may, through grace,
be made to operate as the means of their salvation.
FOKM OF PRAYER FOB A PARENT ABOUT TO PRESENT HIS CHILD
FOR BAPTISM.
May not this be an appropriate form of prayer for a parent about
to present his child for baptism“ O Lord! as I have received
this child from Thee, and am soon to devote him to Thee in the
sacred ordinance of baptism, help me and the partner of my life to
view him, not as ours, but Thine. And as many, very many, in
infancy and childhood, are taken away from this evil world by
the stroke of death, enable us, painful though the thought be,
to stand prepared for such a bereavement. If in early life he be
removed from our fostering care, may he be received into the bosom
of Thy fatherly love. May he bloom in the beauty of eternal
youth in the Celestial Paradise; may he share in those unfading
pleasures which are at Thy right hand. And far from accusing
Thee as if Thou didst wrong in taking from us only Thine
own, may the sentiment of our heart and the language of our lips
be, ‘ The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away: blessed be


the name of the Lord.’ But should this babe be spared, and either
I myself, or my beloved partner, or both of us be removed from
him in the morning of his days, and he be left a fatherless or
motherless or orphan child, be Thou O Lord his_ never-changing
Friend and Father. Provide for him a kind and pious guardian of
his youth ; preserve him from the sins and follies to which he may
be exposed : make him an early and faithful follower of the Lamb.
Or if Thou indulgently prolong our lives, and continue him under
our parental care, may we be taught and strengthened to bring
him up for Thy service. By our instructions, example, and
pravers, may we travail as in birth, that Christ may be formed m
him “ the hope of glory.” And may we have the happiness of seeing
our endeavours crowned with success—the happiness of seeing him
grow up in the knowledge and fear of the Lord ; the happiness of
meeting him with joy before the tribunal of Christ; the happiness
of spending with him an eternity of bliss m the kingdom of the
Father.”
Fergusson and Moore, Printer*, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.




