

THE
WIRRAWAY
OPERATING
INSTRUCTIONS




Copy No
Issued to
MANUAL
OF
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS
FOR THE
WIRRAWAY
GENERAL PURPOSE AIRCRAFT
COMMONWEALTH AIRCRAFT CORPORATION PTY. LTD.
c . MELBOURNE
September, 1939


2nd IMPRESSION
JUNE - 1940


Fig. 1. Wirraway—Left-hand side




TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword - 8
Section I.—Table of Characteristics 9
Section It.—Cockpit Arrangement and Controls.
1. Enclosure - 10
2. Flying Controls—
Control Columns 10
Rudder Pedals 10
Trim Tab Controls 10
3. Engine Controls.
Throttle, Mixture and Airscrew Controls - 1 1
Carburettor Air Heat Control - 11
Hand Fuel Pump Control - - - - 12
Fuel Selector Valves 12
Starter Control 12
Ignition Switch 12
4. Auxiliary Controls—
Landing Gear Control 12
Flap Control 12
Hydraulic Hand Pump 12
Hydraulic Power Control - - - - 12
Gyro Selector Valve 13
Brake Controls 13
Ventilating Control 13
Flying Controls Lock 13
Rudder Pedal Adjustment - - - - 13
Seat Adjustment 1-3
Enclosure Locks 14
Instrument Flying Hood 14
5. Equipment Controls—
Landing Flare Release 14
Electric Lights 14
Radio Controls 14
Intercommunication Controls - 15
Fire Extinguisher 15
Signal Pistol 15
Fixed Guns Control 15
Rear Gun Controls 15
Camera Gun 16
Camera Controls 16
Electro-Magnetic Bomb Controls - - 16
Mechanical Bomb Controls - - - 16
Bomb Sighting Equipment .... 16


6. Handling Equipment —
Lifting Tubes
Jacking Points |'
Lifting Eyebolts J'
Tie-down Eyebolts *'
Section 111.—Landing Gear and Flap Operation.
General ' ' | ®
Landing Gear - :
Landing Gear Warning
Landing Flaps
Hydraulic Power Control Valve ----- 1°
Hydraulic Hand Pump
Emergency Operation
Landing Gear Latch Failure iy
Section IV.—Power Plant Installation and Operation.
General Data
Starting Engine -
Warming-up Engine
Stopping Engine y
Manifold Pressure
Mixture Control
Exhaust Gas Analyser
Cylinder Temperatures - j'
Limiting Operating Conditions
Carburettor Air Heating j-
Airscrew
Fuel System
Oil System
Hand Starting
Section V.—Electrical and Radio Installation.
1. Electrical Installation —
General *•'
Spare Fuses and Lamps
Control Panel —Front Cockpit - - - 27
Control Panel —Rear Cockpit - - - - 28
Lights - 28
Warning Indicators
Starting System 29
Temperature Indicators 30
Pitot Heating 30
Exhaust Gas Analyser 30
Electro-Magnetic Bomb Controls - - - 30
Automatic Bombing 31
TABLE OF CONTENTS.-Continued


2. Radio Installation —
General -------- 32
Coil Stowage 32
Aerials * - 33
Radio Power Supply 33
Neutralizing Unit 33
Section Vl.—lnstrument Installation.
General 34
Gyro Instruments 35
Suction Gauge 36
Pitot-static Head 36
Compasses - 36
Clock 36
Air Temperature Indicator 36
Engine Gauge Unit - 37
Manifold Pressure Gauge 37
Exhaust Gas Analyser 37
Tachometers 37
Engine Cylinder Temperature Indicator - - - 37
Section Vll.—Photographic Installation.
General 38
Installation of Camera 38
Installation of Camera Sight 38
Camera Control and Motor 38
Removal of Photographic Equipment - - - 39
Pilot’s Warning Indicator 39
Section Vlll.—Armament installation.
1. Fixed Guns—
General 40
Gun Synchronising Gear 40
Gun Mounting 40
Gun Sight - -- -- -- 40
Ammunition Box 40
Feed and Ejection Chutes - - - - 41
2. Rear Gun —
General 41
Gun Hoist - 41
Ammunition 42
TABLE OF CONTENTS.— Continued


3. Bombing Armament —
General - 4 2
Universal Carriers 42
Light Series Carriers 43
Mechanical Releases
Bombsight 44
Section IX.—Flying Characteristics.
Control Surface Tabs 45
Ballast 45
Take-off
Manoeuvres
Landing - - - - ■ 46
Taxying
Air Speed Correction Chart 46
Section X.—Weights.
1. Weight Summary—-
Tare Weight ' 47
Fixed Military Equipment - 47
Normal Gross Weight
Maximum Gross Weight - 48
2. Typical Loadings—•
Day Fighter - 48
Night Fighter 48
Day Reconnaissance 49
Night Reconnaissance 49
Day Bomber 50
Day Bomber (Overload) - - - - 51
Night Bomber 51
Dive Bomber - 52
TABLE OF CONTENTS. -Continued


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Fig. 1. Wirraway—Left Hand Side
Fig. 2. Front Cockpit—Left Hand Side
Fig. 3. Front Cockpit—Right Hand Side
Fig. 4. Rear Cockpit—Left Hand Side
Fig. 5. Rear Cockpit—Right Hand Side
Fig. 6. Rear Cockpit—lnstrument and Radio Installation
Fig. 7. Front Cockpit—lnstrument Installation
Fig. 8. Installation of Camera
Fig. 9. Prone Bombing Position
Fig. 10. Air Speed Correction Chart


FOREWORD
The purpose of this Handbook is to furnish
information on the operation of the "Wirraway'
general purpose aircraft.
Detailed information regarding the maintenance
and repair of this aircraft will be found in the
Service Manual for the "Wirraway" type.


SECTION I.
TABLE OF CHARACTERISTICS
WIRRAWAY GENERAL PURPOSE AIRCRAFT
Normal Gross Weight 5,575 lb.
Maximum Gross Weight 6,450 lb.
Fuel Capacity (total) 92 gals.
Reserve Fuel (included in total) - - - - 16 gals.
Wing Area - - 256 sq. ft.
Wing Span 43 ft.
Rated Power of Engine—
Normal - - 600 h.p. at 7,000 ft. at 2,300 r.p.m.
Take-off - 650 h.p. at 2,300 r.p.m.
Wing Loading (normal) - - - 21.8 lb. per sq. ft.
Power Loading (normal) - - - - 9.3 lb. per h.p.
Top Speed at Critical Altitude (8,600 ft.) - 220 m.p.h.
Operating Speeds (2,100 r.p.m. and 28 ins. manifold pressure)
At Sea Level 177 m.p.h.
At 9,000 ft. 199 m.p.h
At 13,000 ft. (critical altitude) - - 209 m.p.h.
Landing Speed (at normal weight)
Flaps Down 65 m.p.h.
Flaps Up 70 m.p.h.
Maximum Rate of Climb - - - 1,950 ft. per min.
Endurance at Operating Speed (at 450 h.p.) - 3.07 hours
Range at Operating Speed (at 450 h.p. at critical altitude)
640 miles
Range at Economical Speed - - - - 850 miles


SECTION II.
COCKPIT ARRANGEMENTS AND
CONTROLS
1. Enclosure.
The two tandem cockpits are under one enclosure with
individually operated sliding sections for ingress and egress of
the crew. The forward and rear sliding sections may be locked
at intermediate positions between the open and closed positions.
The side panels in the sliding sections may be released by means
of the emergency release handles, which are located on the inner
sides, thereby providing for an emergency exit of the crew.
2. Flying Controls.
A complete set of flight controls is installed in each cock-
pit.
Control Columns. —The control columns for operation of
aileron and elevators consist of two tubes attached to aluminium
alloy castings, which are fastened to the aileron torque tube.
The torque tube is supported at two points on the fuselage
frame. Stops are provided on this assembly to limit the move-
ment of the ailerons and elevators.
The control column in the rear cockpit is detachable, and
when not in use should be removed and stowed at the lower
side of the cockpit in the socket which is provided for this
purpose.
Rudder Pedals. —The control system for the rudder is
actuated by foot pedals which are adjustable to suit the pilot s
leg length. The front and rear cockpit rudder pedals are inter-
connected by means of tubes. The rudder movement is limited
by stops located on the extension of the fin rear spar.
Trim Tab Controls. —The elevators and rudder are pro-
vided with adjustable trim tabs, which are controlled by a
system of cables and pulleys and actuated by control wheels
located at the left side of each cockpit. The control cables
are interconnected with the tabs by means of a drum and
irreversible screw mechanism, located in the leading edge of
each of the respective control surfaces, directly forward of the
tab. The screw mechanism is interconnected with the tab by
means of a push-pull rod.


Fig. 2. Front Cockpit—Left-hand side


Control
Throttle -
Rearward
Position
Closed
Forward
Position
Open
Mixture -
-
Rich
Lean
Airscrew
-
Coarse Pitch
Fine Pitch
The tabs should be adjusted as required to obtain directional
and longitudinal trim of the aircraft. Clockwise and counter-
clockwise rotation of the outer wheel turns the rudder tab
to the left and right, respectively, to obtain directional trim
of the aircraft. Clockwise and counter-clockwise rotation of
the inner wheel controls the elevator tabs, providing for trim
of the aircraft in the tail-heavy and nose-heavy conditions
respectively.
3. Engine Controls.
Engine controls are of the steel tube push-pull type.
Throttle Mixture and Airscrew Controls. —The throttle,
mixture and airscrew control handles are all assembled in a
single quadrant located on the left side of each cockpit, and
are interconnetted by means of rods. The function of the
controls are as follows:
The full lean position of the mixture control provides for
positive stoppage of the engine through an idle cut-off device
incorporated in the carburettor.
Forward travel of the airscrew control lever decreases the
airscrew pitch, with a resulting increase in engine R.P.M.
Travel of the lever towards the rear increases the airscrew pitch,
with a resulting decrease in engine R.P.M. For take-off, climb and
landing, set the control for high R.P.M. (‘‘FINE PITCH”).
For cruising and high speed, set lever for desired R.P.M.
Carburettor Air Heat Control. —Hot air from the exhaust
manifold shroud may be taken into the carburettor through
a valve in the air mixture chamber below the carburettor. The
control, incorporating notches to provide for vernier adjust-
ment, is mounted on the control shelf in the left-hand front
corner of the front cockpit. The control handle is pulled back
to increase the carburettor air temperature and the extreme
forward position admits cold air only to the carburettor. The
temperature of the air in the mixing chamber is indicated by
the air temperature thermometer on the instrument sub-panel
in the front cockpit when the two-position switch is turned
to position 1. This instrument records the free air temperature
when the selector switch is in position 2.
SECTION 11.


Hand Fuel Pump Control. —The hand fuel pump handle is
located on the left side of each cockpit, between the rudder
and elevator trim tab control wheels.
Fuel Selector Valves. —Fuel selector valve controls arc
mounted on the control shelf at the left side of each cockpit,
and are directly connected to a gear-box that is common to
both.
Starter Control. —The starter is controlled by means of a
push button located on the instrument sub-panel in the front
cockpit. A guard is provided to prevent the starter being
inadvertently energised.
Ignition Switch. —The ignition switch is located on the
left side of the aircraft ahead of the rear cockpit. The switch
is operated by a mechanical linkage from either cockpit, the
lever being located in the front left-hand corner of each cockpit
ahead of the throttle controls.
4. Auxiliary Controls
Landing Gear Control. —A landing gear control handle is
mounted in a control quadrant at the left side of the front cockpit,
and on the control shelf at the left side of the rear cockpit. The
controls are interconnected with the hydraulic selector valve. The
forward position of the control handle selects the “DOWN”
position of the landing gear and the rear position of the handle
selects the “UP” position of the landing gear. The operation of
the landing gear is described in Section 111.
Flap Control. —A flap control handle is mounted in a
control quadrant at the left side of the front cockpit, and at
the inboard edge of the control shelf at the left side of the
rear cockpit. The controls are interconnected with the hydraulic
selector valve. The forward position of the control handle
selects the “DOWN” position of the flaps and the rear position
of the handle selects the “UP” position of the flaps. For
detailed instructions regarding the operation of the flaps see
Section 111.
Hydraulic Hand Pump. —A hand-operated hydraulic pump
is provided in the hydraulic system, and this may be operated
by means of a handle on the control shelf on the left-hand
side of each cockpit ahead of the trim tab controls.
Hydraulic Power Control. —A power control push valve,
for controlling the operation of the landing gear and flaps by
means of the engine-driven hydraulic pump, is located on the
left-hand side of each cockpit immediately aft of the engine
control levers. The operation of this valve is explained in
Section 111. of this Handbook.
SECTION 11.


Gyro Selector Valve. —The gyroscopic instruments are
operated by the engine-driven vacuum pump or the venturis
installed within the engine cowl. If desired, both pump and
venturis may be connected to the instruments at the same time.
The selector valve is located in the front cockpit at the right-
hand side of the main instrument panel.
Brake Controls. —Brake pedals are incorporated in the rudder
pedal assemblies. The brakes are hydraulically controlled and
are actuated selectively from either front or rear cockpit. A
parking brake control knob is located in the front cockpit, to
the *left of the instrument panel. To apply parking brakes,
pull out on control knob and then press both brake pedals. Release
brake pedals and then release control knob. Parking brakes
may be released from either cockpit by merely pressing brake
pedals.
Ventilating Control. —A valve for controlling the admission
of fresh air is located in the front cockpit between the rudder
pedals. The valve is operated with the foot by rotating the
notched control wheel.
Flying Controls Lock. —The control handle for locking
and releasing all surface controls is located to the left and
forward of the control column in the front cockpit.
To lock controls, set rudder and ailerons in neutral and
push column forward. Release the plunger holding the lock
in the stowed position, and engage the column socket in the
lock recess, allowing the plunger to locate itself in the locked
position. To release, reverse the above procedure.
Rudder Pedal Adjustment. —Rudder pedal adjustment may
be obtained by pressing sidewise the lever located on the inner
side of each pedal. This lever extracts a plunger and allows
the connecting adjustment tube to be lengthened or shortened
to suit the pilot’s leg length.
Seat Adjustment. —Vertical adjustment of both seats is
provided. The pilot’s weight is balanced by a shock absorber
cord, and a lever controlling the locking plunger is located
on the lower right side of each seat. The rear seat is of the
rotating type and is locked in the forward or normal position
by a spring loaded latch at the front of the seat pivot convenient
to the observer’s heel. A lock strut is provided to hold the
seat in the rearward position for use when the observer occupies
the prone bombing position. The latch is on the right-hand
side of the rotating seat.
SECTION 11.


Enclosure Locks. —A locking arrangement is provided at
the left-hand side of each of the sliding sections of the cockpit
enclosure to provide a means of locking the enclosure in the
open, closed and intermediate positions.
Instrument Flying Hood. —An instrument flying hood, to
be used in training for instrument flying, is installed in th'e
front cockpit. When not in use, the hood is folded back and
held down by means of a clamp and shock cord arrangement
which is attached to the structure.
To lock the hood in the closed position, pull the hood
forward and engage catch on the lug attached to the front
bow of the hood. The hood may be released from the front
cockpit by pulling the knob of the catch assembly, which is
located under the cowl above the instrument panel. The release
knob in the rear cockpit is installed at the longeron level on
the left-hand side.
5. Equipment Centrols.
Landing Flare Release. —Provisions are made for releasing
two standard, 4 inch, landing flares through launching tubes
located in the rear end of the fuselage. The two release handles
are of the toggle type and are located at the right side of the
pilot’s seat in the front cockpit. The flares are released
individually by the release handles.
Electric Lights. —Switches controlling lighting services are
located on the panels of the main control boxes at the right-
hand side of each cockpit. Instrument panel lights are regulated
in intensity by rheostats, and each switch and rheostat is plainly
marked to indicate its operation. Upward and downward
identification lights are controlled by a keying switch of standard
pattern installed at the right of the pilot’s seat in the front
cockpit. Details of the electrical equipment are given in Section
V. of this Handbook.
Radio Controls. —A remote control unit of standard type
is located on the left-hand side of the front cockpit for the
operation of the T.R. ll.b. transmitter and receiver. The
TlOB3-RlOB2 radio equipment is installed in the rear cockpit
below the instrument panel and is readily accessible from the
rear seat in its normal position. Power supply for the radio
equipment is controlled by switches on the panel of the main
electrical control box in the rear cockpit. A three-position
switch on the same panel controls the operation of the motor
generator which provides power for the TlOB3 transmitter.
An aerial winch for the trailing aerial is fitted on the right-hand
side of the aircraft behind the rear cockpit. This is accessible,
from the rear seat in its reversed position. A spare trailing
aerial with reel is stowed on the right-hand side of the aircraft
behind the motor generator shielding box.
SECTION 11.


Fig. 3. Front Cockpit—Right-hand side


The neutralizing unit for the TlOB3 transmitter is installed
in a unit mounted on shock absorbers on the right-hand side
of the rear cockpit. Incorporated in the assembly is a switch
which permits the insertion of a condensor in the aerial circuit
for operation on the higher frequency range with the fixed aerial.
Intercommunication Controls. —lntercommunication between
the pilot and observer is controlled by means of a change-over
switch located on each main control panel. By means of this
switch, intercommunication may be effected on either the T.R.I lb
equipment or the RlOB2 receiver.
Fire Extinguisher. —A hand-operated fire extinguisher is
installed on the inner side of a door -located on the left side
of the fuselage at the rear cockpit. When the aircraft is not
in flight, the extinguisher is readily accessible from the ground
by opening the hinged door.
Signal Pistol. —A 1-1/2 in. calibre No. 3 Mark I. type
signal pistol is installed at the right-hand side of the pilot’s
seat in the front cockpit. A rack for stowage of eight
cartridges is located at the extreme left of the front cockpit
ahead of the flap and under-carriage position indicators.
Fixed Guns Control. —Firing triggers for the two fixed
Vickers Mark V. guns are incorporated in the handgrip unit
of the front control column. The reservoir for the hydraulic
gun synchronising gear is located between the rudder pedals
in the front cockpit, and the air release valves are installed on
either side of the main instrument panel, below the guns.
Rear Cun Controls. —The rear gun is a Vickers G.O. No. 1
Mark I. gun installed on a hydraulically-operated gun hoist,
which is carried on a truck rolling on a track in the form of a
circular arc. The position of the truck may be fixed by the locking
handle which actuates a cam-operated lock. The gun hoist is
controlled by a three-position valve on the left-hand side of the
hoist, the upward and downward positions of which cause the gun
to be respectively raised or lowered. The hoist may be locked
in any position by returning the valve lever to the central or
normal position. The hydraulic power for the operation of
the gun hoist is supplied by the engine-driven hydraulic pump,
but in case of failure of this supply, the hoist may be operated
by the emergency hand pump on the left-hand side of the
cockpit. Stowage is provided for eight magazines for this gun,
each containing sixty rounds. Ihe gun hoist control valve
may be locked in the central position by means of a pin attached
to a short length of chain. This locking pin should always
be in place when the rear gun is not in operation, to prevent
accidental raising or lowering of the hoist.
SECTION 11.


Camera Gun. —When a camera gun is fitted, the control
is operated by the left-hand firing trigger of the pilot’s control
column in the front cockpit. The loading handle for the
camera gun is installed on the fuselage bracing member at the
left side of the pilot’s seat.
Camera Controls. —The camera doors in the bottom of the
fuselage may be opened in flight, but the door in the inner
skin of the fuselage bottom structure must be opened before
the camera is fitted. The camera control is mounted on a
wedge-plate on the left-hand side of the aircraft in the rear
cockpit, and another wedge-plate is provided for the camera
motor unit above the camera mounting position. A green
camera warning indicator light is permanently fixed on the front
cockpit instrument panel.
Electro-Magnetic Bomb Controls. —Switches controlling the
release of bombs are installed both in the front cockpit and at
the prone bombing positions. In the front cockpit the selector
switches are situated at the top of the main electrical control
panel on the right-hand side of the aircraft; and fusing switches
and firing and jettison switches are located on a bomb-firing
panel on the left-hand side of the instrument sub-panel. At
the prone bombing position all switches are located on the left
side, except the automatic bomb distributor box, which when
fitted is installed on the right-hand side of the bomb aimer.
Full details of the bomb installation are given in Section VIII.
of this Handbook.
Mechanical Bomb Controls. —Provision is made for the
operation of eight mechanically-controlled release units fitted in
the lower skin of the wing centre section. The control unit
is positioned on the left-hand side of the front cockpit
on the control shelf below the engine control levers. The
control unit consists of a lever which may be selectively operated
for individual release of the slips. The left-hand group of
four slips may also be released in a salvo by engaging the
release lever in the SALVO slot of the release unit.
Bomb Sighting Equipment. —A Course Setting Bomb Sight
Mark VII. or Mark IX. may be fitted on a mounting fixture
below the floor in the after part of the rear cockpit. For this
purpose part of the floor is arranged as a double-hinged door,
which may be folded up and latched against the left side of the
aircraft. Before the floor is raised the rotating seat must be
latched in the rearward-facing position. Bomb sighting doors
are arranged in the fuselage bottom, actuated by a lever to the
right of the bomb sight position. To permit a flat sighting
SECTION 11.


Fig. 4. Rear Cockpit—Left-hand side


angle from the prone bombing position, these doors are inter-
connected with a section of the centre section landing flaps,
which is arranged so as to swing upward as the bomb sight
doors are opened.
6. Handling Equipment.
Lifting Tubes. —Lifting tubes are built into the rear fuselage
of the aircraft. These are arranged to slide inwards for stowage
and are secured by a bayonet arrangement incorporated with the
assembly.
Jacking Points. —Jacking points arc provided on each outer
wing, 30 inches outboard of the wing joint position. Additional
jacking points are provided on each landing gear leg near the
wheel axle and at the rear end of the fuselage just ahead of
the tail wheel.
Lifting Eyebolts. —One pair of lifting eyebolts is supplied
with each aircraft. These are not normally carried in the
aircraft. To lift the aircraft, the eyebolts should be screwed
into the position provided on the top of the centre section, in
the landing gear lock fitting.
Tie-down Eyebolts. —One pair of tie-down rings is pro-
vided. Stowage is arranged for these fittings inside the fuselage
side access door. Fittings into which the tie-down eyebolts
may be screwed are built into the wings near the wing tips.
SECTION 11.


SECTION III.
LANDING GEAR AND FLAP OPERATION
General. —The retractable landing gear and the landing flaps
are hydraulically operated, either by engine-driven pump or by
hand pump. The normal operation is by the engine-driven
pump, and after the control handles are set at the desired
positions, the hydraulic power control knob should be pushed.
An instruction plate for the operation of the hydraulic system
is located at the forward end of the control shelf, on the left-
hand side of the front cockpit.
Landing Gear. —The landing gear is operated by double-
acting hydraulic rams, with mechanically-operated spring-loaded
latches at the limiting upward and downward positions. The
landing gear may be lowered from either cockpit, but as a
safety catch is incorporated in the front cockpit control quadrant,
the landing gear cannot be raised by the rear cockpit controls.
Mechanical indicators and a warning device are provided for
the pilot’s position in the front cockpit.
Landing Gear Warning. —The landing gear warning indicator
consists of a vibrator unit attached to the left-hand rudder
pedal in the front cockpit. This vibrator acts as a warning
indicator in cases of unsafe landing conditions. The unit is
interconnected electrically with the “DOWN” position latch pins
and the throttle control in such a manner that when the throttle
closed to an extent resulting in engine speeds under 1,000
R.P.M., the vibrator will operate if either “DOWN” position
latch pin is not in place.
Landing Flaps. —The hydraulically-operated landing flaps
are controlled in a similar manner to the retractable landing
gear. A calibrated indicator adjacent to the landing gear
position indicator in the front cockpit shows the position of the
landing flaps from the “UP” position (0°) to the “DOWN”
position (60°). When it is desired to stop the flaps at an
intermediate position, the flap control handle should be moved
to the “LOCK” position when the flap indicator shows the
flap extension desired. The flaps MUST NOT be lowered
when flying at indicated air speeds in excess of 125 miles per
hour.
Hydraulic Power Control Valves. —The hydraulic power
control valves are balanced type sliding valves which operate
the landing gear or flaps when the selector controls have been
set for the appropriate operation. The valve in the front
cockpit being completely balanced, it will remain In engagement
after being pushed for operation and must be withdrawn by
the pilot to cut off the hydraulic power at the completion of
the required operation. The rear cockpit control valve is only
partially balanced and must be held in by hand for hydraulic


power operation. This arrangement ensures that the hydraulic
power cannot be inadvertently left on by the occupant of the
rear cockpit.
Hydraulic Hand Pump. —The hydraulic hand pump is
incorporated with the selector valve unit on the left side, of
the aircraft, below the control shelf. It is operated from either
cockpit by means of the handle provided on the left-hand side
of each cockpit. The hand pump is intended primarily for
use in case of failure of the engine-driven power supply.
Emergency Operation. —ln the event of failure of the engine-
driven pump or its connections, the hand pump should be used
for the operation of the landing gear and flaps. The reservoir
in the hydraulic system is so arranged that even in the event
of failure of the pressure line from the engine-driven pump,
with the consequent loss of hydraulic fluid, sufficient will always
remain in the system to provide fluid for the operation of the
emergency hand pump. Should complete failure of the hydraulic
system occur—i.e., failure of both engine-driven and hand
pumps, the landing gear will fall to the extended position when
the control handle is set for the “DOWN” position and the
emergency valve, located to the left of the pilot’s seat in the
front cockpit, is opened. This valve is of the needle type and
the handle is painted red and the valve suitably labelled. After
the landing gear has reached the down position during this
emergency operation, without the use of either hydraulic pump,
the latches may not positively engage unless the aircraft is
rocked to and fro about the rolling axis to throw the landing
gear into place. The safe landing condition is indicated if,
on closing the throttle, the landing gear warning vibrator on
the pilot’s left rudder pedal does not operate.
Landing Gear Latch Failure. —The landing gear is held in
the “DOWN” position by a spring-loaded latch, and failure of
the spring may prevent the latch pin from going into place.
This condition will be indicated when the vibrator warning
unit on the front rudder pedal warns of an unsafe landing
condition when the landing gear has otherwise functioned
normally. The DOWN’ position latch pin may then be
operated by a mechanical over-ride, which is actuated by the
landing gear control handle in the front cockpit. In order to
do this it is necessary to move aside the lock plate marked
“EMERGENCY—This portion of Handle Travel Pushes Latch
Pins in Place,” which normally limits the forward travel of
the landing gear control lever; the control handle should then
be pushed forward as far as it will go. Safe landing condition
is then as usual, indicated when, with throttle closed, the vibrator
warning ceases to operate. It should be noted that this extra
portion of the landing gear control handle travel is to be used
only in this emergency and not for normal operation.
SECTION 111.


SECTION IV.
POWER PLANT INSTALLATION
AND OPERATION
General Data. —The aircraft is fitted with a C.A.C. Wasp H
geared radial engine of the following rating;—
Take-off; 650 B.H.P. at 2,300 R.P.M. with 38" Hg. Manifold
Pressure.
Normal: 600 B.H.P. at 7,000 feet at 2,300 R.P.M. with 34"
Hg. Manifold Pressure.
Cruising: 2,100 R.P.M. with 28" Hg. Manifold Pressure.
Fuel: 87 Octane Rating.
Starting Engine. —The following procedure should be
followed when starting the engine:—
1. Check level in fuel and oil tanks.
2. When starting from cold, pull airscrew through several
turns to ensure engine is free and that cylinders are free
of excess oil.
3. Put parking brakes on.
4. FueI—“LEFT” tank “ON.”
5. Carburettor Heat—Full “COLD” position.
6. Propeller Control—Low R.P.M. (coarse pitch).
7. Mixture Control.—Place mixture control in full “LEAN”
(Priming) position. Prime engine with four to six
steady strokes of the Throttle Lever. Return mixture
control to full “RICH” position.
8. Throttle Control —Lever approximately half-inch open.
9. Hand Fuel Pump—Operate until pressure on gauge is
approximately three to four lbs. per sq. inch.
10. Ignition Switch—Full “ON.”
11. Starter Switch—Push switch to energise starter.
Caution. —During the starting period, DO NOT pump
throttle when engine is cold, as this may cause back-firing with
the accompanying risk of fire.


Warming-up Engine. —The following procedure is recom-
mended for warming-up the engine:—
1. When engine starts, manipulate the throttle to obtain
500 to 600 R.P.M. as quickly as possible, and hold
this speed for approximately one minute, or until the
oil pressure reaches 50 lb. per sq. inch.
2. Place propeller control in full high R.P.M. position
(Fine Pitch) as soon as oil pressure reaches normal and
engine is running smoothly.
3. Advance throttle to increase R.P.M. to 1,000 for
warm-up.
4. Check mixture control for full “RICH” position and
leave in this position during warming-up period.
5. Oil temperature should be 60° C. minimum for take-off.
6. Maximum permissible cylinder head temperature is
260° C. on ground.
Stopping Engine. —The following method should be adopted
for stopping the engine;—
1. Set airscrew control for full low R.P.M. (Coarse Pitch),
in which position the airscrew cylinder covers and
protects the piston.
2. Idle engine to approximately 600 R.P.M.
3. Set mixture control to full “LEAN” position.
4. Turn ignition switch to “OFF” position AFTER
engine ceases to fire.
Note. —The carburettor is equipped with an idle cut-off
device, which is operated by the mixture control in the full
“LEAN” position.
Manifold Pressure. —For take-off the propeller control lever
should be set in the maximum R.P.M. position. The constant
speed control should limit the engine speed to 2,300 R.P.M.
with the propeller in full fine pitch (19° at 42" radius).
The maximum allowable manifold pressure for take-off is
38" Hg., and this should be obtained at approximately full
throttle condition during take-off.
For cruising and other conditions of continuous operation,
the throttle opening and propeller control should be set to the
operating conditions desired, which should, however, not exceed
those specified in the Table given in this Section.
SECTION IV.


Mixture Control. —During take-off, while climbing at or
near maximum rate, or during high speed level flight below
5,000 feet altitude, the mixture control should be maintained
in the full “RICH” position. For all operations above 5,000
feet altitude, the mixture may be leaned only sufficiently to
maintain smooth engine operation, except when cruising at or
below the maximum recommended cruising power output of
450 H.P. The use of the mixture control at any time should
be governed by the exhaust gas analyser, and it is contingent
also upon satisfactory engine cooling as determined by the
maximum allowable cylinder head temperatures as listed below.
Before descending from altitude at which the mixture control
was last set the mixture control lever should be moved to full
rich.
The mixture must not be leaned under cruising conditions
if the cylinder head temperature tends to rise above the maximum
recommended, 235° C.
Exhaust Cas Analyser. —The exhaust gas analyser indicates
the proportions of the mixture entering the engine by electrically
analysing a sample of the exhaust gas. Normally the indicator
has a lag of five or six seconds, and this must be borne in
mind when checking the mixture control: a minimum time
equal to this must be allowed after any adjustment of the mixture
control lever before taking a reading. A correct fuel-air ratio
should not be taken as lessening the importance of the head
temperature indicator in guarding against over-heating the
engine. Should detonation occur, the pointer of the mixture
indicator will move erratically, generally towards the rich end
of the scale.
To facilitate adjustment to the correct mixture for normal
operating conditions, a scale of manifold pressure is incorporated
above the fuel-air ratio scale. This scale is intended only as
a reference, and it should be understood that the instrument
does not measure manifold pressure. In operation, the manifold
pressure should be observed on the manifold pressure gauge
and the mixture should then be adjusted to cause the mixture
indicator pointer to move to the corresponding pressure. This
setting will give the optimum fuel-air ratio. The mixture
should never be leaned to such a degree as to cause the indicator
to show a fuel-air ratio less than .072.
When carburettor heat is applied, it becomes necessary to
lean out the mixture to restore the former fuel-air ratio. Before
closing the carburettor heat by moving the control towards the
“COLD” position, the mixture should be enriched to avoid
the possibility of detonation due to too lean a mixture.
SECTION IV.


G -g u
s
E u
II § X
Is
E 5 o
CONDITION
* 5 w
ssl-1
n al
s «
Mini
Fuel
Raci<
Take-off (at sea level)
38.0
2,300
Full “RICH’
Climb ...
34.0
2,300
.084
Level Flight . -
34.0
2,300
.084
CONTINUOUS CRUISING OPERATION
Maximum
Manifold
Pressure
(ins. Hg.)
R.P.M,
Minimum
Fuel-air
Ratio
o
}I .
5 v X
2 M o
Ida*
Maximum
28
2,100 .073
31
Desired
26
2,000 .073
27
Cylinder Temperatures. —Operation of the engine must
alwa/s be such as to maintain cylinder head temperatures within
the following limits:—
1. Take-off and short climbs—Maximium allowable for
five minutes, 290° C.
2. Continuous operation—Maximum allowable, 260° C.
3. Cruising—Maximum recommended, 235° C.
Prolonged steep climbing may result in high cylinder head
temperatures; under severe operating conditions, therefore, it
will be found desirable to climb at air speeds somewhat in excess
of the best climb speed (approximately 120 m.p.h.), so as
to obtain adequate cooling. An increase in air speed of sto 10
m.p.h. will considerably reduce cylinder head temperatures with
very little sacrifice in rate of climb.
Limiting Operating Conditions. —The following table gives
the limiting conditions of operation of the engine:—
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE POWER OPERATION
Maximum Diving Condition :
The maximum R.P.M. in a dive is not to exceed 2,650
R.P.M. The manifold pressure under these conditions should
not be less than 20 inches and should not exceed 25 inches.
Carburettor Air Heating. —The use of the carburettor air
heating system is necessary to prevent or remove ice formation
in the carburettor. This is most likely to occur at part throttle
(moderate to low manifold pressures) under conditions of high
humidity over a considerable range of temperatures.
SECTION IV.


Formation of ice in the carburettor can generally be detected
at cruising throttle by a gradual decrease in manifold pressure
at a fixed throttle setting under steady level flight conditions.
At greater throttle openings, it is more difficult to detect except
from irregular engine operation.
To prevent carburettor icing under adverse weather condi-
tions, the carburettor air temperature should be maintained at
from 32° C. to 38° C. The air temperature thermometer is
of the resistance bulb type, connected through a two-position
selector switch to two thermocouple units, one of which is
fitted in the air mixing chamber below the carburettor. The
other unit is enclosed in a chamber in the wing centre section
leading edge from which the fresh air ventilating system to
the front cockpit is taken.
Due to the high manifold pressure permitted for take-off,
it is imperative that the carburettor heat control be set to
full “COLD" before take-off, except when operating in unusually
cold or damp weather, when a moderate amount of heat may
be permitted. The high carburettor air temperature resulting
when the control is set for “HOT" causes a material reduction
in power output from the engine and may cause detonation, with
its accompanying serious effects.
Caution. —As variations in air temperature entering the
carburettor affect the weight of air in the charge drawn into the
cylinders, it is important that the mixture control be re-set
with any adjustment of the carburettor air heat control. This
is most essential when the control is moved towards the “COLD”
position, owing to the consequent leaning of the mixture.
Airscrew. —This aircraft is fitted with a 10-feet diameter
Hamilton Standard three-bladed propeller, arranged for constant
speed operation over the pitch range of 15° by means of a
Hamilton governor unit driven by the engine. The setting
of the blades at the 42" radius reference section is 34° in coarse
pitch and 19° fine pitch.
Fuel System. —The fuel system incorporates two tanks within
the wing centre-section, providing a total capacity of 92 gallons
of fuel. The left tank accommodates a normal supply of
30 gallons and a reserve supply of 1 6 gallons, which, by means
of a stand-pipe type outlet, is held in this tank unless the
fuel selector valve is set for “RESERVE ON.” The right-
hand tank holds 46 gallons. The cockpit fuel selector valves
have four positions as indicated on the valve dials: “RIGHT
ON.” “LEFT ON,” “RESERVE ON,” and “OFF.” The
SECTION IV.


two fuel tanks are not directly connected together and therefore
it is necessary to switch from one tank to the other and then
to reserve for maximum continuous operation. If running on
the left tank when the fuel level is approaching the 16 gallon
reserve level, the selector valve should be set to “RESERVE ON”
before attempting any manoeuvres, or before landing or taking
off.
The fuel level in each tank is indicated by a float type
gauge built integral with the tanks, and situated one on either
side of the aircraft above the top of the wing centre-section.
The position of the gauges is arranged so as to be easily visible
to the occupant of either cockpit, and for night flying the)
gauges are illuminated, the lights being controlled by a switch
on the main electrical control panel on the right-hand side
of the front cockpit.
The normal fuel pressure in flight should be from four to
six pounds per square inch, and a fuel pressure indicator is
contained in the front instrument panel assembly. The fuel
pressure relief valve is incorporated with a fuel strainer in a unit
mounted on the left-hand side of the engine mounting structure
within the engine cowling.
The hand fuel pump, which is incorporated in the system,
is used to apply fuel pressure at the carburettor before starting
engine. In case of failure of the engine-driven fuel pump,
this hand pump may be used to provide emergency supply of fuel
to the carburettor.
Oil System. —The following general particulars relate to
the lubrication system of the engine and its operation:—
Oil Service Capacity—-83 gallons.
Oil Pressure—
Take-off 70 to 90 Ib./sq. in.
In flight 70 to 90 Ib./sq. in.
Minimum permissible - - 50 Ib./sq. in.
Oil Temperature (Inlet)
Minimum permissible for take-off - - 60° C.
Maximum permissible in level flight - - 85° C.
Maximum permissible in climb - - - 90° C.
The oil tank and complete oil system is built into the engine
mounting unit. An accelerated warming-up device is incor-
porated in the oil tank to ensure rapid warming of the oil.
SECTION IV.


Attached to the bottom of the oil tank is an oil temperature
regulator fitted with a thermostatically-operated valve, which
by-passes the oil radiator .when the oil is cold, controlling the
oil inlet temperature to 70-85° C.
Hand Starting. —The engine may be turned with a hand
starting crank, which is stowed inside the fuselage side access
door. The starting handle should be engaged with the extension
shaft from the starter, the end of which projects beyond the
engine cowling on the right-hand side of the aircraft.
When starting by hand, the engine will probably not start
without the aid of the booster coil. In this case, the left-hand
side removable engine cowl should be removed, and the starter
disconnected by disconnecting the cannon plug on the main
electrical power supply box on the firewall (the starter connection
is the larger of the two cannon plugs, the smaller one connects
the generator) . The cowl should then be replaced.
As the booster coil Is energised by the starter switch, this
switch should be pushed by the occupant of the front cockpit
while the engine is being turned by means of the starting handle.
SECTION IV.


SECTION V.
ELECTRICAL AND RADIO INSTALLATION
1. Electrical Installation.
General. —The electrical system of the aircraft is, in general,
of the single wire type; the majority of the equipment, including
lamps, is, however, of the two pole type, the negative terminal
being earthed at the nearest convenient point in each case.
The supply is provided by a 12-volt battery carried on a
mounting in front of the firewall. An engine-driven generator,
rated at 750 watts is fitted, the generator output being auto-
matically controlled by a generator control panel, providing
voltage and current control. The control panel, together with
a 120 ampere generator fuse is located in a shielded box on the
right side of the front fuselage. This panel requires no adjust-
ment beyond routine servicing, particulars of which are contained
in the Service Manual for this aircraft.
A main supply switch is incorporated with the battery
terminal shield. This switch is accessible through a small
hinged door in the removable cowling on the right-hand side
of the engine. When operations with the aircraft are completed,
this switch should be turned off to avoid possibility of accidental
discharge of the battery.
Spare Fuses and Lamps. —Spare lamps and fuses arc con-
veniently stowed within an accessible box on the right side of
the front cockpit at the level of the top longeron. A spare)
fuse box is also located in the rear cockpit. All Instrument
panel and cockpit lamps, and all warning indicator lamps, may
be replaced in flight.
Control Panel—Front Cockpit. —The main electrical control
panel in the front cockpit is arranged along the right-hand side
of the cockpit. A hinged cover is provided over the fuse
panel behind the left top corner of the main panel. The fuses
in this panel cover all circuits except those under the immediate
control of the occupant of the rear cockpit. All fuses may
be replaced in flight.
Switches are arranged on this panel controlling the follow-
ing:—•
Generator.
Landing Light, Left.
Landing Light. Right.
Navigation Lights.
Pitot Heating.
Fuel Gauge Lights.
Cockpit Lights (Front Cockpit).
Bomb Loading Lights in Wing.
Bomb Main Power Control (Master Switch) .


Two rheostats are also provided to control the intensity of
illumination of the instrument panel lights and the self-contained
lights built into the compass and the gas-analyser instrument.
Two warning lights are also fitted, an amber light which glows
when the bomb loading lights in the wing are on, and a red
light which gives warning when the bomb control master
switch is on.
The panel also carries the inter-communication change-over
switch, and the bomb firing selector switches for the pilot’s use.
A volt-ammeter is fitted to indicate the charge and discharge rate.
Control Panel —Rear Cockpit. —The control panel in the
rear cockpit controls the services with which an observer or
radio operator is mainly concerned. As in the case of the front
cockpit panel, the fuses are carried on an enclosed panel, which
is readily accessible to the occupant of the cockpit. All fuses
may be replaced in flight from the spare fuse box on the left
side of the cockpit.
The following switches are fitted to the panel:—
Cockpit Lights, Upper.
Cockpit Light, Lower (Bomb Aimer’s Light) .
TRllb Radio Power Supply.
RIOB2 Radio Power Supply.
Camera Power Supply.
1.C.W./C.W. and R/T.
Rheostats controlling the lighting of the rear cockpit instru-
ment panel are installed and an inter-communication switch is
also fitted on this panel. At the top of the panel is the starter
switch for the radio power supply motor generator.
Lights. —Two 240 watt landing lights are fitted to the
aircraft, built into the leading edge of the wing. These lights
are fitted with pre-focussed base lamps, and the lights are directed
at the proper angle for night landing.
Navigation lights, controlled from a switch on the front
cockpit control panel, are built into the wing tips and fin. The
correct lamps for these lights are 12 volt, 6 watt lamps.
Upward and downward identification lights are installed in
the rear fuselage on the top and bottom respectively. These
lights are standard R.A.A.F. Type C lights and they are con-
trolled by an Identification Keying Switch, No. 2 Mark 111.,
which is fitted on the right-hand side of the front cockpit in
a convenient position for operation by the pilot.
SECTION V.


Fig. 5. Rear Cockpit—Right-hand side


Lighting of the cockpits is effected by two lights in each
cockpit at the level of the top longeron. In addition, a further
light is provided to illuminate the bomb sight when the prone
bombing position is in use. Lamps for these lights are 1 2 volt,
3 watt.
The fuel gauges are lit for night flying by two 3 watt lamps
enclosed in a fitting incorporated with the fuel gauges. A/l
warning indicator lamps are of 6 watt size.
The front instrument panel is floodlit by means of four
3 watt lamps, and the rear cockpit panel by two lamps of the
same size. The compass and gas analyser lights are of extra
small type and spares are not carried in the aircraft.
Warning Indicators. —The operation of the landing gear
vibrator type warning indicator has been explained in connection
with the operation of the landing gear. The vibrator is con-
nected through three switches of the momentary contact type, one
operated by the throttle control and the other two by the left
and right hand landing gear units respectively.
A red warning light is fitted to the main instrument panel
in each cockpit to indicate when the main hydraulic relief valve
is operating. This will occur when the hydraulic power control
valves are engaged and the desired operation of the landing gear
and/or flaps has been completed.
Five other warning lights' are fitted, as follow:
On Front Instrument Panel—
Camera Signal (Green) .
On Front Cockpit Electrical Control Panel—
Bomb Light Warning (Amber).
Bomb Power Warning (Red).
On Prone Bombing Position Control Panel—
Selective Bombing Control (Red).
Automatic Bombing Control (Amber).
Lamps for all seven warning lights are 12 volt, 6 watt
lamps.
Starting System. —The engine is started by a direct cranking
electric starter, operated by a push button switch on the sub-
panel in the front cockpit, through a solenoid relay switch
which is installed in the main power supply box on the front of
the firewall.
SECTION V.


Temperature Indicators. —Two electric temperature indicators
are installed, a thermocouple type cylinder head temperature
indicator on the front cockpit main instrument panel, and an
air temperature indicator, with a two-position switch, for reading
carburettor and free air temperatures, on the instrument sub-panel
in the front cockpit. When the switch is in position 1, the
indicator records the temperature of the air entering the car-
burettor, and when the switch is turned to position 2, the
temperature of the outside air is shown.
The air temperature indicator is connected to the 12-volt
supply from the battery, and the selector switch should there-
fore be turned to the “OFF” position when operations with
the aircraft are completed. The power supply to the exhaust
gas analyser is also controlled by this switch.
Pitot Heating. —The pitot-static head, carried on a strut
projecting from the leading edge of the wing on the right-hand
side of the aircraft, is electrically heated to prevent ice formation
on this unit in adverse weather conditions. The heating unit
is a wire-wound resistance built into the pitot head, and the
power supply is controlled by a switch on the front cockpit
control panel.
Exhaust Gas Analyser. —The exhaust gas analyser measures
the fuel-air ratio of the mixture entering the engine by electrically
analysing a sample of the exhaust gases passing through a cell
which is located in the engine bay ahead of the firewall, on
the right-hand side of the aircraft. The recording instrument
is installed on the main instrument panel in the front cockpit,
and is connected with the 12-volt power supply through the
air temperature switch. The gas analyser does not function
therefore until the air temperature instrument is switched on,
either to the carburettor or free air temperature units.
Electro-Magnetic Bomb Controls. —Ten electro-magnetic
bomb slips are fitted to the aircraft, four universal carriers with
electro-magnetic fusing, and six light series carriers. The slips
are built into the wing and centre section.
Two bomb control positions are provided, at the front
cockpit, for the use of the pilot, and at the prone bombing
position in the rear fuselage. Firing selector switches at the
SECTION V.


pilot’s position are contained in the main electrical control box
on the right-hand side of the front cockpit. The selector
switches are numbered as follow:
No. Bomb Position
1. Inner Bomb, Left-Hand Universal Carrier.
2. Inner Bomb, Right-Hand Universal Carrier.
3. Outer Bomb, Left-Hand Universal Carrier.
4. Outer Bomb, Right-Hand Universal Carrier.
5. Inner Bomb, Left-Hand Light Series Carriers.
6. Inner Bomb, Right-Hand Light Series Carriers.
7. Centre Bomb, Left-Hand Light Series Carriers.
8. Centre Bomb, Right-Hand Light Series Carriers.
9. Outer Bomb, Left-Hand Light Series Carriers.
10. Outer Bomb, Right-Hand Light Series Carriers.
A diagram illustrating the bomb locations and numbers is
fixed to the control panel adjacent to the selector switches in
the front cockpit.
7he selector switches at the prone bombing position are
similarly numbered for reference, and an additional bomb
position diagram is fixed to the panel at this position.
A bomb firing panel is located on the instrument sub-panel
in the front cockpit. This mounts the fusing switches for
operating the nose and tail electro-magnetic fusing units at the
bomb positions, and also contains the bomb-firing and jettison
switches. The jettison switch on this panel is also connected
to a specially designed solenoid operated multipole switch at
the rear bomb control position; this switch enables the pilot
to jettison all bombs in an emergency, even though they may
have been selected for automatic bomb dropping by the prone
bomber.
Except for the automatic distributor, all bomb controls at
the prone bombing position are contained on the control panel
to the left of the bombing position. Nose-tail fusing selection
is made by a fusing selector switch, and the bombs are fired
by a fusing and firing switch.
Automatic Bombing . —For the purpose of dropping bombs
to a predetermined pattern, a Bomb Distributor Box, Type A,
may be fitted to the aircraft on the right-hand side of the prone
bomber. The box should be connected to the group of
terminals provided in the main bomb circuit junction box, which
is situated just aft of the electrical control panel in the rear
SECTION V.


cockpit. Selection of the bombs to be connected to the
distributor, either light series or universal carriers, is made by
plug-in type bridges in this box; the selection of bombs to
be fired is, however, made in the usual way by means of the
selector switches incorporated in the distributor box.
To operate the distributor, a manual control is fitted to the
solenoid multipole switch in the bomb control box to the left
of the bombing position. This switch connects the bomb-
firing circuits to the distributor box and at the same time
connects the power supply and the amber-coloured indicator
light.
Details of the operation of the bombing equipment are given
in Section VIII. of this Handbook.
2. Radio Installation.
General. —Provisions are made for the fitting of the follow-
ing radio sets: —
T.R.llb Transmitter and Receiver.
T 1083 Transmitter.
R 1082 Receiver.
The T.R.llb set is carried on a shock-absorbing carrier in
the rear fuselage. It is arranged for remote control by the
pilot from the front cockpit, and is normally operated in con-
junction with the fixed aerial suspended between the radio mast
in front of the cockpit enclosure and the top of the rudder.
The T 1083 —R 1082 equipment is mounted on a shock
resisting shelf in the rear cockpit, below the flying instrument
panel. The shelf incorporates a small sliding table for the
use of the observer. This table is provided with a lock to
ensure that it will not interfere with the movement of the
rear control column. It should, therefore, be used only when
the rear control column is not in use and is properly stowed
in the socket provided for the purpose at the right side of the
rear cockpit. When it is desired to fly the aircraft from the
rear cockpit, the table MUST be securely locked in the stowed
position, before mounting the control column.
Coil Stowage. —Stowage is provided in the bottom of the
rear cockpit for two transmitter coils for use with the T 1083
set, and the other pair of coils normally carried should be fitted
in the set. Stowage is also provided under the observer’s
rotating seat for a standard transport case for the receiver coils
for use with the R 1082 receiver unit.
SECTION V.


Fig. 6. Rear Cockpit—Instrument and Radio Installation


Aerials. —Two aerial systems are provided, a fixed aerial
above the fuselage and a trailing aerial on an Aerial Reel, Type
B, which is mounted on a Winch, Type 5, installed on the
right side of the aircraft. To provide for possible loss of
the trailing aerial, an additional aerial, with its reel, is stowed
on the right-hand side of the aircraft behind the rear cockpit
and above the level of the top longerons.
The fixed aerial is normally used with the T.R.llb set,
and the trailing aerial with the T 1083—R 1082 sets. To
cover emergency operation, such as in the case of a forced
landing, the fixed aerial may be connected with the longer
range equipment by operating the aerial change-over switches,
one of which is positioned on the right side of the aircraft, at
the back of the rear cockpit, and the other at the next fuselage
bulkhead position immediately aft of this point.
Radio Power Supply. —Power supply for the T.R.llb set
is obtained from a vibrator unit which is incorporated within
the power crate inside the set. Power is supplied to the
T 1083—R 1082 sets by means of a motor generator, controlled
by a starter switch on the rear cockpit electrical control panel,
and from a vibrator unit installed on the right side of the
rear cockpit. The motor generator is installed in a screening
box behind the mounting ring of the rear gun.
Neutralizing Unit. —The neutralizing unit, for use with the
T 1083 transmitter, is incorporated in a unit mounted on the
right-hand side of the rear cockpit. A switch is provided on
the panel for the purpose of switching in a series condenser in
the aerial circuit when operating on the higher frequencies
(8,000 —10,000 kcs.), particularly when operating with the
fixed aerial.
SECTION V.


SECTION VI.
INSTRUMENT INSTALLATION
General. —lnstrument panels are installed in the conventional
position in each cockpit. The panels are mounted on shock
absorbers to prevent damage to the instruments due to engine
vibration. A sub-panel is also fitted to the front cockpit, below
the main instrument panel, and a small instrument panel is
installed at the prone bombing position.
The main panels are indirectly lighted by lamps located
behind a hinged reflector panel on each panel. The intensity
of illumination is governed by a rheostat control located on the
electrical control panel of either cockpit. In addition, the
compass and gas analyser instruments have built-in lights, which
are also controlled by rheostats.
The following instruments are fitted:—
Front Cockpit Instrument Panel.
Air Speed Indicator.
Bank and Turn Indicator.
Rate of Climb Indicator.
Directional Gyro.
Gyro Horizon.
Altimeter.
Compass.
Clock.
Exhaust Gas Analyser.
Tachometer.
Manifold Pressure Gauge.
Engine Gauge Unit.
Engine Cylinder Head Temperature Indicator.
Front Cockpit Sub-Panel.
Air Temperature Indicator (Carburettor and Free Air) .
Suction Gauge.
Rear Cockpit Instrument Panel.
Altimeter.
Air Speed Indicator.
Turn and Bank Indicator.
Clock.
Compass.
Tachometer.
Bomb Aimer’s Instrument Panel,
Air Speed Indicator.
Altimeter.


Fig. 7. Front Cockpit—Instrument Installation


Gyro Instruments. —The gyroscopically-controlled instru-
ments —artificial horizon, directional gyro, and turn and bank
indicators—are normally operated by an engine-driven vacuum
pump through a vacuum relief valve set to approximately five
inches of mercury at cruising R.P.M. Two venturis are pro-
vided for use only in case of failure of the engine-driven pump.
The directional gyro directly indicates to the pilot all turns
and the amount of turn in degrees. The instrument has no
time lag being dead beat, and, therefore, by using it as
a turn indicator, the pilot can change his heading by any pre-
determined number of degrees.
The directional gyro should be used for straight course
keeping, for exact course changes, and for making exact turns.
A caging knob on the front of the instrument below the card
will cage the gyro and mesh with the card frame when pushed
in. By rotating this knob the card will revolve to any
desired compass heading. When the indication desired is reached,
pull out this knob and the instrument is ready for use. At
intervals of twenty minutes to half-hour, check the indicated
heading with the magnetic compass. Resetting of the directional
gyro may be necessary, as it has probably drifted off two to
five degrees. This drifting may take place in either direction,
and in long flights will result in error of course keeping unless
corrected.
Banks, climbs or dives up to 45° are within the operating
limits of this instrument. If this limit is exceeded it will be
necessary to reset the heading indication upon resuming level
flight.
The gyro horizon directly indicates to the pilot his relative
position to the real horizon. It has no time lag, being dead
beat, and the pilot can manipulate his controls to bring his
ship to any desired position by noting the relation of the
miniature aeroplane with respect to the horizon bar. Wing
down, climbing or diving positions are shown by this instru-
ment in exactly the same relations as when using the true
horizon.
The banking indicator shows degree of bank and extremely
accurate lateral control can be maintained by watching the pointer.
This indication, also being dead beat, has no time lag.
Banks up to 90° and climbs or dives up to 60° are within
the operating limits of the instrument.
SECTION VI.


Warning.— When aerobatics are to be performed, the
directional gyro and gyro horizon MUST be caged, as loops
and rolls with the instrument free will impose excessive loads
on the bearings and pivots, and will result in injury to the
instruments. The directional gyro may be caged by pushing
in the setting knob below the face of the instrument. The
gyro horizon is caged by pulling out the knob at the right-hand
side of the instrument, turning the arrow on the knob inwards
and pushing the knob back: the aircraft must be held straight
and level in order to lock the instrument central. The gyro
horizon may be uncaged by rotating the knob until the arrow
points inwards and pulling it out to its fullest extent, the knot
may then be turned clockwise and released.
Suction Gauge. —The suction gauge on the instrument sub-
panel of the front cockpit is provided to indicate the amount
of suction, in inches of mercury, of the engine-driven vacuum
pump.
Pitot-Static Head. —The altimeters, air speed indicators and
rate of climb indicator are operated by the air flow on the
electrically-heated pitot head. The connection of the altimeters
and rate of climb indicator to the static side of the unit makes
these instruments independent of air pressure conditions inside
the cockpits. ,
Compasses. —Vertical reading type compasses are fitted with
integral compensating units for compass adjustment.
Caution. —Whenever the front fixed guns are changed or
removed, the compass in the front cockpit MUST be re-swung
and adjusted to compensate for the resulting change in magnetic
characteristics.
Clock. —The sweep-second hand clock on the front instru-
ment panel is of the eight-day type, although a margin of
two days is normally achieved to eliminate the necessity of re-
winding precisely on the eighth day.
Air Temperature Indicator. —The temperature of the car-
burettor air and the outside air temperature is taken from two
resistance bulbs, one in the mixing chamber below the carburettor,
and the other in the leading edge of the centre section at the
point where the ventilating air for the cockpit enters.
SECTION VI.


Engine Gauge Unit. —The engine gauge unit consists of
three instruments built into the one case. They are: oil
temperature indicator, oil pressure indicator and fuel pressure
gauge. The oil temperature is taken from a capillary bulb in
the INLET pipe to the engine.
Manifold Pressure Gauge. —The manifold pressure gauge
indicates the pressure of the fuel mixture as it enters the
engine. The instrument is calibrated in absolute pressures in
inches of mercury, and a red danger zone indicator forms part
of the instrument face. This instrument is used in conjunction
with the exhaust gas analyser (see Section IV.).
Exhaust Gas Analyser. —The exhaust gas analyser measures
the fuel-air ratio of the mixture entering the engine by electrically
analysing a sample of the exhaust gas. Particulars of the
operation of this instrument are given in Section IV. of this
Handbook.
Tachometers. —The tachometers indicate the number of
revolutions of the engine per minute. The drive from the
engine is by means of flexible drive shafts.
Note. —The gear ratio between engine and propeller is
three to two.
Engine Cylinder Temperature Indicator. —The temperature
of the hottest cylinder head under normal operating conditions
(in this case, No. 1 cylinder) is indicated by a thermocouple
indicator unit by means of copper constantin wires leading from
the rear spark plug gasket.
SECTION VI.


Part No.
Part Name
No. Rcq'd
01-73104
Front Rail Assembly
1
01-73104-2
Rear Rail Assembly -
1
01-73106
Pin Assembly -
4
01-73112
Front Post
2
01-73113
Rear Post
2
SECTION VII.
PHOTOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT
General. —Provisions are made for the fitting of a Type
F. 24 Camera, together with a Camera Mounting Type 25. The
camera may be installed through the fuselage side access door.
An Aldis Camera Aiming Sight may be installed on a wedge-
plate mounting fixed to the panel which mounts the bomb
aimer’s instruments. The camera may be installed only when
it is not desired to use the prone bombing position.
Installation of Camera. —The camera and its mounting are
carried by supports which are not normally fitted to the aircraft.
The necessary parts arc, however, supplied with each aircraft
and brackets for their attachment are provided. The following
parts are required for installing the camera:—
Before installing the camera, the door in the inner skin of
the fuselage bottom structure must be opened and folded back.
The camera doors in the bottom skin of the fuselage may be
opened in flight.
Installation of Camera Sight. —The mounting ring for the
Camera Aiming Sight is a permanent installation in the aircraft.
Before fitting the camera sight, it is necessary to move the cover
plate which is normally over the sighting hole in the fuselage
bottom. To effect this, remove the forward attaching screw
of the cover, loosen the rear screw and rotate the cover through
180° about the rear screw. The cover may then be secured
by the first screw, through the additional hole provided.
Camera Control and Motor. —Wedge-plate mountings arc
provided for the installation of a camera motor and control unit.
The motor may be fitted to the wedge-plate, which is fixed to
the top of the fuselage frame, at the bulkhead station immediately
aft of the camera mounting position. The wedge-plate
for the camera control is fixed to the fuselage structure on the


Fig. 8. Installation of Camera


left side of the rear cockpit. Electrical power connection
of the camera equipment is made by means of four-pin cannon
plugs. The sockets are located adjacent to the camera wedge-
plate fitting. The camera is intended to be operated by the
occupant of the rear cockpit with the rotating seat fixed in
the rearward-facing position.
Removal of Photographic Equipment. —The camera installa-
tion may be removed from the aircraft by reversing the above
procedure. When the camera is removed, the parts detailed
above should also be removed from the aircraft.
Pilot’s Warning Indicator. —A green camera light is per-
manently fixed on the front cockpit instrument panel.
SECTION VII.


SECTION VIII.
ARMAMENT INSTALLATION
1. Fixed Guns.
General. —The fixed gun installation consists of two .303
calibre Vickers Mark V. machine guns, fitted one on either side
of the front instrument panel, and firing forward in a line
outside the engine ring cowl. The left-hand gun is fitted
with a left-hand feed block, and the right-hand gun has a
right-hand feed block.
The guns are covered by a hinged section of cowling, which
may be readily opened for accessibility when the aircraft is on
the ground.
Gun Synchronising Gear. —Synchronisation of the guns with
the movement of the propeller blades is achieved by means of
a standard type generator for each gun. These arc actuated!
by cams on the vertical accessory drive shafts at the rear of
the engine. A standard type reservoir is fitted in the front
cockpit between the rudder pedals, and the guns are fired by
bowden controls from triggers built into the control column
handgrip. Air release valves arc incorporated in the system
and are fitted one on either side of the main instrument panel,
below the guns.
Gun Mountings. —The guns are mounted on a rigid tubular
mounting formed as part of the welded structure of the fuselage.
The gun trunnions are of forged steel, and alignment of the
guns is effected by adjustment vertically of the rear trunnion
and by horizontal adjustment of the screw through the top
of the trunnion.
Cun Sight. —The gun is sighted by means of a standard
type ring and bead sight. The bead is supported by a tubular
structure over the oil tank, and the ring is fitted to the cowling
behind the windscreen.
Ammunition Box. —Ammunition for the two front guns
is carried in a two-compartment ammunition box of spot welded
stainless steel construction. The box is designed to provide
stowage for two 600 round belts, or a total of 1,200 rounds.


Fig. 9. Prone Bombing Position


The ammunition box is a removable unit fitted with rollers,
which engage on a track support extending across the aircraft.
Access is provided by means of a hinged portion of cowling
on the right-hand side of the aircraft, and the box must be
removed from the aircraft for charging.
Feed and Ejection Chutes. —The feed chutes arc readily
detachable from the gun to facilitate loading of the belt. A
hinged cover in the top of the chutes also aids in this operation.
The rounds ejection chutes meet in a Y at the centre of the
aircraft, and the link ejection chutes are joined to the Y chute,
so that all spent rounds and links are ejected through a central
chute leading vertically through the wing centre section leading
edge.
For the purpose of salvaging empty links and cases, the
main ejection chute leads to a box structure in the centre section
ahead of the front spar, and a removable cover is provided in
the bottom skin of the centre section at this position.
Warning. —Owing to the proximity of the guns to the
front instrument panel, the compass in the front cockpit MUST
be re-swung and corrected whenever any changes of guns arc
effected, or whenever any gun is removed or re-installed.
2. Rear Gun.
General. —The rear gun is a Vickers G.O. No. 1 Mark 1
machine gun of .303 calibre. It is carried on a hydraulically
controlled hoist arranged to move on a track in the form of
a circular arc. The ball bearing truck which mounts the
hoist unit may be locked at any position along the track by
means of a locking handle actuating a cam operated lock.
Gun Hoist. —The raising or lowering of the gun is effected
by means of a three-position valve at the side of the hydraulic
hoist. The upward and downward positions of this valve
raise and lower the gun respectively. The hoist may be
locked in any position by merely returning the valve to the
neutral or central position when the desired amount of move-
ment is obtained. The hydraulic power for the operation
of the hoist is derived from the engine-driven hydraulic pump,
but in case of failure of this supply, the hoist may be operated
by setting the valve in the desired position and operating the
band hydraulic pump.
SECTION VIII.


Warning.— When the rear gun is not actually in operation,
the control valve should be locked in the central position by
inserting the locking pin which is attached to the valve by
a short length of chain. This will avoid accidental raising
or lowering of the gun hoist should the valve be inadvertently
knocked.
The gun hoist may be removed from the aircraft by dis-
connecting the flexible high-pressure hoses at the after end,
leaving the hoses with the hoist. When this is done, the
hydraulic circuit must be closed by installing the special block
(Part No. 01-58189) provided with each aircraft for this
purpose. The copper sealing washers and drilled bolts should
be retained with the aircraft for attaching the special block.
It is necessary to unbolt the track from its supports in order
to remove the hoist.
Whenever the gun hoist is removed or re-installed, the level
of the hydraulic fluid in the reservoir should be checked, and
in the case of installation of the hoist, the hoist should be
operated several times by means of the hand pump in order
to fully prime the complete system before checking the fluid level.
Ammunition. —Ammunition for the rear gun is carried in
magazines, each holding sixty rounds. Stowage is provided
for eight magazines, or a total of 480 rounds.
3. Bombing Armament
General. —A total of eighteen bomb-slips are built into the
aircraft. These are as follow:
4 Universal carriers on the outer wings, two each side.
6 Light series carriers in the wing centre section.
8 Mechanically-controlled carriers in the centre section.
Universal Carriers. —The universal carriers in the outer wings
consist of single claw release slips and electro-magnetic release
Un^ S t-° i ns jde the wings. Access doors are provided at
each bomb position to enable removal of the units for servicing
and to facilitate loading of the bombs.
The bombs are fused by E.M. fusing units, and for this
purpose, channel members are fitted, into which the fusing units
may be inserted. Electrical connection of the units is made by
a cannon plug fitted at each nose and tail fusing positions.
SECTION VIII.


Bomb steadies consist of screwed strut members with a
knurled head piece and locking nut. The bombs should be
lined up fore and aft with the fusing unit channels, taking
care to keep the tail of the bomb well down in order to clear
the tail fusing unit. The steadies should be drawn up hand
tight only, and locked by means of a spanner on the locking nuts.
The total normal load of bombs to be carried on these slips
is 500 lb., but for the overload case 1,000 lb. of bombs may
be carried. The universal carriers arc designed for use with
any of the undermentioned bombs:—
100 lb. A.S.
112 lb. H.E.
120 lb. G.P.
250 lb. G.P., S.A.P., A.S., or R.L.
Nos. 1 and 2 universal carrier positions (inboard universal
carriers) are also arranged to load 500 lb. S.A.P. bomb.
Light Series Carriers. —The six light series carriers arc
electro-magnetically controlled release units built into the trailing
edge portion of the wing centre section, just ahead of the landing
flaps. Access doors are provided for servicing and removal
of the units.
The rear steady is adjusted to a fixed length and should
not require further setting. Steadying of the bombs should be
effected by the adjustable nose steady, which incorporates a
lock-nut and split cone locking arrangement. The steady should
be drawn down on to the bomb, and held firmly in position
with the fingers while the lock-nut is tightened with a spanner.
Each light series carrier is designed to carry one of the
following bombs;—
83 lb. Practice Bomb Mk. I.
11+ lb. Practice Bomb Mk. I.
Mechanical Releases. —Eight mechanically-controlled release
slips, arranged in two groups of four slips each, are installed
in the lower panel of the centre section. These slips are intended
primarily for the carriage of pyrotechnics.
The slips are actuated by a cam bar and pawl mechanism
operated by a release lever in the front cockpit. Pyrotechnics
from the left-hand or right-hand group of slips may be released
individually by successive strokes of the release lever in the
left-hand or right-hand slot of the release quadrant respectively.
In addition, all four slips of the left-hand group may be
released simultaneously by operating the release lever in the centre
or SALVO slot of the quadrant.
SECTION VIII.


The front and rear steadies arc adjustable and are of the
same type as the adjustable steadies of the light series E.M.
carriers. A removable fuse safety bracket is provided for each
release for use when required.
Bombsight. —Provision is made for the fitting of a Course
Setting Bombsight, Mark VII. or Mark IX., on a mounting
below the floor in the rear cockpit. The part of the floor
covering the bombsight position is arranged as a double-hinged
door, which folds against the left-hand side of the aircraft
when the rotatable seat is locked in the rearward facing position.
The operating of the bombsighting doors is. explained in Section
11. of this Handbook.
Note. —Further details of the bombing armament installation,
particularly in regard to the electrical controls and operation,
are given in Section V. of this Handbook.
SECTION VIII.


SECTION IX.
FLYING CHARACTERISTICS
Control Surface Tabs. —The rudder and elevator trimming
tabs provide means for obtaining directional and longitudinal
trim of the aircraft in flight. The control wheels are situated
on the left side of each cockpit (see Section 11. of this Hand-
book) . The ailerons are provided with servo tabs to reduce
the operating loads at the control column; these tabs may be
adjusted on the ground by shortening or lengthening the tab
connecting rods in order to compensate for wing heaviness.
Ballast. —No ballast is required to be carried for any of the
normal operations of the aircraft as listed in the Weight Schedules
in Section X. of this Handbook.
Take-off. —The taking-off characteristics of the aircraft are
normal. Apart from considerations of engine starting pro-
cedure and instrument readings recommended for limiting
operation, the pilot should invariably check the following
points:—■
1. Fuel on.
2. Controls unlocked.
3. Mixture control “RICH.”
4. Propeller control “HIGH R.P.M.” (Fine Pitch).
5. Flaps “UP” (see Note below).
6. Elevator tab control “NEUTRAL.”
7. Carburettor heat off (Full “COLD”).
Note.—Maximum obstacle clearance at take-off is obtained
with landing flaps set at 15°, but this is only achieved at the
expense of a somewhat longer ground run before actually taking
off. High air temperature conditions will increase the run
required for take-off due to decrease in power.
Manoeuvres. —Diving or acrobatic manoeuvres must not be
carried out unless the wing flaps are fully closed.
In diving at high air speeds, the 34° coarse pitch limit of
the airscrew will not be sufficient to permit continuation of the
governing action of the constant speed governor unit. Under
these conditions the airscrew will act as a fixed pitch propeller,
allowing the engine to turn in proportion to the air speed and
throttle opening. The maximum R.P.M. in a dive should
not be allowed to exceed 2,650 R.P.M. and under these
conditions the manifold pressure should not be less than 20
inches or more than 25 inches.


Caution. —Under no circumstances should the maximum
allowable engine speed of 2,650 R.P.M. be exceeded, and any
operations above 2,100 R.P.M. should be kept to a minimum.
Landing. —Before landing, the pilot should check the follow-
ing items:—
1. Mixture control “RICH.”
2. Landing gear full “DOWN.”
3. Flaps “DOWN.”
4. Propeller control “HIGH R.P.M.” (Fine pitch).
5. Carburettor heat off (Full “COLD”).
The landing characteristics of the aircraft are normal for
this type of aeroplane. The best gliding-in speed is 100 m.p.h.,
and the aircraft should not normally be glided in for landing
at an indicated airspeed less than 95 m.p.h. Trim tabs should
be used for necessary correction of balance during the glide.
Taxying. —Taxying, the aircraft behaves normally. The
landing flaps should be completely closed after landing and prior
to taxying, to prevent possible damage to the flaps.
Air Speed Correction Chart. —'The air speed correction chart,
Fig. 10, may be used to determine true air speed from the
indicated speed and altimeter and free air temperature readings.
The correction chart incorporates the normal position error of
the aircraft, as may be noted by the difference between true
air speed and indicated speed for sea level conditions.
An example is plotted on the chart as follows:
For an indicated pressure altitude of 8,500 ft. (i.e., with
altimeter barometer scale set to 30 inches), an indicated air speed
of 167 m.p.h., and free air temperature 13° C., move up the
standard temperature line to point 1. at 8,500 and then diagonally
along the pressure altitude scale to 13° C. (point 2.). Then
move horizontally to the right to the indicated air speed of
167 m.p.h. (point 3.). Vertically below this read true air
speed of the aircraft for these conditions—i.e., 203 m.p.h.
SECTION IX.


Fig. 10. Air Speed Correction Chart


(a) Tare Weight - - -
-
-
„
lb.
3.895
( b ) Fixed Military Equipment—
Radio R 1082-T 1083—
Item
Total
Stowage for Transmitter and Oscillator
lb.
OZ.
lb.
OZ.
Coils -
-
.
3
12
Crate
-
-
3
08
Motor Generator and Switch
.
.
12
08
Morse Keys - - -
-
-
08
Trailing Aerial Winch
-
-
2
08
22
12
Radio TR 11 b —
Remote Control - - - -
.
-
2
00
Fixed Aerial and Mast complete
-
.
5
08
Crate
.
.
2
08
Total Radio TR 11 b
10
00
Front Guns —
Gun Trunnions -
-
4
04
C.C. Gear -
-
.
15
08
Chutes and Top Slide of Ammunition Box
10
00
Total Front Guns
29
12
Rear Gun —
Gun Track, Truck, and Hoist -
-
-
22
00
Total Rear Gun
22
00
Bomb Gear —
Light Series Slips with Steadies -
-
.
10
08
Mechanical Bomb Releases -
-
-
6
00
E.M. Release —4 Universal Carriers
_
5
00
6 Light Series Carriers
-
4
08
Bomb Selector Switches (12) -
.
-
1
08
Fusing and Firing Switches
-
-
02
Firing Switch -
-
-
06
Jettison Switches (2)
.
-
12
Nose and Tail Fusing Selector Switches
.
11
Total Bomb Gear -
29
07
Pyrotechnics —
Signal Gun Mounting
-
-
1
00
Parachute Flare Containers and Controls
_
12
00
Total Pyrotechnics
13
00
Electrical —
Identification Key ...
-
_
1
08
Identification Lights -
-
1
00
Total Electrical -
9
08
Total Fixed Military Equipment
129
07
SECTION X.
WEIGHTS
1. Weight Summary.


(c)
Normal Gross Weight -
-
lb.
5,575
id)
Maximum Gross Weight -
.
6,450
2. Typical Loadings.
(a) Day Fighter—
Weight empty + fixed equipment -
3,895
Fixed military equipment ....
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
-
400
Removable Equipment —
2 Vickers fixed guns, Mk. V., complete
with loading handles and trigger motors -
1,200 rounds .303 ammunition in belt
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. 1, Mk. I. -
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
drum) -
Radio—T.R. 11b
Signal Pistol and cartridges -
Fire Extinguisher
First-aid equipment
Total Removable Equipment -
lb.
61
87
25
67
32
6
5
3
286
Fuel—92 gallons
-
690
Oil — 8| gallons
-
79
Total
5,480
(b ) Night Fighter—
Weight empty + fixed equipment -
3,895
Fixed military equipment - - -
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
.
400
Removable Equipment—
2 Vickers fixed guns, Mk. V., complete
with loading handles and trigger motors -
61
1,200 rounds .303 ammunition in belt
87
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. 1, Mk. I. -
25
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
drum)
67
Radio—T.R.l lb
32
Signal Pistol and cartridges -
6
2 Landing Flares
37
Fire Extinguisher
5
First-aid equipment
3
Total Removable Equipment -
323
Fuel—92 gallons
690
Oil—8f gallons ------
-
79
Total
5,517
SECTION X.
Weight Summary—continued.


(c) Day Reconnaissance —
Weight empty + fixed equipment -
-
3,895
Fixed military equipment - - -
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
-
400
Removable Equipment—
2 Vickers fixed guns, Mk. V., complete
lb.
with loading handles and trigger motors -
61
1,200 rounds .303 ammunition in belt
87
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. 1, Mk. I. -
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
25
drum)
67
Radio —T.R.llb - - - - -
32
Radio —R1082-T1083 -
84
Camera F. 24
37
Signal Pistol and cartridges -
6
Fire Extinguisher
5
First-aid equipment
3
Total Removable Equipment - - - -
—
407
Fuel—92 gallons
-
690
Oil—8i gallons
-
79
Total
-
5,601
(d) Night Reconnaissance —
Weight empty + fixed equipment -
.
3,895
Fixed military equipment -
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
-
400
Removable Equipment—
2 Vickers fixed guns, Mk. V., complete
with loading handles and trigger motors -
61
1,200 rounds .303 ammunition in belt
87
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. 1, Mk. I. -
25
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
drum)
67
Radio —T.R.l lb
32
Radio—R1082-T1083 - - -
84
Camera F. 24
37
Signal Pistol and cartridges -
6
SECTION X.
Typical Loadings—continued.


2 Landing Flares -
lb.
- - 37
2 Reconnaissance Flares
- 45
Fire Extinguisher -
- 5
First-aid equipment
. 3
lb.
489
Total Removable Equipment -
—
Fuel—92 gallons -
-
690
Oil—8f gallons
-
79
Total ....
-
5,689
0) Day Bomber—
Weight empty -j- fixed equipment -
3.895
Fixed military equipment -
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
-
400
Removable Equipment—
2 Vickers fixed guns, Mk. V., complete
with loading handles and trigger motors -
61
1,200 rounds .303 ammunition in belt
87
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. I, Mk. I. -
25
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
drum) -
67
Radio—T.R.lIb
32
Radio—RI082-T1 083 -
84
Signal Pistol and cartridges -
6
Bomb Sight
15
Bomb steadies + 4 nose and tail fusing units
13
Bombs
500
Bomb Distributor
1
Fire Extinguisher
5
First-aid equipment
3
Total Removable Equipment
899
Fuel—92 gallons
• -
690
Oil—8f gallons
-
79
Total
_
6,093
SECTION X.
Typical Loadings—continued.


(0 Day Bomber (Overload) —
Weight empty -f- fixed equipment -
lb.
3,895
Fixed military equipment - - -
-
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
-
-
400
Removable Equipment —
1 Vickers fixed gun, Mk. V., complete with ib.
loading handle and trigger motor - - 31
600 rounds .303 ammunition in belt - - 43
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. 1, Mk. I. - - 25
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
drum) 67
Radio—T.R.l lb 32
Signal Pistol and cartridges - - - - 6
Bomb Sight 15
Bomb steadies 4- 8 nose and tail fusing units 1 5
Bombs 1,000
Fire Extinguisher 5
First-aid equipment - - - 3
Bomb Distributor 1
Total Removable Equipment -
1,243
Fuel—92 gallons
-
-
690
Oil— 8i gallons
-
-
79
Total
6,437
(g) Night Bomber—
Weight empty + fixed equipment -
_
3,895
Fixed military equipment -
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
-
400
Removable Equipment—
2 Vickers fixed guns, Mk. V., complete
with loading handles and trigger motors -
61
1,200 rounds .303 ammunition in belt
87
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. 1, Mk. I. -
25
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
drum)'
67
Radio—T.R. lib
32
Radio —R1082-T1083 -
84
Signal Pistol and cartridges -
6
2 Landing Flares
37
Typical Loadings—continued.
SECTION X.


2 Reconnaissance Flares -
Ib.
45
Bomb Sight
15
Bomb steadies -f 4 nose and tail fusing units
13
Bombs -------
500
Bomb Distributor
1
Fire Extinguisher -
5
First-aid equipment
3
Ib.
Total Removable Equipment -
—
981
Fuel—92 gallons
-
690
Oil—8i gallons
-
79
Total
-
6,175
(h) Dive Bomber—
Weight empty + fixed equipment -
_
3,895
Fixed military equipment ... -
-
130
Crew at 200 lb. each, parachute inclusive
-
400
Removable Equipment—
2 Vickers fixed guns, Mk. V., complete
with loading handles and trigger motors -
61
1,200 rounds .303 ammunition in belt
87
1 Vickers Gun, G.O., No. 1, Mk. I. -
25
8 Drums .303 ammunition (60 rounds per
drum)
67
Radio—T.R.l lb
32
Signal Pistol and cartridges -
6
Bomb steadies + 4 nose and tail fusing units
13
Bombs
500
Bomb Distributor
1
Fire Extinguisher
5
First-aid equipment
3
Total Removable Equipment -
—
800
Fuel—92 gallons
-
690
Oil—8f gallons
-
79
Total
-
5,994
SECTION X.
Typical Loadings—continued.


NOTES


























