

LIGHTS AND
SHADOWS
No. 1.
mapoon
A MISSION STATION—
AMONG THE ABORIGINALS
OF NORTH QUEENSLAND
BY
Rev. J. W. DAVEY
PRICE TWOPENCE


Mapoon:
A MISSION STATION AMONG THE ABORIGINALS
OF NORTH QUEENSLAND,
BY J. W. DAVEY.
Xon&on :
THE MORAVIAN MISSION AGENCY,
32, Fetter Lane, EC.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER PAGE
I. Introduction 5
11. The Commencement of the Mission 6
111. First Impressions and Early Results 11
IV. “ Servant of God, Well Done ” , 14
V. The Ward Memorial Church... ' 17
VI. Mapoon : A Modern Village 21
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Native Camp, Mapoon Fnmtixjmvr
Rev. and Mrs. Ward and Rev. and Mrs. Hey 13
Mission Station, Mapoon, with Ward Memorial Church ... 19


GENERAL PREFACE.
*jf N introducing to tlie reader the series of brief sketches which we
¥ hope will appear from time to time under the general heading of
I “ Lights and Shadows,” we would observe that in systems as well
as in individuals the combination of light and shade appears to be
needful for the completion of the picture, none the less in divine than
in human affairs.
So it has been in the history of Missionary enterprise ever since the
day that Paul and Barnabas shook off the dust of their feet at Antioch
and departed for more promising fields of labour.. Nor has it been
more so in the experience of the Moravian Church than of other
branches of the Church of Christ. Days of brightness and apparent
success inspire with new hope and courage; in the hour of darkness
we become more conscious of the lightening grasp of the Strong
Hand that holds our soul in life. When the Sun of Righteousness
sheds His beams abroad with evident healing in His wings, the
Church of Christ is glad that the gospel has free course and is thus
glorified ; and when those beams seem to be hid and the Missionary
pathway is shrouded in gloom, still, athwart the hovering cloud, the
eye of faith perceives the bow of promise that declares, in spite of all
opposition, “ This gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations.”
Times of special difficulty and trial may develop within the faithful
soul renewed energy, and may possibly lead to a reconsideration of
ways and change of plans, and the exercise of patient waiting until
the fulness of God’s own time has come.
One thing we may clearly gather from the wonderful record of
simple facts that mark the gradual development of the Brethren’s
Church abroad, and that is, that, whenever in the past clouds did
overshadow in the prosecution of Missionary labour, and temporary
failure seemed to be stamped upon the Church’s effort, whatever may
have been wanting in knowledge or discretion, it was certainly not
through lack of that Christian zeal, childlike
without which no work for Christ can hope t


NATIVE CAMP, MAPOON.


MAPOON.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.
W F our readers will turn to the map of Australia, they will observe
M on the north-east corner a sharp, wedge-shaped piece of land
I jutting northward into the Torres Strait; that is Cape York
Peninsula. About two degrees from its most northern point, go-
ing southward on the Western Coast, is Cullen Point. Near this spot
is the Moravian Mission Station Mapoon. It lies about one hundred
and forty miles south of Thursday Island, which is the nearest point
of contact with civilized life and a calling station for ocean liners
hound for East Australia. In this unexplored district of North
Queensland reside, or rather roam, considerable numbers of the
twenty or twenty-five thousand Aborigines who are the remnant of
a race fast dying out. These poor, long-neglected creatures have
lately become an object of concern on the part of the Christian
Church.
The Queensland Home Secretary —the Hon. J. F. G. Foxton —
says in regard to the Aboriginal: “No doubt he must disappear—
it is only a matter of time; but it is possible to make his disappear-
ance easier, and so to remove from us part of the reproach for the
ill-treatment we have given him in the past.”
Not only to make his disappearance easier, but also to shed
within his darkened soul some ray of that heavenly light which
streams forth from the Cross of Christ—that is the great object of
Missionary self-sacrifice and effort.
The story of the Mapoon Mission is invested with a peculiarly
fascinating interest, owing to the special circumstances attending
its establishment, the nature of the work, the sturdy, indomitable
courage, marvellous tact, and patient endurance of its pioneers, the
tragic sorrows that clouded its early days, and the wonderful trans-
formation that ten years of faithful labour have brought about


The Cape York “ Black ” with whom our story deals is sup-
posed by some to represent, in the Kowrarega tribe, the junction
of the Papuan from the north and the Australian from the south;
by others, to indicate an admixture of Dravidian and Malay. From
whatever source he takes his origin, he is without doubt amongst
the least pleasing of mankind. His ill-favoured and sooty coun-
tenance, from which his degrading mode of life has effaced every
trace of beauty, is overspread by widely distended nostrils and a
debased and sensual mouth. His only shelter, when during the
wet season he takes the trouble to erect one, consists of a few bent
sticks thrust into the ground and covered over with strips of bark.
His main food supply is the fish he spears, supplemented by such
wild roots or fruit as his gin (wife) is able to collect, and varied
occasionally by an alligator, snake, or human being, as opportunity
offers. He is a pronounced cannibal, gloating with evident relish
over the very mention of hoomar (human flesh). The district over
which he roams, like himself, is not very beautiful. Long sandy
ridges, interspersed with- belts of long grass swarming with sand
flies and mosquitoes, or unbroken stretches of impenetrable scrub,
with a foreshore of muddy bank teeming with alligators—here,
armed with a rudely fashioned spear, the Queensland “ Black ” leads
his nomadic life, roaming about whithersoever the call of hunger
or thirst or revenge may lead him.
CHAPTER II.
THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE MISSION.
As early as the year 1885 the attention of the Moravian Church
was called to this locality by the united action of the Presbyterian
and Lutheran Churches of Australia. Having witnessed the won-
derful .results attending the missionary labours of the Moravian
Church in Victoria under the Rev. F. A. Hagenauer, they came to
the conclusion that the Moravian Brethren were best able to cope
with the difficulties likely to be met with in the prosecution of a
similar work amongst the Aborigines of Queensland. Accordingly,
in the year 1886, they appealed to the Brethren’s Church to under-
take the work, on the understanding that they would hold them-
selves responsible for all travelling expenses and the maintenance
6


of the missionaries. This appeal was favourably received by the
Directing Board of the Moravian Missions, and steps were at once
taken'to find suitable men. Owing, however, to various unforeseen
hindrances, the Presbyterian Church was unable to accept the
Brethren’s offer of service until four years later.
On June sth, 1891, the Rev. J. G. and Mrs. Ward and the
Rev. N. Hey—the missionaries selected for this work—set sail from
England accompanied by the prayers and good wishes of the
Church. After calling at Sydney, Brisbane, and other Australian
centres, in order to stir up additional interest on the part of the
Church that was to support them, they arrived safely at Thursday
Island in the month of November. Here they were cordially wel-
comed by Sir John Douglas, the Government Resident of the
Island, who, from the first, has taken the warmest Christian interest
in the work and has done everything possible to strengthen the
hands of the missionaries and to insure success to their efforts.
At four o’clock on the afternoon of Friday, November 25th,
Mr. Ward and Mr. Hey left Thursday Island in the Government
steamer “ Albatross,” and on Saturday morning they anchored
within Cullen Point, in a magnificent bay called Port Musgrave,
into which natural harbour flow the rivers Batavia and Ducie.
They were accompanied by four carpenters, a white Inspector of
Police named Ford, and two so-called native “ troopers.”* The
carpenters were to assist in erecting the Mission house; the Inspec-
tor of Police and the “ troopers ” were simply a Government
measure of precaution deemed necessary from the treacherous
character of the natives amongst whom they were going. Mr. Ward,
in a letter written about that time, expresses a sense of degradation
at the idea of Moravian missionaries being under Police protection,
but in this arrangement he and his colleague were not consulted.
After sundry expeditions along the coast it was finally decided
to settle down about three quarters of a mile from the Point. Mr.
Ward then returned with the “ Albatross ” to Thursday Island, to
rejoin his wife fintil proper shelter should be constructed for her
reception. He was very reluctant to leave his brave colleague thus
to bear the brunt of the battle without his companionship, but as
Mrs. Ward was only just recovering from a severe illness it was
* Rural constables.


deemed desirable not to expose her to the perils and discomforts of
the earliest stages of the Mission.
About the same time the steamer “ Dicky ” arrived in the
bay, bringing a supply of needful stores and provisions. As she
could only be brought within a mile of the landing place, it .was
with considerable difficulty that these stores were landed by means
of two boats, rousing many bitter imprecations on the part of the
captain and crew, who regarded it as “ utter folly to want to save
these niggers from hell, as it could not be any hotter there than it
was here.” “My courage,” says Mr. Hey, “ often flinched under
their scornful railleries, but I told them that God, who had safely
brought me so far, would help me through.”
His first precaution on going ashore was to construct, with
Ford’s assistance, a kind of fort with the boxes and cases, roofing
it in with corrugated iron, within which the provisions were stored.
As the brief tropical twilight gathered around, with Mr. Ford as
his only companion—for the carpenters had returned to the
“ Dicky ” —Mr. Hey lay down on the bare sand to rest. It had
been a hard and trying day’s work, and he was wearied out; but
the intense excitement of his surroundings entirely banished sleep.
At first, few blacks had appeared on the scene, but gradually they
could be observed creeping cautiously along the shore in the direc-
tion of the missionary camp. As the darkness deepened they ap-
proached nearer and nearer, and all night long kept up a fearful
howling. Never before had a white man spent a night on this in-
hospitable shore, “ and,” says Mr. Hey, “ as the tribe dwelling in
this locality had, only two months before, killed and eaten two
white men, we had to be prepared for all emergencies.”
Moreover, as they anticipated possible attacks from wild beasts or
snakes, as an extra precaution their loaded guns lay within easy
reach. From one source or another all through that long, lonely
night an attack was momentarily expected, but at length the morn-
ing dawned and, so far, no harm had overtaken them. Who that
amidst the comforts of civilized surroundings has' lost one whole
night’s rest from weary watching or physical pain, could measure
the sum of strained and feverish anxiety involved in Mr. Hey's
simple statement, “ During those first ten nights I never slept a
wink; yet I was able to be at my post every day, for I experienced
that the Lord gives unusual strength to His servants in extraordin-
8


arv circumstances.” On the second day he tried to come into con-
tact with the natives. Some amongst them were less shy, having
already had intercourse, demoralising though it was, with white men
engaged in the pearl and leche-de-mer (sea-slug) fishery, and had
in this way picked up scraps of English. It was a matter of common
notoriety, however, that the blacks of this district were not to he
trusted. “ Never allow them to get behind you, for in this position
they cannot resist the murderous instinct,” was the advice the mis-
sionaries received from ordinary secular sources—a theory to be
hereafter disproved, thanks to the influence of Christian love and
S3 T mpathy. At first, the women and children ran away on Mr.
Key’s approach, but some little presents soon won the children.
Then he found a man suffering from a dangerous wound in his foot.
The. wound was carefully dressed and bound up, and in time the foot
was fully restored. Another was found so exhausted from lack of com-
mon necessaries as to be unable to walk. Mr. Hey shared his own
meals daily with him, and he, too, very soon recovered. These little
services soon wrought a change in the disposition of the blacks.
Where they expected to find an enemy they found a friend, nor were
they slow to show their grateful appreciation of these simple acts
of kindly sympathy. Mr. Hey says he was often astonished at their
gentle kindness in rendering any little services within their power.
Presently they gained courage and began to come to the Mission
station of their own accord. “ Then,” says Mr. Hey, “ I read to
them the English text for the day (from the Moravian text-book), ex-
plaining to them as best I could, and using some of their own words.
I always closed with a simple prayer. They were all very devout,
although they could not understand much. So far I have discovered
no word in their language for love, but I believe I can say that some
of them know what it is to love. I found a little boy who had no
parents. As he had no name I called him Willie. I set about
making him a pair of trousers, and succeeded. Since then Willie
has been devoted to me, and has proved most useful in rendering
little services.”
Thus day after day passed on in this strange seclusion. “ Meal-
times,” says Mr. Hey, “ we entirely forgot until hunger rang the
bell.” For the first ten days they lived on tea and “ damper,” the
latter being Mr. Hey’s own manufacture, simply a mixture of flour
and water baked in ashes.
9


At length, the store-house was erected, the stove was set up,
the boxes were opened, and things began to look more promis-
ing. “So far,” Mr. Hey records, “we had been able to keep our-
selves alive and in a condition to work, but the worst was the bad
water. On the day of our arrival we found a little pool in our
search for the best site for the station. Thirsty and weary as we
then were, we pronounced the water ‘ passable,’ and we continued
to be thankful for it. Nevertheless, when we had boiled it, it was
so dark that I sometimes did not know whether I had put in the tea
or not. One day, when I went down to the pool, two of the natives
were standing in it and washing themselves. And this was our
only drinking water!”
It was impossible that this mode of life could be practised with
impunity for any length of time, and it is therefore not surprising
that Mr. Hey gradually found his strength beginning to fail. On
Sunday morning, however, December 20th, the “ Albatross ” once
more steamed into the bay, and, to Mr. Hey’s intense joy and relief,
Mr. and Mrs. Ward arrived to share his burden and rejoice his spirit.
It was none too soon. Beneath the undue pressure of strained
anxiety and excessive fatigue, his iron constitution had at length
yielded, and he broke down entirely. Fever and delirium ensued,
and matters began to look serious. The Captain of the “ Albatross ”
reported the case to Sir John Douglas on his return to Thursday
Island, and the sympathetic Governor immediately returned with
the steamer, and brought the patient back to the care and attention
of his own hospitable home, where he was soon fully restored.
10


CHAPTER II.
FIRST IMPRESSIONS AND EARLY RESULTS.
Meantime, it was Mr. and Mrs. Ward’s turn to take up the
work where their brave colleague had left it, and this they did with
an energy and spirit which those who were privileged to know them
could well understand. Of our missionary party the Rev. James
Chalmers, of New Guinea, writes, in reference to a visit he had paid
during those early days:—“You have got two good men, I should
think, well suited for that work.”
In a letter to a friend Mrs. Ward thus records her first impres-
sions : —“ I wish you could see the people as I saw them on the day
of my arrival. There were about eighty women and girls sitting
in a semi-circle, most of them quite without clothing, others with
a dirty piece of calico tied round their loins. Such a spectacle !
Many of them full of sores, one old woman blind, one with cancer.
I cannot tell you how miserable I felt. I would have given any-
thing to be in Europe again. I felt I had no love for these people
and I could never work amongst them. For long I could not bear
the idea of having any of them in the house to help me. The men
did not look so bad, as some of them had got clothes, and Mr. Ward
gave them calico to wear when they came to the house.”
Gradually, however, the constraining love of Christ overcame
all such difficulties, as the sequel of our story will show. Even in
the course of a few months, as the noble work of reformation de-
veloped around her, she was able to write:—“For the last few
weeks twenty-five boys, girls, and young women have come regularly
to school. When, after their lessons, my husband tells them what
Jesus has suffered for them and how He loves them, their solemn,
earnest faces are quite a picture. Certainly, a great change has
come over one of the lads. What joy it will be when we know that
even one has been turned from darkness to light by our instrumen-
tality.”
It may, however, be easily understood that, in the pursuit of
a work of this nature, hopes and fears, joys and discouragements,


follow each other in quick succession. Thus, in regard to the savage
lights that often break out suddenly in the native camps, we are in-
formed, in a letter of May 29th, 1892, that “ Mr. Ward again stayed
bloodshed and secured peace by fearlessly placing himself between
the armed and infuriated combatants.” That his good wife was full
of anxiety when he went down to the camp on such an errand, can
well be imagined, for, although the missionaries had already won
the esteem and regard of the natives, yet in the wild excitement of
the moment matters might easily have gone wrong, or a. stray spear
have missed its intended mark, as sometimes happened. Strangely
weird must be a scene such as Mr. Ward describes— the camp
divided into two parties about one of the gins; the combatants
drawn up in opposing lines threatening one another with their wea-
pons and jabbering in their strange tongue; between them the
women, some squatting and beating their breasts, others dancing
and chanting a sort of dirge, while Mr. Ward moves about amongst
them with a God-given fearlessness, reasoning with them in such
broken English as they can understand Me no savais your law
{i.e., about marriage); /when you savez the Lord Jesus Christ you
no do such things.”
Amidst such exciting experiences as these the noble work of
construction and transformation proceeded. Little by little the
confidence of the natives was gained, so that native labour could
be employed with more or less approach to system. As soon as Mr.
Hey returned, a dwelling house was constructed capable of accom-
modating the missionaries in comparative comfort; also a small
church, with corrugated iron roofs; extensive gardens, too, were laid
out, planted, and fenced. Some degree of recognised law and order was
established; regular instruction was carried on amongst the young;
and services were regularly conducted for all who frequented the
station. The natives who attached themselves to the station were
decently fed and clothed—clothed, moreover, be it remembered, in
garments made and despatched by their grateful compatriots, the
reformed blacks of Victoria.
Thus, in spite of the dark and unpromising outlook which faced
these brave pioneers only one short year before, Mr. Ward was able
to write as follows in regard to Christmas, 1892 :—“ What a blessed
contrast between Christmas, 1891, and Christmas, 1892. After
breakfast we had our usual private service. Then a few boys came


for Scripture lesson. The afternoon service—it being Sunday—•
was conducted in the usual fashion, and.soon after we had our final
meal for the day. After dark the boys came to the Mission house
for singing and to look at the pictures. As a rule I give them a
short Scripture lesson, and then sing to them hymns tending to ex-
plain the lesson. They are very much taken with ‘ Jesus in the
boat,’ as they call ‘ Master, the tempest is raging,’ also ‘ Will you
meet me at the fountain ?’ That evening they were more than
usually impressed. Presently I asked them, ‘ Now, who is going
to belong to Jesus?’ The impulsive ‘ Treacle ’ • —the orphan lad —
was at once ready to assent. So was another boy named Harry, and
also a bonny-faced child, likewise called Harry. They all said ‘Me
master, me master.’ They may not have understood the full sig-
REV. J. G. AND MRS. WARD.
REV. N. AND MRS. HEY.
nificance of what they said, but they meant it, and it was a great
joy to hear of this assurance from their lips. The adult members
were invited on Monday morning, to their delight. The sports over,
all re-assembled in the church, where a short service was held. Then
flour was distributed, and in the evening there was a magic lantern
entertainment. How little did we anticipate ever spending so bright
a Christmas day among the Aborigines. Now we can say that


Christmas, 1892, was one of the brightest, if not the brightest, we
have ever spent.”
It must not, however, be supposed from this that all was hence-
forth bright and cloudless, following so hopeful a dawn. The poor
blacks of this district were amongst the lowest possible type of de-
graded humanity—sunk into yet deeper degradation by periodical
intercourse with vicious and ungodly whites, whose temptations they
seemed powerless to resist. Thus Mr. Ward has occasion to speak of
sad and trying times, in which surrounding heathenism manifested
itself in thefts, strifes, nocturnal dances, wailings for the dead, quar-
rels and fightings in the native camps—all which called for constant
wise and tactful handling, patient endurance, and increasing prayer
for help and guidance. Still, wild and degraded as the natives are,
almost to the level of the beasts, yet they have shown that they have
human hearts. By patient kindness their affection has been gained,
and they have unlimited trust in their missionaries, who, in spite
of their hereditary treacherous character, are able to move amongst
them with easy confidence and courage.
Day by day the arduous yet hopeful work steadily proceeds;
brighter and brighter grows the prospect that is opening out before
them ; when suddenly a dark and heavy cloud rises over the land-
scape and threatens the extinction of the whole work, only that the
Hand of the Good Shepherd was over all for good.
CHAPTER IV.
“SERVANT OF GOD, WELL DONE.”
Shortly before Christmas, 1894, Mr. Ward, accompanied by a
white man—Charles Hodges, from Thursday Island—and a number
of Mission blacks, entered upon an exploring expedition up the
Batavia River, for the purpose of testing a site for a second Mission
station. The result was not very satisfactory, as the supply of water
seemed everywhere so limited. In the course of the journey home-
ward, owing either to over-exertion or unfiltered-water, or both com-
bined, Mr. Ward contracted an illness'which, in spite of strenuous
efforts to throw it off, gradually developed into a fever of an alarm


ing type. Unwilling at first to believe that it was anything more
than need of absolute rest, he struggled to prepare for the usual
Christmas celebration, even translating the story of the Saviour’s
birth into the native language, in order that they might better enter
into the spirit of the occasion.
Christmas Day dawned on a sad and anxious household,
troubled at the very thought of losing so beloved and indispensable
a member. Mr. Ward would not hear of the postponement of the
celebration on his account, but when Christmas was over the ill-
ness had assumed an increasingly dangerous form, in spite of every
remedy. Not, however, until December 29th did his anxious
relatives apprehend serious danger; but during the following night
delirium set in. Is it to be wondered at that the lonely watchers
in that Mission house felt an overwhelming sense of their isolation
and helplessness? No doctor—no means of sending for medical help
to Thursday Island, a hundred and forty miles away —not even a
white friend or neighbour to lend a helping hand. Well was it that
the Great Friend and Refuge in Trouble was near, or they never
could have borne up against the terrible anguish of those few suc-
ceeding days and nights.
During one interval of comparative calm, though his hearing
had become dull, and his speech imperfect, Mr. Ward insisted upon
seeing the poor blacks for whom he had thus risked his life. First
the men, then the women, were called in—as many as the two rooms
would hold—and, to the amazement of the other missionaries, he
told the blacks in their own language that God had restored his
voice in order that he might once more speak to them of the reality
of sin and its punishment, and the only Saviour and Friend of sin-
ners, and expressing the earnest hope that he might hereafter meet
them in heaven. At the close of the interview he fell back ex-
hausted upon his pillow, and once more delirium set in. So severe
did the paroxysms become that the aid even of some of the blacks
was summoned to restrain the vigorous efforts of the afflicted suf-
ferer, whose naturally muscular frame rendered this all the more
difficult. Even one of the blacks who witnessed these terrible
struggles was constrained to remark, in his simple way, “ I have now
seen that it is not good to wait till one is ill before one gives oneself
to Jesus as His property. Then it is too late; the sickness might
go to the head; if so, one is no longer able to pray.” At times, as


is often the case under such influence, dark clouds gathered over the
poor sufferer’s mind, but these subsequently gave way to rest and
peace in his Redeemer, and, with an expression of joy upon his face,
he told his wife that the Word of God had come to him, “ What
I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter.”
When morning dawned—January 3rd—a momentary con-
sciousness returned once more, the flickering spark that foretold the
end was near. He cheerily bade his wife “ Good morning,” and
shortly afterwards quietly breathed his last.
Who amongst our readers can realise the depth of anguish and
the intensity of midnight gloom that shrouded the sorrow-stricken
home, when the dark reality of this terrible loss vividly forced itself
upon the mourners? Two frail and lonely women with their one
male companion, all alike exhausted and unstrung by nervous anx-
iety and incessant watching—surrounded by a horde of natives only
just recently reclaimed from savagery! And yet beneath them all
were the Everlasting Arms, and a Voice out of the silence saying
even in the falling tears of the sorrowing blacks that stood by,
“ Servant of God, well done.”
As soon as Sir John Douglas heard, by means of a
passing pearling schooner, of what had taken place, he
despatched the “ Albatross ” with Mr. Charles Hodges on board,
to the help of the Mission. After a tempestuous voyage, during
which the steamer was once obliged to put back to Thursday Island,
the boat reached Mapoon, only to find that, so completely broken
down in health were the remaining members of the Missionary
band, the only alternative was for all to return with the steamer.
Accordingly, on January 12th, the church and school were locked
up. Mrs. Ward and Mr. and Mrs. Hey and their little child went
on board the “ Albatross,” and Mr. Hodges remained behind in
sole charge of the temporal concerns of the Mission station. The
parting with the natives seems to have been most touching. Mr.
Hey closes his letter with the words, “ What the future will bring
is hidden to us. One thing alone is clear; we are in God’s hands,
whether it be to live or die. His holy name be praised.”


CHAPTER V.
THE WARD MEMORIAL CHURCH.
From Thursday Island they all started for Brisbane, at which
port they safely arrived a week overdue, after a most trying and
dangerous voyage. In a short time the change began to make itself
apparent, and in the course of a few months Mr. and Mrs. Hey
were once more ready to return to their labours. They had spent
the interval not only in recruiting but in visiting various congre-
gations, in order to stir up increased interest on behalf of their
work, besides raising means for the erection of a proposed Ward
Memorial Church. Early in June, 1895, they landed safely once
more at Mapoon, to the intense delight of the poor natives, who,
in the absence of the missionaries, had done their best to remain
loyal to the amount of light and knowledge they had attained.
They had even kept little prayer meetings, when the children sang
the hymns they had learned, after which one of the men spoke as
well as he was able of the Saviour. In other respects, however,
they had lapsed into a terrible state of misery and neglect. Their
bodies were covered with sores, and what remained of their garments
was ragged and filthy. But all this was speedily remedied, and
external matters were soon once more brought into shape.
In the course of a month or two Mrs. Ward rejoined her relatives,
and was likewise accorded an enthusiastic greeting on the part of the
grateful blacks.- Owing to low water the “ Albatross ” was unable to
approach nearer than a quarter of a mile from the shore. The
blacks therefore pushed the station boat over the mud, when four
of them shouldered a chair and bore “ Mother ” in triumph to land.
What a contrast to her first landing four and a half years before!
Then, she shuddered at the sight of the natives and shrank from the
work before her. Now, she warmly greets the crowd of blacks that
throng to shake her by the hand, and hails with joy the prospect
of once more ministering to the present and eternal needs of those
for whom her beloved husband had sacrificed his all. The Sunday
following, one hundred and fifty blacks were present at the service,


and when the news had spread that “ Mother ” had returned the
Sunday after brought three hundred to the scene.
The work was now prosecuted with renewed energy.
Under the vigorous management of Mr. Hey system and
order were soon once more restored, and in the course
of the following year the Ward Memorial Church became
an accomplished fact. When complete, it was capable of
conveniently seating three hundred natives. “It looks,” says Mrs.
Ward, “ very neat and clean. Mr. Hey ought to be very pleased
with his handiwork. It has cost him a great amount of labour.”
The opening occasion was a red-letter day in the history of the
Mission, and must have cheered and rejoiced the hearts of the three
devoted missionaries whose work of faith and labour of love was
beginning to. bear such evident fruit.
At a signal from the new Mission bell which the four hundred
assembled blacks understood, they took their accustomed bath in
the Bay and decked themselves in their Sunday clothes. They then
proceeded to the old church, where a farewell service was conducted
for as many as could gain admission. Mr. Hey spoke to them of
the love of God in sending the Gospel amongst them in order to
teach them how to live and how to die. He reminded them of the
self-sacrificing labour of their late friend and teacher, Mr. Ward,
who, he hoped, was rejoicing with them that day in heavenly rest,
and concluded by earnestly beseeching them, out of gratitude to
God for all His loving care over them, to give Him their hearts and
themselves. A procession was then formed, the bell rang out
loudly, and all filed in some sort of order into the new building.
We are not surprised to hear that for a few moments there was a
perfect Babel of chatter until all got seated. -Many of the
Aborigines present had never been inside a closed building before-
had never even seen a bench, much less sat upon one. Then, too,
they had to express their opinions on all they saw —the palm-leaf
decorations, the Scripture pictures hanging round the walls, &c.
The service commenced with singing and prayer. Then suitable
addresses were given, after which followed one of the principal
events of the day—the baptism of Jimmy and his wife Sarah, the
first converts who had thus openly come forward to confess Christ.
In the course of this public confession Jimmy made a speech to his
countrymen, earnestly pleading with them to give up fighting and
18


MISSION STATION, MAPOON, WITH WARD MEMORIAL CHURCH.
19


the like and turn to Jesus. The blacks listened most attentively
amidst profound silence, nodding their heads in approval of what
was. said. “ I could scarcely restrain my tears,” says Mr. Hey, “so
great was the effect of this man’s words upon me. lam convinced
that a testimony such as this, out of the mouth of one of their own
people, does a great deal more good and is followed by a greater
blessing than our words.”
At the close of the service followed the usual distribution of
flour, after which they all settled down to feast upon a fine large
bullock that the missionaries had had killed on the previous day.
The services of the day concluded with a short singing meeting.


CHAPTER VI.
MAPOON: A MODERN VILLAGE.
It is impossible within the scope of a brief narrative of this
nature to record the wealth of detail upon which the Mission station
of Mapoon has gradually been established, or to show how, little by
little, the neck of the cruel savage has bowed beneath the kindly
yoke of Christian love and sympathy —how heathenish customs have
been abandoned, a waste and barren desert transformed into a
“ garden of the Lord,” and once naked and barbarous cannibals
now clothed and' in their right mind, listening to the Gospel of
Peace, and endeavouring to shape their lives according to its sacred
principles.
In regard to the transformation that has been effected, let one
or two references from impartial sources suffice to disarm suspicion,
and remove false impressions from the minds of those who are
inclined to look doubtfully upon Foreign Mission Work as a whole,
or to condemn it as fruitless or superfluous.
The following is the official report of Police Inspector Fitz-
gerald, who was regarded as cherishing no specially friendly feeling
towards Mission work. It was despatched to Sir John Douglas, who
afterwards forwarded it to the Colonial Secretary as an official
opinion of the value of Mission work amongst the Aborigines:
“ I have much pleasure in stating that, from personal observa-
tion of the management at Mapoon Mission station, Batavia River,
it appeared to me to be a perfect success—the result of common
sense, courage, and good temper, applied to lt was quite
a new experience to me, when compared with other stations. I
consider that the maintenance of the station reflects great credit
on those identified with its existence, and deserves the support of
every humane man in North Queensland. I also feel convinced
that under such management the work of civilization will be ex-
tended without the assistance of police. I should think it reason-
able to station another missionary with Mr. Hey, to assist him in
his plucky and solitary life. The work accomplished exceeds any-
thing I have ever seen in my experience among natives, extending


over more than thirty years. ... I consider myself fortunate
in having been enabled to visit the station, conducted, as it is, on
such an excellent system by Mr. and Mrs. Hey and Mrs. Ward.”
Mr. Parry Okeden—Commissioner of Police—reports as fol-
lows:—“Knowing, as I claim to do, thoroughly the characteristics
of the Aborigines, I was much surprised and impressed with the
good work done at Mapoon. I saw over three hundred blacks at
work in the field, and sixty-seven young people were in school. I
heard these last sing several hymns remarkably well. Their reading,
writing, and mental arithmetic surprised me, and they showed a
good knowledge of Bible History. Two days before I visited them,
lam told, five hundred were in church. Previous to the mis-
sionaries’ arrival one’s life would have been in danger. No murders
have been committed in that locality for three years, and those who
land on the Coast are now safe. In case of shipwreck or other
disaster, the blacks now take the survivors to the Mission station,
as was the case with the Kanahooka* survivors.”
Instead of a native camp Mapoon has developed into a modern
village, with two rows of houses separated by a wide street, relieved
here and there by cocoanut trees, and tenanted by two hundred
permanent inhabitants. The houses are floored with cement, made
from pounded coral. They are regularly inspected—small prizes
being given for special order and cleanliness. The Official Inspector
states that each home forms a model tenement in its way and, with
its flag, which each householder has made for himself, presents a
bright and cheerful appearance. Several gardens, comprising about
ten acres, have been securely fenced in and put under cultivation,
thereby raising fruits and vegetables sufficient, with the addition of
* According to the “St. James’ Gazette” of March 2Cth, 1894, the
steamer Kanahooka foundered in a gale off North Queensland on January
19th, 1894. The Captain and chief engineer were drowned. The rest of
the crew were eventually driven ashore about CO miles south of Cullen
Point. After being exposed for several days to the risk of starvation, as
well as treachery on the part of some of the blacks along the coast, who
took advantage of their destitute condition, they were befriended by
some natives connected with the Mapoon Mission, who rendered them all
the help they could, and enabled them to reach the Mission station in
safety. Mr. Bradley, the chief officer of the shipwrecked party, attri-
butes their survival to the influence of the Missionaries with the natives.


Government supplies, to feed Mr. Key's large black family. Two
large paddocks of about forty acres each are fenced in with rail
and wire fencing, including milking sheds and draughting yards.
The number of live stock, according to the last report, was eighty
head of mixed cattle, five horses, and a number of goats and fowls. It
mixed cattle, five horses, and a number of goats and fowls. A
stout little lugger named the “ J. G. Ward ” serves for communica-
tion with Thursday Island and for coasting purposes. Mr. Hey
has been officially appointed Honorary Superintendent of the
Mapoon “ Aboriginal Reserve,” which gives him control over an
area of a hundred square miles, in regard to employment of natives
within the “ Reserve ” by any pearl fishery or other boatmen who
may happen to be in the neighbourhood.
The latest official report from the Northern Protector of
Aboriginals, dated May 24th, 1901, states that, “ as far south as
Albatross Bay, all the coast and correspondingly inland Aboriginals
now regard the settlement at Mapoon as a place where they are
always welcome, and where they can obtain medicine when sick,
and food when starving, and at Christmas time and on Queen’s
birthday —when they all come, and join in the season’s festivities—
a suit of clothes.” The report deals extensively with the progres-
sive state of the school in all the elementary branches of education,
including also housework and cookery; also with the Mutual Im-
provement Society and night classes for young men and young
women, where such simple subjects are dealt with as Elementary
Mechanics, History of a Butterfly, Rules of Health, &c., with prac-
tical illustrations wherever possible.
The Spiritual work of the Mission appears also to be steadily
progressing. On May 20th, 1898, seven converts and three children
were admitted into the congregation by baptism, and one native
assistant by confirmation. A more recent report also states that
a further number of young men and young women were under
instruction with a view to baptism.
Besides definite instances of this kind, there is the extensive and
effectual work assiduously carried on by the lady missionaries
amongst the children which cannot fail in due course to be followed
by good results. In addition to all this, there is the general elevat-
ing effect which must be continually exercised upon large numbers
who are constantly brought under the influence of the Mission, and


which, with the Divine blessing, must more or less act like leaven
in preparing them for a more definite development of faith.
The Missionary band at Mapoon was reinforced in 1895 by the
arrival of the Rev. and Mrs. Brown, and again quite recently of
Miss L. Schick and the Rev. and Mrs. Richter. Other Mission
stations in the district have been or are being established, and thus
the work is extending more and more.
May continued success and blessing attend the noble work of
these and all God’s messengers throughout the wide world, and may
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob uphold them amidst all
their many discouragements and hopes deferred, and bestow upon
them the faith and patience and wisdom so necessary in the success-
ful prosecution of this important work.
FINIS
