

Marcus Clarke:
His Work and .
-0. a;, brazier.








Marcus Clarke.


Copyright 1902


Martus Clarke:
•His IUorL nu 6 (genius..
A. W. BRAZIER, M.A.,
(Sub-Librarian of the Public Library of Victoria, and President of the
Australian Literature Society).
" Ille potens sui
Laetusque deget, cui licet in diem
Dixisse ‘ Vixi!’ ”
"Non omnis moriar, multaque pars mei
Vitabit Libitinam.”
— HORACE.
ECHO PUBLISHING CO., LIMITED,
Melbourne.




NOTE.
When this monograph on his illustrious predecessor
in our noble Public Library was read by the author be-
fore the Australian Literature Society, its value as a
brilliant exposition of the work and genius of Marcus
Clarke was fully appreciated, and its publication urged,
in order that both those who had had the pleasure of
hearing it and those who had not might possess it in
a permanent form. It may be objected by people who
are always so sure of what they are not sure, that “ we
know all about Marcus Clarke.” But if, having any wish
to learn anything at all about one who remains facile prin-
cess in the Australian section of English literature, such
people, who even know all about Shakespeare by glanc-
ing at the volumes that contain his works, will be at the
pains to peruse these pages, they will be undeceived.
Moreover, those of them who have underrated the artist
or misjudged the man will become better disposed to
appreciate at their true value the work and genius of
Clarke.
“ Tis he who gives my breast a thousand pains,
Can make me feel each passion that he feigns;
Enrage, compose, with more than mortal art,
With pity and with terror tear my heart,
And bear me o’er the earth or through the air,
To Thebes or Athens, when he will and where.”
It is in the fitness of things that Mr. Brazier,
who is both Clarke’s successor in office and Presi-
dent of the Australian Literature Society, in suc-
cession to the far-famed “ Rolfe Boldrewood,”
should be the writer of this monograph, as it was also
in the fitness of things that he should have read it before
a Society whose chief objects are the study of Australian
literature and the encouragement of Australian authors
whose work has artistic value or the promise of artistic
value—with which the commercial value, sad to say, is too


oft at variance. And it is as well for the advancement
and usefulness of this Society, which has already a large
and daily increasing membership, including most of the
leading writers in Australia, as for the reasons above
stated, that this appreciation of the work and genius of
Clarke is now presented to a wider audience.
HENRY C. J. LINGHAM.
Melbourne,
February, 1902.


MARCUS CLARKE:
HIS WORK AND GENIUS.
So much more is known of the life of Marcus Clarke,
who has been dead now these twenty years, than of his
work, that I do not intend to deal with my subject bio-
graphically. Or rather, so many anecdotes abound,
more or less true, often silly, sometimes malicious, that
it is time some serious and adequate estimate were made
of the man as a writer, and of his genius, from a source
that is an open page to all, namely, his work. I will only
here state that a life of Clarke by Mr. Cyril Hopkins, an
old schoolmate of his, is to be published shortly. It will
no doubt be looked forward to with interest. Neither
do I intend to enter into idle speculations as to what
might have been if Marcus Clarke’s mother had not
died when he was so young; if his father had not died
at all, or had at least died wealthy; if he had not come
to Melbourne; if he had not been a failure as a bank
clerk; if he had not gone to Bullocktown; if he had gone
to London at the invitation of the “ Daily Teiegraph;” if
he had been a model as a Government official; because
“ if ifs and ans were kettles and pans, what would tinkers
do?”
I, for my part, am quite prepared to take him as he
was, and would not risk his having been otherwise. But


I venture to affirm that to label Marcus Clarke “ Bo-
hemian” (whatever that may be), and then shelve him
in a dark and dusty corner of our intellectual warehouse,
is by no means an adequate or even a possible treatment
for such a man. With a heart as big as a basket, and,
one may well admit, with quite no taint of the instincts
of the miser, he was a new Peter Bell.
A sovereign rolling on its rim,
A yellow sovereign was to him,
And it was nothing more.
Money was nothing to him but so much metal milled
to scratch the itching palms of those who played upon his
good nature, upon a heart strangely simple in the affairs
of the world; too generous even to be suspicious. I met
a man once who told me that Marcus had once borrowed
half a sovereign of him and had never paid it back.
Fancy! It was to buy a bottle of champagne. How
dreadful! We may safely presume, however, that Mar-
cus’s creditor had his half of the bottle. And fancy a glass
of champagne with Marcus ! Which would have sparkled
more —the wine or the man ? My first impulse was to
put my hand in my pocket and repay the debt; but I
did not do so for two reasons: (i) the debt was evidently
regarded as “ a hair of Caesar begged for memory, to
be bequeathed as a rich legacy.” And so I had not the
heart to take it away. My second reason was that there
was not half a sovereign in my pocket.
But let us Melburnians look to ourselves, Marcus
Clarke has left us great wealth, as yet untold; wealth
that beggars the word value in terms of gold. It is
coin stamped with the image and superscription of genius.
Is there no currency for such coinage in this land of his
adoption? Nay, is it true that “a few South Austra-
lians ” over in Adelaide erected in 1898 a monument
over a long-neglected grave in a Melbourne cemetery?
Is it true that from Brisbane to Hobart—aye, from Cape
York to Port Arthur —a certain name is a name to con-
jure with in the hearts of Australians —save only where
lies that intellecutal desert, illiterate Melbourne? Is it
true that Sydney is now the capital of letters and the


centre of literary activity in *his Commonwealth of
Australia? Is it true that a certain weekly journal pub-
lished there—a publication whose vigour the literati fail
to deny, but whose tone they are prone to deplore—
holds, and has earned, a representative position in Aus-
tralian literature ? “ Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers
of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel ? May
we not wash in them and be clean?” Where is our “ land
flowing with milk and honey”? Are the well-springs of
Jordan all dried up? And so the literary leprosy cleaves
to us still.
Was it so in Marcus Clarke’s day? For, behold, the
glory has departed out of our heavens. Let but the light
of a sun go out, and his satellites, robbed of their re-
flected glory, roll restless and unseen in their ambitious
graves. All is dark and desolate now. Nay, let him at
least occupy the seat of honour to-night. Let us see
from his work, at one brief glance, what manner of man
he was who poured forth his wealth at our feet; giving
“ like a rich man who cares not what he gives.” And
then let us cry with ancient Pistol: “ Base is the slave
who pays.”
Let us open his “ Peripatetic Philosopher ” papers.
Now then, page I, chapter i., line I: “ A certain sect of
ancient philosophers were wont to carry on their argu-
ments, not in heated rooms or noisy pubdc meetings,
not in the shade of pilastered porches or in cloistered
seculsion, but in the open air. As they walked they philo-
sophised. . . . They commented on all things.
‘ Quid toto fiat in orbe;
Quid Seres, quid Thraces agunt.’
A dirty little sunburnt Athenian gamin playing in the
gutter; the chariot with its three foaming horses and
white-cloaked driver as the fat, full-fed city magnate
swept down to the baths; the latest town gossip; the
last escapade of Alcibiades, or the last bit of news con-
cerning Nicias and the army; the disputes of the
oily vagabond water-carriers; the shrill clamours of
the women at the fountains —all had some interest for


these philosophers. Not for them the hot schools, where
fierce disputants split straws by the waggon-load, figura-
tively, and had more than split crowns, practically, all
the broiling summer’s day—until the sun went down be-
hind the black olive groves on the hill, and the mighty
statue of Pallas stood out one sable mass against the
violet of the evening sky.” That is not a bad start,
surely.
But it must not be forgotten that the local habitation
and the number of our philosopher was: No. 2 Gaspipe,
Cole’s Wharf. He says: “He is a poor philosopher,
whose shoes are down at heel and worn out in the soles;
whose elbows are visible through his ragged jerkin (’tis
true, O Marcus!); who munches his black bread with
thankfulness, and in his inmost heart has an utter con-
tempt for everybody, himself included.”
How our philosopher anatomises the new chum—
“ Guy de Vere, for instance, who has been liberally edu-
cated, has fagged at Eton and been plucked at Oxford.
He is tolerably wealthy, and travels about for amusement,
which he never obtains. Not being endowed with
brains to any alarming extent, he is given to boasting,
and will talk about ‘ poor Hastings,’ and ‘ that rum fellah
Hartington,’ while he invariably speaks of the female
members of the aristocracy by abbreviations of their
Christian names, and bewilders the plebeian mind by
constant references to ‘ Lady Bab, you know,’ and £ little
Emily,’ and hints that, in his opinion, ‘ Flo’ didn’t do
badly, when you come to think of it.’ And so on. He
walked down Collins-street once, it appears, and ‘ re-
marked that Melbourne was not the place for an idle man,
and that he should never again come further south than
the Mediterranean.’ ” “ But Guy de Vere is an exception.
The average new chum disappears mysteriously, none
can tell whither. Dickens desires to know what becomes
of all the postboys and donkeys. I want to know what
becomes of all the new chums.” Then there is the ana-
tomisation of “ Mr. Montague Tigg;” there is the share-
broker, “ the names of whose friends read like a chapter
from the Book of Numbers.” Sharebroking, it appears,
is “ not immaculate.” There is the “parochial committee-


man,” who is, “ of course, intensely respectable and in-
tensely narrow-minded;” who is “ the father of a
family,” and is “ practical, sir, strictly practicalwho
is “ eternally rising to order, and begging to say ‘ a
few words on the subject of hard-boiled eggs” who,
being a member of some charitable institution, is “always
proposing economical tricks by which twopenny worth
of cream and one basin of gruel can be saved per diem—
amounting at the end of the year, Mr. Chairman, to a
very considerable sum.” Then there “is that exquisite
“ reminiscence ” —quite French in substance and in man-
ner—of a bet in which “ I took five to one in Provinces
with Esterhazy concerning a statement of Louis Napo-
leon, that if he married, he would “ marry a Bourbon and
consolidate the empire;” and it is explained how Ester-
hazy “ me the money to this day.” There is that
picture by an Australian artist that “ reminds someone
forcibly of Turner or Creswick.” There is the Melbourne
cabman “ smarter ” than his London prototype, “ because
he drinks brandy instead of gin;” who is “ like the hippo-
potamus of the showman—a singular unique animal,”
who is “ independent, bold, sturdy, and pot-valiant to
excess; who is not altogether averse to bullying quiet
people; and never has change late at night.” There
is the “sham criminality” of the ingenuus puer, aetat 20,
who has committed, by his own hinted showing, all the
seven deadly sins seven times over;” who “will sneer
at all that is pure and good, not because he has found
out that goodness and purity are simply relative terms,
but because he thinks that vice is manly, and purity a
quality confined to school-girls and Horniman’s teas.”
. . . “ One meets donkeys of this sort all over the
world, but they swarm in Australia.” . . . “Oh,
dear! will nobody say anything really worth listening to
in praise of poor, honest, ugly, neglected Virtue?” There
is the “ little wonder ” of the circus, who “ one day,
while standing above the cruel faces she knows so well,
above the tobacco smoke and clamour, and rustle of silks,
and popping of corks, and shrill unnatural laughter, a
sudden sickness seizes her, and the ropes tremble, and
cross-beams swing before her, and women shriek, and the


end has come to the poor ‘ little wonder.’ . . . . “ I
venture to think,” he says, “ that this is not an improve-
ment on the old times,” on “ those old Roman days.”
There is Democracy—not Democracy “in a red cap
leaning on a blood-stained axe;” that is terrible enough;
but “ Democracy in ill-made dress clothes, spouting
watery adulation at a corporation dinner;” there are
“ some people,” it appears, “ who combine the wildest
republicanism of sentiment with the profoundest humility
of deportment. They talk like Camille Desmoulins, and
act like Jeames in a new suit of plush. . . . They
talk about liberty of soul, equality of honest men, but
would disdain to nod to their tailor if they met him in
the street. . . . The fact of this apparent contradic-
tion is easily accounted for. They want equality to their
own level. . , . ‘ Gentleman ’ (it appears) once
meant an honest, courteous, brave, and liberal man—a
man who had an arm to strike at oppression and vice, and
a heart to pity the repentant and weak. Now it means—
money, for one thing; clothes for another; social position
for another; an ability to read, write, dance, and run into
debt for a fourth; a certain style of speaking, looking,
walking and eating for a fifth; but it means principally —
» u—l T < 1
monev.” . . . “ Heaven save us! lam no ‘ red re-
publican,’ but the cant of ‘ good blood ’ is utterly abomin-
able to me. As Crebillon said, ‘ I hope there is distinc-
tion of rank below, for the gentlemen will get the best
seats —next the fire.’ . . . The sham aristocracy of
a country like this is pitifully absurd. Every man has
it in himself to make himself respected, honoured, and
ennobled. If he does not do it, let him take it for
granted that Nature did not intend him for an aristocrat,
and be contented.” That is fair enough; there is no
snobbery about it. The sympathies of our philosopher
go up even to the “ Sixpenny Gallery ” —amongst the
gods. His readers are “ for the most part of the por-
celain of humanity—a little cracked here and there,”
perhaps; but he still “ confesses a sympathy for common
clay.” He “ likes to see human nature with its coat off,
and to descend an octave in the social scale.”
“ Did you ever study the face of a begrimed and shirt-


sleeved son of toil as he leans over the railing in the
front of the gallery, and resting his chin upon one half-
naked and muscular arm gloats upon the stage, and
pushes his rusty cap back over his touzled head in in-
expressible rapture? He is well worthy the looking at.
So also is the fat matron, who unpins her shawl to gasp
the easier at the pathetic passages. So is the small boy
who cracks nuts,” and the rest. “ I made a study of an
old woman there the other night who would have been
worth £ 10,000 to Eugene Sue. She was the only living
representative of La Chouette I ever saw. A glorious
old woman! Her hideousness was so superlative in its
magnificence that it was almost beautiful.” But the
gallery folk do not “ come in late, or bang the doors, or
talk loudly and laugh,” as they do in the boxes. “ Give
me the gallery,” says our philosopher. There is the
“ quiet club ” called “ Golgotha ” —a literary club, the
place of skulls, of which “ I may briefly mention the
story about the newspaper lad being scraped to death
with oyster-shells at a late supper and buried in the
back kitchen is not absolutely true in all its details. . .
More I cannot reveal.” Then there is the classification
of “ Bows,” of which “ one method is purely colonial,
. . . It consists in grinning superciliously and then
jerking the head back over the off ear, as if to avoid a
tap on the chin. The instant the bowee recognises you,
you resume your wooden expression, and look as if you
had never seen him before. . . Indeed, when accom-
panied with a nonchalant swing'd a threepenny cane,
etc.” There is that on “ Cant.” “ I am not good my-
self. I own it. Neither are you, reader. Neither is
Mawworm there, who leers at his neighbour’s wife over
the top of his psalm-book. We are all human, and are
apt to err. For goodness’ sake, let us be charitable. It
is so easy to be good if you don’t want to be wicked.”
I have no time to tell how our philosopher once “ danced
until daylight at the Duchess of O—’s ball,” and what
happened to his royal master; nor how he wandered one
evening into an Arcadia of love in the Fitzroy Gardens,
and “ felt out of placeof “ those young gentlemen
who write those pretty letters to strange pretty faces ”


“ those letters with a P.S.: ‘ Meet me at Bourke and
Wills’ monument at half-past eight.’ And the pretty
faces come, too! Ah me! there is a great deal of human
nature in men and women.” And of the railway refresh-
ment rooms, and “ the mosquito-bitten boy there who
stared ostentationsly at a hole in my elbow and whistled
‘The Bloated Young Aristocrat’ with contemptuous
emphasis.” And “ Where are the boys of our boyhood,
Omy Pompeius ? Where are those rosy-cheeked urchins
who played at prisoners’ base and at marbles, who
‘ fagged out ’ so tearfully and ‘ broke bounds ’ so
eagerly ? Where are those happy fellows • • ? Gone,
like the years. Labuntur anni, Postume , Postume! The
years glide away and are lost to me —lost to me. Those
boys are grey-headed old fogies now.” Then there is
“ young Meliboeus, yonder, who is five and twenty, red-
headed, freckly, stupid, and conceited,” who “ has 50,000
sheep, drives a drag,” and ultimately marries haughty
Miss Belinda Battleaxe, whose fortune is nearly as big as
her feet.” But I must pass the rest with regret —even
“ the question, asked aloud, as to what has agitated your
gentle breasts this week, my dear public; and the young
man with the fixed eye and greasy hair, who officiates
as waiter, and who stops before me in a stolid manner
and says: “Barmaids.” “Why barmaids?” say I. To
which he makes no answer, but digging his fixed eye
into me, as it were —like one leg of a pair of compasses—
rolls the other one round me, and, with a contemptuous
snuffle, departs.” And we must now dismiss our philoso-
pher to his private residence, “ No. 2 Gaspipe, Cole’s
Wharf.”
One has only to read these papers of the " Peripatetic
Philosopher ” to be forcibly and finally convinced that
Marcus Clarke was a man of tender, large, and far-reach-
ing sympathies. Nothing human is too mean to com-
mand his attention and interest; nothing too high to
escape his censure. Nothing so brilliant of its kind has
ever before or since appeared in colonial journalism. It
is really not ephemeral literature at all, but literary art
of a very high order. How our philosopher sparkles


with wit, too ! How true he rings—every time. How
strong he is; how hard he hits. He will not surrender
even to divide the spoil with such conquerors as Sham,
Cant, and Humbug. One seems to discover a sort of
missionary spirit in this our Marcus; not religious, but
social. He would have disclaimed it, no doubt, utterly.
But he is surely a new, an Australian, St. Mark, the
Scrivener, the Writer, the Clarke; not a man of action,
but one who “ held the mirror up to Nature/* and “ Na-
ture ” did not altogether like it. Who was this upstart
who dared to make himself heard? And so he made
many bitter enemies. Well and good; we would have
it so. “ Friends ” are often less a certificate of merit.
We can well understand how one so naturally gentle,
single-hearted, so refined and sympathetic as he was,
would revolt to the depths of his whole being against
whited sepulchres set up in high places, sepulchres full
of dead bones from which the spirit has, with all hope,
departed. Surely he was “ dowered with the hate of
hate, the scorn of scorn,” as well as “ the love of love.”
But we must get along to “ Holiday Peak.” We must
“ ride hard all night in an Australian tempest.” (There
is some brilliant descriptive writing—artistic, ideal—at
the beginning of this piece.) And then “you shake
your bridle, the mare lengthens her stride, the tree trunks
run into one another, the leaves make overhead a con-
tinuous curtain, the earth reels out beneath you like a
strip of grey cloth spun by a furiously flying boom, the
air strikes your face sharply; the bush, always grey and
colourless, parts before you, and closes behind you like
a fog. You lose yourself in this prevailing indecision of
sound and colour. You become drunk with the wine of
the night, and, losing your individuality, sweep onward
on a flying phantom in a land of shadow.” And so on.
“ With what delight I hailed the glorious outburst of a
sunny morning!” I was “ expected,” it appears. “ Ex-
pected ? Then what place is this ?” “ It’s got a lot o’
names,” said Wallaby Dick. “ Some calls it one thing,
and some another. I call it Holiday Peak, because I
comes here for my holidays; but it’s known to many


folks as Mount Might-ha-been.” Many travellers stay
here, it appears. There is even Ah Yung, the Chinaman,
Who is “no cook. Me Chinee gentleman. Me might-
a-Feen cook if me run away on board ship, and go fool
my money away in lottery.” There is Jack Reckless,
who “ might have been in gaol for forgery, but instead
told his dear old father all about his debts, and so was
all right.” And “ Little Lucy,” his wife. “ You re-
member little Lucy.” There is Gerard, “whose picture,
the £ Death of Alcibiades,’ is the talk of the year?” “ I
shall soon be as famous as you?” “As I? You jest.”
“Ah, lucky fellow!” said Gerard, “ how different things
might have been if you hadn’t taken your uncle’s ad-
vice !” (Sarcasm, Marcus ?) “ You dine with Carabas
to-night, remember,” said Gerard. “ Balthazar Claes
and Byles Gridley will be there.” There is Mostyn.
There are Dickens and Thackeray, who “never looked
better“ they are great friends now, you know.” There
is Constantia, who did not marry Count Caskowisky,
after all. “ Count Caskowisky be confounded,” said
Gerard. “ No, she married me. We have three chil-
dren. Sans adieu!" . . . “ I fell back in my easy
chair. I must be dreaming. But no ! there is my Swiss
valet, laying out my dress clothes.” (It is all real
enough.) The Countess of Monte Christo has ordered
her lord to give up travelling, and, of course, he obeys.
He has, in fact, sold his island to an Australian wine-
grower, who has turned the cavern into cellars. There
is “ poor Danglarsand Lord and Lady Byron, Balzac
being between them. There are Lord Steyne and Becky
Sharpe—beg pardon, Mrs. Crawley—and the rest; the
Rev. Henry Foker and Archdeacon Castigan, Steerforth,
and Sir Montague Tigg. There is Warrington, who
married Laura, it appears. ‘I thought that ’ There
is “ George Gentle and Mr. Casaubon at billiards, Major-
General Hinton, and Colonel Lorrequer betting on the
game.” There is Admiral Cuttle, K.C.8., and Prince
Djalma, who “ could not resist Fosco.” “ Save Quilp,
I seldom found a more fascinating man,” said Guy Liv-
ingstone. “He is too fond of violent exercise for my
taste, though. I detest your muscular heroes.” “ Who


does not ?” said Kingsley from a little table where he sat
with Dr. Newman and Swinburne. “Algernon, we’re
four by honours.” _ “And the odd trick!” interjected
Antonelli. “ I decline to take advantage of an adver-
sary.” (“ Surely,” I thought, punching myself violently,
“ I must be dreaming!”) And so on. “ Here, then, was
Atlantis, here the Fortunate Isles, the Valley of Avilion,
the true El Dorado —the wondrous Land of Might-have-
been. , . . Charlemagne and Arthur had come
again, . . . and the mighty laughter of the heroes
shook the hall. . . . Yes, it was true. . . . All
around me were beauty, truth, honour; and serene
in the midst of great and noble souls, I felt mv spirit
strengthened and sustained. At length, above a door of
ivory, half hidden by a purple curtain, I saw, perched
upon the bust of Pallas, the mocking figure of a raven.
The door yielded, and I entered. I was in a long apart-
ment, going on a balcony open to the night; as I entered,
a lady, clad in white, came towards me. I knew her at
once. It was the Lady Lenore. Lenore! The lost
Lenore. She who forever waits and forever eludes our
passionate arms. Dante called her Beatrice, Petrarch
Laura, Burns knew her as Mary, Byron as ; but why
multiply names? ‘Lenore.’”
She gave me two cool hands and kissed me. “At last,
then! At last, Lenore ! Our ‘ strange unsatisfied long-
ing ’is over; and at last—oh, other half of my soul!—I
have and hold thee.”
She did not speak. I drew her to the window. ‘ I
know thou art real. Come, my love; see, the boat lies
below. Let us leave this place.’ In the far East, where
the waves tumbled white upon the shore, trembled the
dawn. The moon was fading, the city, the river, and the
enchanted gardens lay lapped in a mysterious light.
Alas! “Come ” “But even as I pleaded she seemed
to withdraw from me. One glance, sad and tender, pity-
ing and hopeful, thrilled me; a farewell kiss, pure as fire,
light as a falling roseleaf, hushed my lips, and—l was
alone. Alone upon the triform hill, whose mysterious
altars reddened in the risen dawn. My holiday was
over.”


See what this our Caesar has left us. Here is some of
the wealth I spoke of. Come, oh ye worshippers of
Mammon, slobber over his memory now. Come, oh
“ Master of Arts of Trinity College, Cambridge, and
Bencher of the Inner Temple, who hadst a world-wide
reputation in literature, thou who wast glum once be-
cause thou wast indebted for thy dinner to this little cad,
who has just gone out ” —of life.
See:
“He has left you all his walks,
His private arbours and new-planted orchards,
On this side Tiber.”
The Tiber of death. Yes, he is quite dead now. Read
“ Holiday Peak.” How the printed page seems to glow.
The writer writes not in words, but in images. His pass-
ages are marvels of vividness and conciseness—flashes of
vision hardly less real because they are imaginative;
rhythms of musical thought. What is this secret of
genius—a secret so subtle that genius itself cannot
answer ?
“ Here was a Caesar! Whence comes such another?”
The citizens, forsooth, will have “ the will, the will.” He
died bankrupt, oh citizens, save for some few pages,
some few books, within the covers of which he is sealed
more securely than all the Pharaohs in the pyramids of
Egypt. He himself is all his wealth.
And “ Pretty Dick,” the seven-years’ old son of Rich-
ard Fielding, the shepherd. “ Pretty Dick was a slen-
der little man, with eyes like pools of still water when the
sun is violet at sunset, and a skin as white as milk —that
is, under his little blue and white shirt; for where the
sun had touched it, it was golden brown, and his hands
were the colour of the ripe chestnuts his father used to
gather in England years ago.” He understood, it ap-
pears, “all about milking, did Pretty Dick;” he could
chop wood; he could ride, not a buckjumper, but old
Molly, the wall-eyed mare. “ Everyone loved Pretty
Dick; even old Sam, who had been a ‘ lag,’ and was a
very wicked man, hushed the foul jest and savage oath


when the curly head of Pretty Dick came within hearing ;
and the men always felt as if they had their Sunday clothes
on in his presence.” . . .
‘ Mother,’ said Pretty Dick, ‘ I am going down to the
creek.’ ‘Take care you don’t get lost!’ said she, half
in jest, half in earnest. ‘Lost! No fear!’ said Pretty
Dick. (He did though. How graphically it is all de-
scribed.) It is related how he went into “ the bushhow
he became tired and went to sleep; how he awoke, and,
seeing that it was getting late, “ he must go home, or
mother would be frightened.” But somehow “ the trees
did not seem familiarhe seemed to hear his mother say
quite plainly, ‘ Take care you don’t get lost, Pretty
Dick.’ He “ swallowed down a lump in his throat,
and went on again.” He saw Mr. Gaunt, the overseer, on
horseback, and coo-eed—in vain. At length “he could
only stagger along from tree to tree in the gloomy woods,
and cry ‘ Mother! mother!’ ” But there was no mother
to help him. . . . “ Nothing living was near him,
save a hideous black crow, who perched himself on the
branch of a withered tree and mocked him: ‘ Pretty
Dick! Pretty Dick! Walk! Walk! Walk!’ At last
the sweet night fell, and the stars looked down into the
gullies and ravines, where Pretty Dick, all bruised, bleed-
ing, and despairing, was staggering from rock to rock,
sick at heart, drenched with dew, hatless, shoeless, tear-
stained, crying, ‘ Mother! mother! lam lost! Oh,
mother! mother!’
“ The calm, pitiless stars looked down upon him.”
. . . “Poor Pretty Dick! No more mother’s kisses,
no more father’s caresses, no more songs, no more plea-
sures, no more flowers, no more sunshine, no more love.
. , . There, among the awful mystery and majesty of
nature, alone, a terrified little human soul, with the eternal
grandeur of the forests, the mountains, and the myriad
voices of the night, Pretty Dick knelt down, and, lifting
his little, tear-stained face to the great, grave, impassable
sky, sobbed, ‘ Oh, take me home! Take me home! Oh!
please, God, take me home!’ ”
And so the days and the nights passed; but “no one
came near Pretty Dick. He had almost forgotten, indeed,


that there was such a boy as Pretty Dick. He seemed to
have lived years in the bush alone. He did not know
where he was, or who' he was. It seemed quite natural
to him that he should be there alone. . . . He had
lost all his terror of the Night. . . . The hut was
down in the gully yonder; he could hear his mother sing-
ing; so Pretty Dick got up, and, crooning a little song,
went down into the Shadow. * * * They looked for
him for five days. On the sixth, his father and another
came upon something, lying, half hidden, in the long-
grass at the bottom of a gully in the ranges. A little army
of crows flew heavily away. The father sprang to earth
with a white face. Pretty Dick was lying on his face,
with his head on his arm. God had taken him home.”
Read “ Pretty Dick ” through. Does not Marcus Clarke
answer the supreme test of an artist—to clothe common
things of everyday life in beauty and interest—the beauty
of natural description, the beauty of innocence, of
family love, the beauty of a little child’s mind? Surely
when he wrote that, he became as a little child, and
with Pretty Dick entered his new home. I asked a mother
to read “ Pretty Dick ” to her bright, wonder-eyed boy,
and to tell me the result. There were tears in his eyes at
the end, it appears; and he thought for a long while, and
said, “ How do they know the crow said ‘ Pretty Dick!
Walk! walk! walk!’ if there was no one but Pretty Dick
there?” Ah, my boy, if we only knew that, you should
have many stories like “ Pretty Dickmany beautiful
stories, such as only a beautiful mind can tell; such stories
as a mother might read on a summer’s evening to her
children gathered about her knees—
Cum tibi sol tepidus plures admoverit aures,
when to thee, sweet story, the cool of the sunset has
drawn greater numbers of hearers.
Then there are “ Poor Joe,” “ Gentleman George’s
Bride,” “ Bullocktown,” and the rest; not forgetting
“ Horace in the Bush.” And let us look a moment at his
best known work, “ For the Term of His Natural Life.”
An innocent man, Richard Devine, later “ Rufus Dawes,”


is transported—voluntarily to save his mother’s name, as
he thought—to a convict settlement to be formed beyond
the seas—Port Macquarie, Van Diemen’s Land. We
have no time to follow the powerful characterisations of
Sarah Purfoy, John Rex, Maurice Frere, Mrs. Vickers,
and the Captain. But from the time the convict ship
Malabar left good blundering old England, till the
Lady Franklin was caught in a cyclone and foundered
off Norfolk Island, the narrative is full of vivid, natural
description, often on a grand scale—such as the descrip-
tion of the “ Blow Hole ” and the Cyclone—and of mas-
terly portrayal of human character, developing in a
strange and horrible environment. We must pass by the
vivid descriptions of the Malabar's hospital, the Barra-
coon, the fate of the burning ship Hydaspes, the Typhus
Fever, the Mutiny, and the rest. We must leave the
Malabar lying on the water “ like a glow-worm on a
floating leaf,” in a Mrs. Vickers, who dislikes
“ these dreadful calms.” “ John, have you my smelling
salts ?”
_ Many of the things in the book are gruesome and hor-
rible enough, even diabolical; such as the incidents con-
nected with Gabbett, the manifold murderer, the loath-
some man-eater; such as the lashing to death of Captain
Burgess’s butler for the serious offence of stopping his
ears when the Captain used bad language; the pathetic
incident of “ Cranky Brown,” age twelve years, who “ did
it this morning 4hat is, committed suicide “by jump-
ing off a high rock, and drowning himself in full view of
the constableshe was tired of his poor little life; and of
the two babes, Tommy and Billy, who followed his ex-
ample—they “ did it ” also by drowning, “ condemning
their young souls to everlasting fire,” as the Rev. Mr.
Meekin said piously; and the dreadful lottery of the longest
straw.
If many of these incidents are gruesome and cause a
revulsion of horror, it must be remembered how powerful
is the imaginative work which has placed human beings
in such an environment with results so inevitable as traced
with a sequence and vividness that only genius could
command.


But let us run our eye over the current of the life of
the central figure, Rufus Dawes. Read how the Osprey
was seized; how Frere and Mrs. Vickers and Silvia were
left at Macquarie Harbour; how Dawes was left to die at
“ Hell’s Gates,” and how he escaped; how Dawes became
“ Mr.” Dawes, and how he nursed Mrs. Vickers and
starved for the sake of little Silvia; how he built a coracle;
how he learnt that he was the veritable heir to Sir Richard
Devine’s fortune; how he dreamed day-dreams; how he
became aware that “in the desert he was ‘ Mr.’ Dawes,
the saviour,” and that “ in civilised life he would become
once more Rufus Dawes, the ruffian, the prisoner, the ab-
sconder;” how he suffered mental agony more exquisite
than all the physical pain he had so long endured; how
he saw the writing on the sand, “ Good Mr. Dawes;” of
his great sacrifice—how he resolved to restore the sick
lady, Mrs. Vickers, and Silvia to their home, and himself
to the tortures of a living death at Port Arthur; how he
suffered and starved; how he watched over little Silvia in
the coracle; how she became delirious, and her memory
a blank concerning “ Good Mr. Dawes,” and all his good-
ness ; how Frere, taking advantage of this, clothed him-
self in the cloak of Dawes’ heroism and sent Dawes in
his convict grey to the impenetrable silence and the
secrecy of the grave at Port Arthur.
Read how “ the notorious Dawes ” was brought to
Hobart to identify the mutineers of the Osprey; how
Dawes broke out in court: “ I was sentenced to death for
bolting, sir, and they retrieved me because I helped them
in the boat. Helped them! Why, I made it. She will
tell you so. I nursed her; I carried her in my arms. I
starved myself for her. She was fond of me, sir. She was,
indeed. She called me * Good Mr. Dawes.’ ” “At this
a coarse laugh broke out ” in court, but was instantly
checked. (It was all useless.) Dawes “ began to have a
new religion. He worshipped the dead. For the living
he had but hatred and evil words ; for the dead he had love
and tender thoughts.” Read how “if she knew I was
alive, she would come to me. I am sure she would.
Perhaps they told her that I was dead.” How he escaped;
how he revealed himself to Silvia, who did not recognise


him, but cried to Maurice for help. “ She, too —the child
he had nursed and fed, the child for whom he had given
up his hard-earned chance of freedom and fortune, the
child of whom he had dreamed, the child whose image
he had worshipped—she, too, was against him. Then
there was no justice, no heaven, no God.”
The Rev. Mr. Meekin converses with the Rev. Mr.
North. “ Captain Frere says the scenery is delightful.”
“So it is; but the prisoners are not.” “ Poor abandoned
wretches! I suppose not, ‘ How sweet the moonlight
sleeps upon that bank.’ Eh!” “Abandoned indeed by
God and man—almost.” “ Mr. North, Providence never
abandons the most unworthy of His servants. Never have
I seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their
bread. . . . Really, the commandant’s house is charm-
ingly situated.”
Contrast these two characters—Meekin and North.
“He who would touch the hearts of men must
have had his own heart seared,” says Clarke. “ The
missionaries of mankind have ever been great sinners be-
fore they earned the divine right to heal and bless. . . .
The crown of divinity is a crown of thorns.” Read of the
worthy Pharisee Meekin, “ who was sent to Dawes to
teach him how mankind is to be redeemed with Love,
but who preached only that harsh Law whose barbarous
power died with the gentle Nazarene on Calvary;” how
poor Dawes cried to him in despair, “ What do you know
of such as I?” North learnt to love “ charming little
Silvia, with her quaint wit and weird beauty; ‘he (Frere)
is not good enough for you,’ North wrote in his diary.”
John Rex in the meantime turned up in London and
personated the long-lost heir of Sir Richard Devine, and
“ couldn’t use wuss langwidge if he was a dook, dam ’im!”
said Smithers, the butler.
“ Silvia liked her husband least when he loved
her most. In this repulsion lay her power over
him. Maurice Frere, though his wife obeyed him,
knew he was inferior to her, and was afraid of the statue
he had created.” What agonies and self-reproach poor
North suffered! Dawes became thoroughly broken at
last, and consented to try his luck “ in the lucky bag,” as


blind Mooney called it. Dawes’ luck was out again; he
drew the shortest straw, and had to live. North had to go
at last. Silvia revolted, and was to return to her father
in the Lady Franklin • North was going by the same ship.
Dawes discovered the rebellious, the blind love of North
and Silvia; he would not let North go. “ But I love her!
Love her, do you hear? What do you know of love?”
“ Love? Oh, it is you who do not know it. Love is sac-
rifice of self. . . . Listen, I will tell you the history
of such a love as yours.” Dawes told him “ the secret of
his own life, the reason why he was there.” The rest is
short. The sentry drunk, the door open, Dawes escaped in
North’s cloak and hat to the ship Lady Franklin. Dawes
“ saved Silvia.” There was a cyclone. “ The sight was
one of wild grandeur. The huge, black cloud which hung
in the horizon had changed its shape. Instead of a curtain
it was an arch. Beneath this vast and magnificent portal
shone a dull phosphoric light. Across this livid space
pale flashes of sheet lightning passed noiselessly. Be-
hind it was a dull and threatening murmur, made up of
the grumbling of thunder, the falling of rain, and the roar
of contending wind and water. . . , Lightning seemed
to burst upwards from the sullen bosom of the sea. At
intervals, the darkly-rolling waves flashed! fire, and
streaks of flame shot upwards. The wind increased in
violence, and the arch of light was fringed with rain. A
dull, red glow hung around, like the reflection of a con-
flagration. Suddenly a tremendous peal of thunder, ac-
companied by a terrific downfall of rain, rattled along the
sky. The arch of light disappeared, as though some in-
visible hand had shut the slide of a giant lantern. A
great wall of water rushed roaring over the level plain
of the sea, and with an indescribable medley of sounds,
in which tones of horror, triumph, and torture were
blended, the cyclone swooped upon them From
the deck of the vessel the scene was appalling. The
clouds had closed in. The arch of light had disappeared,
and all was a dull, windy blackness. Gigantic seas
seemed to mount in the horizon and sweep towards and
upon them. It was as though the ship lay in the vortex
of a whirlpool, so high on either side of her were piled


the rough pyramidical masses of sea. Mighty gusts
arose —claps of wind which seemed like strokes of thun-
der. A sail loosened from its tackling was torn away and
blown out to sea, disappearing like a shred of white
paper to leeward.” . , . Silvia “ shrieked aloud for
help, but her voice was inaudible even to herself. . . .
The door opened, and from out the cabin came a figure
clad in black. She looked up; ... a pair of dark
eyes beaming ineffable love and pity were bent upon
her, and a pair of dripping arms held her above the brine
as she had once been held in the misty mysterious days
that were gone. . . . Regaining her memory thus,
. . . she understood how her husband had deceived
her, and with what base injustice and falsehood he had
bought her young love. . . . The shock of recovered
memory subsided in the grateful utterance of other days
—‘ Good Mr. Dawes !’ The eyes of the man and woman
met in one long, wild gaze. Silvia stretched out her white
hands and smiled, and Richard Devine understood in his
turn the story of the young girl’s joyless life, and knew
how she had been sacrificed. In the great crisis of our life,
when brought face to face with annihilation, we are sus-
pended, gasping over the great emptiness of death, we be-
come conscious that the self which we think we knew so
well has strange and unthought of capacities. To de-
scribe a tempest of the elements is not easy, but to de-
scribe a tempest of the soul is impossible. Amid the fury
of such a tempest, a thousand memories, each bearing in
its breast the corpse of some dead deed whose influence
haunts us yet, are driven like feathers before the blast, as
unsubstantial and as unregarded. The mists which shroud
our self-knowledge become transparent, and we are smit-
ten with sudden lightning-like comprehension of our own
misused power over our fate. . . . These two human
beings felt that they had done with life; together thus,
alone in the very midst and presence of death, the distinc-
tions of the world they were about to leave disappeared.
Their vision grew clear. They felt as beings whose bodies
had already perished. As they clasped hands, their freed
souls, recognising each the loveliness of the other, rushed
tremblingly together.” And “at day dawn on the morn-


ing after the storm, the rays of the rising sun fell upon
. . . a portion of the mainmast head of the Lady
Franklin, and entangled in the rigging were two corpses
—a man and a woman. . . . The tempest was over.”
I must keep close to my purpose—to try and ascertain
from his works what manner of man Marcus Clarke was.
I have purposely passed by brilliant descriptive passages,
and kept as closely as time will permit to the pathos that
was his; how the most diabolical physical tortures and
the most exquisite mental sufferings could not kill the
love, the faith, the sweetness of the hero, Dawes—wrong-
fully but lawfully convicted by his country. We have
here the same Marcus Clarke that we had in the papers
of the “ Peripatetic Philosopher.” He saw that the same
organised and constituted society which, as a nation, pro-
duced the convict system at Port Arthur, produced also,
in civil administration, such inhuman butchers as Frere
and Burgess and Troke, and, in church administration,
such heartless and brainless noodles, such Christless
“ Christians ” as that ass Meekin, so fond of “ his friend
the Bishop.”
He saw that as society goes onward on the lines of
democracy, government by the best ( aristos —best) ; that
is, aristocracy (not the “cant of good blood”), but govern-
ment by the best in politics, in art, letters, religion, and
society generally, tends to give place to cast-iron systems
in which the average \man, the mediocrity, with nothing
but his mediocrity to recommend him, the “ parochial
committeeman, intensely respectable and intensely nar-
row-minded,” flourishes. Vested interests, are they not
everything? Are they not moulded in cast-iron? Who
dares to stand on his own feet and cry out with his own
voice, he must be silenced. Why not? Such conduct
is not deducible from cast-iron. Mob-rule, and rule
the mob, and spoils to the victors! Count heads ;
mathematics is your only truth. He saw ahead the com-
ing slavery of the individual to the State, to society, in
the person, everywhere, of the narrow-minded parochial
committeeman—a slavery more degrading to humanity
than chain-gang slavery, because it is mental and spiritual


slavery. I ask, is not Marcus Clarke’s attitude vindicated
to-day? Even the Church has to submit; the Church has
become a mere social function. The Church does not
believe so much in its Master as in what it
conceives to be its own interest —its vested interest.
The Church does not stand between society vic-
tims. Not the weak sot, North, who, at least, believed in
his Master, and so was not too proud to ask forgiveness
even of a convict, but the pious Meekin “ preached that
harsh Law whose barbarous power died with the gentle
Nazarene on Calvary.” These are great and serious in-
dictments. The Church exists for purposes of govern-
ment only, he asserts.
Look at Clarke’s controversy with Dr. Moorhouse,
a great and good Bishop —broad-minded and liberal.
Clarke certainly got the best of the argument, both
in substance and in dialectics. Of course people
were very shocked at his audacity —even fine old
Sir Redmond, who estimated that a man should have
some thousands a year of independent income before he
could do such a thing in a community like ours. Perhaps
Sir Redmond was only ironical after all. However, it
must be remembered that Clarke wrote an article to the
“ Victorian Review ” on “ Civilisation Without Delu-
sion,” and it was the Bishop who attacked him first.
Surely Clarke could reply.
Clarke looked upon “ religion ” as a political necessity
merely at present and in the past; but looked forward to
a time when “ the elevation of the race will be the sole
religion of mankind.” There is evidence of Comte and
Positivism here. Of course, the Bishop could not under-
stand a religion where there is “ no God, and no worship,
and no hope of a futurewhich, of course, again, Clarke
never affirmed. To disagree with the Church has always
been to be an atheist, an infidel, a heretic, and so on.
What large engines the Church does wield, to be sure!
Clarke, in his reply, denied that he was an atheist. The
Bishop, a great orator, with his eye on the gallery all the
time, then proceeds to an ingenious rehash of Argu-
ment from Design, which has long been recognised as
quite insufficient to demonstrate the existence of God, the


Creator. There are several other arguments he might
have used, which are equally insufficient. His lordship
then traverses, in Ethics, the positions of Utilitarianism
and of Nativism; but he cannot prove his categorical im-
perative, his ought, outside of human reason. Questions
oi hrst and final causes, of origins and purposes, are al-
ways, and must necessarily remain, obscure. We can in-
ler at best; we cannot demonstrate, much less prove. The
Bishop, I think, underrated his man. However, his lord-
ship is satisfied with his statement, and proceeds through
long periods and flourishes of rhetoric to beg the whole
q u 6S u by s P eakin §’ of “ the great Author of Nature,”
,™i All-wise and Almighty Intelligence,” the “ Divine
V\ ill, and so on. The Bishop would surely have done
better to have rested his case on faith and belief rather
than on reason and knowledge; Clarke points out tha f he
has not used the name of his Master, Christ, once in'the
whole of his statement. The Bishop, in his peroration
waxes eloquent, indeed, on behalf of the “ fundamental
social institution of property”—vested interests again • as
if property could not take care of itself if the Church
were to take care of the souls of men.
One almost wonders sometimes (I speak with rever-
ence) if the Almighty Himself is supposed by the doctvi-
nanes of the Church to lean for support on their argu-
ments. The ordinary layman commonly imagines
the Almighty is quite able to take care of Himself, and
will do so—Church or no Church. Some bright child of
Cod might again to-day dispute with the doctors in the
temple, and “ ask them questions” much to their
astonishment.”
With the exception of a few phrases that might have
been toned down a little, Clarke’s rejoinder was respect-
iul enough. He clenches his case thus: “ But your lord-
ship will reply that many of the sayings of Jesus were
allegorical, that it is impossible in these days to give
our clothes to robbers, and to turn our cheek to the
smuter. Very good; then Christianity, as Christ taught
it, is, as I say, dead.” The Church would do well to profit
by his warning; there is much need of it. “ Where,” he
asks, “is religion in every-day life ?” “ Read,” he cries,


“ read the literature of the day—sip the life-blood of the
running age, and answer.” To my mind, there is nothing
more pathetic, in the narrow ways of these latter days,
than the state of that man who can believe the divinity of
Christ more readily than some of the mysteries the Church
teaches as necessary to salvation. To prevent misunder-
standing, and as I am much too timid to be a freelance
myself, I hasten to “ hereby declare ” that I am a Church-
man —fairly orthodox. But that I conceive to be no
reason why one should not appreciate sound judgment
and fair play.
Why should Marcus Clarke have taken up this stand
in religion too? He was a clever man. It is so much
easier to follow and pretend to lead, to count heads and
be on the winning side, to “ jump when the cat jumps.”
He was evidently not a cunning man. He enjoyed the
fruits of the earth as much as any man. He was a brilliant
conversationalist. He might have acquired a reputation
even for tact (save the mark!) if he had only let the
world go hang. What an odious word “ tact ” has be-
come. See how the Pharisee “ rises on stepping stones
of the dead selves ” of others “to higher things,” as he
“ thanks God he is not as other men are.” Surely Marcus
was a fool.
The fact is, he was a deeply religious man. Your irre-
ligious man is he who, being too lazy, or too cowardly, to
face the great questions that mankind has to face, each
man on his own individual responsibility, takes refuge
in a dogma because it is conventional, orthodox, con-
venient ;or who, like Gallic, “ cares for none of these
things.”
I would like to ask the young authors of this Society
if they are prepared to pass through the fire for the sake
of what they believe to be true in their very hearts —as
Marcus Clarke did. And so he will take a high place in
literature; nothing can stop it. And yet there is this con-
solation —that when he was doing his best work, he was
happiest. What is that unmistakable stamp of true literary
art? Does not the eternal harmony that flows with the


spheres flow also through the hearts of the poets of art —
literary and other? Are not these but tones of the one
universal harmony? We may smile at the odiousness of
comparisons; but we must judge all pure literature finally
by the same tests, the same canon, the same rules if we
can find such, as we judge the immortals, or as the immor-
tals judge us by. We cannot shut principles out, as with
a wall—not even out of Australia. “Australia for the
Australians,” indeed ! What next ?
When he flew in the face of things and made “ many
bitter enemies,” he did not do so for fun. He could only
speak what was in him; and nothing is so cowardly as a
lie. If he spoke, there would be no compromise. Young
authors, try it. You will die soon; but you will live here-
after. The gods try authors in the fire before they \elect
them amongst the chosen.
Marcus Clarke is easily first in Australian literature.
“ Others abide our question; he is free.” He possessed
an intellect that one cannot help feeling was altogether
wasted in this little back-yard of the British Empire. This
man must (it is as much an affliction as a gift) search out,
the truth for himself. He brought his wealth of human
sympathy to bear upon all things human. We can see
in his best work how fine his intellect was ; how he worked
in images rather than mere words, in words that were,
indices of images passing into expressed thought.
Of such stuff are the greatest minds made; heart, head;
courage, sympathy; vision, expression. Let us turn to
good old Carlyle here. Clarke read Carlyle a lot; there
is ample evidence of it. You will remember how, after
“ having fallen lately among new chums,” our philosopher
had to take “ cold baths of Carlyle, Balzac, and Voltaire
in order to restore his nervous system.” But Carlyle
says: “ One grand, invaluable secret there is, however,
which includes all the rest, and, what is comfortable, lies
clearly in every man’s power; to have an open and loving
heart, and what follows from the possession of such.
Truly it has been said, emphatically in these days ought


it to be repeated:—A loving heart is the beginning of all
knowledge. This it is that opens the whole mind, quick-
ens every faculty of the intellect to do its work, that of
knowing; and, therefrom, by sure consequence, of vividly
uttering-forth. Other secret of being ‘ graphic ’ there is
none worth having; but this is an all-sufficient one. See,
for example, what a small Boswell can do ! . . . It
has been said: ‘ The heart sees farther than the head;’
but, indeed, without the seeing heart, there is no true
seeing for the head so much as possible; all is mere
oversight, hallucination and vain superficial phantas-
magoria, which can permanently profit no one.”
There is much evidence that Clarke was influenced
by French literature, Balzac especially. He has Balzac’s
vast human sympathy, his minuteness of observation, his
consuming interest. Daudet too; that light touch, grace-
ful expression, elusive charm. Clarke should have been
a dramatist of great power; perhaps he was. He has
written plays, but I for one have not seen them. They
are in London now, I believe. A man who could live in
the mind and heart of a little child as Clarke did when he
wrote “ Pretty Dick;” and could live the life of a god-
forsaken convict, as he to all intents and purposes did
when he traced the life and character of Rufus Dawes,
with all the brutal and hideous environment; such a man
had the one essential element of a great dramatist. Look
at that gallery of types, drawn with such ease by a master
hand, in his “ Peripatetic Philosopher ” papers. These
were his ephemeral literature, forsooth. Oh, sad, sad
“ Bohemian!”
He was a student of Horace too—of Horace’s clear-cut
verses, his taste in expression, his conciseness, his sweet
reasonableness. And Carlyle he read, we know. He
must have read not only deeply, but widely. He wrote
poetry, too; one wonders that he did not write more of it.
He translated not only from the French, but from the
German and the Greek; and Horace, we know, was a
familiar spirit. It is not to be presumed that he had much
knowledge either of Greek or German; but a man such
as Clarke was, would absorb the spirit of the poets of the


classics more fully, and therefore render a better trans-
lation, than mere scholars in those languages.
He had much of the pathos, the passion, the force of
Heine; and was not without some of the chief character-
istics of Shelley: his rebellious spirit, the purity and vivid-
ness of his imaginative gift. But I have no time now to
go into suggestions of this kind.
I intended to draw up a bibliography of the works of
Marcus Clarke; I have not had time; I shall have time,
and will do so. He wrote two complete novels; over
thirty tales and sketches; a volume of “ Old Tales of a
Young Country” (fine examples, some of them, of what
might be called the historical style); about a dozen dra-
matic works, and adaptations from the French; review
articles upon such diverse subjects as Balzac, Dore, Comte
and Beaconsfield. Besides ordinary journalistic work, he
wrote many brilliant articles for the press, one of which
is credited with having wrecked a government. And all
this and more was packed into some fourteen years. He
could not have had much time on his hands, this idle
“ Bohemian.” '
Oh, the bright broad land of Bohemia, a land upon
which the sun never sets! All the brightest and
best spirits have dwelt there—even Shakespeare and
all his company are of them —those who have dared to
forswear the soulless conventionalities of their day, and
even to cry out upon them as with the voice of the pro-
phets of the Most High. Never have they denied what is
true, beautiful, good; but rather this have they searched
out without ceasing through all the channels of their
being. The smiles they wear so lightly are for the world;
their sorrows are all their own.
In certain passages in “ His Natural Life” and in the
problems that are suggested by some of his “ psycho-
logical ” pieces, there is evidence of the depth of Clarke’s
nature and of its inward questionings. He seems to come
now and again upon that thin partition that divides the
material from the spiritual, the relative from the absolute,
phenomena from—well, some “ thing in itself.” He


knocked at the door —the very inmost door called Mystery
—that separates the question from the answer. He must,
indeed, have a rational answer—an answer of reason in
terms of reason. Rationalism, however, cannot explain
Religion; that is impossible. Neither do we ask Faith,
the “ evidence of things not seen,” to explain phenomena.
Speaking of “John Rex,” the arch-scoundrel of “His
Natural Life,” and his awful experiences in “ The Blow-
hole,” Clarke, in the narrative, proceeds: “ The convict’s
guilty conscience, long suppressed and derided, asserted
itself in this hour when it was alone with Nature and
Night. . . . The bitter intellectual power which had
so long supported him succumbed beneath imagination—
the unconscious religion of the soul.” Imagination—the
unconscious religion of the soul! A strange phrase
surely, but there is much in it; more than a superficial
glance reveals.
Clarke, like most men, believed, indeed—something;
he had knowledge of —something; but these two some-
things questioned, they answered not, each other. And
we must keep on knocking; some day the door will be
opened.
“ No, no! the energy of life may be
Kept on after the grave, but not begun !
And he who flagg’d not in the earthly strife,
From strength to strength advancing—only he,
His soul well-knit, and all his battles won,
Mounts, and that hardly, to eternal life.”
Oh, the bright, broad land of Bohemia, where it is never
Night! Fare on, thou child of Nature, through sunshine
and through shower. Cherished by thy smiles and
watered by thy tears, how luxuriant in its beauty is thy
world, where the seeds of human kindness fall upon the
good ground of the heart, and not amongst thorns, nor
in stony places. How beautiful is Nature in all her handi-
works ! “ Only man is vile.” There are tears in thy
voice, there are smiles in thy tears, oh gentle Anarchist,
as thou wanderest on and on, full of strength and sweet-
ness, for thy faith hath made thee whole.


How sweetly human he was; how human his faults;
how almost divine his virtues. Surely he was a menace
“in such a community as ours.” “ Those who knew
him intimately,” the Memorial Volume pathetically
remarks, “ were few.” But he has been dead now
these twenty years. He can do no more harm
now. There is something strangely _ fascinating
about this man, whose heart was more pitiful than a
woman’s, and yet fearless withal as that of Sir Lancelot
himself as he fared forth alone with his lance in rest;
and he tried in vain to conceal his very goodness under
a veil, nay, an armour, of cynicism. His seriousness, how
high! His sincerity, how deep ! What a bright spirit!
Where, then, has he gone —this strong, sweet soul?
Back to “ Holiday Peak,” I think.
“ Little Nelly (to the story-teller): ‘ But, Mr, Marston,
did you not go back to Holiday Peak?’
“ Marston: ‘ I do not know the way, my dear.’
“ Little Nelly: ‘ But there must be a way. If so many
people stop there, a coach should go near the place.’
“Marston: ‘There is a coach that goes to the very door,
little one —a coach by which we must all travel one of
these days —a black coach, drawn by black horses. Some
day they will take me when I am sleeping soundly, and
put me into a big box, nail me up, and put on the lid a
neat brass plate:
John Marston,
Aetat —(well, 34).
For Holiday Peak. With care.
This side up.
Good night.”


In the Press.
THE
Living Pillars of the Colosseum
A DRAMATIC PICTURE POEM
THE ROMAN PERSECUTIONS
WITH
“THE ATTIS ” OF CATULLUS.
HENRY C. J. LINGHAM, M.1.5.A., London.
(Author of “ The Last Hours of a Lion Heart,” '* The Litany of Love,”
and “Juvenal in Melbourne : a Satire Social and Political.”)
Will be issued early in the month of March, 1902.
“ The Australian Literature Society must be congratu-
lated on the brilliant programme it presented toits numerous
audience at its rooms on Wednesday evening, June 6.
Whatever opinions may exist as to its ability to be of
practical aid to Australian authors, one thing is clear—
that it can, when it chooses, command from certain of its
members really first-class fare wherewith to regale its
guests at its monthly literary banquets, which is more than
can be said of most of our literary societies. The first
item, Mr. Henry C. J. Lingham’s ‘Living Pillars of the
Colosseum,’ is a strong dramatic poem in musical un-
rhymed verse, which was delivered by the author himself
with great elocutionary effect, presenting a most vivid
picture of the cruel sports and the corruption prevailing in
the old Roman Empire, when women and girls, as well as
men, were periodically exposed in the arena of the Flavian
Amphitheatre and torn to pieces by famished lions,
leopards or tigers—and all to make a Roman holiday !
The reading or recitation—for it was rather the latter—
created a profound sensation, and was loudly applauded
at its conclusion. The work being pronounced above criti-
cism, no discussion followed.” —Table Talk, June 14th, 1900.








’ - :•
’ p "
trAMirnm:
«* Iv: %■ ■■■ •
■ aw&
r - , * >:r g
- -. * 1
•«re .y* -


