

MARJORIE
MAY
\jUovw£
Mary Pauline Calleneler


I


MARJORIE MAY
LEARNS ABOUT LIFE
MARY PAULINE CALLE-NDER
DEDICATED TO MOTHERS
THE WORLD OVER


For free additional copies write to —
Mary Pauline Callender
C/o Australian Cellucotton
Products Pty. Ltd.
111-115 Albion St.
Sydney, N.S.W.
* J 7
Copyright by Australian
Cellucotton Products Pty. Ltd.
All Rights Reserved
Printed in Australia


Time: An afternoon in late May.
Place : Marjorie May’s home.
IT \\ AS Tuesday afternoon. Marjorie
May s mother had been working in the
front garden just as Mrs. Sherman was
passing by with her new baby. Marjorie May
had returned from school—and it seemed just
the right moment for mother to ask Mrs.
Sherman in for a cup of tea —for a gentle
breeze wafted to their nostrils the aroma of a
sunshine cake which old Emma, the cook, had
taken out of the oven a few minutes earlier.
The day was to hold a new adventure for
Marjorie May. She had never held a live
baby in her arms—and Mrs. Sherman allowed
her to do just that. Marjorie May was de-
lighted. How lovely and cuddly it was, with
its little pink face framed in a bonnet of the
softest angora wool!
The afternoon passed all too Quickly and
Mrs. Sherman at last had to leave for home.
It was too beautiful a day to stay in the
house, and when Marjorie May and her
mother had waved goodbye to Mrs. Sherman
they instinctively returned to the garden
w here the\ had had tea, and to the swinging
couch under the trees. The hush of Spring


seemed to hold Marjorie May and her mother
in a spell, or perhaps it was the charm of
Mrs. Sherman and the adorable sweetness of
her baby that caused them to sit so quietly and
without conversation.
“Mother/* said Marjorie May, breaking the
silence, “how did I really come to you and
Daddy?”
With the question coming to her in so sud-
den and straightforward a manner, Marjorie
May’s mother was completely taken unawares.
“My, but you ARE a sudden person. Sup-
posing I should tell you that a stork dropped
you down the chimney, or that the doctor had
brought you in his little black bag ?
“Then, mother,” replied Marjorie May.
pretending to be serious, “I’d quickly ask you
where you got your information —.” Marjorie
May, really serious now. continued —“A few
weeks ago you said that when any of the
children I know talk about things I do not
understand. I should come to you and you
would try to explain: and Mrs. Sherman’s
visit this afternoon makes me want to get one
of these questions off my mind. During school
recess today one of the girls was telling us
about people having babies. She said an older
girl friend of hers had told her all about it.
and . . . well, Mother, she is a girl none of us


like, and—what she said has frightened me.”
I know just how you feel, dear.’’ said the
mother, her voice filled with sympathy and
her face betraying her anxiety. “I faced ex-
act!} the same situation when I was a girl.
I probably should have talked to you about
babies some time ago. but I must confess that
the average mother, and I am one. doesn’t
know exactly when or at what age her daugh-
ter should be given this information. It is
very hard for mothers, and daughters too. to
open the subject, so we put it off from vear
to year until the information Mother intended
to give sometimes comes far too late ... after
an ill-advised and misinformed school chum
offers a so-called explanation in an unsatis-
factory manner. So, where shall we begin?
Shall I be scientific, or medical, or ... ”
“Of course not,” interrupted Marjorie May.
“just tell me in your own way. and let me ask-
questions as we go along.”
“Well, then,” said Mother, “because it is
still Spring I might begin by going into the
mating habits of animals, fish and Hrds, but
I don t think I shall. ou have a^ r eady learned
in \ our school studies, and by your own ob-
servation. perhaps, how Nature arranges for
the reproduction of different forms of life.
“So, to start right with our own family. 1


will begin with you—and me —and Daddy.
"Just as Nature discovered that the best
place for a bird to begin is within the shell
of an egg. the egg being warmed and pro-
tected from temperature changes and harm
by the mother bird’s soft body and wings—
so Nature knows that the best place for a
human baby to be created is within the body
of the baby's own mother.
"In the beginning, you were very tiny
indeed.” continued Mother; "in fact, you
started not unlike a seed. A seed too small
to be seen without a microscope, and looking
as unlike Mrs. Sherman's chubby baby as a
small brown flower seed looks like the beau-
tiful flower at your feet. And. darling, you
did not look at all like a baby. As a matter
of fact, many weeks and months went by
while you gradually grew bigger and bigger,
and took on the form of a baby. Then, after
nine months of gradual growth within the
protection of mother's body, you at last grew
just large enough. And —you came out into
the world, and we said you were born.
“That is why birthdays are so joyfully cele-
brated by all of the family. We give you
presents on your birthdays for no other reason
than to re-afflrm how glad we are that you
were born. Just think how the American


nation reveres Washington’s and Lincoln's
birthdays! Their births were important not
only to their parents, but to the millions of
Americans who now live, and to the hundreds
of millions who will be born to enjoy the
security Washington's and Lincoln’s works
accomplished for that great country."
"Tell me more. Mother. Was I inside of
you for years and years, or did I just sud-
denly begin to grow one day?’’
"No. you were not inside me for years and
years,” replied the mother; "and the fact is
you could not have begun to grow until some
time after Dad and I were married.”
"Why not?”
"Because mothers are never alone in bring-
ing a child into being. Fathers are very im-
portant, too, for it is the law of Nature that
a male and female together, in the intimate
contact of married life, shall produce their
kind—that is, babies.
"Many things in this world seem to need
two entirely different substances. For in-
stance, in electricity, we have to use two wires
called a positive and a negative in order for
the lamp to light: the water we drink is com-
posed of hydrogen and oxygen. We need food
and drink in order to sustain life. To keep us
healthy, our biood must contain both red and


white corpuscles. A song must have words
and music. If a Kodak film were not black and
white there would be no picture. In breathing
we must both inhale and exhale. I could go
on for hours illustrating that Nature needs to
combine two forces, or substances, in order to
create its works. And of all Nature’s crea-
tions —a baby is the most wonderful.
It is the law of Nature, and God s wise
plan, that the world shall always be peopled
with creatures of the field, and stream, and
with children of men. According to this law.
all male and female humans, and animals cre-
ate their offspring with substance from within
their own bodies. And so that this plan shall
be carried on from generation to generation,
it is arranged that soon after we pass the age
of childhood. Nature implants within us an
urge or desire to have a number of children.
“When animals have offspring, their only
motive for doing so is this so-called ‘animal’
urge or desire. Consequently, when the ani-
mal's new family is but a few months old.
it is left to get along by itself as best it can.
and the animal parents are no longer inter-
ested in their children.
“But. when human fathers and mothers
bring a baby into the world, their reason is
gre -ter than the ‘animal’ urge or desire of


Nature, for humans are guided by some-
thing animals do not recognise, and that is
Love, and we protect and shelter our children,
and care for them all our lives.
“Since the world became civilised, we hu-
man beings would not think of giving in. or
yielding ourselves to any physical urge or
sex desire which might bring children, until
the love for the person we want to live with
has resulted in marriage.
“My," said Marjorie May's mother, “If I
don’t watch out I will find myself lecturing
on the subject of high ideals, which is very
much akin to love and marriage—but we will
go into that some other day. So to continue
—Nature has provided you and Mother and
all women and girls, with what doctors
describe as ‘the important external and in-
ternal organs' having to do with the creation
of a child. These external organs are located
at the lower part of the abdomen. Father, and
all men and boys also have external organs
located at the lower part of the abdomen,
but these are different. They are so formed
as to allow ready entrance into the body of
the mother so that the substance I mentioned
awhile ago can be placed within, where it will
meet and fertilize the female ovum.
“Now to get back again to our biology and


the female internal organs—the creation of
a child begins when one of two glands (called
ovaries) give off an ovum (egg). Once a
month this ovum leaves one of the glands and
proceeds on a journey through a tube which
leads into a nest-like place called the womb.
The nest-like place (womb) is in itself lined
with hundreds of thousands of blood vessels;
and is Nature’s store-house for the menstrual
fluid which I told you about on your twelfth
birthday. During the nine months from the
day it began as a mother-father made seed,
until the day of birth, this fluid is entirely
used to nourish the developing baby.
“When we say a woman is pregnant, it
means that the ovum, during the monthly
journey, has become united with and fertilized
by the entirely different substance (called
sperm) which Nature had stored within the
father, and which had entered the mother’s
body during the intimate contact of married
life.
“Of course, when one is not married and
there is no baby growdng in the womb, Na-
ture needs neither the ovum nor the menstrual
fluid, and they leave your body through the
same passage a new baby would use in com-
ing into the world.
“Again, it proves how skillfully Nature has


planned that life shall go on. We have two
eyes, two ears, two hands and two feet. So
that if one organ is weak, or should mis-
fortune cause us to lose one. we can still be
successful in life. And, although only one
ovum is released at a time. Nature gives us
the assurance of the two tubes, so that we can
quite surely depend upon having a baby when
the mother and father are ready for it.
“And that is the end. dear, or rather I
should say the beginning, for it is the story
of life. It won’t be a great many years be-
fore you will be telling it to your own little
gi-rl, and, perhaps—under this very same tree.
“My goodness,” laughed Marjorie May’s
mother, taking her daughter’s hands within
her own, “and she will be calling me grand-
ma !”
“But,” said Marjorie May, her eyes twink-
ling, “as far as tennis is concerned, you
aren’t a grandma by any means. Do you re-
member the score when we stopped playing
yesterday afternoon?”
“Four —three.” replied her mother.
“Yes —and in your favour.” said Marjorie
May. “Come on. let’s get the rackets and
I'll try to beat you.”
And off they went, arm in arm —peace


shining in the mother’s eye—love and confi-
dence in the eyes of her daughter.
* * * * *
When f was a girl, it was no wonder that
menstruation days were annoying. We didn’t
have Kotex then, and we didn’t have the nar-
row. invisible Kotex belts.
But since then I have personally used
nearly every kind of sanitary pad. You may
think they look alike, but when you take a
Kotex napkin apart and compare it with other
kinds, you can readily understand that it is
made to give security and comfort which
others cannot give.
Just let me add this. I suppose I’m like
other women in that I want to save pennies.
But I am not tempted to try other brands of
sanitary napkins because Kotex satisfies my
needs so fully. I know Kotex is always a step
ahead in providing exactly what we women
want. And it’s too important a need with
Marjorie May and me to take a chance.
A sanitary napkin is not KOTEX unless the box
reads KOTEX —and unless the name KOTEX
appears on each pad.
12


6«2
yv fMt/
3 1508
00226108


t
