

MARK TWAIN
VIVISECTION
Used by permission of the Author
Do not destroy after reading,
Please pass on to your friends
British Union for Abolition of Vivisection
Office of Melbourne Branch:
Room 11, First Floor, Elizabeth House
Melbourne, Cl
ESSENDON GAZETTE PRINT


I believe I am not interested to know whether
vivisection produces results that are profitable to
the human race or doesn’t.
To know that the results are profitable to
the race would not remove my hostility to it. The
pain which it inflicts upon unconsenting animals
is the basis of my enmity toward it, and it is to
me sufficient justification of the enmity without
looking further.
It is so distinctly a matter of feeling with
me, and is so strong and so deeply rooted in my
make and constitution, that I am sure T could
not see even a vivisector vivisected with anything
more than a sort of qualified satisfaction.
I do not say I should not go and look on:
I only mean that I should almost surely fail to
get out of it the degree of contentment which
it ought, of course, to be expected to furnish.
I find some very impressive paragraphs in
a paper which was read before the National
Individualists’ Club (1898) by a medical man. I
have read and re-read these paragraphs, with
always augmenting astonishment, and have tried
to understand why it should be considered a kind
of credit and a handsome thing to belong to a
human race that has vivisectors in it.
And I have also tried to imagine what would
become of the race if it had to be saved by my
practising vivisection on the French plan. Let
me quote:
“Vivisectors possess a drug called curare,
which, given to an animal, effectually pre-
vents any struggle or cry. A horrible feature


of curare is that it has no anaesthetic effect, but
on the contrary, it intensifies the sensibility to
pain. The animal is perfectly conscious, suffers
doubly, and can make no sign.
“Claude Bernard, the notorious French
vivisector, thus describes the effect of curare:
‘The apparent corpse before us hears and dis-
tinguishes all that is done. In the motionless
body, behind that glazing eye, sensitiveness and
intelligence persist in their entirety. The appar-
ent insensibility it produces is accompanied by the
most atrocious suffering the mind of man can
conceive.’
“There is unfortunately abundant evidence
that innumerable experiments of the following
character have been performed on sensitive ani-
mals. They have been boiled, baked, scalded,
burnt with turpentine, frozen, cauterized; they
have been partly drowned and brought back to
consciousness, to have the process repeated; they
have been cut open and mangled in every part of
the body, and have been kept alive in a mutilated
state for experiments lasting days or weeks.
“If I wished, I could pile up mountains of
evidence, to be found in the publications of
physiologists and in the report of the Royal
Commission.
“Here are some by Dr. Drasch in 1889 (Du
Boise Reymonds ‘Archives’) : The frogs, curarised
or not, are prepared in the following manner:
The animal is placed on its back on a piece of
cork fastened by a needle through the end of the
nose, the lower jaw drawn back and also fastened
with pins.


“ ‘Then the mucous membrane is cut away in
a circular form, and the right eyeball, which
protrudes into the back of the throat, is seized
and the copiously bleeding vessels are tied.
“ ‘Next a tent hook is introduced into the
cavity of the eye, drawing out the muscles and
optic nerves, which are also secured by a ligature.
“ ‘The eyeball is then split with a needle near
the point where the optic nerve enters, a circular
piece cut away from the sclerotic, and the
crystalline lens, etc., removed from the eyeball.
I may remark that my experiments lasted a whole
year, and I have therefore tried frogs at all
seasons. ’
“He calmly gave directions for keeping the
animals still. If the frog is not curarised the
sciatic and cural nerves are cut through.
“Prof. Brucke says: ‘The first sign that the
trigeminus is divided is a loud, piercing shriek
from the animal. Rabbits, we know, are not sen-
sitive, but in this operation they invariably send
forth a prolonged shriek.
“In Pfluger’s ‘Archives,’ vol. 2, p. 234, are
accounts of similar experiments on curarised cats,
a large number of them having the nerves cut,
dissected out, and stimulated, the spine opened,
spinal marrow cut, etc.”
I could quote still more shameful vivisection
records from this paper, but I lack the stomach
for it.
MARK TWAIN.
Courtesy New England Anti-Vivisection Society.
