

GURNEY SLADE


? i.f


.
? ?




MARLING RANGES






A track which a mountain goat might have shaken
bis head at (p. 279).


MAR LI NG
RANGE S
(by
GURNEY SLADE
illustrated by
W H HOLLOWAY
Thomas nelson and sons ltd.
LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK.




84978
VIAY 195/
CONTENTS
I. Ferry Ahoy 1 g
11. Ax Gable House ig
HI. The ? Laurette?s ? New Hand . . 30
IV. En Route 45
V. ? Jack-in-the-box " 58
VI. Captain Walters-Meete ... 70
VII. Express for Kalgoorlie ... 84
VIII. The Bird
IX. A Cab Drive 10 6
X. At Koggalunga
XI. Poor Hard-working Men . . . 133
XII. Malaria?and its Consequences . . 145
XIII. The Acquisition of the " Golden
Hind ? 157
XIV. On the Road
XV. The Captain bows low .... 178
XVI. A Discourse on Love . . . .188
XVII. The Picking of a Bone .. . .197
XVIII. The Wedding
XIX. A Serenade
XX. New Hats 228
vil


XXL A Contract at Markup .... 242
XXII. The Heir of Thorndene . . . 255
XXIII. En Route to the Marlings . . .263
XXIV. Mount Cruet 274
XXV. Roy makes a Decision .... 283


MARLIOmS a
CHAPTER I
FERRY AHOY !
ROUND the point from Lara showed a
feather of smoke, and then a large steam
yacht swung slowly into view, steering a west-
erly course. The sun shone upon her gleam-
ing white sides and polished brasswork.
? And that,? said old Tom Humphreys, ? is
something like a yacht.? His companion, an
athletic boy of eighteen, agreed.
? She?s like a young liner, Tom.?
? A very young liner,? said the old man.
? She ain?t more?n eight hundred ton. But
that?s big for a yacht. You could go round
the world in her, Mr. Roy, without spilling too
much soup.?
The two were standing on the jetty at Gat-
mouth in South Devon. Before them stretched
the beautiful Gatmouth Harbour, known then,
9


as now, as one of the most idyllic spots in
England. The grey little town rose at their
backs, terrace upon terrace of cottages of quaint
design, with the tower of the ancient church
dominating all. At the entrance of the harbour
stood the two great bluffs of Lara and Gorle,
green and glowing inland, but showing fronts
of sheer white headland to the sea.
Roy Lavington perched himself easily on the
railing of the jetty, and stared at the yacht.
? Wonder where she?s off to, Tom ? ?
? Down to the Reveera, I reckon. They
anchor ?em there, you know, and then go
ashore and sleep in a hotel. Seems a sinful
waste of money ?like paying for your board
and lodging twice over. But there, what does
it matter to people like them ? Her owner
must be a millionaire, and it don?t matter to
him what he spends.?
? Hullo, she?s going to put in. She?s hoist-
ing a flag.?
? Wants a pilot. There?s a fiver for Jimmy
Cole. He ain?t wasting much time, either.?
Down the steep stone stairs leading from the
High Street a bearded mahogany-faced man
in sea-boots came hurrying.
? Wish I was a pilot, Jimmy,? grinned
Tom.
? Wish I wasn?t,? said Jimmy, climbing into
his boat, and hoisting a brown patched sail.


FERRY AHOY I
? There ain?t enough of these yachts to go
round.?
Tom?s services as ferryman were now re-
quisitioned by some people bound for Port-
combe, the village on the opposite side, and when
he returned the yacht had successfully nego-
tiated the tricky parts of the estuary, and was
lying at anchor off Gatmouth. Tom brought
his boat alongside the jetty, and ascended the
green slippery steps.
? She?s w r orth looking at,? he remarked to
Roy, who was still perched on the railings.
? It was a nartist who designed her, I reckon.
Beam enough for any sea, but it don?t hit you
in the eye. Lifting at the bow like a dainty
lady. And masts ? ?he stepped back a pace,
and half-closed one eye?? just right ?not too
rakish, and not too much like a Hull tramp. I
was talking to a man just now who?d been
reading about her in the paper. She?s been
chartered by Sir John Stanford, and he?s going
to take her to Australia and New Zealand and
the Pacific, So I takes back all I said about the
Reveera. Must be a bit of a seaman, this
Sir John Stanford. . . . Stopping on the jetty
for a bit, Mr. Roy ? ?
? I don?t know. Why ? ?
? Well, that last lot I took over was a big
cargo ?two fat men, three fat women, one very
fat, three fat babies, and a dog that weighed as


much as the three fat babies put together. I
ought to have charged for that dog, but I
couldn?t bring myself to do it. He come and
planked himself down alongside me, and tried
licking my chin. You can?t charge for a dog
that does that. But it?s given me a thirst, that
boatload has, and only cider?ll quench it.
If I thought you was staying on the jetty, so
that you could tell any one that came that
I?ve gone for a new oar, I?d nip down to the
? Brigantines ? and get rid of that thirst right
away.?
? All right, Tom. I?m in no hurry. I?ll
wait here and tell people about the oar.?
Tom departed at once for that haven of Gat-
mouth mariners and longshoremen, the ? Two
Brigantines,? a low-browed little hostelry at the
end of the High Street, where the good rough
cider of Devon was served in glasses of a capa-
city seldom seen outside the ? Shire of the Sea
Kings.?
On the yacht a section of the crew were busy
with one of the davits. But something seemed
to have gone wrong : the dinghy?s nose stuck
high into the air, and refused to budge.
? Jammed,? said Roy, watching the operation.
? You?ll have to try one of the others.? The
yacht, he noticed, carried two launches, two
cutters, and a gig. But apparently it was not
the owner?s pleasure to lower one of the other


boats. Instead, an officer leant over the yacht?s
rail and hailed Gatmouth.
? Ferry ahoy ! ? he shouted.
But there was no response from the sleepy
little town. It was late March, and the boat-
men who thrived on nautically inclined visitors
in the summer months were engaged now on
other occupations, and most of their boats were
high and dry, covered with tarpaulins. The
few loungers who heard the summons took it
for granted that Tom Humphreys would attend
to the needs of the people on the yacht.
?Hi, ferry ahoy! ? came the call again,
peremptorily this time. ? Buck up. We?re in
a hurry.?
Roy decided to have a mild joke. Waving
his hand to the yacht, he darted down the steps
and got into the ferry. He knew that Tom
kept a spare cap and jersey in the locker. It
was the work of a few seconds to don these and
cram his own coat and hat into the receptacle.
A dab at his face with an oily rag completed his
disguise. These operations were hidden from
the yacht by the bulk of the jetty.
? He?s coming, sir,? said the officer who had
sent the hail.
?So I see,? said Sir John Stanford. He was
a big man of about fifty, clean shaven, close
lipped, and dry of speech. But his name was
uttered w r ith profound respect in many circles,


and his reputation in the House was that of
straight speaking and straight dealing. A long
spell of Parliamentary work had necessitated
a complete change and rest. Hence the hiring
of the yacht Laurette.
? So I see,? repeated Sir John, looking with
a puzzled expression at the advancing boat.
? And tell me, Mr. Severs, did you ever see a
ferryman row like that before ? ?
? Come to think of it, sir, I never have,?
the officer admitted.
? He?s handling that old tub like a skiff,?
said Sir John. ? Here, Adela,? he turned to
his wife, who had approached with a tall dis-
tinguished-looking man in a navy blue ulster.
? Come and see the Gatmouth ferryman row.?
But Lady Adela was already regarding the
boat attentively. She was a bright-faced,
gracious woman, and had forsaken without a
murmur her luxurious house in Mayfair and
the delights of Farley Park, their Sussex seat,
to accompany Sir John in his quest of health.
? That man is from one of the rowing schools,?
she said quietly. ? What do you think, Hec-
tor ? ?
Sir Hector Maling nodded emphatically.
Most decidedly. But what?s he doing in
Gatmouth?in that cap ? It might have been
white once, but it was before he was born.
And that jersey came out of a slop-chest.?


? He?s coming, sir.?
? I want to see his face,? said Lady Adela.
? Heavens ! ? she whispered, as Roy shot the
boat alongside, and looked up smilingly at the
group. ? He?s only a boy?eighteen at the
outside. I thought it might have been an
Oxford man come down in the world. But this
boy can scarcely have left school. And look
what he?s done to his face?he?s been smearing
oil on it. He must have done it for a joke.
Let?s keep it up.?
?You want a ferry, sir ? ? Roy asked. His
public school accent broke through his poor
15 r


attempt to imitate the vernacular, and Lady
Adela nudged her husband.
? Yes,? said Sir John gravely. ? One of our
crew has fallen sick. We want a doctor to
come on board and sec him. Do you know of
one handy ? ?
? There?s Doctor Somers, in the High Street,?
Roy replied, quite ignoring the vernacular this
time. ? I?ll bring him out.? He shortened
an oar and prepared to shove off.
? Wait a minute,? said Sir John. ? I?ll come
with you.?
? And I really must go ashore,? said his wife.
? I?ve one or two things to buy.?
The two descended the ladder, and Roy
assisted them into the boat, and pushed off.
Thinking that it was a case for speed, he con-
centrated on his rowing, and sent the old boat
racing to the jetty. His passengers, sitting in
the stern, watched him, admiring the play of his
powerful muscles.
? And how?s business in Gatmouth ? ? Sir
John asked presently.
? Fairly good, sir. ... Is your man very ill ? ?
? Not dangerously, we think. But we may
have to leave him ashore, either here or in Ply-
mouth. It depends on what the doctor says.?
? Are you going to be a ferryman all your
life ? ? Lady Adela asked suddenly.
? I don?t think so ? ?Roy searched desper-
(2.67B)


FERRY AHOY!
ately for the correct title to apply to a lady
passenger on a ferry. ? Mum,?" he added.
Lady Adela used her handkerchief adroitly,
and Sir John, with a slight quiver of the lips,
looked up at the houses peeping through the
pines and oaks on the western slopes of the
harbour.
? That s a nice place,? he said, pointing to
one \\ ith many gables w T hose lawns ran down
to the cliff edge. ? Who lives there ? ?
? Mr. Worthman,? Roy replied. He did
not think it necessary to add that he also lived
there himself.
? Worthman,? Sir John repeated. ? Not
Langrove Worthman, by any chance ? ?
? Yes, that?s the name.?
Sir John gave an exclamation of disgust, and
turned to his wife. ?So that?s wLere he has.
buried himself.?
? The name seems vaguely familiar,? said
Lady Adela. ? What did he do ? ?
? Company promoting. I had his history
from a friend in the city. That last business
of his was particularly vile. There were thou-
sands of poor homes ruined, and at least three
suicides. Worthman safeguarded himself, of
course, and made a fortune out of it. A black-
guard, if ever there w r as one.?
The boat shot alongside the steps, and Roy
assisted his passengers to disembark
(2.678) ?


? This doctor is in the High Street, you say ? ?
said Sir John.
? Yes, sir. Turn to the right when you get
to the top of the steps. His house is about
twenty yards down on the right-hand side.
There?s a brass plate on the door.? Roy
forced himself to make a response to Lady
Adela?s bright smile, and then busied himself
tying up the boat. His uncle, Langrove
Worthman, a blackguard ? Could it be true ?
He stared unseeingly at the half-crown which
Sir John had left on one of the thwarts.
? I hope he didn?t row too hard,? said Lady
Adela, as she ascended the steps with her
husband. ?He looked rather pale, I thought.?


CHAPTER II
AT GABLE HOUSE
ON learning the nature of Sir John?s visit,
Doctor Somers put on his hat at once, and
accompanied his visitors to the jetty, where the
yacht?s dinghy was lying in waiting, in charge
of one of the crew of the Laurette. Beyond the
dinghy lay the ferryboat, with the half-crown
still lying on the thwart. Lady Adela pointed
to it.
Sir John smiled, and turned to old Tom
Humphreys, w T ho was lounging near.
? Are you the ferryman ? ?
? Yes, sir.? Tom straightened himself, and
took his pipe from his mouth to reply, for Sir
John had a manner.
? Then who w r as that who ferried across just
now from the yacht, and neglected to take his
fare ? ?
? Friend of mine, sir.?
? No name to him ? ?
? Not for the moment, sir.? Tom was not


sure whether Roy wished his identity to be dis-
closed, and he was taking no risks.
? I see,? said Sir John pleasantly. ? Good
day to you.?
? Good day, sir,? said Tom, touching his
cap.
? There was rather a taking-looking lad
acting the ferryman just now,? Sir John ex-
plained to the doctor, while they were rowed
out to the yacht. ? I suppose the ferryman
had gone for a drink. This lad put on an
atrocious cap and jersey, and blacked his face
for the part.?
? There are two or three young men in Gat-
mouth who might have done that for a joke,?
said Doctor Somers. ? Quite a mild joke, Sir
John.?
?Oh, quite. But this boy rowed rather
well, and my wife was rather interested in him.?
? Now, now,? said Lady Adela chidingly.
? You were just as much taken with him as
I was. ?This boy, doctor, was about five
feet ten, with large grey eyes, straight nose, a
good chin, and a sensitive mouth. He might
do equally well as a violinist or a prize-fighter.
. . . Why, that looks like him going up the
road yonder.? She pointed to the low stone
wall which abutted the cliff path leading from
Gatmouth to Gorle Head.
?I?m afraid my eyes are not much good at


this distance,? the doctor apologized. He was
a studious-looking little man. ? I can see
somebody?s head and shoulders above the wall,
but that is all.?
? Try these,? said Sir John, pulling a pair
of binoculars from a locker.
The doctor focused them on the road, and
succeeded in picking up Roy just before that
young gentleman disappeared into the oak woods
of Gatmouth Glade.
? Why, that?s young Roy Lavington ! ? he
exclaimed. ? You?re right, Lady Stanford, he?s
a nice lad ?very popular in the district, though
he?s only been here a couple of months.?
? Lavington,? said Sir John. ? Any relation
to the Wiltshire Lavingtons ? ?
? I believe so. Roy?s father, Major Laving-
ton, was killed in the South African War, and
his wife died soon afterwards. Roy was the
only child, and he is living with an uncle at
present, Mr. Worthman of Gable House.?
Lady Adela darted a startled glance at her
husband, but Sir John?s manner was quite calm
as he inquired,?
? And what sort of a man is this uncle ? ?
Good enough,? said the doctor carelessly.
? Free with his money?gives to all the charities
and clubs ?but not very sociable. He spends
most of his time horse-riding and motoring.?
? And what are Roy?s prospects ? ?


? Quite good. He left Tembourne last
term ?
? I knew it was a rowing school,? said Lady
Adela.
? and he?s going to Oxford, I believe.
The lad?s lucky, for I?ve heard that his father
left very little ?just enough to see him through
his schooldays.?
The boat slid alongside the Laurette, and the
three went on board. The two men went for-
ward to see the sick man, and Lady Adela retired
to her stateroom. A quarter of an hour later
her husband tapped at the door and entered.
? It?s a case of appendicitis,? he told her, ? and
the doctor says w T e?d better put him ashore at
Plymouth. I told him that we were going to
put in there to pick up our own medical man.
... I rather put my foot in it with that lad
Lavington. He evidently doesn?t know his
uncle?s shady history, nor any one else in Gat-
mouth for that matter. The town looks upon
him as a rather desirable rich resident. The lad
must have had a shock.?
? I?ve been thinking about it ever since the
doctor told us,? said Lady Adela. ? I like
that boy. He took it splendidly, and smiled at
us when we left.?
? He?d learn to do that at Tembourne,? said
Sir John musingly. ? It?s a good school. . . .
Sooner or later he?d have to find out, though.?


? But what are his other relations thinking
about ? ? said Lady Adela indignantly. ? There
are heaps of Lavingtons. Surely one of them
could have taken the boy ? ?
? They?ve fish of their ow r n to fry, I expect.
I?ve never run across a rich Lavington yet.
They?re all as poor as church mice. What
amazes me is that this fellow, Worthman, should
have troubled his head about him.? Sir John
shrugged his shoulders. ? Where?s every-
body ? ?
? Dressing,? said his wife. ? You?d better
put on something respectable yourself.?
Meanwhile, all unconscious that he was the
subject of discussion on the yacht, Roy was walk-
ing swiftly up the steep slope on the southern
side of the town. Reaching the top, he flung
himself down on the wooden seat provided by
a thoughtful corporation for the short of wind
and feeble of limb, and gave himself up to pain-
ful reverie.
His uncle a swindler ! Could it be true ?
A picture of Sir John and Lady Stanford rose
in his mind. They did not look the kind of
people to make an accusation of that sort with-
out very good grounds. One thing was certain :
if his uncle?s income was derived from the ruin
of thousands of poor homes, he, Roy, could not
go on living with him. But what could he do ?
and to whom could he apply ? People would


not welcome an impecunious young relative,
he knew. Mr. Worthman, his mother?s step-
brother, was an exception. He had appeared
rather miraculously when the time had come
for Roy to leave school, and the Lavingtons in
Wiltshire and London had been quite content
when they heard that a rich benefactor had come
forward, and that Roy was destined for Oxford.
The boy?s holidays had been mostly spent with
school chums, and none of his relatives had any
great personal interest in him. Roy had been
popular at school, where he had excelled in
most games, and the thought of his future had
not weighed very heavily upon him. In spite
of a slightly-mocking manner which repelled
Roy at times, Mr. Worthman had behaved
generally like a sportsman. He had brought
Roy down to Gatmouth, given him the run
of everything?cars, boats, and horses ?and
treated him like his ow r n son. Life had looked
good to Roy when he had started out that after-
noon on a mackerel fishing expedition to Lara.
But now ! Well, there w r as only one thing to
do. He must go and tackle his uncle, and ask
him if he w r as a blackguard. It was an un-
pleasant duty.
Two of Gatmouth?s octogenarians came
wheezing up the hill, their eyes fixed longingly
on the seat. Roy got up and continued his
walk. Some half-mile farther down the road


a white gate showed, set in pillars of grey
stone. Pushing it open, Roy strode down the
drive to Gable House, whose chimneys, rising
above the pines, were just visible from the
road. It was a big, low, roomy residence,
with historical associations; for centuries before,
the forces of the Parliament had striven to beat
dow r n the resistance of a band of Devon loyalists,
immured in the keep of Gatmouth Castle, wdiose
ruins, like the husk of an old tooth, still stand
on a rocky spit less than a hundred yards from
the shore.
Finding that his uncle had not yet returned
from a motoring trip to Plymouth, Roy bathed
and dressed, and at half-past seven, his relative
still being absent, dined alone.
An hour later, when Roy w r as sitting by the
fire in the hall, Mr. Worthman entered, and
took off his leather driving-coat. He was a tall,
spare man of thirty-eight, fair-haired, with light
blue eyes, and thin lips.
? Two punctures in ten minutes,? he said,
throwing his goggles on to a chair. ? These
Devon roads?? He broke off as he saw Roy?s
expression. ? What?s the matter ? ?
? Oh, there?s something I?ve got to ask you,
uncle. Perhaps you?d rather wait till you?ve
had dinner ? ?
I d prefer to wait, if there?s no desperate
hurry.?


? It will keep for an hour,? Roy said quietly.
Mr. Worthman darted one very keen look at
his nephew, and then went upstairs to remove
the stains of travel. Roy could hear him
whistling as he washed. Presently he came
down, dressed in a dinner suit, and entered the
dining-room, and a couple of servants bustled
to and fro with trays. The meal finished, Mr.
Worthman came out into the hall, puffing an
Egyptian cigarette, and confronted Roy.
? Well, what is it ? ?
? It?s this,? said Roy, looking straight into
his eyes. ? I brought some people off that big
yacht this afternoon, and I heard your name
mentioned as a blackguard and a swindler.?
? Oh.? Mr. Worthman?s lips curled in a
slight sneer. ? And what did you do ? ?smite
the libeller ? ?
? No. He was a man of fifty or so, and looked
a decent sort. I thought I?d better come along
and ask you about it.?
? And what else did this decent sort say ? ?
? He said that you?d ruined thousands of poor
homes, and that at least three people had com-
mitted suicide as a consequence.?
? What is this man?s name ? ? Mr Worthman
asked coolly. ?He seems rather well informed
as to my doings.?
? Sir John Stanford.?
?I?ve heard of him, though I?ve never met


him. Well, Roy, what have I got to do?fight
this Sir John Stanford ? ?
?It isn?t a joke, uncle. I want to hear what
you?ve got to say about it. Is it true ? ?
? And if it were ? ?
? Why, I can?t stay here. You must see
that.?
? You?ll take your car, and go and stay at the
Savoy for a bit while you look round, I sup-
pose ? ? sneered the other. Then he changed
his tone. ? Don?t be a fool, Roy. Listen to
me. I?m a retired business man ?a successful
one. Every successful business man has a litter
of what you call ruined homes around him.?
? I don?t believe that,? said Roy stoutly.
? You?ll realize it all in good time. Take the
Stock Exchange. Men rise there on other
people?s misfortunes.?
? Yes, but they?ve all got a sporting chance.
But if what Sir John Stanford says is true, you
didn?t give these poor people a chance at all.
And you?re living now on their money. That?s
not cricket.?
? Well ? ?Mr. Worthman?s voice was cutting?
? are you in a position to talk about what is
cricket and what isn?t ? I?m aghast at your
threat of leaving this house, for, of course, all
\our poor relations would jump at the chance
of adding you to their responsibilities. You
would be such an asset ?a good knowledge of


cricket and football, appetite exceedingly
healthy, and income a little less than nothing.
The Lavingtons will tumble over themselves
for the privilege of housing you.?
Roy flushed at the sarcasm.
? You don?t deny this accusation of Sir John
Stanford?s, then ? ?
?I?m a successful business man, if that?s
what he meant.?
? I see. Then I can?t stay here, uncle.?
Mr. Worthman frowned as he sensed the
determination in the lad?s voice.
? Don?t be a fool, Roy. What can you do ?
I?ve merely done what thousands of other men
have done ?pillars of society, some of them.
This sense of honour is all very well at school ;
but you?ll have your work cut out, I can tell
you, if you want to carry the Tembourne code
through life. Now listen. I?m rather fond
of you. I?ll tell you that. Stay here, and I?ll
see you through. I?ll give you a decent allow-
ance at Oxford, and see that you have a good
start when you leave.?
Roy shook his head emphatically.
? I?m wasting my breath,? said the other
impatiently. ? You?ll have to stay. I don?t
suppose you have more than a couple of pounds
in your pocket, and ? ?he sneered ?? you owe
that to successful business, you know.?
Roy drew out two sovereigns and a few silver


? I'll send you what I owe.?
coins from his pocket, and laid them on the
table.
? That?s all I have left of your money, uncle.
When I get a job, I?ll send you what I owe.?
He turned and went upstairs.
Mr. Worthman stood for a moment looking
after him. Then he lit another cigarette and
entered the billiard room. Switching on the
lights, he took a cue and began to practise shots.
He missed several very easy ones.


CHAPTER 111
THE ? LAURETTE?S? NEW HAND
ROY sat on his bed, and tried to collect
his thoughts. He had burnt his boats,
and he intended to leave Gable House at once.
But what to do ? And where to go ? He sup-
posed that he would have to go to one of his
Gatmouth friends and beg a lodging for that
night. But he would have to look for work at
once. He had no intention of imposing himself
on his relatives. His window was open, and
the light breeze from the sea, southerly to-night,
with a hint of coming summer, swept into the
room and set his thoughts far afield. If only
he had enough money to pay his passage to
America or Australia! Out there it wouldn?t
matter what kind of work a man did. But
he was penniless. He had laid every penny
he possessed on the table in the hall. Well,
he did not regret doing that. There was
nothing else to do after that last remark of his
uncle?s.


He crossed to the window and looked out.
Below him stretched the estuary, shining softly
in the starlight, with a light flashing from the
dark mass of Lara at the entrance. The sea
breeze stirred his hair, and filled his heart with
a great longing to sail out past Lara?away,
thousands of miles away, to a new land, where
he could do a man?s work and earn a man?s pay.
England, Devonshire, were glorious places if
one had money. But for penniless young
men !
Off Gatmouth gleamed a long row of yellow
points?the lighted portholes of the Laurette.
Roy looked at them. Lucky people on the
yacht, he thought. They were going to sail
out past Lara. If only? Then he straightened
suddenly as the germ of an idea struck him?
the sick man !
With almost feverish speed he tore off his
dinner suit and donned some of his oldest
garments. Then, flinging a few personal be-
longings into a bag, he ran quickly downstairs
and out of the front door.
Mr. Worthman, still bending over the billiard
table, heard the bang of the door, and paused
in his shot. ? The boy?s gone,? he muttered.
Well, what of it ? ? Then he aimed at the
red, and missed by an inch?the worst miss
that had ever occurred on that table. ? Well,
I?m hanged! ? he said, between set teeth, and


putting up his cue, he went into the hall. The
little pile of money w r as still lying on the table.
Obeying a sudden impulse, Mr. Worthman
picked it up and flung it into the fireplace.
And suddenly the big house seemed very
lonely.
Tom Humphreys, at work in his Gatmouth
cottage on the construction of a faithful model
of an old English three-decker, the cherished
hobby of his spare hours, was interrupted by
his wife, who had answered an imperative knock
at the door.
? Here?s young Mr. Roy Lavington to see
you, Tom. Says he won?t come in.?
Tom put down his chisel, and with an injunc-
tion to his youngest son not to touch, went to
the door, and opened his eyes as he saw Roy?s
get up.
? What is it, Mr. Roy ?mackerel ? ?
?No, Tom, nothing like that. I want you
to run me out to the big yacht. Will you do
it??
?To be sure,? said Tom heartily. He took
his cap from a peg in the passage, and called out
to his wife, ? Shan?t be long, mother.?
? I?ll tell you what I?m after,? said Roy, as
they descended the steep slope to the High
Street. ? I?m going to try and get a job on the
yacht.?
?Eh ? Eh ? Say that again, Mr. Roy.?


? I?m serious, Tom. But that?s as much as
I am at liberty to tell you.?
?Me ?ead?s mazed,? said the ferryman
simply, ? clean mazed. But come on. I?ll ask
no questions.?
? There?s one thing you can do for me,?
Roy said, as they got into the boat.
? It?s done, I reckon.?
? I?d like to swap sweaters with you, and caps
too, if you don?t mind. I don?t mean the ones
you?ve got on, but your spare ones in the locker.
Sir John saw me in those this afternoon, and
I think they?re more suitable for a deck-hand.?
? Take ?em, Mr. Roy. I?m getting the best
of the bargain, but I see you don?t want no
argyment.?
Tom produced the garments, and pushed off.
By the time Roy had effected the change they
were close up to the yacht, and a voice hailed
them, ?
? What boat?s that ? ?
? Gatmouth ferry,? Roy replied. ? I want
to see Sir John Stanford.?
Roy?s accent was at variance with his dress,
and the seaman on the Laurette invited him
to come on board, and a passing steward was
commissioned to take the message to Sir John.
? Gentleman to see me ? ? said Sir John,
engaged at bridge with his guests in the saloon.
? Where is he ? ?
(2.678) 3


?On deck, sir,? replied the steward. ? I
thought he?d prefer to stay on deck, sir.?
? Why ? ?
? He?s a young gentleman, sir, in a jersey and
a very old cap. Looks as if he might have been
fishing.?
? Young Lavington,? said Lady Adela. The
guests ?there were five in the saloon ?put
down their cards, and looked their interest.
Roy had been the subject of conversation at
dinner.
? I?ll go and see,? said Sir John. He went
on deck, and found Roy standing by the rail,
while the ferryboat nudged gently against the
yacht?s side.
? Good evening,? said Sir John. ? What can
I do for you ? ?
Roy plunged at once.
? I want to get to Australia, sir, and I thought
there might be a chance of working my passage
out on your yacht if you are leaving your sick
man behind.?
? I see,? said Sir John, concealing his sur-
prise. ? Are you tired of the ferry ? ?
?I?m not the regular ferryman, sir. I just
took that on while Tom Humphreys was away
this afternoon.?
? Have you had any sea experience ? ?
?I?m afraid not. But I can manage small
boats, and I?m not likely to be seasick. I?d


be thankful for any job you could give
? _ yy
me.
? You?d be prepared to work in the stokehold
or act as steward if necessary ? ?
? I?d jump at the chance, sir.? Roy?s voice
was intensely earnest. But inwardly he hoped
it would be the stokehold.
? Well, I?m not in the habit of engaging hands
myself. Just wait here a minute. You can
send your boat back. We?ll put you ashore if
necessary.? Sir John turned and went below,
and Roy leant over the rail and hailed the ferry-
boat.
? You can go back, Tom.?
? You?re taken on, then ? ?
? I?m not sure yet, but I think I?ve a chance.?
Roy descended a few steps of the ladder, and
shook hands with his friend. ? Good-bye,
Tom, in case. And thanks very much for
bringing me out.?
? I?m still clean mazed,? said Tom, holding
Roy?s hand for some seconds in his hardened
paw. ? And I?m more?n a bit sorry. I?d
take it kind if you?d write me a card some odd
time, Mr. Roy.?
? I will,? Roy promised, and waved a fare-
well as the old boatman disappeared in the
darkness.
Lady Adela and her guests looked up ex-
pectantly when Sir John entered.


? It?s young Lavington, right enough,? he
said. ? Wants to work his passage out to
Australia on the Laurette .?
Lady Adela looked shocked
? He?s quarrelled with his uncle,? she ex-
claimed.
? Looks like it.? Sir John looked at his
guests. ? Any suggestions ? ?
? I don?t think you want any. It seems to
me that Sir John Stanford has made up his
mind already what to do.? The speaker,
Professor Campbell, a grand old Scotsman,
who intended combining business with pleasure
by making a study of the flora of the Pacific
islands, twinkled at his host.
? You?re right, professor, I have. But all
the same I should like to hear my guests? views.
?What would you suggest, Susan ? ?
Lady Pavey, the widow of an Australian
State governor, with five years? residence in
the Antipodes to her credit, looked thoughtful.
? I should be inclined to let him come,? she
said at last. ?I think Australia is better than
Oxford for a boy like that.?
? Of course he must come,? said Lady Adela.
? And he must have the spare state-room.
We are the cause of his quarrelling with his only
rich relative. We must make it up to him.?
? But would that be good for the lad ? ?
queried the professor.


? I think not,? said General Redshaw, a
grizzled veteran, who had gained a bar to his
D.S.O. in South Africa. ? And if the boy is
anything like his father, who was with us at
Chitral, he wouldn?t like it, either.?
? And what says the diplomat ? ? asked Sir
John.
Sir Hector Maling smiled.
?If this w r ere my yacht, I should do as he
asks, and let him work his passage. From what
you tell me of his uncle, it wouldn?t be fair
on the boy to send him back to him. Mean-
while, you wdll have your eye on the boy, and
you?ve plenty of time between here and Aus-
tralia to make further plans if you wish to.?
Sir John nodded, and rang the bell.
? My compliments to Captain Rawley,? he
said to the steward, ? and I should like to see
him for a few moments.?
Captain Rawley, a spruce, seamanly-looking
man of forty, entered the saloon, cap in hand,
and bowed to the company.
? Captain,? said Sir John, ? there?s a lad on
deck at the present moment. He wants to w-ork
his passage to Australia on this boat. If agree-
able to you, 'we?ll ship him.?
? Certainly, sir.?
?As a deck-hand, captain. We should like
you to treat him as such. Ostensibly we are
not friends of his.?


? I see, sir. Shall I go up and interview
him ? ?
? If you please, captain.?
So it was Captain Rawley, brusque and
business-like, that Roy saw next.
?Well, my lad, you want to come with us
as far as Australia, I hear. You?re willing to
make yourself generally useful ? ?
?I?m willing to tackle anything at all,? Roy
replied, with a deep feeling of thankfulness.
? Got your gear here ? Or do you want to
go ashore again ? ?
? I?ve everything here, sir.?
? Good. WVII sign you on in Plymouth.?
Captain Rawley blew his whistle, and a seaman
approached.
?Take this man to the fo?c?sle, and give him
Tarbutt?s berth.?
? Aye, aye, sir.? The man beckoned to
Roy, and the two went forward and descended
six feet of perpendicular iron ladder into the
fo?c?sle.
Half a dozen men were lying in the narrow
bunks, five of them apparently asleep. The
other, a stocky, bull-necked seaman, was read-
ing by the light of a hurricane lamp suspended
over the rough unpolished table.
? That?s Tarbutt?s berth,? said Roy?s guide,
pointing to an unoccupied bunk. ? You can
crawl in there. ?Danny,? this to the man with


the book, ? here?s a new hand.? He turned and
went on deck again.
? Gum ! ? said Danny, staring at Roy, and
letting fall his paper-back novel. ? Did ?e say
you was a new ?and ? ?
? He did.? Roy flung his bag into the bunk.
? Gum ! ? said Danny again.
? That?s two gums,? said Roy, smiling.
? I?m going to make it three,? said Danny,
and he did, with such emphasis that one of the
other men stirred uneasily, and inquired what
all the swearing was about.
? Can?t you let a man sleep ? ? he inquired
resentfully, but without opening his eyes.
? Can?t you read your blinking books quieter,
and not shout the fo?c?sle down every time the
villin cuts off the girl?s ?ead ? ?
? It wasn?t the book, Albert,? said Danny.
? We?ve got a new ?and ?ere.?
Albert opened sleepy eyes, and then gaped
himself wide awake as he saw Roy standing
by the table.
? Great ships ! ? he ejaculated.
? You seem surprised,? said Roy. ? I sup-
pose you ship new hands occasionally ? ?
? We do, young feller,? said Albert solemnly.
? But we don?t ship ?em like you.?
The conversation was irritating the rest of
the fo?c?sle, and strange sea-phrases began to
issue from the bunks.


? Well, I know I?m yapping,? said Albert ;
?and I?ve got something to yap about. The
Laurette's got a new ?and. I don?t know ?is
name.?
? Roy Lavington.?
Four more pairs of eyes regarded Roy with
astonishment. It is difficult for an ex-captain
of games of a big public school to assume at a
moment?s notice the outward characteristics of
a deck-hand. And Roy had forgotten to change
his socks ; they gleamed, silken and expensive,
in the lamplight. His flannel trousers, too,
though old, were of superfine quality, and well
cut ; and Tom Humphrey?s blue jersey merely
served to accentuate his slim, powerful build
and graceful carriage.
Danny, looking perturbed, sat up in his
bunk
? Don?t do it, Roy,? he said seriously.
? Don?t do what ? ? Roy asked.
? Don?t you ship on ?ere before the mast. Go
back and tell your father you?re sorry. Go an?
eat a bit of ?umble pie. It won?t ?urt yer.?
? But why should I eat humble pie ? ? Roy
was rather enjoying the conversation.
? Tell ?im you?re sorry you done what you
did?calling ?im names, or spending all that
money in London, or falling in love with that
girl in Cambridge. Tell ?im you?ll take it all
back.?


A murmur of approval came from the bunks,
and Albert chipped in, ?
? Danny?s right, young feller. Don?t you
throw away no chances.?
? I?ve seen too much of it in these,? said
Danny, lifting his pillow, and displaying a
litter of dog-eared paper-backs. ?If you ship
with us, you might come out all right in the
end, but the things you?ll ?ave to go through
first will turn your ?air grey.?
? But it?s impossible for me to do what you
say,? said Roy.
? Too much pride, I know,? said Danny,
shaking his head. ? But if you ?old out you?ll
?ave to eat ?caps of bad grub before you walk
into your mansion again.?
? But I haven?t a father.?
?No father ? You ain?t been cutting up
rough with your mother ? Don?t tell me
that.?
?My mother died many years ago. I
shouldn?t have dreamt of cutting up rough
with her, or with my father either.?
? That?s good,? said Danny, with much relief
in his voice. ? That?s the way I likes to ?ear
you talk. It?s the other bloke, then, that you?ve
come up against ? ?
? What other bloke ? ? Roy was pleased to
think that he was to have Danny for a ship-
mate.


? I can?t think of ?is name. ?George,? he
appealed to a large bovine seaman, ? you read
the Splash of Mayfair . What did they call
that bloke what minded the young sprig?s money
till he was twenty-one ? ?
? The guardian, you mean,? said George.
? Sir Christopher Bowater ?is name was.?
? That?s ?im, the guardian. Now, Roy, you
cut off ?ome and tell your guardian you won?t
cut no more capers. ?E?s got the brass, mind ;
and some of these ?ere guardians ain?t too careful
what they does with it if they get a chance.
I?ve come acrost two like that. A lawyer feller
in the Heir of the Allenfords was one. ?E spent
a good ?arf of the ?ero?s quids before ?e got
jugged. And there was Captain Veseldene in
Complexions and Cream , a reg?lar shark of a man,
in spite of ?is soft ways and waxed moustache.
Now ?
? One moment,? said Roy. ? Let me explain
my position. I haven?t a guardian, and nobody
is minding any money for me. Most of my
relations are quite poor, and rather than be a
burden on them, I?m going to work my passage
to Australia, where I shall probably get a job
on a farm.?
The men exchanged glances, and Danny
voiced the general thought.
? I reckon what seems poor to you don?t
seem poor to the likes of us. I ?old to what I


say. You take my advice. ?Op back and offer
to manage one of your poor relations? estates.
It ain?t a bad job : you ride round the country
on a blood ?orse and see that the fences are all
right. And sooner or later you?ll meet a heiress.
You can laugh, but you?ll meet ?er all right.
And then one of your poor relations will up
and die, and leave you all the brass. And then
there won?t be nothing to prevent a speedy?
a speedy ?
? Marriage,? said one of the men help-
fully.
? No, there?s a better name for it than that.
Speedy union, that?s it. Now these speedy
unions are points better than scrubbing decks,
Roy, take my word.?
? I daresay. But I?m going to give the decks
a trial, all the same.?
? Nothing we can say is going to make no
difference to you ? ?
?Not in that line, I?m afraid. I?ve quite
settled to go to Australia.?
? Well, we?ve done our best for ?im, mates.?
Danny looked round the bunks. ? But now,
as ?e?s quite made up ?is mind to come along,
I don?t know that I?m altogether sorry.?
? None of us ain?t sorry,? said George.
? You?ll do your cut of work, I reckon,
Roy ? ?
? You?ll find I?ll do my share. I?m new at


the game, of course, and I?ll be grateful for any
tips you can give me.?
? Then ?ere?s tip Number One,? said Danny.
? Turn in and ?ave a good snooze. It?ll be the
last long ?un you?ll get for more?n a considerable
time.?


CHAPTER IV
EN ROUTE
AT six o?clock the next morning the Laurette
l steamed slowly out of Gatmouth Harbour.
Professor Campbell was the only passenger
on deck, where Roy and two or three others
were busy with mops and buckets. He reported
on the new hand at breakfast.
\ oung Lavington shapes well,? he remarked.
? I was watching him as we passed his uncle?s
house. He gave one long look at it, and a longer
one at the English Channel, and then bang went
his mop into the bucket, and I heard him sing
a snatch of a song. We are an island race.
It was Hugo, I think, who said that the sea
and the Englishman are synonymous terms.?
? All the same, it must be a great upheaval
for him, said Lady Adela. ? I wish we could
send him in some poached eggs for his break-
fast.?
Two poached eggs for deck-hand Lavington
would cause an upheaval in the fo?c?sle,? said
the professor.


? But are you really going to let him stay in
there for the whole voyage ? ? Lady Adela
appealed to her husband.
? Certainly I am, Adela ; and very likely
after the voyage too. He shall go into the
fo?c?sle of Australia. After all, thousands of
young men leave England every year under no
worse conditions.?
? The lad sang as we went over the bar,? said
the general. ? I look upon that as a very good
sign.?
? Every one should emigrate at least once in
a lifetime,? said Sir Hector. ?Itis an invalu-
able experience.?
? You are hard, rough, unsympathetic men,?
said Lady Adela.
Plymouth was reached that morning, and
there they picked up the remaining guest,
Doctor Crane, a middle-aged practitioner, who
had given up his house in Harley Street three
years before to lead the life of a West Country
squire. The sick man was taken ashore, and
arrangements made for his comfort during
convalescence. Most of the passengers took
the opportunity to make a few last purchases
at the Plymouth shops, and it was not till five
in the afternoon that the Laurette resumed her
voyage.
For the first few days Roy found the short
watches rather irksome. It seemed to him that


? He gave one long look at his uncle?s house."
no sooner had he got to sleep than he was
bidden to ? show a leg ? ; but at the end of a
week he had settled down to the routine, and
began to enjoy the life. The Laurette was a


good sea-boat. Built of steel, and of about
eight hundred tons burthen, she carried three
deck officers, two engineers, a bo?sun, a car-
penter, eight deck-hands, six firemen, and four
stewards. The culinary arrangements were in
charge of a cook and his mate. Roy?s work,
under the supervision of the bo?sun, consisted
of washing and scrubbing the decks, polishing
brass, attending to the boat falls, and keeping
the quarters clean. The lad?s absence of
? side,? and his extreme willingness to plunge
his hands into the tar-pot, were soon noted by
crew and passengers alike ; and forward he
began to be regarded as an acquisition, for
he possessed a good voice, and was always
ready to give a song to the accompaniment of
George?s mouth-organ. Danny, however, was
his special crony. Nothing pleased that sea-
man more than to get Roy up in the bows for a
quiet chat about what he called ? ?igh life.?
? This ?ere?s a chance for me, Roy,? he said
one day as, Gibraltar passed, the Laurette
ploughed her way through the blue Mediter-
ranean. ? I?ve read a terrible lot about gentry,
but I ain?t never mixed with them before.
None of them ain?t ever rolled fags for me and
called me Danny in the way you do. Now I
like gentry. There ain?t nothing of the socialist
about me.?
? I?m quite sure there isn?t, Danny.?


? Not the faintest atom, there ain?t. What
I says is: If a man?s born ?igh and likes ?is
pals to be ?igh, well, that?s ?is business. There
ain?t no need to go round rantin? at them.
Most low men likes their pals low, and the ?igh
ones don?t interfere with them. Not that a
low man can?t work ?is way in with the nobs if
?e?s got eddication. I read a book once about
one of that sort ?quite a poor young chap ?e
was, but ?e went to night school and worked
?imself up, and in the end you couldn?t tell ?im
from one of the upper ten. The earl give ?im
?is favourite daughter in the last chapter but
one.?
? Why don?t you go to night school, and have
a try for an earl?s daughter, Danny ? ?
? Now ?oo are you funning, Roy ? I could
put in twenty years at that sort of work and
never be anything more than I am now. I
ain?t got the ?ead for it, nor the body either.
I can?t walk without rolling to save my life.
And rolling ain?t no good in a ball-room.
You?d ?ave the leddies putting up their ?what
do you call them spectacles on little sticks ? ?
? Lorgnettes.?
? That?s it. You?d ?ave them shoving them
up, and they?d say to one another, ? Go?s that
bloke ? ? ?
Roy leant back against a coil of rope and
laughed till his sides ached.
(2,678) i


? Ay, you can laugh,? said Danny, grinning,
however, himself; ?but you can?t deny that
they?d do it.?
At Malta, where the Laurette stopped for a
day, Danny?s respect for Roy?s ? eddication ?
increased. The two had gone ashore together,
and Roy, with the aid of a guide-book, was
locating the different buildings of historical
importance.
? That?s where the English auberge was,?
he said, pointing to the Opera House. ?It
seems funny to think that hundreds of years
ago the English knights in armour were living
there.?
? Never ?card anything so funny,? said
Danny. ? What was they doing ?ere ? ?
? It was an Order ?the Knights of St. John.
All the countries of Europe contributed to it.
They were a great power in the Mediterranean,
first at Rhodes and then here. Malta was
besieged by forty thousand Turks, and the
garrison of nine thousand knights held it,
though they were reduced to six hundred.?
? Now listen to that,? said Danny admiringly.
? The times I?ve been in and out Valetta and
never knowed that. Well, well, sometimes we
live and learn, and sometimes we live and don?t
learn. I?ll never come ?ere again, though,
without thinking of them knights. I read a
book about a knight once, Sir Wilbert Podrin-


The two had gone ashore together.
gay. ?E went about looking for trouble, with
?is girl?s ?an?kerchief stuck in ?is ?elmet. One
day, riding along in France, ?e meets another
knight on a black ?orse, and stops ?im. ? This
?ere ?an?kerchief was give me by the finest leddy
in Christendom,? ?e says to the other chap.
* ?Ave you got anything to say to that ? ? The


other chap lugs out a bracelet. ? Lady Ursula
give me this,? ?e says. 4 I?ve no doubt your
young leddy ?as got a few points, but she don?t
come within a mile of the Lady Ursula.?
That done it. Sir Wilbert shuts up ?is ?elmet
with a bang, and wipes at the other chap with
?is sword. The black ?orse rears and ?is rider
wipes at Sir Wilbert wdth ?is mace, and away they
go ?ammer and tongs, and they?d ?ave done for
one another if a nun ?adn?t come out of a convent
close by and told ?em to drop it. Sir Wilbert?s
girl went into that convent afterwards, and Sir
Wilbert came riding up waving a permit from
the king, and got ?er out.?
? Did she marry him, Danny ? ?
? I think so, though the book didn?t exactly
say. But in the last page they were sitting
together in a wood, with a lot of antelopes
prowling round, and she was ?aving a drink out
of ?is ?elmet.?
? It sounds rather an exciting book, Danny.?
? Aye, it was that.? Danny looked round
at the fortifications. 4 ? I?m glad I read it.
It makes a man get the ?ang of this place
better. . . . Let?s come and get a drink. I
know a place where there ain?t too many
goats.?
Port Said was reached in due course, and
there the yacht?s bunkers were replenished by
a long string of native women. The passengers


kept clear of this operation, departing en bloc
for the principal hotel. After tea Roy gladly
assented to Danny?s suggestion for a turn on
shore.
? Any knights in this place ? ? Danny asked,
as they walked up the street leading from the
quay.
?No ; Port Said isn?t an historical town. It
sprang into being with the Suez Canal.?
? Right. Then I?ll have to show round.
I know this town like a piece of old cheese.
Now don?t go buying no watches nor nothing.
I?ve bought three ?ere at different times, and
they all stopped before I?d been a day at sea.?
There was need of this caution, for they were
pestered at every few steps by vendors of
watches, rings, parrots, lace, tortoises, amber
beads, and gewgaws of every description. But
when they reached the main street they were
less incommoded, and they sauntered along,
gazing at the shops and cates, and the strange
hotch-potch of nationalities which make up
the population of ? the wickedest town on
earth.? For an hour they strolled idly, and
then Roy suggested that they should enter a
cafe and listen to the music. He halted by
the door of one as he spoke. But Danny shook
his head.
? It ain?t a seaman?s place, Roy. Look at
the people in there ?all dressed up to the nines.


If you want some music we could go down to
the ? Jack-in-the-box.? ?
? Where?s that ? ?
?In the native quarter. It?s a bit rough,
and I don?t know that you?d feel at ?ome there.
Most of the men off the ships look in at the
? Jack-in-the-box ? when they?re on shore. It?s
a seaman?s place, and I?ve never seen no clurks
there.?
? I think I?d like to have a look at the * Jack-
in-the-box,? Danny.?
? Come on, then. We?ll go along the front.
It ain?t so smelly there.?
They walked down the main street again,
and reaching the breakwater, turned to the west
along a good road flanked with white houses.
Fifty yards to their right was the sea, flecked
with the lights of steamers. After twenty
minutes? walking the architecture of the houses
changed, and they found themselves on the
outskirts of a large block of low, unsavoury-
looking dwellings, and there a low rhythmic
drumming challenged the beat of the surf on
the beach. It did not come from one, but from
many houses, and its influence seemed to per-
vade the whole neighbourhood.
? What on earth is it ? ? Roy asked.
? That means we are in the native quarter,?
said Danny. ? All these Eastern places are the
same. Directly it gets night, the natives start


banging on drums and tambourines and tom-
toms ?anything that?s got a skin stretched across
it. They tap them in a way that?s all their own,
and it goes with the sea and the palms and the
?ot nights. Funny, ain?t it ? If a man started
drumming them things in Portsmouth or South-
ampton, ?e?d ?ave the neighbours on to ?im in
no time. But ?ere it?s different.?
Danny led the way through the native quarter,
plunging without hesitation through narrow
lanes and alleyways, and stopping at last in a
small square fringed with palms. In this
square showed the lighted faade of a good-
sized house. A large painted sign w*as sus-
pended over its doorway, depicting a dissipated
Jack Tar springing from a red and yellow
box.
Roy stopped and examined the sign.
? I know what you?re thinking,? said Danny.
? You reckon that seaman couldn?t never get
in that box with the lid down.?
? That?s just what I was thinking. The
picture?s out of all proportion. It?s absurd.?
? The artist what drawed it knew what ?e
was about, though. Seamen come down this
way and see that sign, and they stop to ?ave
a look at it. They get thirsty telling each other
that the box is too small, and then they go in
and ?ave a drink. That?s the way it?s done.?
? Perhaps so, Danny.? Roy, however, was


not convinced that the artist was not an incom-
petent.
Passing through the bare entry, they entered
a long, low, brilliantly lighted room, its walls
adorned with large floral-decked mirrors. It
was crowded with mariners, smoking and
drinking at small tables. The place hummed
like a hive, and the atmosphere was thick with
the fumes of strong tobacco. At first it seemed
as though they could not be accommodated
with seats, but at last Danny espied a settee
in a corner, the only occupant of which was
a huge blond Dane. They pushed their way
through the maze, and sat down.
The Dane, who had evidently had enough
to drink, smiled at them with boyish blue eyes.
? Have a drink with me, English ? ? he invited.
His hand went to his pocket, and he displayed
a little heap of yellow sovereigns, perhaps to
impress the two with his solvency.
? Put them away, and don?t be a darn fool,?
said Danny gruffly. ? You ain?t tired of life,
are you ? You ain?t particular anxious to get
a knife stuck in your back, I suppose ? ?
The Dane gave a great laugh, and looked
round the room.
? There is not one here that is able to take
money from Karl Bender,? he announced.
? No, not one of all these people would be able
to do it.?


? Not one couldn?t, perhaps,? said Danny,
? but two or three would ?ave a darn good shot
at it. We?ll ?ave a drink with you, Karl ; but
you keep that yeller gold-mine out of sight.
It?s for your own good I?m telling you.?
Karl smiled again, very confidently, and
ordered beer from a flamboyant little waitress.


CHAPTER V
? JACK-IN-THE-BOX ?
THE beer was rather a long time in coming,
but at last the little waitress approached
with a tray laden with three pewters. These
she banged down on the little metal table, swept
up the money in the most business-like way,
and hurried to attend to the wants of some
thirsty mariners in another part of the room.
One sip of the liquid was more than enough
for Roy. There and then he decided that he
would not drink the warm beer of the ?Jack-
in-the-box.? He looked at his companions.
They had each taken a deep draught, and were
now engaged in a discussion on the merits of
different ships in the port. The opportunity
was good. Roy lowered his tankard gradually
beneath the table, and poured the contents into
a spittoon. Replacing the pewter casually
on the table, he made a pretence of drinking
at intervals, and gave his attention to his sur-
roundings.
At one end of the room w r as a platform, on


which an orchestra ?three gaily-dressed but
w T eary-eyed females in company with a dissipated-
looking male pianist?discoursed music likely
to appeal to the taste of the audience. From
behind a curtain at the back of the platform
came the beat of tom-toms ; and it was this,
more than the scraping of the catgut and the
tinkle of the piano, that set the feet of the
audience swinging and stamping. It w r as a
rough audience. All the fo?c?sles of the ships
in Port Said were apparently represented in the
? Jack-in-the-box ? that night ?British, French,
American, Spanish, Italian, Scandinavian ?all
with the stamp of the seas on their weather-
beaten faces ?drinking, shouting, singing, and
brawding in the thick haze of tobacco smoke.
The orchestra stopped suddenly, and an
impromptu turn was given by two brawny
seamen, very much in their cups, who proceeded
to fight in the centre of the room. Partisans
were to hand immediately, and three men and
two tables bit the dust before some sort of order
was restored. Then three dancing girls ap-
peared on the platform, and gave the perform-
ance, low-class and tawdry, which may be
witnessed any evening in the seaports of the
Mediterranean.
By this time Roy had had enough of the
place, and he tried to convey as much to Danny ;
but that seaman was talking excitedly to Karl,


the latter, his face flushed, gesticulating with
mighty arms. Presently Danny beckoned the
waitress. Roy shook his head warningly.
? Must repay favours,? said Danny. He
turned with grotesque solemnity to the Dane.
? This is my friend, Roy Lavington. ?E?s
?igh, Karl.?
? Six feet ?seven feet ? ? inquired Karl
politely. He took a gulp from the refilled
tankard, and added, ? eight feet ? ?
?No, not that kind of ?eight. What I mean
is, Vs eddicated.?
? You arc captain of ship ? ? said Karl, beam-
ing at Roy. ? You are young to understand the
logarithm. What is the name of your ship ? ?
? She?s a yacht, the Laurette ,? said Danny.
? Roy ?ere don?t own ?er. But ?e could, you
know, Karl. What I mean is, ?e could carry
it off.?
? He must have big strength,? said Karl,
looking with much respect at Roy. ?I, too,
am strong, but I could not lift a yacht.?
It became evident to Roy that his companions
had imbibed quite enough of the warm beer
of the ? Jack-in-the-box.? ? You?re both
talking awful rot, Danny,? he said. ? I think
we?d better go.?
? I don?t know that you ain?t right,? said
Danny, putting a hand to his head. ? This
room?s flying round.?


? The platform will not stay still,? Karl
complained. ? Let us walk by the sea.?
They got up, and Roy piloted his staggering
companions to the door. But the fresh air
had the opposite effect to that anticipated.
Danny staggered against the wall and seemed
incapable of movement.
?My ?ead, Roy. That was funny beer.?
? Pull yourself together,? Roy urged him.
Karl, obedient to his strongest instinct, was
groping his way along the wall, his face turned
to the sea.
A burst of oaths and shouts came from the
window nearest them, and then came a crash
of glass, and a small iron table hurtled on to
the roadway, where it collapsed.
? Getting pleasant in the old Jack,? Danny
murmured, gazing with lack-lustre eyes at the
fragments of table. ? Oh, my ?ead. I be-
lieve I?ve been doped.?
A sudden suspicion darted into Roy?s mind
that perhaps Danny was speaking the truth.
He remembered the Dane?s injudicious display
of wealth. The beer might have been drugged
?with a purpose. His eye fell on the frag-
ments of table, and stepping forward, he picked
up an iron leg and stuffed it quickly under his
coat. If foul play was intended he w r ou!d make
a fight for it, anyway.
? It?s quite likely that you?ve been drugged,


Danny,? he said. ?But I didn?t drink the
stuff, and I?m all right. Now hang on to my
arm, and we?ll get out of this.?
Walking very unsteadily, Danny suffered
himself to be led down the road, and presently
they came upon Karl, leaning against a wall and
gaping stupidly.
? I wish for my ship,? he said. ? The houses
here do not keep still.?
? What is the name of your ship ? ? Roy
asked.
? Stralsund , Stralsund .? Karl placed a heavy
hand on Roy?s shoulder. ? Stralsund ,? he re-
peated owlishly.
? Come on, then, and I?ll see you on board,?
said Roy. He placed himself between the two
dazed seamen, gripped an arm of each, and set
off. It was heavy work, and he had all he could
do to prevent the two from subsiding. And
then, when they had traversed some hundred
yards, he saw what he expected to see ?three
dark shadows hovering in their wake.
For a moment Roy was tempted to let go of
his companions and begin the fight there and
then. He knew it would have to come. He
was about to do this when another idea occurred
to him. Why not pretend to be drugged too ?
Those shadows might attack carelessly then, and
give him a good chance to use his iron table-leg.
This plan he put immediately into execution.


From side to side of the narrow ill-lit street the
three rolled?lurching, staggering, and pitching,
and the three dark forms behind began to
decrease their distance. Roy watched their
movements narrowly, and presently he knew
that the moment had come. Releasing his
hold of his companions, who immediately sank
to the ground, he staggered to a wall, and stood
there with his knees bent. Then, as the three
dark forms sped towards him, he straightened,
whipped out his bar, leapt forward, and struck
with all his force at the foremost. The man
pitched and fell without a groan. His com-
panions recoiled for a second, and this gave Roy
time to bring his bar with a backhand sw T ing
full into the face of another, who swayed
drunkenly for a moment and then fell. The
third shrank back, snarling, and hurled a knife.
The weapon grazed Roy?s face, and then he
leapt and struck again. The bar struck the
brickwork, raising a shower of dust. The man
had ducked and fled.
The whole affair had lasted but a few seconds.
Roy, still gripping his bar, looked at the four
prostrate figures, and wondered what he should
do next. He was helped in his dilemma by
the noise of wheels. A gharri returning from
depositing a load of French seamen at the
? Jack-in-the-box ? was passing the end of the
road, and approached at Roy?s hail.


? How many ? ? inquired the driver, keep-
ing at a safe distance, however, for mariners in
their cups are liable to overload the Port Said
gharris.
? Three,? Roy shouted. ? I?ll pay you well.?
To his great relief the gharri approached.
The driver, a native in a skullcap, climbed down
from his perch, and gazed at the scene.
? Proper drunk,? he remarked. ? What
ship ? ?
? Stralsund and the yacht Laurette ,? Roy
told him ; and between them they lifted the
two seamen into the body of the vehicle. The
driver then prepared to get on his box.
? But what about these others ? ? Roy asked.
? Dead ? ? inquired the driver casually.
? I hope not,? said Roy, slightly shocked.
The driver approached the two, and bent over
them.
?No, they will not die ; but it will be many
weeks before they will speak with civility.
There should be one more.?
?He got away.? Roy pointed to the hole
in the brickwork. ? That was meant for
him.?
The driver glanced at the indenture.
?He might have died,? he announced.
? His luck was what you call in. He will return
for his friends. Come.?
They drove first to the Stralsund , and a hail


The whole affair lasted but a few seconds
from Roy brought two of her crew to their
aid. The inert Karl was unloaded and shipped,
and then they proceeded to the Laurette , where
George and two more men from the fo?c?sle
(2.678) 66 5


shook their heads over Danny?s condition as
he lay helpless on the quay.
? You been with ?im all the evening ? ?
George inquired of Roy. ? That?s funny.
?E?s done brown, and you ain?t a bit,?
Roy was about to explain, when three gharris
drove on to the quay, and the whole of the
Lauretta's passengers got out, and prepared to
go on board. The sight of Danny stretched
at full length and the four bending over him
drew their attention, and they hesitated. But
Sir John told them to go on.
? One of the crew has been celebrating, I
expect,? he said. ? I?ll see.? He approached
the group and looked at Danny.
? Been drinking ? ? he inquired.
? Drugged, I think, sir,? Roy replied.
? Drugged ? Are you serious, Lavington ?
. . . And what are you doing with that piece
of iron ? ? Roy was still clutching his table-
leg.
?We got into a bit of a fight in the native
quarter, sir. I?d forgotten I?d still got this.?
Roy was about to pitch the memento over the
quay when Sir John stopped him.
? One moment, please.? He took the piece
of iron and examined it closely. ? H?m, per-
haps it would be as well to get rid of it.? He
tossed it into the water, and looked at Danny
again. ? Can you manage to get him on board ? ?


? Easy, sir/? said George. ? We?ve done it
often. . . . Not with Danny, of course, but
other men.?
? And on other ships, of course,? said Sir
John dryly. ? Well, get him into his berth,
and I?ll ask the doctor to have a look at him.
When you?re free, Lavington, I should like
to have a few words with you.?
George made a wry face when Sir John had
gone.
? You?re in for it now, Roy. The doctor?ll
see ?e ain?t drugged, and you?ll get it ?ot for
spinning a yarn.?
? But Danny happens to be really drugged,
George, so I?m not afraid of what they?ll say
to me. Let?s get him on board.?
Between them they carried Danny up the
ladder and on to the deck of the Laurette.
Lowering him into the fo?c?sle was a precarious
business, but they managed it at last, and then
Roy left his companions to put the sick man to
bed, and went aft.
Sir John was awaiting him in the ante-room
of the saloon, an apartment which also served
as the ship?s library. He motioned Roy to a
seat on one of the plush settees. ?Now let?s
have this story,? he said.
Roy told it without garnishing, and Sir John
nodded at the end.
You re well out of your first adventure in


the East,? he remarked. ? How did you like
the native quarter ? ?
? It struck me as being a particularly filthy
place, sir.?
r . .. t- f i cc nrv 1 1
?It is that,? Sir John agreed. ? Tinsel and
filth. Port Said has been the ruin of many a
fine young man. They think they are going to
see ? Life,? and they see what you saw to-night
?just filth and sordidness.? Sir John gave
a few instances from his own experience of
young men going out to Australia and New
Zealand whose lives had been ruined by a few
hours? indulgence in the so-called pleasures of
Port Said.
Roy listened with some amazement.
? I?d no idea it was as bad as that, sir.?
? Oh, that?s merely a few cases that I?ve
heard of. Every man who has travelled could
tell you of others. I believe there are notices
put up in the cabins of some liners now, warning
passengers about the place. . . . That?s all I
have to say to you, Lavington. Good night.?
? Good night, sir.? Roy went forward, and
Sir John rejoined the guests in the saloon.
? Our young deck-hand progresses,? he told
them. ?He has been behaving like a detective
of the first water. He poured his drugged beer
on the floor, secreted an iron bar, knocked out
two of Port Said?s night-birds with it, and
brought home two doped seamen in safety.?


? I knew the boy could fight,? said the
general quietly. ?He has the look of it.?
? But he might have got seriously hurt himself
roaming about those awful places,? said Lady
Adela with a shudder. ? How can you let him
do it, John ? Now do be sensible, and bring
the poor boy aft.?
? The time is not yet ripe, I think,? said the
professor, with a shrewd glance at his host.
? Not yet,? said Sir John. ? I want to see
exactly what the lad?s made of. As far as I
can see, he?s good stuff; but there may be a
flaw somewhere?one never knows.?


CHAPTER VI
CAPTAIN WALTERS-MEETS
ROY had his first real view of the desert
the next morning when the Laurette
steamed slowly through the canal. Danny,
certified drugged by the doctor, kept to his bunk
that day, and it was not until the yacht had left
the narrow waterway and was bowling down
the Gulf of Suez that he came on deck for a
breath of fresh air.
? My ?ead?s still a bit dizzy,? he told Roy.
? It was that blinking Karl that done it?flash-
ing ?is quids about in the ? Jack-in-the-box.*
Lucky you didn?t drink none of that beer, Roy.
But I didn?t see you pouring it away.?
? No, I took good care that you shouldn?t.?*
? It?s a dangerous game, that,? said Danny
thoughtfully. ?As a rule, if a man stands you
a glass of something, *e don?t like to see it
poured away. It?s like pouring ?is money on
the floor, you see. I read a yarn about that
once. It was called The Tarnished Mirror.


The young feller in that started pouring ?is
drink on the floor in a pub in Arizona, and
suddenly there was a loud scream??e?d poured
one on the pub cat. The men in the bar looks
from im to the cat, and the young feller tries
to explain that ?e kicked ?im by accident. But
it wouldn t do. One of the men stoops and
puts ?is ?and on the animal?s fur. ? Boys,? ?e
says in a voice of thunder, ? this cat?s wet ! ?
And before the young feller can draw ?is gun,
they grabs im, puts a lariat round ?is neck, and
planks ?im under a tree. ?E?d ?ave been ?ung
for a cert if it ?adn?t been for Trixie.?
? Ah, I thought Trixie would come.?
?Did you? Well, she did, anyway, and
she didn?t give them cowboys nothing, either?
called them a lot of low greasers, and let out
that the young feller ?ad shot two sheriffs in
fair fight. That done it. They untied the
lariat, and give ?im some chewing gum, and ?
? Trixie married him.?
? You?ve been reading The Tarnished Mirror ,?
accused Danny.
? No; I just guessed that?s what would
happen.?
Well, it was a mighty good guess. She
did marry ?im, and ?er old man give them a big
ranch to live on. So the young feller did
pretty well for ?imself. But the point is that
e nearly got ?imself ?ung for spilling ?is drink.


And if there?d been a cat under that table at
the * Jack-in-the-box,? you might ?ave ?ad old
Karl on top of you.?
? All I can say is, Danny, that I?m very
thankful that there wasn?t a cat under the
table. Karl was a bit above my weight.?
? Quite the sort of man one wouldn?t want
to get a punch in the ear from,? said Danny
gravely. . . . ?And if ?is ?ead?s anything like
mine to-day, it?s feeling pretty bad.?
The Laurette touched at Aden and Colombo,
and after a good run across the Indian Ocean
arrived at Fremantle on the 15th May. There
Roy received the few pounds due to him in
wages, and was gathering together his scanty
belongings preparatory to departure, when a
steward came with a message that Sir John
wished to sec him before he left.
? Going to offer you a job as purser,? said
Danny. ? Mind you take it if he does, Roy.
Don?t go slinging no chances away.?
? No fear of his offering me a job, Danny.
Why should he ? ?
Sir John, who had been busy with callers
ever since the yacht?s gangway had been lowered,
was in the ante-room when Roy arrived.
? Ah, there you are, Lavington. You?re
leaving us to-day. How did you like the
trip ? ?
? Very much, sir, thank you.?


? Got any plans ? ?
? Nothing particular, sir. I shall take the
first job that offers, and try and save a little
money.?
? Your heart doesn?t quail at the prospect of
striking out in a new land, eh ? ?
? Not a bit, sir. I wanted to come here, and
now I?m here. I shan?t forget your kindness
in giving me the passage, sir.?
? You?d like to repay that ? ?
? I should, very much. If there is anything
I could do ?? Roy stopped. What could he,
a penniless immigrant, do for Sir John Stanford,
the millionaire ?
Sir John read his thoughts.
? But there is something you can do for me,
if you will. One of my hobbies is the collection
of photographs taken from the high places of
the world. Western Australia is not repre-
sented in my collection. There are no stupen-
dous peaks in the State, but there is one respect-
able range running to about four thousand feet
?the Mar lings. If you are near there at any
time you might take a photograph from the
highest peak, and post it to me.?
? I?ll do that, sir, with pleasure.?
? I should like it posted before this day
twelvemonth. If I can rely on you to get it,
I won?t trouble anybody else with the job.?
? I?ll get it for you, sir.?


Sir John took a card from a drawer, scribbled
a few words on it, and handed it to Roy.
? There you are, then, Lavington. Good-
bye, and good luck to you in Australia.?
Good-bye, sir. Thank you.?
Roy went forward again and joined Danny,
who was sitting on the windlass.
? Did ?e offer you a job ? ? Danny inquired
eagerly.
? No, not exactly. He has asked me to do
something for him on shore.? Roy looked at
the card. Tve got to take a photograph for
him from the top of some mountains. This
is what it says : ? Marling Ranges. Highest
Peak. To be posted on or before 15th May
next. Sir John Stanford, Farley Park, Sussex.??
? Only that,? said Danny in disgust. ? Well,
jiggered. What?s ?e thinking of, I should
like to know ? ?
?He?s thinking that he would like a photo-
graphy from the Marling Ranges, that?s all;
and I m glad to have the chance to get it for
him. I should think he?d be a top-hole man
if one knew him well.?
Roy?s bag had been borrowed by one of the
crew at Colombo, and had failed to return on
board. So it was with his belongings tied up
in a blue handkerchief that he made his farewell
round of the yacht. This over, he walked down
the gangway and stepped on to the wharf, where


a Customs official passed his bundle without
comment. Turning at the comer of a big shed
to wave his hand to Danny, he was surprised
to see Lady Adela standing watching him from
the deck, and he was more surprised still when
she waved a dainty piece of cambric in a very
friendly fashion. ? That?s jolly decent of her,?
he thought, raising his hat and smiling in
acknowledgment. Then he turned round the
shed and directed his steps to the railway
station.
Lady Adela entered the saloon, and told her
friends what she had done. ? I don?t care what
any of you say, I simply had to wave to him,
and he smiled at me so nicely.?
? Lucky boy,? said Sir Hector.
? Lucky ? I think it?s most pathetic. That
poor boy going off into a strange country, with-
out a single friend, with that pitiful little bundle,
and only five pounds in his pocket.?
? He has much beside the things you men-
tion,? said the professor. ?He has health,
youth, and spirits. I have tried all my life to
eradicate envy from my disposition, but I must
confess I should like to be in young Mr.
Lavington?s shoes.?
? You are like Mr. Bultitude in Vice Versa,?
said Lady Adela scornfully. ?If you were in
his shoes, you would be longing to get back
to your nice comfortable middle age.?


? Perhaps so,? said the professor, and per-
mitted himself a slight sigh ?a very rare
occurrence with that philosophical man.
The Perth train was in the station when Roy
arrived, and buying a second-class ticket, he
took his seat in a smoking compartment,
receiving a friendly nod from the only other
occupant, a mechanic in blue overalls.
? Jumped your ship ? ? inquired this man,
eyeing Roy?s bundle.
?No, not exactly. I worked my passage out
from England.?
? Got a trade ? ?
Roy shook his head.
? Take my advice, then. Don?t hang about
Perth. Get up country.?
? That?s what I intend doing. But I expect
I shall have to stay one night in Perth. Do you
happen to know of a small, inexpensive hotel ? ?
? I do. The ?Admiral Wilmot ? would suit
you, I reckon. Get out at West Perth, and ?
but I?ll draw you a chart.? The man tore a
corner off his newspaper, and sketched a plan
of the locality. ? Here you are ?down here
when you come out of the station, round here,
and down here, and there?s the ?Admiral? on
the right. You can?t miss it.?
Roy thanked him, tucked the paper into his
pocket, and the two chatted until the train drew
into West Perth. There he got out, and with


A man shot across the pavement and into the gutter.
the aid of the mechanic?s plan he had no diffi-
culty in finding the ? Admiral Wilmot.? It was
a small, unpretentious hostelry in a back street.
As Roy drew near the entrance he heard a noise
as of some heavy object being dragged down the
stairs, and the next moment a fair-haired, slim
man of about thirty-two shot across the pave-
ment and into the gutter, and a large, red, angry
face glowered at him from the doorway.
? There y?are, Captain Walters-Meete,?
bawled the red-faced man. ?You been asking


for this for some time. You go and cook
your own fish, if you can get any one to trust
you with any. Don?t you come worrying this
hotel again.? He withdrew, slamming the
door.
Captain Walters-Meete picked himself up
out of the gutter, and saw Roy?s concerned face.
? I say, that was pretty rough,? said Roy.
? Rough ? ? scoffed the captain, his light
blue eyes blazing with wrath. ?If you want
to see something really rough, wait here a
minute.? He took two steps across the pave-
ment, and delivered a mighty kick at the door.
Unfortunately he had forgotten that he was
wearing canvas shoes, and he recoiled with
something like a howl of agony.
? You?ve got boots on,? he said to Roy, after
a few tense moments spent in nursing his
injured toe. ? Would you mind kicking that
door down for me ? The brute?s bolted it.?
? I don?t think I?ll do that. I want to stop
here to-night.?
? Stop here ? Don?t you dream of it. The
man?s the rankest of outsiders. He?ll pinch
your things. He?s got my helmet now. But
I?m going to get it.? The captain looked
round for some implement with which to batter
down the door. But at this moment the
proprietor?s head and shoulders appeared from
an upper window, and a shabby grey helmet


A passing dog tore away with the helmet.
swung over their heads, suspended by a pair of
tongs.
? I don?t want this in my hotel,? said the
proprietor insultingly. ? It?ll give me a bad
name. Take it away into the bush and sleep
under it.?
The helmet dropped, bounced like a rubber
ball, and was seized by a passing dog, who tore
away with it down the street.
? After him,? cried the captain.
Roy joined in the chase, and they ran their
quarry to earth in the garden of a well-kept
bungalow. The dog yielded his capture with
reluctance, and the garden suffered somewhat.
In the midst of the scene the lady of the house
appeared and said some bitter things, being
under the impression that the dog as well as
the helmet belonged to the captain.
? I wish you were a man,? said the captain,
glowering at her.


? And I wish you were,? said the lady,
retiring, and shutting the door with a slam.
? I hope she dies very soon,? said the captain
fervently. ? Now for that blighter at the
hotel.?
? What are you going to do ? ?
? Get my kit. He?s not going to keep that.?
? I think he?s getting rid of it now,? said
Roy, looking up the street, where dark objects
were floating down from the upper windows of
the ? Admiral Wilmot.?
They ran back very quickly, and Roy suc-
ceeded in catching an old sock, and the captain
a pair of pyjama trousers. The pavement
outside the hotel was littered with a motley
collection of garments.
? There?s a Caruso record of mine up
there,? the captain wdiispered. ? Surely the
blighter wouldn?t ?
? I should stand by to catch it, anyway,? said
Roy. The proprietor?s face, appearing at inter-
vals, was still full of purpose.
A shower of soiled collars floated like snow-
flakes round their heads, and then a black disc
sailed out of the window. Roy took two swift
steps and caught it between flat hands.
? Well fielded, sir,? cried the captain.
? That?s the lot, I think,? said Roy, as the
window shut down with a bang.
? Now for the blighter?s head, then,? said


the captain. ? I?ve still got to punch that.?
He went up to the door and rattled it furiously.
Roy caught his arm.
? I shouldn?t worry him any more, captain.
You?ve got your things, and ?
? And what ? ? demanded the captain, stand-
ing up very straight. ? You don?t think I?m
afraid of the blighter, do you ? ?
? I?m quite sure you?re not.? Roy thought it
unnecessary to add that he was also quite sure
that there was no fear in the proprietor. ? But y
well, you?re an army man, aren?t you ? ? he
added diplomatically. ? It?s hardly the thing,
for you to get mixed up in a hotel squabble.?
? Well, since you put it that way, perhaps
we?ll let the blighter live. But don?t tell me
you?re going to sleep in this abode of outsidery
to-night ? ?
? I shouldn?t dream of it.? Roy thought it
a small concession to make for peace. . . . ? But
I?ve got to sleep somewhere.?
? I?ll put you on to a hotel,? said the captain.
? You?re not in a hurry, are you ? Good. I
want to go round to the Post Office to see if my
remittance has come. If you like to that
far, we?ll beat up a hotel afterwards.?
Among the captain?s effects was an old
travelling rug. Roy assisted him to gather his
property into this ; and then the bundle being
tied with boot-laces, the captain tucked it
(2,678) g


under his arm, and set off with Roy down the
street.
? What was the row about ? ? Roy asked.
? Fish. I congratulated him on the shark
we had for breakfast, and he got nasty at once
?reminded me that I owed him three quid for
board and lodging. As a matter of fact, 1 do
owe him three quid, but my remittance is a bit
late this time. Then he said some absurd
things about the army ?reckoned that it must
have bucked up a lot since I left it, and a few
more things like that. So I rubbed the shark
in his face. Then we got mixed up, and some-
how we got on to the stairs. That?s where
I had bad luck, for I reached them first, and
all the blighter had to do was to push.? The
captain stopped with a dissatisfied expression.
?I?m not at all sure that I did right in leaving
him.?
? Yes, you were quite right, captain. After
all, you rubbed the shark in his face. You?re
about quits.?
? Well, if you really think so?? The captain
moved on again. Reaching the main road
they boarded one of the long single-decked
trams, and hurtled down the steep hill into
Perth proper. Alighting at the Town Hall,
they walked round to the Post Office, and there
the captain found his remittance awaiting him.
? Fifty quid,? he said, waving the slip.


CAPTAIN WALTERS-MEETE 83
? You?ll dine with me to-night?by the way,
I don?t know your name.?
?Lavington. . . . Thanks, I?ll dine with you
with pleasure.?
The captain cashed his slip, and then they
sallied out to look for a hotel.
They found one in East Perth, small, but
clean and well-kept.
? Good enough to sleep in,? said the captain,
? but eating?s a different matter. And I had
no breakfast to speak of. You?ll lunch with me
to-day, Lavington ? ?
Roy demurred. ? I think this ought to be
my show. I?m dining with you to-night.?
Pooh, I?ve fifty quid, or, rather, forty-seven.
I owe that blighter three.? The captain took
a pencil and wrote something about shark
breakfasts on the back of a pound note. This
he slipped into an envelope with two others,
addressed it to the proprietor of the ? Admiral
Wilmot,? and left it at the hotel office for
postage.


CHAPTER VII
EXPRESS FOR KALGOORLIE
THEY lunched in an expensive restaurant
in Hay Street to the strains of an imported
orchestra. While they ate, Roy made a clean
breast of his financial position.
? I?ve got five pounds, and I?ve got to shift
for myself. Do you know this country well,
captain ? ?
? More or less like a book. I?ve been here
three years. I?ve been a fool at times, and
chucked chances away. But from this day I?m
going to draw in my horns. I?ve learnt the
value of money now. I?m going very easy with
this fifty quid. There are quite a number of
blighters in England that have got to be shown
I can make good. Mining?s my next move.
It?s the only thing I haven?t touched so far.
You?d better come along if you want to make
some money.?
? I know nothing at all about mining, I?m
afraid.?


? That doesn?t matter. Cling to my skirts,
and you?ll pull through all right, and come out
properly gilded at the end.?
? Where would you go ? ?
? Kalgoorlie. It?s the mining centre of the
State at present. I?m going to take a job as an
ordinary miner at five quid a week, and stand
by for a rush. That?s where my fifty quid
comes in. I can get anywhere with that. Will
you come ? ?
? Thanks, I will. I?ve got to get a job at
once, and a fiver a week sounds pretty good. . . .
By the way, captain, did you ever strike the
Marling Ranges in your wanderings ? ?
? Marling Ranges ? That sounds familiar.
Yes, I remember. They?re down in the south-
west ?a lovely range, that, Lavington. I was
staying ?working, rather, at a place fifty miles
from there. Why ? ?
? I?ve got to go there before the year is out,
and take some photographs from the highest
peak.?
? And a nice little job too. I?ll come with
you when you go. There ought to be some
good shooting there. We?ll make an expedition
of it ?a couple of good light horses, and a pack
for our gear. We could pitch camp for a couple
of months in those mountains, and have a prime
time.?
? But wouldn?t that be rather expensive ? ?


?You forget that we?re going to make a pot
on the goldfields. Here, I?ll work it out for
you. We?ll allow ourselves three months on
the Mar lings. That gives us nine months on
the goldfields. Our wages are five pounds a
week, and we?ll allow ourselves two quid a week
for board and lodging and baccy. That?s three
quid a week steadily mounting.? The captain
made some calculations on the menu card.
? Nine months at that rate is a hundred and
eight pounds?two hundred and sixteen between
us. And that?s not counting rushes. A rush
might come at any moment, and then we start
reckoning in thousands. We?re safe for the
Marlings, anyway. And if we tire of the place,
we?ll sell our horses for more than w r e gave for
them, and come back, money in pocket, to do
a bit more mining. All clear ? ?
Roy still felt a little doubtful, but as the
captain had taken such pains with his calcula-
tions, he thought it would be rather ungracious
to make further objections. So he nodded,
and said, ? All right.?
? Then let?s go to the Zoo,? said the captain.
He called for the bill, which had mounted to
quite a respectable figure, further depleted his
remittance by a handsome pourboire to the
waiter, and sallied forth into Hay Street with
one of the restaurant?s choicest cigars in full
blast. Crossing to South Perth on the Swan


River ferry, they spent the afternoon in the
Zoological Gardens, where the wood pigeons
cooed encouragingly as the captain evolved
further plans for a rich and honoured old age.
They dined that night at a small table with
shaded lights in Perth?s principal hotel, where
the waiters forbore to notice the captain?s
frayed garments because of the princely way
in which he ordered the dishes.
? It?s not worth while buying any new togs,?
he remarked to Roy. ? We?re going to rough
it ?well, let?s do the thing properly, and look
the part. ... Try some of these marrons
glaces.?
Roy tried them, and inquired the probable
time of the departure in the morning.
? Ah, yes, to-morrow,? said the captain
vaguely. ?We ought to have settled that
before. After all, I don?t know that it wouldn?t
be a bit of a rush if we tried to get away to-
morrow. Suppose we go the day after. That
will give us time to get our things together.?
? I don?t think it will take us all that time to
get ready. Neither of us has much stuff.?
? There?s that Caruso record. It?ll have to
be packed. I couldn?t risk getting that
smashed.?
? Well, you know my position, captain. I?ve
very little money, and the fare up will take most
of it.?


? Don?t worry about a few quid. I?ve
plenty.?
? Thanks very much, but Td prefer not to
borrow if I can help it. Look here, if you want
a day or two longer in Perth, why not have it ?
I?ll go to-morrow, and you can come along when
you feel inclined.?
? Not much fun hanging round on one?s own.?
The captain drew a half-crown from his
pocket. ? Heads we go to-morrow, tails we
don?t,? he said, before Roy could remonstrate.
The coin spun, hit the edge of the table, and
rolled on to the carpet. A waiter hurried to
the spot.
? What?s it say ? ? asked the captain.
? Heads, sir.? The waiter made a laggard
movement to return the coin.
? Take it away,? said the captain. ? I say,
Lavington, this is serious.?
? Oh, I think it?s for the best. The sooner
we get to work, the sooner we shall see that
three pounds a week mounting up, you know.?
?Of course, of course. But I wonder if that
blighted waiter made a mistake. Hi! ? ?he
called the man ??? are you sure that was heads
just now, waiter ? ?
? Quite sure, sir.?
? All right, that?s all. ... We start to-
morrow, then. We?d better do a to-
night. Very pleased if you?ll be my guest.


? Aren?t you going it, rather ? ?
? Pooh, it?s our last night in Perth. We
must top it up. I?ll put back the few quid I
spend when I start wage-earning, and then I?ll
slap that fifty into the bank. That?s the only
way to deal with fifties.?
?I?m inclined to agree with you,? said
Roy.
? They?re there when you want them then,?
said the captain. He called the head waiter,
and commissioned him to engage a box for the
best performance in the town.
Their train left at five the next afternoon.
They travelled second class, and the captain
exercised particular care in the stowing of the
Caruso record in the rack.
? Did you ever have a gramophone for it ? ?
Roy asked.
? I?ve had three since I?ve been in this
country ; but somehow I can?t keep them.
I suppose it?s shifting about such a lot that
does it. A girl is minding one for me at Limes
Hill, and there?s a part of one in a hotel at
Lannykine, and I?m hanged if I know where
the other is?it just went. Curious thing.?
? What, the gramophone ? ?
? No, the way it went. Somebody badgered
me into a fight up at Moora, and I laid the
gramophone on the top of my swag. When
we?d finished, it was gone. I think some one


must have hopped out of the train and pinched
it.?
? Oh, there was a train there, was there ? ?
?At the end there was. We were fighting
near the line, and I suppose the engine-driver
w r anted to see it. He stopped the train, any-
way ; and away went my gramophone. We?ll
have to get another for our Marling trip. Signor
Caruso on the top of one of those peaks will want
a lot of beating.?
The train sped westward through the undu-
lating bush land, and at seven o?clock they w r alked
along the rocking corridors and took their seats
at a table for three in the restaurant car. The
other seat was occupied by a snub-nosed little
man in a grey tweed-suit, with a squat little
gold Buddha dangling from his watch-chain.
He nodded affably and engaged them at once
in conversation.
? Going all the way ? ?
? As far as Kalgoorlie,? replied the captain.
?Soam I. Seem to know your face. Have
I ever struck you, I wonder ? My name?s
Budd ?Albert Budd.?
?I?m Walters-Meete. I don?t think we?ve
met.?
? Captain Walters-Meete ? ?
? Correct. Have we met ? ?
Mr. Budd?s shrewd little eyes twinkled.
? Not officially. But I?m not mistaken. I


saw you fighting a ticket-collector at Wangee-
ling. I was passing in a buggy, going out to
a bush fire, so we couldn?t stop. But somebody
told me your name. Did you win ? ?
? Just. He was a touchy sort of man. I
happened to pass a few remarks about the
management of the railway, and he took it to
himself.?
? They are touchy, some of them. . . . Going
to have a look round the fields ? ?
? Going to work,? said the captain.
? That?s bad.?
? Lavington here is rather proud of it.?
? Ah, but he?s young. . . . Going up on
spec ? ?
? That?s the ticket.?
The restaurant service was excellent, and
Mr. Budd talked fluently during the meal. He
told them that he was an agent, and that his
business entailed a good deal of travel.
? I daresay I shall run up against you pretty
often if you stay in this country,? he said,
proffering his cigar-case.
? I hope so,? said the captain, crackling a
choice weed against his ear.
? Well, I hope so too,? said Mr. Budd.
? There aren?t a terrific number of army men
in Western Australia.?
? We?ll hit up against you before very long,?
the captain assured him. ?If you?re down in


the south-west in nine or ten months? time,
keep your weather-eye lifting for a shooting
expedition on trek to the Marling Ranges.?
?Eh ? ? said Mr. Budd. ? Are you going
there ? ?
?We are.? Pressed for particulars, the
captain gave them in full.
? Ideal,? said Mr. Budd. ? Ideal. Gran-
deur and solitude, eh ? It makes me feel young
to think of it,?
? You?d better come along. The trip will
stand three, eh, Lavington ? ?
? Oh, certainly, if Mr. Budd would like to
come.? Roy was beginning to get used to the
easy ways of the country.
? I should like to come,? said Mr. Budd
earnestly. ?We must keep in touch.? He
handed them each a card.
? P. 0., Perth, will always find me,? said the
captain. He began to construct a model
range with the discarded serviettes, using a
cruet for the principal peak. ? This is where
we thought of pitching our camp ?just under
this peak. Lavington?s got a little job to do on
top, you see. . . . Hang it,? as the train gave
a sudden lurch, ? there?s our camp gone, the
whole range gone.?
? Nothing remaining but Lavington?s Peak,?
said Mr. Budd, smiling. ? I think we ought
to call that Mount Cruet.?


? Done,? said the captain. And then, the
table being required for the next sitting, they
retired to their compartments.
Living up to its reputation as the premier
express in the State, the train rocked and
rattled through the farm and bush lands.
Roy and the captain passed an uncomfortable
night, for their carriage was fairly full, and
there w r as no room for stretching out. At long
intervals the train stopped for a few minutes
at refreshment stations, allowing the passengers
time to secure a scone and a cup of tea. Day-
light found them speeding through an immense
expanse of desert country, and at midday, just
before they reached Kalgoorlie, Mr. Budd,
spruce and groomed after a peaceful night spent
in a first-class sleeper, came upon the two in
the corridor, and inquired their programme.
? Hotel,? said the captain promptly.
? Well, you know your own business, of
course,? said Mr. Budd, shrugging his shoul-
ders. ? But if I wanted a job in this place,
I should hike right round and follow the
shifts.?
? Shifts ? ? said the captain. ? How the
deuce does one follow them ? ?
? The shifts come off at midday,? explained
the other. ? And that?s when they take on new
hands. I hear that things aren?t too good here
at present, so there are several applicants for


every job. If you?re on the spot, you get more
chance of being taken on, you see.?
?We must follow the shifts at once, then,
captain,? said Roy.
?Of course,? said the captain, without
enthusiasm. ? But it looks to me as if we?d
rammed our heads into a funny sort of nest.
Where are these blighted shifts, Budd ? ?
? I should go along to Boulder City ?to the
Golden Mile. Ail the big mines are there.?
? It?s Heigh-o for the Golden Mile, then,?
said the captain. He looked out of the window
at the cheerless expanse of desert. ? But as
a health resort, I much prefer the Marlings.?


CHAPTER VIII
THE BIRD
IT was a short ride from Kalgoorlie to
Boulder, and as they walked in the direction
of the Golden Mile the captain was at no pains
to conceal his impression of the place.
? Flat, dusty, and reeking of work,? he said,
looking with a great distaste at the vista of big
dumps and unbeautiful buildings. ? Tell you
what, Lavington, we?ll cut down our luxury
money, and start away for the Marlings a month
earlier.?
? We?ve got to get a job first, though.?
? Budd was a bit of an ass,? said the cap-
tain. ?He didn?t tell us which mine to make
for.?
? This will be as good as any, I expect,? said
Roy, pointing to the nearest.
?Or as bad as any. I suppose we?d better
try the brute. If they don?t want us, we?ll
make tracks for a hotel. No use wearing our-
selves out on the first day.?


They crossed a patch of deserted ground
and approached the cluster of mine buildings.
Round one of the sheds a number of roughly-
dressed men were standing, miners evidently.
? We?ve tumbled right on to it,? said the
captain. ? These blighters must be following
the shifts. Well, we?ll give them first chance;
that?s only fair.? So they took up a modest
position at the back of the group, and dropped
their bundles.
After a short time the captain began to grow
restive.
?I?m going to give them another couple of
minutes, and then I?m off,? he announced.
? If these blighters think I?ve got nothing better
to do than hang round their cursed dumps all
day, they?re mistaken.?
Even as he spoke the door of the office
opened, and a big man in shirt-sleeves stepped
out. Apparently he had been scanning the
group from the office window, for his choice was
already made. A short stocky man in a suit of
brown reach-me-downs, his neck devoid of
collar, but with a brass stud much to the fore-
front, received a nod, and entered the office.
Then the big man looked over the heads of the
assembly and held up a hand to Roy and the
captain.
? He wants us,? said Roy, stepping forward.
?Eh ? ? said the captain, hanging back.


? Surely not. What the deuce does he want us
for ? ?
But the big man beckoned again, imperiously.
There was not a shadow of doubt?Captain
Walters-Meete?s services were required for
mining purposes. He moved to the door with
Roy, and the rest of the men turned and drifted
away.
In the office they waited while the collarless
man gave particulars to the big foreman.
? Name ? ?
? Jack Winter.?
? Shoveller ? ?
? Yes.?
? Come on at midnight,? said the foreman.
? Next.?
? Walters-Meete,? said the captain.
? Walter Smeet,? wrote the foreman.
? Shoveller,? added the captain grimly.
? Come on at midnight.?Next.?
Roy gave his name, and was bidden to attend
at the same time.
Jack Winter was waiting for them outside.
? Starting to-night ? ? he asked amiably.
?We are,? the captain replied. ?Do you
happen to know the name of this mine ? ?
? Chuck it,? begged Winter. ? You mean
to tell me you don?t know it?s the Bird ? ?
? I know it now. It seems, Lavington, that
we are employees of the Bird Gold-mine.?
(2,678) y


Winter regarded them keenly. ? Come to
think of it, you do look a bit new. It?s the
Grey Parrot Mine, but it?s always called the
Bird. . . . Just lobbed ? ?
? About twenty minutes ago, from Perth.?
? You?re quick on it,? said Winter admiringly.
*? Lucky, too. Some of these blokes have been
following the shifts for weeks.?
? You can?t blame the foreman, though,?
said the captain. ?He wants to do the best
he can for his mine, no doubt. ... Is there
a hotel anywhere handy ? ?
?I?m staying at the ? Pick and Nugget ? my-
self. There?s a room vacant, I think. It might
suit you.?
? You?re Jack Winter, aren?t you ? ? asked
the captain.
? All of me.?
? This is Roy Lavington, and I?m Captain
Walters-Meete. Jack, my friend, we?re all on
the Bird, and we should flock together. Would
you like some more information ? ?
? My oath,? said Winter, with a grin.
? We want the ? Pick ? kept quiet this after-
noon. We must have some sleep if we?re to
burrow in the Bird to-night.?
? Come on,? said Winter. ? I?ve got the
strength of you. You?re proper guys. They?ll
be glad to have you round at the ? Pick.? ?
Winter introduced his new friends in true


Jack Winter was waiting for them.
democratic manner to the proprietress of the
? Pick and Nugget/? which was a small bungalow
hotel in the heart of Boulder City.
? These two blokes are starting on the Bird
to-night, mother. What about a room for
them ? ?
The proprietress, a buxom lady of forty, with
a large experience of men, scanned the two, and
nodded.
How do ? ? she said. ? Yes, they can have
90


the large double-bedded room. Take them
along, Jack.?
Winter led them to a fair-sized, scantily-
furnished room at the back of the house, and
the captain flung his bundle on the floor and
climbed on to one of the beds.
? Don?t go to sleep yet,? said Winter. ? What
about tucker ? They don?t board you here.
We have to go out to a restaurant ?twenty-five
bob a week, three meals a day, or single tickets
one and six.?
? I don?t want anything to eat at present,?
said Roy. ?We had plenty on the journey
up.?
* _ mm mm mm mm mm II
? I?m crammed full of their blighted scones,?
added the captain. ? Come and talk about
food at seven, Jack.?
? But togs,? persisted Winter. ? You?ll want
dungarees to work in, and I don?t suppose you?ve
got a tea-can or a spider, have you ? ?
? Spider ! ? echoed the captain, staring.
? A little wire bloke, to hold your candle ?
a thing with about a dozen legs that you can
stick on the end of a truck or on a bit of
rock.?
? Get us each a complete underground
miner?s equipment, there?s a good fellow,? said
the captain, producing a couple of pound
notes.
? A quid?ll do,? said Winter, taking one of


the notes. ? And I?ll make you a couple of
spiders.?
They slept solidly until seven that evening,
and then Winter arrived and took them out to
a restaurant. At half-past eleven they set out
for the Bird, each carrying a suit of dungarees,
a tea-can, and a packet of sandwiches and
cheese tied in a handkerchief. Midnight
found Roy and the captain, clad in their
working clothes, in company with their two
new mates, Harry Doggett and Tom Bowles
?huge, skull-capped miners, these?standing
in the group waiting to go below.
Presently their turn came, and the four
stepped into the cage. The next moment it
seemed to Roy that they had dropped like a
stone into the very bowels of the earth. He
had a fleeting glimpse of yellow flickers on the
different levels, and then the cage stopped with
a jerk, one thousand feet down, and the four
got out, lit their candles, and picked their way
along a damp tunnel until they came to some
trucks standing by a great heap of broken
rock.
? This is us,? said Doggett, sticking his
spider into a crevice in the wall. ? Done much
of it ? ? he asked Roy.
? It?s the first time I?ve ever been down a
mine,? Roy confessed.
? What about you, cobber ? ?


? I?m newer than the newest egg,? said the
captain. ? How do we earn our money ? ?
? Shifting this into trucks,? said Doggett,
pointing to the heap of debris, ? and running
them down to the cage. When we?ve finished
this lot, there?s some more waiting for us on
the next level. You don?t want any ?ead for
this game, only back. You look as though
you might ?ave a bit of a ?ead, though.?
?No fear,? said the captain earnestly. ?If
I?d had any head I shouldn?t be here. Why
the deuce don?t they import Chinamen to clear
away this stuff ? ?
? Can?t do that in a white man?s country,?
said Bowles.
? This strikes me as being more of a white
man?s hell,? said the captain, looking round
him with great distaste.
? By ghost, you ?ave got a ?ead,? said Doggett.
? That?s just about what it is. But talking
won?t fill the trucks.? He picked up a shovel
and set to work, and the others stuck their
spiders on to convenient rocks and followed
suit. By the time the first truck was full the
captain had delivered himself of some sur-
prising statements regarding mines.
? It takes it out of you at first,? said Doggett
kindly, noting the captain?s exhausted con-
dition. ? ?Ave a spell. You can run ?er down
while we start on the next. ?Eave ah ! ? He


? What happened, captain ??
placed a huge paw on the truck and gave it a
start, and the captain moved off with his charge
down the tunnel.
? What made you take on this game ? ?
Doggett asked Roy, when they were half-way


through the second load. ? You look as if you
might ?ave a bit of a ?ead too.?
? I?ve just come out from England. I hadn?t
any money, and I wanted a job, so I came up
here with my friend.?
? It?s a mug?s game,? said Doggett. ?No
one with any ?ead sticks it for long. . . . Your
cobber?s a long time with that truck. ?E ain?t
the sort to fall down a ?ole, is ?e ? ?
? I don?t think it?s a habit of his. Shall I
go along and see ? ?
? Might be as well. Take your spider.?
Roy took his candle and hurried along the
tunnel. Half-way along he came upon a man-
hole, apparently bottomless, and it was with a
slight feeling of anxiety that he turned the curve
and bore down upon the shaft. Then, to his
great relief, he saw the captain sitting on a
truck, smoking a cigarette.
? What happened, captain ? ?
? Oh, the blighted truck ran away with me.
I had my spider in front, and when we hit the
truck ahead it gave up the ghost. I only had
one match, so I lit a fag with that. I thought
some of you would be along soon. ... I say,
Lavington, what a blighted game this mining
? One doesn?t want any ?ead for it,? Roy
agreed. ? Let?s get your spider out.?
Between them they pulled back the truck


and rescued the candle. It was as flat as a
pancake. The captain unhooked his spider
and straightened out the legs. ? Good thing
it wasn?t a live one,? he remarked.
? Thought you?d jumped down a ?ole,?
grinned Doggett, when they returned.
? I did think of it,? said the captain airily ;
? but I wasn?t sure it was deep enough. Some
blighter left a truck on the line. If I knew who
it was I?d sue him for a new spider.?
? By ghost, you didn?t ought to be under-
ground with a ?ead like that. You ought to be
in a office, scribbling on paper. Didn?t ?e,
Tom ? ?
? My oath,? said Bowles, with considerable
feeling.
They set to again, and Roy was deputed to
manage the trucks, which task, profiting by the
captain?s mishap, he accomplished without a
hitch. Then, the end being cleared, Doggett
led them by devious ways, down narrow man-
holes scaled by perpendicular iron ladders, and
along warm and humid tunnels where the mud
squelched above their ankles, to other ends,
where rows of large unfilled trucks awaited the
captain?s comment.
That comment was always forthcoming.


CHAPTER IX
A CAB DRIVE
THE captain had used up his invective
underground, and when Winter caught
them up the next morning on their way back
to the hotel, he was inclined to be taciturn.
? I think I?m in for malaria,? he announced.
? Not surprising, considering I?ve been pretty
well up to my armpits in water all night.?
? You?ll feel better after some sausages and
mash,? said Winter. ? Mines ain?t too good,
especially at the first jump ; but while they?re
kept open, you?ll always find mugs to go and
work in them.?
They breakfasted at the restaurant, but the
sausages and mash failed to revive the captain,
and after the meal he went to the hotel and slept
for nine hours. He awoke to find Roy, bright-
eyed after a good sleep, moving about the room.
? How goes it, captain ? ?
? Malaria,? said the captain contentedly.
? You?ll be fit enough for work to-night ? ?


? Quite out of the question. Some other
blighter can have my shovel to-night, and I only
hope he?s strong enough to use it. Did you
notice that shovel of mine ? It was about three
foot square, and weighed two hundredweight.?
? They are brutes,? Roy agreed.
? It strikes me that we are square pegs in
round holes here,? said the captain. ? What
do you say to cutting stick for the Marlings right
away ? I?ve still a few quid.?
To Roy, stiff after his labour of the previous
evening, the prospect sounded tempting. Then
he shook his head. He did not wish to be a
drain on his friend?s resources, and also he
felt that he ought to get used to hard work now
that he had started.
? Thanks, but I think I?ll stick on here. But,
of course, you must please yourself.?
? You?re thinking of the money ? ?
? Partly.?
? Well, look, I?ve an idea. The Bird is going
to do my constitution no good. I?d better
sever my connection with it. This is my
proposition. You stick to your job, and make
a few quid, and I?ll hang on here, living on
next to nothing. When your savings equals
my residue we?ll strike camp and hit out for the
Marlings. Do you agree ? ?
? Right,? said Roy, after a moment?s thought.
This important point settled, the malaria


departed at once from out the captain?s body,
and he got up and performed his ablutions with
zest. Another full night?s rest restored him
completely to his normal self, and he inquired
brightly after Doggctt and Bowles when Roy
returned the next morning.
? Yes, I?m still with them,? said Roy. ? I
told them that you?d got malaria, but they didn?t
believe it.?
? Didn?t believe it ? ? echoed the captain,
with some hauteur. ? Why ? ?
? Oh,? Roy smiled, ? Doggett thought you?d
got too much ?ead to stay underground long.?
? He?s going the right way to get his own head
punched,? growled the captain. He got out
of bed and dressed, and Roy undressed and
got into bed, a proceeding which caused the
captain to remark that they were leading a
dog?s life.
It was rather a strange life that Roy led during
the next seven w T eeks. At work every evening
from midnight till eight ; singing songs to
Winter?s vamping accompaniments in the little
bar parlour for an hour or so after tea ; roam-
ing through Boulder and Kalgoorlie for a
couple of hours before setting out to work
again ; accustoming himself to sleep in the
midst of the varied noises of the hotel in the
daytime. He had plenty of opportunities for
studying the mining character. The ? diggers ?


on the whole he discovered to be thoroughly
good fellows ?rough, generous, and tinged with
fatalism, sportsmen to their finger-tips. Fights
were frequent and waged with great fervour.
Roy was only engaged in one at the hotel, and
that was more of the nature of a mel6e. On
that occasion a band of noisy youths had invaded
the precincts of the ? Pick and Nugget.? They
were ? flash ? young men of Kalgoorlie, of the
class known in Australian cities as Smart Alecs,
Sports, and Yah-hoos. The residents of the
hotel had risen up to eject them. In the fight
which followed the captain sustained a strained
wrist and Roy a black eye. Their friend of the
journey up, Mr. Albert Budd, had rendered
them first aid. He had come in to have a chat
about the Marlings, and had seen the finish of
the conflict. It had been rather a dramatic
finish. Roy, felled by a blow from a concertina,
had picked himself up, sprung at the throat of
the invading leader, and, with muscles hardened
by labour in the Bird, dragged him along the
passage, and dispatched him with a kick into
the road.
The ? Pick and Nugget ? was not invaded
again during Roy?s residence there, but on the
following Saturday he received another call for
help. The messenger was a fourtcen-year-old
son of the goldfields, one Dicky Haynes, alert,
democratic, with the names of all the race-


horses in the State at his finger-ends. He
tapped at the door of the back room at ten in
the evening, and found Roy alone, reading by
the light of a candle.
? You?re a cobber of Jack Winter?s, ain?t
you ? ? he asked.
? Yes. What is it ? ?
? Jack?s been playing round at the 4 Golden
Bar ? and he?s had a big win. He had a roll of
three hundred quid when I left. But he won?t
get away with it without a good bit of help.?
Roy put down his book and sat up.
? He?s afraid of getting knocked out for his
money, is that what you mean ? ?
? I don?t know that he?s much afraid. But
he knows that?s wdiat?s going to happen if some
of his cobbers don?t come along. He?s a good
sort, Jack Winter, so I whispered him casual-
like to get out at eleven. I couldn?t do any
more, or I?d have been outed myself. As it
w T as, I saw some pretty good toughs knocking
about round the ? Golden Bar.? ?
??You think Jack knows that you?ve come
round here ? ?
? Oh, he knows all right. He?d trust me to
use my head.?
?You seem to be a pretty live man. What
do you suggest we do ? ?
? Get a cab, and drive down to the 4 Golden
Bar.? ?


? Where can I get a cab ? ?
? Beecher?s got one. He lives in that house
near Kalgoorlie Station. He keeps it in that
shed in his backyard.?
? I know it. Well, if I get the cab, will you
rout round and try and dig up some men ?
I think Walters-Meete is playing billiards at the
? Star.? This hotel seems to be deserted to-
night.?
? I?ll dig up as many as I can,? Dicky pro-
mised, ? and I?ll bring them round here.
Better get a move on, though. Jack?ll come out
at eleven for a cert. It?s his only chance.?
? I?ll be as quick as I can. There?s a bicycle
in the passage. I don?t know who it belongs
to. I might borrow that.?
? Snork it,? said Dicky, the son of the gold-
fields, ? and ask questions afterwards.?
So Roy rode to Kalgoorlie on the bicycle,
and knocked loudly at the cab-owner?s front
door. Mr. Beecher, lying in bed in his front
room, requested him in unrefined language to
depart.
? I want your cab,? Roy shouted through the
glass. ?I?ll give you a quid, and I?ll drive it
myself.?
There was silence for a few moments after
that, and then the window was thrown up and
the broad red face of Beecher appeared, and
demanded the pound. Roy handed it to him.


? I suppose I?ll have to put the horse in for
you,? grumbled Beecher. ? Wait a second.?
He lit a lamp and struggled into a few clothes.
Then he issued from the front door, and led
the way to the back premises, where Roy
assisted him to put a surprised and disgusted
bay horse into the shafts of a dilapidated
cab.
? Ten bob an hour after twelve, mind,? said
Beecher, as Roy climbed on to the box and took
the reins.
? All right.? Roy caressed the bay?s flanks
with the whip, and they rattled out into the
street.
Arriving at the hotel, he found the captain,
Harry Doggett, another miner by the name of
Andy Hume, and Dicky awaiting him.
? It?s all I could dig up,? said Dicky, ? and
time?s getting short.? It was, in fact, ten
minutes to eleven.
They held a hasty consultation, and it was
agreed that Roy should drive up to the door of
the ? Golden Bar ? on the tick of eleven, and
that the other three should be handy in the
street to ward off attack. Dicky had protested
against the captain?s suggestion that they should
all go in the cab.
? If you do that, they?ll lame the horse, and
then where would we be ? ?
? That?s true enough,? Doggett agreed.


? You?ve got a ?ead, Dicky. Don?t you never
go underground.?
? We?d better be getting along at once,?
said the captain. ? Dicky can wait here for us.?
? Dicky is going in the cab,? announced that
young gentleman calmly, ? and Dicky is going
with this.? He held up an empty bottle.
? I?ve been in a rough house before now.?
?So ?e ?as, by ghost,? said Doggett. ? I?ve
seen ?im, and ?e goes well.?
The three departed, armed with two life-
preservers and a large spanner, culled from
different rooms of the ? Pick.? Roy and Dicky
waited a few minutes, and then drove off in the
cab. The street in which the ? Golden Bar ?
was situated was apparently deserted as they
passed through, but their timing was perfect,
and it was exactly on the stroke of eleven that
they drew up outside the portals of the hotel.
Winter, lounging with apparent aimlessness
in the entry in the midst of a group of men,
took three steps across the pavement, shot into
the cab, the door of which w r as flung open for him
by Dicky, and shouted to Roy to ? let her rip.?
Roy whipped up, and they were off down the
street at a smart pace before the group in the
? Golden Bar ? quite realized what had hap-
pened.
? Got anything to hit with ? ? Winter asked
Dicky.
(2,678) g


?My oath. Cling on to this.? Dicky passed
an empty bottle.
? Good. We ain?t out of the mud yet.
That?s Roy Lavington driving, ain?t it ? ?
? Yes. He?s a real doer, and his cobber and
two other blokes are around somewhere.?
They gripped their bottles and peered out
of the windows. In another ten seconds the
attack came. Five men darted out from a
corner of the roadway and surrounded the can.
One grabbed the horse?s bridle, and held on
in spite of Roy?s determined slashes with the
whip ; the others wrenched open the doors
and strove to drag out the occupants. The
bottles rose, fell, and splintered, and then it
was a case of fist and boot against sticks and
knuckledusters. Roy helped all he could,
standing upright on the box, and slashing
with all his force at the attackers. But the
stake was a big one, and the assailants had
evidently made up their minds to have it.
They fought in grim silence, heedless of kicks
and buffets and the biting whip-lash, and
presently one of them succeeded in grabbing
Winter by the ankle, and exerted all his force
to drag him out.
It was at this moment that the rescue party
arrived, headed by the captain, who hurled
himself at Winter?s assailant with such force
that the ankle was freed immediately, and


Five men surrounded the cab.
Winter delivered a swift kick at the man?s chin
which caused him to sway limply and fall in
a heap, leaving the captain free to tackle
another. The next second the horse reared
in the shafts, the grip on his bridle released


at last; his detainer had needed both hands
to meet the thunderbolt assault of Doggett.
That side contest was soon over : Doggett
took two blows from a thick stick without
so much as a grunt, and then gripped his man
by the throat, swung him for a moment as a
terrier does a rat, and dashed him on to the
pavement, where he lay, a silent heap.
Roy had all he could do now to hold the
plunging horse. The sticks were still rising
and falling round the cab, but the issue was no
longer in doubt. As Doggett added himself
again to the melee another of the attackers
subsided, felled by a blow on the head from
Hume. The remaining two ran for it, and
Dicky, hopping out of the cab, hurled the
remains of his bottle after them.
? Three,? said the captain, panting, survey-
ing the fallen. ? That?s not bad. Any of our
mob hurt ? ?
All, with the exception of Roy, had cuts and
bruises to show, but there were no serious
injuries. So the captain climbed on to the
box, and the others inside the cab, and Roy
whipped up once more, and brought them
safely to the ? Pick and Nugget.? There
Winter?s first act was to put his winnings, three
hundred and forty odd pounds, in the pro-
prietress?s safe. Then he joined the others
in their quest for unguents. Roy, being intact,


took upon himself to return the cab, mindful
of its owner?s warning that it would be ten
shillings an hour after twelve o?clock. He
returned on the bicycle, and found the captain
in his room, in company with Mr. Albert Budd
and Jack Winter. The others had tended their
wounds and departed. Roy was appealed to
at once by Winter.
? Look here, Roy, I want to sling you two
guys a hundred quid, and the captain won?t
listen to me.?
? I should think not,? said Roy decidedly.
? But listen to reason. If it hadn?t been for
you guys I shouldn?t have a bean of that three
hundred odd, also I should have been knocked
out trying to hold it. I reckon that hundred?s
yours.?
Roy shook his head, and the captain said,
? Not a farthing of it, Jack.?
? You?re up against a brick wall with these
two, Winter,? said Mr. Budd. ? You needn?t
waste your breath.?
? It looks like it,? said Winter ruefully.
? But I ain?t going to forget it, all the same.?
? What are you going to do with your riches,
Jack ? ? inquired the captain.
? I reckon I?ll chip in with old Davy Black,
and do a bit of prospecting. Davy?s on his
uppers at present, but there ain?t much he
don?t know about the game. I?ll buy a horse


and cart and go out with Davy. . . . Reckon
if we struck lucky any old time, you guys
wouldn?t jib at being let in on it, eh ? ?
? We won?t jib if you can show us where to
peg out a rich claim, eh, Lavington ? ?
? I?d come like a shot,? Roy laughed.
? I?ll remember that,? said Winter seriously.
? S?long.? He got up and went out.
? And how much longer are you going to
stay in Kalgoorlie ? ? Mr. Budd asked.
? Depends upon the money,? replied the
captain, and explained their arrangement,
? How much have you got now, Lavington ? ?
? Twelve pounds ten and sixpence.?
? I don?t know exactly how I stand.? The
captain emptied his purse on the bed. ? Great
Scott ! I only beat you by two bob. . . .
This means starting on Monday.?
Roy was rather startled.
? I thought you?d got heaps more than that.?
? It?s a deuced expensive town, this. What
jammed me was the malaria. It was death for
me to keep on at the Bird.?
? Well, I suppose we?ll have to stick to the
arrangement,? said Roy.
? Like iron. I shan?t be sorry to leave.
Some of the cues in this place are nothing more
or less than murderous.?
? Shall you go to the Marlings right away ? ?
asked Mr. Budd.


The captain looked dubiously at the heap of
coins.
?We might have to take a job first. But
we?ll try for something fairly near the Ranges.
We?ll keep in touch with you, Budd.?
? It?s very good of you. I may see something
of you before then. I?ve some jobs to do down
that way. P. 0., Katanning, would find me
during the next few months.?
The captain scribbled down the address, and
then undressed and got into bed, while Roy
made preparations for his last shift at the Bird.
Mr. Budd, expressing a wish for frssh air and
further talk, accompanied him as far as the mine
premises.


CHAPTER X
AT KOGGALUNGA
IMMEDIATELY after the arrival at the
hotel in East Perth on the following Tuesday,
the captain sallied out and returned laden with
a shot-gun and a second-hand gramophone of
the hornless variety.
? They?re necessaries,? he told Roy. ?We
may meet a wild turkey in the bush. If we?ve
got a gun, he?s ours. If we haven?t, he strolls
off, and it?s ten bob gone.?
? Yes, I can see that a gun might be useful.
But the gramophone ?
? More useful than the gun even,? the
captain assured him. ?The Australian is a
born lover of music. We?ll take it that I?m
after a job in the bush. I roll up with my
gramophone, and find another fellow after the
same job. The boss looks us over, sees the
gramophone, and nods to the other man to
go away. I stop. You can?t blame the
boss.?


? And supposing the other fellow had a
gramophone too ? ?
? It would be a kind of competition then.
We?d tune them up, and let the boss decide.
That?s where Caruso would come in. He?d
sway the decision in nine cases out of ten. I?ll
put it on, and you can judge for yourself.?
The captain wound up the gramophone,
put on the record, and adjusted the needle.
? Now,? he said, throwing open the twin doors
of the instrument, ? you?ll imagine yourself in
Fiesole when he gets going.?
The next moment the great Italian was filling
the air with an impassioned love plaint in his
native tongue. The needle, finding itself with
more room than it needed in the well-worn
grooves of the record, supplied an impromptu
and somewhat astonishing obbligato, and with
every ten revolutions of the disc some portion
of the instrument?s anatomy subsided noisily
and recovered itself with a blood-curdling groan.
? There?s only one Signor,? said the captain,
beaming softly. ?? Who?s that ? ? A knock
had sounded at the door.
A maid put her head into the room.
? The boss can?t stick it, please, gentlemen.
He?s afraid it will drive away custom. He says
he must ask you to turn it off.?
? You mean to tell me ?? cried the cap-
tain, and paused, at a loss for words.


?He says it?s making him ill, sir. I ain?t
objecting myself. I?ve stood worse than that
before now. A gentleman in the last hotel
I was at used to play the bagpipes in his bed-
room. But the boss here ain?t too good in the
temper, and he?ll come up himself if you don?t
stop it.?
The captain raised the arm of the instrument,
and the Signor, wdth an expostulatory grunt,
relapsed into silence.
?You can tell the boss to shoot himself if
he can?t find any one to hang him,? said the
captain.
Yes, sir,? said the maid politely, and with-
drew.
The captain, with nostrils dilating, took
several turns round the room.
? We?ll get out of this place, Lavington. A
man can?t breathe here. How much money
have we got ? ?
The fares from Kalgoorlie and purchases
in Perth had depleted their store very consider-
ably. Roy had a little over seven pounds, and
the captain slightly less than thirty shillings.
? This means work with a capital W, Laving-
ton. The question is, shall we go out on spec,
or shall w T e try an agency ? ?
? I think an agency would be better.?
? That?s settled, then. I?ve had some good
jobs from agencies before now. A man named


Cass in Hay Street got me a beauty last year.
I had to mind a farm at Widdagine while the
people were away. All I had to do was to cook
my grub.?
? But what about the animals ? They had
to be looked after, surely ? ?
? There were too many of them for one man
to tend. So the first thing I did w r as to open
all the gates on the place, and all the beasts
had to do if they wanted anything w r as to go and
get it. I didn?t lose a single one.?
? Did you have to fight anybody ? ?
? Only the owner, and that was right at the
end. It was a top-hole job. . . . Sling us that
paper, will you ? We must do a theatre to-
night.?
Mr. Cass, the head of the Alpha Employment
Agency, reached by three flights of uncarpeted
stairs, received them affably the next morning.
? Can you milk ? ? was his first question.
? It?s quite immaterial whether we can or
not. We?ve no intention of milking,? said the
captain.
? Clearing, then ? ? suggested the agent.
? Know anything about trees ? ?
? I?ve often walked about under them,? said
the captain.?? I expect you have, too, Laving-
ton ? ?
? More than once,? said Roy.
? You sound just the men I want for a job


at Koggalunga,? said the agent. ? Are you
strong ? Could you lift me ? ?
? With the greatest ease,? the captain assured
him, but made no effort to essay the feat.
So Roy stepped forward, lifted the chair with
Mr. Cass in it, and deposited them on the
table.
?I can fix you both up,? said the agent.
? Lift me down. . . . Thank you. . . .
Koggalunga. Thirty bob a week and tucker.?
? It would be a change from mining,? said
the captain musingly. ? What do you think,
Lavington ? Shall we swing the axe at Kogga-
lunga ? ?
? Oh, I think so. We?ve got to get work,
and we might as well go there as anywhere
else.?
? Write your names on these cards, please,?
said Mr. Cass. ? Thank you. My fee?s ten
bob. . . . Did I hear you say you?d been
mining ? ?
? Just down from the fields,? said the
captain.
? How?s things up there ? ?
? Pretty bad. The men are following the
shifts.?
? Ah,? said Mr. Cass, ? that?s bad.?
? Heart - breaking,? agreed the captain.
? Good morning.? They made way for another
applicant for work, and as they reached the


head of the stairs they heard Mr. Cass ask,
? Can you milk ? ?
The captain examined his card as they
walked down Hay Street. ? Mr. J. Andersen,
Koggalunga,? he read. ?Well, he?s a lucky
man.? He paused and examined some gramo-
phone records displayed in the window of a
music shop. ? Peer Gynt. I say, that would
go well in the bush. Lend me a quid, will
you ? ?
Roy handed over the money without protest,
for he still considered himself in debt to his
friend.
The captain entered the shop, and came out
with a square parcel tucked under his arm.
? Anitra?s Dance and The Death of Ase,?
he said. ? Andersen ought to raise our wages.
.. . Now all w T e want is a couple of blankets
each, and then we?ll have lunch and hop off.?
This programme they carried out, and after
a train journey of five hours on the Southern
line, a journey which, as the captain pointed
out, brought them a hundred miles nearer the
Marlings, they got out at Koggalunga station,
and surveyed that rising township. It consisted
of the station shed, a tin-roofed store, and three
tents. Here and there the green clearings of
the settlers had eaten into the surrounding
forest; but the prevailing aspect was of bush
and solitude. The platform was deserted save


for the stationmaster, an unkempt dog, and
a farming man, black bearded, and wearing a
hat suggestive of the farthest back-blocks.
The stationmaster glanced at the new-
comers, and disappeared into his sanctum;
the dog stared at them, uttered a short yelp of
disapproval, and rushed away into the bush ;
the bearded man alone displayed interest in
them, and of him the captain inquired the
whereabouts of Mr. Andersen.
? Norwegian bloke, ain?t ?e ? ? said the man.
? Calls himself Joe, don?t ?e ? ?
? Quite possibly.?
? See that big gum ? ? said the bearded man,
nodding at the line of forest.
I see a number of big gums. They?ve a
deuced fine collection of gums about here.?
? See that great big gum ? ?that bloke ?itting
the sky ? ?
? Ah, that one with the white trunk. Yes,
I see it. You don?t tell me that Andersen grew
that ? ?
The bushman dismissed the question.
? The road to Andersen?s camp leads out
by that gum,? he said. ?It ain?t much of a
track farther on. ?E?s clearing a patch for
Jackman.? He surveyed their luggage, which
consisted of two swags, the shot-gun, and
the gramophone. ? Ain?t you got a water-
bag ? ?


? We thought of buying one at Koggalunga,?
the captain replied. ? But Koggalunga is
going to let us down, by the look of it.?
? You can get one at the store. Revel ?ll be
asleep, but don?t let him bluff you. Wake ?im
up, and tell ?im you ain?t going out without
one. . . . What?s London like these days ? ?
? It was doing pretty well when I left.
They were building another house, and three
more men had come into the place.?
? Rainin?, wasn?t it ? ? The man glanced
at the frayed bottoms of the captain?s trousers,
which were turned up.
? May I ask your name ? ? said the captain.
? Slavin ?Jack Slavin.?
? Well, Jack, I?m sorry to have to tell you,
but that joke about it raining in London was
shouted at Noah in the ark.?
? W ant to fight ? ? asked Slavin pleasantly.
? I don?t mind.? The captain put up his
hands. But Roy thought it was time to inter-
vene.
? No, I?m hanged if you?re going to fight
over a trifle like that. It?s too dashed silly.?
? But I thought he wanted to fight,? said
Slavin.
? But there?s nothing to fight about,? said
Roy. ?So don?t be a couple of fools.?
? Oh, well,? said Slavin, dropping his hands.
? How are you off for tea ? ?


? We left London without any,? said the
captain.
? I ain?t sure that Revel?s got any. I?ll let
you ?ave a pannikin of dry if ?e ain?t.? Slavin
turned and busied himself with the loading of
a spring cart, and Roy and the captain crossed
to the store, at the door of which they knocked
loudly.
? The store ain?t open,? bawled a hoarse
voice from the inside, ? Come in the morning.?
? We?re coming in now,? the captain assured
him.
? Go and bury yourselves,? howled the voice
indignantly. ?Go and?? The rest of the
sentence was lost owing to the abrupt entry
of the visitors, who had put their shoulders to
the door, and forced the barricade of tinned-
meat boxes.
? You got a nerve,? snarled the owner of the
place, an unshaven, bullet-headed little man.
? I tell you the store ain?t open. Get out! ?
He raised himself on one arm from the camp-
bed on which he was lying, and glared at them.
? Deadwood Dick,? the captain said to Roy,
? just walk round this store and see if you can
find a water-bag, a billy-can, a tin of condensed
milk, and some tea and sugar. If you hear a
noise while you?re at it, you?ll know I?m killing
Mr. Revel, but don?t let that interrupt you.?
? Very good,? said Roy, with becoming


They put their shoulders to the door.
gravity. He began to rummage; and the
captain, standing up straight, with folded arms,
gazed fixedly at the storekeeper, who elected
to stay where he was.
Roy was successful in finding all the desired
articles, and the captain inquired the lowest
(2.678) 129 9


cash price of them. Revel forced himself to
reply, and received the money without thanks.
Their next act was to fill the water-bag at the
tank attached to the store, and Revel, freed from
their immediate presence, was at pains to shout
his opinion of the proceeding through the wall.
The flood of his eloquence was baulked by the
captain beating the side of the building wdth
an old spade.
?You didn?t let him bluff you, then ? ? said
Slavin, as they passed, with full water-bag,
billy-can swinging, and pockets distended with
packages.
? We got what we wanted,? said the captain.
? Yes, I thought you?d got him ticked off
when I saw you ?itting the store with the spade.
Revel ain?t exactly cut out for storekeeping.
?E ain?t civil enough. I generally ?ave to show
?im my fist if I want anything, and one day
I ?ad to raise my gun to ?im. There ain?t
enough competition round ?ere, that?s the
trouble. The man?s got it all ?is own way. . . .
S?long! .. . Gee-up, you? ! ? Urged by a
number of hair-raising adjectives, followed by
a totally irrelevant noun, Slavin?s horse broke
into a trot, and disappeared into the forest.
Roy and the captain continued their way, and
reaching the great big gum, discovered the
track leading to the domains of Andersen. It
was an inconsiderable affair, which penetrated


? This ts better than mining.?
the bush on the principle of least resistance,
skirting the boles of forest giants, going straight
through patches of light scrub, breaking sharply
to right or left at outcrops of rock, but always
reverting to its original direction in the path of
the setting sun. For the first four miles they
came across farms set well back from the road,
but as these became fewer the track narrowed,
and at the end of the sixth mile, when the


captain dropped his swag and suggested a cup
of tea, they were, as he said, ? Well and nobly in
the bush.?
The sun had now gone down, and a full yellow
moon swung up above the tree-tops and assisted
them in their choice of sticks for the fire. The
captain made a couple of tripods, set a stout
stick across them, and suspended the billy from
it. The fire crackled cheerily beneath.
? This is better than mining,? Roy remarked,
gazing appreciatively around.
? Heaps,? the captain agreed. ?In a mine
a man makes more or less of a blighted mole
of himself. Here he?s more of a blighted
eagle. Caruso ought to go well here.? He
unpacked the gramophone and put on the rec-
ord. The Signor proceeded to fill the forest
with amorous appeal, and was hooted at by
an owl perched on a neighbouring red gum.
Whereupon the captain took careful aim at the
bird with his shot-gun, and missed.
They drank their tea to the accompaniment
of Anitra?s Dance and The Death of Ase,
and then feeling considerably refreshed, they
shouldered their swags and set off again, and
after two hours? walking the smell of wood
smoke came to them, strong and pungent, and
yellow points glimmered through the tree-
trunks ahead.
? The fires of Andersen,? said the captain.


CHAPTER XI
POOR HARD-WORKING MEN
THE track lost itself in a small clearing, in
which were standing two tents, a larger
structure of timber and sacking, and a big tank.
A thin fringe of trees separated this clearing from
a much larger one. A haze of smoke hung over
the latter, punctuated by the flickers of many
fires. Roy and the captain came to a halt
by the tank, and looked round them.
? No sign of Joseph,? said the captain.
? Listen,? said Roy. Far out on the big
clearing some one was singing. The night was
still, and they could catch the words ?
? Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea I
Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea I
Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea!
And de poor 'ard-working men.?
There w r as something dirgelike about the
tune ; and the voice was quite uncultured.
? Did you ever hear such a wail in all your
born days ? ? said the captain with a shudder.


? Give him a hail, Larington. We can?t stand
about here all night.?
Roy put his hands to his mouth and sent a
loud coo-cc across the clearing. The singing
stopped abruptly, and an answering call came
to them out of the smoke. They waited a few
minutes, and then out of the haze appeared the
figure of a tall, burly man, dressed in blue dun-
garees, and carrying a long-handled shovel
and an axe over his shoulder. He strode into
the camp, leant the shovel against the tank,
dealt a mighty blow at a tree with the axe, and
left the implement sticking in the trunk ; then
he approached the two and said, ?
? Good day. Come to do a bit of graft ? ?
?We have,? the captain admitted. ? Are
you Mr. Andersen ? ?
? Reckon I am.?
? Let me hand you our credentials, then.?
The captain produced the cards given them by
the agent in Perth.
Andersen took them and examined them long
and minutely by the moonlight. Then he shook
his head.
? What dey say ? ?
? They say that we are Messrs. Waltcrs-Mcete
and Lavington, and that we have engaged our-
selves to chop down trees for you for the
consideration of thirty shillings a week and
tucker.?


? Which is Walter ? ?
The captain dealt his chest a resounding
blow.
? I?m Joe,? said Andersen. He turned to
Roy. ? And what?s your name ?Ted, ?Any,
Dick ? ?
? I?m Roy Lavington.?
? Roy,? said Andersen musingly. ? There
ain?t many Roys in the bush. Done any
clearing ? ?
? We?ve just been clearing out a mine in
Kalgoorlie,? said the captain, before Roy could
reply. ? The old Bird.?
? I?ve ?cared of it. ?Ow?s things up dat
way ? ?
? Not too good. We had to follow the shifts
to get a job.?
? Derc arc too many men in dem cities,?
announced Andersen. ? Dey all want soft
jobs. Some of dem ought to come into de
bush and do some work. . . . Are you ?ungry ? ?
? Peckish. We?ll put it that way, Joe.?
? You can camp in dere if you like.? Andersen
nodded to one of the tents. ? I bought it off
a man what was grafting for me last week. We
?ad an argyment. ?E didn?t like ants in the
butter?reckoned I ought to ?ave kept it in
water, ?e did. I told ?im if ?e didn?t like ants ?e
could ?
The list of things which he had submitted to


his assistant as practicable was long and en-
tirely unprintable.
? Joseph strikes me as being a virile sort
of old bloke,? the captain remarked as they
spread out their blankets in the tent. ? But
what an infernal song.?
Outside, their employer was rekindling the
fire, and the refrain came to them mingled with
the snapping of sticks?
? Who gets up at de 'arf-past two or free ?
Who gets up at de 'arf-past two or free ?
Who gets up at de 'arf-past two or free ? ?
? The blighted working man, for a cert,? the
captain whispered. ? Listen.?
? Why, de poor ?ard-working men/'
crooned Andersen pathetically.
The captain shivered.
? I knew it. What a murderous wail it is.
We?ll have to introduce him to the Signor.
Come on.?
They went out and approached the fire.
? Where did you pick up that ditty, Joe? ?
the captain asked.
Andersen lifted the billy from the fire, and
looked at it fondly.
? Pert?. Four years ago. It?s been a good
friend.?


? The song, I mean ?The Poor Hard-work-
ing Men.?
? Oh ? ?Andersen looked slightly surprised ?
? was I singing dat ? I learned dat on a bar-
quentine, fifteen, twenty years ago. I sing it
sometimes.?
? Ever hear Caruso, Joe ? ?
Andersen shook his head, and flinging a
handful of tea into the billy, proceeded to stir
it with a stick. ? Was ?e up dis way ? ?he asked.
? No. He?s a singer.?
? Oh, I don?t go much on dem cows.?
? I?ve a gramophone in my swag. I?ll put
him on for you, if you like.?
? We?ll ?ave ?im after supper,? said Andersen.
He lifted the steaming billy, and led the way
into the log hut, where they took their seats
on a tree-trunk resting on socketed supports
in front of a bush-made table. Andersen
opened a couple of tins of meat, and produced
some butter, jam, a damper, and a bottle of
tomato sauce.
? I don?t see any ants in the butter,? said
Roy.
? I keep it in water now. I was going to do
it before, but dat cow spoke out of ?is turn.
?E was a grouser. Nothing was no good to
?im. If it ?adn?t been de butter it would ?ave
been de axes.?
? What became of him ? ? Roy asked.


? I carried ?im in on my back after de fight.
?E looked like dying, and I didn?t want no dying
men in my camp.?
? They do make the place untidy,? the
captain agreed. ?Do you know, Joe, if ever
I fight you, it will be over something more
important than ants. You look toughish.?
Andersen regarded his immense arms com-
placently.
? I can fight a bit,? he admitted. ? I learned
at sea, and I?ve practised in de bush. Fifteen
years I?ve been in de bush, and t?ree fights a
year. ?Ow many?s dat ? ?
? Forty-five,? said Roy.
? Forty-four. I?ve only ?ad two dis year.?
? Plenty of time for the third,? said the
captain. ? You mustn?t break your record,
Joe.?
? I ain?t looking for fights.? Andersen
shrugged his shoulders. ? It?s de odor cows.
Dey come along and speak out of derc turn ?
ants in de butter, greasy meat, and all dat.
And den I ?its ?em.?
? And then they look like dying,? said the
captain.
? Gencr?ly. Not always. I?ve been ?it out
before now. ?More tea, Roy ? ?
They finished the meal, and then went out
and sat by the fire. ? What about dat cow ? ?
said Andersen, filling his pipe.


? Which particular cow ? ? inquired the
captain.
? Dc singing one.?
? Oh, Caruso. Yes, you must hear him.?
The captain got up and fetched the instrument.
? * Cow * is hardly the right word to apply
to Caruso,? he remarked, winding up the
gramophone, and placing the record on the
disc.
Andersen applied a burning ember to his pipe.
? I?ll tell you if Vs a cow or not when I
?ear ?im,? he said, sitting back, and assuming
a judicial expression. This expression changed
to one of distaste as the Signor vomited his
passion for a certain lady of Italy.
? A cow,? said Andersen, as the last thrilling
notes died away. He rose and took up his
long-handled shovel. ? I?m sorry, Walter, but
dc man?s a cow.? He strode off into the big
clearing. ? Going to do a bit of stoking,? he
told them over his shoulder.
? He?ll get his forty-fifth fight this year, I?m
afraid,? said the captain, looking after him.
? And I think he?ll win it.?
? If he fights either of us, I?m afraid he will,?
Roy agreed. ? He?s like a great bull.?
? Well, let?s have The Death of Ase,? said the
captain.
They used six more needles, and then sought
their blankets.


With the first streak of light the next morning
a brilliantly-plumaged little bird sat on a branch
above the ridge-pole of their tent and disproved
the statement that the birds of Australia have
no song. Soon, from every bush and tree, he
was joined by friends and relatives, who lifted
up their voices in thanksgiving for another day
of sunshine. Then, as the gold showed through
the tree-trunks to the east, another and deeper
voice joined in the warbling. It was that of
Andersen, singing the song he had learned
on the barquentine fifteen, twenty years before.
He sang it to the accompaniment of earth-
shaking blows of his axe on refractory logs.
? Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea I ?
The singer repeated the line twice, men-
tioned the poor hard-working men, then, drop-
ping the axe, and rattling the billy against the
side of the tank, he proceeded to inquire the
identity of the persons who were in the habit
of rising in the early hours.
? We do,? shouted the captain, trying vainly
to shut out the noise with his blankets. ? Poor
hard-working blighters that get woke up at the
half-past twelve or one.?
? Any one awake ? ? cried Andersen, who
had not caught the remark. ?De billy ?ll be
boiled in five minutes.?
They got up at that, and washed at the tin


They washed at the tin basin perched on three sticks.
basin perched on three sticks outside the tent.
By the time they had finished their ablutions
the billy had boiled, and they joined their
employer in the log hut. It was a simple bush
meal of tinned meat, damper, jam, and the
inevitable tomato sauce, and when they had
finished, Andersen took his axe and long-
handled shovel, and led the way to the clearing.
The smoke had died down a good deal during
la


the night, but innumerable fires were still
smouldering gently. Reaching the northern
end of the clearing, Andersen picked up a couple
of stout branches, lopped them clean with his
axe, and gave them to Roy and the captain.
? You can start ?ere,? he said, and showed
them how to manipulate the great logs lying
around so that a fire placed at the windward
end of the heap would devour the whole.
? When you?ve finished dat, you can get de
small stuff togedder in ?caps.? He stood by
for a few minutes watching them, and then
departed to the edge of the clearing, where
he proceeded to lever up the lighted logs
burrowing into the boles of about fifty trees.
? We,? said the captain, after an hour?s
strenuous work on the end of his lever, ? are
nothing less than a couple of blighted fools.?
? How?s that ? ?
? Why, we ought to have taken a contract
ourselves. We could have taken our time at
the job then, pouched our six or seven quid a
week, and floated off to the Marlings at the end
of it. Instead of that, we?re bullocking our-
selves to death for an outsider who rants about
vessels sailing on the sea.? The captain
glowered at a corpulent log which refused to
be dislodged. ? What do you say ? Shall we
roll up our swags and go and look for a con-
tract ? ?


? But I don?t know the least little thing about
clearing,? Roy objected. ? I think we ought to
stick this for a bit, learn the game, and then
perhaps we could look out for a contract later
__ 
on.
? But I know clearing from Ato Z.? The
captain sat down on the corpulent log to talk,
? All you?d have to do would be to cling to my
skirts.?
? But we can?t chuck up this job on the first
day. It would look like running away. We?d
much better stick it for a few months. After
all, we?re getting thirty bob a week. ... I should
get off that log, captain, if I were you. Ander-
sen?s looking this way.?
The captain glanced scornfully at their
employer, who, with a hand shading his eyes,
was looking fixedly in their direction.
? Let him look. We had to listen to his
blighted song. Well, it?s up to him to watch
me sitting on his blighted log.? And the
captain continued to sit for another five
minutes.
At lunch Andersen?s manner was decidedly
curt to the captain ; but, on the other hand,
he seemed to take a pleasure in ministering to
Roy?s wants. The captain remarked on this
as they walked out that afternoon to belabour a
patch of undergrowth with Kelly axes.
? He did make himself pleasant,? Roy agreed.


? But I expect he would have been the same to
you if you hadn?t sat about on that log this
morning.?
?I?m not going to have a Scandinavian pot-
walloper tell me when to sit down and when to
stand up. He?s a cunning blighter, though.
He?s given me an axe that weighs a good half-
hundredweight. Just feel it.?
Andersen, watching from the edge of the
clearing, noted Roy?s axe swinging steadily
all that afternoon. But the captain?s was less
persistent. He confessed to a great longing
for the lonely and toilless spaces of the Mar-
lings, and sat for considerable intervals on a
tree-stump to pour out his feelings. His gait
as he walked back to camp that evening was
that of a man broken with labour.
The Signor was silent that night; and
Andersen, busy, with set expression, over the
cooking of a damper, made no mention of the
vessels sailing upon the sea.


CHAPTER XII
MALARIA ?AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
THE tea was cooling in the billy when the
captain, a good ten minutes late, made
his appearance in the log hut the following
morning.
? Malaria,? he said calmly. ? I?d better
keep quiet to-day, Joe.?
? You been keeping quiet ever since you been
?ere,? was the unsympathetic reply. ? Roy
?as been earning ?is tucker. Your wages are
dirty-five shillings a week now, Roy.?
? Oh, thanks very much,? said Roy uncom-
fortably.
? You ain?t earned your tucker yet,? Andersen
went on, turning to the captain. ? I don?t tink
you got much ?eart. I tink your mudder reared
a jib.?
? Your mudder,? retorted the captain, lifting
the billy and emptying its contents into his
employer?s face, ? raised six feet of inferior
bullock.?
(2,678) l JO


Andersen wiped his face slowly and methodi-
cally with a big red handkerchief, and nodded
to the captain to step outside. Roy, knowing
that it was useless to interpose, went out too.
The fight was of short duration. The cap-
tain fought fiercely, and at the outset got in
several blows that must have knocked out a
less weighty opponent. But Andersen merely
snorted scornfully, and biding his time, sent
the captain flying against the tank, which
boomed resonantly with the impact. Seeing
that he was powerless to rise, Roy ran to him,
and raised his head.
?He can fight,? murmured the captain.
? I saw stars that time. Let me down. I?ll
be all right in a minute.?
Roy stood up and turned to Andersen, who
was wiping the blood from his face with the
red handkerchief.
?I?m afraid I shall have to fight you now,
Joe.?
? What for ? ? Andersen stared at him.
? I ain?t quarrelled wid you.?
?You called my friend a jib.?
' ? Well, ?e is a jib?at work. I don?t say ?e
ain?t a fighter. . . . And I can beat you,
Roy.?
?I?m quite aware of that. I expect I shall
get half killed. But I can?t see anything else
for it.?


The captain emptied the contents of the billy into his
employer?s face.
? But ? ?Andersen scratched his head, and
spoke almost shyly?? I like you, Roy.?
? It?s very good of you to say so. And I
rather like you. You?ve been pretty decent,
raising my wages and all that. But the captain
will expect me to fight.?
? We?ll ask ?im,? said Andersen, and ap-
-147 r


proached the prostrate captain. ? ?Ere,
Walter, I reckon I ain?t got no call to fight
Roy because I called you a jib ?
? Of course not,? said the captain, in a weak
voice.?? Don?t be a fool, Lavington. I won?t
have you fight him. It?s like tackling St. Paul?s
Cathedral. You?ll just hurt your hands. If
you start, I?ll crawl through your legs and
upset you.?
? Oh, well, if you?re quite sure ?I didn?t want
you to think that I funked it.?
? Walter wouldn?t never tink dat,? said
Andersen. ? You ain?t much good at work,
Walter, but I reckon you wouldn?t never jib
at a fight.?
? Aji apology,? murmured the captain.
? Joseph?s doing the handsome. I mustn t
be outdone, Joseph. I said that your mudder
raised six feet of inferior bullock. I now
publicly withdraw the word ? inferior.? ?
? I?m satisfied,? said Andersen gravely.
? ?Ow are you feeling ? ?
? Cheap deuced cheap.? The captain
staggered to his feet and supported himself
against the side of the tank. ? Would any
kind gentleman direct me to the nearest heap
of blankets ? ?
Assisted to the tent, the captain subsided
with a sigh of relief. ? I?m all right,? he told
them. ? Run away and work.?


? Will he be all right, do you think ? ? Roy
asked.
? I reckon.? Andersen gazed critically at
the sufferer. ? I?ve ?it men before like dat,
and after t?ree hours dey sit up and want some-
ting to eat.?
So the two departed for the clearing, Andersen
delivering himself of some sage remarks on the
way.
? Dis Walter ?what?s ?e captain of ? ?
?He was in the hussars.? The captain had
let fall scraps of his career at times.
? ?Oosahs ? What?s dat ? ?
? A regiment of mounted soldiers.?
? Oh, Walter?s a soldier, is ?e ? Why didn?t
?e stay soldier ? ?
? I think he had a row with his colonel.?
? Ah,? Andersen nodded, ? ?e would ?ave a
row, dis Walter. If de colonel told Walter to
boil de billy, Walter would empty it in de
colonel?s face.?
By this time they had reached the scene of
their labours, and Roy did not consider it
necessary to explain that boiling the billy is
not one of the duties which a captain of hussars
is called upon to perform. Instead, he picked
up his axe and set to work on the undergrowth,
and Andersen went on to fell some more trees.
Roy worked on the undergrowth all that day,
and in the late afternoon he was interrupted by


his employer, who approached with a brow
furrowed with thought.
? Walter ?ll ?ave to go, Roy. I ain?t going to
?ave ?im on my mind. I can?t afford to feed a
?oosah.?
? Well, it?s a point for you to settle.? Roy
struck at a sapling, put his weight against it, and
broke it off.
? ?E ain?t no good to you eider, Roy.?
? He?s got a lot of good points, all the same.?
? You?re wort? dirty-seven and sixpence a
week to me. I?ll give you dat to stay.?
? It?s jolly good of you, Joe. But I?ll have
to see what the captain thinks. If he wants
me to go along with him, I shall have to go.?
? Tink it over, Roy. Dere?s five weeks? work
on dis clearing, and ?oosahs ain?t no good to
you ?not a bit of good.? Andersen shook his
head ponderously and strode away.
The captain, considerably revived after a
sleep and a meal, beckoned Roy into their tent
after tea that evening.
? Joseph?s given me the sack,? he said. ? I
half expected it.?
? Yes, he told me this afternoon. And he?s
offered me another half-crown a week to stay
on. What shall Ido ? I?m in your hands.?
? Thirty-seven and sixpence a week,? said
the captain musingly. ? It?s a stop-gap, cer-
tainly. On the other hand, if we had our own


MALARIA 15
contract, we should be pouching a good deal
more than that.?
? But could we get a contract ? ?
? I don?t see why we shouldn?t. We?re
both experienced clearers now. Look here,
there?s no need for us both to hunt round.
You stay with Joseph for a bit, and I?ll go into
Koggalunga and nose out a paying proposition
?something with a small size in trees and good
money on the end of it. Directly I strike
something suitable, I?ll let you know, and we?ll
butt in, work like niggers for a few weeks, and
then streak for the Mar lings.?
? Sounds all right. But this contract of
Andersen?s will last five weeks, and if I take his
extra money, I feel that I ought to see it out.?
? Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea I ?
wailed Andersen unmelodiously from his seat
by the fire.
The captain shuddered.
? If you can stick five weeks of that, you?ll
be pretty tough. I should ask him to make
it thirty-five bob, and reserve the right to leave
when you like.?
? I?ll ask him.? Roy crossed to the fire
and explained the situation to his employer.
? Stay as long as you like at dirty-seven and
sixpence,? said Andersen agreeably. ? Walter
won?t get no contract in a ?urry,? he added.


So the captain departed after breakfast the
next morning, laden with blankets, gramophone,
and shot-gun, and with two pound notes, bor-
rowed from Roy, tucked away in his waistcoat
pocket.
Roy now settled down seriously to earning
his thirty-seven and sixpence a week. He
found the life slightly monotonous, but it had
its compensations. He was in the fresh air
from morning to night, and Andersen, big,
simple child of nature, exerted himself to be
pleasant. He initiated Roy into the use of
the broad axe and the bill-hook, and went to
some trouble to explain the finer points of
clearing.
? You want to let de fire work for you,? he
said one day. ?De fire is a very quick work-
man, but it wants ?andling. Two burning
logs apart will soon go out, but give dem a shove
wid a lever now and den, and keep dem togedder,
and dey?ll eat each odder up. . . . And look
at dem blokes ? ?he pointed to half a dozen logs
lying crosswise on the trunk of a prostrate red-
gum, and burning their way steadily through
its bulk ?? dey?re working almost as quick as
a two-?andled saw, and I don?t ?ave to pay dem.
Fire is as good as two ?undred men if you use
it right.?
Roy proved himself so apt a pupil that his
employer became more friendly every day, and


at the end of a fortnight he broached a pro-
position.
? We could make money togedder, you and
me, Roy. What about a big contract when we
finish dis ? We could get men up from Pert?
to work for us.?
Roy shook his head. His plans were made,
though somewhat vaguely, for the ensuing nine
or ten months. By hook or by crook, he must
find his way to the Marlings. He had not much
faith in the captain?s grandiose schemes for
a prolonged shooting expedition, but he had
promised Sir John Stanford some photographs,
and he meant to get them. Meanwhile he
thought that it would be as well to see as much
as he could of the country, try his hand at any-
thing that came along, and find out which
district and occupation suited him best. Once
those photographs were obtained, he could, if
necessary, turn in his tracks. So he thanked
Andersen, and refused the offer.
? You?re going to stick to dat ?oosah, is dat
de reason ? ?
? Partly that, Joe. I?ve got to work off a
debt to him. He was very decent to me when
I first landed. But there?s something else.
I?ve got to do a job down in the south-west.?
? It?s a pity. We could ?ave made money,
you and me. I?m going in to-morrow to see
about a big contract.?


The next day brought a message from the
captain. It was delivered by a competent-
looking farmhand wearing a red-white-and-
blue ribbon round his broad-rimmed felt hat.
He came out to replenish the water tank, and
brought his wagon and four round the stump-
littered clearing with an ease and certainty that
compelled Roy?s admiration.
"You Roy Lavington ?? he inquired. ? Tve
got a letter for you from a cobber of yours in
Koggalunga.? He pulled up by the tank,
descended, and handed Roy the missive. It
contained but a few lines :
?Dear Lavington,
?No luck yet in the way of con-
tracts. I think we?d better hoof it out of
this district when you?ve finished with your
old ballad-singer. There is a lot of work
going, I hear, round Riverton, mostly
fencing. I?ve done quite a lot of that in
my time, so all you would have to do would
be to cling to my skirts. I?ve bought a
tent off Revel, and I?m living on the skin of
my teeth. It?s a flat old stretch round here,
and I shan?t be satisfied till I hear our rifles
cracking beneath the peaks of the Marlines.
? Yours,
? Walters-Meete.?


? Bit of a customer, that cobber of yours,?
said the farmhand. ? Living on tick at Revel?s.
Had to fight him first, though. Why don?t he
get a job ? Work-shy ? ?
? Malaria,? said Roy gravely. ?He gets
attacks of it at times.?
? Wasn?t much malaria in him when he fought
Revel. Proper ding-dong it was. I saw it.?
? What did they fight about ? ?
?To see who was the better man. Your
cobber ?Meete, ain?t his name ? ?goes pretty
well. Revel?s quite civil to him now.? The
man took a bucket, climbed into the wagon,
and Roy gave him a hand to fill the tank.
Gradually the clearing ate its way into the
forest, but it required another three weeks?
steady toil before the work was finished. On
the evening of the last day Roy and Andersen sat
by the fire and looked out at their handiwork.
? Dere?ll be wheat on dis next year,? said
Andersen, ? and perhaps a shed.?
? And w r here will you be, Joe ? ?
? Furder out.? Andersen pointed to the forest.
? Aren?t you ever going in for farming your-
self ? ?
? No, my job is making farms for odder
people. It satisfies dcm, and it satisfies me.?
Andersen hummed a verse of his only song,
filled his pipe with plug tobacco, and spoke
out of his simple philosophy ?


? I done a good many clearings dese last
fifteen years, and all of dem is green now, and
some wid houses on dem, and children running
about. But I can?t stay on dem myself, I
got to get out furder and furder. De bush is
like de sea : bot? of dem knock you about,
but a man likes dem bot?. I been shipwrecked
on de sea, and I been lost in de bush. A British
vessel picked me up out of de open boat, and
a British man picked me up out of de bush.
And still I like de sea and de bush. I like de
birds and de smoke and de sky, and I like to see
de moon coming up over de trees. Dat?s more
wort? seeing dan de picture palaces in Pert?.?
? That?s so, Joe.?
? And I?m sorry you?re going,? Andersen
continued. ? Dat ?oosah ain?t going to do you
no good. But dere?de men dat I?ve seen and
worked wid in de bush !?dey come and go, but
not many sit down and tink about de bush like
I do. . . . And now I?m going to ?ave a look
at de last fire. Dat stump ought to be burnt
out by de morning.? He picked up his shovel,
and went out through the fringe of trees. A
few minutes later Roy heard him singing as he
tended the last fire ?
" Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea 1
Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea I
Oh, Bill, our vessels dat sail upon de sea I
And de poor 'ard-working men.?


CHAPTER XIII
THE ACQUISITION OF THE ?GOLDEN HIND ?
THE captain, lying at full length on his
blankets in his little tent at Koggalunga,
looked up as Roy?s shadow fell across the open
entry.
?Ah, Lavington, here you are at last. Wel-
come as the birds in May, my boy. You?re
looking well, in spite of your five weeks with the
ballad-singer.?
Roy dropped his swag between the gramo-
phone and the shot-gun, and sat down.
? I hear you?ve been fighting Revel ? ?
? Oh, that was weeks ago. We?re good
friends now, and I owe him seven quid.?
? How did you manage that ? ?
? Quite simple. I was a bit done up when
I arrived here, what with Joseph?s singing and
the malaria, so I bought this tent off Revel for
thirty bob, and kept quiet for a couple of days.
The third day I tramped round looking for
contracts, and I soon discovered that there


was nothing in this district likely to suit us.
The people here want their work done for
nothing, and some of them would like you to
pay them for giving it to you. So I came back
to the tent and did some real hard thinking.
I asked questions, too, of all the people passing.
It cost me a bit in tucker, but it was worth it.
I got what I wanted from the store ?after the
fight ?and Revel?s chalking it up on the slate.
Now everybody I?ve met up to the
present since I?ve been camped in this fairway
tells the same story ?if you want to make money
quickly, go to Riverton. They can?t get men
in that district, and directly we show our noses
in the place we shall be snowed under with
offers of contracts. And what?s more, if we
go there, we shall be sixty miles nearer the
Marlings. . . . What say you ? ?
? Let?s try Riverton, by all means. But
Revel will have to be paid. And that?s going
to leave us rather short. I?ve only twelve
pounds all told.?
? That leaves us five. Whips, my boy, with
Riverton screaming for us on the horizon.
Let?s have some scran.?
They boiled the billy with water taken from
Revel?s tank, the storekeeper making no protest,
and the captain opened a tin of salmon, and
produced shop bread and a big pat of butter.
? That?s the best of living near the railway,?


he remarked. ? You don?t have to eat that
blighted damper.?
A swagman with three days? growth of beard,
inferior boots, and an attenuated roll of blankets
approached them as they ate, and said ? Good
day.?
? Got a pannikin ? ? asked the captain.
? I?m getting it,? said the swagman, untying
the article in question, a very capacious one,
from the strap of his blankets. He sat down
and accepted everything that was offered him.
? Had my bicycle stole,? he said morosely,
? or you wouldn?t see me padding it like this.?
? Where are you from ? ??the captain asked.
? Riverton. I got out of it quick. The
flies are dying there by thousands for want of
nourishment.?
Roy tried to exchange a glance with the
captain, and failed.
Their guest ate enormously, and spoke
gloomily of the future of Western Australia.
? It won?t be fit for a dorg to live in soon,?
he assured them. ?The country?s all right,
but the people are up to mud?a lot of blank -
ety blanking blanks, with no more heart than
a dingo. I tapped a man this morning for a
bit of tucker. ? Yes,? he says, ? I?ll give you
some tucker,? and he takes me round to a wood-
heap the size of Perth. ? You might chop this
up first,? he says, the blankety blanking blank.


I called him that. And then he set his dorg
on me. Western Australia ! You can have it
for me. If I had the price of my fare I?d hop
on the first boat for New South Wales.? He
paused and looked meaningly at his hosts.
? If I had the price of my fare,? he repeated.
? Nothing doing,? said the captain. ?As
a matter of fact, we?re looking for work our-
selves.?
? Well, I hope you find it,? said their guest
bitterly. ? What about a bit of tucker to carry
me along ? ? He stowed away a tin of meat
and a hunk of bread, emptied the dregs of his
pannikin into the fire, nodded, and steered his
course for a large white gum some hundred
yards down the road. They watched him
spread out his blankets in its grateful shade.
? He didn?t seem to think much of Riverton,?
said Roy.
? Riverton didn?t think much of him, that?s
about it. That fellow?s mortally afraid of
work. And I?ve heard that yarn about the
stolen bicycle before. These fellows are the
curse of the country. They neither toil nor
spin, and yet they expect to have their beds
made for them. . . . Hullo ! Who?s this ?
?another swaggie ? ?
A man on a bay horse, with a roll of blankets
tied to the pommel of his saddle, came cantering
up to the siding.


A swagman approached and said ? Good day."
? It's Budd,? said Roy suddenly.
Mr. Budd it was, dapper as ever, with fresh,
clean-shaven face and spotless white collar,
looking a pleasant contrast to their late guest.
? Well met, you two,? he sang out, di5(2.678)
(2.678) 161 11


mounting, and throwing the reins over his
horse?s neck. The animal, being well-trained,
deemed itself tethered, and stood still. Mr!
Budd came across and shook hands with his
friends. ? I seem fated to run against you,?
he remarked. ? Been working about here ?
And when do we start for the Marlings ? ?
You might say we?re on our way there
now,? said the captain. ? A month or two
in Riverton to knock up a cheque, and then
away we go.?
? Nothing to eat, thanks.? Mr. Budd waved
away the salmon. ? I?ve had scran. But I
can?t say No to a pannikin of tea. I?m on
business in Koggalunga. I?ve got to see a man
named Andersen about a clearing contract.
Do you know where he?s to be found ? ?
Yes, said the captain, and gave a minute,
if biased, description of his late employer and
his residence.
? 1 d n?t agree,? Roy put in. ? I found him
.a decent old stick.?
?Go and see for yourself, then. Go out and
listen to his song about the working men. Go
and listen to him eating tinned meat. Go
and ?
? I will,? Mr. Budd promised. ? And now,
what have you been doing since I last saw
you ? ?
They told the story between them, and Mr.


Budd laughed heartily. Then, having listened
to the Signor?s avowal of love, encored twice,
Anitra?s Dance, and The Death of Ase, he
shook hands and rode aw r ay to interview Joe
Andersen.
? He?s got a good job, that fellow,? said the
captain, gazing after him. ? I wouldn?t mind
being an agent myself.?
? What peculiar eyes he has, though. I should
think he was very shrewd.?
? Never met an agent yet that wasn?t shrewd.
It?s their shrewdness that makes them agents.
. . . Now, what about Riverton ? Are you
game to start to-morrow ? ?
? Rather. How shall we go ? ?by train ? ?
? I?ve a better plan than that. What do
you say to the road ? ?
? What, sixty miles carrying our swags ? ?
? Not carrying our swags ?pushing them.?
? I don?t understand.?
? Listen. Revel has a perambulator at the
back of his store. I think he?d sell it to us for
a quid. He used to hire it out to the farmers
years ago, but the front wheels came off one
day and emptied a few twins into the road.
The people around here fight shy of it now.
We could fix up the wheels with a bit of wire,
dump our swags into it, and simply prance
through the country. How does that strike
you ? ?


Roy was suffused with the possibilities of the
scheme.
? Laugh away,? said the captain. ? But
it?s a sound proposition. We?re in Australia,
remember, and nobody cares a twopenny blight
what you do. That perambulator would make
things deuced easy for us. We?d be in the
country all the time, and w r e could keep our
eyes and ears open for likely jobs. If we w r ent
by train we might be leaving good openings
behind us ?see what I mean ? ?
? Yes, I see. 1 think we ought to have the
perambulator. But will he sell it ? ?
? He?ll sell it. He won?t risk another fight.
Give me the money, and I?ll tackle him right
away.?
?You might as well settle what you owe
while you?re there,? said Roy, and handed over
eight pounds.
Ten minutes later the captain returned,
wheeling his purchase?an ungainly-looking
vehicle, with lustreless body, wheels almost
devoid of rubber, a cracked white handle, and
a protesting squeak.
It?s been a dashed good thing in its time,?
said the captain, surveying it proudly, ? and
the foundation?s there yet. Give her a drop
of oil, and she?ll be as right as rain.?
? But it?s squeaking now. It oughtn?t to
squeak standing still.?


? Oh, I forgot, that isn?t a squeak.? The
captain plunged a hand into the recesses of
the vehicle and held up a small black kitten.
? This little blighter was in it when I bought
it, and Revel asked me to take it away. It?ll
come in handy at the Marlings ?keep away the
ants and lizards. Sturdy little brute ; look
at the legs on him. He could pull down a
kangaroo. Try him with some milk. I think
he?s hungry.?
The kitten accepted some milk poured for
him in the lid of a cigarette tin, and made no
objection to having his tail pulled by the
captain while he drank it.
? What?ll we call him, Lavington ? ?
?We might call him after an explorer. He?s
going to do a lot of travelling if he comes with
us.?
?Not a bad idea. Hi, Ulysses, take your
black head out of that milk.?
The kitten turned a deaf ear to the command,
and lapped steadily.
? Doesn?t think much of Ulysses,? said the
captain.
They tried him with Livingstone, Mungo
Park, Stanley, Marco Polo, and Shackleton, but
received no encouragement.
? Independent little brute,? said the cap-
tain. ? Who was that blighter that doubled the
Cape ? ?


? Vasco da Gama.?
As Roy uttered the name, the kitten left his
milk, bounded sideways on four straight legs,
and looked archly at his audience.
? Vasco it is,? said the captain. ?He likes
that name. And while we?re about it, we might
as well christen the perambulator. What was
the name of Vasco?s ship ? ?
But this was too great a strain on Roy?s
scholarship.
? Blessed if I know. I don?t think I ever
heard.?
We 11 call it the * Golden Hind,? then.
Some blighter sailed in the Golden Hind. I
think it was Drake.?
? But he wasn?t a blighter.?
? Perhaps not. But,? the captain had a
sudden inspiration, ? it?s long odds that he had
some blighters with him.?


CHAPTER XIV
ON THE ROAD
THEY set out southward the next morning,
Roy wheeling the ? Golden Hind,? with
Vasco da Gama sitting on the gramophone in
the bows, and two full water-bags slung like
collision mats against the side of the vessel.
The captain, entirely unfettered, enacted the
part of convoy, and seemed full of spirits.
? This is better than slinking into Riverton
by train, eh, Lavington ? ?
Roy, enjoying the novelty of the situation,
agreed. It was a lovely morning, typical of
the mild Australian winter, with a light cool
breeze stirring the branches of the gum trees.
The road, broad and fairly well-kept, looked
peculiarly inviting to Roy after five weeks spent
in the forest. Even the ? Golden Hind ? seemed
appreciative of the adventure, and squeaked
gaily with every revolution of her wheels.
The captain had been liberal with oil the
previous evening, but had evidently overlooked
more than one rusty spot.


They had arranged to take shifts of one hour
each in the steering of the argosy, and at ten
o?clock by Roy?s watch they made the change.
The captain seized the cracked white handle
and pushed hard for half an hour ; then he
stopped and poured oil over everything friction-
able.
? We gave Revel fifteen bob too much for
this machine,? he remarked.
? Hullo ! ? A farmer on a big black horse
pulled up by their side, and surveyed the
outfit. ? Looking for work ? I w r ant a couple
of men to give me a hand to build a shed?a
fortnight?s job ?thirty bob a week and tucker.
Any good to you ? ?
?Not this morning, thanks,? said the cap-
tain, before Roy could speak. ? We?re taking
up a contract in Riverton.?
The farmer nodded and rode on.
? We?re not out of the slave-driving district
yet,? said the captain, still busy with the oil-can.
? It would have meant six quid, though. . . .
Look out, you?re oiling Da Gama.?
? A drop won?t do him any harm. . . . Let?s
have a boil up while the oil soaks in.?
They did fifteen miles that day, and at dusk
they pushed the ?Golden Hind ? into a thicket,
and slept on the folded tent. The next day
they did ten miles, the captain pointing out
that the ? Golden Hind ? needed humouring, and


it was not till three days later that, at eleven
o?clock in the morning, they reached the long,
straggling township of Riverton.
Their progress through the High Street was
marked by only one event, when a well-fed
mongrel dog rushed out of a butcher?s shop
and strove to reach the spitting Da Gama.
The captain beat off the attack with boot and
shot-gun, and two bearded octogenarians sitting
in the shade of the Farmers? Rest Hotel said,
? Well done, cobber 1 ? and made it perfectly
clear by their demeanour that they were pre-
pared to drink beer at the captain?s expense.
? Doesn?t look as though we?re going to get
pestered with offers of work,? Roy remarked,
as they cleared the town.
? Shouldn?t be surprised if some one gallops
after us in a minute. I expect we were watched
as we went through. Well, we?ve shown our-
selves, anyway, and if they like to let us slip,
that?s their misfortune. We won?t hang about
for the brutes.?
So they filled the water-bags from a rusty
tank attached to a roadside shed, and trudged
on for half an hour through the smiling wheat
country of Riverton. At the end of that time,
the ? Golden Hind,? giving way to a sudden fit
of senility, shed her two front wheels, and sank
by the bows, emptying the tent and Da Gama
into the road.


? And that?s that,? said the captain, who was
steering. ? We?d better have a drink of tea.
Steady on, Da Gama.? The kitten was giv-
ing his opinion of the accident with extreme
viciousness.
Roy burrowed in the hold of the vessel, and
discovered that they had used their last piece of
wire the previous day.
The captain pointed to a five-wire fence
bounding a neighbouring paddock. ? Might
find a bit along there. . . . I?ll make the fire
while you?re having a look.?
Finding himself deserted, Vasco da Gama
sprang on to the wreck of the ? Golden Hind,?
and proceeded to clean himself. He made a
pretty sight, but it was little to the taste of a
frolicsome mare between the shafts of a smart
yellow sulky which approached at that moment.
The mare, glad perhaps of an excuse for not
going into Riverton, strove at once to bolt into
the fringe of scrub bordering the road. Her
driver, a well-dressed man of about thirty-two,
used whip and voice to dissuade her, where-
upon the mare strove to kick the sulky to
pieces.
The captain left his fire and strolled out
into the road. The casual ease of his move-
ments exasperated the driver of the sulky.
? Hi, you there ! ? he shouted. ? Get a
move on. What the devil do you mean by


leaving your Noah?s ark in the middle of the
road ? ?
? Ever hear of the word Civility ? ? inquired
the captain.
? Civility! ? rasped the other, as the mare?s
hoofs at last reached the dashboard. ? You
out-of-work damper ! Take your tinker?s
barrow out of the road.?
? Couldn?t they find a driver for that mare
this morning ? ?
? I?ll show you.? Still holding the reins
the man leapt down from the sulky, backed
the vehicle into the scrub, and tied the mare
to a tree. Then he ran towards the captain.
As he did so, the pugnacious expression on his
face changed to one of amazement. The
captain had taken off his helmet in preparation
for the onslaught.
? If it isn?t Walters-Meete ! ? shouted the
sulky?s driver.
? Cuddy Seymour ! ? cried the captain.
?Well, I?m hanged!? They gripped hands
and stared into each other?s faces. Roy, arriv-
ing at that moment with a piece of wire culled
from the straining-post of the fence, was
introduced.
? This is Cuddy Seymour, Lavington. He
was at March ester with me. ?How many years
ago, Cuddy ? ?
? Seems like two hundred. . . . But what


on earth are you two fellows up to with that
perambulator ? ?
? We?re off to the Marling Ranges,? said the
captain. ? But come and have a cup of tea.
Got time ? ?
? Oh, I?d make time for that if my house
was on fire. But let?s get this apple-cart of
yours off the road first. The next man that
comes along might not have been to school with
you, and he?d certainly want your blood. I
wanted it badly myself a minute ago.?
Between them they lifted the ? Golden Hind,?
and brought her to an anchorage in the scrub.
Seymour examined the cargo with interest.
?My most maiden of aunts ! ?shot-gun,
gramophone, French novels, black cat ! . . .
Got any babies stowed away underneath ? ?
? Nary one.? The captain dropped a hand-
ful of tea into the billy and lifted it off the
fire.
? You look such a couple of break-ups, you
know,? said Seymour, accepting a pannikin of
the brew. ? How on earth did you get into
this state ? ?
? We?re quite happy. I picked up Lavington
in Perth some months ago. We did a bit of
mining together in Kalgoorlie?followed the
same shift, you know. We?ve just come from
Koggalunga, where we helped a man to clear
some land. We?re on trek now for the Mar-


? Take your tinker?s harrow out of the road.?
lmg s ?going to pot kangaroo and sell the skins.
You?d better come along, Cuddy.?
? Can?t. T?m getting married to-morrow.?
?My poor dear chap,? said the captain
sympathetically, ?I?m awfully sorry.?
? Sorry for what, you ass ? I?m the happiest
man in the world.?
? Yes, yes,? the captain?s voice was soothing;
I know. . . . And what are you doing in
Riverton ? ?
? Farming. I was rubber planting up in
the Malay States for some years, but the climate
didn?t agree with me too well. Then I got
178 6


a legacy of a few thou from an uncle in Eng-
land, and I sold out and came to Australia.
I did a bit of jackerooing, liked it, and bought
a place of my own. But ? ?a frown settled
on Seymour?s pleasant features ?? just at the
moment I?m in a bit of a hole. I?ve just had
a wire from my best man, who was coming
down from Singapore on a holiday. He?s been
held up at Broome; something gone wrong
with the engines of the s.s. Ganeroo. He
thinks he?ll be two days late at least. The
wedding?s fixed for to-morrow.?
? You?ll have to scurry round and find
another man,? said the captain. ? You can?t
be properly married without one. Must have
some blighter to hold the ring and give you
brandy. Got your eye on any one ? ?
?No, that?s why I?m going into Riverton.
I thought I might be able to find some Good
Samaritan. But ?hang it !?of course ?why
not ? . . . I say, Walters-Meete, we were at
school together ; come and help me out of a
hole.?
? Not in these trousers, Cuddy.?
? I can lend you togs, both of you,? Seymour
spoke eagerly. ?? I?d be very pleased if you?d
come as a guest, Lavington. ?Now, be a couple
of top-hole sportsmen and say Yes.?
? I suppose we?ll have to do it,? said the
captain, rather grudgingly. ? Who is the girl


ON THE ROAD
you?re promoting to the rank of Mrs. Sey-
mour ? ?
? She is the loveliest lady in Western Aus-
tralia,? replied Seymour, with great feeling.
? And get the idea of promotion out of your
head at once. There?s nothing of that sort
about it, except on my side. She?s lifting me
up.?
? You?ve got it in the neck, I can see that.
What?s her name and estate ? ?
? Her name is Elsa Barnaby. I have a hazy
idea that her father is rich. I know that he
has two well-stocked farms. But that is noth-
ing. His claim to immortality is based solely
on the fact that he is Elsa?s father.?
Have some more tea,? said the captain
kindly. ?It will clear your head. You?re
dithering, you know.?
? No, thanks. ... It was rather strange,
the way I first met Elsa. I was jackerooing
on a farm about five miles off, and I had come
to their place to buy a pig. And there she was
?just shining.?
? Funny sort of pig, Cuddy.?
I m talking of Elsa, you chump. She was
standing on the veranda, just shining.?
? Glow-worm sort of business, you mean ? ?
? Your similes are pretty rotten, but you?ve
got the idea. Elsa seems to glow wherever she
is. The world changed for me from that


moment, though, of course, I never dreamt
that I had the least chance. But one day she
looked down and saw me.?
? She?s tall, then ? ?
? No, my good fool, I?m speaking metaphori-
cally. What I mean to say is, that this lovely
lady, who could have married a governor-
general if she had wished, deliberately chose
me ?a simple farming fellow ?
? Steady on,? interrupted the captain. ? I
can?t let that pass, Cuddy. Could she have
married a governor-general ? I doubt it.
Governor-generals don?t grow on cherry trees.
No, my boy, it looks to me as if your fate was
sealed the day you went after that pig. Elsa
knew you were coming, I expect, and she was
all ready for you. Girls don?t glow for nothing.?
? Bah ! ? said Seymour.? * You understand,
don?t you, Lavington ? ?
? I think so. You?re very much in love with
Miss Barnaby, and she?s very much in love with
you. And she?s a jolly decent girl. That?s
what you mean, isn?t it ? ?
? She?s more than a jolly decent girl. She?s
?she?s Elsa Barnaby.?
?So we gathered,? said the captain. Cheer
up, Cuddy. We?ll do what we can for you. . . .
You said something about lending us togs.?
? I?ve got whips at my place. Come and
take your pick.?


? Where is your place ? ?
? About two miles from here. We pass
Elsa?s place, the Homestead, on the way.
There?s a room ready for the best man there.
You wouldn?t mind sharing it with Lavington ?
Hop into the sulky, and I?ll drive you up right
away.?
? But what about the ? Golden Hind ?? ? The
captain surveyed the wrecked perambulator.
? Leave it where it is, and I?ll fetch it this
afternoon. You can bring anything you want
with you now.?
? Right. It can all stay except Da Gama.
He?ll have to come along.?
They gathered up the billy and pannikins,
stamped out the remains of the fire, and lifted
the ? Golden Hind ? a little farther into the
scrub, so that it was invisible from the road.
Then they climbed into the sulky, and with Da
Gama perched on Roy?s knee, rattled off down
the road in the opposite direction to Riverton.


CHAPTER XV
THE CAPTAIN BOWS LOW
is the Homestead/? said Seymour,
X when they had covered a mile, pointing
to some chimneys showing above the trees a
couple of hundred yards from the road. ?We
shall come on the road leading to the house
in a minute. .. . Here it is.? He checked
the mare?s pace. ? See that big hollow tree
on the right ? Some of Elsa?s chickens lay
eggs in there sometimes, and she comes down
to get them.?
? Marvellous,? said the captain. ? But don?t
point out any more objects of interest, Cuddy ;
you?ll have us in the bush if you do.? He
regarded Seymour closely. ? You?re feverish,
old man. You remind me of Billy Baines.
Remember him at school ? ?
?Fat chap, wasn?t he ? always hanging
round the tuck shop ? ?
? Yes. I was best man at his wedding in
London. I walked down Bond Street with him


the day before he was married, and he pointed
to the pavement and said that it was strange to
think that her feet had touched there ?seemed
to think that other people had no right to walk
on it after that. He made quite an ass of
himself at dinner that night?kept on pouring
wine down his collar instead of his throat, and
asking me if I thought he was good enough for
her. I told him he was miles too good, but he
kept on shaking his head and messing up his
collar. So I lugged him off to the Empire
to see if that would take his mind off it ; but
I don?t believe he saw a blessed person on the
stage. When the audience clapped, he clapped,
and when they laughed, he laughed ; and every
five minutes he?d turn to me and ask me if I
was quite sure he was good enough for her.
I had to shake the fool at last, and he looked as
solemn as an owl while I was doing it, and said,
* Thanks, old chap.? He didn?t sleep a wink
that night, and I had to half carry him into the
church, and after the ceremony he stood like
a lamb and let the boys ram confetti down his
neck. It was a sickening spectacle.?
? Funny how all these other men get married,?
said Seymour. ?If I hadn?t met Elsa, I should
have remained a bachelor all my life.?
? Bridegroom talk,? said the captain un-
believingly. ? You?d have fallen sooner or
later.?


Five minutes later they drove up through a
patch of picturesque blackboys to a small
bungalow of red jarrah. Roy and the captain
assisted Seymour to unharness the mare and
back the sulky into its shed, and then they
followed their host on to the broad veranda
which ran round three sides of the house.
? The house isn?t quite finished yet,? said
Seymour ; ? but I?ve some men coming to
finish up while I?m on my honeymoon. You
get rather a fine view from here. You can just
sec the chimneys of Elsa?s place. That?s the
smoke from their kitchen curling up above the
trees.?
? I wonder you didn?t batter down all those
trees in between,? said the captain. ?It
would only have taken you a year or so to do
it.?
? I did think of it. But we hit on a better
idea than that. We?ve got a telephone rigged
up.? Seymour opened a door and led them
into a sitting-room. ? That?s it,? pointing to
an installation on the wall. ? Sit down a
moment, while I ring her up and tell her you?re
here.? He turned a handle and held the
receiver to his ear.
? Is that you ?Elsa dearest ?
The captain stirred uneasily.
? Come on, Lavington, let?s get out of this.?
? Sit down, you ass.? Seymour scowled at


? No, Marlings. ... No, they weren?t
motoring. They had some kind of conveyance
with them. I hardly know how to describe it.
The front wheels were rather rocky, and they
were going to fix it up with a bit of wire when
I met them. . . . Yes, he?s going to act as best
man for me to-morrow. . . . Yes. . . . Yes.
them threateningly. ?There?s nothing you
mayn?t hear.? He resumed his conversation
with the Homestead. ??? No, that?s what I
want to tell you. He?ll be two days late. His
ship?s broken down. I was nearly frantic.
And then, as luck would have it, I ran into an
old schoolfellow ?man named Walters-Mccte.
He was off on a shooting expedition with a chum
of his ?young Englishman, name of Lavington.
... Oh, some old Ranges or other ?Snarlings,
I think he said ?
Here the captain corrected him, rather
fiercely.
... My dearest girl ?
? Come on, Lavington,? the captain growled.
? Let?s try the veranda.?
Seymour held them with a glance.
? Oh, I expect so. I?ll ask them. Hold on
a minute.?
? Elsa wants to know if you play tennis.?
? I?ve played a bit,? said Roy.
? Used to be a game of mine,? the captain
admitted. ? But look here, Cuddy, I?m not


going to goat around playing pat-ball with, any
of your flippery bridesmaids.?
Seymour nodded and turned again to the
wall.
? Yes, they both play, but Walters-Meete?s
a little out of practice. He hopes you?ll find
him some good partners.?
? The man?s ranting,? the captain wdiispered
to Roy. ? He?s miles worse than Billy Baines.?
? Yes. . . . Yes. . . . That?s good. . . .
Oh, I?m simply bubbling. . . . It is a pity.
Perhaps they?ll invent it some day. . . . Au
revoir .? Seymour laid down the receiver, and
the captain said, ? Invent what ? ?
? Elsa w T as saying that it seems a pity that we
can?t send other things besides words along the
? 99
wure.
? What sort of things?eggs ? ?
? No, not exactly eggs.?
The captain suddenly saw light.
? That would be no good, Cuddy. If you
sent kisses along the wire, you?d have some of
them going astray at times. Give you a bit of
a shock if you sent a couple along to Elsa and
found that the old cook had got them.?
? Don?t talk bosh. Elsa wants you down
after lunch. They?re going to fix up another
bed in your room, and she says you?ll be quite
comfortable. . . . You?re going to shave, of
course. The bathroom is the second door on


this veranda. You?ll find towels and things
in there. While you?re cleaning up I?ll pull
out my wardrobe, and then you can help your-
selves.?
The bathroom, as is usual in Australian
houses, was spacious and well-fitted, and, after
the limited toilet facilities of the open road,
Roy and the captain enjoyed themselves
mightily. Emerging at the end of half an hour,
shaved, damp-headed, and smelling strongly
of scented soap, they invaded Seymour?s bed-
room, where a number of suits, shirts, collars,
ties, and boots were spread out for their
selection.
The captain fastened at once upon a light
grey herring-bone tw r eed suit, and Roy chose
a smart navy serge. They fitted excellently,
and to their joy they discovered that Seymour
took their size in boots.
Seymour, busy in the kitchen cooking eggs
and bacon, gasped as they entered.
? Upon my word, you look a couple of dukes.
I?d no idea my togs were such a good cut.
You?ve been in the army, haven?t you, Walters-
Meete ? ?
? Rather. I?m a giddy captain.?
? You begin to look like it now. And
Lavington looks as if he?d got a bunch of
millionaire uncles in New York. . . . Well,
scran?s ready. Don?t think I want any myself.?


? But you?re going to cat something, all the
same,? said the captain. ? I?m not going to
have you fainting in the church to-morrow.
Stand by to prise open his mouth, Lavington.?
? All right,? Seymour capitulated. ? I?ll try
and get something down.?
? Can?t understand why you?re getting mar-
ried, Cuddy,? said the captain, after ten minutes?
vigorous onslaught on the bacon and eggs.
? You cook things pretty decently yourself.?
? The sooner you see Elsa the better, that?s
all I can say,? Seymour replied disgustedly.
? You?re the most prosaic thing that ever came
out of Marchcster. ... I?m going round to
put the horse in now. But don?t hurry, you
two.?
? What arc we going to do with Da Gama ? ?
Roy asked.
Seymour looked at the kitten, who was busy
stalking a fly on the curtain.
? I don?t know. Like to take him down wdth
you ? ?
? Better leave him here,? said the captain.
? You know what these weddings are. People
get morbid and stagger about. We don?t want
him trodden on.?
? All right. I shall be sleeping here to-night,
and I?ll look after him. You might like to take
him down to the Homestead to-morrow. I
expect they?ll ask you to stay for a few days.?


?We shan?t accept, if they do. We?ll put in
one night after you?re done in, and that?s all.?
? Aren?t you pitching it in rather strong ? ?
Roy said, when Seymour had gone. ? Any-
body would think he was going to get shot at
dawn by the way you?re carrying on.?
?It amounts to the same thing. He?s saying
good-bye to life. The man?s living in a fool?s
paradise at present. He thinks he?s got forty
or fifty years of bliss in front of him, whereas
if he gets five minutes he?ll be lucky. He and
his Elsa will be snapping and snarling like a
couple of dingoes before they?re half-way
through their honeymoon.? The captain
helped himself to another egg. ? Seems a
pity?a man like that. Unmarried he could
have come along with us to the Marlings, and
been as happy as a cricket with two squeaks ;
married he?s got to go and bring in the cow
and bawl for Elsa to get his tea ; and the odds
are his Elsa will bawl at him to get it himself.?
? But some people are happy when they?re
married.?
Give me an instance.?
? There?s Sir John Stanford and his wife, the
people whose yacht I came out on. They?re
quite happy.?
? They might be?on the yacht. But would
they be happy in the bush, cooking their own
grub and cutting their own firewood ? ?


? I?ll bet they would. Sir John?s a first-class
man, and Lady Adela?s a first-class woman.
They?d be happy anywhere, so long as they were
together.?
? If you fellows have finished we?ll be cutting
along,? Seymour sang out from the veranda.
? I?ve packed you a bag with some toilet gear
and tennis flannels.?
The mare, feeling brisk after her feed of
oats, took them at a smart pace down to the
Homestead, and shied skittishly as two young
ladies in light frocks appeared round the bend
by the hollow tree.
? Whoa ! ? said Seymour, and pulled up.
Then he bent down and said, ? Elsa.?
The elder of the two, a pretty girl, whose
face wore an expression of serene happiness
and contentment, stepped forward and said,
Vernon,? in precisely the same tone. Then
she smiled up at the captain.
? And this, of course, is Mr. Walters-Meete.?
? Captain Walters-Meete,? said Seymour.
? He tells me he?s been loafing in the army since
he left school.?
The captain leapt out of the sulky and shook
hands.
? It?s awfully good of you to step into the
breach like this, captain,? said Elsa. ? And
this is your friend, Mr. Lavington.? She
held out her hand to Roy, and smiled so brightly


that he was convinced that the captain?s views
on marriage were the most utter rot.
? And this,? said Elsa, ? is my sister, Doris.?
Doris Barnaby, every whit as pretty as her
sister, though lacking an inch of her height,
smiled at them with a hint of roguishness,
wdiich Roy, though no connoisseur of feminine
beauty, approved. But, nevertheless, he was
surprised at the depth of the captain?s bow as
he acknowledged the introduction.
Seymour exchanged a few whispered words
with his fiancee, and then picked up his whip.
? Take them up to the house, Elsa, there?s a
dear. I must fly into Riverton. I?ll be back
for tea if I hurry.?


CHAPTER XVI
A DISCOURSE ON LOVE
THE captain picked up the valise and
walked with Doris up the shady lane
leading to the house. Coming presently on
a rustic old shed, they peered in through the
window, talking animatedly, and allowed Roy
and Elsa to pass.
? Is the captain interested in forges ? ? Elsa
asked.
?Not that I know of. Was that a forge ? ?
? Yes, that?s where all our blacksmithing is
done. . . . Vernon tells me that your friend
is a confirmed bachelor ; is that true ? ?
? He thinks he is, Miss Elsa, but I don?t think
he can have met the right sort of girls, you
know. What I mean is : if he had met some-
body like you, I don?t think he would talk the
way he does.?
This remark was made so ingenuously that
Elsa laughed aloud.
? Thank you, Mr. Lavington. That is quite
188


the nicest compliment I?ve had for a long time.
I think I must call you by your Christian
name.?
? Please do. I?m Roy.?
? And so, Roy, you think that Mr. Seymour
isn?t making a mistake ? ?
?No fear; he isn?t. I knew that the moment
I saw you.?
Roy answered so simply and sincerely that
Elsa beamed more brightly than ever, and they
crossed the hard tennis court to the house the
best of friends.
The Homestead was of old-fashioned colonial
design, long, low, and spacious, its wings
connected in front by a polished veranda. To
the left were clustered the numerous out-
buildings ?barns, men?s quarters, and stables.
On the veranda by the main entry of the
house a short, ruddy-faced man of sixty was
seated. There was something of the autocrat
in his appearance, due perhaps to his thick
eyebrows.
? Father,? said Elsa, ? this is Mr. Lavington,
friend of Vernon?s best man.?
? How do, Mr. Lavington ? ?
? Please don?t get up, sir,? said Roy, shaking
hands. Mr. Barnaby subsided without further
protest.
? Fond of horses, Mr. Lavington ? You
are ? That?s right. You?ll find plenty in the


stable. Help yourself when you want one
Make him comfortable, Elsa.?
? Yes, father.?
Elsa tripped along the veranda and opened
the door of the front room in the east wing,
the window of which looked out on the tennis
court. The apartment contained two beds,
one a solid-looking four-poster and the other
of the camp species.
? I think you?ll find all you w T ant in here,
Roy ; but please shout if you need anything.?
? This is top-hole.? Roy looked with appre-
ciation round the well-furnished room. ? But
what?s become of the captain ? ?
? I really think he must be interested in
forges,? said Elsa, with the slightest of twinkles.
? But Doris will bring him along presently.?
She went out and closed the door.
Left to himself Roy wandered round the room,
and discovering a small bookcase, picked out
the Pilgrim's Progress , a book of which he had
heard much, but never read. Dropping into
an armchair, he began to turn over the pages
and examine the quaint illustrations. He was
thus engaged when, ten minutes later, he heard
Doris?s silvery laugh outside. Then the cap-
tain entered, and going straight to the mirror,
proceeded to examine his moustache.
? How did you like the forge ? ? Roy
asked.


? Forge ? ? The captain spun round.
? What forge ? ?
? That was the forge that you and Miss
Doris were looking at when we passed you.?
? Oh, was it ? Come to think of it, I did
see something that looked like an anvil in
there. Deuced interesting place. Which is my
bed ? ?
? The best bed for the best man.? Roy
pointed to the four-poster.
The captain stretched himself out on the
coverlet.
? I?ve a bit of news for you, Lavington.?
Roy laid down his book.
? Good. Let?s have it.?
? Seymour is a blighted fool.?
? I don?t agree with you. Miss Elsa is a
splendid girl. So don?t talk bosh.?
? Seymour is a super-blighted fool.?
? If you?re going to drivel, I?m not going to
listen.? Roy picked up his book again.
? Put that down. I?m going to give reasons.
. . . Did you notice Doris ? ?
?Of course I did. I was introduced to her.?
? Well, you must admit, then, that Seymour
is super-blighted.?
? I can?t see what you?re driving at. What?s
Doris got to do with Seymour ? ?
? Why, my poor blind lad, Doris and Elsa
are as the rose and the faded dog-daisy.?


? What absolute rot 1 Why, Miss Elsa?s as
sweet and dainty as any girl Ive ever
seen.?
?In comparison, I mean. Put her on her
own and I daresay she s all you say , but
alongside Doris she becomes the dog-daisy pure
and simple.?
? Well, you are drivelling. She?s every bit
as good-looking as her sister.?
? Seymour wants well kicking. He never
told us that Elsa had a sister.?
? X can quite understand that. He?s marry-
ing Miss Elsa to-morrow, and naturally he?s
wrapped up in it.?
? Seymour is a blighted fool.? The captain
reverted to his original declaration. But
no, perhaps I?m hasty. He may have asked
Doris and got turned down. That would
account for it.?
? Asked Doris to marry him ? Why on
earth should he ? ?
? Because she?s Doris.?
The immense feeling in the captain?s voice
as he made this reply gave Roy a clue.
? Great Scot! Have you fallen in love with
her ? ?
? Don?t give it such a common tag. Doris
Barnaby is a gleaming star, and I, a wandering
body, have come within the sphere of her
attraction.?


? Does that mean that you?re going to revolve
round her ? ?
? I?m revolving now.? The captain got
off the bed and examined his teeth carefully
for traces of tobacco stain. ? Are there any
tooth-brushes in that bag of Seymour?s ? ?
? I think so.? Roy opened the bag and
handed the captain a brush and a tube of
paste. . .
? Love,? said the captain, anointing the
brush with a liberal layer of the paste, and
working vigorously at his molars, ? is a good
word, rightly used. But Seymour hasn?t the
faintest conception of what it means. He
neglected the star and went for the dog-daisy.
He wants some one to look after his chickens
and keep his house clean. Real love is service,
the higher kinds of music, art in garrets,
renunciation without moderation, and a general
heightening.? Here the captain straightened
himself, and froth fell from his mouth on to the
carpet. ? Love is always there, Lavington,
but sometimes a man floats about the world
without coming within its influence. He?ll
take a girl from a tea-shop to the pictures ;
he?ll dally with a midinette on the boulevards ;
he?ll fetch and carry for his sister?s friends ;
and he thinks he knows all about love. Then
one day, when he least expects it, he comes
within range of the Centrifugal Essence, the
(2,678) 13


Glowing Heart of the Universe, and then?
and then ?
? He cleans his teeth ? ?
?It all comes within the scheme. He must
make his person presentable for the Temple
Is there a nail-brush in that bag ? ?
? There?s one behind the basin.?
? This mining and clearing work plays the
deuce with one?s hands.? The captain began
to scrub his nails assiduously.
?You haven?t finished, have you ? ?
? No.? The captain examined his little
finger. ? There?s still a speck here. It must go.?
? About love, I mean. It?s rather interesting.
I haven?t heard you talk like this before.?
? Love,? said the captain, talking and scrub-
bing with equal gusto, ?is a transfigurer. It
plunges into the depths of a man?s being and
brings up unsuspected treasures. A man comes
within scope of the star, and then the scales
drop from his eyes, and he finds he can do things.
Caruso felt it, and he sang like an angel ; Dante
felt it, and he wrote the Inferno; George
Washington felt it, and he made the United
States.?
? And Seymour ? ?
? Seymour thought he felt it, and made a
blighted fool of himself. Real love is a fertilizer.
With it a man grows. His body may be dead,
but his spirit permeates the universe.?


? And you really are in love with Doris
Barnaby ? ?
? I?m sweeping through space on the outer-
most rim of her starry robe, if that?s what you
mean ? ?
? It?s not quite what I meant. But I see
you?ve got it pretty badly. ... I suppose this
will affect our trip to the Marlings ? ?
? The Marling Range is a totally unimportant
excrescence on the earth?s surface. For me
it does not exist.? The captain dived into the
bag for tennis flannels. ? You?d better change,
Lavington. We?re due to play this afternoon.?
Roy got up and began to undress, and the
captain switched on to the subject of destiny.
? It?s been handling us all along, Lavington.
Just hark back a bit. Revel has the ? Golden
Hind ? for sale, and you have a quid to buy it.
Then its wheels choose to come off at the moment
when Cuddy drives along the road. His best
man chooses a ship with a rotten propeller,
which breaks down on that particular voyage.
It seems to me that Doris was meant to grow
and bloom and wait here until I came along.?
? Half a minute. Aren?t you going a bit
fast ? How do you know that she isn?t attached
to some one else ? ?
? Good heavens ! don?t talk like that,? The
captain looked aghast for a moment, and then
recovered himself. ?Well, if there are any


weeds round the feet of the lily, it will be my
business to clear them away.? He delivered
a round-arm swing at an imaginary weed which
was unfortunately intercepted by the head of the
bedstead.
? No need to clear the bed away,? said Roy.
? Skinned my blighted thumb,? said the
captain, nursing the injured member.
A tennis ball bounced against the window at
this moment, and the clear voice of Doris
Barnaby was heard from the court, exhorting
them to make haste. The captain gave one
hasty glance into the mirror, passed a comb
through his hair, and hurried out, followed more
leisurely by Roy.


CHAPTER XVII
THE PICKING OF A BONE
THE sisters Bamaby, open-air girls, and used
to tennis from their infancy, played a
vigorous game. The captain, his face wearing
a singularly uplifted expression, partnered Doris,
and galloped about the court for an hour.
At the end of that time they were interrupted
by a buggy-load of people, relatives of the
Barnabys, who had come to stay for the wed-
ding ; they consisted of a married sister, a
Member of Parliament husband, and a well-fed
little boy. Roy and the captain, after being
introduced, acted on Elsa?s suggestion, and
taking their towels, wandered round to the back
premises, where they discovered a big green
pond, an old upturned boat, and a ten-foot
springboard. The water was deliciously cool
after the heat of the game, and they had been
diving and basking for a full quarter of an hour
when they saw Seymour approaching, leading
the mare.


? I?ve taken your Noah?s ark up to my place,?
he called out. ? And Elsa told me to tell you
to buck up and get some tea.? He slipped
the bridle as he spoke, and the mare, wading
into the pond, cocked a suspicious ear at Roy
and the captain, snorted loudly, and began to
drink.
? All right,? The captain swung his drip-
ping body on to the springboard, and wiped
the water from his eyes. ? But I?ve a bone to
pick with you, Cuddy.?
? Nothing serious, I hope ? ?
? Deliberate suppression of facts.?
Oh, that?ll keep till after tea.? Seymour
lassoed the mare with the bridle and led her
off to the stables.
After a brisk rub down with rough towels
Roy and the captain returned to the house.
More guests had arrived in the interim. A
bank manager from Riverton had dropped in
with the local doctor, and a farmer?s wife with
her two daughters had driven up in a Ford car,
anxious to gauge the exact state of the wedding
preparations. In addition, the two sons of the
house, Tom and Walter Barnaby, good-looking,
upstanding young men of twenty-four and
twenty-five, had come in from one of the far
paddocks.
Tea was an alfresco affair, taken on the ver-
anda and the tennis court. Elsa and Doris


presided at a big polished urn, and a buxom
maid, with the bloom of Sussex still on her
cheeks, circulated among the guests with a tray.
Roy sat with the blue-shirted Barnaby boys, and
found them most genial company. The cap-
tain, preferring to sit nearer the urn, made a
false move, and was captured by the Member of
Parliament, who treated him to a dreary dis-
sertation on the benefits of fiscal reform in
England. Under the impression that he had
secured a good listener, for the captain had no
comments to make on fiscal reform, except
those of the sotto voce variety, the Member
continued his discourse beyond the confines
of the tea hour, and his victim had the mortifi-
cation of seeing the Centrifugal Essence and
her sister carried off to play tennis by the bank
manager and the doctor. He was rescued at
length, however, by Seymour, who, having
first got rid of the Member by informing
him that his son and heir was eating his ninth
piece of plum cake in the seclusion of the dining-
room, requested more information concerning
the unpicked bone.
? Ah, yes,? said the captain, rising and
stretching himself. ? What a particularly
blighted man that Member of Parliament is,
Cuddy. He?s been droning about taxes for a
good hour.?
? Keen on his work. I like to see it.?


? It might be all right to watch, but it?s
infernal hard to listen to.?
? But what about this bone ? ?
? Come into our room,? the captain invited.
They moved along the veranda, picking
up Roy on the way, ? for a witness,? as the
captain said.
? Suppression of facts, didn?t you say ? ?
said Seymour, seating himself on the four-
poster.
? Not so much facts as a fact. Now look
here. We drove up to your bungalow in the
sulky, and we lunched with you, and we drove
down here with you, and you never once men-
tioned Doris Barnaby. Now what was your
game ? ?
? Game ? ? repeated Seymour blankly.
? There was no game. Why should I men
tion her ? ?
? Why shouldn?t you mention her ? That?s
what I want to know. You kept her in the
background. Why ? ?
? It was quite inadvertent, I assure you.
Of course, I knew that Elsa had a sister.?
? Oh, you knew that ? ? said the captain
cuttingly. ? You knew that ? I suppose
somebody wrote and told you, eh ? You?d
never have noticed her otherwise.?
? Don?t be a chump. Don?t you see that
when a man?s going to get married, he?s natur-


ally thinking all the time of the girl he?s going
to marry. All her relations are like so many
chairs and tables to him. They?re there, but
he doesn?t notice them. It simply didn?t occur
to me to mention Doris. I didn?t mention her
brothers either, did I ? ?
?I?m hanged if I know, and I?m hanged if
I care. My point is, that you can?t have a
prospective sister-in-law like Doris Barnaby
without thinking a good many hours a day about
her.?
? Oh,? said Seymour. ? Oh.? His mouth
creased in a grin and then broadened into a great
pleased smile. He looked at Roy, and received
confirmation of his suspicions.
? Oh,? he said again, and sank back on to
the pillow. His mirth was slow-moving, but
it bade fair to develop into a paroxysm. He
endeavoured to avert the catastrophe by stuffing
bedclothes into his mouth. ? She?s a nice
girl,? he stuttered. ? Oh.? He collapsed
utterly, and the bed shook and shivered beneath
him.
The captain came to his aid with another
pillow, and at the end of three minutes the
sufferer sat up and wiped his eyes.
? That?ll do,? he said to the captain, who
showed signs of continuing the assault. ? I
won?t laugh any more. She?s a dashed fine
girl. What can Ido for you ? ?


?You can stop behaving like a gorilla,?
snapped the captain. ? Why isn?t she mar-
ried ? ?
?I?m sure I don?t know. Too young, I
expect. She?s only twenty-one.? Seymour
tried desperately to keep his plighted word
and refrain from laughing. But his feelings
were not to be denied, and he sank back again,
making strange noises.
? Out you go,? ordered the captain, flinging
open the door.
? I can?t move.? The protest was made
faintly.
The captain helped him out, banged the
door, and regarded Roy, who was having
difficulties with his own facial expression.
?You, too, Lavington ? ? There was re-
proach in the captain?s voice.
?I?m awfully sorry, captain ; but it struck
me funny, somehow.?
? I can?t see the semblance of a joke any-
where.? The captain marched out, sat on
the veranda, and proceeded to say ? Well
taken ? every time the ball came within three
yards of Doris Barnaby. The set over, Doris
surrendered her racquet to one of the other
ladies, and announced that she must go and
gather eggs. The captain requesting and
obtaining permission to carry her basket, the
two disappeared in the direction of the forge.


It was an irradiated Walters-Meete that
changed into the grey herring-bone before
dinner that evening.
? These Marlings, Lavington
? What about them, captain ? ?
? There?s nothing in it. It?s a deuced
desolate place, nothing but blighted trees and
rocks. We?d be wasting our time there. Now
there?s only one game worth tackling in West-
ern Australia, and that?s chickens. That?s
our next move, if you?re game.?
? But I don?t know one end of a chicken from
the other.?
? You?re not expected to. Your part would
be to cling to my skirts. We?ll have the biggest
run in the country in a couple of years.?
? I didn?t know that you knew anything about
chickens. You never mentioned it before.?
? Oh, I?ve always watched the beggars when
there have been any about. And I learnt
a lot to-night. Doris and I got a huge lot of
eggs just now. And this, mind you, from a
roaming little crowd round a farm. If we
tackled the game properly we shouldn?t know
what to do with our money after a year or so.
We?d be founding hospitals and things like
that. It would do some of those blighters in
England good to hear of it. They?ve got
to be shown that I?m not out here for my
health.?


? So you really are thinking of starting a
chicken farm ? ?
?It would be suicidal not to. What does
old Shakespeare say?something about a tide
which, when taken at the flood, leads on to
fortune. We?re on the tide now. We must
concentrate on Leghorns. There?s an old
Leghorn on this farm, and they can?t stop her
laying. She goes down to that hollow tree and
simply piles them up.?
? But lots of chicken farmers go broke.?
? And why ? Because they?re too dashed
lazy to look after the incubators ?forget to turn
on the gas, or else turn it up too high. It?s an
ideal life, really. You start off with a hundred
fowls ; then you wake up one morning and
find you?ve got a thousand ; you wake up again
and find you?ve got five thousand. You start
sending to market then, and employ hands.?
? And where do you think of setting up your
farm ? ?
?In this district. There?s something in the
soil here that makes them lay.?
? And what about money ? ?
? I?ve fifty quid due in three months? time.
Till that arrives we shall have to live on the
skin of our teeth, and perhaps borrow a quid
or two from Seymour.?
? Well, I?ve got to go to the Marlings. You
know that.?


? That?ll be all right. If you want a week off
you can have it. You?ll come back and find
a few thousand more Leghorns running about,
that?s all there is to it. I?ll look after the
incubators while you are away. There?s no
sense in our both wandering about those blighted
ranges, when ?
? When you might be near Doris Barnaby ? ?
? It?s for your good as well as mine, mind
you, Lavington. When that girl isn?t trailing
through the heavens she can be deuced practical.
She knows fowls inside and out; and apart
from the glory of her company, it would pay
us to keep in touch with her.?
? Did you tell her that you were thinking of
setting up near here ? ?
? Not a word. I just carried her basket,
and kept my eyes and ears well open. I?ve
got the hang of all their fowl-houses ?kind of
little huts with perches in them. The chickens
roost in them at night, though some of them
prefer the fig trees. Then, when you want to
feed them, you yell out, ? Chick, chick,?
and the beggars hear you miles off and come
swarming round. They did to-night, and I
had to give one of them a straight left, or he?d
have eaten some of Doris?s hair. . . . Ever
notice her hair, Lavington ? ?
?Not particularly.?
? You should have.? The subject of Doris?s


personal attractions was even more engrossing
to the captain than chickens, and he descanted
on it until the throbbing notes of the Burmese
gong, summoning the guests to dinner, rendered
further conversation impossible.
More Barnaby relations had arrived since
tea ?two aunts, one uncle, and four cousins,
three male and one female. The captain sat
next to Doris during the meal, and filled her
glass with the air of one performing a holy rite.
In the midst of the talk and laughter Seymour
and Elsa sat with shining eyes in a world of
their own. After dinner the younger members
danced on the veranda to the music of the
piano, and the elders discussed crops and argued
over the merits of harvesters and suchlike
implements. At a late hour Seymour returned
to his bungalow, being escorted thither by the
captain, who at long intervals awoke to his
responsibilities as best man. It was past
midnight when the captain entered his room,
to find Roy reading by candle-light.
? Blighted dark outside,? said the captain.
? I stubbed my toe against one of their infernal
vines. Who sleeps in the room corresponding
to this on the other side ? ?
? Doris. I heard her say so.?
? I thought so. I saw her shadow on the
blind. You never saw such a shadow, Laving-
ton.?


? What?s the matter with it ? ?
? Nothing. It?s a top-hole shadow. I?ve
never seen another like it. There was some-
thing ethereal about it. It moved, and then
stopped, and then moved again ?
? And then stopped again ? ?
? That?s the ticket. You could see that it
was no ordinary girl.? The captain lay down
on his bed and thought deeply about the shadow.
? How?s Seymour ? ? Roy asked.
? Very shaky. I had to pull him up?told
him he?d gone too far to withdraw. . . . I say,
did you notice Doris dancing to-night? Did
you ever see anything so sylphlike in all your
days ? ?
Yes, I thought she and the bank manager
danced very well together.?
Bank manager ! Why, the fellow pranced
like an elephant. . . . Did you see her dancing
with me ? *?
I did. And I saw you tread on her toe.?
? You saw nothing of the sort. . . . And
I say, Lavington, did you notice the way she
ticked off that big cousin of hers when he asked
her for a dance ? ?
?Yes, I heard what she said. I was quite
close to them.?
? What did she say ? ?
? Oh, it isn?t worth repeating. Let?s get to
sleep.?


? Now look here, Lavington, I want to know
what she said. If we?re going to run Leghorns
together we must have everything square and
above board. That fool of a cousin was
trundling about after her all the evening, and
I?ve a right to know what she said.?
? Well, if you will have it, she said, ? Not
to-night, Arthur. Captain Walters-Meete has
taken all the skin off my toe.? ?
? Good heavens ! Did she really say that ?
Why, I scarcely touched her toe. I w r as no
sooner on than I was off again. Great Scot!
Do you really think I damaged it ? Oh, I say,
that would be too awful. A foot like that !
Did you notice the shape of it ? It?s the dain-
tiest thing that ever dashed the harebell from
the dew ?I mean the dew from the harebell. I
say, Lavington ?
A loud false snore came from Roy?s bed in
response.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE WEDDING
BREAKFAST was in fits and starts the
next morning. The captain had his at
an early hour, and departed at once for Sey-
mour?s bungalow. Roy, after a mid-morning,
dip in the pond, came back to find a great
atmosphere of excitement pervading the Home-
stead. Somewhere in the house the bride
was being dressed, and womenfolk were rush-
ing from one room to another, carrying wisps
of filmy clothing. Tom Barnaby, wandering
along the veranda, holding a stiff-winged
collar and a spotted tie, hailed Roy with
relief.
? Ah, Lavington, you?re an Englishman,
What about giving a man a hand ? Doris says
I?ve got to wear this cow of a stiff collar, and
she w r as going to help me fix it when somebody
roared for a pin, and off she went. Elsa?s
room is buzzing like a hive, and I don?t expect
to see Doris again for a bit.?
(2,678) 209 14


? Come along to my room,? said Roy, laugh-
ing. ? I daresay I can fix it for you.?
? By gosh, you?ve done that all right,? said
Tom, surveying himself in the mirror a minute
later. ? Ah, it takes an Englishman to tie a
bow. . . . Feel like a ride ? I?ve got to get
in a sheep.?
? Rather.?
They went round to the stables, saddled a
couple of horses, and galloped out to a far
corner of the home paddock, where a cluster of
sheep watched them with evident misgivings.
Riding with the consummate ease and grace
of the native born, Tom cut out one of the
animals and gave it into the charge of two
Barnaby dogs, who had come racing out after
them. Then they returned at a more leisurely
pace, to find that the bride was dressed and the
guests ready to depart for the church.
Roy drove off in the first batch, and the
.-arrival of the buggy was the signal for a general
-entry on the part of the crowd of neighbours
gathered round the little tin-roofed church at
Doolabong, two miles up the road. They filed
in, men, women, and children, and a subdued
whispering went on all over the building, rising
in volume with every fresh load from the Home-
stead. Presently Seymour and the captain
arrived, the latter in bright yellow gloves,
which Roy knew must have been borrowed


? Doris says I?ve got to wear this stiff collar.?
from the bridegroom. The captain?s ? Cheer
up, Cuddy. It?ll soon be over now ? was dis-
tinctly audible to half the congregation. Then,
fresh and dainty in her bridal robes, Elsa came
down the aisle on her father?s arm, and at that
sight the womenfolk bent and shivered like
corn in the breeze, and the captain?s injunction
211


to ? Straighten yourself up, old top ! ? reached
the bridegroom?s ear alone.
It was a simple ceremony. The captain
produced the ring at the right moment; the
wheezy harmonium proved equal to ? The
Voice that breathed o?er Eden ? ; the more
emotional of the bride?s female relatives sobbed
quietly into their handkerchiefs ; and then the
happy pair retired to the vestry to sign the
register, and emerged to run the gauntlet of
confetti and rice hurled at them by strong-
armed friends. They left the church in a four-
seater car, driven by a chauTeur ornamented
with a nosegay of not more than nine inches
in diameter. And then the captain, yellow
gloves much to the fore, assisted Doris Barnaby
to a seat in a sulky, and climbed up beside
her.
? Your turn next, Doris I ? cried a well-
wisher from the crowd, misled, perhaps, by
the captain?s stylish herring-bone suit, and
evidently unaware of the existence of the
? Golden Hind.?
The captain, taking no umbrage at the re-
mark, flashed his yellow gloves in a professional
manner, whipped up the horse, and drove off
with eclat.
Following the good old English custom, the
wedding breakfast was of the nature of a feast.
Small tables had been placed at either end of


the large one in the dining-room, until there was
scarcely room to squeeze between them and the
wall. Speeches w r ere made. Mr. Barnaby, his
brows working fiercely, congratulated Seymour
and bemoaned the loss of a daughter. Tom
Barnaby got up, and, over his unaccustomed
wing collar, told the guests that Seymour was
a good fellow, and hoped that his marriage
wouldn?t stop his going on being one. His
brother, Walter, who had flatly refused to
encircle his neck in anything starched, said that
Elsa was pretty decent when you knew her, and
he didn?t think that Seymour was making a
mistake. The Member of Parliament, who
had been making notes on his shirt-cuff, im-
pressed upon the couple the need for give and
take in their new state, warned them that it
was nearly all give, and deplored the easiness
of modern divorce laws. The captain, called
upon by many voices, spoke earnestly of the
need for more Anglo-Australian marriages, and
the extreme suitability of poultry farms as the
foundations of such unions.
With the departure of the bride and groom
two hours later the inevitable feeling of flatness
descended upon the Homestead, and Roy and
the captain, following the example of most of
the guests, repaired to their room for a siesta.
There the captain discoursed upon British
customs.


? Not enough romance in them, Lavington.
It?s all roast beef and cake and tea. They
manage these things better in Spain and Italy.
The British Empire will never have a con-
tented womanhood until guitar-playing is made
compulsory in the schools. No girl wants to be
bartered for like a piece of merchandise. She
wants to lean out of her casement and hear
what a man thinks of her in song.?
? Are you going to sing outside Doris?s
window ? ?
? I can?t sing. I wish I could. Half a
minute, though?what about the Signor ? ?
? What about him ? ?
? Why shouldn?t I turn him on underneath
Doris?s window ? ?
? You?re not serious, surely ? ?
? I am.? The captain warmed to the idea.
? It?s never been done before that I know of.
She?ll appreciate that. Women like men to
think out new schemes of pleasing them.?
? But it would be Caruso singing, not
you.?
? Caruso and me. The Signor can?t do
anything without me. I?m the man behind
the gun. She?ll appreciate that.?
? It would be a bit thick on the other people
in the house,? said Roy thoughtfully. ? The
Signor?s pretty powerful when he gets going.
It?s a very old record, you know.?


? The Signor will sing to-night,? said the
captain decisively. ?I?m going up after dinner
to bring him down.?
The strong fragrant tea which was served at
half-past four put new life into the party.
Sets were made up for tennis and clock golf,
and once more the captain accompanied Doris
on her quest for eggs. He returned more con-
vinced than ever that destiny was leading him
to poultry and fortune.
? There?s a bird called the Wyandotte,? he told
Roy ?? one of the biggest money-makers in the
State. From the moment the Wyandotte steps
out of the egg she starts looking after her
employer?s interests. If she doesn?t manage
her forty eggs a week she tries to commit
suicide, and there are precious few suicides.
Imagine a thousand Wyandottes scratching
round our shanty.?
Roy essayed the feat, failed utterly, and in-
quired after Doris?s health.
? She?s ripe for the Signor,? the captain
replied. ? Half sad and half merry?misses
her sister, and smashed tw T o eggs getting them
out of a kerosene tin. I talked to her about
Dante and the Inferno , and she brightened up
a lot. She?s half in Florence now, and when
the Signor gets into his stride to-night she?ll
come to the window for a dead cert.?
? And what will you do then ? You?ll look


a bit of an ass, won?t you, standing by the
gramophone ? ?
? Not a bit of it. I shall kiss her hand, bow,
and retire. That?s the way it?s done. A single
incident like that saves a man weeks of court-
ship.?


CHAPTER XIX
A SERENADE
DA GAMA, lying asleep on the floor of
Seymour?s kitchen, with much food and
drink scattered around him, opened one eye
and purred when the two entered after dinner
that evening.
? He?s all right,? said the captain. ? He?s
been doing himself well by the look of it.?
They went round to the stable and, lifting
a tarpaulin from the ? Golden Hind,? got out
the gramophone and records.
? We never fixed that wheel,? said Roy,
gazing at the wrecked equipage.
? Don?t suppose we?ll ever want to now.
The Leghorns and Wyandottes are going to
scratch up a Rolls-Royce for us. . . . Ready ?
Off we go.? The captain swung the gramo-
phone on to his shoulder, and set off to the
Homestead, They had refused Mr. Barnaby?s
offer of a sulky for reasons of secrecy.
Reaching their room unobserved, the captain


deposited the instrument beneath his bed, and
then they joined the rest of the party and danced
and chatted till ten o?clock, when there was a
general exodus to bed.
Knowing that there would be no chance of
sleep until after the serenade, Roy did not
trouble to undress, but lay on his bed and
listened to the captain?s dissertation on the art
of love-making in many lands. As the grand-
father clock in the dining-room boomed out
the hour of midnight, the captain dusted the
record for the sixth time, placed it on the disc,
and adjusted the needle.
?I?d like your impressions of this, Lavington.
Try and imagine that you are a girl interested
in a man for the first time, and let the Signor
sink into you, as it w r ere. Could you do that ? ?
? Not the faintest hope in the world.?
? Oh, well, it?s a pity. But I expect I?ll hear
all about it from Doris to-morrow. Here goes.?
The captain picked up the gramophone and
went out.
Roy, watching from the window, saw him
skirt the end of the tennis net and take up his
position a few yards from Doris?s window.
There came a raucous muttering as the needle
traversed the smooth edge of the record, and
then Roy held his breath as the Signor lifted
up his voice for the conquest of Doris Barnaby.
The intense stillness of the night made his


immense lung power even more manifest than
usual. The rich volume of sound penetrated
to every recess of Doris?s chamber, rolled out
again, its force undiminished, swept round the
house, visited the distant stables, hurtled back
intact in echo, hovered above the gum trees,
and sported in the rear of two restive horses in
the home paddock. The night, indeed, was
full of Caruso at his very best, so full, that Roy,
after half a dozen bars, was not at all surprised
to hear other sounds.
The two dogs chained at the back of the house
struggled furiously to get free, and howled their
hate and defiance at the intruder. Mingled
with this came other noises, as of ornaments
being thrown down and people getting hastily
out of bed.
The attack came half a minute later. Two
open-mouthed dogs accompanied by Mr. Bar-
naby, with mouth shut, in pyjamas, and armed
with a shot-gun, appeared round the corner of
the house. The captain, after one hasty glance
at the bevy, picked up the gramophone, and
with the Signor still vomiting his impassioned
emotions, ran for safety. His leap over the
tennis net was not emulated by his pursuers,
who charged full tilt into it. The net, unused
to such forceful impacts, gave way, and enve-
loped the dogs and Mr. Barnaby in its meshes.
This respite enabled the captain to regain his


room, where he threw himself panting upon the
bed.
Outside the hubbub continued. Still in-
volved in the net, Mr. Barnaby and his canine
friends were howling at the top of their voices,
and mingled with the uproar came a sustained
ripple of feminine laughter, evidently from
some one in the throes of uncontrollable mirth.
Roy, silently convulsed himself, watched from
behind his curtain, and saw a little cloud of
people clad in heterogeneous garments issue
from the house and run to the aid of the stricken
trio.
? What was it, father ? ? asked Tom Barnaby,
assisting his sire to his feet.
Mr. Barnaby ignored the question. In a
trembling voice he proceeded to find fault
with the makers of the tennis net and queried
the breed of the dogs. Drawing largely upon
the vocabulary of the shearing sheds, he spoke
for three full minutes, the women present
finding it necessary to cover their ears.
? But we?re all in the dark, father,? Walter
complained. ? It?s no good standing there
swearing. What happened ? ?
Mr. Barnaby controlled himself sufficiently
to tell him.
?It was a dingo, Walter. I heard him
howling, so I got my gun and loosed the dogs.
Coming round the corner I caught sight of a


The captain picked up the gramophone and ran for safety.
man on the tennis court here ?after the chickens,
no doubt ?and I?d have had him if it hadn?t
been for this confounded net. . . . Who?s
kicking up all that noise ? ?
? Doris,? said Tom. ? She?s just about
splitting herself.?


? Stop that noise, Doris,? snapped Mr.
Barnaby. ? There?s nothing to laugh at.?
Doris, in a red dressing-gown, came out of her
room and approached the group. She swayed
slightly as she walked, and her silvery ripple of
mirth showed no signs of abatement.
? Pull yourself together, my girl,? said her
father sternly. ? There?s nothing to cackle
about. You?ve had a chicken-stealer and a
dingo within a few feet of you this night.?
?It wasn?t a dingo, father. It was somebody
singing.?
? Somebody singing ? ? Mr. Barnaby?s voice
was vibrant with unbelief. ? Who could be
singing at this time of night ? ?
? I don?t know. It sounded like an Italian
to me. Oh, it was too funny! ? This state-
ment Doris proceeded to prove, using Tom as
a support.
? You?ve had too much champagne, that?s
what?s the matter with you,? said her father
unkindly. ? You heard that dingo, Amyas ? ?
? I did,? said the Member. ? And a dashed
big one it was by the sound of him,? He pulled
his overcoat closer round him. ? It?s getting
a bit chilly, don?t you think ? As there?s
nobody shot, perhaps we could get to bed ? ?
The company dispersed at that, and Roy,
withdrawing from the window, slid on to his
bed.


? You?re laughing,? accused the captain
suddenly.
? Sorry, captain, but I can?t help it. It was
the funniest thing I?ve seen for years ?the two
dogs and Mr. Barnaby in the net, and you
scurrying along with the gramophone.?
? I can excuse you, perhaps,? the captain
conceded. ? But that ! ?Listen ! ?
Doris?s mirth was subsiding, but it w r as still
plainly audible.
? That,? said the captain venomously, ? is
the Barnaby woman.?
? No, it?s Doris. I expect she saw it
all.?
? The Barnaby woman, I say,? repeated the
captain savagely. ? Her Christian name may
be Doris. It doesn?t matter. She is the
Barnaby woman.?
? But, hang it, you can?t blame her. It was
enough to make a cat laugh.?
? Would Beatrice have laughed if Dante had
been chased by a couple of mongrel dogs and
an old fool with a shot-gun ? ?
? I expect she would.?
? I expect she wouldn?t. It didn?t give me
any pleasure to run, I assure you. I did it to
save explanations. And she thanks me by that
inane cackle. . . . And there?s more for you
to hear. That woman was laughing before
the mongrels came round the corner. I wasn?t


sure at first, but now I?m positive. I recognize
that cackling note. . . . Well, one can?t expect
to make a silk purse out of a pig?s ear.?
? Rot. She?s a topping girl. And she didn?t
give you away.?
? Coarse-fibred,? growled the captain.
? Worse than Charlotte Corday. Charlotte
stabbed with a dagger, but this woman stabs
with her awful cackling. I offered her Romance
with a big R, and she?s shied it back in my
face.?
? Well, if I were a girl, and somebody started
the Signor blaring into my room at midnight,
I know I should laugh. . . . Will this affect
your poultry-farming scheme ? ?
? It?s smashed it completely. I shall never
look at a Leghorn without thinking of that
woman.?
? You?ll leave this district, then ? ?
? I shall be leaving it in a quarter of an hour.?
The captain struck a match and looked at his
watch. ?It is now twenty minutes past
twelve.?
?Do you mean that ? ? Roy was rather
startled.
?I do. I hitched my wagon to what I
thought w T as a star, and it turns out to be the
sorriest of tallow candles, with a cackle that a
hyena would be ashamed of. I?ve unhitched
my wagon now. Je pars.?


? Without saying good-bye ? They?ve been
very decent to us, you know.
? Granted. But to save general embarrass-
ment Igo to-night. Are you coming ? ?
Roy pondered the question for a few moments.
? I suppose I?d better,? he said at last.
?Seems ungracious, though. We?ll have to
leave them a note.?
? We?ll do that.? The captain lit the candle
and scribbled a few lines on a leaf from his
note-book. ? Like to put in a postscript ? ?
? I should.? Roy added his contribution,
expressing his gratitude for the hospitality shown
to them at the Homestead, and regretting that
circumstances compelled them to leave without
making personal adieus.
This note they left on the table in a con-
spicuous position, and then, after waiting
another ten minutes to assure themselves that
all was quiet, they stole out on to the veranda,
turned to the left through the little gate leading
into the vineyard, and picked their way down
to the road.
Swayed by a mighty indignation against the
world?s women, the captain strode on in silence
until they reached Seymour?s bungalow, where
the difficulties attendant upon affixing the
? Golden Hind?s ? front wheels with a piece of
wire induced him to break into the vernacular.
But at last the job was done, and, wheeling
(2,678) IB


the equipage out of the stable, they went into
the bungalow to change their clothes and gather
up Vasco da Gama.
Ten minutes later they were on the road, their
faces turned to the south, the ? Golden Hind ?
rocking and swaying under the stress of the
captain?s indignation, and Da Gama clinging
desperately to the port bulwark to save himself
from being thrown overboard.
At the end of two miles the calm beauty of
the starlit evening began to have a soothing
effect on the captain?s ruffled feelings, and he
ventured a remark.
? Feeling better, Lavington ? ?
? Oh, I?ve been all right all along. Are
you ? ?
? Much. There?s nothing like the long
trail after all.?
? Rather a pity you fell in love.?
? Oh, it was worth it if only for the pleasure
of falling out of it again. When a man gets
clear of an entanglement like that he realizes
what he really wants.?
? Do you want something else now ? ?
?I do, and I?m going to get it.? The
captain lifted one hand from the cracked wdiite
handle of the ? Golden Hind ? and pointed ahead.
? I want something down there, something
big and blue. I want the great wide spaces
between the jutting peaks. I want to hear our


rifles cracking in the high-up solitudes. In a
nutshell, Lavington, I want the Marling Ranges,
and I?m going to get them. If any tomfool
tries to mix me up in his matrimonial schemes
after this, he?ll come off pretty badly. Some
men are born for the starlit peaks and some for
the lamplit houses in the valleys. The trouble
starts when they try to put the peak man into
the valley. That?s where we came adrift at the
Homestead.?
? But you tried to put yourself into the valley
there.?
?No fear; I didn?t. That was the Barnaby
woman with her talk of Leghorns and Wyandottes.
She?d have every man in the valley, if she could,
hanging round holding her confounded egg-
baskets. But she couldn?t hold me. A peak
will get me before a woman every time, and I
glory in it.?
At the end of another hour the keen edge had
quite worn off the captain?s resentment, and he
acquiesced at once when Roy suggested a camp.
Wheeling the ? Golden Hind ? into a clump of
York gums, they spread out their blankets, and
with Da Gama snuggled comfortably between
them, were soon in the land where Wyandottes
and Leghorns are non-existent.


CHAPTER XX
NEW HATS
THE ?Golden Hind? had ample opportunity
to prove the skill and forethought of her
builders during the next five months, for she
developed no defect that could not be mended
with a piece of wire, and her trials were many
and severe. Roy thoroughly enjoyed those
months of roaming. The weather, after the
rains had ceased, was warm and bright ; the
people were of his own race and kindly disposed.
When their money ran short he took the first
job that came to hand, and it was always in
these periods of financial distress that the
captain?s malaria took to rearing its ugly head,
necessitating its victim?s immediate cessation
from toil. The captain?s fights during those
months totalled up to six, and his working days,
by reason of the malaria, were seven to Roy?s
eighty-two. Roy, returning one day from a
six weeks? fencing job many miles from the
railway, found the captain ensconced in the


local hotel, with fifteen pounds left of the
remittance of fifty pounds which had reached
him five weeks previously, a distaste for the
local company, a contempt for the hotel billiard-
table, and a great thirst for the wide and empty
spaces of the Marlings. Therefore they had
gathered up Da Gama, grown now into a self-
reliant and wideawake young cat, wheeled out
the ? Golden Hind ? from her anchorage in the
shed at the back of the hotel, victualled her with
much tinned food, and set out once more on
what the captain was pleased to call the ? long
trail.? Their combined resources took them
a hundred miles that trip, and then they suc-
cumbed to the pleadings of an out-back farmer,
and agreed to ringbark a large paddock of trees.
The unaccustomed exercise aroused the malaria
demon at once, and the captain spent his days
in the shanty they had constructed of boughs
and sacking, cooking the meals and teaching
Da Gama to chase lizards, while Roy, armed
with a light axe, put the mark of death on the
trees around. They left that paddock with six
pounds in money, and the captain minus the
heel of one of his boots and with no headgear
to speak of, the crown of his helmet having
been purloined by the parrots of the locality,
possibly with a view to nest-building.
The captain presented such an amazing
spectacle as he limped along in the rear of the


? Golden Hind ? that Roy insisted that his
wardrobe should be replenished, and, leaving the
equipage in charge of Da Gama in a friendly
thicket, they went into the nearest township
and entered the store.
The storekeeper?s eyes sparkled as he scanned
them.
? You want quite a lot of things, I can see,?
he remarked kindly. ? Take your time and
have a look round. You?ll find everything you
want here.?
? I want to buy a hat and borrow a chisel,?
said the captain.
The storekeeper stared, then passed over a
chisel and went to unhook a bunch of hats.
He returned to find the captain prising off the
other heel.
? Gum ! ? said the storekeeper.
? No, nails,? the captain corrected, regarding
his mutilated boot; ?but they?ll wear down.
Which is your cheapest hat ? ?
? That one.? The storekeeper indicated a
light - grey felt. ? Seven - and - six. But I
wouldn?t advise you to buy it. Here?s one at
a quid that?ll last you four times as long.?
The captain put on the cheap hat, paid for
it, and laid the remains of his helmet and the
heel of his boot on the counter. ? You might
be able to make use of them,? he remarked.
? I won?t charge you for burning them,?


the storekeeper promised. ? Not that I oughtn?t
to, though. Ain?t you got a cheque on you,
you two ? You look as though you?ve come in
from out back.?
? We haven?t a penny more than five thousand
quid between us,? the captain assured him.
They walked out and sauntered up the street,
intending to have lunch at the hotel before
taking to the road again. The pristine grey
of the captain?s hat and his English manner of
walking were at once remarked by a group of
men lounging outside the hostelry. When the
two arrived these men were indulging in a game
with a stock-whip. One of their number,
blindfolded, was endeavouring to strike an old
hat placed in the roadway, while the rest stood
round and cheered him on.
The captain paused to criticize.
? That fellow?s got no idea of using a whip,?
he remarked, careless of the crowd of listeners.
? He doesn?t even know how to hold the thing.?
? Ever handled one, cobber ? ? asked one of
the group.
? More than once,? the captain replied.
? Have a go,? the man invited. ? We?re all
woodcutters here, and we don?t know much
about whips. I told him he was holding it
wrong.?
? Right, I?ll have a go,? said the captain.
The performer immediately surrendered his


whip and handkerchief, and the captain remov-
ing his hat, had his eyes bandaged by eager
helpers, and stepped out into the road.
At this moment Roy, an interested spectator,
was seized swdftly and silently by three strong
men. A firm hand was placed over his mouth,
and powerless to move or speak he watched the
captain strike at his own new grey hat, which
had been substituted for the old one in the
road.
Shouts of encouragement began to rise.
? You?ve got it, cobber ! Oh, a beauty !
He?s a stockman right enough ! A bit more to
the right?got him again ! This bloke?s off a
station ! Oh, what a clip ! I wouldn?t care
to be that hat.?
The adulation began to rise to the captain?s
head. He gave stunts with the whip. The
hide spun round his head in graceful spirals,
and then the lash darted out in search of its
prey. The grey hat, lashed mercilessly, danced
and quivered in the dust. It became shapeless ;
it gave up its band ; and then a roar of approval
broke out as the lash beat it inside out.
The hand on Roy?s mouth loosened as its
owner gave w r ay to a paroxysm of mirth, and he
was quick to take advantage of his opportunity.
? Shut up, captain. It?s your own hat.?
The next moment he was gagged again.
But the warning had been given. The captain


The grey hat danced and quivered in the dust.
removed the bandage, looked at the shapeless
thing in the road, and inquired whom he had
to fight.
He was told that he could take his pick.
The captain nodded, and beckoned to the
largest man in the group, a choice that was
noted with approval by the others.
tSi


A ring was formed, a timekeeper appointed,
and the combat began. Luck was with the
captain in that fight, for in the first round he
got in a blow on the other?s jaw which rattled
that big honest fighter considerably, and made
his mighty blows a trifle slower than usual.
Had one of those blows got home the captain
must have spent at least a week in bed. As it
was he kept out of reach, contenting himself
with tiger-like rushes, and at last got in an
upper-cut that laid his opponent low. The
timekeeper counted solemnly, and then said,
? Out.? Ten seconds later the big man rose,
put on his hat and jacket, and shook hands with
the captain. ? Good luck to you, cobber,? he
grunted. ? You can fight a bit.?
The onlookers added their congratulations,
and then, after some whispering among them-
selves, one of their number turned to Roy.
? What about you, cobber ? Do you want a
piece of any one ? ?
Roy had been sufficiently long in Western
Australia to know what reply was expected
from a man of spirit. He was not feeling
angry ; he had enjoyed the joke as much as
any one, but he knew what he had to say.
? I want the next biggest.?
? Yes,? said the man, ? we thought you
might.? He turned to his friends, and the
whispering began again. Presently a hat passed


round the group, and there was a clinking of
money. Then their spokesman addressed
Roy.
? The boys are satisfied you?re game, cobber.
The next biggest is Charlie Mac Nab, middle-
weight champion of the South-West. He
reckons we can ask you to leave out the fight
and come and have some scran with us without
you thinking wrong thoughts, eh ? ?
? I think so,? said Roy, with a laugh. ?To
tell you the truth, I wasn?t particularly keen on
fighting. I enjoyed the joke too much, you
see.?
? Come on, then. One of the boys has gone
down to the store to get your mate a new lid.
It?ll be a better one than the one he knocked
about with the whip, for we mustered twenty-
five bob between us.?
On that they moved en bloc into the hotel,
and the landlord was bidden to provide of his
best. His suggestion of champagne cider was
acceded to at once, and the golden-topped
bottles gave a gala air to the feast. The men
were in high humour. The joke had been
a good one, and the strangers had proved
themselves doughty. In this genial atmosphere,
and slightly under the influence of the cham-
pagne cider, the captain expanded, and told
stories of the South African campaign which
were quite to the taste of his audience. He


required but little pressing to sing the marching
song of his regiment, and he sang it standing
upon the table, wearing his new hat by request.
It was received riotously, and the two received
many offers of employment if they would stay
in the district. But the cider was not so
strong that the captain could not perceive the
fillip which his malaria would receive in such
work as sleeper-cutting, and he excused him-
self and Roy from accepting any such offers
on the grounds that they were due for a shoot-
ing expedition to the Marling Ranges at an
early date.
It is to be feared that the output of sleepers
dwindled considerably in the neighbourhood
that afternoon, but at four o?clock the last of
the blue-shirted hosts had departed, and Mr.
Albert Budd came into the dining-room to
find the two, surrounded by a forest of empty
bottles, poring over a map lent them by the
landlord.
? I?ve heard all about it,? said Mr. Budd.
? I had my hair cut at the barber?s just now,
and you were the topic of conversation. Is
this the new hat ? ?
? That?s it,? said the captain. ? They?re a
sporting crowd round here.?
Mr. Budd glanced at the map.
? Studying the locality ? Going to work in
this district ? ?


The captain shook his head.
? No, nothing like that. We find that we?re
only fifty miles from Marrup now, which is
our jumping-off place for the Marlings. I was
just suggesting to Lavington that we break
through to Marrup, take a job there, and get
our outfit together for the expedition.?
? And what does Lavington say to that ? ?
? Oh, I?m quite agreeable. We?ve been
talking about the Marlings for such a long time
now. It will seem strange when we do get
within sight of them.?
? And what are you doing down this way ? ?
the captain asked their visitor.
? Business, as usual. I?ve got to go on down
to Marrup when I?ve finished here, so I expect
I?ll see something of you?. Meanwhile, let?s
have some tea. I?m keen to hear your ad-
ventures.?
They had tea in the dining-room, and so
interested was Mr. Budd in the tale of their
wanderings that it was six o?clock before the
captain rose and said that they would have to
be making a move.
? By the way,? said Mr. Budd, as they shook
hands, ? do you ever hear from any of your
Kalgoorlie friends ? ?
? Lavington had one letter from Jack Winter.
?You answered it, didn?t you, Lavington ? ?
? Yes ; I replied at once. He?s out prospect-


ing, and so far he hasn?t done much good. He
hoped to strike oil sooner or later, he said.?
? Well, I hope he docs. He?s a good fellow.
I?ll see you at Marrup, then. You?ll let me
know when to send to Perth for my rifle ? ?
? We?ll let you know all right. Au revoir .
Come on, Lavington. Da Gama?s tongue must
be hanging out for a drink.?
Four days later, at eleven o?clock in the
evening, two tired men, a disconsolate cat, and
a growling perambulator crept into the out-
skirts of Marrup. The journey had been
marked by two outstanding incidents. The
first had occurred two days previously, when,
emerging from a tree-clad rise, they had seen
a blue jagged line standing up against the
southern horizon. The captain had halted
dramatically, gesticulated as Cortes might have
done upon his peak in Darien, and announced,
? The Marling Ranges ! Let?s have a boil-
up.? They had made tea, moving mechanically,
their eyes all the time on that distant range.
And when, two hours later, they rose to depart,
the captain remembered with horror that he
had once seriously thought of chicken-farming
in Riverton.
The second incident had occurred rather
late on the evening of the fourth day, when
the captain, departing from their usual regime
of camping an hour before sundown, had


She rid herself once more of her front wheels.
suggested ?breaking through ? to Marrup, dis-
tant six miles, that night. They had stopped
to fill the water-bags at a dam, and the ? Golden
Hind ? had chosen that moment to rid herself
once more of her front wheels, with the result
that Vasco da Gama, a roll of blankets, and the
tent had pitched into the muddy water. Da
Gama, all his feline instincts outraged, had
239


complained bitterly. They had dried him to
the best of their ability with the captain?s spare
pair of trousers and the inside of Roy?s hat,
but he had refused to be comforted, and now,
as they reached the first house of the straggling
little township, he mewed piteously and seemed
to beg for rest, warmth, and a meal.
? Marrup looks rather a blighted place to
me,? the captain remarked, coming to a halt.
He stared at two pyramidical shapes rising out
of the darkness on their right. ? W hat are
those ? ?tents ? ?
? Bell - tents, I should say,? said Roy.
? They?re in the garden of this house.?
? We?d better have a look at them. Hold
on a jiff.? The captain scrambled through a
wire fence and reconnoitred.
He was gone two minutes, during which
time Da Gama vented his feelings by scratch-
ing the gramophone.
?They?re bell-tents all right,? said the
captain, returning. ? One?s full of boxes and
things, and the other?s empty. We?d better
camp in there to-night.?
? Seems a good idea,? Roy agreed. Six
months before he might have demurred at
spending the night, uninvited, in a tent on
private property, but now he had no scruples
at all on the matter. There was an empty
tent. Why not make use of it ? Explana-


tions, if they were needed, could come in the
morning.
They lifted the ?Golden Hind? over the
fence, and wheeled it into the tent. Then they
applied themselves once more to Da Gama,
Roy rubbing him vigorously with his waistcoat,
while the captain put the finishing touches
with an old tooth-brush. Five minutes of this
treatment served to set the animal all aglow,
and a drink of condensed milk sealed his con-
tentment. Purring loudly, with tail erect, he
superintended the spreading of the one roll of
dry blankets, and, when all was in readiness,
stretched himself out in the middle, allowing
his masters to range themselves round him.
Soon all was quiet in the bell-tent at Marrup.
(2.678)


CHAPTER XXI
A CONTRACT AT MARKUP
ROY opened his eyes at eight o?clock the
. next morning to find the surprised face of
a ten-year-old boy looking in at them through
the flap. They stared at each other for a mo-
ment in silence, and then the boy withdrew
hurriedly. Roy nudged the captain, who
groaned, grunted, and inquired where they
were.
? Bell-tent, Marrup,? said Roy.
?So it is. I thought I was back in the good
old army for a moment.?
? There was a kid looking in at us a second
ago.?
? What did you throw at him ? ?
? Nothing?listen ! ?
Up at the house the boy was communicating
his discovery in an excited voice.
? Bushrangers, father. In the tent. Two of
them.?
? Nonsense,? said a cultured male voice.


? But they?re there, father. Go and look.
Awfully dark men, with hair hanging over their
foreheads. And they?ve got their gun with
them, and a perambulator and a black cat.?
? Perhaps you?d better go and see, Athel,?
said a woman?s voice, a trifle anxiously.
Footsteps sounded on the path, and the next
moment a tall, rather elderly man, with a short
grey beard and kindly blue eyes, stood at the
flap and gazed in at his uninvited guests.
? Good morning,? said the captain affably,
throwing off the blanket, and sitting up. ? Hope
you don?t mind our making use of your tent,
sir. Some of our gear got wet last night, so
we crawled in where we could. I?m Captain
Walters-Meete, and this is Mr. Lavington.?
? Pleased to meet you,? said the other
courteously. ?My name is Walsh, and I?m
the new doctor in this district. I?m glad you?ve
been able to make use of the tent. Won?t you
come up to the house and have some break-
fast ? ?
? Oh, thanks. But it will mean shaving
first.?
? And how long will that operation take you ? ?
? Half an hour, I?m afraid. Our razor,
doctor, is like the curate?s egg ?good in parts.
Lavington will use it for opening meat tins.?
? You had better let me lend you a razor,?
said the doctor, smiling. ? I?m right in sup-


posing that IVe only two guests, I suppose ? ?
He looked at the perambulator.
? Absolutely,? said the captain. ? That?s a
gramophone in there.?
?Ah, I thought perhaps you might be a
widower ?with encumbrances. We shall ex-
pect you, then, in half an hour. I will send
Gerald with the razor. He is extremely inter-
ested in you.?
The doctor went away up to the house, and
a few minutes later Gerald arrived with a jug
of hot water, a pair of ivory-handled razors,
and an inquiry as to whether they had ever shot
a bushranger.
The captain screwed up his face as if with
an effort of meditation.
? Let me see: when did we shoot our last
one, Lavington ? ?
? It must be some months now,? said Roy
gravely.
Gerald?s eyes sparkled.
? Did he yell ? ?
? It was more of a screech,? said the captain.
? Did he let out an oath ? ?
? He let out two, Gerald, but he took one
back. And then he stood on the bucket with
the noose tied round his neck, and Lavington
kicked the bucket away.?
Gerald turned an adulatory glance on Roy.
Then his eyes clouded.


'* Have you ever shot a bushranger f?
? But you said you shot him.?
?We shot him first; but he wasn?t quite
dead, so we hanged him to make sure. He
died game, did Bluff Bill of ? What was the
name of that place he came from, Lavington ? ?
? Boodlabarrah.?


? Bluff Bill of Boodlabarrah,? said Gerald,
with great relish. ? Did you put penny pieces
on his eyes ? ?
? Lavington did. He always does on every
man he kills. I think it?s a waste of money
myself.?
? I don?t,? said Gerald firmly. ?He died
game. I think he deserved it.?
Gerald stayed with them while they shaved
and washed, and gained thereby a good general
insight into the character of Bluff Bill of
Boodlabarrah. Then they went up to the
house, where Mrs. Walsh, a refined-looking
lady of forty-five, received them smilingly, and
ushered them into the dining-room, where a
dish of bacon and eggs and a pot of aromatic
coffee awaited their attention.
? Yours is rather an uncommon name, cap-
tain,? Mrs. Walsh said, as they seated them-
selves. ? Are you related to Sir Basil Walters-
Meete of Wiltshire ? ?
? Merely his second son,? replied the captain.
? Then I have met your father. I was stay-
ing with the Freynes last year, and we drove
over to Thorndene Park one day. What a
lovely old place it is.?
? Not a bad old barn at all,? the captain
agreed.
? Mother,? said Gerald, pulling her sleeve.
? Captain Walters-Meete and Mr. Lavington


killed Bluff Bill of Boodlabarrah. Mr. Laving-
ton kicked the bucket away and put penny
pieces on his eyes.?
? Really. That was very thoughtful of Mr.
Lavington.?
? We are quite new to this country,? said the
doctor, ? and there is one question I should like
to ask you. Is the perambulator much used in
Australia for other than its original purposes ? ?
? Well ?no. Lavington and I have walked
about three hundred miles with ours, and we
haven?t met with another all the time we were
on the road.?
? Three hundred miles,? murmured the
doctor. ? That is really astonishing.?
? The whole country is astonishing,? said
his wife. ?We have been here a fortnight,
and when we arrived we found the hotel full,
so the local policeman took us to his house and
kept us there for three days while this one was
being cleaned. And he wouldn?t take a penny
in return.?
? A fine fellow, that policeman,? the doctor
added. ? A very well-informed man. He put
me right over a quotation from Carlyle. ... Are
you staying in Marrup ? ?
?In or around,? the captain replied. ? We?re
going to look for a job, scrape a few pounds
together, and then tackle the Marling Ranges
on a shooting expedition.?


? I see. Work should be easy to get in
Marrup. I?ve bought that patch over there.?
The doctor pointed through the window to the
woodland on the opposite side of the road. ? I
want it cleared, but nobody seems anxious for
the job.?
The captain pricked up his ears.
? Going to put up a house ? ?
? Yes, that?s my idea. I sold my practice
in Kensington, and came out here, mainly for
Gerald?s sake. He is not over strong, and we
thought the bush air would suit him better
than London fogs. I?ve got six acres in that
plot, and later on, when I get it cleared, I hope
to plant fruit trees.?
? Six acres,? said the captain thoughtfully.
? We might be able to clean that up for you,
doctor.?What do you say, Lavington ? ?
? I should think so?if the doctor isn?t in
any hurry, that is.? Roy knew perfectly
well by now that the captain?s malaria would
have to be reckoned with in the signing of any
contract.
? Well, well, this is very fortunate,? said the
doctor. ? I had no idea clearing was in your
line. The people round here tell me that
seven pounds an acre would be a fair price to
pay, but, of course, you?d like to satisfy your-
selves about that. I shall be prepared to take
your word for what is a fair price.?


The conversation then turned on general
topics, and after the meal the doctor ushered
the two across the road and showed them the
patch.
? Jarrah and blackboy mostly,? said the
captain, with a quick glance round. ?We can
eat this up pretty quickly at seven pounds an
acre, eh, Lavington ? ?
? If we work we can,? said Roy guardedly.
? You think the price is adequate, then ? ?
asked the doctor.
? Quite,? the captain replied. ?It all de-
pends on the way one goes at it. A new hand
would most likely put in half his life here ;
but we?ve done clearing before.?
? At Koggalunga,? Roy put in.
? Yes,? said the captain airily, ? at Kogga-
lunga. We helped a man skin out a big plot
there.?
? Oh, then you?ll know exactly how to set
about this.? The doctor led the way to the
centre of the plot and stopped at a small log
hut fitted with a roof of corrugated iron.
? You might like to camp in here,? he said.
? There?s a water tank at the side, you see.?
? Full too.? The captain kicked the tank
in a professional manner. ? Yes, this?ll suit
us down to the ground. We?ll move into
residence right away, and to-morrow you?ll
hear the axes ringing, doctor.?


They went back to the garden, lifted down Da
Gama from an apple tree, placed him in the
? Golden Hind,? and wheeled the equipage
across to their new quarters. Then the captain
kindled a fire in the grate, and boiled the billy.
? Walters-Meete and Lavington, contractors,?
he announced. ? We?ve stepped right into it.
There?s forty-two pounds in this job. And
how much have we got now ? ?
? About three quid.?
? That?s forty-five pounds. We live on the
skin of our teeth here for a month, tucker cost-
ing us, say, six quid. That?s thirty-nine for the
expedition. And, I say, Lavington, look there.?
The captain pointed through the doorway.
Far away, a good fifty miles to the west, a
solitary blue peak was visible above the tree-tops.
? The Marlings,? said the captain. ? Now
I call that a most nerving sight. With that
staring us in the face, we can?t help putting
our backs into it.?
Roy looked long at the distant peak, and then
turned his attention to the array of portly
tree-trunks in the foreground.
? We?ll have to work, though, if we?re going
to finish this in a month.?
? We?ll take our coats off for the job,? the
captain assured him.
After a cup of tea they went into Marrup
to make a few purchases. They found the


township to consist of scattered bungalows,
mostly with orchard gardens, with a row of
shops and an hotel fronting on the railway.
Their first call was at the barber?s, where they
heard much local gossip. Doctor Walsh, they
were told, had made a very good impression
in the district, and it was probable that a
number of the residents would have formed
themselves into a voluntary aid society for the
clearing of his plot if he had not been able
to secure other labour. Leaving the barber?s
they went into one of the general stores, where
they purchased axes and shovels. Laden with
these they returned to the hut, and spent the
afternoon in the construction of two bush beds
and a rustic table.
At six o?clock the next morning the new axes
began to flash in the rays of the rising sun.
An hour later one of them ceased to flash,
being relegated to a dark corner of the hut.
The malaria had once more delivered its
ultimatum, and the captain, out of regard for
his constitution, had given way. It was not
until late in the afternoon that he appeared in
the clearing again, and carried round a few
shovelfuls of live coals to the logs which Roy
had placed against the boles of numerous trees.
As he had expected, the bulk of the work fell
on Roy, and he buckled to with a will. He
liked the doctor, and he made up his mind that


the plot should be cleared at the earliest possible
date. At the end of a week the captain was
forbidden by the malaria to spend more than
one hour each day in the clearing. Roy, in
consequence, increased his own working day
from twelve to fourteen hours, and sometimes
longer. This state of affairs was soon known
in Marrup. Horsemen and drivers of vehicles
on the road heard the crashing of trees and
the blaring of the gramophone from the hut,
and drew their own conclusions.
Doctor Walsh frowned over this state of
affairs. Strolling on to the clearing one day
he found Roy, looking like the presiding demon
of an inferno, in the midst of smoke and
flames, swinging steadily with his axe at a patch
of undergrowth. Unseen, he stood for a few
moments, admiring the poise of the lad?s figure
and the play of sturdy muscles. Then he
coughed, and Roy let the head of his axe drop
and turned round.
? Good day, Lavington,? the doctor greeted
him ; ? you?re getting along well, I see.?
? Not as quickly as Td hoped, doctor. It?s
going to be a two months? job.?
? Where?s the captain ? ?
? I think he?s in the hut.?
?He seems to be always in the hut. We
hear the gramophone going all day long. Why
doesn?t he do his share of the work ? ?


Swinging steadily with his axe.
? Malaria,? said Roy, trying not to smile.
? There?s no malaria about the captain. I
should know if there were. I suppose I?ve no
right to interfere, but it seems hardly fair that
you should do all the work. Why do you stand
it??


? Well, I suppose I owe him something.?
? Money ? You don?t mind my asking ? ?
? No, not money. I?ve cleared that off long
ago. But he?s stood by me more than once ?
in fights and things. He?s a plucky chap in
some ways, though he hates work.?
An ominous crack sounding from their right
interrupted the conversation for a moment.
A giant jarrah, its vitals gnawed by a week?s
fire, began to sway.
? It?s all right,? said Roy, watching it keenly.
?It won?t fall this way. No need to move.?
There came another crack, and then the great
tree toppled and crashed, bringing down a litter
of smaller fry in its fall. From the hut came
the impassioned plaint of the Signor.
? He?s an amusing man to travel about with,
too,? said Roy.
? I should imagine he would be,? the
doctor agreed dryly. ? Rather a costly amuse-
ment, though.?


CHAPTER XXII
THE HEIR OF THORNDENE
IT was one evening in the seventh week of
the residence in the hut that the captain
inquired into the finances of Walters-Meete
and Lavington, contractors.
? Caruso?s getting a bit worn,? he added.
? Vasco?s noticed it. He always goes out now
when I put it on.?
We might be able to spring a new one,?
Roy said, a little doubtfully. ?We seem to
have spent a lot of money on tucker since we?ve
been here. We shall have to look out for
another job next week. I can?t see our Marling
trip coming off just yet.?
? No, nor I. The doctor was on a soft
thing when he got us to take this contract.
I?ve seen people smiling as they passed our
clearing. Still, I haven?t wasted my time.
There s one thing about malaria, Lavington:
it makes a man think. Now I?ve got the
*6B 6


germ of a pretty good idea. Did you ever
hear of the Jonathan ? ?
? The Jonathan ? No ; what is it ? ?
?An apple. And the place for growing
Jonathans is Marrup. If you try and rear the
Jonathan in any other place than Marrup, it?ll
pine itself into a crab apple in no time. Now
there?s a craze for Jonathans abroad. England
and Germany are at one another?s throats to
get them, and America thinks more of the
Jonathan than she does of her Monroe Doctrine.
So the growers of Marrup are getting sleek.
No wonder they laugh when they see us bul-
locking ourselves to death over these jarrahs.?
? So you?re thinking of going in for fruit-
farming ? ?
? Jonathan-farming. You can have all your
oranges and peaches for me. You know what
old Shakespeare says about hopping on to the
tide and sailing down to fortune. The tide?s
pretty well at the flood now; all we?ve got to
do is to sit on the Jonathan and float down
with it.?
? But you?d need capital.?
? There?s fifty quid due in three months?
time. This isn?t a bad little hut. We could
hang on here till the money comes.?
But Roy shook his head.
? This is getting serious, captain. I don?t
mind so much about the shooting trip being


deferred, but I?ve simply got to go out there
and get those photographs ; and that means
buying a camera, and not a cheap one
either.?
?Just so, Lavington. You?ve got to get
those photographs, and I?ve got to show a lot
of nincompoops in England that I can make
good. Take your time and think it over.
There?s no hurry for a few days.? The cap-
tain wound up the gramophone, and the voice
of the Signor, now grown extremely raucous,
put an end to further conversation. Vasco da
Gama, darting a reproachful glance at the two,
marched out and sat on the roof.
In spite of the captain?s repeated warnings
that they were working themselves out of a
home, Roy refused to slacken his efforts, and
another week found the clearing within a day
of completion. On that day they had an
unexpected visitor in the shape of Mr. Albert
Budd. He arrived as the two were lunching
in the hut, and required no pressing to join
them.
? I?ve a letter for you, captain,? he said. ? I
was in the Post Office just now, and happened
to mention that I was coming out here, so
Mrs. Wiggins asked me to bring it along.
Been chasing you all over the country by the
look of it.?
? Thanks.? The captain took the letter and
(2,678) 17


glanced incuriously at its various postmarks.
? Some blighter wants some money, I expect.
He?ll have to wait.?
? Hard up ? ? inquired Mr. Budd, smiling.
? Slightly. My malaria let me down rather
badly in this contract.?
? Our shooting expedition is likely to be
postponed, then ? ?
? Indefinitely. Lavington is talking about
making a flying trip out and back in the next
two months.?
? Indeed ? ?
? I?ve got to get a few photos for a man,?
said Roy, and explained the position.
? I see,? said Mr. Budd. ? Well, I don?t
think I?ll offer to accompany you on a trip of
that sort. I don?t particularly want to leave
my bones on the Marlings. But I still claim
my place when the real expedition starts.?
? You?ll be reckoned in,? the captain assured
him. ? I daresay it will be six months before
we start getting the horses and rifles together.
But ? ?he pointed through the doorway to the
distant peak?? there it is ! And one of these
days we?ll be standing on top there trying to
locate Marrup.?
When their visitor had gone the captain
passed a knife through the flap of his letter
and pulled out a typewritten sheet. Some-
thing like a low whistle escaped from his lips


as he read it, and Da Gama, taking it for a signal,
scrambled down from the roof outside, and
marched in, looking for milk.
? Not bad news, I hope ? ? said Roy.
? Yes, pretty bad, Lavington. My elder
brother has been killed in the hunting-field.?
The captain laid down the letter and went to
the doorway, where he stood staring out at the
fast dwindling fires. ? Poor old Jimmy,? he
murmured softly. ? Well, I?m hanged. Poor
old Jimmy.?
The disappointed Da Gama mewed plain-
tively, and Roy quietened him with milk.
? Poor old Jimmy,? murmured the captain
again.
?I?m most awfully sorry, captain,? said
Roy. ? Were you great pals ? ?
The captain turned and picked up the letter
again.
? No, not particularly. He was in a different
set to mine, and I never had much to do with
him, though he did me several good turns at
times. I?m not surprised that he?s come to
grief. He was always a terror for his fences?
rode straight as a die. . . . This letter is from
a solicitor in Perth. He has orders to book
me a passage to England and supply me with
necessaries to the value of thirty pounds. . . .
Don?t think I?ll do any work this afternoon,
Lavington.?


Roy did not smile at the unconscious humour
of this remark.
The captain reached out mechanically for his
shot-gun, and strode off into the bush. He
returned three hours later, as Roy was sitting
down to tea.
? I?ve thought it all out, Lavington.?
? You?re going home, of course ? ?
? Yes ; there?s nothing else to be done.
I?m the blighted heir of Thorndcne now.
Jimmy?s dead; that?s that. Wailing won?t
bring him back. I won?t bore you with my
feelings on the matter. Let?s talk business.
This has put the lid on the Jonathan scheme.
What do you say to coming home with me ? ?
Roy looked his surprise.
? What would be the good of that, even if I
had the money for my fare ? ?
? Heaps of good. I?m the blighted heir,
and Thorndene?s a big estate ?big enough for
you to cling to my skirts and make a good thing
out of it.?
? Impossible. What on earth would your
people think of me ? ?
? They?d think what I told them to think if
they wanted to keep me in England. We could
pension the bailiff, and you could have his job.
We can get you home easily enough. They?re
sure to book me a first-class passage. Well,
I?ll get the solicitor to give me two second-


class ones instead, and you could buy yourself
some togs out of the thirty pounds.?
? Thanks very much, but there?s nothing
doing.?
? Definite ? ?
? Absolutely.?
? I?m sorry, then. We?ve bullocked together
for nearly a year now, and I?m afraid you?ll go
on bullocking.?
The captain departed next day by the night
train.
? I?ll drop you a line when I?m in residence,?
he said to Roy, who had come to see him off.
? Sorry we couldn?t bring off that Marling
trip. But we may do it some day yet.?
? Thinking of coming out again ? ?
? Shouldn?t be surprised. I?ve a few jobs
to do in England first. One of them will be
to shake up some of those blighters in Parlia-
ment. But I?ll keep in touch with you, and
when I come out we?ll do the Marlings in style
?travelling-rugs and yellow linings to the tents
and all that sort of thing. Tell Budd, will
you ? ?
? I will ; but it sounds a bit too opulent for
us, captain.?
? Bah ! I?m not asking you to pay your own
expenses. My skirts will be pretty wide, I
hope, by that time, and all you and Budd will
have to do will be to cl ?


The guard?s whistle blew shrilly ; the train
jolted ; and Captain Walters-Meete was borne
away from the region of the Marling Ranges.
Roy went back to the hut, where he lay awake
for a long time, fighting a most disagreeable
sensation of loneliness.


CHAPTER XXIII
EN ROUTE TO THE MARLINGS
ROY, passing the Marrup Hotel the follow-
ing afternoon, was hailed by Mr. Budd
from the veranda.
? Whither away, Lavington ? ?
?To the boarding-house.? Roy stopped,
and his friend came into the road. ? You
knew that the captain went off last night ? ?
?No, I?ve heard nothing. Where?s he
gone ? ?
Roy told him in a few words what had
happened.
? And what are your plans now ? ? asked
Mr. Budd.
? Oh, I?ve finished the clearing, and I?ve
just wheeled our perambulator and cat down
to the doctor?s place. He?s going to mind them
for me. The captain took the gramophone
with him. He couldn?t bear to part with
Caruso. I?m starting work to-morrow on the
dam.?


? The Marrup dam ? That?s pretty tough
work, isn?t it ? ?
? Very tough by the look of it ?pick and
shovel for eight hours a day. But the pay?s
good ?eleven bob a day.?
? I suppose you had to finance the captain
for his trip up to Perth ? ?
? Yes ; I gave him a fiver. He said he?d
send it to me when he got to England.?
?He may do. Stranger things than that
have happened. Then our Marling trip is off ? ?
Roy laughed.
? Did you ever seriously believe in it ? ?
? Well, perhaps I wasn?t exactly building on
it,? Mr. Budd admitted. ? Still ?
? The captain told me to tell you that he
hasn?t given up all hopes of it. If he does do
it, it will be with travelling-rugs and yellow-
lined tents. But he said that he?d got to shake
up some of the blighters in Parliament first.?
? That will take him a very long time, I?m
afraid. Have you got a room at the boarding-
house ? ?
? Part of one. I?ve one of the six beds in
the long room there.?
? Good. I?ll look you up now and again.?
Roy started work the next morning in the
big shallow basin a mile to the north of the
township, where a hundred or so men w T ere
engaged in breaking up the hard white clay


EN ROUTE TO THE MARLINGS 265
and loading it into the numerous carts which
plied backwards and forwards from the dumps.
It was gruelling work, and Roy could not speak
with any enthusiasm about it when next he saw
Mr. Budd.
? Every fly in Australia seems to have got
into that dam,? he said. ? And there?s no
breeze there. It?s a festering spot.?
? But you?re going to stick it ? ?
? Got to be done,? said Roy promptly. ? It?s
a kind of debt of honour.?
? To Sir John Stanford ? ?
? That?s it.?
? Don?t you think it likely that he?s forgotten
all about it ? ?
? More than likely, I should think ; but
that?s not the point. I promised him I?d get
those photos, and I?m going to get them.?
? Are you going to tell him what you went
through to get them ? ?
?No fear. That wouldn?t interest Sir John.
No, I shall just send him the photos and films
with a very short note, and then that?ll be off
my chest.?
The bright spots for Roy during those weeks
of toil were the week-ends. Work at the dam
ceased at twelve o?clock on Saturdays, and at
tea-time the men from the out-back farms and
clearings began to flock into the township.
In the evening the long room at the boarding-


house was transformed into a dance-room, and
the men and maidens footed it to the strains of
a concertina and fiddle. The festivities were
usually kept up till midnight, when Roy and
the other occupants of the room rearranged
their bunks, and went to bed in a thick haze of
tobacco smoke. On Sundays the young men
of the neighbourhood sometimes banded to-
gether for a kangaroo hunt. Roy accompanied
them twice on these expeditions, mounted on
a ? brumby ? pony lent him by the doctor.
These outings induced in him the greatest
respect for the riding qualities of the native-
born, for the pace set by some of the young
? bloods ? in the rough bush country was little
less than terrific, and Roy wondered that
accidents were not more frequent.
At the end of a month he sent to Perth for a
camera. It arrived in due course with a book
of instructions, which Roy studied at night,
lying on his bunk in the long room. The
camera had cost him ten pounds, and when he
had mastered the mechanism he took it to the
doctor for safe custody. Then he began to
purchase gradually the other necessaries for his
expedition?a good compass, a strong water-
bag with a leathern bottom, small tins of con-
centrated food, comfortable boots, and a ser-
viceable knife. On the 9th of May, all being
in readiness for his trip on the morrow, he


On Sundays the young men handed together for a
kangaroo hunt.
ceased work at the dam, and accepted an
invitation from Mr. Budd to lunch at the hotel.
Calling at the Post Office he was surprised to find
a telegram awaiting him. It was from Winter.
? Come at once, you and W.-M. Have
wired ten pounds P.O. Marrup. Can w r ait
two days only. J. W.?
267


Roy took that telegram round to the hotel
and handed it silently to Mr. Budd, who read
it with pursed lips.
? He?s struck something good, Lavington.
What are you going to do ? ?
? Wire him I can?t come, and return his ten
pounds.?
?You may be turning your back on a
fortune.?
Roy shrugged his shoulders.
? It?s come just at the wrong time.?
? It?s this Marling trip that?s stopping you ? ?
? Just that. Otherwise I?d be off like a
shot.?
? Couldn?t you put it off for a week ? ?
? No. I said I?d post those photos on or
before the 15th of this month. I?ve got to
forget about Winter.?
? Then come and have some lunch,? said
Mr. Budd, and led the way into the dining-
room.
? Now what is your route ? ? he asked, as
they seated themselves.
? I?m going first to the Barralong Hills.
There?s a farmer there by the name of Camp-
bell, I?m told ?a good fellow. I shall ask him
to put me up for the night. Then I shall cut
away straight through the bush. The Marlings
are about forty miles from there. I ought to
be able to reach them in a couple of days from


the Barralongs. Then another day for climb-
ing the peak, and three days back.?
? You?ve decided to go on foot ? ?
? Yes, I thought it would be better. I don?t
know what sort of country I shall strike, and a
horse would be a nuisance at night. Also I
don?t want to advertise the trip, which I should
do if I hired a horse. As it is, people think
I?m simply taking a jaunt out to the Barralongs.?
? You?re taking on a big contract, do you
know that ? Men have been lost in the
Marling country before now.?
?So I believe. But I don?t intend to get
lost.?
When they parted that afternoon Mr. Budd
shook hands with what for him was extreme
heartiness.
? Good-bye, Lavington. The best of luck.
I?m very pleased to have met you.?
? And you think there?s a good chance of
never seeing me again ? ? Roy laughed.
? Quite a good chance. But you?re a refresh-
ing change after most of the people I?ve had to
deal with. Good-bye.?
Roy cooked his own bacon and eggs the next
morning, and before the other inmates of the
boarding-house had stirred, he was out in the
fresh morning air, with his face turned towards
the Barralong Hills. Following the road for a
quarter of a mile, he then took a bearing by


his compass and plunged straight into the bush.
He had cut down his swag to the last ounce,
carrying but a single blanket with his eatables
wrapped in it, the water-bag, compass, camera,
and knife. His tea he proposed to boil in his
first empty tin. But even thus lightly burdened
he found the going heavy enough through the
thickets, forests, and burnt lands, with addi-
tional obstacles in the shape of wire fences for
the first six miles, and it was with some relief
that he saw at midday the great bulk of the
Barralong Hills swelling up through the trees
ahead. Reaching the bracken-covered foot-
hills he halted, scooped the meat from one of
his tins, and made some tea; after which he
rested for an hour. Then, throwing a pile of
green stuff on to the fire in order to make a
smoke, he left his swag and climbed some
distance up the hill. He soon saw what he
sought: a big green patch four miles to the
south-east ?Campbell?s farm without doubt.
Returning to the fire he extinguished it care-
fully, took up his swag, and set off along the
foot of the hills. An hour and a half?s walking
brought him to a big clearing, and following
the cart-track which led through it, he saw in
front the roof of a large barn and the chimney-
pots of a farmhouse showing above the trees
of a small orchard. Rounding the corner of
the bam he found himself in a neat courtyard


A small piece of paper attracted Roy?s notice.
fronting a fair-sized house built of grey stone.
A few chickens inspected him hopefully, and
a tabby cat lying by the door blinked a sleepy
eye, but made no effort to move. A small
piece of paper tacked on to the door attracted
Roy?s notice at once. He went up and read it:
*7l


? Away for a week. Back next Friday.
There are three loaves in the pan. Use
veranda rooms , and oblige ,
? Keith Campbell.?
Taking this to be an open invitation to use
the house, Roy turned the handle and entered.
He found himself in a long low room, furnished
mainly with firearms standing in racks on the
walls. Mr. Campbell was evidently a keen
sportsman. Two doors opened from this
armoury, one leading to the kitchen and the
other to the principal living-room, the latter
lined with shelves of books and containing a
big table with a green cloth. From the absence
of knick-knacks in this room and from the
ungraceful hanging of the curtains, Roy judged
the owner to be a bachelor. Three more doors
led out from this room. Roy opened them in
turn, and peeped into first a big bedroom,
furnished with a massive four-poster and some
curious old chairs ; next, the drawing-room,
whose high-backed brocaded chairs and quaint
old settee gave him the impression of having
stepped into some long-shut-up boudoir of the
Queen Anne period ; and then the third, which
opened on to a small veranda. The rooms
Mr. Campbell had requested his guests to use
were at either end of this veranda. Roy
examined them both, and found them to be


small apartments, simply furnished with iron
bedsteads, cheap chests of drawers, and home-
made wash-hand stands. These rooms, too,
were evidently not greatly used, for a fig tree
had thrust an arm through the window of one,
and a goldfinch sat on its endmost twig and
cocked his head perkily at Roy as he unstrapped
his swag.
Lying down on the bed Roy rested for two
hours, and then went into the kitchen, where
he kindled the fire and made some tea. He
spent the evening in the big room, reading the
Pickwick Papers by the light of an oil lamp,
and at ten o?clock he retired to his room on the
veranda. There he lay awake for some time,
musing on the lonely life which the owner of
the premises must lead. Through the window
he could see the dark line of the Barralong
Hills blotting out the stars, and from the near
distance he could hear some bull-frogs holding
concert ?deep-noted, like the twanging of violin
strings. Then his thoughts turned again to his
own immediate projects, and w r hen he did fall
asleep it was to dream that he was assisting
Mr. Pickwick to take photographs from the
top of the Tower Bridge.
(2.678)


CHAPTER XXIV
MOUNT CRUET
A FLOCK of ? squeakers,? members of the
rook family, flying low over the orchard
caused Roy to open his eyes at an early hour
the next morning. He got up at once, made
his bed, and left everything as he had found it
in the room. Then, after a good breakfast in
the kitchen, he filled his water-bag from the
tank, shouldered his swag, and set out.
The morning w r as blue and cloudless, cool
as yet, but with a prospect of fierce midday
heat. As he strode up through the clearing
Roy scanned the line of the Barralongs, and
decided to make for the saddle between two
tall peaks. From there he knew that he would
get a good view of the Marlings. In other
circumstances he would have paused to admire
the beauty of this wild southern country, but
the scantiness of his resources bade him keep
his mind severely on the work in hand.
Leaving the foothills he crossed an old water-
course, which marked the green hillside like


a white scar, ploughed through a patch of
bracken and ferns, where the plump little
wallabies scattered at his approach, traversed
an expanse of bare slippery rock, which neces-
sitated his going on hands and knees to avert
catastrophe, crawled through a thicket so dense
that he emerged with his face and hands bleed-
ing and minus several portions of his clothing,
zigzagged through a patch of giant karris, and
at last, after a good hour?s climb, reached a
stretch of stunted sward on the summit of the
hills. An eagle-hawk flapped slowly out from
its fastness in the adjoining peak, swung up
into the blue, and took stock of the intruder.
Judging him harmless, it sank slowly back again.
Roy scarcely noticed the eagle-hawk, for,
forty miles in front, rising from the sea of bush
in a series of tumbled peaks, lay the Marling
Ranges in their entirety. Roy sat down on his
swag and gazed at them, and for a moment his
thoughts turned to the captain, and wished that
he could have seen the Marlings from the top
o 1 the Barralong Hills before he departed for
England. Then he scanned the distant peaks
carefully, and soon picked his objective. It
lay near the eastern end of the range, and topped
its fellows by perhaps a couple of hundred feet.
? Mount Cruet ! ? Roy said to himself with a
smile, and thought of the train journey from
Perth to Kalgoorlie, when Mr. Budd had


christened the peak. Consulting his compass
he found Mount Cruet to lie W.N.W. from the
spot where he was sitting.
After a ten minutes? rest he shouldered his
swag, walked over the saddle, and picked his
way down the precipitous side of the Barra-
longs. Another hour and he was in the
solitudes of the bush with both ranges lost to
view, and oppressed by a growing thirst which
he dare not assuage. Water, he realized, was
going to be his chief consideration on the trip.
If he struck it on the way or in some rock hole
on the Marlings, all would be well. If not, the
return journey was going to be distinctly
unpleasant. Bearing this in mind he steadily
resisted the temptation of taking a good pull
from the bag, and at midday contented himself
with a bare half-pint of tea. This allowance
he increased slightly at nightfall. Pitching
camp was an extremely simple matter. Clear-
ing a patch of ground about two yards square,
he kindled a fire, put on two or three stout
branches, and spread out his single blanket
beside it. His weariness after the day?s ardu-
ous journey was such that he was asleep a few
minutes after he had laid himself down. But
the chilliness of the autumn nights in the south-
west country soon made itself manifest, and he
awoke at two in the morning, half-frozen, to
find but a few dying embers left of his fire.


He kindled it again, and then, despairing of
getting any more sleep that night, sat over the
flames, huddled in his blanket.
At dawn he filled a meat-tin with water, and
made himself some strong tea. This, with
some meat and biscuits, constituted his break-
fast. The moment he had finished he shouldered
his bundle, glanced at his compass, and set off
again. The country he traversed that day was
similar to that of the preceding one. But his
broken night was having its effect, and he knew
that he was not making the same pace. Despite
the acuteness of his thirst, he cut down his water
allowance still further, and at midday he rested
for a half-hour only. The last stage of his-
journey that day was accomplished by the light
of the stars, and when at last he debouched
from the forest on to the foothills of the Mar-
lings he w r as too tired even to make a fire.
Swallowing one delicious mouthful of water,,
he wTapped himself in his blanket and went to
sleep. Once more the cold aw 7 akened him at
an early hour, and once more he kindled a fire
and crouched over it till dawn.
But the daylight had a heartening effect on
him, for it showed him that he had steered a
true course. He was at the foot of Mount
Cruet. The great bare slopes, broken with
outcrops of rock, towered above him four
thousand feet into the blue, and on his left the


long line of sister peaks melted away into the
distant landscape. Roy wasted no time in
admiring the rugged grandeur of the scene.
He was going to have his work cut out in
reaching the top of that immense peak, and he
set about his preparations at once. Going
back to the fringe of the forest, he filled his
pockets with a tin of meat and some biscuits,
and laid the rest of his provisions in his blanket
at the foot of a good-sized tree. His camera
he slung in a red handkerchief, and tied it to
his belt. Breakfast was a quick affair with
him that morning, for he did not trouble to
make tea, thinking that a draught of water
might be more valuable for thirst quenching.
His frugal meal over, he took up the precious
water-bag and began the ascent. The first
two thousand feet he found fairly simple to
negotiate, but after that his difficulties began.
He skirted almost impossible ledges, trusted
his life more than once to the tenacity of the
stunted vegetation, climbed, his water-bag
gripped between his teeth, up gullies that
would have tested a seaman of the Nelson
period. When, two hours later, he reached a
rocky plateau on the summit of the range and
saw the pinnacle of Mount Cruet towering
five hundred feet above him, he knew that
nothing less than a solemn promise would have
made him undertake the feat.


Taking off his coat and leaving it with the
water-bag on a flat rock, he skirted the base of
the peak, looking for the best way up. He
found it at last, a track which a mountain goat
might have shaken his head at. When, an
hour later, he swung himself on to a jagged
rock, the topmost point of the Marling Ranges,
he flung himself down, and lay there for five
minutes, occupied solely in regaining his breath.
Then he stood up, unslung the camera, and
studied the scene below.
It was as though all Australia was spread out
for his inspection. To the south he could see
the faint line of the hills fringing the coast ;
to the west and east the virgin bush land
stretched as far as the eye could reach, with
here and there the green spot of an out-back
farm, spots that he could cover with his finger-
nail ; to the south-west, blue in the sunlight,
rose the big bulk of the Barralong Hills ; and
north-west the peaks of the Marlings stood up
like the funnels of some gigantic battleship.
Winding off the spool until the figure 1
showed in the little aperture at the back, Roy
stood with his back to the sun, and began to
take his photographs. He used two spools,
and congratulated himself that the atmospheric
conditions were ideal for his purpose. Then
he reslung the camera and began the descent.
It was even more hazardous than the upward


journey, but he reached the rocky plateau at
last, and then something like a gasp of horror
escaped from his lips as he saw the water-bag
standing in a moist dark patch. Pouncing
upon it, he lifted and shook it. The bag was
empty, and an examination showed a small
puncture in the leather bottom.
Recovering himself, Roy sat down and con-
sidered the situation. Pie did not disguise
from himself that his plight was now desperate.
Pie was tired, jaded, and suffering severely
from thirst. There were three courses open
to him : he could explore the Marlings in the
hope of finding a rock hole ; he could return
by the way he had come ; or he could make
for the nearest farm, which he judged to be
about thirty-five miles to the west. The first
he dismissed at once. The fierce summer
suns had scorched the Marlings since the
last rains, and a search for water there would
be like looking for a needle in a haystack.
The second, after some consideration, he dis-
missed also, for a journey to Campbell?s farm
would mean the scaling and descent of the
Barralongs after a forty-mile trudge through
the bush. In his present state he did not feel
equal to the feat. The third course seemed to
him the most feasible. With luck he might
strike the farm or a track leading to it in thirty-
six hours. If he missed it, well ?he shrugged


* One moment, Lavington /?
his shoulders. Drawing the spools from his
pocket, he tied them together with a strip of
his handkerchief, and wrote on the red cover
of one with a stub pencil ?
? Urgent.
? Will the finder of these please have them
developed and send them to Sir John Stan-
-281
1


ford, Farley Park , Sussex , England, and
oblige , ifoy Lavington.?
Wrapping the spools in a pound note, he
replaced them carefully in his pocket, laid the
camera by the now useless water-bag, took a
bearing of the distant farm with his compass,
and prepared to descend to the spot where he
had left his blanket and provisions. He had
not gone more than a few yards when a voice
called from behind?
? One moment, Lavington ! ?


CHAPTER XXV
ROY MAKES A DECISION
ROY spun round, to see Sir John Stanford,
. in smart English tweeds, sitting negligently
on a rock.
? Rather a shock, eh, Lavington ? ? he said
with a laugh. ? You look slightly done up.
Have a pull at this.? He produced a large
military water-bottle.
? Thanks,? said Roy, and drank deeply.
He could have drained the bottle with ease,
but good manners checked him, and he recorked
the bottle when his thirst was about a quarter
assuaged.
? And now sit down,? said Sir John ; ? I
want to have a chat with you.?
Roy sat down. He was feeling quite dazed.
? I?m afraid I don?t understand, sir. How
on earth did you get up here ? ?
? I claim the privilege of age,? said Sir John,
smiling. ?You must answer my questions
first. Where were you off to just now when I
called you back ? ?


? That farm over there.?
? Rather a small spot to aim at in that
wilderness. Supposing you had missed it ? ?
Roy shrugged his shoulders.
? I should have tried to reach the railway.?
? Which way did you come out ? ?
? From those hills over there ?the Barra-
longs. I should have gone back that way, but
my water-bag sprang a leak, and I was getting
pretty thirsty.?
? You got my photographs ? ?
? Yes.? Roy produced the spools, and
slipped off the pound note. ? I scribbled a
message on them,? he explained apologetically,
? in case I missed the farm.?
? I see.? Sir John read the message. ? You
thought that if your dead body was found,
these would be sent along, eh ? ?
? That was my idea, sir. The bushmen are
a fine crowd, take them all round, and they?d
have done what I asked without the money.
I just added the pound in case the finder should
be hard up.?
? I expect they would have reached me all
right,? said Sir John. ? And now tell me
about your trip.?
Under skilful questioning Roy had to describe
it with full details, and at the end Sir John
passed over the water-bottle.
? You?d better take charge of this, Lavington.


There?s no need for you to go to the farm.
There?s food, water, and shelter within easy
distance from here. But your first need is
sleep. When you?ve had that, we?ll talk
further. Now come along with me.?
Roy made no demur, but followed his guide
among the rocks to where a thick travelling-
rug was spread out in a little nook.
? You can stretch out in there,? said Sir
John. ? Now don?t think of anything, but
just sleep.?
Curled up on the rug, with the water-bottle
for a pillow, Roy had no difficulty in obeying
this injunction; and after waiting near for a
few minutes to assure himself that the lad was
really off, Sir John walked away to the north-
eastern edge of the plateau, mounted an over-
hanging rock, and waved his handkerchief.
An answering flutter came from the slope
far below, and half an hour later Lady Adela,
in short tweed skirt and carrying an alpenstock,
stepped on to the plateau and joined her husband.
? He came, then ? ? she asked eagerly. ? But
there, I knew he would. Where is he ? ?
? Asleep. Come.?
Taking his wife?s hand, Sir John led her to
the spot where Roy was sleeping. Lady Adela
stood looking at him for a full minute. Then
she bent and touched his hair very softly, and
her eyes were full as she turned away.


? He must have had a terrible journey,? she
said. ? His clothes are in rags, and he is
scratched almost to pieces. Which way did he
come ? ?
? From over there.? Sir John pointed to
the Barralongs. ?He had two nights in the
bush, and he rationed himself with water like
a shipwrecked sailor. I punctured his water-
bag while he climbed the peak yonder, and when
he discovered it he wrote this on the films.?
He passed the spools to his wife.
Lady Adela read the message, looked over
the wilderness at their feet, and then rested
her hand on her husband?s shoulder.
? Are you satisfied now, John ? ?
? More than satisfied, Adela. The lad?s a
thoroughbred?gold all through. I want him.?
Three hours later Roy awoke and, hearing
voices near at hand, emerged from his nook.
He stopped short as he saw Sir John and Lady
Stanford seated on a rock with a packet of
sandwiches and a thermos flask between them.
The two laughed at his bewildered expression.
Roy,? said Lady Adela, getting up and
taking him by both hands, ? come and have
something to eat and drink. You look famished.?
Amazed still further by the warmth of his
reception, Roy sat down on the rock and ac-
cepted a sandwich and a cup of hot coffee from
the thermos.


? I think the time has come now to explain,?
said Lady Adela. ? The poor boy can?t eat for
wonderment.?
? I?m quite beaten,? Roy confessed. ? I
had a very stiff climb to get up here, but you
look as if you?d come up on a lift.?
? There?s a good path up the other side,?
said Sir John. ? But before we go into explana-
tions I should like to ask you one or two more
questions. In the first place, how do you like
Western Australia ? ?
? Very much indeed. It?s a fine country,
and the people are sportsmen.?
? And what have you been doing since you?ve
been here ? ?
? Oh, most things?mining, clearing, ring-
barking, fencing, and a lot of walking. The
last job I was at was on a dam.?
? Nawying ? ?
? Pure and simple.?
? Did you like that ? ?
? Not as much as the other jobs.?
? Then why did you take it on ? ?
? The pay was good, and I wanted to make
a few pounds.?
?For any particular reason ? ?
? Well, one likes to have a few pounds
behind one in the bush.?
? You didn?t want to buy anything specially,
I suppose ? ?


? I was getting a bit short of clothes,? Roy
hedged.
? You didn?t by any chance wish to buy
rather an expensive camera ? ? Sir John nodded
at Roy?s kodak.
? I?m afraid it wasn?t a very expensive one.?
? Somew T here about ten pounds, eh ? And
where is the ? Golden Hind ? now ? ?
Roy spilt some coffee over that question.
? The ? Golden Hind ? ? How did you know
about that, sir ? ?
? Oh, we know quite a lot of things. Listen
now.? And Sir John described Roy?s doings
in detail since the day he had left the yacht at
Fremantle. Captain Walters-Meete himself
could not have given a more accurate account
of them.
? And now you are really puzzled, Roy,?
said Lady Adela, smiling.
? I can?t make head or tail of it,? Roy
admitted. \
? How did you like Mr. Albert Budd ? ?
Sir John asked innocently. And suddenly Roy
saw light.
? Ah, so it was he.? His mind travelled
back to their first meeting with that biquitous
gentleman, and his habitual thirst for informa-
tion. ?Heis a friend of yours, I suppose ? ?
? We?ll call him an employee,? said Sir John.
? I wired for him at Colombo on the voyage


out. He came across from Sydney, and met
us at Fremantle. I gave him a year?s work to
report on your doings, and he has confessed
that it was quite the nicest job he has ever
been on. There was nothing criminal about
you, Roy.?
? It seems that you weren?t sure about it
in the first place.? Roy frowned slightly, not
liking the idea of having been dogged by a
detective. But Sir John laid a friendly hand
on his knee.
? Don?t get a false impression, Roy. If we
had thought there was a criminal streak in you
we shouldn?t have bothered you with Mr. Budd.
We hired that gentleman to see just how good
you were, not to pry into your possible mis-
deeds.?
? You mustn?t be angry with us, Roy,? said
Lady Adela. ?You see, we knew who you
were when you came on the yacht at Gatmouth
and asked for a passage. I wanted you to have
a cabin and join our party, but my husband
thought it would be better for you to do as you
wished and work your way. He wanted to see
what you were made of. That was why he let
you go ashore with only a few pounds in your
pocket, and, as an additional test, he asked you
to get him photographs from the Mar lings. We
have been in touch with Mr. Budd all the time
we have been cruising, and have had full reports
(2,678) 19


of all your doings. A fortnight ago we came to
Albany, and there we hired a couple of bush-
men to pitch us a camp at the foot of the moun-
tains here. We knew wdien you had started,
and we knew when to expect you.?
? I was up here at daybreak this morning,?
Sir John added. ? You didn?t see me puncture
your w r ater-bag, Roy ? ?
?Ah, so that was it. I couldn?t understand
that. I?d been so careful with it all along.?
? A horseman brought out Mr. Budd?s latest
message last night,? Lady Adela continued,
? and we learnt that you had refused an offer
to go to Kalgoorlie. We heard, too, that there
had been a big gold rush. Two prospectors,
named Winter and Black, have made a rich find.?
? I?m glad to hear that,? said Roy. ? I never
met Black, but Jack Winter?s a good sort.?
? If you had gone you would have been a
rich man by now,? said Sir John. ? These
photographs have cost you a lot one way and
another.?
? That?s quite all right, sir. You helped me
out of a hole in Gatmouth once. We can call
it quits now.?
? Talking of Gatmouth reminds me that I
have a piece of news for you,? said Sir John.
? In the last mail from England I had a letter
mentioning your uncle. It appears that his
conscience has gnawed him at last, and he has


** I will come with you.?
made restitution?at something like fifteen
shillings in the pound. He has reserved a few
thousands, I believe, and with that he has gone
off to the States, where he hopes to wipe off
the other five shillings before long.?
?I?m very glad indeed to hear that,? said
Roy.
? Yes, it?s very satisfactory. I expect your
leaving at such short notice helped in his
reformation. Have another cup of coffee.?
291


?No, thanks, sir,? Roy frowned again.
? What?s puzzling me is why you took all this
trouble ?the detective and all the rest of it.?
Lady Adela looked at her husband and re-
ceived a nod.
? It?s this, Roy,? she said. ? Years ago our
only son was drowned in a boating accident.
It was a fearful blow to us, for we had planned
great things for him. We think he would have
grown up like you ?strong and clean, and
keeping to his word above all things. We feel
the need of a son. Will you come with us and
take his place ? ?
So that was it. Roy stared out over the far-
spreading bush country at his feet, and was
unable to come to a decision. During the last
year he had mixed with men in the wide open
spaces. He had worked and laughed and
fought, and the life had suited him. What
would Sir John and Lady Adela expect of him
if he accepted their proposition ? Would it
be dress-clothes, social functions, and conven-
tionality ? They had such a great deal of
money.
Sir John, watching him keenly, read some of
his thoughts.
? I want a son, Roy,? he said gravely; ? and
more than that, I want a man ?a young man,
strong, fearless, and absolutely dependable.
To such a one I can offer work ?work that will


count for England and Australia and the other
great countries of the Empire.?
That appeal was not made in vain. Roy
rose to his feet and gave a hand to each.
? I will come with you,? he said simply.
THE END
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
THE PRESS OF THE PUBLISHERS


Established 1798
T. NELSON
& SONS, Ltd.
PRINTERS AND
PUBLISHERS


THE ? PEERLESS ? SERIES
A New Series of Illustrated Reward Books. Very fine
value. Attractively bound with Coloured Tops and End-
papers.
At 3s. net
For Boys
THE FIGHT FOR HONOUR Bernard Bowles
A CHOICE OF CHUMS Harold Avery
BAFFLING THE BLOCKADE J. M. Oxley
THE WOLF RUNNER E. E. Cowper
HOW JACK MACKENZIE WON HIS EPAULETTES
Gordon Stables
THE TIGER OF THE PAMPAS Herbert Hayens
For Girls
SCHOOLGIRL CHUMS Kathlyn Rhodes
COUSIN BETTY Geraldine Mockler
A SISTER OF THE RED CROSS L. T. Meade
A THRILLING TERM AT JANEWAYS
Elinor M. Brent-Dyer
MOTHER MAUD Mrs. Arthur
FOR THE FAITH E. Everett-Green
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York. Toronto, and Paris


?GOLD MEDAL?
SERIES OF NEW
SCHOOL STORIES
Colour Frontispiece and many text Illustrations. A
splendid new series of School Stories only, by recognized
authors. Good Type. Coloured Wrappers.
At 2s. 6d. net
For Boys
SLINGS ROAD
BULLY AUSTIN
Tom Holland
Tom Holland
IN THE CLUTCH OF THE GREEN HAND
Frances Cowen
THE MYSTERIES OF SADDLEWORTH
A. Harcourt Burrage
DAY BOY COLOURS Harold Avery
For Girls
SHIRLEY AT CHARTERTON Christabel Marlowe
A DISGRACE TO THE FOURTH Christine Chaundler
SCORING FOR THE SCHOOL Marjorie W. Newman
MISS PIKE AND HER PUPILS M. L. Tyrrell
THE HALF-AND-HALF SCHOOLGIRL Ethel Talbot
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


THE ?NEW ERA? SERIES
A Specially Attractive New Series of Rewards.
Attractive Bindings and Jackets.
Wonderful value.
Cloth, 2S. 6d. net
For Boys
THE VALLEY OF MYSTERY Captain Oswald Dallas
GOLD FOR THE GETTING Stanton Hope
Stanton Hope
HIGHWAY PIRATES Harold Avery
THE RAJAH?S RUBY Arthur O. Cooke
ONCE BITTEN. TWICE SHY Fred Whishaw
FOR THE EMPEROR Miss Pollard
JACK O? LANGSETT R. A. H. Goodyear
THE EYE OF THE PEACOCK
BLACKBEARD?S BOY
Oliver Barton
Arthur O. Cooke
THE RED HOUSE OF BOVILLE
THE SUNSET EXPRESS
H. Elrington
Francis Marlowe
For Girls
JANE THE DETERMINED
Helen B. Davidson
THE SMITHS OF SILVER LANE
POPPY
Ethel Talbot
Mrs. Isla Sitwell
Bessie Marchant
THE BANNISTER TWINS
THE LITTLE GREY HOUSE Marion Ames Taggart
ON HONOUR E. D. Adams
E. D. Adams
DIANA CARRIES ON Bessie Marchant
GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL E. E. Cowper
PETERINA ON THE RESCUE TRAIL E. E. Cowper
THE TREASURE OF DRUMMERS? HEAD
J. L. Herbertson
PATRICIA. PREFECT Ethel Talbot
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


A LOST ARMY
Fred Whishaw
THE FORTUNE FACE
W. B. Cooke
A CAPTAIN OF IRREGULARS
Herbert Hayens
CLEVELY SAHIB
Herbert Hayens
THE ISLAND OF GOLD
Gordon Stables
RED, WHITE, AND GREEN
Herbert Hayens
CONTRABAND TOMMY
Charles Gleig, R N.
THE VANISHED YACHT
Harcourt Barrage
THE DORMITORY FLAG
Harold Avery
For Girls
NELSON?S BIG BOOKS
New Issue. Special Value. Thick Volumes of the
Best Stories. Illustrated. Attractive Wrappers.
At 2S. 6d. net
For Boys
HIS HIGHNESS Gunby Hadath
BE\ OND THE DRAGON TEMPLE Robert Hudson
BETTY. THE UGLY DUCKLING Doris A. Pocock
STANHOPE E. L. Haverfield
THE GIRL WHO WOULDN?T MAKE FRIENDS
E. J. Oxenham
OLIVE ROSCOE E. Everett-Green
THE DEERHURST GIRLS H. L. Bedford
LITTLE MISS WARDLAW
WINNING THE VICTORY
L. M. Gray
E. Everett-Green
MAUD MELVILLE?S MARRIAGE E. Everett-Green
THE GHOST OF EXLEA PRIORY E. L. Haverfield
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


THE ?PREMIER? SERIES
A New Series of Rewards. Very special value.
Delightful Tales, Illustrated.
Cloth, 2S. net
For Boys
FALCONS OF THE FRONTIER Major J. T. Gorman
THE PEARL FISHERS Gertrude Hollis
Gertrude Hollis
FEN ROBBERS Tom Bevan
THE CABIN IN THE CLEARING Edward S. Ellis
THE GREY FOX OF HOLLAND Tom Bevan
CHANCELLOR?S SPY Tom Bevan
IN QUEST OF PERIL Alfred Judd
THE HOPE OF HIS HOUSE R. A. H. Goodyear
FIVE HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD
Arthur O. Cooke
MIDSHIPMAN REX CAREW, V.C. J. S. Margerison
HIT THE TRAIL E. E. Cowper
E. E. Cowper
For Girls
MRS. NOAH Marjorie C. Barnard
GLEN ALLAN?S DAUGHTERS Bessie Marchant
FREDA?S FORTUNE G. M. Imlach
THE ADVENTURE LEAGUE Hilda T. Skae
THE MYSTERY OF ALTON GRANGE
E. Everett-Green
DUCHESS Frances B. Arthur
PATSEY AT SCHOOL Pamela Hinkson
JUDY, THE GUIDE Elinor M. Brent-Dyer
CAROL?S SECOND TERM Ethel Talbot
THE DISCOVERY OF KATE E. L. Haverfield
THE GIRLS OF ST. AUGUSTINE?S M. H. Ironside
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


?TRIUMPH? SERIES
Full Length Stories of School and Adventure. Cloth,
with Frontispiece and Colour Wrapper. In Actual Value
the Cheapest Series for Boys and Girls offered by any
Publisher. In extent of matter equal to ss. Volumes.
At is. 6d. net
For Boys
DIAMOND ROCK. 296 pages. By J. Macdonald
Oxley.
A SLAVE OF THE SARACEN. 272 pages. By Ger-
trude Hollis.
THE SECRET OF DESBOROUGH HOUSE. 232 pages.
By Lillie Le Pla.
THE PENALTY AREA (S). 261 pages. By Stanley
Morris.
CASTLE MARTIN. 311 pages. By George Richmond.
THE IDOL OF ST. MONCREETH (5). 319 pages. By
A. H. Burrage.
TODDY SCORES AGAIN (S). 311 pages. By Alfred
Judd.
ADVENTURERS ALL. 298 pages. By K. M. Eady.
CAREW OF THE FOURTH (5). 240 pages. By Peter
Martin.
RED DICKON. 288 pages. By Tom Bevan.
THE SILVER BLIMP. 320 pages. By Lieutenant
Walmsley.
SALE?S SHARPSHOOTERS. 316 pages. By Harold
Avery.
THE PEARLERS OF LORNE. 250 pages. By Gurney
Slade.
AROUND THE WORLD IN TEN DAYS. 310 pages.
By C. Curtis Fraser.
DERELICT GOLD. 314 pages. By W. E. Stanton
Hope.
MARLING RANGES. 293 pages. By Gurney Slade.
TRUE BLUE. 250 pages. By Captain A. Wood.
LAST OF THE SEA KINGS. 318 pages. By David
Ker.
(S) = School Story. [Continued


THE ?TRIUMPH? SERIES-cwL
For Girls
THE SECRET OF THE MARSHES. 296 pages. By
Jessie Herbertson.
JAN AT ISLAND SCHOOL (S). 288 pages. By Ethel
Talbot.
PEGGY?S LAST TERM (S). 39 pages. By Ethel
Talbot.
BOSOM FRIENDS. 253 pages. By Angela Brazil.
THE LOWER FOURTH (S). 244 pages. By Brenda
Girvin.
GIRLS OF THE ROOKERY SCHOOL (S). 299 pages.
By Ethel Talbot.
ANGEL PIG (S). 224 pages. By Marjorie C. Barnard.
BY HONOUR BOUND (S). 296 pages. By Bessie
Marchant.
NEIGHBOURS AT SCHOOL (S). 320 pages. By Ethel
Talbot.
MOLLIE HAZELDENE?S SCHOOLDAYS (S). 297
pages. By Maude S. Forsey.
THE MYSTERIOUS SOMETHING (S). 267 pages.
By M. H. Ironside.
SALLY AT SCHOOL (S). 296 pages. By Ethel
Talbot.
DOLLIE TAKES CHARGE. 224 pages. By Queenie
Scott-Hopper.
WITCH OF THE WILDS. 312 pages. By E. E.
COWPER.
THE SCHOOL AT NONE-GO-BY (S). 303 pages. By
Ethel Talbot.
GERALDINE, A RANGER. 283 pages. By Helen
B. Davidson.
SECOND FIDDLE. 253 pages. By Doris A. Pocock.
THE MYSTERY OF OLD BEAMS. 318 pages. By
J. L. Herbertson.
(S) = School Story.
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


T THE
EDINBURGH REWARDS
Stories for all Ages. Well bound. Colour Frontispiece.
At is. 6d. net
For Boys
CAP?N BENNY H. Lawrence Phillips
GUNPOWDER, TREASON, AND PLOT
Harold Avery and Others
MARK?S PRINCESS, or ? NOBLESSE OBLIGE ?
Mrs. Edwin Hohler
THREE SAILOR BOYS, or ADRIFT IN THE PACIFIC
V. L. Cameron, C.B.
TWO LITTLE CAVALIERS W. A. Bettesworth
OUR SECRET SOCIETY
AT THE BLACK ROCKS
W. D. Fordyce
E. A. Rand
THE ACADEMY BOYS IN CAMP
OUR SEA-COAST HEROES
S. F. Spear
Achilles Daunt
Morice Gerard
PRINCE KARL
UP THE CREEKS Edward Shirley
THE LUCK OF CHERVIL H. Elrington
THE LITTLE RAJAH E. Hobart-Hampden
JAKE Adela Frances Mount
TERRY?S TRIALS AND TRIUMPHS
J. Macdonald Oxley
[Continued


THE EDINBURGH REWARDS
? Contd.
For Girls
THE CHIVALROUS FIFTH Christine Chaundler
THE GIRL WHO HELPED, AND OTHER STORIES
Annie S. Swan and Others
TOLD BY EILEEN Alice Massie
CAPTAIN POLLY Sophie Swett
MOPSIE Dorothy Walrond
FLORA A.L.O.E.
For Children
A STORY OF SEVEN Bridget Penn
BATTLING WITH THE WORLD A.L.O.E.
THE CHANGEABLE TWINS A. Wyatt
UNCLE 800 E - Everett-Green
FOUR SEA URCHINS, or WHAT HAPPENED AT
PEN FORTH Theodora Mills
DOROTHY?S THREE Winifred Wheeler
GOLDEN FAIRY TALES
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Lm
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


?CAPTAIN? SERIES
New Stories of School and Adventure,
with Frontispiece,
At is. net
For Boys
THE DOSING OF CUTHBERT
THE REAL THING
THE TWO J.G.?S
THE DUFFER AT DANBY
AT SCHOOL ON THE OCEAN
THE TREASURE OF THE PASS
THE BOY CHIEF
Philip Beaufoy
Michael Poole
A. M. Irvine
Michael Poole
Alfred Judd
Gurney Slade
Reid Whitly
CLARE OF GLEN HOUSE R. A. H. Goodyear
THE EIGHT DAYS? FEUD G. H. Tempany
THE MYSTERY OF THE BLUE DIAMOND
P. Beaufoy Barry
THE LIMBO TRAIL Rowland Walker
RED TIGER W. E. Stanton Hone
W. E. Stanton Hope
For Girls
PAMELA OF PETERS? Edna Lake
THE ENCHANTED CAMP Mabel L. Tyrrell
THE MADCAP OF THE SCHOOL Christine Chaundler
THE NEW HOUSE MISTRESS E. M. Brent-Dver
THE NEW HOUSE MISTRESS E. M. Brent-Dyer
THE MYSTERY OF THE SWAMP Phillippa Francklyn
RANGER ROSE Ethel Talbot
Ethel Talbot
BILLY, LONE SCOUT Nancy M. Hayes
THE MYSTERIOUS MR. FAIRWEATHER
J. L. Herbertson
FOURTEEN FOURTEENS ? Violet Methley
HOW NELL SCORED Bessie Marchant
THAT JOYOUS ADVENTURE E. E. Cowper
BETTY HOLDS THE REINS Ethel Talbot
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris








