

MARRIAGE
AND ITS SURROUNDINGS.
BY
EDWARD VALENTINE BROWNE.
The author most respectfully dedicates this little pamphlet to
Australian mothers and mothers-in-law , on whom he sincerely hopes it
will have a beneficial effect.
MELBOURNE:
ALEX. M‘KINLEY & CO., PRINTERS, QUEEN STREET.
1879.




Melbourne, October 17th, 1879.
Lest there should be any misconception respecting the
proceedings of the 2nd instant at the Royal Society’s Hall, owing
to disturbance caused by providing seats at the commencement
and the subsequent irrelevant discussion, to which I could not
satisfactorily reply on account of my notes being rather confused-
I beg to furnish you—a guest —with an exact copy of my state-
ments on that occasion. Peruse the remarks made by me, then
reflect on the comments, andr you will at once see that the
different speakers were altogether “ wide” of the question.
One gave a dissertation on some law point having no reference
whatever to my statements. Another devoted himself to
pointing out the abuses of banking institutions and the Collins-
street promenade, to which I made no allusion whatever. A
third, in his attempt to defend women, described them as having
far less brain than men—“ whose toys they are”—thus grossly
insulting the sex. A fourth, in Dundreary fashion, merely
referred to my general amusing behaviour when speaking extem-
porary. A fifth declared that my address was not a fair specimen
of what the association could produce, and made vague enquiry
as to what should be done with women who cannot possibly
marry, owing to excessive female population. A sixth gave very
forcible illustrations of my statement respecting waste of parental
love—love bestowed upon monstrosities—the progeny of ill-
assorted marriages. A seventh compared my sentiment towards
ladies to that of some historical despot towards an entire nation
which he wished to have but one neck, so as to afford him an
opportunity of chopping at it. Thus insinuating that I invited


all my female acquaintance so as to hack at them in a body. All
administered to me wholesale personal abuse—declaring my
views to be the outcome of revenge upon women, by some of
whom I must have been jilted, &c. The only remark, then,
worthy of any notice was—“ What is to be done with women
who cannot possibly marry on account of their being fewer men
in existence!” I answer—God only knows! But the fact of
their being fewer men is all the more reason that there should be
no bachelors, who—far as they go—should be distributed among
women. Such distribution might result in equalizing the sexes.
Nature probably intended that old bachelors should have been the
progenitors of many men, who, owing to unnatural social laws
will never be born.
I entertain a kindly feeling towards ladies, and if they were
possessed of only one neck, as I’m supposed to wish, my greatest
regret then should be that my arms are so short. In my address I
adopted a plain style of speaking for the improvement of society
at large, but more especially for the benefit of women, who live
in a false atmosphere—listening all their lives to fulsome com-
pliments from the lips of lying scoundrels who are unfortunately
allowed to associate with females of every grade, which in a great
measure tends towards establishing the present state of things so-
much deplored by your faithful servant.


MARRIAGE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS.
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen,—As a preface to the
question of this evening, I must notice the unusually large and
“brilliant” attendance, which—at the same time that it is very
flattering —makes me feel very uneasy.
Although only going to talk of marriage, I am at this moment
just as nervous as if I were about to become a victim at the
hymeneal altar, for now I begin to realise the fact that it is one
thing to sit down in the lonely chamber of a bachelor and
commit one’s ideas to paper, but entirely another matter to bring
those ideas before such an enlightened assemblage.
However, I must not allow my nerves to overcome my purpose,
and I will at once proceed with the essay, which is an embodiment
of my thoughts on marriage and its surroundings.
I will first ask you to bear in mind that whenever I make
sweeping or wholesale assertions —as I shall have occasion to do—
I am, all the time, sensible of their being exceptions—many
exceptions to the rule; and when anything is said which may
not be flattering to humankind, I pray you to look upon your-
selves as the exceptions, which, with justice you may do, judging
by your pleasing and honest appearance.
Remember, too, that the ideas to which I will give expression
are mine, and that I am but a solitary individual of whom you
are altogether independent. I would also impress upon the ladies
who have honored me with their presence here to-night, and wdio
may have reason to think me “ hard” upon their sex, that I believe
the best people in existence to be women. With such assurance,
which I sincerely trust shall never be forgotten, I will now proceed
with the question.
Marriage is, as you all know, a very old and a very necessary
institution. So old, so necessary, and so natural too, that I firmly
believe our first parents , Adam and Eve (if such people ever
existed) in bygone days, when the world began, and before there
was any possibility of a rival, made to each other solemn vows of
life-long fidelity. Such vows, and only such, constitute a marriage
apart altogether from attending ceremonies which have been
adopted by time and the different denominations.


So much is not only consistent with reason, hut is also acknow-
ledged by every Christian Church, even that of Rome, which
holds —notwithstanding its uncompromising principles —that the
interference or undue influence of parents and guardians to bring
about a marriage which may not be desired by the contracting
parties or any one of them, is in itself sufficient to make such
marriage null and void.
A “case in point” has been recently decided by the Commission
of Cardinals, particulars of which, a short paragraph cut from
the Foreign Memoranda, Home flews, July 4th, 1879, I will read
to you;—
The Courier d'ltalic gives an account of the case of nullity of marriage
now awaiting the Pope’s decision. In 1869, it says, the daughter of the
late Duke of Hamilton, then nineteen years of age, was pressed by her
guardian, Napoleon 111., to marry the Crown Prince of Monaca, and, in
spite of her expressed dislike to him, the pressure was so great, her
mother joining in it, that she yielded. Three months after the marriage
she left the Prince and fled to her mother, the son to whom she afterwards
gave birth being claimed by her husband. The Church of Pome has
always held that constraint or fear invalidates a marriage, and a few
months ago both parties decided to obtain a decision on this point. The
Commission of Cardinals has reported to the Pope in favour of annulling
the marriage.
This circumstance is here introduced because it is a fact. I
have taken great care to avoid mere “ authorities,” for so-called
“ authorities” are hateful to me, as are all antiquated opinions,
which book-worms” often bring forward as an example to
people of this advanced age.
In my opinion we might just as well fall back upon our childish
notions for guidance in maturity.
Many children of to-day could, teach philosophers of old.
Teach them that the world is round.; that stars are world’s; that
steam can be utilized, and managed, too, by illiterate men, who,
with such aid, can do what would in olden times be thought
utterly impossible.
Children of our day could teach the learned men and nobles of
Ancient Rome how to light their apartments with candles or gas
(not to mention electricity), thereby preventing the costly, artistic
ceilings of that time being stained and blackened—as history tells
us—by clouds of smoke from the strong-smelling oil then used to
illuminate palaces.
But, to return to my subject, I have given the question before
you this evening a great deal of consideration —not only con-
sideration but enquiry too—enquiry among ecclesiastics and
learned theologians as to what their ideas are respecting marriage.
Each and every one from whom I sought information believe
marriage to be mutual consent, the mutual consent of man and
woman without physical impediment. All forms and ceremonies
then are, comparatively speaking, but modern inventions, and


according to theologians, have nothing whatever to do with the
binding laws of God.
A distinguished priest told me that the ceremonies now in
vogue regarding marriages were originally introduced for the
protection of women and their offspring, who, were it not for
such ceremonies, which serve to attract spectators, and bring
together the required witnesses, might perhaps in after-life be
deserted by their husbands or fathers, and “ bread-winners.”
Of course, I am only reminding you of what is generally
known. Nevertheless, there are many orthodox people, who
consider it absolutely necessary to have on such occasions an
officiating clergyman. Indeed most young women require not
only a clergyman but at least half-a-dozen bridesmaids, together
with other customary surroundings, including presents, wedding-
cake. <kc. And with all these things, I knew of one instance
where a young bride, at the breakfast after the ceremony,
declared that even then she could scarcely imagine herself married.
Alas ! poor thing she has since realised the fact, the sad fact, as it
turned out in this particular instance.
But of that I will say nothing lest any maudlin sentiment
might distract your attention from my purpose, which is to enlist
all the well-known ability connected with this Association
towards effecting a reform in the present system of matchmaking
and ill-assorted marriages.
I believe that there is not an upright man or woman existing
who does not approve of the marriage tie, “pure and simple.”
Yet how rarely do we see any purity or simplicity in such
matrimonial bargaining as is generally practised ! And often, too,
in “ high life,” where it might be supposed that leisure, oppor-
tunity and means would establish some finer feeling. But for
fine feeling now-a-days there is very little welcome among
fashionable'people, whom we frequently see guilty of the grossest
conduct, especially when in pursuit of husbands and wives.
In “ high life” we often find the fairest blossoms of maidenhood
spinning a subtle web to entrap therein any dried up old mummy
who may have wealth, and nothing more to recommend him;
who may be vulgar, ignorant, ugly, as ugly as a Caliban ; and old,
so old that he should interest none but undertakers. Neverthe-
less, if such men are rich, the choicest specimens of womenkind
are at their disposal.
On the other hand, we see “ the lords of creation”—men ! and
some of the finest looking men sell themselves to rich women who
are often monstrously ugly, the very antipodes of what is calculated
to excite love or passion in the opposite sex.
For such men there is no extenuation whatever, as these men,
it must be remembered, are neither blind, nor lamed, nor
crippled; on the contrary they are by rich women chosen for


their strength, beauty* and other natural advantages, which
strength, beauty, and advantages might well be turned to account
in procuring an honest livelihood, instead of becoming base
loafers, as I will call them in lieu of a more appropriate name,
which, in the presence of so refined a gathering, I hesitate to
pronounce.
It is impossible within the time at my disposal to point out
all the evil effect such conduct may have upon humankind,
among whom there is to be found as much variety as^ there is
among the lower animals. Between man and man (for instance)
I’ve often noticed far greater difference than there is between a
fox and a dog, natural enemies, but not greater enemies than are
men and women of different species, so to speak, that is with
respect to appearance, ideas, and habits, who, nevertheless, for
mercenary motives contract matrimonial alliance most disastrous
to their own happiness, and what is still worse, the fiuit of
such marriages must necessarily be like seed grown in unnatural
soil, rank and worthless—physically, mentally, and morally,
imperfect.
Women for their misdoings in this respect are not so much to
blame. Tis true, that women are said to be of a finer nature
than men ; but is it true that they are so l
I say, no! emphatically, no ! women are of coarser clay ! and
’tis well known that they can endure more mental and bodily
pain, that they can pursue a more objectionable occupation, and
that they can tolerate treatment which would sicken the “ lords
of creation. What man, I ask, could suffer himself to be
caressed and fondled in a way which seems to delight most
womenl
I have known, too, instances of where nice, soft, delicate young
girls really enjoyed the society and close proximity of coarse,
tobacco chewing, filthy looking men, whose presence would be
loathsome to the male sex.
“ There’s no accounting for taste !” and bards tell us that love
is blind, but I question the accuracy of their statement.
A lover, I believe, can see more in the object of love than can
be seen by an ordinary observer. ,
In support of this belief 1 would call attention to the tact or
people being often astonished at what some can see in others to
admire.
Love is in one respect like a blossom, and the person on whom
love is centred like the ground upon which that blossom falls often
most unsightly. . ... „ ,
For instance, I was myself at one time very much gone, so to
speak, about an impudent-looking, cock-nosed girl, and on another
occasion I remember being deeply in love with a woman who ha
a squint. But all this is no argument in favor of creatures who


marry wealthy abominations without a redeeming personal
quality.
Woman’s liking, however, for coarse, filthy looking men, as I
have noticed, may be some justification for her becoming a party
to what seems an objectionable marriage. Indeed, experience
has almost forced me into the belief that a woman can with
serenity marry any man.
In support of this belief into which experience has almost
forced me, I will read to you another fact cut from an English
paper of recent date: —
A young man named Bal'ard was tried before Mr. Justice Hawkins at
ssizes for an attempt to murder Susan Little, a young woman
to whom he had promised marriage. The judge elicited at the trial that the
girl was still willing to marry Ballard. Accordingly the next day the judge
released the prisoner on the understanding that he would at once marry
the girl, and they were actually married at one of the Worcester churches
in the presence of a great crowd.
This man was a murderer (for “ the intention is as bad as the
deed”) and a murderer of the deepest dye, one who attempted to
destroy her whom of all others he should protect. Yet, notwith-
standing the man’s character of which the girl had not only a
thorough knowledge, but was also sensible of his desire to get rid
of herself, she married him, I think there is no need for any-
thing further to be said in support of my belief. But as I have
a third, and still more extraordinary fact clipped from a morning
paper, the A r/c, of August the 14th, and copied from the New
York Herald, of May, the 16th, 1879, relative to the question of
this evening. I must read it to you :
A WAYWARD DAUGHTER.
The little town of Beaver, which is one of the suburbs of Pittsburg, is in
a terrible state of excitement. One of the prettiest, wealthiest, best
known and really accomplished young ladies of the town left her father’s
house and deliberately married a negro, who is as ugly and ignorant as he
is black. For some time past Miss Annie Mason had given her parents a
great deal of trouble by her reckless, wayward conduct, but being an only
daughter she was spoiled by indulgence. Her father is a United .States
storekeeper in Indiana county, but lives in Beaver, and is wealthy. Her
uncle is ex-Chief Justice Daniel Agnew, of the Supreme Court, and the
family is really one of the best in this part of the State. Mrs. George
Jones, lately Miss Annie Mason, is twenty years old, is symmetrically formed,
and is a brunette with large eyes and an exceedingly pretty face. She had
a quarrel with her parents on Wednesday night, and early yesterday morn-
ing she left her home and met George Jones, a coarse, illiterate negro coal-
digger, by an appointment which she made by some unknown means during
the night. At five o'clock in the morning Jones and another negro, accom-
panied by Miss Mason, went to Rochester, which is about a mile from
Beaver, and hurried to the house of a colored clergyman, who married
Jones to Miss Mason in the presence of a couple of white men who were
called in to act as witnesses. The couple then took the next train back to
Beaver, where Jones hired a room in a small house, which has only three
rooms in it, two of which were already occupied by negro families. The


reckless girl sent home for her trunk, piano, and some of the ornaments
from her room, and this was the first intimation her mother had of the
marriage. Her mother tried to persuade her daughter to return to her
home, but she refused. Her father is not at home, and knows nothing as
yet of the affair. It is not known how Miss Mason became acquainted with
Jones, or where she ever met him. Threats are openly made by the young
men of Beaver of tarring and feathering Jones and driving him out of the
town, but up to the present time nothing has been done, and Mr. and Mrs.
Jones are living in their squalid, foul-aired, tiny room, while the wayward
girl’s mother is lying at her elegant home crazy with brain fever brought on
by Annie’s conduct. — New York Herald, 16th May.
Now my sympathy is altogether with the poor black, and if
the young men of Beaver execute their threats, it will merely
prove the truth of that old adage, Misfortunes never come alone.
I should have thought the management of such a “wayward”
wife sufficient punishment to Mr. George Jones, for having
deserted his colors without being subjected to the “ tar and
feathering” operation. But, in pursuit of my argument, I think
the woxdd tacitly admits woman’s nature to be such as I describe,
and consequently she is allowed gi*eat licence in choosing a
husband. Young men dare not, in the face of public opinion,
marry wealthy old women; whereas a woman, no matter how
young or beautiful, may marry any disgusting old man of means,
and the world flocks round with approving smiles to congratulate
those concerned on having negociated the basest of all human
bargains.
This is an every-day occurrence, and the tendency “ through-
out” is to look with pity—pity savouring of contempt upon a girl
who, under the influence of love, marries a poor man.
Love, at the same time, is so much talked of and, like religion,
upheld, but in theory only, not practised by the inconsistent
wordlings who mix up God and gold; sell themselves or their
children for the vilest purpose, and bribe ministers of the Gospel
to sanction their grossness behind that threadbare screen of
religion, through which their base motives can be as clearly seen
as if published with the announcement of such repulsive mar-
riages. Society can not only see the vile motives, but is prepared
to wink at being outraged by the subsequent misconduct of its
own slaves, provided Mrs. Grundy doesn’t chatter. A poet tells
us, ’ Tis a great sin to swear unto a sin, hut a greater sin to keep a
sinful oath.
Religion, too, teaches respecting false oaths, that we sin in
taking them, but also sin in keeping them; so influenced I
suppose by poetry and religion. People now-a-days are rarely
guilty of the greater sin, that of keeping a sinful oath made in
the form of a marriage vow. And ’tis to relieve such people that
we have instituted Divorce, to which I am decidedly opposed.
Life is a chain of cause and effect—action and consequence.
For every noble deed there is I believe a reward, as there is for


misconduct a penalty ; and the penalty of having to “ drag out"
a miserable existence, or else seek relief at the cost of becoming
a social outcast is not too great for one who endeavoured to
make money subvert all natural laws and inclinations.
Such a one, it is true, may have been so influenced by parents or
guardians, who, in modern times educate their young, especially
the girls, from the very threshold of childhood—long before
maturity dawns—to regard money as almighty. And so far they
are very successful. But money is not everything ! There is
an old Irish saying, “ Gloss in a crick a wathy” (green are the
hills far away), “ far away” implying that when such apparently
green hills are approached they become rugged, barren, and
worthless—as is money, “ The false diamond on top of a greased
pole which all try to climb.” But when secured is found to be of
little worth in giving lustre to life, as may be seen by the dull,
haggard, and unsatisfied looks of the wealthy, for whose special
benefit we’ve established the Divorce Court, too costly a relief for
the poor; as are also the proceedings attending actions for
“ breach of promise,” which proceedings are an eyesore to our
much boasted civilisation, a civilisation that, notwithstanding our
boast, is in many respects far beneath savage customs ; but in
none is it more so than when its votaries drag naked through the
Law Courts their sacred feelings and secret actions to be scoffed
and jeered at by all. Such proceedings become more and more
repelling, when instituted, as is always the case, with a view of
obtaining money compensation for injured feelings and sentiment,
or loss of honor, which feeling, sentiment, or honor could never
have belonged to people seeking such relief.
Those who are really injured by the heartless conduct of others,
in whom fond trust was placed, never look for consolation in
courts of justice, which affix, “ justice,” I withhold from courts
of “law,” where such relief is sought; for justice will not lend
itself to robbery—obtaining money under false pretences, which
“ damages” most undoubtedly represent. What an appropriate
name for such base proceeds—damages ! The greatest damage
of all! —the dregs of sorrow’s cup !—an additional weight to bear
down the forlorn one who struggles to float upon society’s un-
stable wave. Suing for damages is a moral suicide, suggestive of
the crushing effect an edifice— public opinion —might have in
falling on a person who leant against a rotten pillar of its
support, to which the false one may be compared ; and who, like
the pillar, should be avoided from the first sign of decaying
affection, lest that fabric, public opinion, collapse. Damages !
Such ill-gotten gain might be classed with the hangman’s pay, or
“ the wages of sin”—not in that mild and attractive form of
death, the Scriptural definition, but where the rights of love
alone are bartered for gold.


“ Gentlemen” of j aries should substitute for money com-
pensation a congratulatory address to the injured one on having
escaped such perfidy as must be centred in a being who gets satiated
with love ere the galling knot is tied. By such remark Ido not
imply that marriage is in any respect galling, but where the law
steps in compelling people of the most opposite natures to be so
closely allied, or else to make provision for each other.
As to “ marriage within the forbidden degrees of kindred,” it
should be, I think, a matter for individual consideration, and
entirely governed by circumstances —that is looked upon by each
person concerned from his or her point of view and interest.
For and against such marriages I have heard the most ex-
traordinary arguments introduced ; but none more absurd than
that of a member of this association who disapproved of
sanctioning them lest it should have the effect of encouraging
love between near relations—exactly what I would consider the
very strongest reasons for doing away with all legal restrictions ;
as love is both a divine and human attribute, that should not be
dictated to by Acts of Parliament, or even religion—orthodox
religion—which is, as I have already shown, often void of
common decency. I am not, however, an advocate for inter-
marriage with relations ; nor do I think that love between
cousins can be sufficiently passionate to be pure. With the
author of “ Ecce Homo,” I believe that no heart is pure which is
not passionate, and therefore I think that love between near
relations must be of a mawkish or mongrel nature —half affection,
void of all pungent, appetising crispness, and only recoursed to
by “ Molly Coddles,” whose deserts being small are unworthy of
a stranger’s regard.
Neither do I approve of marriage with a deceased wife’s
sister: such a union is not so desirable as one might at first
suppose. We are told that a deceased wife’s sister would
naturally take greater interest than a stranger in children of
the first marriage. But marriage with a deceased wife’s sister
often leads to an additional family ; and as “ the crow thinks its
own bird the fairest,” the woman thinks more of her own
children than those of her sister, which causes jealousy ; then a
mother—“ who will sacrifice the whole human race for her child ” —
brings influence to bear upon the husband, who by second
marriage is more or less estranged from the children of his first \
for, like a woman whose whole anxiety, the goddess Minerva
assures us,
Is to increase
His substance whom she weds ; nor care hath she
Of her first children, or remembers more
The buried husband of her virgin choice,
so is it with man, who is, nevertheless, sensible of wrong; his


wife, too, being the children’s aunt, is doubly wrong; a
consciousness of which makes hate all the stronger, and is in
itself the bitterest source of enmity. Besides, love between a
man and his deceased wife’s sister is of an unhealthy nature, and
might reasonably be suspected of smouldering ere it was justi-
fiable —-a species of incendiary to cheat love insurance.
Considering these things, together with the uninteresting
“ Darby and Joan ” style of courtship which must necessarily lead
to such a marriage, I would suggest that second wives be sought
for among strangers, and so leave orphan children their aunt’s
sympathy and protection against the encroachment of a step-
mother. The omniscient poet, Shakspere, says—
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
And so do wife-seeking widowers often disown such high-flown
sentiment. Then, if my suggestion were acted upon, a second
marriage might lead to new family influence for the benefit of
children on whom the care and interest of their deceased mother’s
relatives is already bestowed. There’s but one reason —and
that seems to be entirely lost sight of—which can justify a man
marrying his deceased wife’s sister : —Such a step would prevent a
plurality of mothers-in-law—those objectionable creatures, who
make all men pause on the threshold of matrimony. I have
studied mothers-in-law, and concluded, without knowing why,
that they are most undesirable relations. I’ve known them to
be of the greatest service in families—the best nurses, and when
occasion required, to act the part of menials without pay—
without even thanks. But I never yet knew a man who would
not gladly be rid of his mother-in-law, in spite of all that she had
done or was prepared to do for him and his family. To avoid
increasing such connection, then, is what I consider the best
argument in favour of marriage with a wife’s sister; for “ the
devil you know is better than the devil you don’t know,” and a
man whose wife’s mother allowed him to outlive her daughter
shouldn’t try his luck further.
In discussing this question by-and-bye some gentleman may
show cause for what seems such unreasonable dislike, and
account, too, for the fact of nice girls venturing by marriage to
make their mothers so hateful. In matrimony there must be
wonderful attraction; and yet, notwithstanding such at-
traction, how very few marriages take place, compared with the
adult population—the crowds of bachelors and maidens ! Such
waste of marriage material is entirely owing to the girls, who
substitute tact or cunning for love in their endeavour to secure
a matrimonial prize ; and so fail, except where the man’s blunt-
folly exceeds the lover’s keen sight—causing fools to wed, and
the best husbands to die bachelors.


’Tis superior tact or cunning of this nature that often secures
for widows what girls seek in vain; and in spite of dead weight,
which the “ blooming widow” wipes off like dust, ere to dust the
dead hath returned, her new lover sings—
A fig for your boarding-school misses,
Your sweet timid creatures for me,
Who rave about cupid and blisses,
Yet know not what either may be.
I don’t feel at all sentimental
For romance I care not a rap ;
But give me a jolly and gentle
Young widow in weeds and a cap.
What the burden of his song might subsequently be I do not
know, but the object is secured to the widow, whom designing
girls may imitate.
Now, don’t for a moment suppose that I think all men fools
who marry. It is only when they marry frauds that they are
fools, and so prove the great truth that, “ Deeds are done on earth
which have their'punishment ere the earth closes on the perpetrators ,”
for by such marriages scheming women are denied the happiness
of having honorable, honest, and sensible husbands.
At this stage I will declare myself an advocate for marriage !
It should be the primary consideration of every young man and
woman, more especially woman, because young women are so
trammelled by society’s petty laws, which require them to be at
all times under the protection of men, of men, too, who from
their relationship are entitled to such a position in strict accord-
ance with the demands of “ Mrs. Grundy,” before whom poor
woman must move with cautious step and downcast eye, no
matter how lively may be her nature, and how gay her disposi-
tion. It is such cruelty that induces women to practise the
deceit for which we give them credit.
Can society then grumble at such deception ? Can any honest
man blame “ an erring sister ” —one who breaks loose from the
tyranny imposed by narrow minded people, constituting society,
and who does exactly as she likes ? I, for one, cannot blame her.
I am in a measure disposed to approve of such independence,
which, in spite of the serious consequences attached, excites
within me a feeling of admiration; and ’tis, I believe, such fine
feelings that influence scions of the noblest houses to choose wives
from this grade—as they often do—in preference to their own,
where all character is drilled out of girls till they become as like as
eggs ; where they are directly or indirectly taught to practise all
kinds of deceit; to suppress all natural inclinations; to like
what they dislike and dislike what they like, or pretend as much;
to be in fact the personification of falsehood, or exactly what
some great writer (I think Wendell Holmes) described them when


he said, “ There is nothing in all this world that can lie and cheat
like the tongue and innocent face of a young girl.”
Tis, however, very amusing to watch such a girl in the society
of men, trying to hide her native ease, and seem bashful,
when as “ cool as a cucumber,” far “ cooler” than the men, who
are perhaps as deceitful in trying to hide their native bashfulness,
and seem at ease in the society of women, where some look as
awkward as a bull in a china-shop.
Such awkwardness and deceit are the little “ shallows” which
prevent the course of love from running smooth.
But gold is the great stumbling-block or torrent in love’s pure
stream, which dashes all who float thereon into the most terrible
disorder ; hurling youth and age together, blending ugliness
with beauty, and washing out every noble sentiment. ’Tis thus
that gold becomes “ the root of all evil”—the root from which
springs blossoms neither fair nor fragrant.
And now for the remedy ! —“ Pause and consider.” ’Tis in
itself enough—enough to convince any reasonable being that at all
events the money of other people from whom none is expected,
should have no particular attraction ; and that the possessors of
such wealth should not on account of their possessions be admired
or sought after as they are at present. So much would serve to
scoop out the “ rottenness” of society, and leave the rich no better
than the poor, excepting dress, food, and creature comforts.
Where then would be the inducement to sell one’s self for gold,
or that rivalry which takes pleasure in what is considered a
conquest, even when the profits are despised. Motives of the kind
are very common, and I am thoroughly satisfied that many girls
marry abominable old men more with a view of rivalry, or to
excite the envy of others, than to become possessed of mere
wealth, not to speak of husbands—such husbands ! who are of
course a detraction.
But objectionable husbands and wives are not the only detrac-
tion to be considered. Children may come upon the scene, and as
children are like their parents (the nurse discovers a resemblance
twixt a new born babe and its “ pa”), “ a chip of the old block,”
which is in itself a serious consideration:—l mean the resemblance
quite enough to make one question the economy of marrying for
money. Money that was sufficient to procure for an ugly parent
a husband or a wife, would be far too little to do as much for,
perhaps, many children who resemble that ugly parent. And,
from observation, I can assure you that a housefull of ugly
daughters, who are naturally desirous of being plucked from the
parent stem, is something terrible- to contemplate—a terrible
retribution, even for that great crime of having sold one’s self.
But not the only retribution. There is yet to be considered
the waste of parental love —the purest and most unselfish love of


all, wasted, as we often see it upon little monstrosities, or the
unhealthy progeny of some decrepit old man, who, at the time of
his marriage, was perhaps more in need of a nurse than a wife.
There is then to he considered the weariness of one’s own life
in being so closely allied to an objectionable creature, the misery
of which life would require a lifetime to describe. But, as time
is precious, I will call Milton to my aid. One line of his from
“ Paradise Lost,” “ How wearisome an eternity spent in worship of
him whom we hate." The line is misapplied, but well applied, for
’tis the sentiment of the devil, and consequently I think fitted to
describe the relationship of an ill-matched couple.
In conclusion I would say to those who may approve of my
views, do not confine yourselves to mere approval. Remember
that a pebble in the streamlet has been known to turn the course
of many a river; and so might a word of warning to the young
divert the stream of love from a rugged way blocked up by
shallows of deceit and torrents of gold, into the peaceful, smooth,
and happy valley of life.
I
EDWARD VALENTINE BROWNE.
October 2, 1879.
Alex. iVTKinky and Co., Printers, 61 Queen-street, Melbourne.
