

i t


. % ?> ,
# # v -u
....... ■■■■'■ ■■ ■ ■•■ =‘ r '-v ’a ; .o-'Vit s -■ * , . !
' , MB’ , / . .. :






MARRIAGE
WITH A
DECEASED WIFE’S SISTER
SCRIPTURALLY UNLAWFUL,
BEING A REPLY TO A PAMPHLET PUBLISHED BY THE
REV. JAMES NISH.
BY THE
Rev. A. R. BOYD M'CAY, A. 8.,
CASTLBMAINE.
WITH THE SPEECHES,
DELIVERED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH OP VICTORIA, NOV., 1873.
The Revs. DR. CAIRNS, D. S. M‘EACHRAN, T. M'KENZIE
FRASER, AND JAMES MACBAIN, Esq., M.L.A.
ME LB 0 URNE:
ROBERT MACKAY, COLLINS STREET WEST.
MDCCCLXXIV.




TO THE READER.
In deference to the wishes of many brethren, I have
undertaken to revise Mr. Nish’s pamphlet on
“ Marriage with a Deceased Wife’s Sister.” He has
somewhat modified the substance as well as the form
of his argument advanced in our Assembly ; and con-
sequently the present critique is not, and could not be,
a simple repioduction of my speech. Me make no
complaint on account of the alterations discoverable in
some of the positions occupied in the pamphlet as
compared with those of his speech, because the one
really important question to be considered is not the
absolute consistency of our author, but the tenableness
of his theory in its maturest form. We agree with
Mr. Nish that the usefulness and influence of our
Church would be seriously impaired if she assumed an
attitude of antagonism to public opinion, which cannot
be defended by the principles and deductions of a
sound scriptural exegesis. I trust, however, that the
reader will be satisfied, as he proceeds, that our Critic
has not succeeded in disproving the soundness of our
Church’s interpretation of the Levitical Marriage Law.
The Scriptural evidence of the doctrine of our standards
is explicit and copious ; and for the elucidation of this
most important portion of the subject under controversy,
the Speeches delivered before the Assembly by the
Levs. Dr. Cairns and D. S. M'Eachran have


been added to the critique. These are accom-
panied by the speeches of the Key. T. M/Kenzie
Fraser, and James Macßain, Esq., on other aspects of
the question. The Speeches indeed ought to have
been the body of the present publication, had not acci-
dental circumstances necessitated the adoption of a form
and order different from what the relative weight of
the two sections would otherwise have suggested.
I have only appended in the concluding note a
brief statement of the general principles that appear
to me to underlie the Divine enactments, which
I commend to the attention of the reader. My
main design has been to examine Mr, Nish’s suggested
interpretation, and to show that it is alike inconsistent
with itself and with Scripture. The reader will more
easily follow my argument, if he bears in mind that
the principal aim of Mr. Nish is to destroy the in-
ference drawn from the prohibition of marriage with a
brother’s wife, against marriage with a wife’s sister.
He attempts this task by three distinct but correlated
lines of attack : affirming (1) that we have not
properly a marriage law in Leviticus; (2) that
“ wife” does not mean “widow” in the law; and (3)
that affinity is destroyed by death. I have taken the
liberty of modifying the form without touching the
substance of his statement, in order to avoid digres-
sions and repetitions which would otherwise have been
unavoidable. His own theory, which recognises the
unlawfulness of marriage with the lineal relatives of a
father, mother, self, and husband, or wufe, is shown to
be irreconcileable with one of his fundamental prin-
ciples ; and, if so, he must either go back to the


doctrine of the Confession, or make incest consist in
marriages within prohibited degrees of consanguinity
alone. Would brethren ponder the matter well, before
they commit themselves to such a perilous position ?
Are they prepared to accept the logical and social con-
sequences which would necessarily result ? I would
also ask the reader to weigh what 1 have written in
the concluding note on the nature of incest. It would
have led me too far afield to do more than indicate my
views, but their indication may be suggestive to others,
I think the objection raised against the permanence of
the prohibition in v. 16, on the ground of the Levirate
exception to it, is thereby deprived of its apparent force.
The oidy other matter on which I have touched is the
interpretation of v. 18. I trust that brethren in the
ministry and members of our Church, who may read
what I have written, will give me credit for only one
desire —to know and maintain the truth.*
A. R B. M‘C.
* The whole tone and conduct of the discussion in the Assembly;
gave honourable testimony in this respect to both the majority and
the minority. Notwithstanding the loose charges recklessly preferred
by a leading journal against the speakers as indulging an acrimonious
spirit and descending into the region of mere personalities, I dare
to affirm that the debate was pre-eminently distinguished by the
absence of these noxious and disturbing elements. It would seem
that the odium theologicum is not the only moral malady of mortals.
If Christian Divines occasionally suffer from its attacks, newspaper
critics are not seldom the victims of an odium anti-theologicum.




CRITIQUE OF MR. NISH’S INTERPRETATION
OF THE
DIVINE LAW OF INCEST.
In the course of the marriage debate at the late meeting of
our General Assembly, Mr. Nish endeavoured to establish an
interpretation of Leviticus xviii., designed to conserve to the
Church a divine law of marriage, and at the same time remove
the Scriptural obstacles out of the way of those who might wish
to contract marriage with a deceased wife’s sister. I offered a
few criticisms, on the floor of the Assembly, of his theory, and
the principles on which it was based. After some little
delay, he has issued a pamphlet in his vindication, and I observe
that my arguments are there elaborately discussed, not only in
those pages in which they are directly attributed to me, but
in paragraphs and notes in which the reader is supplied with
no clue to the individuality of the opponent whose strictures
are reviewed. In the companionship of Dr. Cameron and other
esteemed brethren, I receive very marked attention indeed. As
a hope is expressed that the sarcastic sallies with which the
pamphlet is enlivened will not be regarded by any of the
brethren whom they may concern as indicating a spirit of bit-
terness, I hasten to assure my brother and co-presbyter that I
—as one of them—do not find his arrows poison-barbed, and
that they are no more likely to leave a rankling wound in my
feelings than they do in my argument. They are as really in-
nocent as the jests of Miss Mowcher—that funny little personage
who figures so largely in “ David Copperfield,” and who was
wont to make half apologies for her occasional flightiness by
frequently exclaiming, “Ain’t I volatile ?”
The chief points of agreement and disagreement between the
author of the pamphlet and the majority of the Assembly are
thus stated by himself in a note to an appendix:—“The prohibi-


tions contained in Leviticus xviii. are precise, and this should
be enough for those who believe in their divine authority and
perpetual obligation. What was impure and abominable in
the Eg3 r ptians and Canaanites under the former dispensation,
cannot be lawful in any nation now. On this point there is no
ground of dispute between our friends and me. Our points of
disagreement consist, first, in the primary design and practical
extent of the prohibitory enactments ; and next, in the prin-
ciples of interpretation which should—nay, rather, must—
accordingly be applied to them.”
We have erred, first of all (it is alleged), in calling the clauses
contained in verses 7-18 “ the definite provisions of a marriage
law.” “Do we not see,” it is asked, “ that this breaks up the
unity of the chapter ?” And we are reminded that the avowed
design of the chapter as a whole “ was not to regulate marriage,
but to keep and restrain the Israelites from walking after the
doings of the land of Egypt, and the doings of the land of
Canaan and he suggests as the most appropriate generic title
to the entire chapter, “A law for the 'prevention and suppression
of Egyptian and Canaanitish abominations, and not simply
a marriage law,”
He may be surprised to learn that I at least have no diffi-
culty in accepting this title ex animo. But he seems to have
formed a strangely-confused conception of the effect which his
new label must have on the whole discussion. As a general
title for the act, it is unexceptionable. But then, every act has
particular provisions, and we would commend to him as a fuller,
and therefore more satisfactory, description, a considerably
older heading, which he will find in the common edition of
Matthew Henry’s Commentary. “ Here is—l. A general law
against all conformity to the corrupt usages of the heathen,
v. 1-5. 11. Particular Laws: 1, against incest, v. 6-18 ; 2,
against beastly lusts and barbarous idolatries, v. 19-23. 111.
The enforcement of these laws from the ruin of the Canaan-
ites, v. 24-80.” The unity of the chapter consists in its stern
interdiction of kindred crimes*
The confusion of thought pervading the whole pamphlet in
this connection is very remarkable in one who is generally
distinguished by his power of accurate and consecutive reason-
* With reference to the Biblical instances adduced to show that marriage
cannot he one of the subjects legislated on, we would remind Mr. Nish that the
mere recording of an historical event in Scripture, without express censure,
does not imply Divine approval of everything related. Abraham and Jacob
contracted certain marriages, but, on his own interpretation, they are con-
demned by God in this very law. Doubtless, the patriachs knew the law
traditionally, or otherwise, but the infringement of it by them and others
rendered it indispensable to reduce it to writing, Litera scripta manet.


ing. Is it possible that he has in his haste neglected to master
the mere elements of the subject ? His argument proceeds
everywhere on the erroneous assumption that they who find a
marriage law in Leviticus mean that the enactments in the
relevant verses refer to marriage only. Although it is so very
elementary a matter, yet for the satisfaction of the reader, in
the extraordinary circumstances of the case, I adduce one or
two authorities, with which Mr. Nish ought surely to have
made himself familiar before taking so prominent a place in
the discussion. “ Though it is confessed that these words
(uncover nakedness) do not refer exclusively to marriage, yet
there cannot be a moment’s question that they do refer as
much to it as to any other tie The true view of
the subject is, that connection between the parties specified in
the several verses is forbidden, whether in marriage or out of
marriage.”— W. Lindsay, D.D. “The sexual intercourse here
prohibited is every kind of sexual intercourse, but especially
that of marriage.” — B.E. Dwight. “ The expression (uncover her
nakedness) does not exclusively mean marriage. ... It
is not limited to marriage ; it forbids the whole act itself,
which, in lawful marriage, is hallowed by marriage.”— E. B.
Pusey, D.D. Mr. Nish must surely have allowed his polemical
ardour to blind his judgment and paralyse his memory, before
he founded so much of his argument on this transparent
blunder.
But we have still to deal with our author’s denial of the
existence of a direct marriage law in the Word of God. His
theory possesses a peculiar feature of novelty, which quite
justified Dr. Cameron’s description of it as “ a notable disco-
very made for the first time in Sandhurst, more than 3000
years after the law was promulgated.” It appears in his
pamphlet, printed in capital letters, so that he who runs may
read; we will give it in the ordinary type: —“ Though the
prohibitory enactments contained in this chapter are not the
formal clauses of a marriage law—though they had a primary
reference not to marriage, but to the abominations of the
Egyptians and Canaanites —they are nevertheless based on the
fundamental principles of every legitimate marriage compact.”
The specific characteristic of this theory is not its concession
that incestuous fornication and incestuous adultery are objects
of direct prohibition, for they are included in the law of incest
as understood by the Jewish Church for fifteen centuries, and
by the Christian for more than seventeen. Neither is it to be
found in the denial of its primary applicability to marriage,
for as Dwight (the well-known author of the “ Hebrew Wife ”)
remarks :—“ The advocates for one of the marriages long


considered unlawful, when driven from a few of their first
positions, resort usually to this —that no marriage is incestuous;
and the most discerning of their number take this position in
the outset.” But its novel member is its tail—“ they are
nevertheless,” &c. And so great is the virtue of this appen-
dage, that after our author would seem to have destroyed the
marriage law, root and branch, it actually causes the dead
stock that has been left standing among the shattered frag-
ments to send forth shoots and branches; and lo ! there is a
goodly marriage law after all, with its thirteen prohibitions
for the man, and its thirteen for the woman*
We have now virtually disposed of the first charge of “ false
assumption” preferred against us in the pamphlet. It is made
in these terms : —“ They need to assume that to uncover, <lx.,
means to marry!' It is evident from our remarks on the doc-
trine of the Church on the law of incest that we do not assume
that these words mean only to marry. The passage quoted
from Dr. Cameron’s able exposition of “ The Scriptural Law
of Marriage,” cannot be fairly construed in such a sense. Let
me insert it here, with the addition of a clause omitted by Mr.
Nish, and now italicised: —“ Keally and truly the phrase, to
uncover, &c., has no reference whatever to marriage. . . .
Its reference is to foul sin, whether committed in marriage or
out of it, to the incestuous and shameful connection of per-
sons too nearly related,” &c. We proceed on a perfectly
consistent and intelligible principle when we attribute to the
controverted phrase the same signification in all the prohi-
bitions. That meaning fully stated is : —“ Thou shalt not
commit incestuous fornication, nor incestuous adultery, nor
shalt thou contract incestuous marriage.” It is a prohibition
of incest —in all its possible forms; in Dr. Cameron’s lan-
guage, of “ foul sin, whether committed in marnipge or out of
it.” But how will our author defend himself against the
charge of violating the simplest canons of interpretation, by
attaching different and conflicting meanings to the same word,
in the one context ? Could Calvin have had a prophetic eye
fixed upon our brother of Sandhurst when he wrote this com-
ment on Lev. xviii., 1G (with special reference to the words,
* If Mr. Nish’s objection, made in the Assembly, to calling the Levitical
enactments a marriage law because they are “ negative ” in form, only meant,
as he now explains, that all he wanted could have been embodied in a single
sentence, to this effect :—“ These near kinswomen of thy father, &c., thou
mayest not marry ; but those who are not such near kinswomen thou mayest
marry it is unfortunate that he did not say so at the time, when my retort
“ drew forth the most uproarious applause.” I observe that Mr. Nish has for-
gotten to append this saving addition to his own negative marriage law. Is this
a fatal flaw ?


“ nakedness of a brother’s wife”)? “ There are bad interpreters
who raise a controversy concerning this place, and explain that
a spouse is not to be taken violently from the couch of a
brother, that their marriage was unlawful while the husband
lived. For it is not suitable to wrest to different senses things
which in one place are declared in the very same words. God
forbids to uncover the nakedness of the wife of a father, a
father’s brother, and of a son. When he gives the same judg-
ment in so many words concerning a brother’s wife, it is absurd
to feign different senses. Wherefore, if it is not lawful to marry
the wife of a father, of a son, of a father’s brother or nephew,
it is proper to think one and the same thing of a brother’s
wife, concerning which a perfectly similar law is enacted in
one context and tenor.”
Should Mr. Nish imagine himself to be armed against such
a charge, I am afraid his defence will only involve himself
in still more serious difficulties. He may flatter himself that
he is not one of the class of interpreters here censured, because
with apparent consistency he professes to give the one sense to
these terms in all the enactments, but this consistency is dearly
purchased at a cost which involves, as we shall show, the utter
and hopeless subversion of his own marriage law. He tells us
that the prohibitory enactments were primarily designed to
suppress “adulterous connection with the wives of living
relatives, or with the relatives of living wives, and the inces-
tuous connection of persons near of kin.” Here, then, if any-
where, we have his exposition of the true sense of “ uncover,”
Szc. Let us take it, and read the law with its light. For the
sake of greater clearness, I will transcribe the prohibitions as
they must stand, if he has given us the real sense.
“ None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to
him, to commit adultery with the wives of living relatives, or
with the relatives of living wives, or to leave incestuous con-
nection with persons nearly related.'''’
“ Thou shalt not commit adultery with thy mother.”
“ Thou shalt not commit adultery with thy father’s wife.”
“ Thou shalt not have incestuous connection [out of mar-
riage]* with thy sister.”
“ Thou shalt not have incestuous connection [out of mar-
riage] with thy granddaughter.”
“ Thou shalt not have incestuous connection [out of mar-
riage] with thine aunt.”
“ Thou shalt not commit adultery with thine aunt-in-law.”
* For Mr. Nish denies that these enactments were designed “ to regulate mar-
riages.” See his pamphlet, p. 27.


“Thou shalt not commit adultery with thy
law.”
“ Thou shalt not commit adultery with thy brother’s wife.”
“ Thou shalt not have incestuous connection [out of mar-
riage] with thy wife’s mother, or daughter, or grand-
daughter.”
“ Neither shalt thou take a wife’s sister to vex thy wife by
having incestuous connection with her sister [out of marriage]
in her lifetime.”*
Let our readers examine these laws as they are here ex-
pressed by the aid of Mr. Nish’s exegesis. No danger now
remains of their being mistaken for the “ formal clauses of a
marriage law.” They formally prohibit incestuous fornication,
and incestuous adultery, and these alone; but somewhere in
them “ a germ” lies concealed which, when quickened by some
mysterious principle, developes under our author’s kindly care
into a marriage law. Can any one help us to detect that germ,
or explain to us the genesis of the law ? My learned brother is-
not so perspicuous in his explanation as I could desire. I turn
over the pages of his pamphlet in eager quest of the solution
of the problem. “ Marriage within the degrees which are
either expressly specified, or else involved by necessary impli-
cation in vv. 7-14, is assumed in the tenor of these prohibitions
to be absolutely unlawful” (p. 40). This is a truly oracular
utterance; for it asserts that though to uncover, &c., cannot
possibly mean to marry, enactments which are solely prohibi-
tive of uncovering the nakedness of certain relatives, assume
“in their tenor” the absolute unlawfulness of certain mar-
riages. Who will believe, after this, that ex nihilo nihil fit ?
But let us hear our author yet again : “ Sexual intercourse with
such relatives is pronounced incestuous, on the ground that it
* Dwight calls attention to the fact that adultery was universally punishable"
by death by the Mosaic law, and pertinently asks : “What would be thought
of the wisdom of a legislature which should enact a similar statute with
reference to any other crime, for example, that of horse-stealing :— ‘ He who
steals the horse of any person shall be imprisoned three years ; he who steals
his father’s horse shall be imprisoned three years ; he who steals his brother’s
horse shall be imprisoned three years ; he who steals the horse of his father’s
brother shall be imprisoned for three years ; and so on, through a succession of
thirty-three relatives V Is it not, then, equal folly to enact with regard to
adultery : He who commits adultery with any woman shall be put to death ;
he who commits adultery with his mother shall be put to death ; he who com-
mits adultery with his brother’s wife shall be put to death : he who commits
adultery with his father’s brother’s wife shall be put to death ; and so on
through an equal succession ?” Mr. Dwight’s inference is, that if the law of
incest did not prohibit marriage, it was useless. Dr. Cameron quoted this
passage in the Assembly. Can Mr. Nish invalidate the inference ? I meet him,
however, on his own chosen ground.


was incapable of being legitimised by marriage” (p. 40). Note
this: “ Incest with certain relatives is incapable of being legi-
timised by marriage .” Our second Daniel has at length come
to a right judgment. But hear him once more : “Marriage and
a fortiori adulterous connection with a wife’s lineal relatives,
i.e., with her mother, her daughter, and her grand-daughter, is
in like manner declared by these prohibitions to be incestuous”
(p. 40). Most admirable and true! So then, in the seventeenth
verse, even if nowhere else (though it is not “a formal clause of
a marriage law”) there is “ a primary reference to marriage,”
and the prohibition of “adulterous connection” is included
a fortiori. He may exclaim : “I have admitted (p. 15) Mar-
riage may be included in the signification of to uncover, &c.
. . . . All that I care to establish is, that the two phrases
are not synonymous and interchangeable.” Who ever said
they were ? “ Uncover ,” &c., is a generic term, comprehending
under it every species of incest. Finally, if he takes refuge in
this last remaining fort of his argument, we must e’en send
him back to Calvin, who will tell him what he thinks of those
“who wrest to different senses things which in the one place
are declared in the very same words.” If in the tenor of the
prohibitions in vv. 7-14, there is assumed the absolute unlaw-
fulness of some marriages ; and if marriage with a wife’s lineal
relatives is in like manner declared by v. 17 to be incestuous,
is it not (in the words of the great Genevan, jurist and divine)
proper to think one and the same thing of the prohibition
relating to an uncle’s or a brother’s wife, concerning which a per-
fectly similar law is enacted in one context and tenor 1
We know that some professional conjurors excel in tricks of
transformation ; but our Wizard of the North surpasses all his
rivals. He lays upon his study-table eleven enactments against
fornication and adultery alone, and bids us carefully inspect
them, and observe that they really are not “ the clauses of a
marriage law” as yet. Then, he waves over them his pen,
which is his magician’s wand, and utters his cabalistic spell :
“ They are nevertheless based on the fundamental principles of
every marriage compact.” And lastly, he requests his admiring
audience to testify if they are not really transformed, and calls
them to witness that the enactments now declare “ the abso-
lute unlawfulness” and the “ incestuousness ” of marriage
between the parties therein named. The illusion is complete.
It is a clever trick of logical legerdemain.
We hope we have now convinced the reader that our author
is scarcely justified, at this point of the argument, in calling
upon us “to propound our theory with bated breath and
cautious whisper.” The sixteenth verse, prohibiting marriage


with a brothers wife, and pari ratione, with a wife’s sister (for
they are both sisters-in-law), still remains to us a stronghold.
But we are not battling for mere victory. We rejoice only
because all the roar of the enemy’s artillery cannot loosen a
single stone of the rampart which the Deity has reared around
the purity of domestic life in the marriage law of Leviticus.
The language of Mr. Nish is calculated to make a false im-
pression on the unwary in talking of the interpretation of this
law, which we accept, as “ our theory.” It is not, like his, a
private opinion—it has not, like Jonah’s gourd, grown up in a
night. All honour to him for seeking to test its truth, and
draw his views fresh from the fount of Scripture. But has he
accorded to the past decisions of the Church of Christ that re-
spectful and earnest consideration which is their due ? Were
not the compilers of our standards at least as thoroughly
actuated as himself by a desire to elicit truth, “ from a compara-
tive study of the Scriptures ? We yield them no blind sub-
mission ; but after a new and prayerful examination of the
Scriptural evidence, we reaffirm their doctrine as our own
faith. Is it to go for nothing in the argument, that the whole
Christian Church, both in the east and west —both Greek and
Latin —unhesitatingly affirmed that they found a marriage law
in Leviticus, and that this testimony has been maintained
throughout all the centuries of their existence ? That during
the period in which canon law ruled universally in Christendom,
those of its provisions which were deemed most sacred claimed
a direct Scriptural basis, and were rested on the assumption
that God has given a marriage law to men ? That, when the
Reformation separated the foreign additions which the Church
had on her own motion erroneously added to that law, from
the divine elements which they encrusted and obscured, all
the reformers, without exception, proclaimed anew the divinity
of the law, on the authority of the enactments in Leviticus, and
asserted the principle—not more distinctively that of Protes-
tants than of the primitive Christian Church —that within the
prohibited degrees neither Pope nor Kaiser, no human authority
whatever, possesses any dispensing power ? That all the
churches of the reformation accepted this judgment, and
asserted along with it the interpretation of the loav embodied
in our standards ? Add to all this the fact that the ancient
Waldensian church, several hundred years before Calvin or
Luther was born, found the same law therein.* That all
* The doctrine of the Waldensian Church regarding marriage is thus ex-
pressed : —“ Marriage ought to be performed according to the rules prescribed
by God, and not within those degrees which he has forbidden. And there need


“Christian civil legislation which has recognised revelation as a
guide, assumes these enactments to be direct prohibitions of
unlawful marriages. Add, that the Jewish Church—repre-
sented by Talmudists and Karaites alike—has never doubted
that the Scriptures contain a distinct law against incestuous
marriages. Let the reader ponder these facts, and ask himself
is it credible that no Hebraist should have existed during all
these ages among Jews or Christians competent to interpret the
Levitical prohibitions ? Mr. Nish builds confidently on the
fallibility of ecclesiastical councils, but their infallibility would
be, to most minds, somewhat less difficult of belief than that
the Christian and the Jewish Church —that Greeks and Latins,
the Waldenses (who never submitted to Rome), and the Re-
formers (who cast off* her yoke)—have all agreed in the single
point of committing an egregious blunder, and that only now,
and in Victoria, a divine has arisen able to elicit the truth in
regard to this question, and to guide the Church into a position
“ which can be defended by the principles and deductions of a
sound Scriptural exegesis.”
We are necessitated to follow our author from pillar to post,
from post to pillar. But we are sufficiently sanguine in our
expectation of finally dislodging him from every position, to
keep our spirits buoyant to the end. As we next confront him,
we find him contending that we are guilty of the “false assump-
tion,” that brother’s wife, in the 16th verse, means brother’s
widow.
Here he opens his attack by a fire of playful raillery, The
tenth commandment forbids a man to covet his. neighbour’s
wife, and he asks if this means that he is “to have no
affectionate hankerings after his neighbour’s widow ?” In the
Assembly I answered what I still regard as an excellent jest, in
a jesting spirit. “Are we then,” I asked, “to believe that death
destroys (as Mr. Nish maintains) every relationship by affinity,
but that there is something indissoluble in the tie of neigh-
bourhood—that a sister-in-law, at the moment of my wife’s
decease, loses every vestige of her sisterhood to me, but that
my neighbour remains as much my neighbour when he is dead
as he was while yet alive —and this too, I may add, when he
is removed altogether from my neighbourhood (as all but
be no scruple of conscience made concerning what the Pope hath forbidden,
although we neither give him gold nor silver for a dispensation ; for that which
•God hath not forbidden may very well be done without his permission.” “ This
testimony,” observes Professor Gibson, “ ought to put an end for ever to the
rash assertion that the views held in the Churches of England and Scotland,
and other reformed countries, were traceable to Popery, either directly or in-
•directly. ”


Spiritists believe) by death, which introduces him to the fel-
lowship of those who have no share in all that’s done beneath
the circuit of the sun.” But I am no more disposed than
himself to dispute seriously about trifles. Here let the jest
take end. It is “ food for laughter,” and no more. The question
to be really settled is the meaning of the term “ wife ” in the
Levitical Marriage Statute. Our author admits fully that in
Hebrew the word rendered “ widow ” in our English Bible de-
notes condition and not relationship —its root meaning being
desolate or lonely —and further that the term rendered wife
is variously employed to denote a woman, or a wife, or a
widow (“ when,” he observes, “ used in connection with a dead
husband’s name”). And he adds : “ The context invariably
shows in which of these three senses the term is employed.”’
He does not clearly state, but I hope he will admit, with
equal frankness, that in virtue of its wide variety of appli-
cation, this term may also conceivably denote a woman under
hotJt aspects, as the wife of a living husband, and his “ widow ”
after his decease. Here also the context must be allowed to
decide whether it is actually employed in this its most com-
prehensive meaning. Such in fact is its true interpretation in
the prohibitory enactments which we are considering—it
means the woman, viewed in her twofold relation to a husband,,
as his wife and his widow.
Taking our critic’s two pattern cases out of those specified
in the 18th chapter, we will ask whether a comparison of
the prohibitions relating to an uncle’s and a brother’s wife—
with the penalty attached to the violation in chapter xx.,.
v. 20 and 21 —does not afford a strong presumption, nay, rather,
clear evidence that in them it is especially marriage with a
widow which is prohibited. The penalty threatened is child-
lessness. Now it cannot be adulterous intercourse only with
the wife of a living uncle or brother that is forbidden, for the
penalty of adultery is death; and the idea of lawful marriage
with the wife of a living relative, is of course out of the ques-
tion. The only interpretation remaining is that which has-
always been accepted as the true and natural meaning—that
they are especially prohibitions of marriage with the widows
of these relatives; and if so in these cases, the other enactments
must be similarly interpreted. They prohibit alike adulterous
intercourse with the wives of living, and unlawful marriage
with the widows of dead relatives.
“ It ought to be observed,” writes Dwight of the denial that
these enactments refer to marriage with widows related to us
by affinity, “that this palpable mistake . . . grew probably
out of the manner in which the various phrases (in the prohi-


bitory clauses) are rendered in the English version. The
Hebrews usually express the given correlatives [i.e., the
persons to whom we are reciprocally related] by phrases cor-
responding to father’s wife, son’s wife, uncle’s wife, and
brother’s wife; and our translators have generally given a
literal version of those phrases. Had they been uniformly
rendered step-mother, daughter-in-law, aunt-in-law, and sister-
in-law, neither mistake nor cavil probably would have origi-
nated.”*
Our interpretation is proved to be the natural one by the
fact that Jews and Christians, jurists and theologians, have
unanimously given and received it for three milleniums
(and shall we say above all?) by the interesting fact that Mr.
Nish has himself been betrayed into writing in a list of what
he considered Scripturally lawful marriages the term “wife” in
the sense of “ widow f and the converse term “ husband,” as
meaning “ widower .”*f*
We will not weary the reader by asking him to accompany
us in a detailed examination of our critic’s exposition (in the
interests of his theory) of the reasoning of the Apostle in
1 Cor. vii., 4; Romans vii., 2,3; and 1 Cor. xi., 8-12. It is
enough to indicate in passing the fallacy that renders all the
deductions of our author inconsequential and absurd. He has
failed to observe that Paul is speaking only of the nature
and obligations of lawful marriage. There are really no pre-
mises furnished in those passages of the Word, from which any
inference can be drawn regarding the ground or limit of incest.
If it should be supposed there are, we invite ,our friend to
apply his principle of interpretation honestly to Rom. vii., 3.
It is there written of a wife:—■“ If her husband be dead,
she is free from the law (the law of her husband), so that
* “ The language of statutes is chosen with great exactness, yet no law of
incest, probably, can be found in any statute-book in which marriage is
prohibited with a father’s widow, a brother’s widow, &c. ; but the language
uniformly is a father’s wife, a brother’s wife, &c. The other phraseology
is rarely, if ever, used, except when logical precision is necessary.” Dwight’s
Hebrew Wife , p. 61.
f The list is found in Appendix 11. :
Wife’s sister Husband’s brother
Brother’s wife Sister's husband
Aunt-in-law Uncle-in-law
Wife’s niece Husband’s nephew.
Whatever becomes of his challenge about producing a text of Scripture in
which wife means widow, where it is not plainly stated in the context that the
husband is dead, it is satisfactory to be able to refer him to his own appendix
for what he desiderates. His conditions seem rather unreasonable, for how is
he to be convinced that the husband is really dead if it is not so plainly stated
that he cannot possibly deny the fact ?


she is no adulteress, though she he married to another man,”
Would we be at liberty to infer that she may marry any
other man, however nearly related by affinity or consan-
guinity ? But, if this conclusion would be monstrous, the
passages quoted must be understood as having no relevancy
to the law of incest, and the question of the number and
extent of the prohibited degrees must be otherwise deter-
mined.
Our position is this : That lawful marriage is attended by
two related yet distinct effects. It makes the husband and
wife “ one flesh,” and it also constitutes the blood relatives
of the one, the affinities of the other. The law of incest
forbids marriage equally with relatives by blood and relatives
by affinity—with a daughter and a daughter-in-law, with a
sister and a sister-in-law. We do not mean that affinity is,
'per se, the same thing as consanguinity; but simply that, for
wise and benevolent purposes, the Deity pronounces them
to be by his own appointment sources or causes of certain
proximities or relationships, all of which, without exception,
equally bar marriage between the parties who have come to
be mutually related within the prohibited degrees. “Affinity,”
as it is accurately defined by Erskine, in his “ Institutes of the
Law of Scotland,” “ is that tie which arises in consequence of
marriage betwixt one of the married pair and the blood-rela-
tives of the other; and the rule of computing its degree is,
that the relations of the husband stand in the same degree of
.affinity to the wife in which they are related to the husband
by consanguinity; which rule holds also, e converse, in the
case of the wife’s relations. Thus, where one is brother by
blood to the wife, he is brother-in-law, or by affinity, to the hus-
band.” Death sets the wife free “from the law of the husband,”
so that she can contract a second marriage; but it does not set
her free from the law of incest, so that she may marry within
the degrees prohibited. Our author ought to distinguish
things that so widely differ.*
“The law of God explains the principle upon which some
marriages by affinity are forbidden by the very nature of
* The expression “ brother’s nakedness,” has always been recognised as indi-
cating, not only the lordship of the husband over the body of his wife during
his life (which Mr. Nish very fully shows), but further, the ground of the affi-
nity, which marriage has created—a permanent affinity, indestructible by the
brother’s death. I learn from Prof. Gibson’s work that the following com-
ment (quoted by him from Dr. Janeway) occurs in the Targum of Jonathan
Ben Uzziel : —“ The shame of thy brother’s wife, thou shalt not reveal during
his life, or after his death ; it is the nakedness of thy brother.” This comment
refutes Mr. N.’s “ demonstration.” that brother's nakedness “ expresses a reason
which could have no force after my brother’s death.”


marriage itself ” (I quote from Dr. Pusey’s admirable preface to
his published ‘ Evidence’); “it brings out plainly that the
mysterious oneness of those whom God hath joined knits
them together indissolubly (except in the case of that special
sin which dissolves it), and so by their own oneness incorpo-
rates each into the family of the other. Holy Scripture applies
the principle beyond the first sacred relation of parent and
child; but the principle itself God hath graven in the human
heart by His words to the common parents of all mankind.
They twain shall be one flesh. One and the same principle
establishes the great holiness of marriage, its depth of mystery,,
its indissolubleness (except in that one case), excludes in the
wife’s or the husband’s lifetime the union of more than one pair,
i.e., polygamy; and, after the decease of either, prohibits the sur-
vivor from marrying such of the relations of the departed as
would be forbidden if they were the survivor’s own. One and
the same divine principle is the groundwork and rule of all.
Holy Scripture insists upon cases under each head (consan-
guinity and affinity) with equal weight of authority and of
appeal to the conscience. As the instances of the one general
principle, ‘ None of you shall approach to any that is near
of kin,’ it does prohibit in express terms the father’s wife, the
daughter-in-law, the brother’s wife, the wife’s daughter or
grand-daughter. There is no difference in the words of the
prohibition, save that, for fear man should sever them, Holy
Scripture even more carefully identifies the relation with the
brother’s wife than with the aunt. Of the father’s and mother’s
sister it is only said: ‘ She is thy father’s near kinswoman; she
is thy mother’s near kinswoman.’ Of the nakedness of the
brother’s wife, it is said : ‘lt is thy brother’s nakedness, as of
the father’s wife, it is said to be the father’s own nakedness.’
And for those who contend that no law of nature would be
broken by marriage with the sister of her whom a man first
took to wife, because she is commonly termed a sister-in-law,.
and not a person’s own, and that there is no nearness of blood,
it is impossible to say what law of nature would be broken by
marriage with the daughter of her whom a man first took to
wife, since she also is commonly called a daug] iter-in- law,
and with her also there is no nearness of blood. But such
special pleading is rebuked by heathen Rome itself, which
says : ‘A man shall not marry such, for both are daughters.’”*
But our critic here interposes with that most fanciful of
* Dr. Pusey (in a note, Evidence, p. 13) mentions the fact that by the law of
heathen Home, a wife’s daughter or a son’s wife were not to be taken to wife,
for both are daughters ; nor the mother-in-law or stepmother, because they
are in place of a mother.


modern errors : “ Death destroys relationships by affinity alto-
gether !” He surpasses his ordinary self in his efforts to
maintain this most paradoxical of paradoxes. With what
a torrent of sarcasm does he strive to overwhelm my un-
fortunate self, and submerge me beneath the tide of his
invective ! He has opened all the flood-gates of his eloquence
his logic, and his satire, and leaves me nantem in gurgite
vasto.
It is said that everything is simple when it is once explained;
and the secret of his extraordinary earnestness is merely this
—that he feels he has been wounded to the death; and to
make that death more bitter, it must be said of him, as of the
eagle that the archer slew, “ ’Twas his own plume that winged
the fatal dart.” For, how can lie ever get a law prohibiting
marriage with any relatives by affinity, if all affinity takes
end at death ? Is his theory destined to hang, as does the
earth, on nothing ! His wizard trick of apparent transforma-
tion sinks into absolute insignificance beside this last and,
greatest of his achievements. He first destroys my relation-
ship to a mother-in-law, a daughter-in-law, and a step-
daughter altogether! “Are we to be told,” he asks in a strain
of indignant rhetoric, “ that after the nexus in which the
bond originated, and by which alone it could be permanently
sustained, had been broken, the connection resulting from this
bond was still unsevered ?” The very thought is intolerable.
“It savours too much of metaphysical nonsense.” Then, I
inquire in turn, are we to conclude that since my mother-in-
law, my daughter-in-law, &c., are not any longer my relatives
at all, I may contract marriage with either, at my pleasure ?
“ By no means,” he exclaims, “ for marriage with a wife’s lineal
relatives is declared to be incestuous.” May I marry my
father’s widow (my stepmother) ? or, when I become a widower,
my own step-daughter? “No!” is his amazing reply (for he
had just been telling us that “ the dissolution of the central bond
puts an end to all connections which radiate from it”).
“Just as you are forbidden to marry any of your deceased
wife’s lineal relatives, so your father’s widow is precluded
from marrying any of her deceased husband’s relatives; and
they, of necessity, are equally precluded from marrying her.”
But why should we or she be precluded at all in such a fashion
as this, since by his own showing “ death is the termination’ of
all relationships which depend on the connubial contract, and
on it alone ?”*
His human nature has been too strong for his logic, and at
* See his pamphlet, pp. 23, 40-45.


the cost of his consistency he has manifested the strength of
the moral instincts which rise up in rebellion against such
marriages as these. His heart will not permit him to reason
out the full results of the principle, so contrary to right feeling,
to common sense, and the teaching of Scripture—that death
destroys affinity. But while we commend the man, and gently
chide the logician, we can have no mercy for the theory. It is
founded on untenable principles of interpretation, on false
assumptions, on irreconcileable and mutually destructive pro-
positions. Mr. Nish really has given himself the coup-de-grace
—and I ask my readers to constitute themselves a jury, and to
give the right verdict— felo-de-se.
My readers will now, I hope, be able to judge between my
critic and myself in regard to the argument drawn from the
language of the Book of Euth, describing Orpah and Ruth as
still the daughters-in-law of Naomi, after the death of their
husbands, Mahlon and Chilion. Let them consult that Scrip-
ture for themselves, and they will see that Holy Writ does not
endorse our author’s dictum that “ death is the termination of
all relationships that depend on the connubial contract alone.” I
am content to leave them to judge my other arguments, even
as they may be gathered from the pamphlet under review, if they
will place them in the light of my present criticism of Mr.
Nish’s capital delusion that death destroys affinity. I prefer
to occupy the space available for this portion of my work with
the following supplement to my argument, which I transcribe
from Prof. Gibson: “ That the phrase, near of kin, does not
denote blood relationship alone, is clear from the following
passages (Ruth ii., 20) : ‘ And Naomi said unto her daughter-
in-law (Ruth, the Moabitess) . . . the man (Boaz, of
Bethlehem, Judah) is near of kin to US, one of our next kins-
men.’ Again (iv., 14, 15), ‘ And the women said unto Naomi,
Blessed be the Lord, which hath not left thee this day without
a kinsman, that his name may be famous in Israel: and he
shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourishes of
thine old age; for thy daughter-in-law, which loveth thee,
which is better than ten sons, hath borne him.’ Here is
Naomi, who, in virtue of her marriage with Elimelech, the
kinsman of Boaz, called (chap, i.) ‘ a kinsman of her husband’s,’
calls herself kinswoman of Boaz, and Boaz kinsman of
her Moabitish daughter-in-law; while the child of Boaz and
Ruth is called by the women ‘ her kinsman ;’ and among the
whole party there is no blood-relationship whatever, except
with the parents and the child.” The passages are quoted by
Professor Gibson for the purpose of showing that affinity is a
real relationship actually contemplated in the general principle


of the Marriage Law in Leviticus xviii., 6. They further evince
that death did not destroy the “ affinity” of Ruth to Naomi;
and that the kinsman of her mother-in-law was also tier’s, and
continued so notwithstanding her husband’s death.
How does our author’s exposition of Levit. xviii., 18, look
now ? “ Your marriage with the one sister makes her one
flesh with you, &c., and hence to have intercourse with her
sister while she is alive would be virtually to uncover the
nakedness of one near of kin. It will be otherwise after your
wife’s death.” My readers will kindly form their opinion for
themselves ; but it seems to me that this learned gloss needs
only to be quoted in a context in which the light of truth is
permitted to fall upon it, to expose its inherent absurdity. Our
judgment regarding this interpretation is best summed up in
the favourite formula (in similar cases) of a professor of other
days : “ Non expositio, sed magis imposition
It will scarcely be expected that I should devote much space
to the consideration of the supposed virtues of a theory that
is self-destroyed. “ De niortuis nil nisi honumf is a maxim of
which even evil-doers reap the benefit; yet I must say there is
cause for congratulation that .the theory has so signally (in a
fit of temporary insanity, possibly) made its quietus for itself.
Had it been able to survive its self-inflicted mortal stab, it
would have perpetrated anew the impious act of him who was
punished by Jehovah of old for putting forth his unhallowed
hand to stay the Ark of God when the oxen stumbled. It
bespoke our good opinion, because of its intended service to
the Word of God. It was about to protect the Almighty from
the aspersions of his creatures. It, and it alone, was to save
the Holy One from the charge of countenancing foul and inces-
tuous sin, because it pleased Him, as the Author and Lord of
all human relationships, to suspend one clause of His own law,
for a season, among a solitary nation, by a partially-repealing
statute. But as God smote Uzzah for his error, and he died
before the Ark, so this impersonal Uzzah of to-day has been
smitten, and, like Judas, becomes its own executioner.
After its brief life’s fitful fever, it sleeps well. It would, if
it had lived, have mutilated the law, which it pretended to
expound. “ Tell it not in Gath ; publish it not in the streets
of Askalon.” It would have struck two express commands of
Deity out of His own Word, to preserve its own wretched life.
“ Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father’s
brother“ thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy
brother’s wifethese prohibitions must be excised from the
Written Word, rather than itself should perish. Modern
Rationalism is the true successor of ancient Pharisaism,


“ making void the commandments of God by its own tradi-
tions/’ i.e., its own inventions.*
It would have closed its sacrilegious career by legitimising
all marriages within the prohibited degrees of affinity, destroy-
ing by the same act its own existence, and (if it had not in horror
of the prospective crime, plunged sooner into the abyss) the
Divine Law of Marriage ; for, what barrier of affinity would
its fatal principle of “ the dissolution of all affinity by death”
have suffered to escape ? It would have opened wide the door
to lawlessness, caprice, and lust, and invited civil legislatures
to tolerate, nay, to encourage every marriage that is not for-
bidden by the ties of blood. Challenging the wisdom and
learning of all past ages, it would, in the inflation of its own
vanity, have substituted a chimera of the hour for the intelli-
gible and well-defined principle of the Law of Incest, embodied
in the Church’s solemn Confession of Faith.
To recapitulate —We have proved that the charges of false
assumption preferred against our definition of the Scriptural
law of incest, are baseless and unfounded. They have in every
instance recoiled upon the accuser. He has erred in restricting
“ the primary reference” of the prohibited enactments to forni-
cation and adultery: they refer equally to marriage. He has
erred in his “principles of interpretation”—(l) in assuming that
“ wife” cannot denote the woman so designated in a two-fold
aspect —as the wife of a living husband, and also as his widow
when dead; (2) in denying, or seeming to deny, that the pro-
hibition to uncover, &c., refers to incestuous marriage; and (3)
in monstrously and falsely asserting that death destroys affinity.
He has very seriously erred as to “ the practical extent” of the
prohibitions, in giving us a mutilated marriage law, and spe-
cially in making of no effect the express words of Scripture.
Inconsistent as he is in developing a marriage law from enact-
ments which “have no primary reference to marriage,” he is
scarcely pardonable for not having more “ method in his mad-
ness.” He pronounced the one wizard spell over all the enact-
ments alike. How came two, and only two, to resist all his
enchantments ? Ah, there was a consistency, after all, under-
lying all his inconsistencies. Cannot the reader guess ?
One, and only one really valuable principle of interpretation
has been fully recognised, and beautifully developed by our
author. It is not entirely new, but I have never seen it so
clearly stated, and, up to the point at which the exigencies of
his theory stopped him, so simply and thoroughly applied—lt
* See Pusey’s Preface to his Evidence , p. 75 ; Mr, Nish’s table of prohibited
degrees omits those mentioned above, and others.
C


is his “ lineal principle.” If he would allow me to amend it,
and would accept my very necessary addendum, our harmony
would become complete and perfect. The law of incest is
unquestionably based on the permanent relationships of family
life. But marriage unites in an indissoluble bond the two
families (previously distinct) of the wife and husband. Let
“ the twain who have become one flesh,” stand in our table as
they do in real life —the central, uniting bond between their
respective families. Then we shall range under six heads,
instead of four,
I. The degrees prohibited to the man, namely— all the lineal
female relatives of his (1) father, (2) mother, (8) self, (4)
wife, and (this is my amendment) his (5) wife’s father or (6)
mother; and
11. The degrees prohibited to the woman will also range
themselves under six heads, viz., all the lineal male relatives
of her (1) FATHER, (2) MOTHER, (3) SELF, (4) husband, and her
(5) husband’s father or (6) mother. With one alteration of
Mr. Nish’s own language, required by the addition of the last
“heads” of prohibited degrees, I am now able to quote with entire
approbation what he has written (p. 47): —
“ 111. Add to this the application of the principle that the
same restrictions which are binding on the man are equally
binding on the woman, so that the converse relationships of all
those which are comprised under the two previously defined
classifications will also be included. And then—
“ IV. It will be found that all the prohibited marriages for
which our brethren contend are provided for by these classi-
fications, without the exceptions of brother’s wife, wife’s sister,
and father’s brother’s wife, or the cognate relationships de-
ducible from this latter prohibition.”
With this word of hearty appreciation, if not yet of perfect
concurrence, I now take literary leave of my brother, adding
only that, when these various groups of prohibitions are
summed up, their total result will be best expressed in the yet
simpler and more comprehensive principle of our standards:
“The man may not marry any of his wife’s kindred
NEARER IN BLOOD THAN HE MAY OF HIS OWN, NOR THE
WOMAN OF HER HUSBAND’S KINDRED NEARER IN BLOOD THAN
OF HER OWN.”
CONCLUDING NOTE.
I have noticed all the salient points of Mr. Nish’s argument.
But it was no part of my plan to go over the ground suffi-
ciently occupied by others. Some of the speeches accom-
panying the present critique deal directly with the statement


and proof of our Church’s doctrine. I hope that, in addition,
Dr. Cameron’s admirable discussion of the marriage law (both
doctrinally and historically) will yet be made accessible to our
members.
But, in order to prevent the reader from partially misappre-
hending the position which I really occupy in this controversy
relatively to Mr. Nish and to other brethren, I feel it necessary
to append some additional remarks, bearing on his classification,
the nature of incest, the Levirate law, and the force of the words
“ in her life-time,” occurring in v. 18.
The value of his principle of classification lies in its clear
recognition of the family as the organic unit in the social
fabric, like the primitive cell in animal organisms. Its defect
is that it does not fully recognise marriage as ordained of God
to be the great unifying element in the social organisation,
creating relationships among persons not previously a-kin, and
welding together the families of the husband and the wife in
one kinship, permanent and indissoluble. Marriage is prohibited
within degrees of affinity, for the very purpose of rendering
possible the free and healthy development of the pure affections
of family life over a wider area than that included by blood-
relationships. The thought of marriage is made unlawful by
God, in order that no restraint may check the growth of that
affection with which a man ought to love the sister of his
wife, because he is, by his oneness with his wife, the brother
of her sister: or with which he is to guard the daughter of his
wife; because, through marriage with the mother, he stands in
the place of her dead father to his step-daughter. Mr. Nish
does not state, but I presume he will not deny, that the lineal
relatives of a man’s Father, Mother, Wife, &c., are his own
collateral relatives; and it is to be carefully noted that collateral,
as well as lineal, relationships are barriers to marriage within
the first and second degrees of affinity, no less than of consan-
guinity. (See Lev. xviii., v. 9, 12-13; xx., 19 ; and xviii., v.
14, 16.) Mr. Nish speaks of some German brethren as deeply
grieved and not a little indignant at alleged reflections on the
social state of their native land. Perhaps the following state-
ment of Dr. Pusey’s may put the matter in its true light, and
help to prevent misunderstandings: “ I never anticipated sin
so atrocious (as adultery), as a consequence of a change in the
law. I spoke not of consequences, but of facts. Uncles in
Germany cannot be the domestic protectors of their own nieces ;
nor can brothers-in-law have the motherly care of the sister of
their deceased wife (for their children), unless they marry them,
because they can marry them. .....
A person can know very little of that mysterious law


which draws the sexes towards one another, and not know
the relation is quite different when marriage can be and when
it cannot. Now all is safe. No other feeling can spring up
(it would be a sort of monster), except that pure love of relation-
ship or affinity, which may, and one should think would live on,
‘ like the Angels of God in Heaven.’ It was not of this that I
was speaking, yet, since it is brought forward, it must be said
that there may be much short of any extreme sin, which might
yet embitter marriage, or mar that oneness of family affection
which now is so beautiful a part of our English domestic
relations.” We deeply regret that in the present state of our
colonial law we cannot very confidently echo the utterance
in this quotation, “ Now, all is safe.”
According to the law of God, as we understand it, it is
“ incestuous,” i.e., unchaste for a husband or a wife, on the disso-
lution of the first marriage, by death or otherwise, to contract
a second within the limits of the family, as constituted of (1)
his and her own lineal relatives, ascending and descending;
and (2) the lineal relatives of their own and each other’s father
or mother, ascending and descending. As impure intercourse
between persons not united by lawful marriage, and the adul-
terous violation of the marriage vow are deeply criminal acts
of incontinence, so “ marriage ” within the prohibited degrees
of kinship is more or less immoral, according to the nearness
of kin; an infraction, more or less heinous, of the God-given
laws of family life—which are “ holy and just and goodand,
because they are divine, incapable of being abrogated or sus-
pended by “ any law of man or consent of parties.” In the
Levirate law, God asserted his own sovereign right to suspend
one of them, in a single exceptional case; but He is the only
competent Judge of what is best at any period for man, socially
and individually; and His revealed Will is now as ever the
highest law of morality.
The great importance attached by the advocates of marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister to the clause, v. 18, “ in her lifetime,”
leads me to offer the following considerations, whichl have not
seen advanced by any writer, for the serious consideration of
the reader: It is an axiom in logic that every proposition
ought to be interpreted in strict accordance with the real drift
of its author. If, then—as Mr. Nish holds—v. 18 is intended
to prohibit an “ incestuous” form of polygamy, it is not compe-
tent for him to interpret the added clause as if the statute
directly contemplated a state of society in which bigamy or
polygamy is altogether unlawful. The inference drawn from
this clause in favour of the contested marriage is strongly sug-
gested to our minds, just because marriage with a deceased


wife’s sister is the only form in which such a union can be con-
ceivably legalised among ourselves. But suppose the case
otherwise : suppose bigamy or polygamy to be common and
respectable; suppose our statute-book to be entirely devoid
of any law limiting the number of wives which a
man might legally marry. We ask whether, in such a
case, the absolute prohibition of contemporaneous mar-
riage with two sisters would so readily suggest the lawful-
ness of their successive union to one man ? Let us remember,
also, how frequently, and on what slight pretexts, divorce was
practised among the Jews. The practical effect of this is well
described by Conybeare : —“ In the corrupt facility of divorce
allowed both by Greek and Homan law, it was very common for
man and wife to separate, and marry other parties during the
life of each other. Thus, a man might have three or four
living wives, or women who had successively been his
wives. An example of this may be found in the English
colony of Mauritius, where the French revolutionary law of
divorce had been left unrepealed by the English Government ;
and it is not uncommon to meet in society three or four women
who ha've all been wives of one man, and three or four men
who have all been husbands of one woman ?” Surely, it is
morally certain that in such a state of society the temptation
to marry two sisters would practically arise only in the lifetime
of them both; and hence the natural construction of the law in
the actual social condition of the J ews could not fail to be
what is given by Philo : —“Moses does not allow the same man
to marry two sisters, either at the same time or at different
times, even though the husband should have happened to have
divorced her whom he first married; for while the first who
had cohabited with him is alive, even though she be divorced,
whether she remain unmarried or be married to another
man, he considered it not pious that the sister should succeed
to the place of the unfortunate.” We have here a good and
adequate sense, furnishing a valid and sufficient reason for the
addendum, “in her lifetime.” As for the other inference,
which we regard as inconsequential, Basil occupied unassail-
able ground when he wrote : —“ I was asked, ‘ls it written (or
is it not written) in Scripture that a man may take a woman
to (or after) her sister V I replied—and this is both a true
and safe answer —‘ that it is not so written; and to infer and
conclude from the clause added something else about which
nothing is said, is to legislate, not to take the law as it stands.’”
Especially must this be the case when that law elsewhere
directly forbids marriage between more distant relatives by
affinity than a man and his sister-in-law. With the exception


of Basil’s obscure correspondent, I have not been able to dis-
cover any clear evidence of the deduction of the lawfulness of
this marriage having been made in the Christian Church till
the middle of the twelfth century —much too late to carry
any authority —and this, too, only by one or two eccentric
theologians, against the recognised law and doctrine of the
entire Christian Church.
In justice to an esteemed brother involved in a serious
charge of inconsistency made by Mr. Nish against him, as
having been “ privy to expunging the whole Confession from
the Standards of the Church with which he was then con-
nected,” I append here a very condensed summary of his
written statement of the real facts. That church was organised
in January, 1850. There is no minister now in our Assembly
who took part in its original formation. Its basis consisted of
a summary of doctrine, of ordinances, and of polity essentially
Presbyterian. Although the Confession was not definitely
named, in deference to the views of one of the four original
members of the Synod, it was never repudiated. Within
little more than a year of its formation, ordinations and
inductions took place, in which the usual questions of our
“ formula” were answered by the preachers. And in 1857,
when an outcry was raised for the first time regarding its con-
stitution, the Synod formally adopted the Standards of the
United Presbyterian Church of Scotland.


SPEECHES
OF THE
REVS. DR. CAIRNS, D. S. M'EACHRAN, T. MCKENZIE
FRASER, AND JAMES MACBAIN, ESQ., M.L.A,
Delivered at the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria , November , 1873, on the Overture of the Rev. James Nish
to make the question of Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister
an open one.
The Rev. Dr. CAIRNS spoke as follows: In support of the motion
I have laid on the table, I hope I shall say nothing unbecoming
a brother to say in addressing his brethren. First of all, I draw
your attention to our own position, the position of our Church in
relation to this question. The Confession of Faith (c. 24, s. 4)
declares: —“ Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of con-
sanguinity or affinity forbidden in the Word, nor can such in-
cestuous marriages ever be made lawful by any law of man.’
. “ The man may not marry any of his wife’s kindred
nearer in blood than he may of his own, nor the woman of her
husband’s kindred nearer in blood than of her own.” This is a
fundamental article of our Church, subscribed by every one of us
on receiving ordination. To the question, “Do you- own and
believe in the whole doctrine contained in the standards of the
Church ? and do you engage firmly and constantly to adhere
thereto ; and, to the utmost of your power, assert, maintain,
and defend the same, and the purity of worship as practised in
the Church?” the answer given by every minister and elder is
in the affirmative, and this answer is repeated at every ordi-
nation and induction by all the ministers and elders engaged
in the service. At last Assembly a petition to the Queen,
praying Her Majesty not to give the Royal sanction to the act
of our colonial Legislature legalising these marriages, was
adopted by an unanimous vote, there was no dissenting voice;
and this petition set forth in distinct terms that the act com-
plained of was contrary to religion, to good morals, and there-
fore to the welfare of society. Our petition was not successful,
the obnoxious act received the sanction of the Crown. In
consequence, the Commission in May last appointed a com-
mittee, with Dr. Cameron as convener, to take the subject into
consideration, warning the brethren to observe the law of the
Church, and not to compromise themselves by any compliance


with, this offensive act. This committee’s report is now before
you, and will, I trust, receive the cordial approval of this
Assembly. It is due to ourselves to accept and sustain it. The
change of opinion which is now creating embarrassment,
has occurred within the last few months. Surely we owe much
to our standards, much to consistency, much to _ our own
character for intelligence and uprightness. If there is to be a
change in the radical principles of the Church, let it be the
result of long, dispassionate, and grave consideration. Let it
be of such a nature as will satisfy reasonable minds that we
are actuated by conscientious convictions, not by a sudden
impulse, that we are led by light purer and brighter than that
enjoyed by our fathers, that we tamper with the Confession of
Faith because we are compelled to do so by our enlarged
acquaintance with the Word of God. In a report on this very
subject, drawn up by Dr. Rainy, and read to the General
Assembly of the Free Church in May last, great praise is given
to us for the firm stand we had made in defence of the
marriage law, as defined in our Confession. This is our
position this day in relation to this subject, and all will
feel and allow that it involves very great responsibility.
Allow me now to epitomise the history of the marriage law
as we know it.
It was the only law recognised in the days of our Lord
and his Apostles, and it was confessedly the law of the
Christian Church down to very recent times. The teach-
ing of Basil is explicit, evidencing the judgment of the
Church in the 4th century. The Church of Rome retains Jt
to this day. The Council of Trent, which decreed in 1550
that the Pope possessed a dispensing power, acknowledged
the law and confirmed it afresh. It has ever been the law
of the ancient Yaudois Church, the single witness of Christ
in the dark mediaeval ages. The Reformers were quite
decided in its favour. They were a race of men raised up
for a great work, equally illustrious for mental capacity
and learning, for the acuteness of their intellectual dis-
cernment, and the patience with which they conducted
their inquiries. Luther had doubts, but investigation dis-
pelled them ; and it is a very high presumption in favour of
the law that it was incorporated in the confessions of all
the Reformation Churches, including, those in continental
Europe, and those in Protestant Britain. The unanimity in
favour of the law was universal and undisturbed until a very
modern date. It was approved by the Synod of Dort and
by the Westminster Assembly ; and assuredly deference is
due to the unhesitating conviction of a body of divines as


wise and enlightened, and as competent to judge as the
world ever saw. The 24th Chapter of our Confession was
anew considered by the committee of the Churches in Scot-
land negotiating for union. This conjoint committee approved
unanimously of this article of our faith, and their report was
approved by the Supreme Courts of the Churches represented
by them—approved without a single dissent. It is held
firmly by all Presbyterian Churches whether in Europe or
America, a significant fact, to us full of warning and encourage-
ment. The late agitation in Britain for an alteration of the
law led to the formation of a committee of the leading men
of all the Presbyterian Churches in Scotland in defence of our
venerated scriptural marriage law. The result was the full,
candid, and unanswerable statement, the work of Dr. C. Brown,
but signed by the whole committee, which all of us have
seen, and which is entitled to the serious consideration of
every thoughtful mind. The new opinions sprang up in the
beginning of the 17th century, when some petty German
princes wished to marry their wives’ sisters. The question
arose in England in the same way. Certain persons of wealth
and social position had contracted these unlawful marriages,
and set agoing an active agitation to get them legalised. The
first motion was made in the House of Commons in 1839.
With this birdseye view of the history of this subject I must
content myself.
I come now to the consideration of the law of marriage as
embodied in the 18th chapter of Leviticus. The law is un-
folded here and nowhere else. I mean the law that defines the
circle within which marriage is allowable, and beyond which
it is forbidden. It is obvious at a glance that the law here ex-
pounded is not intended for the Hebrews alone, or for any
particular race of men, but for every nation in every place, and
in all time. Nothing can be more clear than that Egypt had
sinned against the law as here detailed, that the tribes of
Canaan had greatly sinned against it, that the Israelites are
warned not to follow their example, but to keep the ordinances
of God, his statutes and judgments. With this preface the
law is set forth; the object of it is to determine the nearness
of kin which bars marriage. The question we have to consider
is what is the nearness of kin pointed out in the law which
interdicts marriage ? Affinity and consanguinity are both dealt
with. The law recognises them as of equal nearness up to a
definite point. This will not be denied. Marriage constitutes
two parties one, or as forming the most intimate and vital of all
relations—so much so, that in the judgment of God affinity and
consanguinity become as really one as if consanguinity were


the only element in the case. I do not mean that consanguinity
and affinity are in every respect the same. Kindred by blood
has a quality, so to speak, that does not belong to kin by affi-
nity. And certainly incest in the one case is more revolting
and horrible than it can be in the other. But this does not
affect the principle of the law. In confirmation of this I refer
to the well known words of our Lord in explaining the mar-
riage law with reference to divorce. He says, Mark x., 6: —
“ From the beginning of the creation God made them male and
female. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother,
and cleave to his wife, so they are no more twain, hut one
flesh.” In our Lord’s day the law we are now considering
was the only authorised marriage law in Judea, and in con-
nection with it he pronounces this verdict. His words imply
that marriage is regulated by this law, and that parties so
united are no more twain, but one flesh ; as completely so as if
consanguinity were the only thing concerned. Our Lord’s
memorable saying conveys this sense and no other, and in this
connection gives to affinity all the meaning and force that
belongs to consanguinity. N earness of kin is thus ascertained—
the one flesh determines and expresses it. And the argument
that marriage is barred only to parties who are related by
blood, and not to those whose relation is that of affinity, seems
to be in the very face of the ancient statute, and in direct
opposition to our Lord’s interpretation of it. It is said a man
cannot marry his own sister because she is his own blood
relation, but he may marry his brother’s wife, because she is his
sister only by affinity. Is this the meaning of the law ? As-
suredly' it is not. In the 16th verse we read : —■“ Thou shalt
not uncover the nakedness of thy brother’s wife, it is thy
brother’s nakedness,” i.e., the brother and his wife are precisely
the same to him. This is reaffirmed in the 21st verse of the
20th chapter:—“ If a man shall take his brother’s wife, it is an
unclean thing —he has uncovered his brother’s nakedness.’ So
far as the question is concerned of “ nearness of kin,” it is here
answered and set at rest, without a shadow of doubt. It de-
volves on our opponents to prove that it is not, and I beg
respectfully to direct their attention to this point. To me, my
brother and his wife are the very same “kin,” and their relation
to me determines mine to them. By this law I am to my
brother’s wife exactly what I am to my brother—to me they
are one flesh. She is as near of kin to me by the law of God as
is my own blood-born sister. I shall not do my brethren the
injustice of supposing that they hold that the law is unequal,
or that, while a man cannot marry his brother’s wife, a woman
may marry her sister’s husband. This idea turns the law


against itself, nay, plainly overthrows it. It is no answer to
say that there is a difference, because the marriage of a
woman to her husband’s brother is not expressly, or in
so many words, forbidden. The only question is, does
such a marriage violate the law of kin here de-
clared and illustrated. That it does so is manifest. There-
fore such marriages are forbidden. It is quite true that
every case is not specified; the cases mentioned are illustrations
of the law—samples of its length and breadth—and guided as
we must be by these specimen cases, there can be no difficulty
in ascertaining the lawfulness of any marriage. Adopt the
loose notions now prevalent on this subject, and you not only
make the law of marriage contradict itself, turn witness against
itself, but you absolutely wipe it out of the statute book, and
get rid of it altogether. It ceases to be an impartial rule —a rule
of equity, binding on man and woman alike, i.e., it is contemp-
tuously abolished. To quote from Dr. Cameron : —“ Marriage
between father and daughter was not in so many words forbidden,
but marriage between mother and son was, therefore also mar-
riages between father and daughter. Marriage between uncle
and niece was not forbidden in so many words, but marriage
between aunt and nephew was, therefore also marriage between
uncle and niece. Marriage between a man and his dead wife’s
sister was not in so many words forbidden, but marriage be-
tween a woman and her deceased sister’s brother was, and
therefore between a man and his deceased wife’s sister.” The
nearness of kin thus legally determined cannot be ignored or
destroyed by anything contained in the 18th verse. On this
ground we rest the law of marriage. It is distinctly embodied
in the 16th verse, and until altered by the authority of God
must remain the ordinance of marriage so long as the world
endures.
Is the 18th verse inconsistent with the 16th? Does the
law as expressed in this strangely worded passage suspend or
abrogate that so unambiguously set forth in the context ? This
cannot be supposed. Up to a period comparatively recent the
testimony of the church has been clear and unanimous in our
favour. Our opponents are bound, therefore, to prove one of
two conclusions.
I. First, that their interpretation of this particular clause of
the Act is not inconsistent with the undoubted sense of the
previous clauses.
11. Or that this verse is exceptional, and refers to the case
of the bigamist or polygamist.
This is the alternative before them; there is no other con--
ceivable, so far as I can judge.


I object to marriage with a deceased wife’s sister for many
reasons.
1. Because it is inconsistent with the law previously defined
and settled.
2. Because it declares that death destroys the relations con-
stituted by marriage, so that a sister-in-law ceases to be a sister-
in-law, an aunt ceases to be an aunt, &c., &e.
3. Because the language of the 16th verse of the 18th
chapter, and the 21st verse of the 20th chapter, expresses in
the strongest terms God’s abhorrence of the connection now
insisted on. “To take a brother’s wife or a sister’s husband
is denounced as an utter abomination—it is to uncover a
brother’s or a sister’s nakedness.
4. Because it justifies the sin of incest.
5. Because it is irreconcilable to the explicit evidence of the
New Testament. John Baptist condemned Herod for a violation
of this law, because his connection with his brother’s wife
was incestuous. There was adultery in the case, but the point
of the Baptist’s rebuke lay in the fact that the offence was the
crime of incest. The same thing is true of the Apostle’s words,
both in 1 Cor. v., 1, and in 2 Cor. vii., 12. The sin in either
case was incest, proving that this law was then recognised as of
divine authority and universal application.
6. It has been suggested that those marriages alone are for-
bidden to which the penalty of death is attached in the 20th
chapter, and that to a deceased wife’s sister, or brother’s widow,
such marriage is lawful under the Christian dispensation; but
the suggestion is quite inadmissible in the face of the distinct
testimony of the 23rd verse of the same chapter, “Ye shall not
walk in the manner of the nation which I cast out before
you, for they committed all these things, and therefore I
'abhorred them.” “ A clear proof,” says Dr. Hodge, “ that these
laws were binding, not on the Jews alone, but upon all people,
and at all times.” These reasons have satisfied the most
thoughtful minds in all ages, down to very modern times, and
I do not see how they can be deemed insufficient by any un-
prejudiced inquirer. Ought not our argument to be that the
subject contained in the 18th verse must harmonise with this
rule, and not contradict it ? Surely the law cannot discredit
or dishonour itself ? Explanations have been offered which
may be true, which our opponents must disprove before they
can ask or expect us to accept their theory.
1. There is the marginal reading, “one wife to another.”
This reading was proposed by scholarly men, quite as judicious
as any of our present expositors. Sound criticism is of the
greatest value, but much of that of the present day is conjee-


tural, some of it bold, and some of it destructive. Of this
reading Dr. Hodge says : “ The words admit of the rendering
given in the margin of the English Bible.” It is found in the
margin of the Geneva French edition, and has been adopted as
the true text in the Berlenburgher Bible.
2. The verse is understood by some to have reference to
bigamy or polygamy then prevalent, though not among the
Hebrews. They argue that if the prohibition exclude a wife’s
sister while she lives, it does not forbid such alliance with
others; therefore it recognises and provides for bigamy. I
confess I shrink from this application of the verse. Bigamy is
not the ordinance of God. Larnech was the first who took to
himself two wives, and the practice begun in lawless wicked-
ness preserved its character in all subsequent generations.
It is quite true that God not only forbore with it, but modified
it by regulations. So he dealt with the atrocity of human
bondage. We revolt from the idea that God originated or
approved of such an evil as slavery, yet we find rules for the
guidance of the slave and slave-owner both in the Old Testa-
ment and the New. The long-suffering of God is indeed won-
derful !
8. “ The words ‘to uncover her nakedness ,’ are expressive
of an intrinsic vileness in the marriage of sisters, which must
render it unlawful under any circumstances. On an examina-
tion of all the places where the phrase occurs, it will nowhere
be found descriptive of simple marriage, but everywhere to
relate to something intrinsically odious and vile. It is the
proper and constant phrase for an incestuous connection, occa-
sionally indeed used otherwise, but never apart from what is in
its own nature loathsome. So that the true and full ground of the
prohibition in this verse is, ‘ Neither shalt thou take a wife to
her sister, to vex her by uncovering her nakedness ;’ to vex
her, that is to say, by the shame and grievance of an inces-
tuous husband. And thus it comes out, that so very far is that
verse from giving permission to marry a wife’s sister, that it
actually by implication forbids it.” Although such a prohibi-
tion was not necessary, the statute having before forbidden it
(Relations luhich bar Marriage), we think it proved that the
words of the Westminster Confession rest on irrefragable
grounds of Scripture: ‘ The man may not marry any of his
wife’s kindred nearer in blood than he may of his own; nor
the woman of her husband’s kindred nearer in blood than of
her own.’
Every attempt to disprove this doctrine has failed, and
every change in practice has been disastrous. Dr. Hodge
quotes from Maurer, Baumgarten, Rosenmuller, Knobel and


Kiel, who supported the view of our opponents. His comment
is—“ The inference which these writers draw from the fact
that in this passage the marriage of a wife’s sister is forbidden
during the life of the wife, that the marriage of the sister is
allowed after the death of the wife, is very 'precarious. All
that the passage teaches is, if a man chooses to have two
wives at the same time, they must not be sisters, and the
reason assigned is that it would bring the sisters into a false
relation to each other. This leaves the question just where it
was. This verse has no direct bearing on that subject.”
Mr. Bishop, in his elaborate work “ On Marriage and
Divorce,” teaches that the relationship by affinity ceases with
the dissolution which death brings, &c., &c. On this Dr.
Hodge remarks, it is very evident that Mr. Bishop never
asked himself what in the present connection the word
“ relationship ” means. Had he had any clear idea of the
meaning of the word, he never could have written the above
sentences. This relationship is not dissolved by the death of
the person through whom it arose. If relationship by affinity
is dissolved by death, then a son may on the death of his
father marry his step-mother, which Paul says, I. Cor. x., i.,
was not tolerated among the heathen.
Does the Levirate law sanction marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister ? This law is found in Deuteronomy xxv., 5,
“ If brethren dwell together and one of them die, the wife of
the dead shah not marry a stranger, her husband’s brother
shall take her to him to wife,” &c., &c.
Undoubtedly this law is from God, as well as that in the
18th Chapter of Leviticus. God is the author of both, and
yet the one does not imply or necessitate the other. That
the Levirate law does not sanction a marriage within the for-
bidden degrees is evident from these considerations. It is
positive in its nature, local and temporary in its use. Its
object was to prevent the alienation of the family inheritance,
or to ensure its safe transmission from one generation to
another, and ceased, necessarily ceased, with the peculiar
dispensation to which it belonged. On the other hand, this
law is moral in its nature, universal in its application; not for
one nation, but for the human race ; not for any period, but for
all time. All moral obligations proceed from the will of God.
His will is final in every case. The time was that brothers
married sisters, such practice being indispensable and in
accordance with the divine will. In process of time this
practice was regarded as unnatural, and held in abhorrence as
an abominable sin. What made it unnatural was the will of
God forbidding it; what made it abominable was the will of


God making it odious and vile. Dr. Cairns read an extract
from a work of Dr. Lyndsey, professor of biblical criticism in
the United Presbyterian Church, ending thus-—“ The marriages
of Cain and Abel were right because God commanded them; the
marriages of brothers and sisters now are wrong because God
has forbidden them. The marriage of a Jew with his childless
brother’s wife was right, because God authorised it, but it was
wrong in all other circumstances because God has utterly
forbidden it.”
I cannot conclude without drawing the attention of my
brethren to the morality of the question. In no country has
domestic life been so pure and happy as in our native land.
In Scotland and in England alike the marriage tie has been
held sacred, and as a consequence the family home has been a
well-spring of all the virtues. Household piety has been the
precious fruit of the marriage covenant. Wherever this law
has been departed from, alienation, distrust, and injustice
have been the inevitable results. Here Dr. Cairns referred
to the demoralising effect of tampering with the law in
Germany, and quoted from the work of Mr. Dwight
in evidence that the effect of recent innovations in the
law of incest in the United States had been to un-
settle the minds of the community on the whole sub-
ject ; and he then proceeded: “ Brethren might regard the
question as a small one, not worthy of the anxiety or the zeal
that had been excited; but he ventured to assure them it was
by no means a small matter; it concerned the 'present
truth, the truth which they were called upon to vindicate
and maintain, and which was the very life of their testimony,
as faithful servants of the Lord Jesus Christ. They were
not left to choose the portion of truth which the enemy should
assail. They had to defend the citadel from every attack.
The attack was now at this particular point, and here we must
rally all our forces to defeat the enemy, and if we do not we
betray the cause, we do not keep the faith. Obsta prin-
cipiis, is the rule of duty. Hold fast that which you have.
Many are looking on with varied feelings, some, no doubt,
eager for our failure, others sympathising with us in our
struggle, and anxiously awaiting the result. Our position is an
honourable one ; let us be steadfast and immovable, let no hos-
tility shake our faith or deprive us of our crown. I beseech those
of my brethren who are seeking this change to pause in their
course, for the sake of the cause itself, which demands from
them the very utmost care and deliberation ; for their own
sakes, that they may not incur the reproach of reckless haste
and apparent presumption; for our sakes, who abide firmly by


the standards of our Church, and who are entitled to the
respect that is due to undeniable consistency. Do not press us
beyond reason, do not threaten us with an innovation for
which we are not in the least prepared. Take much time,
consult the home churches, leave no means untried to ascertain
the rightness of your proposal, before you insist on our accep-
tance of it. I have spent a long life of loyalty to our venerable
Confession, and shrink from the proposal to mutilate it as from an
act of treachery. I care nothing for the vile abuse of a hireling-
pen; they who reject my Lord must despise me; they who
revile His teachings must hold my opinions in utter scorn;
but if my brethren fall away, they will blight my hope of our
yet tender Church, and inflict a wound on my heart which I
know I will carry with me to the grave. Moderator, I move
the adoption of the report, and the following deliverance :
“ That the Assembly approve generally of the report, dis-
miss the overture, and declare the continued adherence of this
church to the doctrine of- Scripture, as stated in the twenty-
fourth chapter of the Confession of Faith, on the subject of
marriage, and especially of Section iv. of that chapter, as fol-
lows : —‘ Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of consan-
guinity or affinity forbidden in the Word, nor can such inces-
tuous marriages ever be made lawful, by any law of man, or
consent of parties, so as these persons may live together as man
and wife. The man may not marry any of his wife’s kindred
nearer in blood than he may of his own, nor the woman of her
husband’s kindred nearer in blood than of her own.’ Further,
the General Assembly reiterate the warning addressed by last
Commission to the ministers of this church against celebrating,
and to the members of this church against contracting, marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister.”
The Rev. D. S. M'EACHRAN, after making some criticisms
on the speeches of the Revs. A. Robertson and J. Nish, spoke
substantially as follows : The statement in the Confession of
Faith is this, “ A man may marry none of his wife’s kindred
nearer in blood than he may of his own, nor the woman of her
husband’s kindred nearer in blood than of her own. Now I
undertake to prove, in the first place, that that statement is
Scriptural, and in the second place, that it is so important that
it ought to be in the Confession of Faith of a Presbyterian
Church.
My position is that so far as marriage is concerned, affinity
and consanguinity are placed on precisely the same footing in
the Word of God. There can be no doubt that within certain
degrees this is the case. This I consider to be a most important


point in the argument, for I am persuaded that the feeling in
the public mind is that affinity is no bar to marriage. The
leading journal in the colony stated that the other day, and I
am persuaded that that opinion is shared in by many. They
see no harm in a man’s marrying his deceased wife’s sister,
because she is not a blood-relation. Their feeling at bottom is
that there is no harm in a man’s marrying any woman who is
not related to him by blood. But this idea is in direct opposi-
tion to the Scriptures. The Scriptures do not permit a man to
marry any woman who is not a blood relation. There are
parties not related by blood whom a man may not marry. It
will not be denied that in the 18th chapter of Leviticus a man
is forbidden to marry his mother-in-law or his step-mother.
It will not be denied that he is also forbidden to marry his
brother’s wife. (Mr. Nish: I deny that). Very well; it does not
affect my argument at this stage. You will not deny that he is
forbidden to marry his mother-in-law, or his step-mother, and
that is enough for my present purpose. In the 20th chapter
also a man is forbidden to marry his mother-in-law, and his
step-mother. In the 22nd chapter of Deuteronomy a man is
forbidden to marry his father’s wife or his step-mother. Mr.
Nish has referred to the statements of Ezekiel. Very well.
Both Ezekiel and Amos speak of it as one of the flagrant
crimes of Israel that men married their daughters-in-law.
The Evangelists mention it as an aggravation of the sin of
Herod that he married his 1 brother Philip’s wife. His sin was
not simply that he married another man’s wife, but it was that
he married the wife of his own brother. It was not simply
that he was guilty of adultery, but it was that he was guilty of
incestuous adultery. In like manner the Apostle Paul enjoined
the Church at Corinth at once to cast out of their communion
the man who had married his father’s wife, or his stepmother.
And not only so, but he speaks of such a marriage as a species
of uncleanness that was not so much as named among the
Gentiles.* In illustration of this it is usual to refer to Cicero’s
Oration pro Cluentio, where he speaks of a mother-in-law
marrying her son-in-law as a thing incredible and unheard of
in all his life, except in that one instance to which he refers. I
entreat the House carefully to mark these things. The idea
that a man may marry any woman who is not a blood relation is
plainly erroneous. There are, to say the least, some of his wife's
relations whom he may not marry. In other words, to a certain
extent, and within certain degrees, affinity and consanguinity
* In the English version the word used is fornication, but the original word
includes all kinds of uncleanness.


are placed on precisely the same footing as barring marriage.
Within certain degrees affinity is made a bar to marriage.
That is a principle which is recognised in the Prophets as well
as in the Law, and which is recognised in the New Testament
as well as in the Old. Nay, it was a principle which was
recognised by the heathen, Paul speaking of a man’s marrying
his stepmother as a species of uncleanness that was not so
much as named among the Gentiles, and Cicero speaking of the
marriage of a mother-in-law with her son-in-law as a thing
incredible, and that had never before been heard of. It is
plain therefore, I repeat, that, within certain degrees, affinity is
placed on precisely the same footing with consanguinity as a
bar to marriage.
But now I say further, that not only are affinity and con-
sanguinity placed upon the same footing within certain degrees,
but that they are placed upon the same footing in respect of
all the forbidden degrees. They run in parallel lines. The degrees
which are forbidden in the one case are precisely the same
degrees which are forbidden in the other. Thus, is a man for-
bidden in the 18th chapter of Leviticus to marry his mother?
He is also forbidden to marry his stepmother and his mother-
in law. A man is not forbidden to marry his daughter, but
he is forbidden to marry his stepdaughter or his daughter-in
law. Is he forbidden to marry his granddaughter ? He is
also forbidden to marry his grand stepdaughter. Is he
forbidden to marry his aunt ? He is also forbidden to
marry his aunt-in-law. Is he forbidden to marry his sister
or his half-sister ? He is also forbidden to marry his brother’s
wife or his sister-in-law. Now, if there be any principle in
the law of God, if his laws are not arbitrary and capricious,
if they are such as were meant to be understood by his intel-
ligent and rational creatures, then undoubtedly the principle
which pervades the law of marriage as given in Leviticus is
that which is stated in the Confession of Faith when it states,
“ A man may marry none of his wife’s kindred nearer in blood
than he may of his own, nor the woman of her husband’s
kindred nearer in blood than of her own.”
But let me not be misunderstood. Ido not mean that there
is an equal heinousness in all the transgressions of this law.
Some of them, undoubtedly, are more heinous than others.
The law itself makes a distinction between them in this respect.
The punishments that were annexed to them under the Theo-
cracy were different. If a man married his stepmother or his
daughter-in-law, both of them were to be put to death. But
if a man married his aunt-in-law or his brother’s wife, the
punishment was that they should die childless—which Dr.


Hodge supposes to mean that the children of such marriages
should not be enrolled in the family registers which the Jews
were so careful to preserve. It is not meant, therefore, that all
the marriages forbidden in Leviticus are equally heinous or
offensive in the sight of God, but what I assert is that they
are all equally forbidden, and that the forbidden degrees in the
case of affinity are precisely the same as those in the case of
consanguinity.
Let me ask the House to look again at the space that is taken
up by cases of affinity in the law. The general principle
which the law lays down is, that a man may not marry any
that is near of kin to him. Then by way of illustrating what
it means by near of kin, it goes on to give instances of parties
whom a man may not marry. It gives thirteen instances in
all, and the remarkable fact is that seven are instances of those
who are related by marriage, and six are instances of those who
are related by blood. What could more plainly show that
affinity and consanguinity are placed on precisely the same
footing as barring marriage ?
And if anything more were needed to show that this is the
principle which pervades the law, it is to be found in the fact
that there is no broad and marked line of separation drawn be-
tween the two kinds of instances. The cases of consanguinity
are not placed first, and the cases of affinity after them, but they
are actually intermixed with one another. The first instance
is one of consanguinity, and the very next is one of affinity. In
the first verse a man is forbidden to marry his mother, and in
the very next he is forbidden to marry his stepmother: The
two instances are regarded as precisely parallel. I think I have
now established my position that affinity is a bar to marriage
equally with consanguinity.
But let us take up by itself the case of marriage with a de-
ceased wife’s sister, and with regard to that I wish the House
carefully to observe that marriages precisely similar are ex-
plicitly forbidden. Thus a man is expressly forbidden to
marry his brother’s wife. Of course lam aware that, in
certain exceptional circumstances, he was not only at liberty,
but bound to marry her, and with that I will deal by and
bye. But beyond all question the rule is that he was not to
contract such a marriage. Now, if a man was forbidden to
marry his brother’s wife because she was near of kin to him,
and if there is any principle in the Divine law, does it not
follow as a necessary consequence that he is equally forbidden
to marry his wife’s sister ? A brother’s wife and a wife’s sister
stand to him in precisely the same relation. They are both his
sisters-in-law.


Again, a man is forbidden to many his stepdaughter or his
grand stepdaughter; and why ? Because she is his wife’s near
kinswoman ; and further, it is said that to contract such a mar-
riage is wickedness. Now, surely, a wife’s sister is her near kins-
woman as truly as her stepdaughter or her grand-stepdaughter;
and if it be wickedness for a man to marry his stepdaughter or
his grand-stepdaughter because she is his wife’s near kins-
woman, then, by parity of reasoning, it must equally be
wickedness in him to marry his wife’s sister, for she also is his
wife’s near kinswoman. That reasoning is, to my mind, per-
fectly irresistible.
Let us come now to the objections. It may be said that we
have no right to deduce a general principle from the passage in
Leviticus, and that the safe ground for us to take is that all the
marriages which are there expressly mentioned are forbidden, but
no others. That seems to be the position which Mr. Nish takes
up, for he-told us that it was a mere assumption on our part
to suppose that the instances given in the 18th chapter of
Leviticus were regulative specimens designed to show the
degrees of affinity and consanguinity within which marriage
was not to be contracted. But if they are not regulative
specimens, mark what will be the conclusion to which we must
come. A man is not expressly forbidden to marry his daughter,
nor is he expressly forbidden to marry his niece. If then we
are to regard the catalogue in Leviticus as complete; if we are
to regard as forbidden only those marriages which are there
mentioned, then we are landed in this monstrous absurdity,
that a man may marry his daughter or his niece. It is plain,
therefore, that the catalogue of forbidden marriages is not com-
plete or exhaustive, but that only instances are given for the
purpose of showing the degrees, whether of consanguinity or
affinity, within which marriage may not be contracted. From
these instances we are left, as rational beings, to deduce the
general principle. Hence we argue that as a man is forbidden
to marry his mother, so is he also forbidden to marry his
daughter; and as a man is forbidden to marry his aunt, so -is he
also forbidden to marry his niece. In like manner we argue
that as a man is forbidden to marry his brother’s wife, so is he
also forbidden to marry his wife’s sister, and as he is forbidden
to marry his stepdaughter because she is his wife’s near kins-
woman, so he is forbidden to marry his wife’s sister, because
she also is his wife’s near kinswoman.
Let us now come to the objection that the Mosaic code is now
abolished. lam glad to say that the permanent obligation of
the law in the. 18th chapter of Leviticus has not been called in
question by any one here, although Mr. Nish, in his overture.


seems to call it in question when he speaks of the assumed
permanent obligation of the Levitical law. But although no one
here has ventured to call in question the continued obligation
of the law of marriage as laid down in Leviticus, yet as we
know that the public assume it to be abolished, and consider
the views of those who hold by our Standards as the anti-
quated prejudices of narrow and unintelligent minds, I must
deal with it. Now, if the Mosaic law of marriage is abolished,
I ask you to observe what will be the result. It is the doc-
trine of all Protestants that the Word of God is a perfect rule
of duty. Nothing is binding on the conscience but what is
commanded therein, and nothing is sin but what is forbidden
therein. The light of nature is all gathered up in the light of
revelation. We shall be judged, not by the light of nature,
but by the written law. If, then, the Mosaic law of marriage
is abolished, what follows ? It follows, as a necessary conse-
quence, that a man may marry whom he pleases without sin.
He may marry his daughter-in-law without sin. ' He may
marry his mother-in-law without sin. Nay, he may marry his
own daughter or his own mother without sin. He may do so,
I say, if the Mosaic law of marriage is abolished, because
nowhere else in the Bible are such marriages forbidden, and
“where no law is there is no transgression.” They, therefore,
who say that the law of marriage as given by Moses is
abolished, must see that the position which they take up is
wholly untenable. It will lead them much further than they
wish to go. It 'will prove not simply that it is lawful for a
man to marry his wife’s sister, but it will prove equally that it
is lawful for a man to marry his own sister. If the Mosaic
law of marriage is abolished, there is nothing in the Word of
God to forbid that. The argument, therefore, proves too much,
and, proving too much, it proves nothing at all.
But it is altogether a mistake to suppose that the law of
marriage as given by Moses is abolished. No one will contend
that the whole legislation of Moses is abolished. The ten
commandments were part of the legislation of Moses, and no
one will say that these are abolished. What was local and
temporary, shadowy and typical, in his legislation, has been
abolished; but what was moral and universal in its nature has
not been abolished. Only that has passed away which has
been fulfilled. The sacrifices have been abolished, because they
have found their fulfilment in the perfect sacrifice of Christ.
The Theocracy has been abolished, because it has been merged
in the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, who now sits upon
the throne of David. And the temporal punishments for
ofiences under the Theocracy have been abolished, partly because


they were adapted to Israel’s peculiar circumstances, and partly
because the far greater punishments of eternity have now
been brought into the foreground. These parts of the legisla-
tion of -Moses have been abolished because they were local and
shadowy in their nature. But the law of marriage is neither
local nor shadowy in its nature; and the ground of the prohi-
bition (nearness of kin) has nothing Jewish in it, but applies
universally. It applies, not to the Jews only, but to all men.
It applies, not to one age, but to every age; and it is not a
type or shadow which has found its fulfilment in the higher
and better things of the gospel.
That the law was meant to apply, not to the Jews only, but
to all men, is plain, not only from its own nature, but also
from the reasons by which it is enforced. God prefaces it by
saying, “ After the doings of the land of Egypt wherein ye
dwell shall ye not do, and after the doings of the land of
Canaan whither I bring you shall ye not do; neither shall ye
walk in their ordinances.” In like manner he follows it up by
saying, “ Defile not yourselves in any of these, for in all these
are the nations defiled; therefore Ido visit the iniquity thereof
upon it, and the land itself vomiteth forth its inhabitants. Ye
shall therefore keep my statutes and judgments, and shall not
commit any of these abominations —that the land spue you
not out also when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that
were before you.” Who can read such words as these, and
imagine that this law was intended only for the Jews ? The
marriages here forbidden were sinful before the Mosaic code
was given. They are not marriages that were sinful only in
the Jews under the Theocracy. They were sinful in the
heathen. They were sinful in the Egyptians and Canaanites,
and on account of these and other abominations God cast the
Canaanites out of the land. Through the light of nature, or,
as I think, through the light of revelation handed down by
tradition, the heathen knew such connections to be wrong.
And if they were wrong in the heathen, they cannot be right
in us. What is wrong in the heathen cannot be right in
Christians.
Moreover, the New Testament recognises the continued
obligation of the Mosaic law in respect of this matter. We
have already seen that the special aggravation of Herod’s sin
was not simply that he had married another man’s wife, but
that that other man whose wife he married was his own
brother; but how could this be an aggravation of his sin,
except on the supposition that there was a law forbidding a
man to marry his brother’s wife ? Again, the apostle Paul, as
we have seen, expresses his amazement that the Church at


Corinth should allow a man who had married his stepmother
to remain in their communion, and he speaks of that as a
species of uncleanness that was not so much as named among
the Gentiles. But whence their superior light ? Why should
they know better than the heathen the sinfulness of such a
connection ? Simply because, in embracing Christianity, they
were introduced to those Scriptures which contained the law
of Moses explicitly forbidding such connections. The apostle
thus recognises the continued obligation of that law.
In short, the arguments in favor of the continued obligation
of the Mosaic code are so conclusive that, with the exception of
a few men here and there, its continued obligation has ever
been acknowledged by the whole Christain Church.
Let us come now to the objection taken from the Levirate
law. That law enjoined a man to marry his brother’s wife, if his
brother died childless. We are asked, therefore, if it was law-
ful for a man in certain circumstances to marry his brother’s
wife, how can it be unlawful for a man to marry his wife’s
sister ? Now this objection goes further than those who use it
intend. It goes to impeach the wisdom of God. It goes to
accuse God of contradicting himself, and of giving at one and
the same time laws that were in direct opposition to each
other. In the 18th chapter of Leviticus God expressly forbids a
man to marry his brother’s wife. In Deuteronomy he enjoins
him to marry his brother’s wife in certain circumstances. These
two commands cannot be in opposition to each other, else
God must have given two contradictory laws at one and the
same time. As Mr. Bobertson has very well shown, the right
way of viewing the matter is this: In Leviticus we have the
general law. In Deuteronomy we have one exception to that
law. This may be illustrated by the Sabbath to which Mr.
Nish has referred. The 4th commandment is, “ Thou shall do
no work on the Sabbath day'’; yet the priests profaned the
Sabbath in the Temple, and were blameless. The rule is
that no work is to be done on the Sabbath day, but there is an
exception to that rule in respect of the work that is necessary
for conducting the worship of God. So the general law was that
a man might not marry his brother’s wife, but in the case sup-
posed, that law did not come into operation. The regulation
in Deuteronomy was simply an exception to the general rule,
and not only was it an exception, but it was purely Jewish
and temporary in its nature, designed probably to prevent the
alienation of the inheritance from the family. But as the
Jewish law is now abolished, that regulation is abolished with
it; and the general rule which was applicable to all men comes into
play, and admits of no exception whatever. The exception, be-


•sides, while it existed, only strengthened the rule. What it
said was —“ In one particular case you may, and indeed
ought, to marry your brother’s wife, but in no other case may
you do so.”
But some of our friends have a difficulty with respect to this
Levirate law on another account. They say, “ How can that
be unlawful which God once enjoined ? Morality never changes.
Right is always right, and wrong is always wrong. What is
right at one time cannot be wrong at another ? What is tole-
rated, nay, commanded, at one time cannot be sin at another.
What is not inconsistent with piety in one age cannot be in-
consistent with piety in another. Now it is true that the
essential principles of morals never change, and in a certain
sense, and within certain limits, what is right at one time
cannot be wrong at another. But these maxims, so true in
themselves, are altogether misleading when applied to the law
of marriage; for the law of marriage has changed, and that
not in the way of being made more lax, but in the way of
being made more stringent as the ages have rolled on. Things
were permitted in former times which are not permitted now.
In the early days of the world brothers and sisters must have
married. No one would say that it would be lawful for bro-
thers and sisters to marry now. In former times polygamy
was winked at, or tolerated. No one will say that polygamy
is tolerated now. Abraham, the father of the faithful, married
his half-sister. No one will say that it would be lawful for a
man to marry his half sister now. Jacob married two sisters
at the same time. No one will say that it would be lawful for
a man to marry two sisters at the same time now. David, the
man after God’s own heart, lived in polygamy. No one will
say that a man can be a Christian who lives in polygamy now.
It will not do, then, to apply to the case of marriage the
general principle that, morality being unchangeable, what was
right in one age cannot be wrong in another; for, in point of fact,
we see that many things which were lawful in respect of mar-
riage formerly, are not lawful now. The truth is that the law
of marriage is regulated by the revealed will of God, and what
we have to do is simply to ascertain what is the revealed will
of God with regard to this matter; and if, as the ages have
rolled on, it has pleased God to make the law of marriage more
stringent, that thus he might throw a greater shield over
domestic purity, it is ours to bow in adoring and grateful
submission to his will.
I come now to the famous 18th "Terse. “ Thou shalt not take
a wife to her sister to vex her, to uncover her nakedness beside
the other in her life.” Some of our friends who are in favour of


marriage with a deceased wife’s sister rest their case on this
verse. They admit the general principle that a man may not
marry any of his wife’s kindred nearer in blood than.he may
of his own; but they hold that this verse makes an exception
in favor of a deceased wife’s sister. In support of this view,
they lay great stress on the expression “in her life.’ Inasmuch
as a man was forbidden to take a wife to her sister in her life,
they argue that that implies that he might lawfully take her
after her death.
Now with reference to this I have to observe, in the first
place, that it is, to say the very doubtful and uncertain
inference. It makes the expression, in her life, to bear a great
deal. It builds a great conclusion on a very slender foundation.
Were we to interpret other passages of Scripture in this way,
we should arrive at very strange conclusions. It is said, for
example, that a bishop must be the husband of one wife. Does
that mean that other Christians might have more wives than
one, provided they did not aspire to be bishops ? It is said,
“ Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.” Does
that mean that when the days of our youth are over we are at
liberty to forget him ? Such expressions may not be stretched
too far, else we shall land in the most absurd and ridiculous
conclusions. And yet, be it observed, the doubtful expression
in her life” is the sole scripture argument in favor of marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister. Now set over against that the
fact that the law sets out with the principle that a man may
not marry any that is near of kin to him, and that his near of
kin is explained by the instances that are given to mean any
who are nearly related to him whether by marriage or by blood;
set over against it,too, the fact that a man is expressly forbidden
to marry his brother’s wife, as one who is near of kin to him;
set over against it, moreover, the fact that he is forbidden to
marry his stepdaughter, or his grand-stepdaughter, because
she is his wife’s near kinswoman: and I ask, is the doubtful
expression “in her life,” sufficient to outweigh all these con-
siderations on the other side ? After laying down "'in the
beginning of the chapter the principle that a man may not
marry any who is near of kin, whether by marriage or by blood,
is it to be supposed that, at the end of it, God should proceed to
overturn the principle with which he set out, and which he
gave as the basis of the law. After explicitly forbidding a man
to marry his brother’s wife, because she was near of kin to him,
is it to be supposed that in the next sentence lie should give
him permission to marry his wife’s sister, who is equally near
of kin to him ? After forbidding a man to marry his step-
daughter, or his grand stepdaughter, because she is his wife’s


near kinswoman, is it to be supposed that in the next sentence
he should give him permission to marry his wife’s sister, who
is his wife’s near kinswoman, as truly as her daughter or her
grand-daughter ? And observe, the evidence for this is not an
explicit statement, but an inference drawn from a doubtful clause
in a verse the object of which is to prohibit certain marriages.
And that, I repeat, is the sole scripture argument in favour of
marriage with a deceased wife’s sister.
But I go further, and maintain that the verse in question is
not relevant. I hold that it has no bearing on the subject under
discussion. I consider that it is a new subject which is here
introduced. Dr. Cairns seems to prefer the marginal reading,
“ one w if e f 0 another.’' I accept the reading in the text. (Ironical
cheers.) Of course there must be liberty of interpretation. (Re-
newed ironical cheers.) Who ever denied that ? What we say
is that we should be honest men. No man should subscribe
standards which he does not believe. Now I did not mean to
say that, but you have drawn it from me. But what I was
going to say, when I was interrupted, is that it matters not which
rendering we adopt; in either case the verse is irrelevant. It
we take the marginal rendering, one wife to another, then the
verse is simply a prohibition of polygamy, and has nothing to
do with marriage with a deceased wife’s sister. If we adopt
the rendering in the text, “ A wife to her sister in her life,” it
is a restriction of polygamy. It assumes that a man might
marry more wives than one; but if he did so, it forbade him to
marry two sisters; and the expression, “ in her life,” comes in
to make it manifest that it is polygamy which the sacred
writer has in view, or the man’s taking a second wife during the
lifetime of his first wife. What it says is, “If you take another
woman to be your wife during your wife’s lifetime, she may
not be your wife’s sister.” That seems to me to be the plain
meaning of the verse. It simply says, “ A man may not marry
two sisters at the same time.” If he has two wives, they may
not be two sisters; and it is supposed that this limitation is
here introduced because Jacob married two sisters, and the
people might be in danger of being misled by his example.
But more than that. This limitation of polygamy is based
on a ground which is entirely in keeping with the principle of
the marriage law. As this verse is usually quoted, an important
part ot it is left out. It is quoted as though it were, “ Thou
shalt not take a wife to her sister to vex her beside the other,
in her life.” But that is not the whole of it. Given in full,
the verse runs, “ Thou shalt not take a wife to her sister to
vex her, to uncover her nakedness beside the other in her
life. Now, as Dr. Cameron has shown in his pamphlet, the


expression “ to uncover her nakedness” has always a definite
meaning in the Word of God. It is never used with
regard to lawful marriage. It is never used with regard to
fornication, and it is never even used with regard to adultery.
It is always used to denote marriage within the forbidden
degrees. (No, no, from Mr. Nish). I know that it is used in
other senses, but wherever used it always denotes something
vile, foul, abominable. And what I say is that, when used
with regard to marriage, it always denotes incestuous marriage.
Now, the reason why a man might not take his wife’s sister
is thus seen to be in keeping with the whole law. It is not
simply that he would vex his wife by so doing; for it does not
appear that it a man was to have two wives, two sisters would
not get on as peaceably and amicably as two strangers. Though
Rachel and Leah had their strifes, yet they seem to have got
on better than did Hannah and Peninnah. If a man, therefore,,
were to have two wives, then, as far as peace was concerned,
he might as well have two sisters as two strangers. The reason
why he should not marry his wife’s sister was not simply that
by so doing he would vex her, but that he would vex her by
forming an incestuous connection. And I put it to yourselves
if you do not feel the force of that reason. If a man were
now to marry two wives, you feel that that would be bad
enough; but if he were to marry two sisters at the same time,
do not you feel that that would be shocking ? And why ?
Because in that case he should be guilty, not only of bigamy,
but of incest as well. It seems to you shocking that a man
should marry two sisters at the same time, simply because
they are so nearly related to each other.
And thus this passage, which is usually quoted as a conclu-
sive argument in favour of marriage with a deceased wife’s
sister, when rightly understood, points altogether the other
way. A man might not marry his wife’s sister in her life,
because that were to form an incestuous connection; and if it
is not lawful to form such a connection during a wife’s life, so
neither is it lawful to form it after her death. An incestuous
connection is never lawful whether in a wife’s life or after her
death.
So much for the scripturalness of the statement in the
Confession. I come now to the second point—that this state-
ment is so important that it ought to be in the Confession of a
Presbyterian Church.
I wish the House to observe that the question which is
raised by Mr. Nish’s overture is not whether a man may law-
fully marry his deceased wife’s sister or no. It is a much
wider and graver question than that. The question with


which we have now to do is, whether we are to change our
standards —those standards which we have all subscribed, and
which we have all sworn to defend and maintain. It is
whether we are to expunge from the Confession the doctrine
which it lays down with regard to the degrees of affinity
which bar marriage, when it says that “ a man may not marry
any of his wife’s kindred nearer in blood than he may of-his
own, nor the woman of her husband’s kindred nearer in blood
than of her own.” The question, I say, now before us is
whether we are to expunge that doctrine from the Confession,
and to do so simply because the Legislature of this colony,
which has a population not much larger than that of Glasgow,
has passed an Act which legalises marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister. In other words, the question which is raised by
the overture is, whether this Church is to have any creed or
to bear any testimony with regard to the relationships which
bar marriage, or whether this Church is virtually to declare
that the Word of God lays down no law upon the subject, and
that, so far as the Word of God—the only infallible rule of
faith and conduct—is concerned, a man may marry any of his
relations, even his nearest, without sin.
That is the grave and solemn question which is now before
us, and I venture to say that a graver and more solemn ques-
tion this Church has never yet had to deal with. Ido trust
that members of this Assembly will realise the gravity of the
position in which some of our brethren have seen fit to place
us, and that they will think twice before they give their assent
to views of so sweeping and revolutionary a character.
For my part, I am utterly opposed to the change of the
standards which is proposed, and for the following reasons;—
In the first place, the doctrine which the Confession lays
down upon the subject has not been proved to be unscriptural.
I have endeavoured, along with others, to prove it to be scrip-
tural. But I put the matter differently now, and I say that it
has not been proved to be unscriptural. I admit, in the ab-
stract, the right of the Church to revise her Confession, but I
think that such a work ought to be gone about gravely,
solemnly, and with much deliberation and earnest prayer. I
think the subject has been treated hitherto with a most un-
becoming levity ; ministers writing letters to the newspapers
about it, instead of discussing it gravely in the Church Courts.
I admit too, nay, I hold strongly, that when a Church is con-
vinced that any part of he* standards is unscriptural, she ought
at once to expunge that part. No man should subscribe standards
which he does not believe; and ministers, of all men, should
stand out before the world as men of unimpeachable honor and


integrity. I admit, therefore, that if the doctrine in the Con-
fession with regard to the subject in question can be proved to
be unscriptural, we ought forthwith to expunge it from the
Confession ; and thus all the grand arguments of our brethren,
with regard to councils erring, and so forth, at once fall to the
ground. What our brethren require to prove is, that the state-
ment in the Confession is unscriptural, and that is what they have
utterly failed to do. In his overture, Mr. Nish speaks of the
assumed permanent obligation of the 18th chapter of Levjticus,
but he has not proved that it is not of permanent obligation;
instead of that, he seemed to arrive, in his speech, at the very
conclusion stated in the Confession, though in a different way
from that in which we arrive at it. I see no reason, therefore,
for expunging the statement in the Confession on the ground
of its unscripturalness.
But, further, I hold that we ought not to expunge or change
the statement in the Confession, because it is a statement of
such' exceeding practical importance that it ought to be in the
Confession of a Presbyterian Church. I say a Presbyterian
Church, as distinguished from an Independent Church, for the
Independents are not a united body. Of course Ido not hold
that everything which we believe to be scriptural ought to be
in the Confession. There are small matters which ought not
to be in the Confession, but this is not one of these matters.
This is a matter of extreme importance, and one with regard
to which the Church ought to have a creed, or to bear a testi-
mony. The question of marriage with a deceased wife’s sister
is a comparatively small one, if it could bo, taken alone and
apart from the principle which underlies it. But it cannot be
so taken. I must be allowed to remind the House that the
question before us is not whether a man may marry his
deceased wife’s sister, but it is whether a Presbyterian Church
like ours ought to give forth any sound or testimony with
regard to the relationships which bar marriage. Are we, as a
Church, to say that there is no law of marriage in the Bible,
or, if there is, that it is so obscure and so difficult to find out
that no man can tell what it is ? Are we, as a Church, to tell
the community that, for aught we know, a man may marry
any one who is not a blood relation ? Are we to tell them
that a man may marry his stepmother if he please, although
the apostle Paul commanded the Corinthian Church to deliver
over to Satan the man who did so? Are we to say that we are
altogether in the mist with regard to the question what mar-
riages are lawful and what are not ? When our people ask us,
ns they have a right to do, “ Is such and such a marriage law-
ful ?” are we to say to them, “ Really we are not sure, you


must be guided by your own judgment.” Surely that is not
an attitude which a Church like ours should take up. What
are we for, as a Church, but to bear witness to the truth? and
what are we for, as a Presbyterian Church, but to bear a united
witness to the truth ? And surely we must be very poor
witnesses if we have no witness to bear with regard to a
matter of such vital importance as this.
Sir, for my part, I hold that this is a matter of such extreme
importance in a moral point of view, that this Church ought
to give forth a certain sound with regard to it. It is of far
more importance than some other things which are in the
Confession, and which we admit ought to be in it. I hold, for
example, that it is of far more importance than the question of
infant baptism. I would be prepared to unite with Calvinistic
Baptists any day were it not that the small point in which we
differ presents a practical difficulty in the way of our working
together. It is of more importance than the question of Pres-
byterian Church government; and if these matters should be
in the Confession, much more should this.
This is a question that cuts dee'p. It goes down to the very
foundations of morality. For, as all history shows, lax views
with regard to marriage are the inlet for every abomination.
Admit a wrong principle on this subject, and you cannot stop.
It will carry you further than you intend. Inexorable logic
will compel you to go through with it, and you know not
where you will end. It will lead to endless confusions and
abominations. And surely it is the duty of a Church like ours
to speak with one voice with regard to a matter which is
fraught with such momentous consequences.
In his overture, Mr. Nish seems to say that none but matters
that are essential should be in the Confession. Is Mr. Nish
prepared to carry out that view? Is he prepared to expunge
from the Confession everything that is not essential to salva-
tion ? If so, he will have to expunge from it a good deal more
than he proposes to expunge from it at present. Will Mr. Nish,
for example, call the doctrine of infant baptism an essential
matter ? If not, is he prepared to expunge it ? Will he call
the doctrine of Presbyterian Church government an essential
matter ? If not, is he prepared to expunge it ? Will he even
call the doctrines which the Confession teaches with regard to
election and the perseverance of the saints, essential matters ?
If not, is he prepared to expunge them ? If everything but
the minimum of truth which is essential to salvation is to be
expunged from the Confession, we shall have the Confession
reduced to very small dimensions indeed.
In his overture, Mr. Nish states that all questions, especially


of positive morality, in regard to which the teaching of Scrip-
ture is neither direct nor explicit, ought to be open questions.
Does Mr. Nish hold that the teaching of Scripture with regard
to the doctrine of the Confession in respect of the relationships
which bar marriage is neither direct nor explicit, and that it
therefore ought to be made an open question ? If so, he must
hold that marriage with a stepmother should be an open ques-
tion, and thus he comes into direct collision with the apostle
Paul, who enjoined the Church at Corinth at once to cast out
of their communion the man who formed such a connection.
Again, Mr. Nish, in his overture, says that the doctrine of
the Confession on this subject should not be made a term of
communion—of ministerial communion, I suppose—for mem-
bers of our Church are not required to sign our standards; we
admit to the Lord s table all who make a credible profession of
their faith in Christ. Well, he says this should not be made a
term of communion, because it is a generalised statement of
what the compilers believed to be in the bible on the subject.
Now, I am very much astonished that a man like Mr. Nish
should have penned such a sentence. His overture must have
been very hastily drawn up. (No, from Mr. Nish.) He has
had a good deal of time to think about it since he drew it up,
but the overture itself bears the marks of having been drawn
up in great haste. Is not everything in the Confession a gene-
ralised statement of the views of the compilers with regard
to the teaching of scripture ? But what I wish the House
specially to observe is, that the Confession serves a twofold
purpose. It is a testimony as well as a test, and its primary
object was to be a testimony. All the Confessions that I know
of were drawn up in the first instance for the purpose of
showing to the world the truths which the Church believed.
Even Calvin’s Institutes were first drawn up with that view ;
and here let me say that Mr. Nish was right in what he said
about Calvin, only he did not make it clear enough that Calvin
held our view. What I have just said with regard to Confes-
sions in general, was especially true in regard to the West-
minster Confession. That Confession was drawn up as articles
of peace; the object of it was that the Churches of Great
Britain and Ireland should present a united testimony to the
world with regard to the points on which they were agreed.
That was the primary object of the drawing up of the Confes-
sion. Its being made a test was a secondary use; and the
Church was warranted in applying it to that use, because she
is enjoined to commit the deposit she has received to faithful
men able to teach others also. But be it observed that its first
use was that of a testimony, and what I say is, that I am not


willing to obliterate from the testimony of this Church the
statement in the Confession touching the relationships which
bar marriage. Nay, more, lam not willing to regard it as no
longer binding on our ministers and office-bearers, because the
consequence of that would be that though a man married his
stepmother, we should not be able to exercise discipline upon
him. We could not do so, because we should have expunged
from the Confession the only statement which declares such a
marriage to be unlawful.
Again, I am opposed to the change of our standards because
that would change our relations with all Presbyterian Churches-
in the world. There is not a Presbyterian Church in the
world, that I know of, but abides by the teaching of the
Confession of Faith on the point in question. The great
Presbyterian Church of America, notwithstanding the dif-
ficulties with which it is surrounded, by reason of the loose
state of the civil law with regard to marriage, has never
deviated from the standards. Attempts have been made once
and again to change them, but without success, and one of
the ablest defenders of the doctrine of the Confession is the
venerable Dr. Hodge, of Princeton. Then, all the Presbyterian
Churches in England, Scotland, and Ireland are unanimous in
adhering to the teaching of the Confession on this point. The
United Presbyterian Church is as firm in her adherence to the
standards as the Free Church; Dr. Cairns has fully proved
that. So strong and decided are the views of all the Churches
at home on this point, that were we to make the question an
open one, the probability is that they would repudiate us, and
neither send ministers to us nor receive ministers from us.
Now, for my part, I am not willing thus to be severed from the
home Churches, and from the Presbyterian Church through-
out the world.
But further, I am opposed to the proposed change because
of the circumstances in which the proposal is made. During
all these years our brethren have been quite satisfied with the
teaching of the Confession; at all events, they have never
hinted their dissatisfaction; they have never asked a change.
Year after year, the Assembly has petitioned the Legislature
against the bill for legalising marriage with a deceased wife’s
sister, and they never objected. But as soon as the Legislature
has passed the bill, against which they petitioned year
after year, lo ! they begin to agitate for a change of the
standards. Now, would that be worthy of us as a Church ?
Is the Church to have no convictions ? or are our convictions
to be regulated by the Legislature ? Are we willing to be held
up to the world as men who have one view when the law is on


our side, and another view as soon as the law comes to be
against us ? For my part, I do not find it so easy to change my
convictions, and so firm are my convictions on the point under
discussion, that instead of saying with the Legislature, I con-
sider that it is our duty to bear witness to the Legislature as
to what we believe to be the will of God on this subject. We
must place ourselves in a most humiliating position, and render
ourselves contemptible in the eyes of the whole community, if
we change our standards simply because the Legislature has
passed an Act in opposition to them. But whether men agree
with us or no, they cannot but regard us with respect if we
quietly and calmly adhere to v;hat we believe to be the teach-
ing of Scripture.
Finally, I am opposed to any change of the standards, in the
interests of peace. We are for peace. We feel aggrieved that
this matter is brought up at this time, and that we are not
allowed to prosecute our work in peace. We feel aggrieved
that our attention is distracted with this question, and that
our time and strength are occupied with it when they ought
rather to be spent in seeking the salvation of a perishing
world. When God in his Providence brings a difficulty before
us, we must face it, but we feel aggrieved that our brethren
should make that difficulty. We do not wish to bear
hard upon them, or to push them into a corner. We do not
want to make any change in the Confession of Faith. We
simply want it to remain as it is. Our brethren cannot justly
complain that that aggrieves their consciences. If their con-
sciences have not been aggrieved by the statement in the
Confession for so many years, I do not see how they can be
aggrieved by it now. Surely they might allow things to
remain as they are. But if not, if they are determined to
insist on a change, then we who approve of the Confession as
cordially as the day we signed it, and who are determined, God
helping us, to the utmost of our power to assert, defend, and
maintain the same—we, I say, must resist them, and on them
must lie all the responsibility of the dispeace and strife, and
whatever other consequences may follow. But by the love
which they bear to the Church, by the love which they bear to
her unity, by their desire for her usefulness, and by the need
which exists for her uniting all her energies against the
ungodliness and infidelity and vice by which we are sur-
rounded, I entreat them to pause before they force on such a
crisis.
The Bev. T. M'KENZIE FRASER said : It is with consider-
able diffidence that I rise to take any share in this discussion


and for this simple reason, that I have been a long time in
making up my mind on the subject; for while I never adopted
the very decided views of the opposite party, it was long before
I could see my way to any clear principle which regulated the
degrees of affinity within which marriage was unlawful. It
may have been from indolence, or from an indisposition to
trouble myself with what I thought a paltry question of Old
Testament ethics, or because I was not compelled to look the
subject in the face as one which would ever practically affect
myself; but at all events I put off the evil day as long as pos-
sible, and relegated the whole matter to the category of the
nugce difficiles of Scripture, while my secret sympathies were
all the time with the broad and liberal party. When I was a
very young man, only twenty-three years of age, I signed the
Confession in perfect honesty, believing in the doctrine of the
24th chapter; it was only after coming to this colony, about
twelve years ago, that any doubts as to the soundness of my
convictions arose in my mind. These doubts were originated
by that famous passage in the Daily Scripture Readings of one
whom I had venerated as a theologian, and almost worshipped
as an instructor, and dearly loved as a friend. Even when I
signed the petition against the Bill which was then before the
Legislature, I did so with considerable misgivings; but I
relieved my conscience with the reflection that I was simply
signing it as Moderator of the Assembly, and as the official
representative of this Church. At the same time my doubts
never became convictions; I was simply in the position of a
man who could not make up his mind on either side. I kept
these doubts to myself, however, or only mentioned them to a
few friends. It was only within the last two years, more
especially since last Assembly, that I began seriously to
grapple with the subject, and the result has been that, against
my prejudices and secret leanings to the side of liberality, I
am compelled to acknowledge that the Scripture upholds the
doctrine of the Confession and bars marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister. I shall not trouble the House with a recapitu-
lation of the different steps or stages by which I was led to
this conclusion, for that would be to plunge at once into
the merits of the case, and into these I do not intend to
enter. Mr. Nish’s argument was put with great ingenuity
and power from his own point of view; and I confess
that it is the most telling that I have ever heard on
that side of the question. But let me ask those on the
opposite side whether they pledge themselves to Mr. Nish’s
views ? Are they prepared to adopt his argument, and
to stand or fall with it ? If not, they are Mr. Nish’s view


simply, and not those of a party in this Church. If they are so
prepared, then, ingeniously as their position is constructed, it
will not stand a moment. For, in the first place, if good for
anything, it amounts to this—that there is no such thing as a
marriage law in Scripture. The 18th chapter of Leviticus is the
only authoritative guide in existence as to the forbidden
degrees; it has been received as such for nineteen, nay for
thirty, centuries; the old Hebrew Church acknowledged it as
its marriage law; so that if it be not binding on the Christian
conscience, there is positively no law upon the subject, and
God has given us no regulations at all upon the closest, the
dearest, the most important relationship of life. But if it can be
shown that a marriage law exists, and that the New Testament
actually appeals to it, then the whole of Mr. Nish’s ingeniously
constructed fabric falls to the ground. Now what says the
New Testament? “It is not lawful for thee to have her,”
says John the Baptist to Herod, “ because she is thy brother’s
wife.” Mr. Nish maintains that this was a case of adultery and
not of incest, since Philip was still living while Herod married
Herodias. I grant the premises, but I deny the conclusion.
For the fact is, as I was reminded a short time ago by Mr.
Henderson, of Ballarat, that Philip was a divorced man: the
marriage had been dissolved ; so that the subsequent marriage
of Herod with Herodias was no adultery, notwithstanding the
life of her former husband. It was not because Herod had
married a divorced woman during the life of her husband, but
because that woman had been his brother’s wife, that John
declared the marriage unlawful; in short, it was not a case of
adultery, but a case of incest. The same consideration applies
to the incestuous marriage of a man with his mother-in-law,
referred to in the Epistle to the Corinthians. Granting that
the man’s father was alive, yet when we consider the facility
with which divorces were obtained in Greece, there can be no
doubt that he too was a divorced man. The woman was free
to marry any other man even during the lifetime of her former
husband; it was her marriage with her stepson that constituted
it no marriage, but fornication of so deep a dye that it was
unknown even amid the lax morality of Greece. In fact, the
phrase ex eiy ywauca never occurs except in connection with
marriage; it never denotes adulterous connection; it always
signifies to marry. Here, then, we have the Old Testament
law of prohibited degrees appealed to in the New Testament;
and as that law occurs nowhere else than in the 18th chapter
of Leviticus, the conclusion is that that was the marriage law
of the Hebrews, and is still the marriage law of the Christian
Church. So that the ingenious argument of Mr. Nish, deprived


of its very foundation, falls in a moment to the ground. But
passing from this I shall simply state how it was that I
found myself forced to grapple with the question as a
matter of Christian ethics. I was one night reading my
Bible in my study, when I came upon the passage, “ Who-
soever shall break one of the least of these commandments,
and shall teach men so, the same shall be called least in
the kingdom of heaven.” It immediately flashed upon my
mind that as a teacher of divine truth I was not prepared
to guide my people in regard to what had hitherto appeared
to me one of the least of the commandments, or to avow
my convictions on what might turn out to be a distress-
ing question of casuistry, marriage within the prohibited
degrees. Was the doctrine of the Confession right or wrong ?
Had it laid a yoke on the necks of the brethren which they
were not able to bear ? Had we been making the heart of the
righteous sad, whom God had not made sad ? Or were such
marriages really incestous, and was I in danger of strengthen-
ing the wicked in his wicked ways by promising him life ?
Forthwith it lay upon my conscience to study this question ;
and though I laboured, like most of my colonial brethren, under
the disadvantage of a defective literature, yet by a diligent
study of the Scriptures, the only authority on the law of incest,
and of such other works as I could procure, I was constrained
to arrive at the result which I have just stated—that these
marriages are incestuous, that those who contract them are
living in sin, and that those ministers who celebrate them are
aiding and abetting sin. I may be told that I ought to be more
choice and careful in my language regarding brethren who have
passed through the same doubts as my own, but whose
inquiries have led them to a different result, and that my own
difficulties ought to have taught me toleration and charity
towards those who differ from me. Well, Sir, I must speak
according to my own convictions as to what is sinful; I must
call a spade a spade; and as to the exercise of charity, I
am quite willing to extend it to the utmost limits of the
Christian law of love. That law says to me—“ Whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.”
I am quite willing to have my vote judged by the standard of
that law. It requires me to extend to my brethren the same
charity and forbearance as I myself should claim were I in
their circumstances. Well, Sir, I was once in their circum-
stances, or in a position pretty near their own: and what
amount of toleration did I expect or wish for ? In the first
place, I never should have expected that the Church would
alter its standards to meet my views. On the contrary, as


government by majorities is an essential element of Presby-
terianism, I should have accepted it as a matter of course that
until I could bring a majority into harmony with my senti-
ments, the Church must hold by its standards in all their integ-
rity. Next, I should never have dreamed for a single moment
of carrying my views into practical effect by celebrating such
marriages, nor should I have expected to be tolerated if I did
so; on the contrary, belonging to a Church whose standards
condemned these marriages, I should have expected that dis-
cipline would be exercised upon me for violating its laws.
And it would not do for me to plead that according to my con-
scientious convictions the law was wrong. Every poacher may
do the same of the Game Laws of England. It is my duty to
submit to the law till I can succeed in getting it changed.
Presbyterianism is constitutional government, not anarchy;
and until our brethren on the opposite side can get a majority
of the Church in their favour, it will not do for them to ask for
toleration while they violate our standards. They tell us that
they don’t want an alteration of the standards, but a declaratory
act proclaiming this question a matter of forbearance. I con-
fess that I should admire and respect them far more if they
adopted the other and more manly alternative; if they came
boldly forward and said—■“ Brethren, our consciences are ag-
grieved by this clause in the Confession; it lays an intolerable
yoke upon our necks; you are teaching for doctrine the com-
mandments of men; we will do our utmost to convince you
that you are wrong, and we will have this section expunged.”
But what is it that this plea for toleration asks us to do ? It
is to hold the truth in unrighteousness; it is to condemn their
.conduct on the one hand, and to condone it on the other; it is
still to declare in our standards that “ a man may not marry any
of his wife’s kindred nearer than his own,” and yet to tell our
ministers and members that they may do as they like, for we
won’t interfere with them; it is to declare what we believe to be
God’s holy law, and yet to declare that the law may be broken
with impunity. Now this is what I could never have asked
the Church to do for me; and what I could not claim for my-
self I shall not concede to others. What then is the degree of
charity and forbearance which I can conscientiously extend to
those who differ from me on a question of obedience to the
Divine law ? By the golden rule of love, I again say, I am
bound to make to them the concessions which I myself could
claim, but no more. First of all, I should assert my great Pro-
testant birthright of free inqidry and private judgment. I
should not expect to be hunted up for heresy, or persecuted or
prosecuted for an opinion. I should hold by that other great


principle laid down in the Confession, that “ God alone is Lord
of the conscience,” and I should claim that “ to my own Master
I stand or fall.” And I am sure that I should regard this in
itself as a great privilege, that I belonged to a Church where
there was no Inquisition, and which allowed even this latitude
to all its ministers. I should feel at any rate that my ecclesias-
tical judges were guilty of no Popish intolerance, and that in
respect to opinion and sentiment I was a free man. Perhaps
there may be some who would blame me for claiming even
this concession. They may think that the moment a man
begins to diverge from the standards, even by a hair’s breadth,
he is bound to resign his charge, and that if he fails to do so
he is not an honest man. Well, if a majority of my brethren
thought the point of sufficient importance to disqualify me from
being a safe expounder of the Word of God; if it were a point
which affected my general views of doctrine, and materially
modified my views of theology, I should unquestionably regard
it as my duty to dissolve my connection with the denomina-
tion. But unless the point were one of such urgent moment
that I must in conscience carry my views into practical effect;
if I held it merely as a private opinion which did not in any way
affect my teaching of the Word of God; I should regard it as
my duty to maintain my position rather than establish a sepa-
ratist movement for the sake of vindicating my own private
sentiments. I may and do entertain views of geology which
conflict with the statement in the Confession that God created,
or made of nothing, the world and all things therein, in the
space of six days —and I remember a minister or probationer of
the Free Church who actually resigned his connection with it
on geological grounds—but I confess that my conscience is not
sufficiently scrupulous to induce me to set up a Geological
Presbyterian Church. And so with this marriage question.
If, while I entertained those doubts, my brethren thought them
of sufficient importance to justify me in dissolving my connec-
tion with the body, I trust that I should have quietly relin-
quished my position, as one who differed from them on a vital
point. But if they had not thought so —if they thought that I
could still hold office in the Church, notwithstanding my
divergence from their views on this single point of casuistry—
I should hold myself guilty of the sin of schism if I divided
from them on a question on which I was allowed to hold my
own views. Further, if I deemed the question of sufficient
importance to justify me in obtaining an alteration of the
standards; in other words, if I thought my brethren guilty of
sin or grievous error in putting a false interpretation on the
Divine law, I should claim the right of agitating the question in


a fair and legitimate way. I repeat that if my views of duty
were so strong and decided on this point that I could not see
my brethren continue in sin, I should agitate the question in the
Courts of the Church until I succeeded in bringing a majority
of them over to my views. This would be the constitutional
course, justified by all precedent—to submit to the standards so
long as they were the law of the Church, but to use my rights
as a member of the Church Courts for a repeal of the obnoxious
law. Most certainly I should never think of violating the law
so long as it stood upon our statute-book, nor could I ask my
brethren to tolerate me in the violation of a law which they
themselves conscientiously upheld. Well, then, the same mea-
sure of forbearance I am quite willing to extend to our
brethren in the present case. They are at perfect liberty to
agitate this question by all constitutional means. If they feel
themselves aggrieved by the principle which affirms the identity
of consanguinity and affinity, we are not tyrants ; we don’t want
to deprive them of liberty of speech ; we are open to conviction;
and if they can succeed through free discussion in satisfying us
that we are occupying an unscriptural position, I trust there is
not one of us who places the Confession above the Bible, or
would hesitate to accommodate the standards to the fresh
light which had been thrown on revealed truth. But in the
meantime they must obey the law; and the most unconstitu-
tional course they could possibly take is just that which they
have adopted—to ask the Church to tolerate a violation of her
laws. But I think the other would be in the long; run their
wisest course; for if their principles are worth anything, they
are worth carrying through, even though it should cost them
years to accomplish the result. For my own part I should
scorn mere toleration in an exceptional course of action. I
should think myself occupying a most ignoble position were
the Church to proclaim me a breaker of the law, and yet agree
to condone my offences. Yet this is precisely the attitude
which the overture from the Presbytery of Castlemaine asks
our brethren to adopt. It overtures the Assembly that, “ While
declaring, if it sees cause, its disapproval of such marriages, it
shall decline to take any authoritative action in regard to
themin other words, while declaring such marriages to be
incestuous, it shall allow its ministers to celebrate incestuous
marriages and its members to contract them ! Sir, I have seen
O ?
many a reductio ad absurdum in my time, but never any
more complete than this. We are asked to declare if we please
that these marriages are condemned by the holy law of God,
and yet in the same breath to say that we will tolerate what
we have just affirmed to be sin. And are our brethren on


the opposite side really contented to occupy the ignominious
position of tolerated transgressors? (Cries of “No, no.”) I
am glad to hear those cries of “ No,” for I was going to tell
them that this is not the attitude of high and holy principle,
but of miserable time-serving expediency. For my own part,
I would either agitate for an alteration in the law, or I would
not agitate at all. I should be ashamed to look my brethren
in the face if I were not their moral equal, if I were simply in
their eyes a condoned sinner. Of all the overtures that ever
proposed to heap insult on the heads of brethren, this is the
worst. Disapprove of such marriages, if you will, it asks,
uphold the doctrine of the Confession, declare such connexions
incestuous, and the celebration of them participes criminum;
but for certain reasons be pleased to grant them indemnity for
their offences ! No, Sir, the proper constitutional course is to
agitate for an alteration in the standards through the regular
channels; and if they have truth on their side it will ulti-
mately prevail. Victory may be long in coming; many a
brave man has laid the foundations of a struggle of which he
has jiot lived to see the issue—our Great Master Himself died
in the conflict for truth; but better, far better the final
triumph of a great principle, than the immediate success of a
disgraceful compromise which aggrieves one party in the Church
and humiliates the other. Finally, supposing all my constitu-
tional efforts failed, and my conscience were so aggrieved that I
could not refrain from carrying my convictions into practical
effect, what further liberty should I claim ? Liberty to violate
the law of the Church on the plea of conscience ? Toleration
in a course of conduct which the Church Courts adjudged to
be sin? Never. I should not dream of putting my brethren
to the painful necessity of exercising discipline upon me; but
if this question were paramount in my conscience, if I could
not subordinate it to my Presbyterianism or consent to hold it
in abeyance, I should then claim the only other liberty that
remained to me, and honourably retire from a body which was
living in sin and which compelled me to commit sin. And,
separating from the denomination on a point of conscience, I
should claim an unblemished character and a full ministerial
certificate, and I should depart with all the honours of war.
“ And is this all the liberty you are willing to concede us,”
our brethren ask, “ either to submit to what we consider an
unrighteous law, or to leave the Church ?” Ah, Sir, this is
a liberty for which great reformers have been thankful.
Luther was thankful that he could leave the Church of
Rome without being burned as a heretic. Our covenanting fore-
fathers would have been only too thankful to leave the Church


of Scotland, and to preach even on a bleak moor, undisturbed
by the sabres of Claverhouse and the carbines of Lagg. And
our Free Church friends at home were thankful that though
forced to leave the pleasant manses of the establishment on a
point of conscience, they could carry out their principles in
churches of their own. But I have not the slightest fear of a
disruption from the other side on this question. I do not
believe there is a single brother whose convictions are so strong,
and whose sense of his position is so excruciatingly intolerable
that, rather than allow the present state of matters to continue,
he would sacrifice his connexion with the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria. Or if there should be one or two who would become
martyrs to their convictions, are they ready to take the conse-
quences ? Are they prepared to face the home Churches after
seceding on such grounds ? Is Mr. Robertson prepared to meet
the Presbytery of Edinburgh as a refugee from that intolerant
Church in Australia which would not allow him to celebrate
marriages between widowers and their sisters-in-law ? Is Mr.
Cooper prepared to return to the Presbytery of Fordoun with
his pamphlet in his hand? Or is Mr. Duncan Fraser prepared
to go back to the Presbytery of London heralded by the tidings
that he has actually celebrated such a marriage ? Then I ven-
ture to predict, though Mr. Nish says he has no great faith in
uninspired predictions, that they will meet with a remarkably
cool reception. The home Churches will sustain us in our
action, but will they sustain them 1 I affirm that there is not a
Presbytery in England, Scotland, or Ireland that will
induct one of them into a charge until they have cried “ pec-
cavi.” But I have a far higher opinion of their prudence.
I believe that the majority of them will be satisfied
with recording their dissent, and thus saving their con-
sciences ; or if there are one or two whose convictions are so
strong that they are not content with passive resistance, they
will adopt the alternative of a constitutional agitation, and
endeavour to spread their views and obtain a modification of
the standards. * But though I can vouch for them, can they
vouch for us ? Have they the same assurance regarding
us as we have regarding them ? What if the vote of this
day should be in their favour ? Have they contemplated
the consequences of their own success ? I venture to say that
success would be far more disastrous to them than failure.
They could accept their position, but could we accept ours ?
For years, for centuries, they have accepted it. Only one year
ago, when the petition to the Queen was read, it was passed
without a dissenting voice ; and whatever their opinions‘regard-
ing the standards of the Church, they have acquiesced in them


till now. They have subordinated their private views to our
common Presbyterianism; and they would feel it but little
hardship to do so still. But let this Assembly by its vote relax
the holy law of God, and with us it will be an instant matter
for consideration whether we can continue in its connexion.
And then, let me ask our brethren whether they are prepared to
carry put their principles into all their legitimate results?
What is right to celebrate cannot be wrong to contract; what
is lawful for a member of the Church is lawful also for a minis-
ter. Well, suppose one of our ministers not merely celebrating
but actually contracting a marriage with his deceased wife’s sis-
ter ; are our friends on the opposite side prepared to receive him
as a brother, to let him occupy his pulpit, dispense the sacraments,
and sit in the Church Courts ? Or, what is more to the point,
would they expect us to do so ? Then what they would not
expect us to countenance in a minister, how can they expect us
to sanction in their own conduct, since celebration and contract
are only two different degrees of the same thing ? Or suppose
that ten or a dozen of our ministers arrived at the conclusion
that polygamy was lawful, and suppose that the Legislature of
this colony were to legalise it—and let me tell them that the
Scripture law against polygamy is far less stringent and
explicit than against marriage with a deceased wife’s sister—
what would be their attitude towards these brethren if they
came up to the Assembly asking that they might be allowed to
carry their convictions into practical effect ? Would they allow
them to celebrate polygamy ? Would they allow them to con-
tract polygamy? Yet why not? I defy any man in- this
Assembly to prove that polygamy is forbidden, except by that
very inferential reasoning of which the overture from Castle-
maine speaks so contemptuously. When the prophet Malachi
argues the question, he does so on purely inferential reasoning.
Why, he asks, did God create only a single pair when He had
the residue of the spirit ? “ That He might seek a godly seed.
Therefore,” he concludes, “ let none of you deal treacherously
with the wife of his youth.” When Christ wishes to establish
the same truth, he adopts the same inferential reasoning. “ Know
ye not that He who made them in the beginning made them
male and female,” the complete force of which is lost in our
authorised version, for the original expression is apaev kcu drjXv, a
male and a female. In fact, half the teaching of the New Tes-
tament is inferential truth. When Christ proves the
great doctrine of immortality, He does so by a reference
to the celebrated saying, “ I am the God of Abraham, of
Isaac and of Jacob. God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living.” When the Apostle Paul would prove the doctrine


of justification without works, it is by an appeal to Psalm
xxxii, 1,2, and by an inferential conclusion from David’s words.
In fact, the adoption of this clause in the preamble involves a
clear denial of another great principle laid down in the Con-
fession (Ch. I, 5), that revealed truth consists of the explicit
statements of Scripture, or of just and necessary consequences
from them. Have any of our friends on the opposite side
studied the history of Mormonism ? If they have, they can con-
firm my assertion that it was just an adoption of their own
principles as to the distinction between explicit and inferential
truth, which led to their hideous system of polygamy. And let
me assure them that this principle of theirs, if good for any-
thing, is good for a vast deal more than they dream of. It must
be applied to the whole of Scripture, and not merely to one
part of it. They must be prepared to go through with it to the
uttermost; they must apply it to the New Testament as well
as to the Old; they must prove every statement in their ser-
mons, not by a fair and legitimate inference from Scripture, but
by an explicit quotation, or their people will condemn them on
their own principles of hermeneutics. For instance, they protest
against the sin of lying or perjury, and where do they find the
fundamental moral command against it ? In the ninth com-
mandment. “ Pardon me,” says one of their hearers, “ the ninth
commandment only forbids false witness against my neighbour;
by your own principles of interpretation I may bear false wit-
ness in his favour ” Or, do they denounce fornication as for-
bidden in the seventh commandment ? On what grounds ? The
moral law speaks only of adultery; and all other uncleanness
is prohibited, simply as an inference from that law. Or take
any of those sins which are the offspring of modern civilisation;
on what scriptural grounds will they condemn these ? On
purely inferential grounds, which, according to their own prin-
ciples, are not binding on the conscience. Surely our dear
brother (Mr. Nish) cannot have considered the frightful con-
sequences of this principle in the preamble of his overture, or
he would never have proposed it. And it is in vain to say
that these things are forbidden explicitly in other parts of
Scripture, for the New Testament writers founded their exhor-
tations on inference, just as we do, and we only have them at
secondhand. Moderator, I in treat the Assembly to pause. You
are invited to a course of action which will create two opposite
standards of duty, two conflicting marriage laws within this
Church. You are asked for the immediate toleration of a class
of violators of our standards. And is this a principle to be
adopted by a hasty vote of an Assembly ? You are asked to do
terrible violence to the consciences of men to whom the holy


law of God is dearer than position, dearer than income, de ar er
than life. You are asked all at once to suspend the discipline
of the Church, in order that, while .Presbyteries are making np
their minds upon the ethics of the subject, a few brethren may
have the opportunity to transgress without punishment. You
are asked all at once to precipitate a crisis in the history of onr
young Church which may issue in disruption and civil conflict.
Let us wait. Let our brethren unite with us in friendly con-
ference and brotherly interchange of thought. Let us take, at
least, another year for the searching of the Divine Word, and
for the free discussion of this subject in our respective Presby-
teries; and I confidently trust that the evils we so much
dread may be averted, and that to the upright light will arise
out of darkness.
Mr. JAMES MACBAIN, M.L.A., said : Moderator, it appears
to me that the time has arrived when one of the articles of the
standards of our church is assailed, and we are called upofl,
virtually, by some of our brethren to make an apology for
holding our opinions in relation to the same. The plea put
forward by the minority is that they have doubts on the ques-
tion under debate, and they make a request that the majority
who have no doubts should make the subject one of forbearance
or leave it an open question.
Mr. Nish a few days ago, when urging the admission of his
overture as a part of the business of the Assembly, stated that
he had doubts on the question, and would be glad if his
brethren could remove these doubts, and give him some light;
but I appeal to you who heard Mr. Nish subsequently address
himself to the overture if he appeared to have any doubts at
all; the impression onmy mind was that if he everhad any doubts
they had all vanished. In the most confident manner Mr. Nish
impugned our position in relying on the standards of our Church
as being supported by the Word of God. Noav is it right for a
minister of our Church to impugn our faith in a portion of our
standards in the manner in which Mr. Nish has done. While
a member of this Church Mr. Nish (like the whole of us) is
bound to respect the standards of our Church, to which he
solemnly gave his adhesion, and in virtue of which adhesion he
holds his position as an ordained minister of this Church. I
think that, holding the opinion he does in not believing now
in a portion of our standards subscribed to by him, his duty, in
my opinion, would be to at once sever his connection with the
Church, and not raise a spirit of dissension amongst us. He
would then be at liberty to form and lead a new party, or join
some other denomination whose views coincide with his own.


What a minister teaches in the pulpit, we laymen have a
right to demand that he himself shall practise. But think of
the gravity of the statement made by Mr. Nish, notwithstand-
ing the position he occupied as a minister of our Church for a
number of years —“ That it was only about twelve months ago
that he came to consider the marriage law to be an article of
our faith,” and that now he discards it and says that it is an
open question. What effect will this have on the Christian
Church and the world ? One effect will be that laymen will
be apt to discredit the sincerity of the ministers of religion, and
will be putting the question, “ Does he himself believe in what
he preaches ?”
I would be the last man in the world to interfere with the
religious liberty we enjoy, or with Mr. Nish or anybody else in
thinking as he likes ; but Mr. Nish, like myself and other office
bearers of the Church, are parties to a contract in regard to the
article of our standards under discussion, and so long as that
article is in our Confession, and we have given our adherence
to it, we have no right to assert that it is not an article of faith
at all.
The prevalent view outside is, “ Why not let this matter alone,
why raise this discussion ?” lam sorry to say that an attempt
has been made to blame the majority, while they had nothing to
do with the raising of the question. lam astonished that a man
of intelligence like Mr. Nish can speak as he has done. We did
not introduce this discussion: we who wish to adhere to the
standards of our faith are apparently forced on our trial by the
minority, and are virtually asked to apologise for our being born
or educated in connection with the Presbyterian Church. As to
the overture brought up by Mr. Nish, it is one of the most extra-
ordinary documents of the kind that ever emanated from a
minister of our Church. He condescends in his jubilant way to
say to us, “Now I believe in the law passed by the Legislature
legalising marriage with a deceased wife’s sister, but I don’t wish
to attach any penalties to you for adhering to the standards of
our Church in refusing to marry or performing such marriages
as are in question.” That is virtually the reading of his over-
ture. I believe that his action will do more to retard the pro-
gress of religion than anything which has happened to our
Church for the last twenty years.
Let Mr. Nish and those who are with him hold their views
if they like ; but I demand them in honesty to carry out the
contract which our mutual agreement binds them to do. And
if they are not prepared to hold to the contract, why then I
maintain that according to that contract they have no right to
remain with us to disturb the peace of the Church in the way


they propose. An honourable example for our brethren I will
now allude to. You will remember that when the Hon. the
Rev. Baptist Noel arrived at the conviction that he could no
longer hold the views of the Church of England on the subject
of Baptism, he did not remain in the Church and agitate the
question —he at once, without disturbing the peace of the
Church, relinquished his living in the Church and the worldly
advantages he had in prospect, and continued to preach the
Gospel of Christ outside the pale of the Church establishment,
not less appreciated for the sacrifices he made. His memory
is still fragrant in the Christian Church.
I will refer, again, to the case of the Rev. Mr. Anderson, of
Aberdeen, known to the most of you, who was compelled from
conviction to change his views on the subject of baptism.
He asked to be permitted to remain in the Church ; this request
could not be complied with, and he was compelled to sever his
connection with his Church. He also was respected for his
moral worth and sincerity. If men like Mr. Nish believe
that they are right and we are wrong, that our Confession of
Faith is based on a fallacy, they have got the world before
them and can go where they will. They can constitute a
Church of their own and have perfect liberty to act on the
civil law of this colony in regard to marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister: but I deny their right to force us to alter our
standards —standards that have been the guide of our Church
for many years back, and which I trust will continue in this
respect so long as the world remains.
Mr. Nish made a clever speech—a very cleveiv speech ; but
I have heard more profound arguments against the divinity of
Christ, and read more logical arguments* against the Trinity of
the Godhead, than were the arguments of Mr. Nish in favour
of marriage with the sister of a deceased wife.
I know that there is a difference of opinion on this subject
amongst some good men, and I acknowledge its importance;
but when we know that, notwithstanding all the difficulties
which surround this subject, the wisest, the most learned, and
the most pious of the fathers in the parent Churches have
recently testified again their adherence to this article of our
standards now in dispute, I do not think we can go very far
witmg in following their footsteps (although fallible) in pre-
ference to following the Rev. A. Robertson of West Melbourne,
and the Rev. James Nish, who are also fallible like ourselves.
I do not feel myself competent to deal with the scriptural
argument; but as none of the other speakers referred to one
portion of Mr. Nish’s speech, I cannot allow the discussion to
close without some allusion to it. I listened to Mr. Nish’s


speech with more pain than to any speech I ever heard from
any of our ministers.
Mr. Nish cleverly tried to destroy our marriage law as con-
tained in the 18th and 20th chapters of Leviticus, although, by
the way, he asserted that the germs of a marriage law might
he found in those chapters,
After satisfactorily bringing down, according to his mind,
the fabric on which we rest about our ears, he tried to erect a
new fabric, and asks us to adopt his exposition of the chapters
referred to.
Without in the slightest degree admitting his theory that these
chapters cannot be construed into a marriage law, I would ask
what does Mr. Nish present us as an alternative for our ap-
proval ? He broadly and confidently asserts that these chapters'
do not contain prohibitions against marriage within the pre-
scribed limits contained in them, but that the prohibitions are
prohibitions only against adultery.
Now, if Mr. Nish is right in his view, we would be forced to
the conclusion that the Church has no marriage law for its
guidance, and that we are left entirely to circumstances, every
man being at liberty to make a law for his own direction
in a matter of such vital importance. The position assumed
by Mr. Nish, to my mind, is one of the gravest character, and
if adopted by our Church will result in the most fearful con-
sequences. We should not forget that prior to the promul-
gation of the laws contained in the 18th and 20th chapters of
Leviticus, the seventh commandment from Sinai was delivered
—“Thou shalt not commit adultery.” Not, be it remembered,
within certain degrees of affinity and consanguinity, but simply
adultery in any sense.
Now, if we adopt Mr. Nish’s rendering of the chapters re-
ferred to, we have no escape from the position that those prohi-
bitions modify the seventh commandment, as they only prohibit
adultery within certain degrees, leaving it to be inferred that
outside those degrees people may indulge as much as they
like—a position which lam sure you will agree with me in
saying is totally inconsistent with the whole scope of not only
the teachings of the Old, but also of the New Testament.
Allusion has been made to the circumstance recorded in
Deuteronomy, where a man is enjoined to marry his deceased
brother’s wife, but I fail to discover the analogy which is tried
to be proved to justify marriage with a deceased wife’s sister.
In the former I maintain that the instruction or law was ex-
ceptional, and only to be carried out in peculiar and exceptional
circumstances, without, as in other cases, the penalty of death
inflicted for non-compliance. In the latter we have no


instruction or law enforcing such a connection, and there are
no exceptional circumstances given to justify such an act. In
the former case, the mere fact of such a command being given
in exceptional circumstances pre-snpposes the existence of a
marriage law prohibiting such marriages, which law is contained
in the 18th chapter of Leviticus, and if there prohibiting mar-
riage with the wife of a deceased brother, then there pro-
hibiting marriage with a deceased wife’s sister. I noticed
that Mr. Nish did not say one word on the social aspect of the
question; on the contrary, he appeared, unintentionally, to
shun it.
I don’t know what his prospects or wishes are in regard to
this matter, but I think he should say what, in his opinion,
will be the good result of breaking down the existing barrier—
of destroying this article of our standards. As a reformer, he
should acquaint us with all the reasons which induced him to
assume the position he has done; he should give us all the
information at his disposal in favour of the particular reform
which he asks us to adopt; he should treat on the social and
moral aspects of the case, as well as on the dry legal; aspect but
this he has utterly ignored. We are indeed informed of what
we never denied, that the Confession of Faith is not an infal-
lible rule—that everything must be brought to the test of God’s
Word. I need not inform you that, according to our standards,
the Word of God is our only infallible rule of faith and life,
and that every human composition is subordinate to that
Word. It seems, however, from the remarks made by some of
the speakers, “ that the glorious characters who composed our
Confession are not to be treated as such able expositors of
God’s Word as some of our lesser ‘lights’ of the present day.”
Does Mr. Nish mean to say that those men who compiled our
Confession of Faith did not bring the Word of God to bear on
their deliberations ? Does he mean to say that they were only
guided by earthly considerations and mere worldly wisdom ?
Are we to discredit their motives, and say that they did not
study the Word of God ? Surely Mr. Nish and his friends do
not wish us to think that those men, who did so much
for the establishment of civil and religious liberty in our
fatherland, tried to palm off on the Church articles of faith not
founded on the Word of God. Has it come to this, that we are to
discard the views, on this subject, of some of the best and wisest
men who ever lived, and adopt the Rev. A. Robertson, of West
Melbourne, and the Rev. James Nish, of Sandhurst, as our ex-
positors on a subject of such importance? If it has come to this
with some of us, then, “ these be your Gods, if ye will worship
them;” but I earnestly trust that this Church will stand by its


standards until the same, after the most deliberate consider-
ation, and in a constitutional manner, be found to be inconsis-
tent with the Word of God.
To those with whom I differ on this subject, I do not bear
the slightest particle of uncharitableness; at the same time I
claim that I shall be protected in holding my own views, and-
that the peace of our Church shall not be broken by a party in
it, who look upon the subject as one of small and trivial im-
portance. Authorities have been quoted on both sides, but I
will venture to quote an authority on the social aspect of the
question, not inferior in intelligence or moral worth to those
referred to. I mean Dr. Wardlaw, of Glasgow, belonging to
the Congregational Church, and who was a contemporary of
Dr. Chalmers. In reviewing a book written by Mr. Dwight, an
American author, Dr. Wardlaw penned these words :
“It was moreover no small recommendation of the work,
that it served to settle on so well ascertained a basis of divine
authority, the principles of jurisprudence and of morals, res-
pecting the important subjects of which it treats ; and thus at
once to direct legislators in the framing of their public statutes,
moralists in the construction of their systems of practical ethics,
and individuals (especially in peculiar circumstances of tempt-
tations, such as not unfrequently occur) in the regulation and
restraint of their affections. This last consideration is one of
prime importance, and of great general interest. There are
cases of affinity, respecting which doubts have been entertained
whether they are within or without the line drawn by the
divine law in regard to the matrimonial union; and in not a
few instances, as might have been anticipated, such doubts
have given way before the strength of inclination. I need not
shrink from saying that I refer especially to marriages on the
part of widowers with the sisters of their former wives. In the
volume before us, these doubts are settled in the only way,
as it appears to me, that is consistent with the safety of either
the virtue or happiness of domestic life, both of which would
in many ways be awfully endangered by such an extension of
that sacred boundary as some have pleaded for. And the
decisions of the inspired volume are satisfactorily shown to be
in full harmony with the secure maintenance of that
. . . ‘ Only bliss
Of Paradise, that has survived' the fall.’ —Cowpeb.”
These words are of intrinsic value as compared with the
reasoning of Mr. Nish and his friends. I accept these words
thoroughly as a testimony against these marriages and the
effects they would produce socially.
I trust that as Mr. Nish has come to this Assembly, as he


professes to have come, to seek for counsel, that he will see it
to be his duty to withdraw his overture, and take into his
serious consideration the able speech of the Rev. Boyd M‘Cay,
of Castlemaine. In my opinion this Church has been placed
under an obligation to Mr. M'Cay for the services rendered in
this discussion. I have never listened to any speech which
gave me so much pleasure. His reply to Mr. Nish was com-
plete both as to matter and form, and of such a crushing
nature that I hope we have heard the last of the discussion
in our Church Courts,
J. AND A. M'KINLEY, PRINTERS, QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.








