

(Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales, Vol. XXXIV.)
MARRIAGE AND DESCENT AMONG THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S., Corres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc.,
Washington, U.S.A.
[ Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, October 3, 1900.]


MARRIAGE AND DESCENT AMONG THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S., Corres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc.,
Washington, U.S.A.
[j ßead before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, October S, 1900.~\
In describing the social structure of a native Australian community
the first matter calling for attention is the classification of the
people into two primary divisions, called phratries, or groups—
the men of each phratry intermarrying with the women of the
opposite one, in accordance with prescribed laws. 1. The natives
of some tracts of country are segregated into the two phratries
referred to, without any further subdivision. 2. In other locali-
ties there is a partition of each phratry into two sections, making
four divisions of the tribe. 3. Among the inhabitants of other
districts there are four subdivisions of each phratry, giving a total
of eight sections. 4. In some parts of Australia, instead of
employing the sharply defined divisions referred to, the marriages
are arranged by the elders of the tribe, who are well acquainted
with the genealogy of the people around them. This I have
designated the Tooar organisation, and is elsewhere dealt with.


Table No. 1.
Phratry. Father.
Mother. Son.
Daughter.
A. Kirraroo
Matturrin Matturri
Matturrin
B. Matturri
Kirrarooan Kirraroo
Kirrarooan
Phratry
Father.
Table No.
Mother.
2.
Son.
Daughter.
A- |
Murri
Butha
Ippai
Ippatha
Kubbi
Ippath
Kumbo
Butha
B 1 {
Kumbo
M atha
Kubbi
Kubbitha
Ippai
Kubbitha
Murri
Matha
Phratry
Father.
Table No.
Mother.
3.
Son.
Daughter.
Choolum
Ningulum
Palyarin
Palyareenya
A.-
Cheenura
Nooralum
Bungarin
Bungareenya
Jamerum
Palyareenya
Chooralum
Nooralum
Yacomary
Bungareeny
Chingulum
Ningulum
Owing to the different methods of subdividing the phratries,
the details of the rules regulating the intermarriage of the men
and women, and the descent of the progeny, are somewhat varied
in each system, but the fundamental principles are the same in
them all. Whether there are two, or four, or eight partitions of
the community, every di vision has an independent name by which
its members are easily recognised. Frequently, but not invariably,
the men are distinguished from the women by means of a mascu-
line and a feminine form of the name of each division.
In dealing with the subject it will be necessary to supply tables
giving examples of the divisions of a tribe in each type of organi-
sation. Table No. 1 represents the Parn-kal'-la system, composed
of the two phratries only; Table No. 2 shows the Kam'-il-a-roi
method of four divisions; and Table No. 3 illustrates theWom-by'-a
type, containing eight divisions.
1 In the Kamilaroi tribe each phratry is distinguished by a proper
name—A. is called Dilbee, and B is known as Kuppathin, but ! have used
the letters A and B so as to preserve uniformity in the three tables, for
purposes of reference.
121
MARRIAGE AND DESCENT AMONG AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


Table No. 8— continued.
Phratry
Father.
Mother.
Son.
Daughter.
Chingulum
Noolum
Yacomary
Yacomareenya
B. -
Chooralum
Neenura
Jamerum
Neomarum
Bungarin
Yacomareenya
Cheenum
Neenum
Palyarin
Neomarum
Choolum
Noolum
A glance at the foregoing three tables shows that each system
is exactly alike as regards the partition of the community into
the phratries A and B. It will also be observed that each phratry
is composed of certain aggregates of women, who have perpetual
succession among themselves. We will take an example from the
column headed “ mother ”in phratry Ain each table. In Table
No. 1, Matturrin produces Matturrin from one generation to
another. In Table No. 2, Butha produces Ippatha, and in the
next generation Ippatha is the mother of Butha, and these sections
reproduce each other in continuous alternation. In Table No. 3
we see that Ningulum has a daughter Palyareenya; Palyareenya
produces Nooralum ; Nooralum is the mother of Bungareenya;
Bungareenya has a daughter Ningulum, and this series is con-
tinually repeated in the same order. If the examples had been
taken from phratry B, similar results would have been obtained.
The brothers of the girls, in every case, belong to the same phratry
and section as their sisters.
We have therefore seen that the women never pass out of the
phratry to which they belong, and that where it consists of more
than one denomination, they pass successively through each of the
sections of which it is composed, in the same number of generations.
It is also apparent that the daughters of each phratry become the
wives of the men born in the opposite one. For example, in
Table No. 3, the women of phratry A are the mothers of sons and
daughters belonging to the same phratry as themselves ; and their
boys on reaching manhood must take their wives from phratry B.
In a similar manner the daughters of the women of phratry A
must obtain their husbands from among the sons of the women in
phratry B. For the reasons above stated, I have found it con-
122
R. H. MATHEWS.


venient to enunciate that the phratries are formed and maintained
by the women.
Having illustrated the structure of the phratries, I will now
pass on to very briefly show the rules of marriage among the
subdivisions, and the descent of the resulting offspring. The three
tables explain themselves —the father, mother, son and daughter
of each division being shown on the same line across the page.
In Table No. 1, where the phratry is undivided, the offspring take
their mother’s denomination direct. In Table No. 2, in which
the phratry is bisected, the progeny take the name of the comple-
mentary division in the mother’s phratry, thus, —Butha’s children
are Ippai and Ippatha, and Ippatha’s progeny are Kumbo and
Butha. In some districts, instead of the marital laws following
the order set out in the table, there are what I have termed
“alternative” marriages, for example—a Murri, male, marries an
Ippai, female, and vice versa; a Kubbi, male, takes a Kumbo,
female, as his partner, and vice versa. The descent of the children,
however, is not affected by this variation—the offspring of an
Ippatha, for example, being always Kumbo and Butha, no matter
whether she is united to a Kubbi or a Murri husband.
Table No. 3 shows the Wom-by'-a organisation, in which the
phratry is divided into four sections. By the ordinary or “direct”
rules of marriage, Choolum takes Ningulum as his spouse, and the
issue of the union are Palyarin and Palyareenya. But Choolum
can exercise the alternative right of marrying a Nooralum woman*
and in such case the offspring will be Bungarin and Bungareenya.
Again, Cheenum takes Nooralum as his regular mate, and his
“alternative” wife is Ningulum, the name of the resulting progeny
being determined by the mother, as before. Similarly, Jamerum
can marry either a Palyareenya or a Bungareenya woman, and
Yacomary’s wife is Bungareenya, with the alternative of Palyar-
eenya. In the pairs of sections, Chingulum and Chooralum,
Bungarin and Palyarin, in phratry B, marriage and descent follow
the same alternative rules, mutatis mutandis. In consequence of
polygamy being sanctioned, it is possible for a man to take one


wife from the “direct” section, and another spouse from the
“alternative” division—the nomenclature of the progeny being
regulated as above explained.
It has been stated in an earlier page that the children belong
to the same phratry as their mother, and in many tribes the totem
is also handed down in the same way. In carefully examining
tables of genealogies, however, it is quite clear that marriage,
relationship and descent, depend mainly on the father’s side of
the house—a law which applies with the same cogency to the
Wombya, Kamilaroi and Parnkalla systems. The rule is equally
persistent in the Tooar type of organisation, which I have
described elsewhere.
I he people of both sexes marry an individual belonging to the
same phratry as their father. Taking an example from Table
No. 3, we see that Chingulum marries Noolura, of the same phratry
as his father Yacomary. Noolura takes as her husband a Chin-
gulum man, belonging to the phratry of her father Palyarin. By
employing Table No. 2, for our example, it is observed that Ippai
marries a Ivubbitha woman belonging to the same phratry as his
father Murri. And Kubbitha marries Ippai, a man of her father
Ku mbo’s phratry.
All the people, men and women alike, marry an individual
belonging to the same section of their father’s phratry as that to
which his mother belongs. By taking our example from Table
No. 3, we find that Choolum’s father is Palyarin, and Palyarin’s
mother is Ningulum. Choolum marries a Ningulum woman, who
therefore belongs to his father’s mother’s section. Again, Nin-
gulum’s father is Yacomary, and Yacomary’s mother is Noolum.
Noolum mates with Chingulum, the name of her father’s mother’s
section. Using i able No. 2, for an example, it is seen that
Murri s father is Ippai, and the mother of Ippai is Butha; Murri
marries Butha, his father’s mother’s section name. Also, Butha’s
father is Kubbi, and Kubbi’s mother is Matha. Bufha is married
to Murri, the section name of her father’s mother.


The children of both sexes take the section name of their father’s
father. By employing an example from Table No, 3, it is seen,
that Ohoolum has a son Palyarin, and Palyarin is the father of
Choolum, the section of his father’s father. Again, Ohoolum has
a son Palyarin, and Palyarin has a daughter Noolum, the name
of the section to which her father’s father, Ohoolum, belongs.
Taking an example from Table No. 2, we observe that Murri’s
son is Ippai, and Ippai has a son Murri, the section name of his
father’s father. Also, Kurabo has a son Kubbi, and Kubbi has a
daughter But ha, the section to which her father’s father belongs.
In the Kamilaroi and Parnkalla systems, the children, in addition,
take the section name of their mother’s mother, (which in their
case is identical with that of their father’s father); but this does
not apply to the Wombya, owing to their more perfect system of
subdividing the phratries.
In the three last preceding paragraphs, examples have not been
supplied from Table No. 1, illustrating the Parnkalla system of
marriage and descent, it being thought that the simplicity of the
table renders explanation unnecessary.
A man takes a wife who is the daughter either of his father’s
cousin, or of his mother’s cousin; and a woman likewise marries
a man who is the son of a cousin of her father or of her mother.
The cousin here meant is the child of one’s father’s sister, or of
one’s mother’s brother. This statement can be illustrated by
using a diagram, with distinctive letters, which can be referred
to, as follows :
Diagram No. 1.
Brother and Sister.
I will commence with examples from the Wombya organisation,
represented in Table No. 3. The pedigree of a mans wife, traced


through his father, is as follows : —A = Choolum ; B = A’s father,
Palyarin; C = B’s father, Choolum; D = C’s sister, Noolum; E =
D’s son, Yacomary; F = E’s daughter, Ningulum, By the table
we see that A = Choolum, marries F = Ningulum, the daughter of
his father’s father’s sister’s son—that is to say, the daughter of
his father’s cousin. By following the pedigree of any given man’s
wife through his mother, it can be shewn that Chingulum, for
example, marries Noolum, the daughter of his mother’s mother’s
brother’s daughter, or in other words, the daughter of his mother’s
cousin.
The pedigree of a woman’s husband, if traced through her father,
can be run out as follows;—A = Ningulum; B = A’s father,
Yacomary; C = B’s father, Chingulum; D = o’s sister, Ningulum;
E = D’s son, Palyarin; F = E’s son, Choolum ; then A = Ningulum
marries F = Choolum, who is the son of her father’s father’s sister’s
son—that is, the son of her father’s cousin. In a similar way it
can be represented, by running out a woman’s husband’s pedigree
.through her own mother, that she herself marries the son of her
mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter, or in other words, the son
of her mother’s cousin.
The same rules hold good in the Kamilaroi organisation, as the
following example from Table No. 2 will explain : —A = Kumbo;
B = A’s father, Kubbi ; 0 = B’s father, Kumbo; D = C’s sister,
Butha; E = D’s son, Ippai; F = E’s daughter, Matha. Then A =
Kumbo marries F= Matha, the daughter of his father’s father’s
sister’s son—that is, the daughter of his father’s cousin.
An example from Table No. 1 will illustrate that the same laws
also apply to the Parnkalla organisation : —A = Kirraroo ;B = A’s
father, Matturri; C = B’s father, Kirraroo; D = C’s sister, Kirra-
rooan; E = D’s son, Kirraroo; F=E’s daughter, Matturrin.
Then, A = Kirraroo marries F = Matturrin, the daughter of his
father’s father’s sister’s son, or, the daughter of his father’s cousin.
One example each in the Kamilaroi and Parnkalla systems has
been thought sufficient, because the rules are analogous to those
126
H. H. MATHEWS.


given in the Wombya organisation, which has been illustrated
more fully, in order to avoid repetition.
In the Kamilaroi and Parnkalla systems, according to the tables,
the men, as well as the women, can marry the offspring of their
father’s sister, or of their mother’s brother, subject to conditions
to be mentioned presently. This also applies to the “alternative”
marriages of the Wombya. By using a diagram this can be made
more clear: —
Diagram No. 2.
Brother and Sister.
Taking an example from the Kamilaroi system it can be demon-
strated that A = Kubbi; B = A’s father Kumbo ; C = B’s sister
Butha ; D = C’s daughter Ippatha. Kubbi marries Ippatha, the
daughter of his father’s sister. If we had traced the blood through
Kubbi’s mother Matha, it could have been shown that he married
his mother’s brother’s daughter. Again, if Abe a female, the
genealogy of her husband can be followed, in the same way, through
her father’s sister, or her mother’s brother, showing that she
marries a son of one of these. If we further consider Kubbi =A,
and assume that his father, Kumbo = B, is an emu, then B’s sister
Cis also an emu. 1 Referring to diagram Ko. 2, it is apparent
that A is the son of an Emu man, B ; and that D, his wife, is the
daughter of an Emu woman, C.
Putting the above example in another form, it will be seen that
the son of a brother marries the daughter of a sister ; and not only
so, but the son of an emu marries the daughter of an emu. To
prevent the union of persons of such consanguinity there are
customary laws in aboriginal society which make it incumbent
that the brother and sister relationship here referred to shall be
collateral or tribal only, and not of the full blood. It may not
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc., Q., Yol. x., p. 22.
127
MARRIAGE AND DESCENT AMONG AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


be unnecessary to state here that by following the ordinary rules
of marriage in the Wombya organisation, as represented in 'I able
No. 3, a brother’s children’s children intermarry with a sister’s
children’s children—a relationship sufficiently wide not to require
any further restrictions.
Selecting an illustration from the Wombya system we can show
by Diagram No. 2 that A = Choolum; B = A’s father Palyarin 5
C = B’s sister Palyareenya ; D = C’s daughter Nooralum. Then
Choolura, as his “alternative ’’ wife, marries Nooralum, the daughter
of his father’s sister. It can easily be shown that Choolum’s
alternative spouse may also be the daughter of his mother s brother.
And if A be a female, the genealogy can be varied as in the
Karailaroi example last given. It also appears that if A’s father
Palyarin, B, is an eaglehawk, then B’s sister, Polyareenya, is like-
wise an eaglehawk. According to the diagram, Ais the son of
an eaglehawk man, B; and A’s wife, D, is the daughter of an
eaglehawk woman, C. As in the Kamilaroi example, this brother
and sister relationship must be titular instead of direct.
It is not thought necessary to furnish an example of the marriage
rules, according to diagram 2, in the Parnkalla system, because
they are similar to those of the Kamilaroi.
In examining each pair of sections in Table No. 3, it is observed
that Choolum is Cheenum’s father’s (Bungarin’s) female cousin’s
(Neomarum’s) son, and also that Cheenum possesses the same
relationship to Choolum. Again, Choolum marries Cheenum’s
cousin, and Cheenum marries Choolum’s cousin. It is likewise
apparent that Jamerum is Yacomary’s father’s (Chingulum s)
female cousin’s (Neenum’s) son; and that Yacomary is related in
the same manner to Jamerum. Also, Jamerum marries Yacomary’s
cousin, and Yacomary maries Jamerum’s cousin. Similarly it can
be shown that the pairs of sections, Chingulum and Chooralum,
and also Bungarin and Palyarin, are respectively related to each
other in the same way. The relationships referred to in this para-
graph account for certain pairs of sections, (s.g., Choolum and
Cheenum), being placed together in the table.


Choolum
Table No. 4.
/Black-snake, death-adder, bandicoot, eagle-hawk,
Palyarin
\ bloodwood, currant bush, tiger-snake.
-(
o
Cheenum
(Fire, opossum, black-duck, emu, rain, corella,
a
Bungarin
V. o
\ scorpion, thunder.
>>
'Jamerum
j Iguana, kangaroo, spinnifex, dingo, lightning,
( crow, carpet-snake, pipe-clay.
Chooralum
.2
'o
b—i
Yacoraary
(Common hawk, yam, frog, white crane, raopoke,
a
Ohingulum
1 galah.
As indicated in Table No. 3, Choolum and Palyarin are related
to each other as father and son in continuous alternation, and I
have found that they have certain totems which descend with them.
Thus, Choolum bandicoot is the father of Palyarin bandicoot, and
in the next generation Palyarin bandicoot is the father of Choolum
bandicoot. The other pairs of sections have aggregates of totems
in the same manner, as enumerated in Table No. 4, hereunder:—
In treating of the “ alternative ” marriages in an earlier page
it was shown that Cheenum could also marry Ningulum, in which
case his son would be Palyarin ; and in a similar manner Choolum
could be the father of Bungarin. With totems descending from
the father to his offspring, in tribes where polygamy is practised,
Cheenum’s totem could be transmitted to both Bungarin and
Palyarin, supposing he takes a wife from each of the sections over
which he possesses potential marital rights. I have discovered
that, in consequence of the close blood-relationship referred to in
the last few paragraphs, the divisions Choolum, Palyarin, Cheenum
and Bungarin, are very friendly amongst themselves, and the same
totems are more or less in use among these four sections, whom I
have accordingly called Moiety A. In other words, the totems
particularized in Table No. 4 as belonging primarily to Choolum
and Palyarin, are also to some extent common to Cheenum and
Bungarin, and vice versa. The same remarks will apply in all
respects to the remaining four sections, who are distinguished as
Moiety B, in Table No. 4. The men and women of Moiety A
I—Oct. 3,1900.


Table No.
5.
Phratry
Father.
Mother.
Son.
Daughter.
/Eemitch
Inkagalla
Uwallaree
Imballaree
Uwannee
Imbawalla
Uwungaree
Imbongaree
A
-
Unmarra
Imballaree
Urwalla
Imbawalla
k Tabachin
Imbongaree
Yungalla
Inkagalla
Yungalla
Immadenna
Tabachin
Tabadenna
B
Urwalla
Imbannee
Unmarra
Inganmarra
-
Uwungaree
Tabadenna
Unwannee
Imbannee
Uwallaree
Inganmarra
Eemitch
Immadenna
are related as brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law respectively to the
people of Moiety B, and conversely. In general, the progeny,
boys and girls alike, take the totem of their male parent.
Marriage between persons of the same totem is forbidden, if
they belong to families residing in neighbouring hunting grounds,
but where the parties to the union come from remote districts,
and therefore cannot be any blood connection, I have observed
individuals of the same totem living as man and wife. Mr. T. M.
Sutton, in speaking of the Adjadurah tribe in 1887, refers to a
man who was a ghardie (emu), being married to a ghardie woman. 1
The following are a few of the principal tribes inhabiting the
country about Elsey Creek, Katherine and Roper Rivers, reach-
ing northerly to Wilton and Goyder Rivers, and onward to Clyde’s
Inlet on the north coast of Arnheim’s land, Northern Territory.
Their names are the Yungmunnee, Charmong, Mungerry, Yookull,
Hongalla, and Koorungo. They have an organisation containing
eight sections, similar to those given in Table No. 3, but bearing
a nomenclature more or less different. These eight sections, how
they intermarry, and the names of the resulting offspring is repre-
sented in tabular form hereunder :
These are the divisions of the Yungmunnee tribe about Elsey
Creek, and their equivalence to those of the Wombya is as follows:
Eemitch is equal to Choolum, Uwannee to Cheenum, Unmarra to
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc,, S.A., Yol. n., 3rd Session, p. 17.
130
E. H. MATHEWS.


Jamerum, and Tabachin to Yacomary in phratry A. Again,
Yungalla corresponds to Chingulum, Urwalla to Chooralum,
Uwungaree to Bungarin, and Uwallaree to Palyarin, in Phratry B.
All that has been said in the foregoing pages in regard to the
Wombya tribe, represented in Tables Nos. 3 and 4, applies equally
in every respect to the sections and phratries illustrated in Table
No. 5.
A brief reference to the geographic distribution of the tribes
adopting each type of organisation dealt with in this article may
not be without interest. The country inhabited by the people of
the Wombya type of division comprises about three-fourths of the
Northern Territory of South Australia, with extensive regions in
Queensland and Western Australia. The territory occupied by
tribes possessing the Kamilaroi system extends over about two-
thirds of New South Wales, the greater part of Queensland, a
wide zone through the centre of South Australia, and more than
half of Western Australia. The Parnkalla organisation includes
nearly the whole of Victoria, about a third of New South Wales,
part of Queensland, and a considerable portion of Western Aus-
tralia and South Australia.
Among the tribes on the south-east coast of New South Wales
and Victoria, the southern coast of South Australia, part of the
west coast of Western Australia, and a tract of country reaching
inland easterly and southerly from Port Darwin, in the Northern
Territory, the Tooar type of organisation is in force, with various
modifications.
APPENDIX.
SOME TRIBES OF CAPE YORK PENINSULA, QUEENSLAND.
That portion of Cape York Peninsula extending from the Cape
to about the fifteenth parallel of south latitude, is occupied by a
considerable number of tribes, out of which may be enumerated
the Yandigan, Merrikaba, Kowanatty, Gametty, Joonkoonjee,
Tannagootee, Yeldivo, Kokinno, Kamdheu and Kookeealla. Of
these I am best acquainted with the Joonkoonjee tribe, on the
131
MARRIAGE AND DESCENT AMONG AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


Table
No. 6.
Phratry.
Father.
Mother.
Offspring.
Jamakunda -
( Lankenamee
Pakwickee
Pamarung
| Namegooree
Pamarung
Pakwickee
Kamanutta
C Pakwickee
Lankenamee
Namegooree
\ Pamarung
Namegooree
Lankenamee
Batavia River, whose organisation is after the Karailaroi type,
possessing four sections, with rules of marriage and descent as in
the following table—the males and females using the same names
for their respective divisions. The dialects spoken from the
Jardine to the Batavia River and Pioneer Downs, or farther south,
are similar in many respects. My best thanks, are due to the
Rev. N. Hey, of Mapoon, and other gentlemen on the Peninsula,
for assisting me whilst engaged in obtaining the following inform-
ation.
The pair of sections forming the phratry Jamakunda invariably
marry the Kamanutta pair, but the rules of intermarriage of the
individual sections constituting the phratries vary in different
parts of the tribal territory. For example, in some districts instead
of the rules of marriage following the order laid down in Table
No. 6, a Lankenamee, male, provided there is no blood relationship,
may marry a Pamarung, female, and vice versa. The descent of
the offspring is not disturbed by this irregularity—the children
of a Pakwickee mother being always Pamarung, irrespectively of
the section name of her husband. These rules apply, mutatis
mutandis , to all the other sections.
Athough marriages are generally regulated by the order of
names in Table No. 6, and the rules given in the last paragraph,
there are, further, what I have designated “family, or sectional v
regulations, under which a man may, in certain cases only, take
a wife bearing his own section name, but of a different totemic
nomenclature. For example, a Lankenamee shark, belonging to
a distant lineage, might be permitted to take as his wife a Lan-
kenamee grasshopper.
132
R. H. MATHEWS.


The sons and daughters of certain women are betrothed in
infancy to the daughters and sons of other women —these betrothals
being of course in accordance with the laws illustrated in Table
No. 6. For the purpose of providing against contingencies, two
or three girls are usually betrothed to the same boy ; or more boys
than one may be allotted to the same girl. Meeoogoo is a mutual
erm of relationship between the mother of the girl and the mother
of the boy.
The totems, called by the natives eedeete , belonging to each
phatry are common to the two sections of which it is composed ;
thus, the totems attached to Jamakunda are common to the
sections Lankenamee and Namegooree; and the Kamanutta
totems are common to the Packwickee and Pamarang sections.
following are some of the totems attached to the phratry
Jamakunda :—black snake, shark, emu, native dog, bush rat, rock,
stone, ironbark tree, wattle tree, north wind, black cloud, yams,
native cat, kangaroo-grass, carpet snake, kangaroo, crow, common
hawk, dove, white fish, silver fish, bronze pigeon, sea, fresh water,
a dead man, grasshopper, green ants, bloodwood tree, fire, and
wind. Among the totems of the Kamanutta phratry may be
enumerated the tea-tree, sun, moon, iguana, plain turkey, opossum,
pelican, common grass, bee, fly, frog, black duck, lizard, bark of a
tree, gum, thunder, water-lily, sea-shell, turtle, butterfly, ibis, crab
and beetle.
The children take the phratry and totem name of the mother;
they do not, however, belong to her section, but take the name of
the other section in their mother’s phratry, as exemplified in
Table No. 6.
When the boys are about twelve years of age, they are taken
from the control of their mothers by the chief men, and are passed
through a course of initiatory formalities, analogous in their main
features to those practised by the Kamilaroi, 1 Dippil, 2 and Koom-
1 Proc. Eoy. Soc., Victoria, Voi. ix., N.S., pp. 137 -173.
2 American Anthropoligist, Yol. n., N.S., pp. 139-144.


banggary 1 tribes, described by me elsewhere. Scars are raised
upon their bodies, the septum of the nose is pierced, and a front
tooth is punched out of each youth, during the ceremonies. The
novices are required to pass through the ordeal of inauguration at
not less than three meetings of the tribes for that purpose, extend-
ing perhaps over a period of several years, and at the conclusion
of the proceedings they are presented with spears and other weapons
and released from certain prohibitions regarding food—for example
they may now eat eggs, iguana, &c., which were before forbidden
to them.
A “bullroarer,” 2 called by the natives pipe-ra-chy , is used by the
tribes on these occasions; it is generally made of bloodwood, of
the usual shape, with a hole drilled in the smaller end, through
which a long string is fastened, to enable the operator to swing it
round his head. The size of the instrument varies from about
sixteen to twenty inches, and is often ornamented with one longi-
tudinal and several transverse bars painted in red ochre on one
or both sides.
Until a youth has graduated in all the inaugural ceremonies of
his tribe, and been admitted to the rights and privileges of
aboriginal manhood, he cannot take a wife, or be present at any
of the councils or deliberations of the men.
Message sticks 3 are used in summoning tribes for festive or
hostile corroborees, and as friendly reminders to relatives at a
distance. They consist of small pieces of wood, four or five inches
in length, with quadrilateral designs and other rude markings cut
upon their surface. Sometimes a bunch of feathers, bound into
a cylindrical form by means of string, and about ten inches long,
is used for the same purpose.
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philad., Yol. xxxvix., pp. 53-66.
z See my article on the different kinds of “ Bullroarers”—Journ.
Anthop. Inst., Lond., xxvn., 52 - 60
3 The reader is referred to my paper on “Message Sticks”—American
Anthropologist, x., 288 - 297.
134
B. H. MATHEWS.


Table No. 7.
Koonjan
Community.
Warkeemon
Community.
Goothanto
Community.
Mykoolon
Community.
Kogai.
Community.
1. Ajeereena
2. Arenynung
3. Perrynung
4. Mahngale
Karpungie
Oheekungie
Kellungie
Koopungie
Erainyer
Arara
Loora
Awonger
Jimalingo
Bathingo
Maringo
Yowingo
Woongo
Koobaroo
Bunburri
Koorgilla
Infanticide, abortion, and cannibalism are largely practised
among all the tribes on the Peninsula in those districts where the
natives are still in a comparatively wild state. The bones of
adult victims, rolled in strips of the bark of the tea-tree, and
fastened with string passed around, are frequently carried by the
relatives of the deceased for considerable periods.
The same divisional system, but with different names for the
sections, extends from Cape York southerly till it adjoins the
Koonjan and other tribes, who use the four divisions reported by
me in Table No. 3, contained in a paper 1 contributed to this
Society in 1899. The equivalence of the four sections of the
Koonjan, Warkeemon, Goothanto, Mykoolon and Kogai com-
munities may be tabulated as follows :
1 Jonra. Roy. Soc., N.S.W., xxxm., pp. 108 - 111.


