

| Reprinted from the American Anthropologist, Vol. io, No. i, Jan.-March, 1908.]
MARRIAGE AND DESCENT IN THE ARRANDA
TRIBE, CENTRAL AUSTRALIA
By R. H. MATHEWS
As there is a difference of opinion among ethnologists respecting
the line of descent in the Ar-ran'-da tribe at Alice Springs and the
Finke river in Central Australia, I have endeavored to obtain correct
details on this important point. The sources of my information are
men who have resided in the country of the Arranda tribe for many
years. These men have taken a vast amount of trouble and have
spent much time in answering my inquiries, which have been repeated
in various forms and at different periods during the last twelve years.
The territory of the Arranda (or Arunta of Spencer and Gillen),
reaches from about Macumba river to Alice Springs and the upper
Finke river. The people within the limits indicated are divided into
four intermarrying sections, as follows :
Table A
Cycle Husband Wife Offspring
A [Pananka Purula Paltara
[ Kamara Paltara Purula
g [Purula Pananka Kamara
[Paltara Kamara Pananka
Kamara Pananka
Taking an example from the above table, it is seen that Pananka
marries a Purula woman, and has a son Paltara. In the next gener-
ation, P&ltara marries a Kamara woman and has a son Pananka, the
same section name as his father’s father, who was also a Pananka.
Looking again at Table A, we observe that Purula is the mother of
Paltara, and in the next generation Paltara is the mother of Purula,
and so on in continuous alternation, showing that a woman takes
the section name of her mother’s mother.
It appears then, that all the children, boys and girls alike, take
the section name of their father’s father as well as that of their
mother’s mother. For example, the father’s father of Paltara and


his sisters was a Paltara like himself and his sisters. The mother’s
mother of Paltara and his sisters was also a Paltara like themselves.
Let us now make a table of the four sections of the Kamilaroi
tribe in New South Wales, in which it is well known that descent is
counted through the mother only.
Table B
Cycle Husband
A f Murri
[Kubbi
B f Kumbo
[lppai
Kumbo
Ippai
Murri
Kubbi
Offspring
Ippai
Kumbo
Kubbi
Murri
In this table we see that Murri marries a Kumbo wife and has a
son Ippai. In the next generation Ippai marries a Kubbi woman
who has a son Murri, the same section name as his father’s father.
We observe also that Kumbo is the mother of Ippai, and Ippai is
the mother of Kumbo in perpetual alternation. That is, a woman
takes the section name of her mother’s mother. It is therefore plain
that every child, irrespective of sex, takes the section name of its
father’s father and also of its mother’s mother.
Up to this point there is no difference at all either in the laws
of intermarriage or in the descent of the section names, in the Ar-
randa and in the Kamilaroi.
When we get into the extreme northern limits of the Arranda
territory, say northward from about the 24th parallel of latitude, we
find that there are four additional divisions, making a total of eight
intermarrying sections in the sociology of the people. Some re-
marks on these intrusive sections will be made farther on. In the
meantime it will be necessary to reproduce a table I published in
1899. 1
Table C
Cycle 2 Husband Wife Offspring
"Pananka Purula Bangata
A Knuraia Ngala Paltara
Mbitjana Bangata Ngala
Kamara Paltara Purula
Ngala Paltara
Bangata Ngala
Paltara Purula
1 Divisions of North Australian Tribes, Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., vol. xxxvm, p. 76.
2 The cycle consists of the names given in the column headed “wife” in all these
tables. Thus, Purula, Ngala, Bangata, and Paltara constitute Cycle Ain Table C, and
s o on.


' Purula Pananka Kamara
g Ngala Knuraia Mbitjan;
Paltara Kamara Knuraia
Bangata Mbitjana Pananks
Knuraia Mbitjana
Kamara Knuraia
Mbitjana Pananka
An explanation of the foregoing table was given in 1899 in the
article above quoted and need not be repeated. Since then I have
at different times obtained, from the most competent of my corre-
spondents in that region, tables of genealogies which I have collated
and present in the following table. This table, U, gives the particu-
Table D
Individual
Answering the Question
Section of Indi-
vidual’s Father
Section of Individ-
ual’s Offspring
Name
Section
Arkara
Purula
Kamara
Paltara
j Kamara
Tjupuntara
Pananka
Tpitarinja
Laramanaka
Kamara
Paltara
Purula
| Purula
Pananka
Jukuta
Ruth
Purula
Kamara
Pal tara
| Kamara
| Kamara
| Pananka
Pananka
Tjirtjalkuka
Relkua
Purula
Kamara
Paltara
Pananka
Nathaniel
Maria
Bangata
Mbitjana
Pananka
Ngala
Paul us
Helena
Mbitjana
Bangata
Ngala
Pananka
| Ngala
Moses
Sophia
Knuraia
Ngala
Paltara
j Paltara
j Knuraia
| Kamara
j Knuraia
| Pananka
| Bangata
Mbitjana
Petrus
Paltara
Kamara
Knuraia
Purula
Rebecca
Johannes
Maria II
Purula
Kamara
Paltara
Knuraia
Jonathan
Emilie
Paltara
Knuraia
Ngala
Mbitjana
Makana
Nakara
Bangata
Kamara
Pananka
Purula
Jakobus
Lydia
Pananka
Ngala
Bangata
Mbitjana


lars of twelve marriages, and will be readily understood from one
example. No. 1 is a man named Arkara, of the section Purula.
His father’s section, Kamara, is given in the next column. No. 1 a
is the wife of No. 1, and is known as Tjupuntara, of the section
Pananka. In the next column is her father’s section, Paltara. The
offspring of this married pair, both boys and girls, belong to the
section Kamara, found in the extreme right-hand column.
In examining the above table we observe that in Nos. 1 to 8 in-
clusive, the marriages and the descent of the children are exactly in
accord with the laws laid down in Table C. For example, No. 1,
a Purula man marries a Pananka woman and the children are Ka-
mara. These eight families are examples of what I have elsewhere
denominated “ direct,” or “ tabular,” marriages. But in the Arranda,
as in the Warramungga 1 and other tribes a little way to the north-
ward, there are what I have called “alternative” marriages.
Next, if we examine Nos. 9 to 12 inclusive in Table C it is dis-
covered that they are all instances of the “alternative” system.
Taking No. 9 as an example, \ve see that Johannes, a Purula man,
marries a Knuraia woman, instead of his regular or “tabular”
wife Pananka. Moreover, according to Table C, the children of his
marriage should be Mbitjana, but they are actually Kamara. A
similar irregularity is noticed in the section name of the offspring in
Nos. 10, 11, and 12, Table D. These irregularities will be explained
later.
I shall now endeavor to explain how this variation in the descent
of the section name of the progeny has occurred in the four families
illustrated in Nos. 9to 12. More than thirty years ago a mission
station was formed on the Upper Finke river, a district in which the
native inhabitants had only four sections in their social structure,
the names of which are given in Table A. Soon after the mission
station was established and the blacks learned that it was for their
special benefit, they flocked to it from all parts, not because of the
Gospel, but because of “ the loaves and the fishes.” They went
there for tobacco, sugar and tea, flour, shirts, blankets, fat beef,
tomahawks, and so on.
I Journal Royal Society New South Wales (1898), xxxil, 73> se( l- I showed both
“.tabular” and “alternative” marriages among the Warramungga in a table given on p.
73. See also American Antiquarian , xxvm, 87-143.


At the time referred to, the eight-section system was in vogue
among the most northerly portion of the Arranda tribe, but had not
made any deep impression on the sociology of the natives about
Ellery Creek, Idracowra, Owen Springs, Henbery, and other cattle
stations, where the social structure remained the same as in Table A.
When the Reverend Louis Schulze went to the mission station
about 1877, he had to deal with a heterogeneous population, some
of whom professed the four-section system and others the eight-sec-
tion system. He was a man who took pride in his work and studied
the laws of marriage and descent. Owing to the two types of
organization marrying one with the other in their new home, some
modifications in the laws appear to have been made by the natives.
In 1891, when Mr Schulze published the results of his labors, he
prepared a table showing four pairs of sections, in which the four
original sections and the four additional ones were not consolidated as
in my Table C, but were placed in juxtaposition, as follows :
Table E, or “ Schulze’s Table
Husband Wife Offspring
. J Pananka Purula Paltara
Ist air |^ nura j a Ngala Bangat:
Ngala Bangata
, _ . f Kamara Paltara Purula
2d . . _ „ T ,
Mbitjana Bangata Ngala
Bangata Ngala
Pajr fP uru l a Pananka Kamara
[_ Ngala Knuraia Mbitjan;
Knuraia Mbitjana
f Paltara Kamara Pananka
4th Pair g an g ata Mbitjana Knuraia
Mbitjana Knuraia
Mr Schulze discovered that a man could marry a wife from either
of a prescribed pair of sections. For example, a Paltara man could
marry his “ tabular ” wife Kamara, or he could take a Mbitjana
woman as the “alternative marriage. 1 In regard to the descent,
Mr Schulze said : “ Whether Paltara has a Kamara or a Mbitjana
for his wife, the children are Pananka, according to paternal de-
scent.” 2 In 1898 I republished Mr Schulze’s table, but contended
that descent was through the mother, and not the father. 3
1 Queensland Geographical Journal , xvi, p. 74.
2 Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia , xiv, p. 224.
'•‘‘Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , xxxir, p. 72.


Let us examine Mr Schulze’s statement that if Paltara take a
Mbitjana wife, his children will be Pananka, instead of Knuraia. Mr
Schulze was no doubt reporting a case or cases which he actually
knew, and I desire to show how such a state of things could come
about. Supposing that the Paltara man whom Mr Schulze had
in mind belonged to that part of the Arranda tribe which had only
the four sections given in Table A. By all the usages and tradi-
tions of his people his wife should be Kamara, and when he married
Mbitjana she was probably said to be the equivalent of Kamara and
her children were accordingly ranked as Pananka. I should sup-
pose that she was received into the tribe on the same footing as a
stranger ; the same as any other stranger, from say the Chingalee>
would be received ; and was given the status of a Kamara, so that
her children were Pananka.
When I caused further inquiries to be made by a friend in 1899
it was found that the important question of the intermarriage and
descent of the eight sections had been settled or “ consolidated,” if
the expression may be applied, so that the regular or tabular child
of a Mbitjana woman was Pananka, whilst the tabular child of a
Kamara woman was Knuraia (Table C), being exactly a transposi-
tion of the progeny of these two women in Mr Schulze’stable. The
offspring of the women of the Purula and Ngala sections were
also similarly transposed. In all other respects Tables C and are
identical.
We will now be able to understand some further explanations
regarding the descent of the children of the married pairs in Nos. 9
to 12 of Table D. We will select No. 12 in that table as an exam-
ple. Jakobus, a Pananka man, marries Lydia who is a Ngala. By
the consolidated law in Table C she is his rt alternative ” spouse and
her progeny ought to be Paltara. The children, however, are actu-
ally classified in the Bangata section. The reason of this would
appear to be that Lydia, being a Ngala, is treated as the equivalent
or complement of Purula, and take the status of the Purula section ;
consequently her children, Table C, would rank as Bangata, being
in accordance with the old laws of the southern branch of the Ar-
randa, that the child shall take the section name of the father’s father
and also that of its mother’s mother. This case is precisely the same


in principle as Mr Schulze’s example, the only difference being in
the names of the parties. If we had taken Nos. 9, 10, or 11 as our
example, the result would have been the same.l
It will be observed that throughout Table D I have given the
section names of the fathers of each married pair, because some of
those who follow Mr Schulze and maintain “paternal descent” lay
great stress upon those instances in which the child is allotted the
section name of its father’s father. Let us again refer to Nos. 9to
12, Table D, in each of which the child possesses the section name
of its father’s father. No. 9 will serve as an example of the four
families. The child of Johannes is Kamara, the section name of the
father of Johannes. But a little further study discloses that the
child of Johannes also possesses the section name of its mother’s
mother. Maria II is Knuraia, and her mother, per Table C, is
Kamara, the section allotted to the child. It is evident then, that
in the four reported cases, Nos. 9, 10, 11, and 12, Table D, the
child takes the section name of its mother’s mother, as well as that
of its father’s father.
But Table D contains further evidence to the same effect. Nos.
i to 4 inclusive represent the pedigree of one of the oldest families
known to my correspondents. These four marriages go back to
the time when there were only four sections (Table A) recognized
in the district in which the mission station is rfow situated. There
was an old chief named Jukara, of the Kamara section. He married
Mokurkna, a Paltara woman, and his eldest son was Arkara, who,
with his wife, was given as Nos. i and la in Table D. Arkara was
the father of Tpitarinja, No. 2in Table D. Tpitarinja was the father
of Jukuta, shown as No. 3in that table. The old chief Jukara had
a second son, Tjirtjalkuka, given as No. 4in Table D. To re-
capitulate, Jukara was the father of Arkara, who was the father of
Tpitarinja, who was the father of Jukuta, being the pedigree of four
generations in the direct male line.
Returning again to the question of descent, and taking No. 3
of Table D as an example, we learn that Jukuta, a Purula man,
whose father was Kamara, married Ruth, a Pananka, and the child
is Kamara, the same as its father’s father. But by inspecting Table
A, which was the only system in force in those days, we find that


Ruth’s mother was Kamara. Therefore her child takes the section
name of its mother’s mother. Precisely the same result would be
obtained by examining Nos. 1,2, and 4.
From what has been said respecting the variations in the rules
of descent, it would appear that lineage is reckoned by two methods.
In one system there is a tendency to continue portions of the regu-
lations of the southern branch of the Arranda organization, exhibited
in Table A. This is observed in Nos. 9to 12, where the section
name of the mother’s mother is inherited by the child. We know
that descent in this form has been in vogue for a long time. Jakobus,
No. 12 of Table D, is descended from old Jukara already men-
tioned. Tjirtjalkuka, No. 4, had a daughter Nakara, No. 11 a, who
is the mother of Jakobus, a man who is now about 35 years of age.
He married Lydia, a Ngala, and the child takes the section name
of the mother’s mother and the father’s father.
In Nos. 5 to 8 inclusive, Table D, we find the descent is in ac-
cordance with what I have called the “ consolidated” system. By
this method all the women of the tribe can be classified into two
cycles, A and B, which have perpetual succession. Taking the
women in the upper half of Table C, or Cycle A, we find that
Purula is the mother of Bangata ; Bangata of Ngala ; Ngala of Pal-
tara, and Paltara is the mother of Purula, and this order of succes-
sion is continually repeated. The women of the lower half of the
table have a similar succession. This arrangement brings the sociol-
ogy of the northern branch of the Arranda into line with the Wom-
baia, 1 Binbingha, 2 Chingalee 3 and other communities among whom
I have elsewhere reported that descent is invariably counted through
the women.
When Rev. L. Schulze made his report, already quoted, that
Paltara’s child must be Pananka irrespective of the mother’s section,
he does not give a reason why it is an evidence of “ paternal descent.”
If it was because the child was assigned the section name of Pal-
tara’s father, Table E, then there is no weight at all in the argument,
because the very same thing happens in the Kamilaroi, where the
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxvii (1898), p. 152.
2 Ibid., xxxviii (1899), p. 77.
3 American Anthropologist , N. s., n (1900), p. 495, with map.


descent is unmistakably through the mother only. In fact, in every
tribe I know possessing female descent, all over Australia, the child
takes the name of the father’s father. This holds good no matter
whether the tribe be divided into two, or four, or eight parts. lam
of course referring to the normal or “ tabular ” marriages.
But when we come to the women, matters are somewhat different.
Taking the Yanderawantha tribe, with maternal descent, whose two
cycles I reported in 1899, 1 we find that a child takes the name of
its father’s father, and also that of its mother, because the cycle con-
tains but one denomination and is reproduced in the first generation.
When dealing with Table B in an earlier page, in which the cycle is
bisected, it was shown that the progeny took the name of the father’s
father and of the mother’s mother. There being two divisions of
women in a cycle, they reproduce each other in the second gener-
ation, instead of in the first, in continuous alternation.
I will now take the northern Arranda tribe, Table C, in which
each cycle of women contains four sections, which reproduce each
other in an established order. Here again the child takes the sec-
tion name of its father’s father. But as there are four divisions of
women in a cycle, instead of two as in the Kamilaroi, they repro-
duce each other in the fourth generation instead of in the second
generation. A child must therefore take the section name of its
mother’s mother’s mother’s mother. For‘example, taking Ban-
gata, the first name in the “ offspring” column of Table C, its mother
is Purula, whose mother is Paltara, whose mother is Ngala, whose
mother is Bangata, the same as the child.
The above examples show that whether there are two, or four,
or eight partitions of the tribe, the resulting offspring gets the sec-
tional name through the women. The child in each of the examples
also gets the section name of its father’s father, but this is a neces-
sary result of the normal or “ tabular ” marriages. When we exam-
ine the “ alternative ” marriages, the father’s father’s succession
disappears, but the descent through the women remains unaltered.
1 Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , xxxm, p. 108 ; Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxix,
p. 83, with comprehensive map. Dr A. W. Howitt mentioned these two divisions in
1904, without giving me the credit of discovering them five years earlier. He also made
free use of my map, without acknowledgment.


Going back to Table B, if Murri marries Ippai instead of Kumbo,
the child is Kumbo, but its father’s father is Ippai. Then if we look
again at Table C we find that if Pananka marries Purula the child
is Bangata, the same as its father’s father. But if Pananka marries
Ngala, his “ alternative ” or No. 2 wife, the child is Paltara, although
its father’s father is Bangata.
I am not finding fault with Mr Schulze’s tabulation, Table E ;
on the contrary, I republished it and became responsible for it in
1898 ; but I differ now, as I did then, from his conclusions in regard
to the descent of the children. When the small detachment of
people possessing eight sections came to settle at the mission station
years ago, they would no doubt bring with them the rules regulating
marriage shown in Table C ; but the other people with four sections
were by far the most numerous, and the two systems never became
properly amalgamated. Some families would conform to the eight-
section system ; whilst others, although incorporating the northern
section names, would treat them as equivalents of their own, and
still count descent in the way in which they had been accustomed.
This would account for Mr Schulze’s table, which actually repre-
sents the families Nos. 9t012 in Table Dat the present time. On
the other hand, Nos. 5 to 8 indicate the intermarriages of such of
the people who conformed to the amalgamated laws of Table C.
Nos. 1 to 4, although falling into line with Table C, contain only
the original four section names.
It will be well to give my reasons for saying that the four-section
organization prevailed in the district around the mission station.
Mr W. H. Wiltshire, 1 a police trooper, went to Alice Springs in 1881
and his duties took him all over the Finke river. Although he
reports the four-section system, no mention is made of eight sections.
Mr H. E. W. Krichauff 2 in 1886 also speaks of the intermarriages
of four sections only. When the Horn Scientific Expedition visited
the mission station, amongst other places, in 1894, Dr E. C. Stirling,
the anthropologist of the party, reported that there were only four
sections. 3 He said he had questioned several blacks who, although
x Aborigines of Central Australia, p. 13.
2 Proc. Poy. Geog. Soc. South. Australia , ir, p. 33.
3 Report Horn Sci. Exped. , iv, p. 47.


quite familiar with Pananka, Kamara, Purula, and Paltara, had never
heard of the other four names reported by Mr Schulze. To quote
the conclusion of Dr Stirling’s remarks in his own words : “ Prom
no single individual, whether white or black, could I get a confirma-
tion of Mr Schulze’s scheme.” At that time the eight-section con-
tingent must have been out on a cattle-spearing expedition, or else
away on a visit to their northern congeners, but we may infer that
they could not have been numerous.
I have read the statements of Spencer and Gillen that descent
among the Arranda (Arunta) is counted through the father, but I
am of the opinion that they are mistaken. From what has been
said in the foregoing pages there is no doubt in my mind that descent
is counted through the mother. It is quite a common thing for
white men to conclude that descent among the aborigines is reckoned
through the men. This comes about by the fact that a wife is taken
into the tribe and hunting grounds of her husband, where all her
children are born and bred and inherit their father’s territory.
A few words will now be said about the descent of the totems.
When a woman first becomes conscious of the approach of the ma-
ternal function, she reports that she had a dream somewhat to this
effect: One night when she and her husband were camped near a
certain spring or waterhole, she heard the voices of infants laughing
among the leaves of a tree growing near. ‘Her husband may also
say that he heard the infant coming down out of the tree just before
daylight, when it came and pulled his hair, after which it vanished and
was believed to have entered the woman’s body through the navel
or any other part. When the child is born, it is assigned the totem
of the locality where the mother or father had the dream. For ex-
ample, if the spot be traditionally known to be haunted by Magpie
people, invisible to human ken, the new-born child would get the
totem of the magpie, quite irrespectively of the totem of either parent.
The component parts of a tribe having the totemic organization
described in the preceding paragraph are in many respects similar
to the Kamilaroi. For example, there is a local division in which
are found the totem names of animals, plants, the heavenly bodies,
etc. People whose totems may belong to any or all of these de-
partments of the universe roam about together, or at any rate fra


ternize when they foregather in any part of their common territory.
There are certain spots in this territory which are specifically haunted,
some by one object and some by another, from which the children
receive their totemic names, instead of from the mother. 1 It appears
then, that like the Kamilaroi, the totems are scattered throughout
the tribal territory, but are allotted to the offspring according to
locality of birth instead of parentage.
In other publications in America, Europe, and Australia I have re-
ported several tribes inhabiting the northern parts of Australia in whose
sociology there are eight divisions similar to those in Table C, and
have maintained that the devolution of the section names is through the
women. In this journal 2 1 published a map of the whole of that portion
of Australia inhabited by the eight-section type. In the Proceedings
of the American Philosophical Society, 3 I published a map of Aus-
tralia showing the regions inhabited by each type of social structure.
The boundaries of many of the organizations were established from
my own personal knowledge, whilst the remainder were determined
from information obtained from reliable correspondents. In the text
explaining the map (pp. 574-578) I gave the names of the subdivi-
sions prevailing in about twenty-five groups of tribes. 4
Before closing this article I should like to refer briefly to other
tribes occupying the country between the Arranda and the Gulf of
Carpentaria. In 1899 I described the sociology of the Binbingha
tribe on the Macarthur river, 5 in Northern Australia. In the table
of eight intermarrying sections published at that time I reported
“ that each group (cycle) has perpetual succession through its
females.” The following is a copy of that table, which was con-
structed on exactly the same principles as Table C of the present
treatise :
1 American Antiquarian, xxvm, 143-147
2 N. S., 11, p. 497.
3 xxxix, 1900.
4 I may here state that Mr N. W. Thomas in his recent work, Kinship Organiza-
tions and Group Marriage (London, 1906), has copied very extensively from the above
mentioned map of Australia, without the slightest acknowledgment. He has given me
credit for being the first to report a large number of section and phratry names, but it is a
pity he did not acknowledge his obligations to my map. If the reader will compare Mr
Thomas’ maps 11 and in with my own, the extent to which he has drawn on the latter
will be abundantly apparent.
s Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxvin, p. 77> table iii.


Table F
Cycle Husband Wife Offspring
'Joolanjagoo Jungalagoo Bullaranjee
Jinagoo Jooralagoo Bungaranjee
" Jameragoo Bullaranjee Jooralagoo
Yukamurra Bungaranjee Jungalagoo
'Jungalagoo Joolanjagoo Yukamurra
Jooralagoo Jinagoo Jameragoo
B 1 Bungaranjee Yukamurra Jinagoo
Bullaranjee Jameragoo Joolanjagoo
There is a feminine form of the name of every one of these eight
sections, but they are not given in the table, because it is thought
that their omission will enable the reader more readily to follow the
details of the rules of marriage and descent, by having eight sections
to deal with instead of sixteen. 1 Besides, by omitting the feminine
names a direct comparison can be made with Table C, if necessary.
In the present Table F, the cycle is represented by the names
given in the “ wife” column. Taking the first woman in cycle A,
we see that Jungalagoo produces Bullaranjee, who produces Jooral-
agoo, who produces Bungaranjee, whose offspring is Jungalagoo,
being the name we commenced with. This series recurs in the
same order indefinitely. 1
Joolanjagoo marries J ungalagoo as his “tabular” or No. i wife
and the progeny is Bullaranjee. If he weds Jooralagoo as his
“ alternative ”or No. 2 wife, his family is Bungaranjee. Should
he take a Jinagoo as his No. 3 spouse, his offspring will be Jamer-
agoo. And if Joolanjagoo mates with a woman of his own section
name as his No. 4 wife, his children will be Yukamurra. From
this we observe that the children of a given man, say a Joolanjagoo,
may have any one of four section names, this matter depending
altogether upon the woman who is his wife. In other words, suc-
cession of the sections cannot possibly be counted through the father.
Although a woman may likewise have a conjugal mate from any
one of four sections, this matter makes no difference at all to her
progeny. For example, a J ungalagoo woman might be married to
1 The feminine forms of the sectional divisions of the Binbingha are given in the
Queensland Geographical Journal, xx, p. 7 1 > table viii.


7<?S5
1 American Anthropologist, N. s., 11, pp. 494-501, with map.
2 Ibid., VII, pp. 301-304.
AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST [n. s., 10, 1908
a Joolanjagoo, or a Jinagoo, or a Jooralagoo, or a Jungalagoo, but
her children would be Bullaranjee just the same as in Table F,
because the succession of the sections through the woman is abso-
lutely invariable.
In 1900 I contributed a paper to the Anthropological Society
of Washington, reporting the eight sections of the Chingalee tribe
in Central Australia, 1 accompanied with a table showing the section
to which a man belongs, the section into which he can marry, and
the designation of the children. I also stated that the sectional
name of the offspring is determined through the mother, and like-
wise that they belong to the mother’s phratry or cycle. In a further
contribution to the same society 2 I supplied a table showing the
English names of eight married pairs in the Chingalee tribe, some
of whom were of the “ tabular ” or No. 1 type ; others were “alter-
native ’’ or No. 2 ; whilst others were No. 3 and No. 4. All these
were actual marriages of individuals personally known to my
correspondents residing in the district. This tabulated list is of great
value, because it proves beyond question that men of one section
can marry into four different sections of women. And not only so,
but it shows that two of a man’s possible wives and consequently
two of his possible families belong to one cycle, and two to the other
cycle. The last mentioned fact points to the non-existence of exog-
amy, a subject which would require a special article.
My object in presenting the present treatise is to place before
the ethnologists of America my views respecting the line of descent
in all the tribes dealt with. My facts cannot be contradicted, and I
shall be glad to learn whether my conclusions are equally unassailable.
There are at present two opinions regarding descent in these tribes.
Spencer and Gillen assert that it is through the men, whilst I main-
tain that it is counted through the women. Referring to differences
of conclusions in difficult matters of this kind, I may mention that
Dr A. W. Howitt, in his Native Tribes of South-east Australia, re-
ported that descent in the Turrubul and Kaiabara tribes in Queens-
land is in the male line, whereas I have incontestably proved that
descent in these tribes is maternal.


Correction
In vol. ii of this journal, for 1900, p. 499, I reported a variety of
totems appertaining to some tribes on Sturt creek and adjacent country,
situated partly in the Northern Territory and partly in Western Australia.
The information was gathered for me by Mr Stretch, Mr Wilson, and
other residents of that region. Upon continuing my inquiries through
these men, and gathering further details, I find that the totems are not
definitely attached to the pairs of sections mentioned in my paper, nor
yet to the quartettes of sections, but are dispersed throughout the tribal
territory. The totem of any particular person is determined by the
locality where his mother first became aware that she was enciente. In
other words, the totems are not divided between the two phratries, nor
allotted to any specific section, but depend upon the accident of concep-
tion. There is still much to be learned in regard to this subject, and lam
continuing my investigations under difficulties.
Parramatta,
New South Wales.


* b
