

MARRY YOUR OWN
iHS AUSttandn Latholic Truth
Society Record.
Sept. 15, 1934. tj gjQ
(No. 22.) C-. 30
Daniel A. Lord, S. J.
The Australian Catholic Truth
Society, Melbourne, C.l.
No. 663 Price 2d.
Registered at the G.P.0., Mel-
bourne, for transmission by post
k as a periodical.


Nihil obstat:
J. DONOVAN,
Censor Deputatus.
Imprimatur:
t&D. MANNIX,
Archiepiscopus Melbournensis


Marry Your Own
A Discussion
of
Mixed Marriage
By
DANIEL A. LORD, S.J.




Marry Your Own
OF late years Lakeside Lodge had de-
cided to build up a winter patronage.
Winter sports were the thing. The
lake froze early—a smooth, slick sheet of
ice perfect for skating, and, when the breeze
blew from the east through the opening
between the hills, excellent for ice-boating.
Some Norwegians were imported to teach
the hotel guests the use of skis and to dig
them out of snow banks when they proved
dull pupils. The hill to the south of the
Lodge made a natural toboggan slide; so
a long flight of stairs was built to make the
painful return trip as easy as possible. If
somebody would only invent a way of coast-
ing uphill!
Guests came, and over the week-end the
manager of the Lodge brought out from
town a dance orchestra, lighted a fire of
pine logs in the hitherto merely ornamental
fireplace, laid in a supply of country saus-
age and buckwheat, and the Lodge bloomed
with a new life.
Father Hall, in his rectory next to the
little village church, paid small attention to
the winter activities of the Lodge. Winter
he gave to writing his books, and the few
extra Catholics who came for the Sunday
Mass, looking very red-faced and chapped


and befurred, found plenty of room in the
midst of his small congregation. They were
merely transients, not at all the same group
as the summer guests to whom Father Hall
gave his wholehearted service and friend-
ship.
Evening in the Rectory.
Father Hall, leaving his aged but efficient
housekeeper to clear away the debris of his
dinner, strolled leisurely into his warm
study. A coal fire burned in his grate. He
preferred wood fires, but they were such a
bother and danger compared with the neat,
compact, steady little heap of red coals im-
prisoned safely behind the iron grill. He
pulled the cord of his reading lamp and
sank into his easy chair under the soft,
warm light. Beside the chair stood his low
table, and on it, flanked by pipes and to-
bacco tins and ash trays and matches and
a humidor of cigars, lay his day’s output
of illegible manuscript, anchored safe
against a chance draught of air by a fat
volume of sermons. Someone had presented
him with the sermons, and he found them
a perfect paperweight. “Heavy stuff,” he
commented genially in one of his pet house-
hold jokes.
The coals threw a soft, red light on his
cassock and picked out the buttons in sullen
spots of fire. His pipe drew beautifully, and,
pencil in hand, he started the task of cut-


ting to pieces the work of the day. When
Father Hall finished a page of his manu-
script, it looked as if it had been through
a l»ng, hard fight. Honourable scars, the
scars made by a severe and painstaking
critic, through word and line and paragraph.
To-day’s output was a little less fortunate
than usual, and, just as he was reading a
paragraph over again with the incredulous
feeling that he could not have written such
positive drivel, the old-fashioned doorbell
rang.
Enter the Twins.
To say simply that the doorbell rang does
not really express what happened. The
doorbell was suddenly shaken loose and
flung into a mad series of convulsions.
Father Hall, sure now that the paragraph
did not even make sense, called out to his
housekeeper:
“If that tramp at the door had rung the
pbell gently, I’d have told you to give him a
quarter. As it is, give him a piece of your
mind and a dime.”
• J But it was no tramp who stood in the
crisp evening air, nor a hobo whose rough
hand had dragged the bell from its moor-
ings. For, as the housekeeper opened the
door, in dashed two young whirlwinds,
furred and gloved, shedding snow behind
them recklessly as they brushed through the


narrow hall door to fill the study with
youthful vitality.
Swift as they were, Father Hall was on
his feet before they could reach him, hold-
ing out both hands welcomingly.
“Dick! Sue!” he cried, smiling at the two
young people who grasped his hands in
their strong fingers.
“Hey, Father!” they chorused. “Surprise!
Surprise!”
It was a surprise. Dear as Dick and Sue
were to him, Father Hall, when he bade
them good-bye at the end of the summer,
never expected to see them again until the
following June, when they would return
with their lovely mother and the younger
brother and sisters to take up vacation life
in one of the summer cottages about Lake-
side Lodge. Theirs was a friendship and
affection such as sometimes exists between
young people and older people who refuse
to grow old, and Father Hall had watched
these twins from infancy, shared their con-
fidences, given them his wholehearted sy®-*
pathy and understanding, and woven him-
self into the very fabric of their lives.
Surprise.
“It’s a surprise, right enough,” he agreed.
“Winter, all this snow, and still you are
here at Lakeside.”
“Just down for the winter sports over the
week-end,” explained Sue.


‘We heard they were keen, so here we
are to make ’em keener,” supplemented Dick,
now burdened under Sue’s fur coat as well as
his own.
“Hang your coats in the hall, where the
melted snow won’t ruin my antique rug,’’
ordered Father Hall. Dick obeyed, while
Sue sank down on a low stool at the priest’s
feet, her back to the fire.
“Bully fire,” she said, approvingly. “I’ll
just sit here and toast—like a toasted marsh-
mallow.”
Like a roasted chestnut,” commented
Dick ungallantly as he sank into the deep
chair on the other side of the hearth. “Don’t
say we’re not faithful to you, Father. We
checked in at the Lodge one hour ago,
stowed our stuff in our rooms, had a bite
to eat, and then hotfooted it right over.”
“Imagine anybody hotfooting it when the
thermometer is flirting with zero,” scoffed
Sue.
“At any rate, before we did anything else,
we trotted right over to the one and only
friend of our dear, departed youth.”
“Dear, departed youth 1” laughed Father
Hall. “As I remember it, the twins are now
just nineteen.”
“But we feel at least a thousand,” said
Sue, seriously.
“I assure you, my dear,” agreed Father
Hall, “that you’ll never feel older. But


you’re certainly welcome, welcome as the
first breath of spring.”
The Undertone.
He pushed the tobacco stand midway be-
tween himself and Dick. Dick helped him-
self to a cigarette and a match.
“And how’s mother?”
“Great,” they agreed.
“Prettier than ever,” was Sue’s additional
contribution.
“And saner,” said Dick, laconically.
“And sends her best.”
They rattled on in rapid-fire chatter, but
Father Hall seemed to feel, underneath the
gay talk of schools and parties and the
theatre and sports and friends, an under-
current of uneasiness. He let the young
people carry the conversation, convinced
that if his suspicion was correct they would
soon solve his doubts. The conversation
lapsed, and Father Hall felt instinctively
that they were hovering on the brink of the
difficulty.
Ready to Wed.
Did mother write you lately?” asked Sue
•ibruptly. While she waited for the answer,
she turned away to stir the coals with a
wrought-iron poker.
“Not for the last three weeks,” Father
Hall replied.


You see? ’ Dick shot across at his twin
She s a good sport and sticks to her word
I told you she wouldn’t.”
Silence for a moment.
‘‘Wouldn’t what?” asked Father Hall.
That is, if you don’t mind my asking.”
Wouldn’t tell on me,” answered Sue,
turning again toward Father Hall.
, Why leave me out?” protested Dick.
I m in it quite as much as you are.”
Don’t be silly. Boys don’t think of
marrying for years after girls are settled for
life.
Think of marrying! Settled for life!
Father Hall looked at the twins with al-
most a start. Overnight they were growing
into manhood and womanhood, with mar-
nage, perhaps, just ahead. It hardly seemed
credible that these two had been the little
babies carried to Lakeside almost two de-
cades before.
"We might as well tell you,” Sue hurried
on. We both got the dickens.”
“It wasn’t the dickens, precisely. But
mother talked out in meeting, and talked
straight. Sue’s been going around lately
with Earl Caldwell, and I took Phyllis Kraft
to the Fortnightly, and though mother likes
them both—”
Silly.
“Earl is a perfectly charming fellow.”
“—she thought we were both getting too
interested, and told us so.”


Father Hall leaned forward to fill his pipe
with fresh tobacco.
“What was her objection?” he asked.
“Neither of them is a Catholic,” said Dick,
“and she just doesn’t want us falling in love
with a non-Catholic.”
“Afraid,” supplemented Sue, “that I’ll
make a mixed marriage.”
Dick shot the end of his burnt cigarette
into the grate. Sue leaned back, her hands
clasped over her knee.
“You* mother is a very wise woman,
chicks, and her advice was absolutely right.”
Sue grew momentarily combative.
“It seems just a little silly to me, all this
talk about mixed marriages. We associate
with non-Catholics in everything we do.
Mother and dad have plenty of non-Catholic
friends. Mother plays bridge with them and
dad does business with them. I like lots of
them vastly, dance with them, talk books
with them, play around with them. So does
Dick. His partner last year in the tennis
tournament was Bill Lowell, who is a . . .
well, some sort of Protestant. If we live
all our lives rubbing elbows with them, why
all the fuss about marrying them?”
“Does seem odd, doesn’t it?” Father Hall
said.
So Narrow.
"And a little narrow,” added Dick, rather
relieved that Father Hall appeared to agree.


“Narrow is an unpleasant word, isn’t it,
Dick? We don’t much like to think that we
are narrow.”
“Rather not.”
“Yet, as a matter of fact, we are pretty
narrow, necessarily pretty narrow, about a
lot of important things. A lawyer is nar-
row when he forms his law firm. He ex-
cludes everyone from consideration who
isn’t a lawyer like himself. He doesn’t
take into his partnership doctors or archi-
tects or actors or plumbers, though he may
play golf with them, lunch with them, and
count them among his very good friends.
It would simply be nonsense if he acted
any other way. Business men are narrow
about their associates. An auto manufac-
turer doesn’t take into his business a man
who knows nothing about automobiles or
has little faith in them.”
“But,” protested Sue, “that’s not the same
as marriage.”
“Then let’s take marriage. No girl who
feels, we’ll say, that music is essential for
her happiness and must always make up a
large part of her life is going to let herself
fall in love with a man who hates music
intensely, can’t bear the sound of it, cor-
dially dislikes a symphony, and refuses to
allow the radio to be turned on except for
stock reports and the broadcasting of the
big fight. For that matter, she wouldn't


consider a man who was merely bored by
music. If she means seriously to keep music
as an important element in her life’s happi-
ness, she would hardly be wise in falling in
love with a man who can’t tell ‘Yankee
Doodle’ from ‘The Blue Danube,’ and who
yawns at the mere mention of grand opera.
She has to be narrow in her choice of a
partner for life unless she wants to drop
forever the music that means so much to
her.
“When things really mean a lot to us, we
naturally gravitate toward people who feel
about those things as we do. That may be
narrow, but it’s certainly common sense.”
“I see,” Sue said briefly.
A Wall Between.
Dick lit another cigarette but took only
a puff or two and then let it burn idly in
his fingers.
“Religion, for a Catholic,” Father Hall
continued, “should be the really most im-
portant thing in his life. If time is only a
preparation for eternity and religion is the
sure guide that leads men through life to
the gates of heaven, then religion must be
terribly significant and vital.
“Now let’s suppose that you marry a non-
Catholic, either of you. One of two things
will happ-en. Your life’s partner will regard
religion with indifference, as something not
particularly interesting, or will consider the


Faith he or she professes to be really im-
portant. If your wife, Dick, or your hus-
band, Sue, thinks religion is no more im-
portant than the ancient detachable cuffs
or the paper fringe on a lamb chop, you
have a tremendous interest in your life that
he or she regards as almost trivial. They
may be respectful to your Faith because
it is yours, but personally it means nothing
to them. Certainly, your religion means far
more to you than music means to that girl
we just looked at a few moments ago; but
religion to them is like ‘The Heroic Sym-
phony to a deaf-mute. You begin marriage
disagreeing on essentials.
But if their religion is an important
thing to them, if they cling strictly to their
creed, they are implicitly saying that they
are right and you are wrong. And as Pro-
testantism is much more insistent on saying
‘Catholics are wrong’ than ‘Protestants are
right,’ you are faced with the fact that the
things nearest and dearest to you will be
regarded as radically wrong by the one who
shares your life. The Blessed Sacrament
is to them blasphemy, or at least a glaring
mistake, confession is a delusion; the vene-
ration of the Mother of God, idolatry; the
Mass, stupid mummery. You are wrong;
and, much as they may love you, they are
sure you are wrong. And the sweetest dis-
position begins to sour a little when we


come into daily contact with someone who
is absolutely sure we are wrong on essen-
tials.
“Marriage, you see, has to be based on
perfect understanding and sympathy. It is
the most intimate sort of partnership, in no
sense like taking a casual partner for bridge
or tennis or dancing or even for business.
Through marriage two people are sup-posed
to become one heart, one soul, almost one
flesh. Is that likely where he and she
utterly disagree about the essentials of re-
ligion?
Unfair from the Start.
“Why, they start off with a fundamental
disagreement about what marriage itself is.
Catholics see in it a beautiful sacrament,
instituted by Christ Himself, a binding con-
tract that lasts until the death of one of
the couple. To Protestants it is either a
civil ceremony or a religious rite without
any sacramental character, a contract (in
the opinion of the vast majority of them
nowadays) that may be easily cancelled,
leaving them perfect freedom for remarriage.
“That last point has always seemed to me
dreadfully unfair to the Catholic. The
Catholic has to make marriage a success.
If it is a failure, it’s his hard luck, for it’s
his one and only chance until his wife dies.
The non-Catholic feels no such compulsion.
If the first marriage is a failure, there is a


second that can be tried, or perhaps a third.
And certainly you know how many people
enter marriage nowadays with the idea that,
if they don’t make a go of this one, they’ll
try another. So, if marriage is a failure
and a divorce is secured, the Catholic goes
on through life tied to the non-Catholic
partner, while the non-Catholic partner goes
off gaily to another marriage, and neither
the great majority of his or her own faith
nor the world will say them nay. It’s a bit
one-sided, that sort of contract, and not
quite fair.
Taboo.
“But quite aside from that, instead of
finding themselves close together in every-
thing, the couple in a mixed marriage find
themselves separated by the widest possible
differences enthusiasm for religion and
utter indifference about it; firm belief in the
Catholic Faith and the conviction that the
Catholic Faith is largely nonsense; love for
the Blessed Sacrament and horror or in-
credulity at the thought of it; loyalty to the
Vicar of Christ and the deep-rooted belief
that he is the most presumptuous usurper.
Heaven knows, there are enough difficulties
in the way of happiness in marriage without
asking a young couple to span these terrible
differences in so fundamental a thing as re-
ligion.”
Sue looked up uneasily.


“But, Father,’’ she protested, “a married
couple needn’t talk religion. They can just
ignore it, can’t they?”
“In other words, Sue, you’re asking me to
picture a happy marriage, a perfect union of
husband and wife, when the most important
subject in the world has to be ignored. The
Catholic husband or wife has to keep it
carefully out of the conversation. It’s thin
ice that must not be trodden upon. It’s a
constant taboo hanging over their heads.
Why should there be any possible subject
that you can’t discuss freely with the one
you marry? Why must you spend even a
part of your married life dodging the thing
that is dear to your heart and vital for your
soul? Ignore? Sue, with your frankness,
I can’t fancy you happy if you had to ignore
anything dear to you—above all your Faith.”
Sue dropped her eyes.
Walking Alone.
“United? Religion will get between you
all the time. Sunday morning comes. You
walk off alone to Mass knowing, with a
pang of loneliness, that the one you love
is sitting calmly at home or kneeling in the
pew of a Protestant church. On Christmas
Eve you turn, Dick, to your wife and say,
‘l’m going to Midnight Mass, dear,’ and she
says either, ‘Please don’t wake me when you
go,’ or, ‘Drop me at the watch service in
the Presbyterian church.’ ”


“Gosh, that hurts,” Dick said.
“The reality hurts far, far more. Alone
you or Sue will kneel at the altar rail to
receive Christ in Holy Communion. The
parish mission or retreat will mean a week
of separation, resented, not unjustly, by the
non-Catholic, who must keep the empty
house alone. And don’t think you’re going
to find it easy to turn your back in apparent
coldness on those dearest to your heart
when you feel you must go to church and
they cannot or will not go with you. Your
whole religious life you will live absolutely
separated from the one you love. Lonely?
How could it be otherwise?”
Sue was not quite convinced.
“Jane Hughes, who graduated from the
academy when I was a freshman, married a
non-Catholic, and he goes to church with
her on Christmas and Easter and whenever
there is an important sermon.”
Father Hall smiled at her.
“Do you think that helps such a lot? She
genuflects in adoration to Christ up-on the
altar, and he enters the pew without a sign
of faith. She bows her head as the Host
is lifted at Benediction or at the moment
of Consecration, while he sits stolidly be-
side her. She listens to the sermon, not
with any view to what the priest may be
saying to her, but with a fear that he may
say something that will hurt her husband’s


September 15, 1934. (No. 22.)
feelings or start an unpleasant controversy
when they return after the service. Let me
tell you, Sue, my dear: though she and her
husband may be so close together there
in the pew that their garments rub, they
are really separated by uncrossed wastes of
chilly, barren doubts and unbeliefs.”
Two Souls Without.
Dick sat apparently engrossed in studying
a slightly burnt forefinger. The fire of his
smouldering cigarette had burned up to his
skin without his noticing it, until the sharp
pain had made him drop the cigarette on the
rug, whence he retrieved it to shoot it into
the grate. But he was not, it seemed,
wholly intent on the burn.
“It does seem rather tough,” he said.
“Hardly the ‘two souls with but a single
thought’ stuflf that I’d like to have in my
marriage.”
“I’d not thought of it from that angle,”
Sue murmured softly. “I’d like to think that
the man I marry and I myself would have
everything possible in common; tastes, dis-
likes, education, position in society ”
“All very important,” agreed Father Hall,
“but which of them is half as important as
religion?”
“Go to My Church.”
“Queer, though,” Dick commented, “that
a Baptist can marry a Methodist, or a Pres-


byterian an Episcopalian, and hit it off. Why
doesn’t religion separate them?”
“What makes you think it doesn’t? If
they are both staunch in their faith, of
course it does. If one believes and the other
doesn’t, they have no union of minds. The
one reason why they can marry nowadays
and make a success of it is just because
the Protestant sects do not any longer dif-
fer as once they did, and it doesn’t much
matter what Protestant church one attends.
“I was talking with a Protestant chap not
so long ago. He had been raised an Epis-
copalian; but when he married a Presby-
terian, he started to go to her church. He
felt that they ought to think alike about
religion if they wanted union of soul; so
he went her way. He told me about the
embarrassment he felt when he met for the
first time his Episcopalian bishop. ‘You’ve
not been at our church lately,’ the bishop
said. The young chap explained what he
had done, and waited for the lightning to
flash. Instead, the bishop patted him lightly
on the shoulder and said, "That’s sensible,
my boy. You and your wife should wor-
ship together. Fundamentally, all religions
are one. In time, I hope we will really all
be one.’
“There precisely you have it. Protestant
sects have so lost their identifying marks
that a Congregationalist president of the


United States can go to a Baptist church
and there be addressed by a Presbyterian
minister, and nobody thinks it at all strange.
The policy of ‘lf you go to my church to-
day, I’ll go to yours next Sunday,’ is simple
enough for modern Protestants. But not
for Catholics! Can you fancy a Catholic
bishop talking as the Protestant bishop did,
or a Catholic being really satisfied in ex-
changing on alternate Sundays the Sacrifice
of the Mass for an Evangelical sermon? It
isn’t the same thing, Dick, and everybody
knows it. With the Protestant, any church
but the Catholic is good enough. With the
Catholic, Christ established one Church, not
a series of discordant churches, and that
Church is Catholic.”
Indifferent.
“Do you think, then, Father, that all mixed
marriages are bound to end in discord?”
Sue was puzzled, and she wanted an answer.
“Discord?” Father Hall echoed. “Well,
let’s see what happens. We’ll say, Sue, that
you marry a non-Catholic whom you love
better than anyone else in the world. You
go to church, either leaving him behind or
on his way to his own church. You avoid
the subject of religion so as not to hurt his
feelings or to start an argument. He is
deeply dear to you. but he does not care
a snap of his fingers about your Faith.
This goes on for a time, months, years.


What happens to you? You grow indif-
ferent to religion or you grow more and
more lonesome.”
“Oh, Father,” she protested, ‘I couldn’t
grow indifferent to my Faith 1”
“Sue,” the priest said, seriously, “it is dif-
ficult not to grow indifferent about some-
thing that doesn’t matter to one we love.
Much as that girl may have been attached
to her music, if she found it bored her hus-
band, she’d either give it up little by little
or she’d give him up entirely. The chances
are that she would give up her music. The
person has much more appeal to us than
other attractive things in the world.
So, as the years slip along. Sue, and you
find that the man you love still regards your
religion as of little importance or as flatly
wrong, there is the strong possibility of
your taking his point of view. Thousands
have, you know, just because they came to
feel, without reasoning about it, that noth-
ing could be very important which made so
little difference to the one they loved.
Or Lonely.
“But let’s suppose that in the face of this
indifference you still cling to your Faith.
At first you go bravely along, buoyed up
with the hope that very soon he will join
you at the altar and the Communion rail.
But he doesn’t. He shows perhaps less


interest than he did when he was wooing
you. Certainly he shows not one whit more
of faith or even simple understanding. You
realise with the passing of years that there
is a great, important section of your life
you must live in utter solitude. And soli-
tude, my dear, does not grow easier with
years.
“Just because of this indifference or lone-
liness so many give up their Faith. Indif-
ference slowly wears them down. Loneli-
ness grows harder and harder to endure.
Faith grows less and less important when
they see it matters so little to the one who
shares everything else in their lives. They
find it hard to cling passionately to what
someone else despises or ignores. And in
unnumbered cases Faith finally disappears.’’
“Now, Father,” cried Dick, in quick pro-
test, “don’t tell me that you think either
Sue or I would give up our Faith for any-
one in the world.”
Father Hall looked at him with deep
seriousness.
“Stronger souls than you and Sue have
given up their Faith. Don’t you know that
the greatest source of fallen-away Catholics
is mixed marriages? Look at the South.
Why, the McCarthys and O’Reillys and
Burnses and Kellys and O’Briens who are
filling Protestant pulp<its all had Catholic
ancestors who married non-Catholics and


drifted slowly away. Go into any city in
the Union and investigate the leakage from
the Church. In nine out of ten cases it’s
the slow or swift leakage through mixed
marriages. The most terrible book ever
written against Confession was the work of
a man born of a mixed marriage. The
Catholic person, unless strong, often grows
tired of the separation, and goes less fre-
quently to the sacraments, drops Sunday
Mass, not because he or she has ceased to
believe, but because each practice of religi-
ous duties means a further separation from
husband or wife.
Warfare.
“And when the non-Catholic party de-
liberately tries to weaken the faith of the
Catholic, attacks it, or blocks the practice
of it ”
“Oh, Father,” cried Sue, protestingly, “we
are talking about people of refinement and
culture.”
“So, unfortunately,” replied Father Hall,
“am I. I remember not so many years ago
hearing of the mixed marriage of a girl I
had known for years, a lovely girl, of a
staunch old Catholic family, a convent-bred,
high-typ'e person. She married one of these
smart scoffers, but married him before a
priest. He wanted her badly enough for
that. He was a gentleman born and bred,


and light-handed in his methods —light-
handed, but terribly efficient.
“From the start it was a battle skilfully
waged. ‘I don’t like the idea of my wife
telling her personal affairs to any priest.’
‘lsn’t it a bit inconsiderate to leave me alone
Sunday after Sunday like this?’ ‘What’s
the particular saint you are praying to this
week that you have to go to church when
I want to go to the theatre?’ ‘I see the
Pope has been making a fool of himself
again. Why must he say absurd, mediae-
val things that make an intelligent man
yawn?’ ‘lt’s a little difficult to see how a
person who pretends to any degree of brain
power can fancy that a piece of bread is
God.’ ‘ls this your rosary? Interesting
piece of bric-a-brac. The illiterate Buddhist
monks have them, too.’
“At first she was impatient and argumen-
tative. He answered arguments with a
laugh. Then she was patient, though
patience is not always a virtue. Day after
day he hacked away, gently and with a
delicate scalpel, at her Faith. The last I
heard of her was the pathetic news that she
had given up her Faith. ‘I no longer can
believe in the supernatural,’ she said. That
may or may not be true. My honest con-
viction is that she gave up through sheer
weariness and a desire for peace. She had
married a gentleman, but he had deftly ac-


complished his purpose of destroying her
faith.”
Every Possible Tie.
Father Hall looked at the twins tenderly.
“When you marry, chicks,” he said,
“marry someone whom you can bind to
your own soul by every possible tie. And
there is no higher or more insurmountable
barrier in the world than the barrier of re-
ligion. It’s a barrier even in business and
society. Can it fail to be a barrier in mar-
riage? Don’t expose yourselves to a life
of probable misunderstanding, loneliness,
and veiled or open contempt.”
“It seems to me,” Dick argued, “if what
you are saying is true, that the opposite
must be true, too.”
“I’m not following that,” Father Hall said.
“I mean that if mixed marriages are so
likely to be unhappy, marriage with a Catho-
lic is likely to be happy. Yet I know quite
well Catholics who have married Catholics
and their marriage has been a failure.”
Fudge.
“Quite right. No man, least of all a priest,
promises happiness as the inevitable con-
sequence of any marriage. There is too
much selfishness, pettiness, meanness, stub-
born pride, in human beings; and the human
vices can spoil any marriage. So Catholic
marriages sometimes do end in failure, too.


But if to the common vices or faults which
one finds in all human beings you add this
difference of religion which we’ve been talk-
ing about, and the whole matter of children
and of viewpoint on morality ”
The heavy curtains that were draped be-
tween the dining-room and the study were
quietly pulled aside and in the doorway
stood Father Hall’s housekeeper, a plate
held out invitingly.
“Excuse me,’’ she said, “but I thought the
young people might like some home-made
fudge.”
Dick vaulted to his feet.
“Home-made fudge! My favourite fruit!”
“Did you make it for us?” cried Sue.
“It was easy enough to make, for on a
cold night like this it hardens almost at
once.”
The two young p-eople bore between them
the precious burden to Father Hall’s little
table and set it down.
“Thoughtful of you,” said Father Hall,
smiling up at his housekeeper. “Thank you
much.”
She nodded briskly and went out.
“Isn’t she a dear?” ejaculated Sue, a huge
piece of fudge caught between a slender
thumb and forefinger.
“And a world-star fudge concoctor,”
agreed Dick.


“You know,” Father Hall said, “that she
has a son who is a missionary priest in
China.”
“I’d heard that,” Dick nodded.
“I wish he had some of this fudge,” said
Sue, generously. “It’s delicious.
“Well, you’ve a perfectly human appetite
for it,” was the ungracious comment of her
brother.
“At least, savage, I don’t eat fudge as if
it were roast beef.”
They all laughed, and once more silence
fell upon the twins. Father Hall sat
thoughtful for a moment and then went on
talking.
Pity the Children.
“Now, of course, that son of hers owes
his missionary vocation largely, under God,
to his mother. But his father was the
proudest man I’ve known, and happy
yond words in the vocation of his son.”
“Why shouldn’t he have been?” asked
Sue.
“He should; he was a Catholic and knew
what a priestly vocation means. Suppose
he had been a non-Catholic and his boy had
wanted to devote his life to bringing the
pagans to Catholicity. Do you know, I’ve
often thought it is the children upon whom
mixed marriages bring the realest suffering
and sadness.


I can remember when, just before I came
to Lakeside, I did considerable work for
Catholic children in public schools. There
were thousands of them in our town, and
all of them practically without Catholic
training of any sort. We used to get them
together on Sunday afternoons, and I tried
to make friends of them.”
“You mean,” interjected Sue, “that you
actually made the best sort of friends of
them. You would.”
Divided Allegiance.
At any rate—and thank you for the com-
pliment—l got their confidence. Most of
those children who were getting no Catho-
lic training were the children of mixed mar-
riages. Their non-Catholic father or mother
objected to the idea of Catholic schooling,
and the Catholic parent, for the sake of
peace, yielded. Those youngsters talked
trankly to me about their problems.
• Father,’ one little boy asked me, ‘what
is the fourth commandment?’ It sounded
like an innocent enough question; but when
answered, he kept saying over to himself,
rolling it about on his tongue, so to speak
thy father and thy mother.’ Then he asked
the question he really wanted to ask. ‘Well,
if your father is a Protestant and your
mother is a Catholic, and both of them want
you to go to church with them, which do


you have to obey?’ Poor little chap, he was
under a double obedience, and that obedi-
ence was pulling him savagely in two direc-
tions.
“ ‘Why don’t you ask your daddy about
Catholic questions you don’t understand?’
I asked a little girl whose father I knew was
a Catholic. ‘Oh, no!’ she protested; ‘I don’t
like to. Whenever I want to ask him any-
thing about church, I have to ask it real
low so that mother won’t hear us talking.
She doesn’t like to hear us talk about the
Church, and I don’t like to hurt her feelings.’
"Again and again the same difficulties
came up: ‘My daddy is a fine man, and he
is not a Catholic. Why is religion so neces-
sary when he doesn’t believe in it?’ ‘My
mother doesn’t go to church on Sunday;
so why do you say it’s a mortal sin to miss
Mass?’ ‘My daddy says one religion is as
good as another, and my daddy always tells
me the truth.’
“I could get their point of view, poor little
youngsters! You see, my father had not
been a Catholic while I was a growing
child, and just the difficulties they were hav-
ing I had too.
“But Dad Doesn’t.”
“I loved my father, and thought him, as
all youngsters do, infallible. What dad
said was right, and what dad did was fine.


Yet here was my dad saying none ot the
prayers I was taught were important, and
doing none of the things 1 was told were
essential. Mother and 1 went to church,
but dad stayed home. Mother and 1 said
our prayers, but dad never made even a
sign of the cross. Confession was neces-
sary; yet dad didn’t go. First Communion
was to be the big event in my child life;
yet I knew that dad had never made his
First Communion, and would not go with
me when later mother and I would go to
the altar together.
"It was awfully hard to puzzle out, and
l lay awake nights, as long as a child can
lie awake, trying to square what I was be
ing taught with what I knew ot my in
fallible and beloved father Had the non
Catholic in our home been my absolutely
perfect mother, 1 shudder to think ot what
would have gone through my mind as 1
lay trying to square the theory of my Faith
with the absence of its practice in her
“And these youngsters that I met had the
same loneliness that I experienced. My
first confession was a thrill and a joy. I
dashed home to tell mother. ‘Shall I tell
dad, too?’ ‘I don’t think I would; he
wouldn’t understand.’ When the day of my
First Communion came, I ran from the
church to throw myself into the arms of
my mother. But dad had not come to see


my big day, and there was a real ache in
my heart as I realised that that First Com-
munion of mine meant nothing to him.
There was even something sad about the
prayer I said after that First Communion,
‘Please, Jesus, make my daddy a Catholic.’
The Centre of Strife.
“My father was an exceptional man, and
all the while, of course, on the road to con-
version. What would life have been for
me had he been different and had I heard
the sneers at religion, the cold contemp-t for
it, the positive hatred of the Church that
mark even supposedly well-mannered
people? What if my mother had been
forced to steal out to Mass and confession,
as thousands of women are forced to do,
and to fight for the right to have me receive
my First Communion or my Catholic edu-
cation?
“Poor little youngsters, thousands of
them, the children of mixed marriages, live
in an atmosphere of religious strife, hear
their Faith held up to ridicule, see the utter
indifference of one of their parents and the
growing neglect of the other, and, without
knowing what they are losing, let the Faith
slip away.
“And when the day comes on which a
school must be chosen, the non-Catholics
again and again, and sometimes for quite in-


telligible reasons, protest when a Catholic
school is suggested. They won’t have the
parochial school; they see no reason for a
Catholic high school; they insist on a secu-
lar college. If the Catholic parent is strong
and courageous, he or she will fight for the
right to educate the children in the Faith.
But it s unpleasant to fight one’s partner,
especially over the children; so the public
schools are filled with the children of Catho-
lic parents who did not have the courage
to carry on a continuous war for religious
education.”
Promises.
I thought, said Dick, “that all that was
taken care of in the promises. Don’t non-
Catholics have to make promises before mar-
riage that they will respect the faith of the
Catholic and allow the children to be
brought up in the Church?”
“Why,” cried Sue, “I wouldn’t think of
marrying a man who wouldn’t make those
promises.”
“There are the promises; and while they
cover essentials, don’t forget they do not
cover the fact that the child sees one of his
parents utterly uninterested in or flatly op-
posed to the things which he is taught are
sacred. They do not cover the loneliness
of a child who feels the separation between
himself and a beloved parent.


“But altogether aside from that I’m not
so sure about the promises. I have the
greatest respect in the world for the non-
Catholic parties who make the promises and
live up to them. I wish I could say all
of them do. But, sadly enough, they do
not. Men and women will promise almost
anything when madly in love and eager at
all costs to marry the person who alone can
give life’s happiness. When love cools
down, however, many of them begin to be-
lieve that they have been tricked into giving
up precious rights over their children, and
they resent that fearfully. The idea, be-
fore marriage, of some vaguely future chil-
dren being brought up good little Catholics
was right enough; the sight of John and
Jane and Fred and Nell trotting off to the
Catholic church with the Catholic parent
while the non-Catholic parent goes alone
and childless to his or her church or stays
at home forsaken by the whole family—
ah, that hurts; and it would be mighty
strange if it didn’t hurt.
“And though I hate to say it, I’ve met
dozens of men and women who after mar-
riage claimed that the promises were un-
fair, and admit they took them without any
intention of carrying them out. They
didn’t feel, since they were not Catholics,
that they could be bound by the Catholic
Church or that the Catholic Church had any


right to step in and dictate terms to them
about their marriage. Some very polished
and well-bred gentlemen and ladies of my
acquaintance quite coolly admitted shortly
after marriage that they never had meant
to keep the promises. Dishonourable, if
you wish, but quite in accord with human
nature as we know human nature.
Suppose You Die.
“Don’t count too much on the promises.
You may remember one summer when we
argued whether a person in love was cap-
able of a really rational act. That was
nonsense, chicks; but when you hear the
extravagant promises lovers make, with the
fullest intention of executing them, you be-
gin to doubt almost everything they say.
And priests can tell you case after case of
the prenuptial promises smashed heedlessly
and heartlessly before the wedding dress had
taken on the scent of the camphor-soaked
closet.
“And suppose that you die while the chil-
dren are growing up. Suppose that as you
feel death coming you suddenly realise that
you are leaving the whole religious future
of those children you cherish in the hands
of one who has not your Faith and theirs.
Do you think that either you, Dick, or you,
Sue, could face death calmly, knowing that
these boys and girls of yours must depend
for their religious guidance on a non-Catho-


lie? Even if he or she were to be loyal to
promises made to you on your deathbed,
you would be leaving the children to take
their Faith from one who does not believe
in it. It’s a difficult position, and I should
hate to face death realising its full signi-
ficance.”
Dick scooped up a few crumbs from the
fudge dish in a sort of final gesture and
reached for one of Father Hall’s pipes.
“May I smoke this?” he asked.
“Of course. But I rather think you’ll
find this one sweeter. It is so heavily
crusted it won’t hold much, but I’ve been
training that pipe for ten years.
Sue rocked back and forth thoughtfully
on her low stool, and then spoke an argu-
ment that Father Hall had felt was bound
to come.
Forgetting Religion.
“From the standpoint of religion, Father,
I can see it perfectly. Not that that stand-
point shouldn’t be enough. But somehow,
I’ve met men and women (I’m talking for
both Dick and myself now) who had no
religion and yet were such likable, attrac-
tive people, the sort one knows belong to
the same class of society, with the, same
education and the same ideals! Don’t you
think they ought to do, even for husbands
and wives?”
Father Hall shook his head slowly.


“As friends and acquaintances, for busi-
ness and bridge and clubs and society, they
have my fullest approval. As husbands and
wives, no.”
“Even forgetting for a moment about re-
ligion?” Sue protested.
“Can one forget about religion even for
a moment?” Father Hall asked quietly.
“Of course not. But just on the sup-
position ”
“I understand. Even there, no. Surely
you’ve read enough and seen enough of life
to know how ethical and moral standards
(I’m not talking about religious beliefs)
have changed in the last few years. The
Catholic Church stands as the staunch be-
liever in and defender of the so-called old
morality. It still believes in personal purity,
in self-restraint, in the sanctity of marriage,
in the right of little children to be born, in
the importance of the home. Outside of the
Catholic Church how many hold those same
beliefs?”
Frank Facts.
Father Hall leaned forward, his face more
serious than it had been thus far.
“You’re old enough to hear frank and
honest truth,” he said, “and I’m going to
talk it out. Years ago we used to say
that if a Catholic man married a non-
Catholic woman the faith of the Catholic
was likely to be imperilled. But if a Catho-


lie woman married a non-Catholic man,
there was a chance for a successful, happy
marriage.”
“Rather tough on the men,” was Dick’s
comment.
“But probably quite justified,” Sue said
with quiet triumph.
“Well,” Father Hall went on, “nowadays
I am convinced the case is just reversed. I
hate with all my heart to see a Catholic
girl marry a non-Catholic man, even when
I know that he is a fine, clean, upright
gentleman.”
“Why?” cried the twins, in one breath.
“Because I’ve talked to too many heart-
sick young Catholic women married to non-
Catholics. You’ve heard of birth-control?”
They nodded.
“Perhaps you know how common it has
become—the accepted thing in vast stretches
of non-Catholic society. Well, chicks, the
most heartbreaking experience of a priest is
when some young woman comes to him,
tears in her eyes and in her voice, to tell
him the torture of soul she is going through.
Her husband will not have more, let’s say,
than two children, sees no sense in having
more, insists that it is perfectly right to
limit the family to what he thinks his means
and her health justify, tells her that her at-
titude is suicidal and will drive him from
her, and that, if she wants a happy married


life with him, she must see things as he
sees them and limit the children to the num-
ber he judges wise. He may be, as I said,
a satisfactory and, on other points, tender
husband. He has persuaded himself he is
right, and he will not listen to another side.
Broken Hearts.
“So the poor woman comes to the priest,
anguish in her heart, to ask what to do. She
stands between the awful alternative of
estranging her husband or turning her back
upon her God. No priest can give her abso-
lution if she agrees with her husband’s de-
mands. So she must choose between the
love of her husband and the love of Christ
in His sacraments. It’s a simply terrible
ordeal that thousands of Catholic young
women have gone through, are going
through at the present moment. And be-
cause they have not been able to face the
peril of losing their husbands, thousands of
them have given up the practice of their
Faith.
My Wife or My Soul.
“It really isn’t so much less difficult for
the Catholic young man. Not so long ago,
a young fellow talked to me on the train—
a dandy chap, fine, clean, upstanding, and,
he told me, a Catholic. ‘But,’ he said, with
a sad sort of smile, ‘I don’t go to the sac-
raments any more. I never miss Mass or


my prayers, but, of course, I can’t go to
Confession or Communion.’
“I knew what he meant. ‘Do you want
children?’ I asked him. ‘More than any-
thing in the world,’ he answered, almost
passionately. ‘We’ve had two, but my wife
positively refuses to have any more; so. . . .
Well, I love her, and I have had to give
up the sacraments. Tough break, isn’t it?’
“Other thousands of those young men are
suffering just that tough break, chicks. It
really looks as if Christ’s plea, Suffer little
children to come unto me’ would soon be
answered only inside the Catholic Church.
It’s only Catholic ethics that dares publicly
to brand as crime the growing practice of
the so-called civilised world. The non-
Catholic you meet and marry, in nine cases
out of ten, has been told, in season and out
of season, that not only is this no sin but
that it is positively necessary for the good
of the individual and the race. It’s a ter-
rible lie, and a conspiracy to make a crime
a custom. Yet it’s not going to be easy
for Catholics to tell the non-Catholics they
love and marry that they have believed a
lie and been taught to practise crime.
Pagan Ways.
“I hate to talk this way to you, chicks,
but it’s terrible truth, and you had better
know it "before marriage than after.


“And the whole moral attitude of the non-
Catholic world is changed. Who cares
about the words of Christ branding remar-
riage after divorce as adultery? Who, after
seeing modern plays and reading modern
novels, dares say the modern world believes
that ‘blessed are the pure of heart?’ Who
defends the sanctities of the home? My
stars! We’re developing a life more pagan
than the life in old Corinth. We have
known the truth and thrown it away. And
that is the worst sort of moral treason.
“For the love of your own happiness, pick
out someone who thinks as you think about
right and wrong and the very foundations
of life.”
Love Chooses.
But, Father,” Sue interjected impulsively,
“how can one pick out somebody? That
isn’t the way love works, is it? One doesn’t
go around shopping for the right man and
suddenly say, ‘l’ll take that one.’ ”
Love picks on us; we don’t pick on some-
body to love,” agreed Dick.
Father Hall smiled.
“That’s the romantic idea that love is
something that strikes like lightning. I
know a brilliant and charming Chinese
gentleman, Sue. Do you fancy you could
fall in love with him?”
“Oh, no!”


“Precisely/’ Father Hall echoed; “oh, no!
Dick, I’ve noticed that the Queen of Rou-
mania has some very beautiful daughters.
Why not pick out one of them to marry?”
“Now you’re spoofing me.”
“No. I’m just showing you that there
are whole classes of people we never, even
remotely, fall in love with. Why? Not
because they may not be vastly attractive
in themselves, but because we have made
up our minds once and for all that they
are not for us.
“Now if either of you were actually in
love with a non-Catholic, I might go on
talking to you as I’ve been doing, but I
should talk with a hopeless sense of the ter-
rible task I had. It’s hard to ask a per-
son, in cold, logical argument, to give up
his love. But it’s quite another thing to
say to you, ‘Don’t think about marrying a
non-Catholic. When you go out with one,
just have a fixed realisation that he or she
is not for you. You’ll never marry a non-
Catholic, because one who is not of your
Faith will not make you happy. Non-
Catholics are delightful companions, but not
for us in the serious and difficult business
of marriage.’
“If you have that attitude, the chances are
that you are no more likely to think of
marrying one of them than you, Sue, are
likely to think of marrying my very dear


friend, the educated and brilliant and splen-
didly Catholic Chinese gentleman, or you,
Dick, of marrying the crown princess of
Roumania.
Not For Me.
“You see, love is usually a gradual, al-
most slow, growth. It begins with this im-
plicit idea. ‘The charming person whom I
have met is somebody whom I might pos-
sibly marry.’ We talk with such persons
and find we have similar tastes. We play
about with them, dance with them, go to
the theatre with them. We grow more and
more interested. We allow ourselves to be
thrown with them. Then some day we
wake with the sudden realisation that we’re
in love. But back of it all has been the
unconscious conviction that, if we fall in
love, quite possibly we might marry them.
“If from the start we have the fixed prin-
ciple that we cannot marry them, that they
are not for us and could not make us happy,
love is far, far less likely to strike. They
are pleasant companions for us, but noth-
ing more. Like the charming wives and
husbands of our friends, we associate plea-
santly with them, but we never think of
them as persons with whom we might fall
in love or whom we might ultimately
marry.”
Father Hall lit a match and held it over
his pipe, in which the tobacco was long


cold. The twins gazed off into the fire,
through the fire, apparently, at something
far beyond. It was Sue who broke the
silence.
Your Mother Did.
“Your mother married a non-Catholic.”
“Yes. He was converted during my years
at college.”
“So, Father, he is one person who prob-
ably would not have been converted if your
mother had not married a non-Catholic,”
she argued cleverly.
“Quite true,” Father Hall agreed smiling-
ly. “But I want to remind you of one
thing. When my mother married my father,
the difference in moral viewpoint between
Catholics and the rest of the world was not
what it now is. Few Protestants regarded
divorce as possible, certainly not as respect-
able. They still loved the sanctities of
home and prided themselves on the loyalties
of husbands and wives. Children were
considered as an honour, gifts from God
that were to be treasured as His greatest
blessing:
“Even at that, don’t think that during the
long years before conversion my mother did
not have her periods of intense loneliness.
Don’t think she didn’t have to battle against
the indifference born of the thought that
religion mattered not the least to her hus-
band. Don’t think that my brothers and


sisters and I did not regard our father’s
lack of faith with astonishment, wonder,
keen disappointment. We did. It was only
when he had finally accepted the Faith that
real union came into our family. For the
first time we knew what it meant for all
of us to kneel together at the altar rail, for
all of us to profess the same Faith, to make
at meals the same Sign of the Cross, to
talk religion, not ‘real low,’ but aloud and
proudly. Union in our family came with
faith.”
Convert First.
“Even so,” Sue returned, “it’s rather a
splendid thing to marry a person and then
convert him.”
“And how many do? Let me tell you
something, little girl. If you want swift
and satisfactory work, convert him before,
not after. Before marriage a man is deeply
in love and eager to please the girl.
"That is almost as true, Dick, of the girl
you marry. The man or girl will go much
more willingly with you to church then.
You may even get them to take instructions
from a priest before. If there is any con-
verting to be done, get it done before mar-
riage. If you wait until after, believe me,
and I talk from a wide experience, you will
wait a long, long time, lonely and tedious
years, and in the end you may not succeed.
"Marrying a person to convert him is al-
most like marrying a man to reform him.


Sometimes it’s done. But the odds in the
open market are ten to one against it. I
know splendid Catholic men and devoted
Catholic women who have waited a lifetime
for that conversion of the partner of their
life. Sometimes it has come after twenty,
thirty, or forty years. Sometimes they have
seen their loved one die without a sign of
faith.
Death Divides.
And that is something to consider, chicks.
It is a terrible thought that the one nearest
to us in life and dearest to us in death goes
down into eternity without the true Faith,
the words of absolution, the visitation of the
Viaticum, or the strength of Extreme Unc-
tion. Death is always terrible, but surely
it is more than terrible when death takes
away from us into the blackness someone
we love with the deepest tenderness of our
heart and whom we see die without any of
the things we pray may be given to us be-
fore we go to meet our Judge. Even in
death the mixed marriage is full of sadness.”
The clock over the hearth chimed ten.
“It's late,” said Father Hall. “I had no
idea that the time had slipped away so fast.
Perhaps I shouldn't have talked so furiously
and lengthily if it were not for an experi-
ence I had just the other day. A dear
friend of mine, passing through the city,
stocDed off to see me. He's a successful


business man, married, the father of a de-
lightful family, with a charming home. A
wonderful Catholic himself, he has been
married to a non-Catholic for over thirty
years.
‘“Well, Tom,' I asked, as I always do,
‘have you converted your wife as yet?’
“He shook his head, as he had done a
score of times before. But this time he
seemed a little more than ordinarily down-
cast.
An Expert Don’t.
“ ‘No,’ he said, ‘and I don’t see that there
is the slightest chance.’
“‘Strange 1 She is such a charming, lovely
woman.’
“‘The best in the world.’ And then he
leaned forward and put his hand on my
knee. ‘Father,’ he said earnestly, ‘if you
do nothing else in your life, preach to the
people and preach to young priests against
mixed marriage. Tell every young priest
you meet to talk against it in season and
out. And tell youngsters who ask your
advice to stay unmarried if they have to;
far better unmarried than married out of
your own Faith.’
“ ‘But why?’ I insisted.
“ ‘Never mind why. You may theorise
about mixed marriages; but I knowl’
“Without any further explanation, he left
me. But, I felt, if he, a happily married


man, could talk like that, what of the thou-
sands of men and women who have experi-
enced the uncrossable division, the loneli-
ness of soul and body, the discord and dis-
sension, the religious bitterness, the ques-
tioning eyes of their children, and the strife
over essentials that have followed their
mixed marriage?
“Dick and Sue, you know how much I
love you both. Let me start your married
life by leading you to the altar of God, say-
ing above you the Nuptial Mass, bringing
Jesus as the first and best beloved Guest at
your wedding, blessing you with the solemn
blessing which the Church reserves for the
Catholic who marries a Catholic, and send-
ing you out united in faith, in hope, in divine
love. Let me do that, and I think I’ll die
happy.”
Silently the twins got their wraps and
slipped into them. Father Hall stood
watching them, with his back to the fire.
His beloved boy and girl, so fine and strong
and Catholic 1 As they came to shake hands
with him, he said:
“You’re staying two or three days?’’
“Till Monday morning.”
“To-morrow’s Saturday; so I’ll be busy
with confessions to-morrow evening. But
I’ll see you when I give you Holy Com-
munion Sunday morning, and perhaps Sun-
day evening. . .


“We’ll be back, if we may.”
“If you may? If-you just dare not come.”
Your Own.
They walked together to the doorway.
Outside the alchemy of the moonlight had
turned the whole landscape into silver, and
in the dead silence they could hear the oc-
casional sharp crack of the frost. Silent
they stood, hesitating about parting.
Then Dick looked up. “Thanks, Father.
I think I understand.”
“You’ve been good to us,” Sue said; “but
then, you always are.”
“That’s because I want so deeply to see
you happy.”
Dick threw open the door and caught Sue
by the arm.
“Let’s go, Sis,” he said.
The sharp air enveloped them in its chill
embrace, but still they stood motionless.
Suddenly Father Hall put his hands on their
shoulders and turned them toward him.
They lifted their eyes to look into his, that
bent so seriously and affectionately upon
them.
“You’ll think about it?” he asked.
“Yes.”
“For your own happiness and the happi-
ness of the children God may give you,
marry your own, chicks, marry your own.”
The Advocate Press, 143-151 a'Beckett St., Melb*


Are You a Member of the I;
Australian Catholic Truth <
Society?
If not, the time to join is NOW.
The Society Needs Your ~ j
Help
In its efforts to provide instruction regard-
ing Catholic Faith and Practice, both for ■'
members of the Church and enquirers from [■
outside, the Society during 1936-1937-1938
sold '«
Jl
Over One Million Pamphlets
■
Ji
Membership: 7/6 per annum :■
B
Entitles you to (1) A copy of every new V
pamphlet issued during the year; (2) rich /
spiritual privileges. "n
s «
Three pamphlets are published every month ,J
—Thirty-six in the year. \
*1
I
Remember the Society in your will. B '
\
Write to the Honorary Secretary:—
Australian Catholic Truth j:
Society I;
143-151 a’Beckett Street, Melbourne. J 1
