

Marshall-Hall.
A Recollection.
It was on a Monday night, not many weeks
ago, in the dimly lighted Chxirch of St. Peter,
that I met Marshall-llall for the first and last
time. The one burning lamp threw a sharp
white light on the organ, and from the brilliant
circle of light gradually flowed into
the church, indistinctly showing the contour df
things, finally absorbed in darkness.
The occasion was a memorable one. Arthur
Nickson was going to play some works of Karg-
Elert, Bach’s inheritor, to Marshall-llall. I was
asked to be present, and waiting for both, sitting
alone in the mysterious atmosphere that only a
faintly illuminated church can produce, I foimd
my mind half consciously occupied with specu-
lations regarding the man I was going to meet.
I had heard various people speak of him, various
things at various times. I had been told that he
was a musical philistine, a mad enthusiast, a
savage free-thinker, an artistic “ franc tireur,” a
violent pessimist, a sarcastic fatalist.
And not without expectations did I wait to see
that man of so many strong qualities and so many
sharp features, curious to watch on a man of
his psyche the effect of the music of one on
whom Bach’s mantle has fallen.
My mind still in dreamy twilight, I saw him
coming in. approaching me, shaking my hand ;
I heard him speaking to me, jestingly, comparing
the lot of the professional and the amateiir
musician ; and 1, seeing suddenly before me the
man of whom I had been musing, did not
answer him, did not say a word, but just looked
at him.
This then was Marshall-llall, this man whose
swarthy features stood out black in the twilight
of the dimly lighted church. Unceasingly he
talked, in a subdued, deep, sonorous voice,
gesticulating sparingly but energetically. He
neared the light, and then I could better observe
his features, and was struck by his likeness to
Nietzche. Only the eyes kinder, without hauteur,
without contempt, almost tender, but in tlie
lower part of the face a wonderful likeness.
The upper lip, the heavy, drooping moustache,
the mouth, the under lip, all that betrayed passion
and pain.
The strength of the forehead and the hushy
eyebrows, the kindness of the eyes and the passion
of the mouth, went well together to make up a
man of sharp psychical features : a man whose
passionate heart woidd often completely vanquish
the strength of his mind, whose firmness of pur-
pose would sometimes utterly conquer the soul’s
passionate fire.
And then I could not .see him for some time, he
sitting far back in a pew, his swarthine.ss swallowed
up hy the darkness of the church, while I, under
the glaring light of the lamp, remained at the organ.
Now Nhckson began to play Karg-Flert’s
music, played as perhaps he had never played
before —a Sonatina, a (’anzona, a Sequence,
.vinding up with the Variations in F fiat minor,
19 in number, culminating in a mighty choral
of light and glory written by the modern Bach,
whose eternal music,, obliterated by the din of
war, would require the majesty and splendour of
])oetic diction of a modern Milton.
Not long did Marshall-Hall remain in the dark
listening to this music. The language he heard
was not the expression of a brooding pessimist:
it ever called to the light. The soul’s discord
never died in a final utterance of fatal gloom, but
was solved, then slowly, as by a painful process,
then startlingly, as a prisoner yearning for freedom
in his pitch-dark cave suddenly looking up in the
rays of the midday sun. Marshall-llall then came
out in the light, asking for the repetition of some
passages, commenting on them enthusiastically,
here pointing out a striking rhythm, there a happy
modulation, at one place praising the felicity of
expression, at another the charm of a theme,
and ever expressing delight with the unity and
completeness of the creation. And all that in a
language rich in epithets, sincere, fiery, full of
passion and eloquent, springing forth from his
soul as a burning offering to Beauty.
What I recognised in Marshall-llall that night
was the passionate artist, to whom all means
to outline the Beautiful sharply, were dear, to
whom all compromise and half ness were anathema.
Nickson’s wonderful registration and executive
skill he praised warmly, and strongly urged him to
arrange recitals for the benefit of the Con.serva-
torium students, offering his personal support and
strong recommendation.
Still passages were repeated and repeated again,
and I became quite still and silent in wonder at
that big dark man who coidd so put his soul in
his words.
One passage of the “ Prologue Tragicus ” I
remember that was repeated over and over,
where suddenly the trumpet cries out. as a soul
in agony and in the bonds of death, in a melody
with bizarre intervals, sending out piercing screams
through an accompaniment of darkness and
gloom. This strophe touched Marshall-llall, as
the powers of darkness not unknown to any soul,
were certainly not strange to his.
And so the evening passed, his enthusiastic
and enraptured comments intensifying the emo-
tions caused by the music, until the final chord of
the Choral of the Variations caused him to
clamor again and again for a repetition, carried
away as he was by the mighty chords, the striking
dissonants, the victorious outburst of the con-
cluding strophe.
On our way home, walking down Collins-street,
Marshall-llall talked much, in his loud, enthusiastic
way. On Karg-Elert he bestowed unbounded
praise in saying that this gifted composer had
done for the organ what Chopin did for the piano.
Then he also spoke of Bach. When he men-
tioned Bach’s fatalism, as heard in the I'olling
pedal passages in one of the Fugues, he laid bare
Ids soul : a soul tortured ami pained, finding in-
spiration in gloom, and yet, perhaps in spite of his
will, yearning for light: a soul scan'ed in the
struggle between light and darkness, but never
vanquished : a smd to which Bach’s moments of
despair were familiar and self-experienced, yet
not fully comprehending the splendor of Bach’s
glorious, reposeful and celestial light, nor the
source whence that light sprung. When I shook
hands with Marshall-llall at parting, I felt that I
had met one whose soul I coidd love.
And now he is no more !
To the man in the street Marshall-llall, whose
aristocratic soul, filled with lofty ideals, inter-
preted the Horatian “ Odi profanum vulgus et
OS
September 1, 1915


Madame ]Vlary Conly,
who has given her talents to help our wounded
soldiers.
arceo ” by a scornful reference to “ The greasy
coin of commerce,” could never be more than
a striking personality, conspicuous for his swarthy
features, bushy eyebrows, great stride and deep
voice.
To me, as I met him that night, lie was a man
who did not win the world, but did not lose his
soul. To me he will always belong to the select
few, one who without boisterous boasting could
thank “ whatever gods may he for his uncon-
querable soul.”
I. X. Raamsdoxk.
Second-Ijieutenant Rupert Boosey, youngest
son of Mr. (Charles T. Boosey, of the well-known
London music publishing house, has been killed in
action in France. The young soldier (he was only
twenty years of age) received his commission in
August last. He was attached to the 4th Royal
Irish Dragoon Guards.
Ht * *
Mr. Percy .John Marshall, from Messrs. .S.
Marshall <fe .Son’s music warehouse in Adelaide,
who served with the Naval Expeditionary Forces
in New Guinea, is now on his way to Europe on the
Naval Bridging Train.
Mr. Stanislaw dc Tarczynski.
Mr. Stanislaw de Tarczynski, whose photo-
graph appears on the cover of this issue, is a
Polish violinist and composer. He is the leader
of the M.P.S. Orchestra, and gave the Melbourne
public an opportunity of hearing him as soloist
in one of the last Tait Orchestral Concerts at the
Town Hall, Melbourne. He is an artist of excep-
tional ability and master of his instrument.
Mr. de Tarczynski is of a really talented family.
His father, a pianist, late Professor Warsaw Con-
servatorium, and his mother and sister are both
pianistes, his sister usually playing solo work
at his concerts in Poland. His uncle, 11. Bobinski,
who has just recently died, was the late Professor
of the Moscow and Kijow Conservatorium. and was
a great pianist and composer. Mr. Stanislaw de
Tarczynski started playing before the public at
an early age, and while still at school played before
Czar Nicholas 11. on the occasion of his Corona-
tion visit to Warsaw. After studying at the
Warsaw Conservatorium he received the highest
diploma for Violin, Piano and Composition. He
studied under the great Polish violinist Barcewicz ;
afterwards he went to Berlin, studying under the
celebrated Master, Henry Marteau, Joachim’s
successor. Imperial Academy, who said : —“ I
have heard Mr. de Tarczynski in such pieces as
Lalo’s Spanish Symphonies ; Concertos ; Paganini;
Bruch (scotch) ; .Saint Saens ; Tartini .Sonate.
etc. He has a remarkable gift of the violin, the
quality of a real musician.”
In Brussels he was selected by competition from
a number of violinists to play at the Yssaye
Concerts at the Theatre Royal, one of the concerts
being given before the King and Queen of Belgium.
On the Continent, Mr. de Tarczynski has re-
ceived the highest praise by most critics,
“ Rouve de Belgigue ” (monthly review under the
high patronage of H.B.M. King Albert), says :
“Stanislaw de Tarczynski, a gifted Polish violinist,
deserves every attention as a violinist performer,
as well as composer of his works, so full of a
special charm, melancholy and inspiration, that
they remind us of his famous countryman, Chopin.”
The “Le Vrai Mondain Brusselles,” says
“ .Stanislaw de Tarczynski is a real artist of a great
talent.” The well-known musical critic, Arthur
Hubens, editor of the “ Guide Musical ” and author
of other works on the theory of music—“
d’ Orphtie et le Drame Musical ” was dedicated by
him to Mr. .Stanislaw Tarczynski —says ; —“ He
plays with the highest animation, showing at the
same time an excellent technique and musical
understanding. The artist proves himself a worthy
pupil of his master, Henri Marteau.”
It is a great pity that we cannot lu'ar more of
him on the concert platform, but on a<!count of
his hand he is unable to give the practice, and has
been compelled to give up for a time concert work.
He has always given his services at M.P..S. concerts
in aid of the Australian wounded, playing on five
different occasions, and he is now going to have
several of his pieces published and the proceeds of
the sale of same to be devoted to his fellow country-
men, one of o\ir Allies, the Poles. In this issue we
publish one of Mr. .Stanislaw de Tarczynski’s
compositions which will speak for itself.
“ It is difficult to be strong and not rash.”
September 1, 1915
