





ihiw/rw
/%> °A,
I O JUN’ ?'?9j i
-v/
Phenomena
in linssia.
k P*
SEANCES WITH THE EMPEROR AND EMPRESS
AND OTHER MEMBERS OP THE RUSSIAN
ROYAL FAMILY.
The work pet formed by the various Mediums in dif-
ferent parts of the world is little known to those who
share the belief in Spiritualism, and still less to the
•utside public, who seldom, if ever, get any idea as to
how persistently our Cause is insinuating itself in every
rank and walk of life. Opposition is met with, but
lime crushes it, and gradually those who jeered are
converted to a common belief with us, through the
phenomena, in a life hereafter. This is specially
the case with those in high life. It has been pan of my
mission for many years past to act as a pioneer in dis-
tinguished circles. Without seeking in the least for
the patronage of those who are the rulers of peoples
the manifestations obtained in my presence have caused
me to be singled out by those possessing supreme
authority, and I have, in consequence, lad the honor
of converting many of the most distinguished poten-
tates in Europe. From Mr. Gladstone to the Czar of
Russia is a great step, because the former is scarcely
hedged about by the same difficulties as the latter; yet
it is of seances with his Imperial Majesty that I now
desire to speak
I had previously been in Russia last year, but
my visit then was practically a private one, a
circle in Moscow, under the presidency of
the lata M. Nicolas Lyotf having exclusively
retained me for sir weeks in that city, during which
time, however, I had the opportunity of meeting the
most notable of the people therein, many of whom are
ardent Spiritualists, My friend, M. Alexander Aksa-
kof. had also ananged that I should pay him a month’s
visit at St. Petersburg for the purpose of scientific
investigation, so that on this occasion I had not the oppor-
tunity of giving the Russian public any chance of wit-
nessing the phenomena attending my presence. My visit
then, however, served tc pave the way for my work this
year, the excellent letters written by the late Professor
Boutlerof (than whom no more doughty champion for
our Cause ever lived, and whose loss to us cannot be
over estimated) and Professors Wagner and Dobroslavin
arousing the graetest possible interest in the subject.
This visit, coupled with the publication in the Rebus,
by M. Aksakof, ef his subsequent photographic experi-
ments in London, caused a wider and greater predis-
position to see me In the Russian capital again. Accord-
ingly, after visiting Munich and Hungary, I arrived in
) St. Petersburg for a second time in February of this
year.
It is perhaps only right that I should here be allowed
to publicly express ray thanks toM. Aksakof, MissPre-
bitkof, her Excellency Madame Sabouroff, Captain
Prebitkof, Prince Nicolas Bogration, Baron Schlichting,
the Prince of Mingrelia, General Racoussa-Souchtevsky,
Admiral Crown, and many others for much kindness
and hospitality extended to me during my stay in the
capital, and by which the important work which I had
tk to perform was considerably enhanced. I had not been
at the Hotel de Paris (which by the way, let travellers
carefully avoid, for a mere uncomfortable hotel,
although it is considered one of the best, I have never
, been in) more than twenty-four hours before I was
literally besieged with callers of all ranks. It became
a matter of difficulty as to how I was to choose
between the different claimants for my services, and
In this respect M. Aksakof served me in good stead.
My first seance was given at the residence of Baron
Schlichting. when there were present—as sitters—the
Prince of Mingrelia (an old friend of Home’s), Colonel
Ridevsky (aide de camp to the Grand Duke Nicolas),
Prince Bogration, M. Zasiadko (page to the Emperor)
Phenomena
and others. Strafe to say, the Russians showed a pre-
ference for dark seances, probably because they admit
of a larger attendance ti.au those for psyehography;
so that on this, as well as on other eccas ons,
I was against my will forced to depart from my ordin-
ary rule. It is unnecessary to refer in detail to pheno-
mena which are familiar to; eaders of the Medium, but
there were sereral manifestations of more than ordinary
interest, which produced a great sensation, and, I
think, carried conviction to all. After this seance tha
newspapers began to insert the most outrageously
absurd statements in regard to the wonders I could pro-
duce, some going so far ns to say that by a ware of my
hand I could causa water to enter a room and make ifc
increase or decrease at will ; others, again, saving that
I could make forests grow, or cause my body to dis-
appear from one room to auether, and other equally
ridiculous stories. For the Russian Press to favorably
notice Spiritualism at all was a great thing, but
I certainly was not prepared for the notoriety
which these statements gave me. I literally had
no peace at my hotel, for there everybody had
access to me; but, fortunately, a gentleman, whose
acquaintance I had made in England a few years ago, Dr,
S. Linn, came to my rescue, and by offering me the
hospitality of his splendid residence saved me much
fatigue and annoyance by kindly undertaking to see
my visitors for me, and thus weeding out the metely
eurious from the really earnest inquirers. To this
gentleman, as well as to his brother, Ur. B. Linn, and
his amiable wife, 1 am indebted for much kindness and
courtesy.
Seance followed seance in rapid succession, some of
those attending (and many of whom are pronounced
Spiritualists) being Madame Bebiknff, the Roumanian
Ambassador, Prince Michael Ghika, Baron Meindorff,
Prince Ourousoff, M. Mohannff (Master of the Cere-
monies to the Grand Duke Michael), Princess Galitz-
ehin. Count Gaiden, M. Gedenoff, Colonel Kogovsky
(aid de eamp te the Grand Duke of Oldenburg), M.
Z6l6«ny (aid de camp to tire Emperor), tire Italian
Ambassador, Count Greppe", the Dutch Ambassador,
Princess Orbeliani, Countess Reholnder, Count -Sten-
boek (aid de camp to the Grand Duke Sergius),
Princes* Dolgonriki, Prince Dernidoff, Count
Soumarakeff, Count Lamsdorff, the Spanish Ambas-
sador, Prince Bdlosselsky, Prince Gortschakoff,
Prince Spdraniky, Princess Barriatinsky Duke of
Leuchtenbarg, General Ignatieff, Priuce Barclay da
Tolly, Prince Gagarin, Priuce Orloff. General Peters,
Madame Mlnekwintz, the Marqu’s de Camposogrado,
General Gerbine, Madame Jeliofsky (sister of Madama
Blavatsky), Professor Paschutin, the Marquis Parulachi,
Prince Mestchersky, Professors Wagner and Dobro-
slavin, Count Sehulenberg, and a holt of other equally
distinguished and well known persons. Following
these sittings came an invitation to give a seance at the
palaee of the Grand Duke Constantine, which was
attended with perfect success. After this I was invited
to the palace of the Grand Duke ot Oldenburg, at which
the Princess, an excellent medium, greatly assisted by
her power.
The night following I spent at the theatre, where I
may say my appearance was as much the object of
criticism as that of the different afctors : and although
the Russian theatres do not close until the
small hours of tha morning, I was comman-
ded by his Imperial Highness, the Grand Duko
Alexis, the brother of the Emperor, to give a seanca
notwithstanding. We were a party of eight in all, tho
sitters consisting of the Grand Duke, his brother tho
Grand Duke Vladimir and the Grand Duchess Vladi-
mir, Count Ardleberg, Countess Bohanoff and others.
One striking phenomenon occurred at the seance, which


is worth recording. Her Imperial H'ghness the Grand
Duchess Vladimir wai sitting by, my sidq in the dark,
Folding my hand, when suddenly «he commenced to
rise hithe air—screaming the while. As she continued
to ascend, I was compelled to leave her hand, and on
returning to her seat she declared-that she had been,
floated over the table without viypiing having been l in
contact with her. Apropos of this seance, I
have in my possession an envelope upon which
is j in ted tne “ Palais 'Vladimir,” the open-
ings of which ae fastened by five seals.
The Grand Duke Vladimir brought this envelope, in
which was a n ,v bank note, the number of which,
; being unknown • him. was correct!/ written between
two slates without the envelope being opened until after
the term In at I—i ,f the seance. This envelope can be
»een by the t . and it affords a notable and strik-
ing answer to some recent criticisms for conditions dis-
pensing with ‘'cntlnuons observation.” As showing
ivhnt let* h- ,• ■ Russians ke n p, I may mention that
the supper tol.owing the seance, to which his Imperial
Hj»hr-,n the Grand Duke Alexis did me the honor of
Inviting me " not finished until 5 a.m.
This ,a .u morning I was informed that the Czar had
requested .ne j give a seance on the toilowing Friday,
ann wishtno m hare the most complete success, I refused
al •••,!,c--. .n tne interim —noeasy matter,as I foundwhen
people of distinction were pouring invitations upon me.
1 was kept in ignorance as to where the seance was to
be held until the last moment, when an Imperial sledge
drove up to my residence and carried me off in a biting
snowstorm to the palace of the Grand Duke of Olden-
burg. it has not often fallen to the lot of an English-
man to see a Czar of Russia, and although I am by this
time familiar with Royalty, 1 confess to an exceeding
nervousness in the consciousness that I was about to
make the personal acquaintance of the Czar of All the
Russias. The day before M. Aksakof and I, desiring
to rerain some souvenirs of this seance, searched
St. Petersburg for some suitable slates, and
finding some to serve our purpose, I armed
myself with a number before proceeding to
the Palace. I had imagined I should find the parcel
opened and searched by the servants for fear of its
being dynamite, bat, to my surprise, on stepping from
the sledge, I found not the slightest evidence that there
was any one present to protect his Imperial Majesty
from the terrible Nihilists of whom I had heard so
much, there being no other guard beyond the Usual
sentries stationed at, the gates of the Royal palaces. A
pleasant interchange of ideas with tlid Prince and
Princess Oldenburg and their accomplished son and
other notabilities preceded the announcement of the
coming of the Emperor and Empress, and beyond a
scamper across the salon to meet their Imperial
Majesties on the part of our host and hostess, and the
placing in line of the assembled guests, there wag no
more ostentation shown than in any ordinary drawing
room. The Empress entered—place anx dames—first,
a small, slender-figured woman, bearing a strong
resemblance to her sister, the Princess of Wales, but
without the latter’s beauty. Behind her came a
veritable giant, a man standing, perhaps, 6 feet 3 or
4 inches in height, and proportionately stout, altogether
an exceedingly fine specimen of healthy manhood.
Dressed in the ordinary military frock coat, and
wearing but two orders, with his sabre dangling
at his heels, there stood the terrible Czar of Russia—
that mnn-eater and fiery monarch whose autocratic will
made thousands tremble! But how much his face
belied the opinion which we have formed of him, for
every line of it spoke a simpiicty, geniality, and
cordiality which chased away every thought of wrong
or harshness. A highly intelligent head, with a huge
forehead ami projecting brows ; keen and observant, but
Withal kindly eyes, with an expression in them at once
revealing t' • goo I nature of their owner; a nose not
well-shape and somewhat inclined to be spread-
ing; lips giving no indication of the least
traces of sensuality; and a chin which betokened
great firm a f purpose, formed my mental photo-
graph o i; mighty person in whose presence 1 then
stood. After gree.ing their friends and acquaintances,
I was duly presented to their Majesties, the Emperor
stepping forward and grasping my hand with a grip
that made me wince, and saying in good English, ‘‘l
am glad to hare the pleasure of making your acquaint-
ance, sir.” The Empress advanced and merely bowed.
They were accompanied by his Imperial Highness the
Grand Duke Vladimir and their Imperial Highnesses
the'Grand Duke and Duchess Sergius, the Duchess
bein'-, a granddaughter of the Queen, and strongly resem-
bling Imi in fcaimes The latter are now in England
representing the Czar at her Majesty’s Jubilee. *
After some time spent over tea, during which tha i ,
Emperor and Empress both engaged me in conversa- 1
tion, from which I learned much of their connection 1 r
w' --nirituaHarr,, l at which lain, for ouvious reasons,
not pcrmlttr* to reco d here, the Emperor requested
me to give a dark seance in preference to the one for
psychography which I had proposed. Of course, I
complied, and a party of ten, including their Imperial
Majesties, adjourned to an adjoining room. Seated
next to me on my left was the Empress, my right hand
neighbor b dng the Grand Duchess of Oldenburg. Next
to tha Emnress on her left was ttie Grand Duke of
Oldenburg, the Czar, the Grand Duchess Sergius, the
Grand Duke Vladimir, General Richter, Prince Alex-
ander of Oldenburg and the Grand Duke Sergius. All
hands being joined—the Empress firmly grasping my left
hand—the lights were extinguished. Manifestation*
followed soon after, the most atriking being a voice
which addressed itself to the Empress In Russian, and-
wlth which she talked for some minutes. What wa»
said I cannot of course say, because my knowledge of
Russian, like my German, as my friend Baron du Prel
says, “isn’t worth mentioning.” A female form was
then seen to materialise between the Grand Duke
Sergius and the Princess Oldenburg, but it
only remained a short time, and then disap-
peared. Of course, I omit a narration of the
less striking phenomena, because they are so
familiar to students of Spiritualism, but it is interest-
ing to note that a huge musical box, weighing at least
40 Ib., was carried rnnnd the circle, until, resting on
tlie hand of the Emperor, he had to call out for it to be
removed, which was at once done. All this time the
manv rings covering the hand of the Empress were
making sad havoc with my flesh, until 1 was compelled
to beg her not to hold me so hard. I began to ascend a
into the air, the Empress and the Princess Oldenburg
following me. The confusion was something indescrib-
able, as I rose higher and higher, both my neighbors
clambering on to their chairs as best they could. It
■wasn’t conducive to mental eonilibrium on the medium’s i
part to know that an Empress was performing such
antics, and might get hurt, and I rep atediy begged,
during my flight, to be allowed to break up the seance.
All to no purpose, and I continued to rise until my
feet came into contact with two shoulders upon
which I rested, and which afterward proved to
be those of the Emperor and the Grand Duke of Olden-
burg. As someone facetiously observed afterwards. “it
was the first time the Emperor of Russia had been under
anyone’s foot!” When 1 descended the seance termin-
ated, I being quite exhausted, and the party delighted.
The Empress acted throughout with great coldness and
judgment, and even asked to be transported with me
into tlie next room ! As a rule I find the ladies are much
more courageous ac dark seances than men. Notwith-
standing our success, both the Emperor and Empress
begged me to give them another dark seance there and
then, but this I was compelled to refuse, owing to my
weakened condition. I however proposed a slate-writ-
ing seance, in which their Imperial Majesties were
pleased to give assent.
An interval for the -'S’er-ready tea then followed,
and then we resumed what proved to Le A most
momentous and perhaps historical sitting. This time
we were four only besides myself, the sitters being
the Emperor and Empress, and the Grand Duke and
Duchess S-rglus. Various experiments were tried, «
one which has frequently been accomplished, viz., that
of four numbers being demanded in four different
colors, tlie sitters choosing their own colors, succeeding
perfectly. Then came the crowning point of thl*
seunco. Various answers haring been obtained to tha .
questions propounded, the Emperor placed two ch an
slates together, and he. the Empress, and myself held
them above the table. Soon tlie sound of writing was
heard, en I on uncovering the slates, one was found to
be filled in the handwriting of one perfectly well knowa


to me. ! cannot here state what the purport of that
•communication was, but as it is well known in Kussis
as well as to some few in thu country, I may at least
say that it had reference to an event which occurred a
few days after, and which has now become a matter of
history. Probably this slate—which is preserved—may
In future generations be referred to as a striking
instance of the power of the spirits to prophesy. Their
Imperial Majesties were much moved bv this communi-
cation, and a painful silence followed Luckily, the
' Grand Duke Vladimir having givn into the custody of
tne Czar a sealed envelope containing a bank note, I
was enabled to break the silence by proposing to get
the number written. Tae Cz ir placed it between my
Brahma-lock slate, the Czarma choosing a piece of red
crayon. The slate rested under tue hands of the Em-
peror and the Grand Duchess. After ws had heard ‘lie
writing the slate was o mned and the number 716,990
was found therein. Upon the outside envelope the
number was found to agree with that of the bank note.
Rising from bis chair and shaking me warmly by the
hand, the Emperor said, “This is truly won-
derful, and 1 thank you very much for
having been the means of showing me sue”
manifestations. All were delighted, I most of all, per-
haps. but saddened somewhat by the events of the e<en-
Ing, and terribly exhausted. Half-an-hoor span' in
V conversation with their Imperial Majesties terminated
this eventful evening, and I hurried off in the small
hours of the morning to M. Aksakof’s, with all the
slates with which we had tried our experiments in
my possession, and which were afterwards distributed
to my friends as souvenirs of the occasion.
With this account of my first seance with the
Emperor and Empress of Russia, 1 must hasten to
make reference to other events and seances, lest X tire
the reader. As no restriction was placed upon any
reference to the sitting above recorded, beyond what
was naturally left to my good taste and judgment, I
have no hesitation in giving them publicity, but in
regard to other interviews I am unable to speak.
1 may, however, say that before I left Russia
I was the recipient of a handsome pa ! r of dia-
mond and sapphire solitaires, which I wear in token
of remembrance of the events narrated, and because of
the honor attached thereto.
As may be supposed, after the news of this sitting
spread abroad, I was in greater request than ever.
Society usually follows its leaders like a flock of sheep.
Even in the height of a London season, and In a coun-
try where I am well known, I have had so many invi-
tations. fn quently from 20 to 50 coming in one day.
Of course these were not all requests for seances. Even
the conjurers paid me an Indirect compliment upon my
success, one of them, Beautier de Kolta (the cousin and
late manager of the Beautier de Kolia of Egyptian
Ball fame), paying me a visit for the express purpose
of offering to be my manager. He seemed to be some-
what astonished when I told him no medium wanted a
manager, and that I did all my own work and travelled
without confederates or apparatus. "Ah,” remarked
he, “that’s a pitch of perfection to which we con-
jurers have not yet attained.” It was, perhaps,
a mistake on the part of my friend, M. Aksakof.
under the circumstances, to have arranged for
a series of seances with a hard-headed body of
scientist*, in cons-qnence of the great fatigue I was
undergoing, rendered still more painful at this period
by an accident to my left foot, and through which I
was only able to hobble about in a slipper. In spite,
however, of my wish to postpone these sii tings for a
more favorable opportunity, M. Aksakof felt that we
ought to se.ze the chance of getting these men in a
mood to investigate. And so a series of seances was
arranged and held. The results were not brilliant, but
they confirmed the experiences and experiments of the
previous year witli some of the same men.
The day following the first stance with the. Emperor,
I pare a seance at the palace of the Grand
Duke Sergius, there being present the Grand
Duchess, Count Stenbock, Colonel Stepanoff,
J. WING, PRINTER & PUBLISHER, 33
Count Soumarakoff, and several others. The
results were as satisfactory as those of previous
seances Again the Grand Duke Alexis honered me
by another invitation to his palace, there being present
their Imperial Highnesses the Grand Duke and Duchess
Vladimir, the Grand Duke Alexis, their Royal High-
nesses the Prince and Princess Mecklenburg-Schwerin,
<fec., ifcc. On tills occasion, also, we were eminently
successful, and 1 received the warm thanks and con-
giatulations of all. Altogether the Grand Duke
Alexis at* nded four oi my seances, the most interest-
ing one he saw b„sng the one held at the Spanish Am-
bassador’s, various phenomena taking place at the
supper table. Before I left the city I received from hi*
Jmpe’ial Highness a handsome present of an old silver
loving cup of exquisite workmanship, which he begged
me -• '"ep in remembrance of him.”
Perhaps one of the most pleasant incidents in my
Russian experiences was the meeting with M. de Giers,
the great Foreign Minister. A Spiritualist of many
' standing, his two sons mediums, and trying, with
some success, for transcendental photographs, it is,
perhaps, only a sequence, to my good fortune to say
t.haf I received a cordial welcome in his palace, and t
retain many pleasant recollections of his talented
family, his musical evenings being for me a special
treat, when, in the privacy of his home, he conversed
freely upon various subjects of great interest. If I
were to give my impression of ttiis brilliant man, I
ihould say he is too honest to be a Minister. No
diplomat can, politically, afford to be so, hence the
attacks which are constantly being made upon him by
the Katkoff party. Katkoff is himself, so Xam reliably
informed, a Spiritualist of long standing.
Seance after seance followed, again and again with
Royalties, the Grand Ductless Vladimir honoring menu
less than seven times by attending my sittings, it i*
curious to note that the military element dominated at
the seances, but perhaps this is accounted for by the
fact that as Russia has such a vast army she must
necessarily have a huge array of officers. One
of the most interesting seances was held at the
residence, of General Grosser, the chief of the police,
who arrested with nis own hand the man carrying the
bombs intended for the destruction of tue Czar.
Of course this upheaval which was going on in society
in regard to Spiritualism necessarily attracted the
attention of the journals, which began to fear the
undue prominence they had given me. Owing to one
or two Metropolitans of ttie Church having sought
interviews with me. at once tiie cry “ the Church is in
danger” was raised, and henceforth the papers, by
which the Russian public are more particularly led,
began to heap abuse on me. after having tried their
hardest to damn me by their praise. Then arose the
proverbial two parties, the one for and the
others against, and in that condition I left
them. 1 could have remained In St. Peters-
burg for a year and been busily employed, but a
prior arrangement witli my Moscow friends made it
imperative for me not to tax their kindness and patience
too much.
Thus after two months’ hard work in the Russian
capital I left on the 3rd of April for Moscow, where I
was met the following morning by my friends of the
past year.
It, was my intention to have stayed in Moscow for a
considerable period, but the sudden tiauMtion of the
president of the Society disarranged all our plans, and
I returned to England after having remained in that
city two weeks. The kindness and grci.t h£a>jii ality I
everywhere received in Russia, more particularly at the
hands of my Moscow friends, among wh m 1 may
mention Colonel Blagonravoff. M. Theodoi e Lv. ff, M.
Maytoff, M. Kludoff, Colonel and Mrs. Greek, M.
Blagoi, and others, have left n<thing hut a desire to
visit the country again, and which Ima n obably do
at no distant date ; but whether in my r , achy as a
professional medium, Xam unable at till moment to
aay.—W. Eglinton.
WELLINGTON
ST., COLLING WOOD (PARADE END.) ,


