

MARY CARD'S
CROCHET BOOK
NO 4
Containing Designs & Charts
in the New Filet Crochet for
Australian and New Zealand
Crochet Workers.
One of Mary Card’s Giant Charts—No. 6. (See inside Back Cover.)
Additional copies
may be obtained
from T. Shaw
Fitchett, 376
Swanston street.
Melbourne, price
2/6
A new Crochet design by Miss Mary Card appears every month in “Every-
lady’s Journal” (price 7/-a year posted), published by T. Shaw Fitchett, 376
Swanston Street, Melbourne; publisher, also, of Mary Card’s Giant Crochet
Charts, and Mary Card’s Crochet Books Nos. 1, 2, and 3.
PRICE
2/6
Copyright in Australasia by T. Shaw Fitchett, 376 Swanston Street, Melbourne.




now 1 't-
*w
* '
{■*ss*
W'Mw
mm::: lBggi
m
TO SECURE THIS “ SNOW-GLOW ” BEAR—-18 in. TALL.
PROPRIETORS “SNOW-GLOW CLEANSER/’ 382 Swapston St., Melbourne.
Please send, postage pa!4, to address below, one
Bear, as described above, ready for cutting out anl stuffing. As stipulated,
I enclose three “ girUheads cut from the labels of three separate tuts of
J ‘ Snow-GlovV Cleanser/' to prove that I am a regular user of { ' Snow-Clow. ?
(Note.—-If preferred, the leaflet to be found under the ltd of every tin of
"Fixo-Pest” may be enclosed instead of one of the “Snow-Glow” girS-hoads. ■
I also enclose 64, in postal note (stamps accepted) to cover cost of
postage, packing, etc,, as stated above. I give my grocer's pome below.
A big, chubby Australian Native Bear that is right, in shape and
colour will delight the heart of any little girl! Just such a Bear is now
ottered free to every little girl in Australasia whose mother Is a user of
“Snow-Glow” (the great Australian cleanser), or “Fixo-Pest” {the
popular and Improved insect-powder).
This new and original rag Beer —called “ Snow-Glow Jin. "—take*
the form of a chubby, cute, and beautifully-coloured Native Bear, just
about life-size—see small picture at side.
" Snow-Glow Jim ” was designed by a clever Australian girl,
painted by an Australian artist, and lithographed in ilva colours on
strong material by skilled Australian workmen whilst his original
gambols in the Australian gum-trees.
The " Snow-Glow ” Bear Is supplied flat with foil printed di-
rections that enable any woman to quickly qnd easily cut out the
boar, sew it together, and stuff it with any soft material. The result
is a big 18-inch life-size Australian Native Bear that will fascinate every
little lassie.
HOW TO GET A FREE
“SNOW-GLOW” BEAR
This novel “ Snow-Glow " Bear cannot be bought in any shop. It
has bean created solely to delight the little girls of the patriotic women
who regularly use “ Snow Glow Cleanser’ - or “ Fixo-Pest ” —both made
In Australia. To secure the gift Bear at once you must do these four
simple things;
1. —Oct three full-size tins of “Snow-Glow Cleanser” (perhaps you
have them In the house), and with a sharp knife cut off from
the label of each tin the head of girl using scales as shown on
label.
2. Pin the three “girl-heads” to form given at side, and fill
in and sign the form. The “ girl-heads ” are essential to
satisfy us that you use “ Snow-Glow Cleanser ” —or will use 11
in the future.
3. —lf you prefer It, send the leaflet to be found under the lid of a tin
of “ Fixo-Pest. ’’ instead of one of the " Snow-Glow ” girl-beads.
That is, you may send tiro “ Snow-Glow ” girl-beads and ow
“ Fixo-Pest” leaflet instead of - the three “Snow-Glow” girl-
beads, if you wish.
4. —Place the signed form and girl-heads in envelope and post to us,
first inserting sixpence In stamps, or a 6d. postal note. This is
essential to cover cost of postage, packing, etc., as the dolt has
bean produced at great expense, and is the only thing we can
supply free.
The free “ Snow-Glow ” Bear will be sent postage paid to any
address in Australasia on receipt of form at side, provided above condi-
tions have been compiled with.
SPECIAL NOTE. —If you have no tti_s of “ Snow-Glow Cleanser” In
the house, get them from your grocer for a few pence each. Three tins
will probably last you six weeks. You will find “ Snow-Glow ” the
finest cleanser sold, and matchless for cleaning in a hundred ways
round the house. “ Snow-Glow ” is entirely made In Australia, and
each tin gives half-pound more than usual without increase In orice.
My Name
Address
My Grocer’s Name....
Grocers AMre-ss
We suggest that you make one of your coupons the leaflet placed
under the lid of each tin of “ Fixo-Pest” “ Fixo-Pest ” -a great ad-
vance on ordinary insect-powders, and kills flies, f1e.,., ants, cock-
roaches. bugs. “ silver fish,” etc., in a wonderful way, i. will repay yon
to get a trial tin from grocer, storekeeper, or chemist
NOTE,—TO AVOID CUTTING PAGE, WRITE OUT ORDER FORM.
m. 4. 2MBC. «i'


Light
Running
WHITE
SEWING MACHINES
Noiseless and Efficient
I
i
IB
There is no better machine made than the World-renowned.
WHITE, which combines Simplicity, Quality, and Economy
with faithful construction and elegant finish. ,
BUY THE WHITE—
To turn out more and better sewing witb less labour;
For its light-running, easy-sewing qualities;
' ' For its fine mechanical adjustment;
For its beauty of construction and durability;
For its incomparable labour-saving devices, which are exclusively
WHITE—for example, its tension indicator, etc.; for its
attachments and improved features, which enable unfinished
work to be removed and replaced at will
WHITE Sewing Machines are sold all over
Australia. Price Lists may be obtained
from any of the Agencies : -
VICTORIA—White Depot Fly. Ltd,, 10 Royal Ateasle, Melbourne.
BRISBANE—Shaw &. Boos Ltd,, The Granite- Buildings, 241 Queen
Street; abo at Toowoomba, Buodaherg, b. 0.4 Mock&y.
TOWNSVILLE—McKhnmIn & Ricbardsoo Ltd,, Criterion House.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA—-Geo. P. Harris, Scarfe & Co, Ltd,, Adelaide,
WEST AUSTRALIA—WiIIows Sandover & Co,, Hay Street, Perth.
HEW SOUTH WALES—Anthony Hordern & Sous Ltd., Only Universal
Proeldete, Mew Palace Emporium, Brickfield Hill, Sydney.
rivn DTTCT
Jr Milk. Mlii!) JL
Kills Flies, Fleas, Ants, Cockroaches, “Silverfish," Etc.,
in a Wonderful Way.
Special Merits of Fixo-Pest
A buzz-fly or two in the kitchen—a flea brought home in
one’s clothes —a cockroach from behind a shelf—a track of
ants in the pantry —wriggling “ silverflsfa ’’ found in piano or
carpet: what woman does not hate them all?
Behind the unpleasantness of these insect pests lies a real
danger. Disease and sickness may come with the bite of a flea
or from the contamination of a cockroach.
The ant is not a great germ-carrier, but he makes up for
it in damage and unpleasantness, and runs the “ si’verfish ”
close as a thoroughly objectionable pest.
The hateful bug, and lice that infest neglected poultry need
scarcely be mentioned to make the cleanly housewife -shudder.
Last, but not ’east, comes the deadly fly—the great. carrier of
disease germs.
THE DISCOVERY OF “ FIXO-PEST.”
In the past the Australian housewife, has attempted—with
varying success—to destroy household pests with ordinary in-
sect powder. With the outbreak of war. supplies, of this
powder failed, ’s in most cases it was imported from Europe.
Promptly a leading Australian chemist —a University Lec-
turer —was engaged to make experiments in killing flies, fleas,
cockroaches, ants. etc. Success '■arae *t once in the form of
the greatly improved insect powder *' Fixo-Pest,’’
Scores of thousands of housewives in Australia are now
using “ Fixo-Pest ” to kill flies, fleas, ants, cockroaches,
■ s<]v-»rfioVi.'’ and odwr insect nests. Indeed, one.wonpn writes
that she has even found it successful in treating her children’s
heads pfte r going to a dirty school.
" Fixo-Pest” is not an ordinary insect powder, and pos-
sesses unique qualities . If fr manufactured in Australia, and
contains no ingredients whatever of enemy origin. It is harm-
less to human beings.
“ Fixo-Pest ” is the ideal vermin powder to send to sol-
diers in camp or at the Front.
HOW TO SECURE “ FIXO-PEST.”
All enterprising grocers, storekeepers, chemists, or iron-
mongers in Australasia sell “Fixo-Pest.” Ask for ft locally.
If unobtainable, send rod. (from N.Z., 1/1) in stamps to Red
C. Proprietary Ltd., 382 Swanston Street, Melbourne; and a
full-size tin will be sent by post, to any address in Australasia.
"Fixo-Pest" is Now Sold in New Zealand at 1/- per tin!


MARY CARD'S CROCHET BOOK
NUMBER 4.
Original Designs and Instructions for Working in the
Netv Filet Crochet by Mary Card
AUTHOR OF:
(1) “ MARY CARD’S CROCHET BOOK—No. 1 ”
(containing)
I.—Lessons in Simple Stitches and First
Principles.
II-—Lessons and Designs in Australian Linen-
Crochet.
III.—Lessons and Designs (with Charts) in
Filet Crochet.
(2) “MARY CARD’S CROCHET BOOK—No. 2”
(containing)
Section L—Filet Crochet.
„ II,—Torchon and other patterns.
„ ill..—Linen Crochet.
IV,—New Crochet Lace Ribbon De-
■ signs.
(3) “MARY CARD’S IRISH CROCHET BOOK”
(containing)
9
I. —Lessons in Padded Irish Crochet (Easy).
II. —Lessons in Padded Irish Crochet (Advanced),
III. —Lessons in Fine or Baby Irish Crochet (Simple).
IV. —Lessons in Fine or Baby Irish Crochet (Advanced).
These three books are uniform in size and price—2/6 each—and contain exactly the same printing space as this
volume (No. 4), but the pages are just half the size. Any of the four books can be obtained through the mail (post
free) from “ Everylady’s Journal," 376 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
A NOTE ABOUT MATERIALS FOR WORKING.
Miss Card has spent a great deal of time in testing the materials for this work, and in each
case mention is made of those she has herself proved. These goods are stocked by the big houses
in the leading cities; but for the convenience of workers in outlying parts, and those who cannot
obtain them without difficulty, the Publisher of “Everylady’s Journal ” will endeavour to supply
materials. lie will do this at the price charged by the city shops, plus fifteen per cent, to cover
expense and time. In remitting, be sure to send the hill amount plus postage. It must be
understood, however, that the war has affected the supply and materials very considerably, both in
quantity obtainable and in price, so that he cannot absolutely guarantee the supply and may
possibly need to adjust the prices; also that orders are sent at the risk of the purchaser, though
every care will be taken. Address Crochet-Work Department, “Everylady's Journal,” 376 Swanston
Street, Melbourne.
THE PRESENT PRICES ARE AS FOLLOW:
Quadrant Mercinc, sd. per reel. Coats’ Mercer-Crochet, large balls, all sizes, Bd.
Mercine Briilante, 4d. per ball. Best Linen, 36 in., .4/6 per yard.
Boar’s Head, sd, per reel, Cork-handled Needles, Sd.
Ardern’s, 6d. per ball.
Send orders with postal notes, money orders, or stamps, to Crochet-Work Department, “ Everylady’s JoujiaV 1 '3.76
Swanston Street, Melbourne.


Who is Mary Card ?
A CHAT IN WHICH THE AUTHOR SUPPLIES SOME
INTERESTING PERSONALITIES.
BY W. A. SOMERSET (in "Everylady'a Journal ").
Some eight years ago, Mary Card, her own architect, contractor,
and clerk of works, luii't a little chalet on a mountain-top. It was
nicely calculated to cost just £lO0 —ail she then possessed—but fate
decreed that while the timber, carted up the mountain at great ex-
pense, still lay on the ground, a giant tree should fail across the
waiting rafters and break them into matchwood. To most this
would has'e been a severe, if not a staggering, blow —for more
rafters meant less furniture and other comforts —but the. recipient
of this unexpected gift of the gods, this. bewildering entanglement
of trunk and stem, branch and branchlets,'.cp’igs, leas'es, and strips
of bark, that obscured the view and b}d fnjilk of her brand-new
half-acre of landed estate, merely remarked to her sister, “ Well,
thank goodness, we have now firewood enough for the rest of
our lives, and nothing to pay for cartage, either!" That was Mary
Card to a T, as this little sketch may reveal.
Miss Card and “ The New idea.’"
The building of the cottage, and her introduction to the readers
of “ Everyiady’s Journal ” (then “The New Idea’ - ) occurred to-
gether, so that the long succession of crochet-designs in the pages
of the magazine and in her books have been produced amid some
of the most, enchanting and most romantic scenery of Victoria.
Possibly, so much could not have been accomplished in less peace-
ful and less inspiring surroundings. Like many hard workers.
Miss Card has no love of publicity, and no use for visitors, who
come to waste her precious hours of daylight: but requests from
rentiers tor her photograph and for some account of her work have
been so frequent that she at last agreed to be " interviewed.”
“ I hope,” she remarked, with a smile, when I had duly “ discov-
ered ” her in her mountain-fastness, “ that you do not want to know
too much. Look at this table.” pointing to one covered with draw-
ings, photographs, proofs, and correspondence—especially correspon-
dence—“ T have to get most of this stuff away ,by the mail, so please
be merciful and brief. What do you want to know most?”
“Everything,” said I. modestly. “Tell us. first, why you took
up journalism.”
“ X was made a journalist by a policeman.”
“ 1 beg your pardon... by whom ?”
“By a policeman,” she repeated, gravely, ignoring my mystifi-
cation. “At the time, of the extension of the franchise to women
a policeman called to enrol the new electors. When the rest of the
family had been duly listed under ‘ home duties/ the ‘ bobby ’ asked,
‘ls that all?’ ‘No, there’s Mary; she’s out, just now/ ‘Oh!’ said
the ‘ bobby,’ entering me with the others; ‘ more home duties, I sup-
pose ?’ ‘ Oh! no; she doesn’t do a thing/ my family explained in
chorus. The delinquencies of Mary as a home-duty expert were
a domestic sore point with them. ■ She must do something, 1 said
the ‘bobby.’ ‘What does she do most of?’ After consultation, the
family replied, ‘Writes stories for the “Australasian.” ‘Oh!’
said he, contemptuously, ‘we calls them sort journalists/ And thus
was I entered in the electors' rolls.
“ Having in this way become a journalist by process of law, and
in absentia, so to speak, I thought I ought at least to fry to live
up to my new dignity by doing some journalism.”
“How did the crochet come into it?” I asked.
When the School-Door Slammed.
“ I must go back a step to explain that,” she answered. ‘I had had
to give up teaching through defective hearing. I had considered teach-
ing to be my life-work, and loved it, so that when the trouble came
it looked as if the door had slammed on life for me. There was
nothing for it but to open another door, so I began by taking stock
of ray qualifications, eliminating all the things I could not do with-
out hearing. Until you have parted with one of your senses, you
have no idea how many things there are you can't do, without that
particular sense. I tried to tarn handle after handle, but for a
while no door would open without hearing. But, finally, I sifted
it down to this; I could write, but not weli enough to earn a living;
I coaid draw, but understood only the elements of design-; and I
could do most kinds of needlework. There was, plainly, not a liv-
ing in any of these singly, but a happy thought occurred to me to
combine them, and become a professional designer and teacher of
needlework through the press.”
I laughed. “Talk about, being driven by fate!”
“Life is always like that, I think," she replied, quietly. .“What
it takes away in rafters it brings in firewood. At all events, I was
able to open my door. .Writing and teaching were already second
nature, I had only to decide- what branch of needlework I would
lake up; Irish crochet was just coming into one of its periodic re-
vivals, so I decided on crochet.”
“ Where did you learn it ?”
What She Learned as a Lace-Mender.
“ There were no teachers, no books, and only a few stray maga-
zine articles. But where there’s a will there’s always a way. People
were hunting up their family heirlooms in the crochet way, and
having them repaired and remade into fashionable articles of wear.
It came to my ears that the Ladies’ Work Association was looking
for crochet-workers competent to undertake this work of remodel-
ling and mending. I was not competent, but resolved to become so;
so I boldly became a working member of the Association, and un-
dertook to do what was wanted. My first task was to fill in some
enormous holes in a piece of fine flouncing very old and very rotten.
With patience and care I exactly copied the pattern, matching the
cotton, the very stitch of the original worker, till, when finished,
you could not see where the new parts were, except by the colour
of the new white cotton against the yellowed lacc. Then, to com-
plete the work, I stained the new parts with weak tea, working
with a brush, and when the lace was brought back to the shop I
had the satisfaction of seeing the attendant hunting all over it for
the repaired parts, without being able to find them. As you may
suppose, more and more heirlooms came my way, in every style of
Irish crochet; much of it extremely valuable, and in the very best
style of design and craftsmanship. And as I never allowed a piece
of work to go back to the owner showing the join or the additions
I gradually became as expert as the original worker had been.
A New Method in Crochet.
“Of course, this was copying rather than designing, but
no one can design till they have thoroughly mastered their
medium, and learned the limitations of the material they are to
work in. I had to iearn the principles of Irish crochet, and to dis-
tinguish artistic design from the dreadful rubbish that presently
flooded the market. I soon found that I could improve on many
of the patterns, and began to plan new ones for myself. While
doing this, I discovered that I could make a new and more effective
style of crochet by combining it with linen in a new way. T called
these new designs Linen Crochet, and in these I made my first suc-
cess of any note.”
“They certainly caught on with the public in ‘Everylad/s
Journal/ ” I remarked. “ Where do you get the ideas ?”
“Ideas seem to spring into existence. They shape themselves
in the mind, one suggesting another, and that one another, in
never-ending and ever-varying ways.”
A Sideboard Runner typical of Miss Card's Australian Linen-Crochet.
(From a phoiograph in "Mary Card’s Croohet Book—No. 1.”)


A Rose and Ribbon Doyley.
This is an example of The manner in which Miss Card has adapted ideas
from various departments of lace-work and crochet-work. This doylèy has
all the effect of fine Irish Crochet, but is worked without padding cord or
the use of calico. The design is from “Mary Card’s Crochet Book —No. 2."
“ Yes, yes,” I said; i; I understand. I knew a chap once who dis-
covered an unsuspected talent for designing monograms. He told me
he used to find himself carving the corned beef into monograms.”
Miss Card smiled. “I know the feeling; ideas grow out of
ideas. With me they don’t seem to know how to stop. With ex-
perience, you get to know, automatically, what will do, and what
wot) t. You do not have to waste much time in trying effects. A
good piece of crochet is the successful combination of its component
parts. '.lhe parts themselves must be correctly designed; they must
harmonise just as the parts of any scheme of decoration, or fur-
niture, or any piece of music. Pieces from different patterns may
sometimes be re-combined with a new pattern effectively, provided
the pieces are themselves in harmony, but you cannot so combine
different styles, without incongruity, any more than you can put
Jacobean legs and a Chippendale back into a ‘Mission’ chair.”
“ How did you find your market?”
“My first original work went to America. The ‘ Ladies’ Home
Journal’ —the biggest women’s magazine in the world —accepted it
at once, and asked for more. The designs were new, and made a
hit. I found I could dispose of all I could do in America at good
prices. But on account of the distance, and a keen desire to succeed
in my own country, I took some, worked designs to ‘ Everylady’s
Journal,’ and offered to supply a monthly article on crochet for a
year. '1 he editor was sympathetic and of a trustful disposition, and,
as a result, the agreement then .catered upon has run on for eight
years.”
‘’And you gave up America?”
“ I had to: the demand here has kepi me going constantly. When
journals containing the most popular patterns sold oat, the appeal
for back numbers was so insistent that, to satisfy it, the most
popular had to be reprinted in book form. The first book (now
known as ‘ Mary Card’s Crochet 800k —No. i ’) was published the
day the war broke out, and since then two others have followed, the
third being exclusively Irish crochet. In the same period the Giant
Charts have been published, and the success of these has been so
great that the Fourth Book, entirely of Filet Crochet designs, has
been produced, with charts on the ' giant ’ scale.”
“ Do you work all these things yourself, Miss Card r”
A Wide Circle of Friends.
" rio; no: now. At first I had to work everything, but, as a re-
sult of the tremendous crop of correspondence the ‘ Journal ’ has
brought me, I can now give the actual working over to others.
Prom every little out-of-the-way nook of Australia and New Zea-
land I must have received letters asking tor advice, or for patterns
tc fill some particular want, and these have brought me into touch
with women in very lonely places, whore, crochet pas been a real
joy. Many of them work beautifully, and are quite eager to get
fresh pa: ferns, which they work out from the mere description. I
must have rnswerecl many thousands of these letters by my own
hand: and though this heavy correspondence has added greatly to
my work, it has made me a very happy woman, proving, as in no
other possible way, that I have been working on right lines; and
it h:s also guided me in developing them. Moreover, it has given
a human interest to my work, and 1 only regret that my arrange-
ments for the immediate future make it impossible for me to keep
up this correspondence.
“■Of course, among so many, there are some utlerij unreason-
able correspondents, who ask too many or too trivial questions about
things they could do very well for themselves, and others who lor-
get to send stamps for reply; but the net result is an abiding respect
tor my fellow-countrywomen, particularly those in the hinterlands. ’
“ But your patterns are so different, in so many styles, ’ I sug-
gested, rather helplessly, glancing round on the wal's, where charts
and half-finished sketches or printed sheds were pinned or hanging
in bunches from metal clips. “ Where do you get all these ideas? ’
Who Suggests the Designs.
" They come in various ways. Some are deliberately worked
out, in response to requests for this or that. A girl wants a sachet
for her glory-box, and it must have a true lovers’ knot in it. Hali-
an-hour will give this damsel a sachet with a true lovers’ knot, and,
at the same time, give one to a good many other girls who did net
know they wanted it, till they saw it. Or an old Scotch lady, far
from home, would like a dressing-table cover with a thistle pat-
tern. Nothing in the wide world but a thistle will make her happy.
So she and sundry other Scotch ladies get their thistle. Some de-
signs spring from Nature's own book of design—the poise of i
bird, or the hang of a fruit cluster, or a spray of foliage that seems
to lend itself to conventionalising. One is not always success*’ '
of course. Several noor .designs may have to be rejected bef<
a good one is evoh n. ■ On the other hand, one poor design may, >
the process of reconstruction, give material for several good one..
Bat I must admit that I do not waste much time in trials, for the
very greatest requirement of a crochet-designer is vision, or the
faculty of seeing the thing mentally quite clear and complete, be-
fore it exists at all. Therefore, a good deal of the rejection is done
mentally. Very few of the patterns are now worked out by myself.
I visualise the design, then draw it carefully, calculate every stitch,
mentally, from the drawing, and send it, with explicit instructions,
to a good worker, and in the majority of cases do not see my
own designs till they are sent back finished.
“My ‘ working staff ’ is everywhere: on stations in Queensland,
in Western Australia, New Zealand, or far, far inland; in light-
houses, at lonely railway gates on the great trunk lines, on Gipps-
land farms, in Tasmanian mining towns; wherever a good worker
in need of an interest is to be found.”
Miss Card’s glance fell to the work -laden table, but mine studi-
ously avoided it, and travelled, instead, to a large chart, thirty by
forty inches, that hung on the wall —a flight of swallows above a
field of irises, and the legend, “ The Blue Bird for Happiness.”
How the Giant Chart was Invented.
"Hot from the presses!” and Miss Card smiled. ’‘That is one
of the new Giant Charts. Naturally in a magazine, and even more
so in a book, one is limited to a certain size of page, and, as a
result, many ambitious designs had to be shat out. Then, too, many
people, who were not so young as they used to be, kept writing
to know if I could not give them a pattern that would be
easier to follow. As a result, I thought out the idea of the Giant
Chart, drawn on the scale of ten squares to the inch, with a guid-
ing line at every inch. It was quite a. giant task to draw it, and
to make the zinc blocks for the printing, but when the first was
done, and the publisher of ‘ Everylady’s Journal ’ had issued it, or-,
ders flew in from every corner of the compass where my work
was known, and the Giant Chart was established. So far, I have de-
signed six of these Giant Charts and they have proved immensely
popular.”
[A detailed statement of these Giant Charts and of Miss Card’s
Crochet Books will be found on the inside cover of this volume.]
“And your programme for the future, Miss Card?’’ 1 asked.
“ That is like everyone else's. more or less uncertain. With
this volume, there are now four books of crochet on the mar-
Mias Mary Card,
Who for eight years has contributor
a never-failing bat always improvin
series of designs for the benefit of
Australian and New Zealand, crochets
workers.
ket, and I have a fifth one,
containing a great variety
of small pieces of work,
Christmas gifts, and so on,
completed, but not yet in
print. There are three more
Giant Cham in process of
working out, and I have made
arrangements for supplying
• Everylady’s Journal’ with a
monthly article on crochet-
work for the coming year. But
I look for a tremendous re-
vival of crochet-work all over
the world after the war, and
am planning to place my de-
signs on the market in Amer-
ica, Great Britain, and Eu-
rope, and shall possibly at-
tend to it in person. Mean-
time, however, I. hope, during
the forced waiting, to evolve
some fresh ideas; and, be-
sides, one can always find
something useful to do in
these days of stress, if one
looks for it”


An Afternoon Tea Cloth in Linen Crochet
With a Marguerite Motif.
Fig. 1.—Photograph of an Atternoon Tea Cloth.
This tea doth was worked in coarse thread, but it looks very well done in either fme or coarse. Figs, 49, So, and
51 (on pages 20 and 21 of this book) give charts of the corner and the border, with full working directions. There
is also a photograph showing a piece of the border worked in heavy thread, with the flowers done in both the flat and
the raised filet.


FILET CROCHET.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
One of the very oldest forms of lace was “ Lacis,” or darned net,
now generally called “ Filet Erode.” Filet Crochet is simply
crochet that is worked in patterns, similar to those of Filet Erode
and of Cross-stitch Embroidery, and the name should properly be
confined to patterns made up of solid figures and open meshes of
square network. But lace, like everything else, is always evolving,
and in modern work the well-known lacets, tufts, and other stitches.
are sometimes introduced to give variety, or to lighten heavy parts
of the design. All these stitches are used in this book, and are fully
described and illustrated.
Filet crochet should be worked closely, so as to be firm rather
than loose when finished. Any good crochet cotton can be used, one
of the best being Coats’ Mercer-Crochet Cotton, which is to be had
in all sizes.
Taking the stitches first, the most used are the chain, treble, and
double-crochet stitches.
Fig 2. Chain (ch). —
Make a slip-knot on the
needle, put the cotton
over hook, and draw it
through the loop.
Fig 2.—Chain (ch).
Fig. 3. —Double Crochet (dc).
again, draw it through both loops on needle.
Fig. 4. Treble (tr).—
With a loop on the needle,
put thread over the hook,
put the hook into a stitch,
and draw the thread
through that stitch—this
gives three loops on the
Fig. 4.— Treble (tr).
needle—put the thread over the hook again, draw through two loops,
thread over once more, draw through the remaining two loops.
Other stitches that may be needed for edgings afe:
Fig. 5. Half-Treble
(h-tr). —Work as for a
treble, but instead of
working off the stitches
two by two, work off all
three together.
Fig. 5.— Half-Treble (h-tr)
Fig. 6. Double-Treble
(d-tr). —Put the thread
over the needle twice, then
put the hook into a stitch,
thread over hook, draw
the thread through the
stitch (there will then be
Fig. 6.—Double-Treble (d-tr).
four loops on the needle), thread over hook, draw through two
loops, thread over, draw through two, thread over, draw through
two, thread over, draw through last two.
Fig. 7. Long-Treble
(1-tr). Put the thread
three times over the
needle then draw a loop
through as for double-
treble, and work off the
five loops two at a time.
Slip-stitches (sl-st) are
worked on six of the 1-tr.
Fig. 7. —Long-Treble (l-tr), and Slip-
stitches (sl-st).
Put needle through the stitch, thread Over hook, draw through
both the loops on the needle at once. Slip-stitches and single
crochet are the same stitch, and are often used for joining.
Fig. 8. Picot (p).—Make
five ch, or any given num-
ber, then sl-st into the fifth
from the hook. For a 4
ch p, sl-st into the fourth.
Picots are sometimes made
Fig. B.—Picot (p)
Fig. 3. Double Crochet
(dc). —With a loop on the
needle put the hook
through a chain —or other
—stitch, thread over the
hook, draw it through
the ch, thread over hook
Fig. 12. —Open Lacet (a) upper,
Close Lacet (b) lower.
with dc instead of sl-st. In the example there are two chains
between the picots.
Fig. 9. Triple Picots
(t-p).—6 ch, make a p of
.the last 5, 5 ch, another p,
5 ch, a third p, sl-st into
the chain that precedes the
first p. This draws the
three up closely. In the
Fig. 9.—Triple Picots (t-p).
example the last three are not yet drawn up.
Since any cross-stitch pattern can be copied in filet crochet, it
follows that by making a chart in cross-stitch, the whole of the
design can be presented in a simple form, much easier to follow
than the long description of the stitches word by word. This plan
is availed of here, and all that is needed is the method of reading
the charts. This brings us to “ spaces,” “ blocks,” and “ lacets.”
Spaces.—A space consists of 2 ch, miss 2 stitches, put a tr into
the 3rd. Therefore, in beginning any piece of work, 3ch must be
made for each space, with 5 extra ch to turn the first one.
To make Fig. to, which has 9 spaces in the row, we shall want
27 ch, plus 5. or 32 ch.
Ist Row. —Put a treble into the Bth ch from the needle, lifting
two threads of the chain. Then work 8 more spaces of 2 ch, miss
a, tr in 3rd.
Fig. 11.— Blocks and Spaces.
Fig. 10.—A Square formed
of Spaces.
2nd Row. —Make 5 ch to turn, and put a tr into the 2nd tr below;
2 ch,,tr in next tr, till 8 spaces are made, then 2 ch, tr into the 3rd
of the 5 ch that turned the row. Work on till 9 rows of spaces
are done, then measure the piece both ways. If the piece is square,
and each mesh also square, your stitch is right. If the width is
greater than the length, the chain stitches are too loose; if the
length is the greater, the trebles are too long, and the needle should
be held more obliquely when making them.
Fig. 13.—Lacet Filling.
Blocks.—These form the solid parts of the pattern shown on the
charts as a cross or dark square. They are made of 3 trebles.
If a space be followed by a block, there will be 4 tr together, of
which the first belongs to the space, the other three to the block,
(see Fig. u). If two blocks follow a space, there will be 7 tr to-
gether, of which the first belongs to the space, and the other six
to the two blocks. The groups of trebles, therefore, always have
three times as many stitches as there are crosses, and one in ad-
dition.
If a block begins a row, make 3 ch to turn and put 3 tr into the
next 3 sts of last row. If a block has to be worked into a space,
put the first 2 of the 3 tr into the hole, and the 3rd on the fpllow-
ing tr. If a block is to be worked over a block, put a tr into each
of the trebles below, taking up both of the top threads. Those
parts of the work showing masses of blocks need to be worked
tightly.
Lacets.—Another fancy network is called “ lacet ” filling. Each
lacet fills exactly 2 spaces. The Open Lacet (Fig. 12a) is made by
working 5 ch, miss 5, tr in the 6th; and the Close Lacet (Fig. 12b),
by working 3 ch, miss 2, dc in 3rd, 3 ch, miss 2, tr in next. The


open lacet is shown on the
charts by a straight bar
across the two spaces that
are to be replaced by the
lacet, thus —. Ihe close
lacet is shown by two
bars forming an angle
Fig. 14.—Lacct Filling.
across the two spaces,
thus /s- In some charts only the open lacets are given, to avoid
crowding the design, but it is always assumed that the close lacets are
worked over them or beside them, unless otherwise directed. These
lacets either fol.ow one another alternately, and with close lacets
worked on open ones, and vice versa in the following rows (see
Fig. I 3) > ° r else are vmrked in one row of open lacets, with the
next row of close lacets (see Fig. 14J. Where there is only room
for half a lacet, a space is put. Where you want the solid
pattern to stand out very sharply against a lacet filling, it is best
to work spaces all round the solid parts, and between them and the
lacet filling, because the lacet filling gives a rather broken outline.
The rows of lacets must be kept in a line right across the pattern;
that is, the lacet filling on the far side of a solid row of trebles
must be continued exactly as if it had been an unbroken row of
lacets. Both top threads of trebles are to be worked into. When
working blocks over spaces, the first two trebles may be taken into
the hole, but the third must be taken into the following treble.
Straight Edges.—To turn a row that begins with a space, work
5 ch, tr in 3rd st.
To turn a row that begins with a block, make 3 ch, tr in next
stitch, then 2 more trebles in following stitches.
To turn a row that begins with an open lacet, work, 8 ch, tr m
6ih stitch.
To turn a row that begins with a close lacet. make 6 ch. dc in
3rd st.
Fig. 15. —Small square of Blocks and Spaces.
Take, now, the small square (Fig. 15), and the chart (Fig. 16),
from which it was worked, and if you are new at this work, follow
the directions here given. As there are 18 meshes across the square,
make three times 18 chain, or 54 chain, for the foundation, and
since the first mesh is a space, do 5 more chain to turn, or 59 in all.
Put a tr into the Bth ch'from the needle, this makes the Ist space.
2 ch, miss 2, tr in 3rd; this is the 2nd sp. 3tr in the next 3 ch, for
the Ist block, and 3tr in the next 3 for the 2nd block. There are
7tr together of which the first belongs to the space. Now make 2
spaces followed by 2 blocks 3 times, and finish with 2 spaces.
2nd Row. —As this row begins with a sp, do 5 ch to turn, and put
a tr on the 2nd tr below, 2 tr into the next sp, and one on the tr.
Then come 15 more blocks in a row, worked into the spaces and
blocks of last row. For the final space, do 2 ch, tr into the 3rd of
the s ch that turned the row.
3rd Row. —This begins with a block, so make 3 ch, and put 2 tr
into the hole, and 1 on the tr. Then 3 tr on the next 3 tr for the
2nd block, and 14 spaces followed by 3 tr on trebles and 2 into the
Fig. 16.—Chart of Fig. 15.
space with 1 more into the 3rd of
the 3 ch that turned the row.
4th Row. —3 ch to turn, 6 tr
on 6 tr, 4 sp, 2 bl, 2 sp, 2 bl, 4
sp, 2 bl. There will be 7 tr in
this last group, of which one be-
longs to the sp, s are worked into
ireb'es, and the last into the top
of the 3 ch.
In the next row, do 5 ch, and
put the first tr into the 4th of 7
trebles below. This is because
three of the 5 ch stand for a
tr, which is therefore not counted.
Uneven Edges.—Uneven edges are made by increasing or de-
creasing either at the beginning or end of a row. The former, as
the more common and the easier, will be taken first.
Figs. 17 and 18 illustrate the simplest form of vandyked edges,
each increase being two rows or meshes wide and one mesh deep.
As a help to novices, a little of this edging is worked out, and it
w : :i be best to work it both bv the description and by the chart.
Fig. 17.—Vandyked Edging worked from the Chart (Fig. 18), and show-
ing how to increase the rows one mesh at a time.
Make 27 chain, 1 tr in the 4th ch from needle, 3 more trebles in
next 3 stitches, 2 ch, miss 2, treb in next for the first space, another
space, a block of 3 tr, 2 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, turn.
2nd Row. —s ch, tr on 2nd tr, 1 bl, 5 sp, x bl.
3rd Row. —This is the first increase, and as the increase is one
block, make 6 ch, miss 3, tr in the 4th, sth, and 6th ch and into
the Ist treble of the block of last row, 3 more tr for next bl, 5 sp,
1 bl, 1 sp.
4th Row. —l sp, 1 bl, 6 sp, x bl.
sth Row. —lncrease like the 3rd row, making 2 bl, 6 sp, x bl, 1 sp.
6th Row. —l sp, 1 bl, 7 sp, 1 bl.
7th Row. —lncrease like 3rd row, 2 bl, 7 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp.
Bth Row. —l sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl.
pth Row. —lncrease like 3rd row, 2 bl, 3 sp, x bl, 4 sp, 1 bl. X sp.
10th Row. —x sp, 1 bl, 2 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, 2 bl, 2 sp, 1 bl.
nth Row. —No increase. Turn with 3 ch, make 2 bl, 3 sp, : bl,
4 sp, 1 bl, x sp.
12th Row.—l sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp, x bl. Omit the last bl
and turn.
13th Row.—2 bl, 7 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp.
14th Row. —1 sp, 1 bl, 7 sp, 1 bl. Omit last block and turn.
13th Row. —a bl, 6 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp.
16th Row. —l sp, 1 bl, 6 sp, 1 bl. Omit last block, turn.
17th Row. —2 bl, s sp, 1 bl, 1 sp.
18th Row. —1 sp, 1 bl, s sp, x bl. Omit the last block.
The next row is the first row again.
Fig. 18.—Chart of Fig. 17.
In Fig. 19 we see the same sort of increase, but made 2 blocks
deep each time.
To make this pattern, work 36 ch, tr in 4th, sth, and 6th. Then
9 spaces, 1 bl.
.’ml Row. —9 ch, miss 3, 6tron 6 ch, 4tron 4 tr, 9 sp, 1 bl.
3rd Row.—l bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl.
In the 4th, 6th, and Bth rows increase like the 2nd row. In the
10th row work 6 ch, and increase by one block.
Fig. 19.—Deeper Vandyked Edging, showing how to increase two
meshes at a time.


Fig. 20.—How to increase.
space or 9 ch, tr on tr, and the
Bth row turns with 5 ch like the top edge. In the 9th row omit
the last space and turn with 5 ch, and in the nth row omit 2 sp
and turn with 5 ch. The 12th row, which is a repeat of the first
row, omits one space, and then the pattern continues with the
2nd row.
Fig. 21.—Chart of Fig. 20,
We now come to increases that have to be made at the end ot
rows when there is nothing to work into. This will be understood
by examining Fig. 22, and working a small bit in coarse cotton.
Fig. 22. How to Add
Trebles at the end of a
row when there is nothing
to work into. Make a few
chain stitches, and upon
them a row
In making the last
when you have the three
loops on the needle before
Fig. 22.—Added Trebles.
Figs. 20 and 21 show how to
increase at the beginning of rows
with spaces. A few rows are given
at length. Make 44 chain, tr into
Bth, then 8 more spaces, 1 bl, 1
sp, 1 bl, 1 sp.
2nd Row. —This row increases
by one space, therefore make 9
ch, tr on tr, 1 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 bl.
9 sp.
3rd Row. —Turn with 5 ch, 9
sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp by working
2 ch, tr into the 3rd chain of the
9-
4th Row. —This row increases
by 2 spaces. 10 ch, tr in Bth from
needle, 2 ch, tr on tr, then 1 sp, 1
bl, 1 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl. 6 sp.
The 6th row is increased by 1
working them off, put thread over needle, draw through the loop
nearest the hook only. This makes a chain stitch at the bottom,
and you still have 3 loops on the needle. Work these off in twos
in the usual way. Now, if another tr is to follow, work it into the
chain you made at foot of last tr, and if another tr is to follow,
make'a chain for it in the same way before you work off the loops
cn the hook. In Fig. 22 you can see five added trebles made after
the end of the chain was reached.
Fig. 23. How to Add
Spaces at the end of a
row when there is nothing
to work into. Make a
chain, and upon it work
spaces to the end. Then
2 ch, long-tr (3 over), into
Fig. 23.—Added spaces.
the bottom of last treble.
2 ch, 1-tr into middle of last long-tr. Continue this for as many
spaces as you require.
Fig. 24. How to Join as You Work.—ln large pieces of work,
such as the Supper-Cloth (Giant Chart—No. 1) it is often necessary
lo work a piece not to the edge, but to some row in the body of the
crochet, where a join can be made fairly invisible. This row will
be one containing more spaces than blocks.
Let us suppose that the darker part of Fig. 24 is the first por-
tion of a pattern worked in one direction, and that the light part
is the 2n'd portion worked in the other direction, and is to be
joined to the darker piece.
Fig. 24. —Joining pieces of work.
The light cotton has been joined on to the dark piece at the
bottom row, then the long chain made for the light spaces, and 7
of these worked on the chain. After the 7th treble, another treble
Is taken sideways into the dark work, 3 chain made, another treble
taken into the dark part at the next row, then the 7 spaces
worked over the 7 spaces below. On these 7 spaces another
7 are worked, then a treble into the dark piece, 3 ch, a treble into
the next row of the dark piece, and the 7 spaces again worked.
Fig. 24 shows the 4th row of spaces about to be made. Of course,
in actual practice the pattern has to be done, and the spaces are
shown here as the simplest form of such joining.
INSERTIONS AND EDGINGS
Fig, 25. —Chart of Narrow Insertion. (See Fig. 17.)
Fig. 25. Narrow Insertion to Match Fig. 17. —This and the little
lace pattern (Fig. 17) are suitable for underclothing or children’s
garments. Begin with 44 ch, tr into the Bth from needle. A row of
trebles can be worked along both edges afterwards, and will
strengthen the lace. Mercer-Crochet Nos. 60 to 100 are suitable
sizes of cottoft to use for underwear. Nos. 40 to 50 for sheets, etc.
(See note to Fig. 26.)
Fig. 26.—This is another insertion to go with the lace pre-
viously described (see Figs. 17, 20, 21). Use the same sizes of
Fig. 26. —Insertion to match lace. (See Fig. 21.)
cotton as for Fig. 25, as it is the same width, and also requires 44
chain to begin.
Note—Variety can be given to these little insertions by working
lacets instead of spaces in one part of the design. In this case by
working an open lacet and a space between the two in'side lines of
blocks an added laciness will result. The first row would then read:
t sp, 1 bl, 2 sp, t bl, 1 open lacet, 1 sp, x bl, 2 sp, I bl, 1 sp, and the
four following rows would be exactly the same, thus putting the
lacet on alternate sides of the middle mesh.
No. 4. 2M9C. 12/7. S 2.


Fig. 37. Comer of Tray-Cloth, etc.— lf this pattern is required
for a tray-cloth, yoke, or any article requiring the corner, begin
with 4S ch, and work a treble into the 4th and each following
stitch as shown at A. Turn the rows at the line shown at B, and
work the length required by the chart, finishing the side to match
the beginning. Then work the first row of the following side into
the blocks and spaces above the line B. This corner can also be
mitred, but when blocks come on the central line of a corner,
mitring should be avoided if possible.
Fig. aB. Border (see Fig. 29). — This pattern illustrates the
use of lacets to give variety to a design, and also shows how a
corner is to be mitred. The directions are therefore given in full.
Begin at A, which is the first row of a side. Make 62 ch. Tr
in the Bth from needle, 2 bl, 1 sp, 4 open lacets. 3 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, turn.
end Row. —l bl, 2 sp, 3 bl, 2 sp, r bl, 3 close lacets, 2 bl, turn,
omitting Ibl and 1 sp. 3rd Row. —s ch, 1 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, x open lacet,
1 sp, 3 bl, 1 open lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl, 2 sp, t bl. 4th Row. —B bl, 1 sp,
2 bl, 1 close lacet, 2 bl, turn. 3th Ron'. —This row begins the in-
crease, II ch. tr in 9th, 10th. and nth from needle. 4 tr on 4 tr,
1 sp, I lacet, 1 sp, 3 bl, 1 open lacet, 1 sp. t bl. 2 sp, 1 bl. 6th
Row. —l bl, 2 sp, 3 bl, 2 sp, 1 bl, 3 lacets. 2 bl. 7th Row. —n ch,
•r in 9th, 10th. and nth from needle, 4 tr on 4 tr, 1 sp, 4 lacets,
3 bl. 3 sp, 1 bl.
Bth Row. —l bl, 4 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp. 4 lacets, 2 bl. gth Row. —n ch.
forming 1 space and 1 bl. 1 bl on bl. 1 sp, 4 lacets. 3 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl
10th Row. —l bl, 6 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp, 4 lacets. 2 bl. nth Row. —n ch.
forming a sp and bl. 1 bl on bl, r sp, 1 lacet. 1 sp. 1 bl, 2 lacets.
3 bl, 2 sp, 1 bl. 4 sp, 1 bl. 12th Row. —l bl. 3 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp. 1 bl. 1
lacet, 1 sp, 3 bl, 1 lacet, 1 sp, 2 bl, omit 1 sp, and turn. The three
loops are left unworked at the bottom of the point in order to keen
a uniform edge for the bordering edging.
13th Row. —B ch, 2bl on last 2 bl. 2 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp. 9 bl, 1 sp. 2 bl, 2
sp. 1 bl. 14th Row. —l bl, 3 sp. 3 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, 1 lacet. 1 sp, 3 bl.
1 lacet. 1 sp. 2 bl. turn. 13th Row. —B ch, 2blon 2 bl. 1 sp. 1 lacet.
1 sp, 1 bl, 2 lacets, 3 bl, 2 sp. 1 bl. a sp, IW. 16th Row. —l bl, 6
sp, 3 bl, 1 sp, 4 lacets, 2 bl. T7th Row. —The points now begin to
decrease. ■; ch. miss i bl. 2 bl. 1 sp. a lacets. 3 hi. 5 sp. 1 bl. 18th
Row. —l hi, 4 sp, 3 hi. 1 sp, a lacets, 2 hi.
The next row is like the first, beginning with 5 ch, miss r hi.
2bl on 2 bl. Work as many repeats as are required, and then begin:
The Mitred Corner. —Work as far as the 6th row of a repeat, full
length. The 7th row will be the first of the corner.
Ist Row of Corner. —11 ch, tr in 9th, 10th, and nth from needle,
4 tr on 4 tr, 1 sp, 4 open lacets, 3 blocks, 3 spaces, omit the last
block, turn, end Row. —5 ch, 4 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp, 4 close lacets, 2 bl,
turn. 3rd Row. —n ch, forming a sp and a block, another bl,
1 sp, 4 open lacets. 3 bl, 3 sp, turn. 4th Row. —4 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp, 4
lacets, 2 bl, turn. 3th Row. —n ch, forming a sp and a bl, another
bl, 1 sp, 1 lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl, 2 lacets, 3 bl, 3 sp. turn. 6th Row. —5 sp,
1 bl, 1 close lacet, 1 sp, 3 bl, 1 lacet, 1 sp, 2 bl, turn.
7th Row. —9 ch, 2 bl on the last 2 bl, 2 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, 5 bl, 3 sp,
turn. 8 h Row. —3 sp, 1 bl, 1 close lacet, 1 sp, 3 bl, 1 lacet, 1 sp, 2 bl.
gih Row. —9 ch, 2 bl on last 2 bl, 1 sp, 1 lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl, 2 lacets,
1 bl, 1 sp. 10th Row. —l bl, 1 sp. 4 close lacets, 2 bl. turn, nth
Row. —5 ch, miss 1 bl. 2 bl. 1 sp. 3 lacets. turn. 12th Row. —6 ch, dc
on lacet, 3 ch, tr on tr, 2 more lacets, 2 bl. 13th Row. —5 ch, miss
1 bl, 2 bl, 1 sp. 1 lacet. turn. 14th Row. —l close lacet, 2 bl. 13th
Row. —s ch, miss 1 block, work 1 bl.
This completes the first half of corner and the cotton is now at
the angle marked X.
Note. —The appearance of a mitred corner when half-worked
will be seen at Fig. 33.
Fig. 27. — Diagram for a Corner.
Fig. 29.—Tray-Cloth in Filet and Lacets.
Second Half of Corner. —Do not break off, but make u ch,
put trebles on the 9th, loth, nth, and 3 more on the side of the
block you made last; then 4 sl-sts on 4 of the chain above the dc
of the lacet, turn. 2nd Row. —1 sp, 1 bl on the block and 1 bl into
the sp, turn. 3rd Row. —n ch, forming a sp and block, another bl,
t sp. 1 open lacet, 2 ch, 1 sl-st on the lacet above the dc, turn.
fth Row. — l sp, 2 close lacets, 2 bl, turn. sth Row. — 11 ch, 1 sp, form-
ing a sp and block, another bl, 1 sp, 3 lacets, 2 ch, 4 sl-sts on
the trebles of block, turn. 6th Row. —1 sp, 4 lacets, 2 bl, turn. 7th
how. —n ch, forming a sp and block, another bl, 1 sp, 1 lacet,
1 sp, 1 bl, 2 lacets, 1 bl, i sp, 2 ch, sl-st to top of tr, and 3 more
sl-sts on the chain' of the corner space, turn.
Bth Row. —2 sp, 1 bl, 1 lacet, 1 sp, 3 bl, x lacet, 1 sp, 2 bl, turn.
{ )th Row. —9 ch, 2blon 2 bl, 2 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, 5 bl, 3 sp, 2 ch, sl-st
on tr and on 3 ch of corner sp, turn. 10th Row. —4 sp, 1 bl, 1 close
lacet, 1 sp, 3 bl, 1 lacet, 1 sp. tt Row. —9 ch, 2blon 2 bl, 1 sp. 1
lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl, 2 lacets, bl, 3 sp, 2 ch, join to side as
before, turn. 12th Row. —3 spr 3 bl, 1 sp, 4 lacets, 2 bl, turn. 13th
Row. —5 ch, miss 1 bl, 2 bl, 1 sp, 4 lacets, 3 bl, 3 sp, 2 ch, join to
side. turn. 14th Row. —3 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp, 4 lacets. 2 bl, turn. 15th
Row. —s ch, miss 1 bl, 2 bl, 1 sp, 4 lacets. 3 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, sl-st to top
of bl. This completes the corner. Now turn vdth;3 ch, work a bl
on the last bl, and continue the lace full width by the pattern.
For the Edge. —lnto the first loop at bottom of scallop, work 1
dc, 2 tr, 1 d-tr, triple picots of 7 ch each, 1 d-tr, 2 tr, 1 dc into same
hole, 2 ch. work another point into next loop, 2 ch, a point into 3rd
loop, (4 ch, a point into next loop) 3 times, 2 rh. a point into next
loop. Repeat down next scallop in reverse orde* - .
Fig. ag. Tray-Cloth, Pillow-Sham, or Duchesse Runner (Figs.
27 and 28). —Mercer-Crochet No. 60 or 70 will be suitable for this
tray-cloth. Worked in finer cotton, such as No. 100, the pattern
is suitable for underwear.
Fig. 28. —Diagram for Border. (See Fig. 29.)


Figs. 30a, 30b, and 31. —The left-hand side of this chart shows an
insertion arranged for articles like curtains that require two of
their sides to be vertical. The right-hand side shows the same pat-
tern with the corner turned to suit tea-, supper-, and tray-cloths,
etc., while at Figs. 32 and 33 will be found a deep border to match.
To work the insertion for curtains, begin at A, make 98 chain,
tr in Bth, then work by the chart till the row marked B is .done.
The work now goes back row by row to C, then forward again to
B, and continues to and fro till the length for the bottom of the
curtain is made, when the pattern travels from C to A.
The vertical sides are then to be worked into the dotted line,
and the left-hand part of the chart followed for the length required.
The curtain lace (Fig. 31) was worked in Mercer-Crochet No. 60
and measured 32 inches in width. Coarser cotton will be more suit-
able if the work is to be used with casement cloth (Bolton sheeting,
or any heavy fabric).
The right-hand side of this chart shows the arrangement for
cushion covers or any article that is used on a flat surface. As
joins taken through blocks are always to be avoided when possible,
begin at X with 86 chain, turn at Z, and work 27 spaces, which are 4
less than the full width. This brings the turning row —shown by
the line of dots —through a line of spaces. When the 23rd row is
finished make 16 ch, tr in Bth, 3 more spaces on the chain, and con-
tinue the border full width for the length of a side, working first
to C, then back, row by row, to B, and so to and fro till sufficient
is made. This side will end as it began by working from B to X,
and reducing the width for the last 23 rows.
To begin the next side, join on the cotton at X, and work into
the dotted line, turning the rows at the dots till the full width Is
reached in the sth row. The corner can, of course, be mitred, but
mitring through blocks is not very desirable.
Note.—lf this insertion is to be used along with the deep border
(Fig. 32, on next page) it should be finished with 6 rows of blocks
and lacets along both edges to match the beading on the border.
These rows can either be worked in the width by making an allow-
ance in the number of beginning chain, or be added afterwards. If
the first plan is used, mitre the corners; if the second, work them
as shown here.
Fig. 31.—Curtain Insertion made from Chart, Figs. 30a, 30b.
Figs. 30a, 30b, and 31. —The left
hand side of this chart shows an in-
sertion arranged for articles like cur-
tains that require two of their sides
to be vertical. The right-hand side
shows the same pattern with the cor-
ner turned to suit tea-, supper-, and
tray-cloths, etc., while at Pigs, 32
and 33 will be found a deep border to
match.
Fig. 30a.
Fig. 30b.


Fig. 32. Deep Border to Match Fig. 30b. —On this chart only
the open lacets are marked. It is understood that close lacets are
to be worked into and between them, and where there is not room
for a whole lacet a space is to be made. A small bit of the border
worked is shown at Fig. 33, which also shows how the corner is to
be mitred.
Worked in No. 50 Mercer-Crochet this border measures 6J
inches deep. It should be begun at a row that passes down the
middle of a flower, as the final join will be less noticeable here.
A thoroughly expert worker could begin at the mitred edge, in-
creasing to the full width and working the final mitre into the first
one, thus showing absolutely no join; but amateur workers had
better keep to the beaten track. Begin, then, with 131 ch.
Ist Row. —Treble in the Bth, 1 bl, 2 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 close lacet,
1 open lacet, 23 blocks (there will be 70 trebles in the group), 3 sp,
1 bl, 1 close lacet, 1 open lacet, 1 bl.
2nd Row. —1 bl, 2 lacets, 1 bl, 5 sp, to bl, 2 sp, 3 bl, 2 sp, 2 bl, 4
lacets, 1 bl, 2 sp, 1 bl.
3rd Row. —11 ch, trebles in 9th, 10th, nth, and into the first tr,
2 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 3 lacets, 1 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp, 5 bl, 4 sp, 4 bl, 8 sp, 1 bl,
2 lacets, 1 bl.
Continue now by the chart from A to B as many times as you
want repeats, then start the corner. The worked specimen, was
mitred from the pattern on the short end of the chart, and if you
are new to mitring, you will do well to work from this, with the
book turned sideways, and comparing it with the crochet as you go.
Work, then, till the 4th row past the middle of a flower is
reached, and in this row omit the block at top, turn with 6 ch, make
the close lacet into the open one, and continue the row as usual.
Now follow the chart, turning always when the dots are
reached, till the last row of 6 spaces and 1 bl brings you to the
angle X.
Now begin the 2nd half of mitre with 26 ch, tr in Bth, make 3
more spaces on the chain and I bl. 2 ch, sl-st into the top of the
treble at the middle one of the 3 upright dots, sl-st into 2 more ch
to the top dot, turn and work 2 sp, 5 bl, 1 sp on the row below.
Now increase with the 11 ch, and work the 3rd row, working a sp
and a bl on the side of the little point of Ist piece.
In doing these blocks that touch the first piece of work, do 2
trebles into the stitches, then sl-st to the side and up to the corner
as before. A tiny edge can be worked on this pattern if liked. The
one described in Fig. 29 is suitable.
A NOTE ON MITRING.
Note.—Mitring requires that the work should decrease by two
meshes in alternate rows. Some patterns require the whole of the
decreases to be two meshes: some —as in this case —that the first
decrease should be only one mesh. It is governed by the require-
ments of the second half of the mitre, and a good designer also cal-
culates in order to avoid, as far as possible, slip-stitching back when
decreasing at the bottom of the rows. Slip-stitching when joining
in the rows of the 2nd half of mitre can be avoided by using the
method shown at Fig. 24, but the usual method of slip-stitching is
described here as easiest for the amateur to understand; good
workers can substitute the other method.
Fig. 34. Trefoil Insertion.—This pattern is not only suitable
for curtains like the one shown at Fig. 30a, but can also be used
for any other purpose.
Begin at B with 107 ch, working first a row of spaces, then a
row of blocks, with one final space. Turn the rows at the dotted
line. The pattern repeats between the rows marked At and A 2. As
it is a rather long repeat, the amount needed for each side should
be carefully calculated before beginning. The side is to be finished
as it began.
Fig. 32. —Deep Border to match Fig. 30b. (See previous page.)


For the next side work into the dotted line, the first
row‘being Row A, with 2 blocks omitted near the top,
as that leaf is not repeated here.
Another arrangement of this pattern to suit an oval
tray-cloth will be found at Fig. 60, which will also show
the appearance of the trefoils when worked. The edging
of Fig. 18 of my second Crochet Book, and the triangle
Fig. 33.—Section of Border showing mitred corner.
in the same figure, can be used with this insertion. The
triangle and insertion, with a narrow band of linen be-
tween them, and a broader hem outside all, would make
a very attractive afternoon tea-cloth. In that case work
the triangles first, and attach them to the central linen.
Then work the insertion, making it rather longer in the
side than the centre, and cut the linen band to suit the
space between.
The deep hem of doubled linen hemstitched is a
rather clumsy finish to table linen, particularly if the
linen be quadrupled at the corners. If you must have a
doubled hem, then do the corners as the Irish workers
do the hemstitched handkerchiefs, by cutting away the
two inside folds of the four (leaving a turning, of
course), and hemstitch the corner both ways out to the
edge.
But the lightest and neatest way of all, in my opinion,
is to have the linen single and the edge crocheted over
with a tiny pattern as described so fully in my first and
second books. There is no clumsiness here, and even a
line of picots on the extreme edge gives a smart finish.
Fig. 34.—Design for Trefoil Insertion.


Fig- 35- Lily Insertion for Casement Curtains.—This pattern has
been arranged for articles that require the design' to be placed in
different directions on horizontal and vertical sides.
Begin at A with 140 ch, tr into Bth. Follow the chart, turning
the rows at the dotted line, then working the full width till the
whole of the bottom portion is done, when the corner will again
be worked by turning at the dotted line. Make as many repeats as
your curtain requires, not forgetting to allow for the outside strip
of material. For the vertical sides, join on the cotton at B, and
work into the blocks and spaces at the dotted line. It will be
noticed that the insertion along these sides is one mesh wider than
that along the bottom.
The curtain material can be hemmed, or whipped if it is thin
enough, and the lace oversewn to the edge.
If the border is wanted for a tea-table cloth or supper-cloth, use
the corner (Fig. 36) and work the other sides like the first, of
course omitting the extra mesh. Use a rather coarse cotton —from
No. 20 to 30 for curtains, Ardern’s Nos. 40 to 60, or Mercer-Crochet
60 to 100 for table linen.
Fig. 36.—Corner of Lily Insertion.
NOTE.
See Fig. 31 for the appearance of this kind
of insertion used as a curtain. It can, of
course, be used in other ways—e.g., a horizon-
tal strip along the bottom, and another at a
little distance from the top, or the vertical
sides only can be worked. A single long
strip, beginning and ending with the divid-
ing pattern, and surrounded with a band of
iinen edged with picots, will mike a very
good strong duchesse runner.
Fig. 35.—Conventional Lily Insertion for Casement Curtains.


Fig. 37.—Insertion suitable for a Yoke or Tray-Cloth.
Fig. 37. Insertion with Corner.—This simple conventional in-
sertion will be found useful for many purposes. It is narrow
enough for a camisole yoke. A square-shaped doyley can be made
by putting only one pattern on each side, and working the four
corners as shown, 'the centre might be either of linen or lacet
filling, and if the lace had no outer margin of linen, a little edge
of loops or picots should be added all round. For a doyley with
lace centre it will be best to work the full width, making 254 chain,
and working 83 spaces on it; the outer line of blocks will be best
added afterwards, and the small margin worked into them. This
makes a firmer and more uniform edging.
To work as a border, 81 chain, miss 3, and work 78 trebles.
The next row will be 1 block and 25 spaces, turning the row at the
dotted line. The 3rd, 25 spaces and 1 block. When one side is done,
if the corner is required work the first row into the dotted line.
Fig. 38.—British Coat-of-Arms. The chart and directions for making this pattern are .published in the
Giant Chart Series, No. 4. Price 10d. a copy. See also the directions in St. George and the Dragon (Fig.
53) for useful hints in working these picture pieces of crochet.


Fig. 42. —Photograph of Thistle Insertion. (See Fig. 41.)
Fig. 38. The British Coat-of-Arms (see previous page). —The
same remark applies to this as to the Blue-Wren Pillow-Sham (Fig.
61) and the Blue-Bird Cushion-Cover (Fig. 76). There was no
space available for so large a chart as this requires, but it is in-
cluded in the Giant Chart series as No. 4. Full details of this series,
which consists, at present, of six articles, with more to follow, will
be found on the cover of this book.
Figs, 39 and 40. Thistle Border.—The row marked A, consisting
of the spaces just before a leaf, is the first row of a side. Make 96
chain, tr into 4th, sth, and 6th, then (1 sp, 1 bl) 3 times, 22 spaces,
1 bl, 1 sp, 1 bl. Follow the chart, and in the sth row begin the in-
crease by making 8 ch, tr in 4th, sth, and 6th, then a space also
over part of the 8 ch. Fig. 40 shows the working plainly. The
corner is to be done by turning the rows at the dotted line B and
finishing the side at C. Begin the next side by working the first row
into the dotted line. Any very narrow edge can be added if liked.
Fig. 40.—Photograph of Thistle Border and Corner.
Fig. 39.—Chart for working the Thistle Border. (See Fig. 43.)


Figs. 41 and 42. Thistle Insertion.—This is
another pattern arranged for curtains. If it
is wanted for a horizontal surface, as in a
tray- or supper-cloth, work the second side
exactly like the first. Begin at A with 120
chain, and work blocks and spaces alter-
nately along the chain; the row is to be
turned at the dotted line B.
Fig. 43. “Lusitania” Inset. —Work this the
short way, beginning with 126 chain, tr in
4th, 3 more tr, then spaces and blocks alter-
nately for the first row.
Fig. 41.—Thistle Insertion described above. See photograph on opposite page (Fig. 42).
Fig. 43—“Lusitania” Inset.


Fig. 44. Convolvulus Insertion. —This insertion is intended to
be used along with Fig. 46, the convolvulus square, in various ways.
Four pieces of the insertion can be worked as a border, and the
square worked to fit inside, or the square can be placed at the
corners and the insertion worked into the sides as shown in diagram
Fig. 45. Make 107 chain and work 34 spaces.
To use this pattern in a loi.ger line, begin again when one strip
is done. The insertion alone will be found a pretty insert to place
in the ends of towels or pillow-shams. (See, also, directions for
Figs. 47-48.)
Fig. 46. Convolvulus Square.—This requires a chain of 185
stitches. It is suitable worked in rather coarse cotton for bed-
spreads, with alternate squares of linen or cross-stitch. Worked in
fine cotton and edged with one of the narrow Irish crochet edgings
shown' in my book on Irish Crochet it will serve as a pretty doyley
for the dressing-table, etc.
Figs. 47 and 48. —This square and insertion can be used either
separately or together in the same manner as Figs. 44 and 46. If
the diagram, Fig. 45, is followed, a little border of a row of blocks,
then a row of spaces, and a final row of blocks should be worked
all round the crochet after it is joined up. Of course, any other
edge of three or four rows can be substituted.
Fig. 44. —Convolvulus Insertion.
Fig. 48. —Convolvulus Insertion.


Fig. 46—Convolvulus Square. (See diagram below.)
Work a square by making 176 chain, tr into Bth, then 56 more
spaces. When finished, work the first row of the insertion into
it, omitting the three blocks shown near the right-hand corner at
the bottom. Make as many repeats as the side of the cloth requires.
The side can be ended just after either of the flowers, or at any spot
that docs not cut the design too much. It is always allowable, in
Fig. 47.—Convolvulus Square. (See diagram.)
finishing or beginning these long sprays at an intermediate spot, to
leave out the whole of a portion that cannot be finished. For in-
stance, if you wish to end the spray just before the 2nd flower, or
about the 40th row, omit the whole of the stalk leading to that
flower, letting the design end with the two branched leaves. This
applies also to the convolvulus spray and all similar patterns.
Fig. 45.—Diagram showing how to arrange Figs. 44 and 46, and
also Figs. 47 and 48, into square Tea Tablecloths.


SIDE ENDS HERE
Fig. 49.—Border for Marguerite Afternoon-Tea Cloth. (See Frontispiece to this volume )
Figs. 49 and 50. Border for Marguerite Afternoon-Tea Table-
Cloth. —These, with Fig. 51, represent part of the directions for
working the cloth shown in the photograph which forms the front-
ispiece of this book. It makes a very pretty cloth, and the border
may be worked in either full or coarse threads. (The photograph on
the opposite page was made from a piece of the border worked in
heavy linen thread.) The border, which is of medium depth, may be
done either in the usual flat filet, or in the new raised style; a
flower worked in each method is shown in the photograph (Fig. 50).
Begin with 72 chain.
Ist Row. —Miss 3, 3 tr, 12 spaces, 9 blocks, 1 space, turn. 2nd
Roit\ —8 ch, tr into Ist tr, 4 blocks, 1 open lacet, 1 close lacet, 1 open
lacet, 3 blocks. 9 sp, 1 bl, turn, jrd Row. —l bl, 7 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, (1
open lacet, 1 close lacet) twice, 1 open lacet, 3 bl, 2 ch, 1 1-tr (3
over), into bottom of last made tr, turn. 4th Row. —B ch, tr into Ist
of 8 ch, 2 bl, 1 open lacet. 1 close lacet, 1 sp, 6 bl, 1 sp, 1 open lacet,
i sp, 1 bl. 6 sp. 1 bl, turn. jth Rotv. —l bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 1 open lacet,
1 sp, 2 bl, 6 sp, 2 bl. 1 sp, 1 close lacet, 1 sp, 2 bl, 2 ch, 1-tr into bot-
tom of last tr. turn. 6th Row. —B ch. tr in Ist of the 8, 2 bl, close
lacet. open lacet, 1 bl, 10 sp, 2 bl, 1 close lacet, I bl, 4 sp, I bl,
turn.
jth Row. —l bl, 3 sp, 1 bl. x open lacet, 1 bl, 6 sp, 1 bl, 6 sp, 1 bl,
1 sp, 1 open lacet. 1 sp, 2 bl, 2 ch, 1-tr into bottom of tr; turn. Bth
Row. —B ch. tr in Bth. 2 bl. 1 open, 1 close lacet, 1 bl, 6 sp, 3 bl, 5
sp, 1 bl, 1 close lacet. 1 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl. pth Row. —l bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, 1
sp, x bl. 6 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, I close lacet, 2 bl, 1
sp. loth Row. —B ch. tr on Bth, 2 bl, 1 sp, 1 open lacet. 1 sp, 1 bl,
2 sp. 3 bl. 2 sp. 3 bl. 6 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp, I bl. 11th Row. —
! bl, 3 sp, 1 bl. 1 sp. 1 bl, 6 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp, 4 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, 1 lacet,
' sp, 2 bl, 1 sp. 12th Row. —l sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, I lacet. 1 bl, 4 sp,
3 bl, 1 sp, 2 bl, 8 sp. 2 bl. 3 sp. 1 bl.
1 jth Row. —l bl. 3 sp. 2 bl, 4 sp, 3 bl, 2 sp. The next is a block,
but when the first of the 3 tr is made, make the raised loop thus:
15 ch (not too loose), dc round the middle treble in the 4th row.
counting backwards—i.e.. the 9th row from beginning. Work 20 tr
into the loop, sl-st into the top of the last tr of the block; finish
the block. I sp. 1 tr of a block. 15 ch, dc round the 4th tr from the
bottom of the petal in the 3rd row, counting back (loth row of
pattern), 20 tr in loop, sl-st to last tr as before, finish the block,
another block, 5 spaces. 1 bl. 1 close lacet. 1 sp. 2 bl, 1 sp.
Note that sometimes these loops are made when working a row
on the front, sometimes on the return rows, but in either case the
method is the same. Of course, all raised parts are worked on the
rame side.
14th Row. —B ch. tr in Bth. 2 bl. 1 close lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl. 3 sp, 2
bl, 3 sp. 1 bl. 2 sp. 4 bl. 4 sp. 2 bl, 3 sp. 1 bl. 15th Row. —1 bl. 3 sp, 2
bl. 5 sp. 3 bl. x sp. 1 bl. t tuft —that is. put 4 tr instead of 1 into the
first st of a bl, 4 tr instead of 1 into the 2nd st of the bl, take
out the needle, insert it in the top of the first of these 8 tr, and
draw the loop through. 1 ch. to close it, and work the next block.
If the tuft is to appear on the side away’ from you, draw the loop
through in front of it; if on the side nearest to you, draw the
loop through at the back of it; 1 sp. 3 bl. 3 Sp. I hi. I sp, 1 open
lacet. 2 hi, 1 sp.
16th Row. —i sp, 2 bl, i lacet. I sp, i bl, 4 sp, 2 bl, a loop of 10
-h, into the first and lowest block of the petal, taking up the chain
that this block was worked into, 1 sp, 3 bl. 1 sp. 1 tr of a block, 12
ch, into the corner bl of the petal, taking up the lowest tr of that
block, 18 tr in loop, finish the block, 1 block, 5 sp, 2 bl. 4 sp, 1 bl.
ijth Row. —1 bl. 5 sp, 6 bl. 3 sp. a tuft on the first block, a block
on the 2nd block, a tuft on the 3rd block. 7 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp. 1 open
lacet. 2 bl. 1 sp. iBth Row. —l sp. 2 bl, 1 lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp,
2 bl, 1 sp, 3 bl. 1 sp, 2 bl. 1 sp, 4 bl, 6 sp, 1 bl. 19th Row. —l bl.
10 sp. 3 bl. 1 sp, 1 bl. 1 tuft. 1 bl. 1 sp, 3 bl. 3 sp. t bl, 1 sp. 1 lacet,
2 bl, 1 1-tr into 3rd ch of last space.
20th Row. —l sp, 2 bl. 2 sp. 1 bl. 3 sp. 1 bl. After doing the
2nd tr of this block, 10 ch. a loop into uppermost corner of petal.
tr in loop, 1 bl. 3 sp. 1 bl. 2 sp. 4 bl, 9 sp. 1 bl. 21st Row. —l bl,
0 sp, 2 tr of a bl. 12 ch, to lower corner of petal, 18 tr in loop, 2 bl.
2 sp. 1 bl. 1 sp. 2 bl. 5 sp. 1 bl, 1 open lacet. 1 sp. 2 bl. I sp. 22nd
Row. —1 sp. 2 bl, 1 sp. r lacet. 1 bl. 4 sp. 3 bl. i sp. 2 bl. 13 sp. rbl
23rd Row. — l bl, 12 sp. 3 bl, 1 sp. 4 bl. 3 sp. r bl. r lacet. t sp, 2
bl. 1 1-tr space. 2fth Row. —l sp. 2 bl. 1 close lacet, t sp. x bl, 2
sp. I hi, 1 tr of next block. 14 ch. to upper corner of petal. 20 tr
in loop, finish block, another block. 2 sp. 3 bl, 12 sp. t bl. 25th
Row. —l bl. 12 sp. 1 bl. 2 tr of next bl. 13 ch. to lower corner of
petal. 20 tr in loop, finish bl. another block. 3 sp. I bl. 2 sp. I bl.
1 open lacet, I sp. 2 bl, I 1-tr space.
26th Row. —l sp. 2 bl. 1 lacet. 1 sp. i bl. 5 sp. 3 hi. 12 sp, 1 bl.
27th Row. —l bl. 13 sp. 1 bl. 5 sp. I bl. 1 sp. 1 open lacet. 2 bl, 1
1-tr space. 28th Row. —l sn. 3 bl. 1 lacet. 1 bl. sp to end. 1 bl. 29th
Row. —1 bl. 16 sp. 7 bl. 1 1-tr sp. jofh Rom —l sp, 8 bl, r 3 sp. 1 bl.
Repeat pattern from the first row.
For the edge, put a dc into a space, (3 ch, tr into corner of
block, s ch, dc in sth, 4 ch. dc in last dc, 4 ch. dc in last dc, sl-st
to top of tr) repeat. Where the spaces form a straight line, put
the dc in one space and the tr in the next.
The chart shows the blocks, marked by a star, in which the
raised stitches occur. In using the chart, work as many repeats as
desired: then work straight along for the corner, turning the rows
»t the dotted line. The first row of the next side is then to be
worked into the dotted line.
Fig. 51. Marguerite Triangle.—The frontispiece shows the mar-
guerite lace and triangle combined into an afternoon-tea cloth.
They were worked in a heavy linen thread, Knox’s No. 30, and
looked very well, notwithstanding the coarseness. The pattern,
therefore, is suited to those who cannot use fine threads. But if a
finer thread is required, make the border two or three repeats
longer on each side, and have the linen in centre octagonal instead
of square. Begin with 359 ch, and work 118 spaces. The third
and each alternate row is two meshes shorter than the previous row.
The thirty-one -rows omitted from chart for want of space are of
plain filet, graduating to a point.


Fig. 50.—Photograph of Border for Afternoon-Tea Cloth.
(See opposite page.)
Fig. 51.— Marguerite Triangle.


Fig. 52.—Child’s Filet Collar. (See photograph on opposite page )


Fig. 53.—Photograph of Child’s Filet Collar. (See chart on opposite page.)
Figs. 52 and 53. Child’s Filet Collar.—ln addition to spaces,
blocks, open and close lacets, this collar has picoted spaces all
along the ribbon that winds through the design. To make a
picoted space, do 6 ch, sl-st into the sth from needle, 1 ch, tr in next
treble. The collar was made in Mercer-Crochet No. 7°. and mea-
sured 4} inches deep.
To make it without showing joins, or bits obviously added on,
begin at one of the scallops at back of collar with 26 ch, tr into
Bth, 6 more spaces, 20 ch. 2nd Row. —Tr in Bth, 4 more spaces on
the chain, x sp on sp, 5 blocks, 1 sp, add three more spaces, 8 ch,
and break the thread. The method of adding spaces is shown at
Fig. 22.
Begin again with 59 ch, tr in Bth, 17 more sp. 2nd Row. —13 ch,
tr in Bth, 2 more sp on ch, 1 sp on sp, 16 bl, 1 sp, add 3 sp. 3rd
Row. —13 ch, tr in Bth, 2 sp on ch, 24 bl, add 3 sp, turn. 4th
Row. —B ch, tr on last tr, 7 bl, (1 picot sp and 1 sp alternately) 8
times, 7 bl, add 1 sp, turn. 3th Row. —B ch, tr on tr, 4 bl, 24 picot-
Sp and sp alternately, arranging them so that picot-sps come over
spaces, and spaces over picot-sp of the row below, 4 bl, add 1 sp,
turn. 6th Row. —B ch, tr on' tr, 2 bl, 7 alternate spaces arranging as
before, then 16 sp without picots (these are to work the blocks into
in the following row), 7 alternate spaces, 2 bl, add a sp, turn.
yth Row. —6 ch, join to end of the Bch left at end of Ist little
piece, 2 ch, tr on tr of larger piece, 2 bl, 4 alternate spaces, 4 plain
spaces, 16 bl, 4 plain sp, 4 alternate sp, 2 bl, add a space, 8 ch, break
thread.
Begin a 3rd time with 26 ch, 7; spaces, 11 ch, join to erid of 8 ch
at end of larger piece, 2 ch, treble on Bth of the 11 ch, 2 more
spaces on ch, 1 on sp, 5 bl, 1 sp, add S sp, 17 ch, turn, tr in Bth, 3
more spaces on ch, 1 on sp, 5 bl, S sp, 3 bl, 4 sp (3 of them on the 8
ch, between the pieces), 2 bl, 1 sp. 1 picoted sp, 3 sp, 28 bl, 2 sp, x
picoted sp, 1 plain sp, 1 picoted sp, 2 bl, 4 sp (3 of them on the 8 ch
between the pieces), 3 bl, 5 sp, S bl, x sp, add 4 spaces.
The work is now at B, and proceeds by the chart the full width
of collar till the 39th row is done, then work first one side, then the
other, following the chart carefully, and also using the pictured col-
lar as a guide. The narrow, picoted edge is made by working a dc
in the first loop at the front, 7 ch, dc into this dc, 8 ch, dc into the
last dc, 7 ch, dc into last dc. This foitas 3 picots, and to draw them
together put a dc round the dc before the xst picot. Make 5 or 6
ch, miss a hole of the collar, or occasionally 2 holes, in order to
reach one of the little projecting points, and make another group
of 3 picots. It may make the drawing up of the picots plainer to.
say, take a dc into the S-ch loop and over or round the dc that goes
into the filet hole.




St. George and the Dragon.
Figs. 54 and 55.
It may interest readers to learn that the beautifully
worked cushion-cover shown in Fig. 55 was made by Mrs.
Noake, of Airey’s Inlet, in one of the lighthouses that are
ever on guard on the fringe of our country. To get the
same result the worker must take the same trouble. It will
be noticed that the space-filling is square, that the lacet-
filling is very even and open —not dragging in any direc-
tion. As such evenness of stitch is rare, the instructions
were to begin the work at the side in order that any slight
difference in the width of stitch should be in favour of the
slimness and height of the youth on horseback, and not in
the other direction, which would have made the figure
squat and the horse too long. In the case of this crochet-
worker the result would have been the same in whatever
direction it had been worked; but if you are not sure of
your stitch, use this hint in beginning your work.
Another innovation was to use two needles. A painter
does not mind using several brushes, nor a draughtsman
several pencils, nor an embroiderer several needles; there-
fore, in an important piece of work, the crochet-worker
need not be above using two needles. The bulk of work
was done with a No. 6 hook, but in the heavy masses of
trebles in the bodies of the man and animals a No. 7 was
used, and this, by tightening the stitches somewhat, avoided
the sagging that is often noticed in the close parts of filet
crochet.
Begin with 4(>5 chain, and with the fine needle make a
treble into the 4th, and then make 461 trebles. Use the
line needle for the Jnd row of trebles, then the coarser one
of the row of spaces and the fine one for the next row.
Do not —unless you like—change the needle for the ring
of the circle nor for small groups of trebles, but only where
the masses come.
Mercer-Crochet No. 70 will be suitable for a cushion-
cover with the needles named above. For a bed-spread
centre, No. 50 will be a good size, with No. 5 and 5J hooks.
The Rose, Thistle, and Shamrock border f see Figs. 83 to
86) can be used with this design round the edge of the
spread, a heavy linen being placed between the two pieces
of crochet.
Mary Card’s Giant Charts
tor Crochet-Workers.
A NOTE BY THE PUBLISHER
This design is, in a sense, the i>iice de resistance
of this volume. In the opinion of the publisher it
represents the very height of skill in the applica-
tion of a great picture to a particular form of work.
To translate the familiar drawing of St. George and
the Dragon to conventional lines, and then to apply
the transformed design to filet crochet so that it
loses nothing of its beauty when worked, is a per-
formance of which anyone might be proud. The
small photograph on the next page conveys some
idea of the excellence of the worked article —in this
case, a cushion-cover.
It might be added that this design is practically a
Giant Crochet Chart, and was originally intended for
one of the series of Giant Charts which Miss Card
has designed for the crochet-workers of Australia
and New Zealand. These Charts now number
eight, and are posted to any address on receipt of
one shilling each. They are;
No. 1 —Wild Rose and Pigeon Supper-Cloth.
No. 2.—Peacock Centre for Bed-Spread.
No. 3.—Handsome Vine and Peacock Border, to
complete Bed-Spread (No. 2).
No. 4. —The British Coat-of-Arms.
No. s.—Blue-Bird and Iris Cushion-Cover.
No. 6. —Blue Wren Pillow-Sham or Cushion-Cover.
No. 7.—Rose Designs for Square and Oblong Tray-
Cloths, Bed-Spreads, etc.
No. B—Waratah Edging and Corner to Match, for
Tray Cloths, etc.
Each chart is drawn on the same scale as this one
of St. George and the Dragon, and is equally easy
to follow, being accompanied by a photograph and
full directions (see page 3).


Fig. 56.—Photograph of Nightgown Yoke, (See chart on opposite page.)
Fig. 55.—Photograph of St. George and the Dragon Cushion-Cover. (See Chart on previous page.)
Figs. 56, 57. and 58. Night-
gown or Camisole Yoke. —
This was worked in No. 60
Mercer-Crochet with a No.
6 hook, and 8 spaces were
allowed to the inch in the
finished work.
Begin at the bottom edge
of one of the sleeves with
296 ch, and work 97 spaces
on this. B'ollow the chart,
decreasing to the top of the
sleeve, then gradually in-
creasing till the neck hole
is reached. Then work
along the front of the yoke,
increasing and decreasing
as the edge shows, till the
row before the one that
goes right across is reached.
Then work 57 chain and
break thread.
Next work the back of
yoke to the same row and
work right across on the
chain and on the front side,
the full width of chart. The
second sleeve is worked by
the same chart in reverse
order.
Fig. 58. Edging for Fig.
54 and Similar Garments. —
Ist Row. —Work a row of
spaces all round if the edge
is irregular, taking the
trebles into the work even-
ly and without tightening
the edge. 2nd Row. —2 d-tr
into one of the spaces (4
ch, miss 1 space, 2 d-tr into
the next), repeat all round.
3rd Row. —s ch (d-tr, picot


of 7 ch) 6 times, all into next loop. 3 ch, dc
into following loop. Repeat from beginning
of row. The second row may be omitted
on straight edges as shown on the sleeves of
big. 54. It is intended for a ribbon casing.
For Edging Round Neck. Ist Row. — Rut a
long-treble over) into the first st, 1 ch. an-
other long-tr in same st. 5 ch, miss 6. 2 long-ti
with ch between in next st. Repeat all round,
making only 3 ch between the long-tr at the
angles.
2nd Rozv. —2 half-trebles between the first
pair of 1-tr (2 ch, tr, 2 ch, d-tr, 2 ch, 2 d-tr, 2
ch, tr) all into first loop of 5 ch, 2 ch, 2 h-tr
between next pair of long-trebles; repeat all ■
along.
3rd Row. —Half-treble between the 2 half-
trebles, 3 ch, dc into 2nd hole, 3 ch, dc in next
hole, 3 ch, half-treble between next pair of half-
trebles.
Fig. 58.—Edging for Nightgown Yoke.
Fig. 57. —Chart of Nightgown Yoke,


Figs. 59 and 60. Oval Tray-Cloth in Trefoil Design.—This is
arranged so as to avoid any unsightly join in the insertion. The
way to add spaces must be understood before beginning (see intro-
duction).
Begin at A with 77 chain, tr into Bth, 23 more spaces, 17 chain
to turn. 2nd Row. —4 spaces on the chain, 1 on sp, 22 bl, 1 sp,
make and adcf 4 spaces. Work to and fro by the chart until the
31st row (marked B on the chart) is done. In the following row,
work only to C, and turn, sl-stitching over 4 spaces. Then continue
along the side, to and fro to D. Now turn the chart round, and,
going to the opposite side, work the row E into the row D, and
then work on to F, finishing this row with 3 added spaces, then 11
chain, and break the thread. One end and one long side are now-
done. _
Now turn the chart again, and, going back to the 32nd row from
the beginning, join on the thread at G, and work up the 2nd side
of the insertion to E. Then into this work the row D, and on to
C. You now have one end and two sides done, leaving one end to
be worked right across both sides. Now, when you get to C, make
30 chain across to the end of the other side, and put a tr into the
end one of the 11 chain, 4 spaces on the chain, and continue the row
to H. Now work to and fro to A.
1 he joining of lace and linen in patterns like this requires care
and exactness. Ihe ovals must be exact. Most workers will find
it easiest to buttonhole the lace to the linen along a pencilled line,
afterwards cutting away the linen underneath; others will prefer to
work round both the linen edge and the outer lines of spaces' with
dc and then sew the two together. The outer pattern is given in
Book I. Fig. 73). r
Fig. 59.—Oval Tray-Cloth in Trefoil Design.


Fig. 60. —Photograph of Oval Tray-Cloth. (See opposite page.)
Fig. 61.—Pillow-Sham of Blue Wrens and Wattle.
Fig. 61. Pillow-Sham of Blue Wrens and Wattle.—lt being
found impossible to include the chart of this artistic piece of work
on account of its size, it has been published separately as one of
the large Giant Chart Series. It is No. 6. It should be worked
in Mercer-Crochet No. 80 or too, and is arranged so as to show no
scam or join anywhere. (Sec page 25 for list of Giant Charts.)


Fig. 62.—True-Lovers’ Knot.
Figs. 6a and 63. True-Lover’s Knot.—This little square can be
used as a pincushion or sachet; or, worked in very fine cotton, can
be inset in table linen, with initials added above or below the knot.
The letters shown elsewhere will be suitable. The border alone will
Fig. 63.—Photograph of True-Lovers' Knot.
do to surround two of the larger initials (as shown in Fig. 74). In
all these insets the outer row of blocks should be added last to se-
cure a uniform edge.
Fig. 64.—Photograph of Arabesque Cushion-Cover. (See Chart on opposite page.)


Figs. 64 and 65. Arabesque Cushion Cover. —This Arabesque
pattern can be put to many uses. By working it one pattern wide in
a long strip, it will make a good insertion; while, worked in pieces
composed of several squares each way, it will do for cushion-covers.
The cover shown in Fig. 64 was worked with Mercer-Crochet Cot-
ton No. 100, and then set in' the centre of a baby’s pram pillow. The
little edging is given in my Book No. 1, and was worked directly
on the linen.
To make a square like that in 64: Begin at A of the chart and
make 3 77 chain, put a treble into the Bth, and work 123 more spaces.
Turn with 5 ch, make 1 sp, then an open lacet, followed by a close
lacet. Work these open and close lacets all along, finishing with a
space. The 2nd row is also formed of lacets with a space at end of
the row, and, as shown in the chart, the close lacets are worked
over the open ones, and vice-versa.
In the 4th row the blocks begin to be formed. The pattern is
quite clear. The 42nd and 43rd are of lacets right across, and in
the 44th the patterns begin again; but it will be seen that the pattern
that was in the middle before is now at the beginning and end, while
the first pattern is now in the middle. The 3rd repeat is just like
ihe first, and two rows of lacets and one of spaces complete the
square.
The warning given in the introduction about getting the spaces
and blocks square is very necessary in this type of pattern. All
beauty would be lost if the work were longer one way than the
other.
For an insertion, make 137 chain, and work 44 spaces upon it.
Begin with a space, and work one pattern, adding a space after the
21st lacet, turn ; work a space on the space, and do another row of
lacets. It is merely necessary to keep a line of spaces along each
edge with a line of lacets just inside them. When the first pattern
is worked, put in the two rows of lacets. and work the second pat-
tern by the chart.
In Fig. 78 a somewhat similar pattern is shown as a tray-cloth,
with an insertion made up of one repeat of the pattern. If the
square of lace here shown is too small for the purpose it is wanted
for, it can be enlarged by making more repeats of the pattern in the
form of a square, or. as in Fig. 78, by placing a strip of the
insertion round with a band of linen between.
What looks like a double row of blocks round the lace in the
cushion is formed of one row of blocks worked into the outside
spaces, and a row of dc worked on the linen. These two are then
top-sewn together. This finish is so neat that it is hard to tell the
right side from the wrong in the finished join.
Fig. 66.—A Useful Narrow Border.
Fig. 66. Narrow Border. —This little border can be placed round
any piece of crochet that requires to be made a little larger. As it
has no particular meaning in itself it will suit conventional or other
patterns equally well. If space-filling is used, the outer trebles are
best added afterwards, therefore make 53 chain and turn the rows
with spaces; but if a lacet-filling is used, then the blocks should be
worked with the rest to keep a firmer edge, and 57 chain will be
wanted. The corner may be mitred for either filling, but must be
mitred for the lacets. In choosing a lacet-filling, of course the one
used in the main design will be followed.
Fig. 65.—Chart of Arabesque Cushion-Cover.


Fig. 67. —Swan Design Milk-Jug Cover, as worked from design in
Fig. 68.
Fig. 68.—Chart of Milk-Jug Cover (Swan Design).
Fig. 70.—Chart of Milk-Jug Cover (Kookaburra Design).
Figs. 67 to 73. Round Covers for Milk-Jugs.— For these, use
Mercer-Crochet No. 60 and a fine hook. The size of the cover will
be in proportion to the size of the cotton and the closeness of the
work. Jf a large cover is wanted, worked in fine cotton, increase the
number of rows of loops in the outer part. Begin'-at the bottom
with 35 ch, tr in Bth, 9 more spaces. In the 2nd row, increase 4 spaces,
then 1 sp, 8 blocks, 1 sp, add 4 spaces. Continue by the chart till
the filet part is finished. The outer rows of loops are of five or
more chain. The placing of the first row can be clearly seen in the
illustration. Put six chain in the next row, and increase the follow-
ing rows by. one Stitch in each loop. When working the outside
row, take up a large bead at the middle of each 4th loop.
Note.— h or the method of working added spaces, see Fig. 22.
Fig. 69.—Chart of Milk-Jug Cover (Snake Design).
Fig. 71.—Chart of Milk-Jug Cover (Blue-Wren Design).


Fig. 72. —Diagram for a Puss-in-the-Corner Milk-Jug Cover.
Fig. 73. —This shows how any or all of the round designs can be
used as a square. If the magpie is wanted round like the others,
follow the darker line that will be noticed round the ring, or work
the outer ring from one of the other charts, putting in the blocks,
etc., of the bird in the places.
To use the chart as a square, make 179 chain and work 58
spaces upon it. Follow the chart and afterwards work a row or
two rows of trebles all round the piece.
These patterns are also suitable for insets in tabic linen, etc,
and for pincushion tops and other uses that will readily suggest
themselves. A novel border for an afternoon tea cloth would re-
sult if they were inset along the edge of a linen square about an
inch and a half apart, and the linen cut to form a scallop with a
small edging worked along the edge. '1 hese little edgings are given
in so many places in my various books and magazine articles that
(hey cannot be repeated here; but a number of suitable ones will be
found in my third, or Irish Crochet, Book. In the first and
second crochet books will be found very narrow insertions that can
r-e worked directly on the linen; and if this idea of making the
scallop border be carried out, one of these narrow insertions and
an edging that will go well with it should be chosen before the
work is started.
Fig. 74. —This little inset needs no description. It is easily
worked from the picture. Any of the letters in the alphabet at the
back can be substituted except W.
Fig. 74. —Photograph of one of the Letter series worked In Inset.
Pig. 75. Red Cross Doyley.— Worked in No. 36 Ardern’s Crochet
Cotton with a fine hook, this doyley measures nine and a half
inches across. It will look better worked tn a fine cotton, such as
Mercer-Crochet No. 100.
, Begin with 17 ch.
Ist Row. —Treble in Bth, 3 more spaces.
2nd Row. —10 ch, tr in Bth, 2 ch, tr on tr, 4 sp, add 2 .‘■paces.
(To add spaces, see directions at Fig. 23.)
3rd Row. —B ch, tr into Bth from needle, 1 sp, 1 bl, 6 sp, add
3 sp.
4th Row. —B ch, tr into Bth, 9 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, add 1 st.
sth Row. —8 ch, tr into Bjth, 1 sp, 2 bl, 11 sp, add 2.
6th Row. —B ch, tr into 8 h, 2 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, i bl, 1
sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, add 1.
7th Row. —5 ch, tr on Ist tr, 1 bl, {5 ch, miss 5, tr on next: this
makes an open lacet), 1 bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 2 sp, add 1.
Bth Row. —B ch, tr on Bth, 4 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, (3
ch, dc into open lacet, 3 ch, tr on next tr; this makes a close lacet);
1 bl, 1 sp, add x. *
9th Row. —s ch, tr on tr, 1 b", 1 sp, 1 open lacet, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1
bl, s sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 2 sp, add 1.
Fig. 73. — Diagram for the Magpie Milk-Jug Cover.
loth Row. —S ch, tr in Bth, 2 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 4 bl, 1
close lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp. nth Row. —5 ch, tr on tr, i bl, 1 sp, 1
lacet, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, add 1. 12th
Row. —B ch, 9 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, 1 close lacet, x sp»
1 bl, 1 sp. 13th Row. —5 ch, tr on tr, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 open lacet, 1 sp,
1 bl, 2 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp. 14th Row. —£ ch, 2 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp,
1 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, i sp, 1 close lacet, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 long-tr into the 3rd
of the 5 ch (this is not “adding” one, but is a way of working a
final space without having to sl-st back in beginning the next row).
15th Row. —s ch, 1 sp, 1 bl, 2 open lacets, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp.
16th Row. —s ch, 4 sp, 3 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, 2 close lacets, 1 bl, 1 sp.
17th Row. —Like 15th row. 18th Row. —s ch, 2 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl,
2 sp, 1 bl, 2 close lacets, 1 bl, 1 sp. 19th Row. —5 ch, 1 sp, 1 bl, 2
open lacets, 1 bl, 1 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 1 sp. 20th Row. —Like 18th
row. 21st Row. —Like 15th. 22nd Row. —Like 16th. 23rd Row.
—Like 15th. 24th Row. —s ch, 2 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 3 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp,
1 close lacet, 1 bl, 1 sp, add i. 25th Row. —Like 13th row. 26th
Row. —25 ch, tr in Bth, 6 more spaces on the ch, then 2 sp, 1 bl,
5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, x close lacet, 1 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp.
27th Row) —5 ch, 1 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 open lacet, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 bl, 3
sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, and 1 long-tr into next tr to make a final
space. 28th Row. —5 ch, 3 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 3 hi, 3 sp, 4 bl, I close lacet,
r sp, 1 bl, 1 sp. 29th Row. — 5 ch, 1 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 open lacet, 1 bl, r
sp. 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, S sp, 1 bl, 2 sp, 1 long-tr sp.


Fig. 75.—A Red Cross Doyley in Linen-Crochet. This little doyley was originally designed for the readers of
“Everylady’s Journal,” in which the photograph of the worked article was published. The directions were
printed separately, and sold at sixpence in aid of the funds of the Red Cross Society. In this way copies
penetrated to every part of Australia and New Zealand, and a sum of over £60 was sent to the author in
sixpences, and turned over by her to the officials. It is now included in this book, with full directions, and
the suggestion is offered that the doyley might be worked and sold at patriotic fetes, Red Cross carnivals.
and so on.
30th Row. —s ch, 5 s'p, i bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, 1 close lacet,
1 bl, 1 sp, 1 1-tr space, 31st Row. —s ch, 1 sp, 1 bl, 1 open lacet, 1
bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 3 sp, 3 bl, 2 sp, 1 long-tr space. 32nd Row. —5 ch,
3 sp, 1 bl, 5 sp, 1 bl, 4 sp, 1 bl, 1 sp, 1 bl, I sp, I 1-tr space. 33rd
Row. —s ch, 2 sp, 2 bl, 12 sp, 1 1-tr space. 34th Row. —Sl-st over 1
sp, 5 ch, 10 sp, 2 bl, 1 sp, I 1-tr sp. 33th Row. —2 sp, 1 bl, 8 sp, 1
1-tr sp. 36th Row.— Sl-st over 2 sp, 5 ch, 7 sp, I long-tr sp. 3JUI
Row. —Sl-st over 1 space, 5 ch, 4 spaces. Fasten off.
Work 3 more pieces like this. At the end of the last one
Jo not fasten off, but turn, and, working into the last-made
4 spaces, first continue thus around the piece, excepting the
square-shaped edge, where the linen is to go. Work 3 dc
>nto each space, and 6 into each space that forms a corner,
putting 3 dc into the space at the extreme point, 18 ch; then
take up the next piece, put 1 dc into the space at the point,
10 ch, miss the 18 ch, sl-st into the final dc of Ist piec",
turn; and over the 10 ch loop work 5 dc, 1 tr, 1 d-tr, 2 long-tr; now-
work down the last long-tr as if it were a loop, 3 dc, 5 ch, 3 dc,
3 more dc on the loop of 10 ch, 2 more into the same space on filet.
Fill the next corner and 3 dc into the following o.ne, 5 ch, dc into
little point between the two long-trebles,- 5 ch, sl-st into the 2nd
corner space of Ist piece, 5 dc, tr, d-tr, into 5 ch, and the two
long-tr, and 5 dc into the other 5 ch. Make 3 more of these join-
ing bars at alternate spaces, and then' continue around the piece.
Join all the pieces together in this way.
Ist Row of Edging. —s ch, a picot loop of 10 ch, 5 ch, dc into
edge. The places where these loops ajre made are distinctly seen
in the picture. One of the picots is made at the tip of the little
point between the pieces.
In the last row put 4 ch, (3 dc, 7 ch) 3 times, 3 dc, all into picot,
then take a tight dc between the 4 ch and 5 ch loops on 1 the other


Fig. 76.—A Blue Bird Cushion-Cover. The chart and directions for making this pattern are published in
the Giant Chart Series, No. 5. Price 10d. a copy.
See also the directions for working St. George and the Dragon (Figs. 54 and 55) for useful hints in
working these picture pieces of crochet.
side of the picot loop to draw it into a good shape, 4 ch, dc on the
dc; 4 ch, 6 dc, 7 ch, 6dc into the next picot loop. Repeat these two
fillings alternately, hut always fill the three picot loops at the angle
with 6 dc, 7 ch, 6 dc, to avoid crowding.
Cut the linen to fit the central space. In the example, a piece
of linen five inches square was taken, and a thread drawn half an
inch from the edge along'each side, making a square of four inches.
Ihen the middle of each side was carefully.marked, and five-eighths
of an inch from this middle mark on each side of it a thread was
gently pulled, and cut where the threads from adjoining sides met.
The linen was next pressed back about as far outside the drawn-
thread as buttonholing would be, and double-crochet worked over
the folded edge and into the drawn line. As each side was done,
the waste linen was cut away from the back, and the next side
turned down. Lace and linen were afterwards sewn together.
Your centre may vary from these measurements, but if you
work on the same plan, and make the linen a shade smaller than
the open space it should be right. But, of course, if easier to you,
you can simply buttonhole a piece of linen to fit the inner space,
being careful to see that it is an exact cross. Any irregularity
in the cross will quite spoil the work. This doyley is designed
to meet the wants of many workers who wish to make small
articles for sale for the patriotic funds.
If the lace and linen be left unsewn at the extreme ends of the
cross, so as to make 4 open slits, two pieces of scarlet ribbon of the
proper width can be laid over the linen and passed through the
slits. A stitch or small safety pin will keep them in place.
Fig. 76. Blue Bird Cushion-Coyer.—The chart of this design
could not be usefully reproduced in this book, so, like Fig. 61, it
has been added to the Giant Chart Series as No. 5. .


Fig. 77. French Fleur-de-Lis Doyley. —This was designed for
those wishing to help the French Red Cross by making and selling
it. Use a rather fine cotton, about No. 40, Ardern’s.
Begin at the bottom with 197 chain, miss 7, treble in Bth, 2 ch,
miss 2, treble in l next, taking up two threads. Make 62 more of
these spaces and turn with 5 ch, tr on 2nd treble. This row and the
next are each composed of spaces only. . In the 4th row the "blocks”
forming the letters begin. Work 8 rows beginning and ending
with spaces; the 9th begins with 3 ch, then a block into the Ist
space, and ends with a block into the last space, and the 10th row
begins with 3 ch and 2 blocks, and ends with 2 blocks.
nih Row. —Begin with 34 ch, tr into Bth from needle, 7 more
spaces, then 2 blocks worked into the last 5 ch stitches, 2 blocks
worked into 2 blocks, and I block worked into the following space.
This makes 5 blocks or 16 trebles. Work the row by the pattern,
ending with 3 blocks, all but the final stitch. There are now 2
blocks and 8 spaces to be made, but nothing to work them into. Pro-
ceed thus:
In working the final treble, when you have the three loops on the
needle, before working them off in twos, put the thread over the
hook and draw a stitch through the bottom loop only. You will
see that it makes a chain-stitch, while }ou still have three loops
on the needle. The chain is to work the next treble into. Work
off this treble in the usual way, and work the next treble into that
chain-stitch at the bottom, and again, when the 3 loops are on the
needle, make a chain-stitch for the following treble before working
off in twos. In this way each treble makes a foundation for the
next one. Make six of these added trebles, or two blocks altogether.
For the space that follows, 2 ch, a long-treble (three times over)
into the bottom chain of last treble, for the following 7 spaces, 2
ch, long-treble, into the middle of last long-tr. You now have an
extension like the other side, and can proceed with the pattern.
When you have worked the fow forming the top of “ Froth and “
sl-st back over 8 spaces and 2 blocks, then 3 ch, 2 blocks, and 60
spaces and 2 blocks, turn, leaving 2 blocks and 8 spaces unworked.
In the next row begin and end with 1 block, and work straight
on to end.
Note. —What appears to be an isolated space in the angles is
formed in working the outer row of trebles. The lacets in the
middle, forming the Maltese cross, are made thus: 5 ch, miss 5,
treble in next (an open lacet), 3 ch, miss 2, dc in next, 3 ch, miss
2, tr in next (a close lacet). These lacets follow alternately, close
ones being placed above open ones, and vice versa. The last row of
the lacet filling had better have 2 spaces worked instead of the
close lacets in order to keep the edge straighter for the following
row of trebles.
When working 2 blocks into an open lacet, put 5 trebles in the
lacet and one on the following treble; and where there is not room
for a whole lacet, the half is always a space.
In the widest part of the Fleur-de-lis there are 8 blocks or 25
trebles. All the other groups are easily seen in the picture.
The Edging. —lhis is all worked in one row. Beginning at the
corner, where the filet finishes, work down the side of the 10 rows
to the angle. Three ch, 4 blocks into 4 spaces, 8 ch, take out the
needle, insert it in the 6th treble, counting backwards, draw the
loop through, 12 dc in loop of 8 ch, sl-st to top of last treble. Three
blocks into next 3 spaces, 8 ch, make a loop as before, 4 dc in loop,
3 ch, insert needle in 4th dc of Ist loop, and over the little
bridge work 1 dc, 1 tr, 1 d-tr, 5 ch, 1 d-tr, 1 tr, 1 dc, 8
dc into loop, 1 bl on a space, 1 bl on side of trebles, miss the last
row and the first 3 trebles of next side, then 4 blocks, and make
another point like the last. Into each of the corner spaces put 3
tr, 6 ch, 3 tr.
On the long sides there are always 3 blocks before each 8 ch
loop, except at the beginning and end, where an extra block appears.
Fig- 77.—The French Fleur-de-Lis Doyley. Like the Red Cross Doyley, this was also designed for patriotic
purposes. Numbers of readers of “Everylady's Journal” worked the design, and the sale of the articles
at a great fete in Melbourne earned a considerable sum for the funds of the French Red Cross Society.


Fig. 78. —Arabesque Tray-Cloth as photographed from the finished article.
Figs. 78 and 79. Arabesque Tray-Cloth. —This pattern can be
worked in any width. The photograph of the worked design above
(Fig. 78) shows it used in two widths. The top and bottom edges
must go through the middle line of the wedge-shaped pieces. It
could be worked in squares of any convenient size and the squares
joined to make an “ all-over ” lace.
The diagram below (Fig. 79) shows the details of the working.
There are exactly 40 meshes in each repeat of the pattern — i.e.,
from A to the middle of the chart. For each repeat make 120
chain with 3 more to turn the row. Work by the chart, putting
open lacets in the little squares as shown by the straight lines.
Insertions can be 20 meshes wide, or multiples of 20. In a 20-
mesh insertion it would be an' improvement to omit the blocks from
the half-wedges along the top and bottom.
Fig. 79.—Diagram of the Arabesque Tray-Cloth.


Fig. 80. A Useful Square for Bed-Spreads, etc. —This is a simple
and easily worked square that can be used for an “ all-over ” bed-
spread pattern, or for an inset, or joined in long strips for an in-
sertion. In the latter case, of course, the pattern can be repeated
without joining.
The illustration is so plain that neither detailed description nor
chart is necessary. It is easiest to take a pattern like this from the
picture. As will be seen, it depends for its effect on three styles of
“filling’'—lacet-filling, inside the centre; space-filling in the in-
termediate part; and open-lacet filling in the outer parts. Be-
gin with 167 ch, put a treble into the Bth, then work 53 more
spaces of 2 ch, miss 2, tr in 3rd. Turn the rows always with
5 ch. The second row has 17 blocks of 3 treble each, following the
space, then 18 spaces, 17 blocks, and 1 space. The third row is all
blocks except the spaces at the ends.
To make the open-lacet filling in the fourth and following rows,
work s ch, miss 5, tr in next. These open lacets are to be so placed
that the trebles are made with the middle of the lacets of previous
rows, and where there is not room for a whole lacet, a space is
placed. In order to get the lacets to go with one another in this
way, it is often necessary to begin with a space. The inside of the
pattern is of close and open lacets, the close lacet being made with
3 ch, dc in 3rd (or into an open lacet), 3 ch, treble on treble.
To join the squares, place the two to be joined with their edges
together, and work 1 dc, picot of 5 ch, 2 dc, into the first spaces of
both, held together; 3 dc without a p into the next two spaces to-
gether; 3 dc with a p into the 3rd; repeat. This row of dc will
form a little ridge, surmounted by picots all along the joined edges.
It will be easiest, in making an “all-over” pattern, to do this joining
as the final row of each square, making strips; then placing the
strips together, join these together in the same way. The patterns
are to be placed all turned in the same direction. The pattern was
worked in a coarse size of “ Boar’s Head ” cotton.
Figs. 81 and 82. Soldier and Wattle-Blossom Border.— This
design can be separated into the Soldier and the Wattle Border.
To use the border alone, draw a line along the inside of
the border at the depth you wish to have the lace, and then work
it in one piece. Begin along the full width, work to your line, then
down one side, and afterwards down the other, adding the stitches
between when you come to the full-width part again.
The wattle blossom is worked in the tuft stitch, with a slight
addition that “ rounds ” the tufts somewhat. In each of the spaces
marked by a star, work five trebles into either of the two stitches
of the space, or block, below, then take out the needle, and if the
right side of the work is towards you, pass the needle into the back
thread of the first of the five trebles, then push it through the back
Fig. 80.—A Crochet Square that may be used for Inset or Insertion.
Fig. 81.—Photograph of the Anzac inset with Wattle Border.
thread of the middle treble (putting it in at the
back so that the needle points to you), then take up
the working loop and draw it through the other
two stitches on the hook. Make one chain tightly,
and make another tight treble into the usual
treble of the space or block below. This little
tuft will be rounded on the front of the work. If
the back of the work is towards you, make the five
trebles, and take out the hook, put the hook
through the first of the trebles but into the front
thread, and entering the stitch from behind, then
forward through the front thread of the middle
treble, and lastly through the working loop, draw-
ing it through as before, and finishing with the
final treble into treble below. This tuft should be
pushed to the back, so that it stands out on the
same side of the work as the others.
In working the soldier, be sure you point his
face as in the illustration, as otherwise he will be
holding the rifle with his left hand and his water-
bottle will be on the wrong side.
Begin at the top, and follow the chart, which
differs in' one or two stitches from the picture.
Make 260 chain, treble into the Bth, and work 84
more spaces on it. The outside row of trebles is
to be worked afterwards.
The best suggestion I can make for the use of
this pattern is to work it in a very fine thread, or
silk of a khaki shade, mount it as a cover for a
MSS. book, or newspaper-cutting book, and fill the
book with cuttings of the very many fine poems,
verses, stories, and incidents of the war appearing
in the daily press, and keep this as a memento of
the times. The men at the front do not see the
news day by day as we do, and many of them,
when they return, will be glad to see in type what
they have missed during their absence.


Fig, 82.—Diagram of the Anzac and the Wattle Border. (Theee may be used separately. See instructions.)


Figs, 83 to 86. Deep Border and Insertion Rose, Thistle, and Shamrock Design.—
These are intended to be used along with either the St. George and Dragon Centre,
or the British Coat-of-Arms to form a bed-spread. Both border and insertion
should not be used in the same article, as either is enough in itself. If the inser-
tion is used, place it about its own width from the edge of the spread, and finish
the edge of the linen with a very narrow crochet pattern.
The corner is the same for both. Worked in No. 70 Mercer-Crochet the border
is about 10 inches deep at the widest part; the insertion being a trifle over 8 inches
deep. [
Fig. 83. —Portion of the Rose, Shamrock, and Thistle Border, showing corner worked,
Fig. 84. —Working chart for the Rose, Shamrock, and Thistle Border, showing the Shamrock inset.


The medallions can, of course, be
worked separately, and be used as
insets. A pretty border can be formed
of them alone by scalloping the linen
along the lower edge, each scallop
being formed much the same size and
shape of the crochet one. The little
pointed pieces could then be worked
separately and placed between the
scallops as they arc in the design.
If used with the central pieces as
suggested, the lacet tilling must be
worked the same in all—it docs not
matter which is chosen, the one in
the British Coat-of-Arms being the
easier and quicker to work.
For the insertion omit the outer
rows of trebles till the rest is done.
Begin the work at A with 191 chain,
and on it work 3 rows of spaces only,
turning the rows at the dotted line
B. Work the whole of the side, fin-
ishing with a corner. Then work the
first row of 2nd side into the dotted
line B, and finish the corner of this
side. Also work the others the
same.
WORK THE MEDALLION HERE ACCORDING TO THE CHART OF THE ONE
IT IS INTENDED TO USE
Fig. 97. —Small Capitals (see page 48).
Fig. 85. —Chart showing how to work Fig 83 as an Insertion.


Fig. 86.—Chart of the Rose Medallion for Figs. 83 and 85.
The corner can be mitred. In this case, begin the work at C,
and mitre the corner when it is reached.
The Border. —This is begun and worked in the same way as
the insertion, except that the rows of outer trebles should be
worked along with the rest. Make 15 more chain to allow for them,
and turn the rows 2 spaces above the dotted line B.
Edging for Border. —Dc under the lowest treble of one of the
rows, p of 7 ch, miss end of next row, and into the next put (d-tr,
p) 5 times. Miss 1 row, dc in next. Repeat all along. In going
round the scallops, put the dc and d-tr into alternate corners.
Figs. 87 to 90. Afternoon-Tea Cloth (see, also, Cover). —
Work the border first. Beginning at row A of chart (Fig.
87) with 152 ch, work to row marked B. Repeat these rows
4 times more, then work on to C and break the thread. Work
the next side in the same way. Place these two sides in posi-
tion and join them by a stitch in their top spaces. The corner
is now to be worked in by following chart (Fig. 88). Join
on the cotton at the bottom of row C and work the row D
into it up to the angle; miss the top space of this side, and
also of the next side, and without putting any chain between
make a treble into the 2nd side and work row E from top to bot-
tom. At E turn and work the next row back to the angle, miss
Fig. 87. —Chart for Border of Fig. 89.
the last space of this side and the first of the other side, and follow
the chart down towards D. In this way work to and fro, changing
from side to side at the row of dots till the whole corner is fin-
ished at F. The upper edge has a row of blocks worked into the
top spaces. This is not shown on the chart lest it confuse the
worker.
Figs. 89 and 90. The Triangle.—The triangle is worked on to the
upper edge of the lace, working to and fro along 2 sides and missing
the corner spaces in the same way as the corner of the lace was
fitted in. Begin at the block beside the middle block of a side —i.e.,
leave the middle block unworked. Work an open lacct on the next
2 blocks and follow this by a close lacet. Work alternate close and
open laccts to the angle; miss the last block of one side and the
first of the next, and continue along the 2nd side, turning, without
working, the middle block of the side. For 14 rows the edges are
kept straight, then the decreases begin. To avoid slip-stitching
Fig. 88.—Chart tor Corner of Border of Fig. 89.


Fig. 89.—A Corner, showing Triangle and
Border of Afternoon Tea Cloth.
back at the turns, let the final space
of these rows be a long treble, 3
over instead of 2 ch, 1 tr.
When the second and other tri-
angles are being worked, the first
14 rows are joined to the adjacent
triangle by taking a treble into
the corresponding row before
turning.
The edge is formed of triple
picots taken into alternate spaces
with a treble. Use judgment and
do not put the picots into places
where they will be too crowded.
Sometimes a single p or chain-
stitch or two without a picot will
be a'l that is needed.
The little points on the inside
edge of triangles should be joined
by loops of 4 or 5 ch, dc into
space, and this chain should be
sewn to the edge of the linen.
Fig. 90.—Chart of Triangle (Fig. 89)


Fig. 91. —Letters A to N of Swastika Alphabet.


MS
*
fn
Alto Knitting i ■
Wools
The only Knitting Wool
made in Alloa is Pat on s,
it is the real Alloa.
t
PATOM’S ALLOA”
IT IS THE ■
REAL THING.-
iS BATON'S ” IS THE
WOOL FOR
<s COMFORTS.”
ASK FOR
PATON*S
and knit Children's
Garments, Socks and
Soldiers’ Comforts
that are comfortable.
Tl- 1 ,
mMMzs
For Socks that will last,
and keep soft and “ comfy ’*
all the time, use Paton’s
Wheelihscs. Super and Rose
/WWWSSS,/
I i
r
For Helmets,
Mitts, etc., you
Paton’s Douhle-
Fingerings, and
Wools unsur-
qaalitles.
Mufflers,
wll find
Kaittmg,
Petticoat
passed.
il
look for the ticket
QU EVERY SKEW
Samples of ah Paton s
Alloa Knitting Wools
sent free on request
jOHN PATON. SON & GO. (A/sla) LO.
>. 230 Flinders Lane, Melbourne J
SS3 Clarence St reel,
Sydney wjfilr
MALI A
PEARSALL’S
EMBROIDERY AND KNITTING
SILKS
111111
Pearsall’s Silks are Britisb-made. They are produced at Pearsall & Co.'a own
factories in London and in Somersetshire. They are made in various twists and
thicknesses to suit all hinds of Embroidery and Knitting. In variety, lustre, and
fastness of colour they stand alone.
■ f MALLARD” FLOSS is specially suitable for all classes of embroidery
on Dresses., Millinery, Needlework, etc.
PEARSALL'S CABLE SILK. —For bold effects It is advisable to use
Pearsall's Cable Silk,
PEARSALL'S WASHING FI LOSELLE.- —This, like the above makes, is
dyed with, boiling dyes, and therefore most useful for embroidery oh
■white linen and underwear,
« PHASiAN ” KNITTING OR CROCHET SILK is a lightly-twisted article
of very high quality, and can be used with advantage for Knitting,
Crochet, or Embroidery. It is wound on small reels; thus there is no
waste. ' ' ■ • : i Ir:
“ PAMELA * CROCHET is a cheaper silk and harder twisted. It is recom-
mended for articles that have to stand wear and tear, such as Peggy
Bags.
jMMHMI
■
i
Peggy Bag made with
“ Pamela " Crochet.
JAMES PEARSALL & CO., LONDON.
And 230 FUNDERS LANE, MELBOURNE.
ALL THE SILKS
LISTED HERE
ARE WASHING
BILKS.
See that Pearaa!)*#
ticket is -so every skein
or reel yon buy.
—™~L.


Fig. 92. —Letters O to Z of Swastika Alphabet.


X
&
*1
w
CH^OOA«
CHEDD?
CHARLI
“SOMEW
IN
FRANCE
First Favourite with the Buys in the Tren
SOMETHING to smoke, something to read,
something to sat —that’s what the boys in
France are asking for.
You know their favourites in books and
tobacco, but don’t you sometimes sender on
what to send to eat? Try sending Red Feather
Cheese.
Think what a weicome change this tas
dainty would make in the monotony of stew
fcu'iy-bsef. and biscuit.
And it whi get there so fresh, so sweet ar
inviting in its airtight tin. Next parcel yt
send, be sure to include “ Sod Feather,' 1
RED
The Australian Cheddar*
L_
SPECIALLY PACKED IN AIRTIGHT TIMS
FOR DESPATCH TO THE FRONT.
“TASTE THE TASTEAT
GROCERS* AND PRODUCE SI
[ln Everything Them Is §i A BEST
\ \
\
i ;
THE BEST SILKS FOR
ALL PURPOSES ARE
cii \r c
EUREKA SPOOL SILK,
For hand or machine sewing;
strong - , elastic, and reliable. ih
50 or 100 yard spools: all stan-
dard colours and the newest,
shades.
«SJ*m BISTSOHHOI.E
3JWISI!,” the most dependable
Silk tor Buttonholing. etc. rn 10-
yard spools, al! staple shades and
fancy colours.
1
a
EUREKA SILKS have proved, by test, to be the best silks
for Knitting, Crocheting, Embroidering, Sewing, etc „ her
cause they are made from the very best raw silk for the
purpose.
Eureka Silks are the most economical, because they arc strong,
durable, and absolutely fast dyes.
Eureka Silks are uniform, free from knots, easy 'to work,
and retain their lustre through repeated washings.
If you. have never worked w ; th Eureka Silks, make a trial ,
and prove to your own satisfaction the truth of all these claims.
ARE YOUR SEAMS SILK-SEWN?
Do you realise the practical economy by bavins all your!
seams sewn with silk?
Silk Is stronger, more elastic, softer, better-looking, and i
“TYRIAN
EMBROiDEF


Fig. 94.—How to make a round Inset of the letters. Turn the
work at the heavy line.
Fig. 95.—Another Alphabet.
Fig. 93.—Useful Alphabet for marking linen.
Fig. 90.—Numerals.


Mary Card's Crochet 1 joks and
Giant Charts Described.
Thousands of women in Australia are using
Mary Card’s matchless crochet designs because
she is one of the best designers of crochet work
in the world. Her designs have swept the boards
at countless country shows and exhibitions; and a
number of pieces worked from her designs have
been sold for £2O each.
Some time ago Miss Card began a aeries of
books with the aim of combining graded lessons
m
Greatly reduced illustration from worked design
of Giant Chart \o. I (Details on this page.)
! Mary Card’s Crochet Book—Mo. 1. ,:
This contains: (1) a series of graded lessons in
general crochet work; (2) lessons and beautiful
designs in Australian Linen Crochet which Miss
Card has invented and perfected; and (2) original
designs in Filet Crochet. Price 2/6 posted. (See
lorm below.)
; Mary Card’s Crochet Book—Mo. 2."
This contains a wonderful series of lessons in
Filet Crochet, Linen Crochet, Lace Ribbon, and
Torchon patterns with detailed instructions and
diagrams. Price 2'6 posted. (See form below.)
“ Mary Card’s Crochet Book—No. 3.”
This is absolutely the best book published on
IRISH CROCHET. It teaches the beginner.and
inspires 'he expert with a galaxy of new designs.
Price a/6 posted. (See form below.)
- ' )\
' >
. -
rr. :::
&
--Ac."!* ..
liVw Jr
t l *.*
ar
ggjg|i§gj
wr Mill --y-
mm "
m
iiiii
WmS^
fiM
'•> p- /I'*:-*'
m llfpipl Mtmin
im
'MO
i':7 ' i ;
m
t¥fi ijff fiHffls tjaateat
(
i
X&ZMi
■k
Greatly reduced illustration from worked d@~
sigrn of a single square in Giant Chart No. 5.
(Details on this page.)
Card 9 ® Crochet Book—No. 4/
This book is composed entirely of new and ori-
ginal designs in the fashionable Filet Crochet.
And practically all the charts are reproduced in a
special giant size that makes this hook exception-
ally valuable. The price is 2/6 posted. (See form
below.)
for beginners with high-class and beautiful designs
for advanced workers. So far, four books have
been published at half-a-orown each. On this page
we give a brief description of Miss Card’s four
books —now ready to be posted to any address in
Australasia. They are printed on heavy art-paper,
and each one contains scores of original and strik-
ing designs, with wonderfully clear and full direc-
tions. Every lover of crochet, work should buy
these four books —for they are unique. Read de-
tails of each book given below, and use order form
at foot of page to secure them.
Mary Card 9 ® Giant Crochet Charts.
Greatly reduced illustration from worked de-
sign of Giant Chart No- 6. (Details on this page.)
TO ORDER CROCHET BOOKS.
T. SHAW FITCHETT, 376 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
No. 1 Giant Crochet Chart.—The Wild Rose and
Pigeon Supper-Cloth or large Tray-
Cloth.
No. 2 Giant Crochet Chart.—The Peacock Centre
for Ped-Spread or large Cushion, etc.
No. 3 Giant Crochet Chart,—Peacock and Vine-
Leaf Design. Suitable as Border for
Peacock Centre (No. 2) or for Tray-
Cloths, ete.
I
'ViMi
mmmm
ill
h:i
Greatly reduced illustration from worked design
of Giant Chart No, 7. (Details on this page.)
No. 4 Giant Crochet Chart.—The British Coat-of-
Arms —a really remarkable piece of
work, suitable for Cushions, etc.
Tn addition to her four Crochet Books (described
on this page) Misg Card has invented a series
of novel Giant Crochet Charts. She discovered a
demand for a chart on such a scale that workers
whose eyesight was past its prime might work in
comfort, and the Giant Crochet Chart was the re-
sult. These Giant Charts became popular im-
mediately. Bach Chart is printed on stout paper
measuring roughly 22 x 35 inches, with only ten
crochet squares to the inch. The designs are very
beautiful. E'ght Giant Crochet Charts are now
ready as described alongside.
No. 5 Giant Crochet Chart.-—Blue Bird and Iris
Cushion-Cover or Table-Cloth.
No. 6G lant Crochet Chart—Blue Wren Pillow-
Sham or Cushion—a charming and dainty
design.
No. 7 Giant Crochet Chart—A set of delightful
Rose Designs—with directions for mak-
ing square and oblong Tray-Cloths, Bed-
Spreads, etc.
No. 8 Giant Crochet Chart.—Charming Waratah
Edging and Corner to match, for Tray-
Cloths, etc. An exceptionally handsome
design.
Each Giant Chart is done up in its own envelope,
and is posted to any address for one shilling. (That
makes 8/- for the eight.) If you order the com-
plete set of eight Charts, the total cost Is only 8/-.
So that, if you use order form below and send 8/-
you will have posted to you the complete set of
eight Giant Charts. Of course, if only certain
Charts are wanted, remit one shilling for each,
and state those wanted. Remit to T. Shaw
Fitchett, 376 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
IMPORTANT.-—Space prevents giving on this
page illustrations of Giant Charts Nos. 2 and 3.
They are equally as beautiful in design as those
shown, and are described above, and should be or-
dered without fall. Every crochet-lover should
order the complete set of 8 Giant Charts described
above.
Enclosed find
Card's Crochet Book No. I, No. 2, N<
wanted.] I have allowed 2/6 for each book.
Name
Address..
....for which please send me Mary
3, No. 4. [Cross out numbers not
[C.8.4.
Greatly reduced illustration from worked
design of Giant Chart No. 4. (Details
on this page.)
TO ORDER GIANT CROCHET CHARTS.
T. SHAW FITCHETT, 376 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
Enclosed find 8/- for set of Eight Giant Crochet Charts, Nos. 1,2, 3
•1. 5,-6, 7 , and 8. “ [C.R4.
Name..
Address..
Greatly reduced illustration from
design of Giant Chart No. 3.
oh this paffe.)
worked
(Details
national
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
