

MASS BSERVATION
ROYAL EXCHANGE ASSURANCE BUILDING,
31 GILBERT PLACE,
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.




MASS OBSERVATION BOOKLET
MASS
OBSERVATION
BY
MASS OBSERVATION
1945
Copyright Reserved
Mass Observation, Royal Exchange, Assurance Building,
31 Gilbert Place, Adelaide, South Australia.


THE ORGANISATION is strictly non-profit-making
and non-political.
It is formed by honorary Observers operating in indus-'
trial towns, country towns and in the capital cities of each
State. Except in the case of Clearing House office workers
the entire staff is voluntary and completely formed by people
who are interested in Mass Observation.
Observations are treated individually and in strictest
confidence, the Observer himself taking the first step in
this direction by treating the subject anonymously.
The data thus collected remains the property of Mass
Observation to be published in the press, journals and books
and used in radio as and when possible.
Report books for recording public opinion, and all
other stationery, including postage, is supplied to members.
Diaries with duplicate sheets for posting, recording the
Observer’s personal opinions, will be supplied if required.
At least once a month the Mass Observation centre
communicates with members by means of a bulletin, giving
analyses and conclusions of its work. At the same time
it includes directive programmes and generally keeps the
personnel acquainted with the progress.
To cover the expenses incurred in organisation, station-
ery, stamps, office personnel, etc., Mass Observation sur-
veys are available to every size and type of business at a
nominal fee.
Printed at
THE MAIL NEWSPAPERS LIMITED
135-139 Currie Street
Adelaide
First published January, 1945.


CONTENTS
Page
Target for To-day ...... 5
Public Opinion 6
Mass Observation Operates in. Britain 7
Mass Observation in Australia . ...... . .. 11
Meanwhile . .. 18
IVorking Details 19
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


TARGET FOR TODAY
AA7" E envisage a thorough investigation into the real
' ' causes of Australia’s social problems.
Reasons are being advanced by various institutions—
not the people— to remould our ideas on current problems.
Population and Immigration, the Rehabilitation of Service-
men and Women, Socialisation, the Nationalisation of Coal
Mines, etc., are all causing grave concern.
But, of these things just how much do we know —
what are the plain wishes of the people?
Unfortunately, very little in relation to the whole is
known about people’s opinions on these subjects.
Attempts to remedy these things have been made, and,
in their turn have failed because men have shown reluc-
tance to voluntarily stating their own individual thoughts,
reactions and ambitions.
To-day, in the face of social discontent, the socially-
conscious are frustrated in their desire to do something.
Mass Observation offers the individual the chance to weld
public opinion into its natural and forcible expression; it
opens new avenues for establishing the origins of social
upheaval; it aids in the discovery of social remedies and
points the way to a fuller and happier life for the people.
Because of its quiz-mind and observation-posts scat-
tered throughout the land Mass Observation will be the
Barometer of Public Opinion linking public thought between
West Australia and Tasmania, South Australia and New-
South Wales with Queensland and Victoria. Mass Obser-
vation will focus public attention on the real Public Opinion
immediately—not months or years after as so often happens.
Not indefinitely later —but now.
By participation in this new scientific opinion poll—■
this the most important of all Public Services—citizens can
shape their own social betterment and national prosperity.
Mass Observation in your hands can achieve these
benefits.


PUBLIC OPINION
Public opinion is that very potent force through which
a community places on record its likes and dislikes of com-
modities, personalities, and governments. It is the yard-
stick of the news-editor, the politician and the sociologist.
Business men have long regarded the newspaper as their
common measure of public opinion. Yet the press by the
nature of its Journalistic sensationalism gives a distorted
view.
The politician is generally certain he knows the trend
of public opinion because he can achieve a very parochial
success at a meeting. With a pre-determined sympathetic
audience his success is more or less guaranteed.
Sociologists have no better measurement for their science
than a series of historical facts, which, when placed in their
correct sequence can trace the course and consequence of
an event. However, the chances of such an event again
recurring are remote indeed.
Sociology could, and should reflect and interpret public
opinion; it could, and should bridge the gap between the
leader and the led, and by its field-work force the leader
to see the vast problems which are piling up and being
by him, as by sociologists, ignored.
Methods of recording public opinion such as Gallup
Poll, telephone surveys, and personal interviews have proved
in some deductions nearly correct and in many cases wide
of the mark. Where there is any question of people doing
so many interviews per hour or being paid so much per
interview or report —a common procedure in commercial
research—much unreliable information will accumulate.
Earlier methods lack two fundamental features. One,
people whose motive for research is not commercial gain;
and two, the confidence and intimacy necessary for giving
a true and undistorted opinion.
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


Public opinion can only be assessed from its natural
source and by unsolicited expression. It is only in the
sincere moments when all barriers are lifted, in chance con-
versations in the streets, on buses or trams, or between
an intimate circle of friends that it is in any way possible
to discover what is happening in people’s hearts.
Because it takes studies from the family circle; because
it observes people passing by, at work and at recreation,
at the races or cricket; because it studies their necessities,
hopes and ambitions, Mass Observation reflects true Public
Opinion.
As the barometer records atmospheric pressure, indi-
cating current weather tendencies, so Mass Observation
records the potent forces of opinion.
Mass Observers, people from all walks of life at their
observation posts throughout the country act as reporters
of public aspiration and comment.
Observers are people who have a natural interest in
their fellow-men, people who are anxious to shape Australia’s
prosperity. They are people who are keen to note the likes
and dislikes, habits, thoughts, desires, ideas, and reactions
to ideas, of citizens throughout the land.
Their reports, constantly flowing to a central clearing
house for analytical study and classification, will collectively
result in that true cross-section of public opinion which is
so essential.
Here, then, is the right background for our activity.
M—O OPERATES IN BRITAIN
This consistent recording, while at all times making an
interesting history, has been practised in Britain with marked
success.
Referring to Mass Observation, A. C. Waddington in
his book “The Scientific Attitude,” says:—
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


. . The comparative neglect of subjects of this kind
by official scientists in England led to the development of
one of the most surprising scientific movements of recent
times.
“The field was empty, and crying out to be filled.
Into its wide open spaces there stepped a collection of amateur
observers; Mass Observation, organised by a few energetic
young men, . . . and with the programme of collecting notes
taken by large numbers of untrained helpers on what actually
occurred around them during a given time, or what were
the statements made by their acquaintances on certain topics.
. . . What it lacked in orthodox scientific rigour, it made up
for by its lack of stuffed shirts, and by its unselective and
receptive approach, which enabled the facts themselves to
suggest the profitable lines of attack. In a subject as
undeveloped as the study of society, a great deal of academic
thoroughness would be necessary to do better than Mass
Observation’s lively realism.
“The disgraceful thing was that there was hardly
any competition from official science. Even the regional
surveys which studied the apparatus of social existence, the
local government, housing, unemployment, etc., of particular
localities, were largely run by organisations which did not
belong to the general body of science. And Mass Observa-
tion’s only important rivals in the investigation of normal
human behaviour in contemporary society were commercial
advertising bureaus. These, of course, selected their prob-
lems not for their theoretical interest or importance to the
community at large, but on account of their relevance to
the business undertakings of the firms which employed them.
They would be requested to discover the kinds of packaging
people preferred, whether one large bottle would be bought
in preference to two smaller ones, and such questions.
“. . . The practical importance of such surveys of opinion
became apparent in the early days of the war, when the
Ministry of Information found it advisable to set up an
organisation to in\ estimate the results of its propaganda
efforts.”
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


Reporting on the bewilderment and perplexity which
existed between the people and the leaders just before the
outbreak of war in 1939, English diarists disclose their feel-
ings thus; —
. . FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 1.
(Germany attacks Poland).
Man, 35: Really, that’s done it. At work girls go into
tears. Go to bed with cold shivers.
Man. 21; Situation worse. Gloomy weather. Am feel-
ing . bad. Business bad. No work, orders cancelled.
Finished early. What price my holiday?
Woman, 35: Felt sick at news. Feeling that we’d be
for it at once. Woke up at 3 and lay waiting for bombs
till time to get up.
Boy, 17: All decided very little hope left. All very
worried. Go on working as usual. Parents have anti-
German outburst.
Woman, 25 : Had been expecting it. Whole world
turned upside down. Everybody grey and serious, but mak-
mg cynical jokes. Didn’t sleep very well.
Man, 48: Speculated that war would be declared on
Germany tonight. Chill or biliousness—feel dizzy.
Woman, 24. Evacuation activities. Very tired. After
news—not very cheerful. General assumption that war is
very close, and everyone quite calm about it.
Man, 23: Most people rather relieved that something
definite has happened. War jokes.
FEELING ON THE EVE
“Between the invasion of Poland and Britain’s declara-
tion of war there was a day’s lull. But by now the con-
viction of the many who only two days before had said
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


there would be no war had dwindled away. The common-
est remark was “Let’s get started,” or “Let us strike and
get right into Germany. . .
Under the impact of Germany’s invasion of Poland
the British people reacted in different ways as recorded by
Mass Observation.
“2% definitely said they would be glad if there was a war.
“43% said they’d rather get it over.
“7% said we mustn’t give in to Hitler under any circum-
stances.
“5% said that it was not true that under present conditions
anything was better than war.
“34% said anything was better than war.
“9% said didn’t know what to think.
“Men and women were almost equally in favour of
getting it over. In all previous crises women have been
more pacifists than men, but by the end of August, 1939,
their patience and nerves were becoming exhausted. . .
Acting voluntarily, even in times of crises, Mass Obser-
vers found the British people 57 per cent, in accord with
its Government policy, 9 per cent, bewildered, and 34 per
cent, still following the earlier Government policy of appease-
ment.
Mass Observation in Britain has achieved sterling work
throughout the war. By its researches it has uncovered
the shortcomings of official action in the directing of the
country’s war effort and pointed the way to a better under-
standing of social problems. Its work is rapidly gaining
wide recognition, both governmental and industrial.
*(“WAR BEGINS AT HOME,” by Mass Observation,
Britain.)
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


M—O IN AUSTRALIA
If the Nation is to progress towards a life of social
betterment and well-being it must keep a census of its
people’s thoughts, actions and mode of living. It must be
able to record the behaviour and the development of cus-
toms.
It should have not only a history of its past but also
extensive information of current tendencies in the growth
of its social structure. Only by observing and recording
the present can any sane planning be promoted for the
people’s future. And, only by Mass Observation’s methods
can an accurate record be assured.
Mass Observation in Australia has evolved a technique,
an improvement on previous research methods.
The vital importance of this new science can be gauged
by taking only one of the hundreds of social problems now
awaiting solution.
The problem of a decreasing birth-rate is vexing the
social scientists in many countries. As in those countries,
so in Australia the dangers of this decreasing birth-rate have
been given wide publicity. Here, the associated problems
of emigration, “White Australia,” territorial rights in re-
lation to the “living-space” claimed by neighbouring races,
the proportional mal-adjustment of young to old people with
its consequent disturbance to production and other economic
factors are significantly important.
The present Ministry of Health, in attempting to assess
the problem, has asked the womenfolk of the country to
write to the Ministry and tell them why they restrict the
size of their families.
The Ministry’s request has been largely featured in the
daily press. With wide publicity the Ministry’s hope of
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


assessing the problem from such information as they might
obtain will fall short of success because:—
(a) The direct question presupposes a definite attitude
of mind in the respondent. It has not first estab-
lished that the individual supports the idea of
restricted families.
Therefore the respondent unless mentally alert
would be saddled with an opinion not previously
entertained.
(b) There will be limited answers because letter writ-
ing is to the majority of people an irksome task.
(c) The question is so directly personal that the indi-
vidual respondent is put on the defensive, and in
that state any excuse or reason might be proffered,
and the true answer concealed.
(d) The wife-to-be’s opinion is more or less ignored;
the replies need to state the present size of the
family, the economic circumstances and the en-
vironment. These relevant factors are not re-
quested.
(e) Husbands and fathers are ignored. Their opinions
are relevant.
Amazed at this approach to the subject a man and a
woman arranged and executed a small research.
The woman first approached mothers by a method of
normal conversation leading from general talk of babies to
the mothers’ future plans. At another time the man ap-
proached the same mothers in the direct questioning style.
Later he had a talk with the fathers.
Relevant information on four typical families is as
follows:
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


FAMILY "A”
Approx.
Age.
Home.
Economic
Circumstances.
Mother 35
Father 45
Daughter 13
Daughter 8
Own on
deferred
payment.
Telephone sub-
scriber. Car
owner (pur-
chased second-
hand).
Woman’s Interview with Mother. Referring to con-
finement, “I never want to go through that again.” “I’d
rather have a dozen girls than boys. Girls are hard enough
to manage, but boys! Still there’s no danger of that happen-
ing again, thank goodness.” “When we married I thought
we might have three at least; but when L came along,
I said ‘Never again’—two’s enough.”
Man’s Interview with Mother. The man asked,
“Will you have any more children?”
“No fear,” was the reply, “it’s as much as I can do to
manage two now. J ’s not so bad; but L ’s not
what you’d call naughty, but difficult. Her father is the
only one who can get her to do anything.”
“Wouldn’t you like a bov?” he asked.
“No, I never wanted a boy. K (her husband) was
in the last war and was wounded. I expect you’ve noticed
how he limps, even now. ...”
Man's Interview with Father. Non-committal ac-
ceptance of the present family status, but half grudgingly
admitted—“l wouldn’t mind a boy.”
CONCLUSION. Father would like a boy-child.
Mother has rationalised the question and set a barrier of
reason against a boy-child; a barrier of social conditions
which envisages the boy marred by war as in the father’s
case. Fears pain of childbirth—“l never want to go
through that again.”
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


FAMILY "B”
Approx.
II m
Economic
Age.
Circumstances.
Mother
32
Own on
Pre-war car
Father
39
deferred
owner.
Son
9
payment.
Woman’s Interview with Mother. “I wish I could
have another baby. I adore them—but then I lost the
first one after six months and when I had M they
never thought I’d recover. I don’t know quite what hap-
pened. We were on holiday. It was on the Wednesday,
in the morning I was just walking out of the gate when I
fell down. I completely lost consciousness. P (her
husband) got a car and rushed me off to the nursing home
and I didn’t know anything ’til eight days later. I didn’t
even know .. . etc. Of course I’d like to have another
baby, but I can’t. It’s always the way, isn’t it?”
Man’s Interview with Mother. The.man said, “I
see the Government’s asking wives why they don’t have
larger families. They want wives to write to the Ministry
of Health about it. Are you going to write?”
"I don’t think I’ll write,” she replied. “I’d have thought
it was plain selfishness these days. They’re too fond of a
good time. Look at the women that can’t miss the pictures
—they even take the babies in their arms. I can’t have
another baby anyway. ...”
Man’s Interview with Father. A detailed story of
the confinement was obtained. His wife was seriously ill,
confirming the information previously obtained.
He was asked, “I suppose you can’t have any more chil-
dren even if you want them?”
“Oh no! We could have another,” he said, “only wc
don’t want to risk it again.”
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


FAMILY " C ”
Approx.
Age.
Mother 34
Father 38
Daughter 12
Son 6
Home.
Own on
deferred
payment.
Economic
Circumstances.
Telephone sub-
scriber. Small
car owner.
CONCLUSION. On the basis of near-tragedy on the
birth of their second child, both father and mother admit fear
of risking a third birth. The father is open and exact
on the possibilities of a third child. The mother has
rationalised her fears and substituted a feeling of complete
inability to reproduce— yet still desiring to do so.
Woman s Interview with Mother . “We (husband and
wife) were talking about having another baby only the
other night. I wouldn’t mind another one, only it does
tie you down so, and I don’t know what I’d do with this
neuritis in my shoulder. I can’t even do the washing. A
(her husband) often helps me on Sunday—my shoulder is
so bad. No, I wouldn’t mind having another. I’m not
frightened of that, although T was a difficult baby.
We spent an awful lot on her. We had to send her to a
special school. . . . She’s all right now, of course.”
Man’s Interview with Mother. “What do they want
to know for?” she asked on being told of the government
enquiry. “You should ask A (her husband) about it.
When the government only allows you £8 per year for
another baby. . . . They’d be better off making a decent
allowance to keep the kids, than asking fool questions.”
Man’s Interview with Father. “Yes, M (wife) was
telling me about it. The Government gives you child en-
dowment on the one band and takes it away in income tax.
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


FAMILY "D”
Approx.
- — —
Economic
Age.
Circumstances.
Mother
35
Father
40
Own.
Telephone sub-
Daughter
9
scriber. Car
(adopted)
owner.
Son
5
If they increased child allowance in income tax and saved a
bit on the extra machinery and organisation incurred in
administering special child endowment it would be more
sensible. What’s the good, anyway, of bringing children
into this crazy world?”
CONCLUSION. The obvious inference is that neither
father nor mother would mind another child providing their
margin of comfortable living were retained. That may or
may not be the true reason. It could only be proved not
the true reason in the event of a substantial and regular
increase in income. The interview with the father was
useless as the mother had already prepared his mind and
ideas beforehand.
WOman s Interview with Mother. “Oh, L (hus-
band) would have another baby like a shot. But that’s
always the way. They don’t have to go through it. No
thanks, I don’t want to go through what I went through
with A . And what happens when you have them?
You’re left at home night after night. You can’t go out.
You can’t do anything. It’s all right for L ; he can
go to the club every night while muggins sits home ”
Man s Interview with Mother. “No, I don’t want any
more. You have to give up too much. We’ve been landed
out here now for fourteen years. I’m fed up with the place.
Dead and alive hole. . . .”
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


Man’s Interview with Father. “I wouldn’t mind an-
other boy. But U (wife) had a bad time with A .
There was one earlier on but U lost it through a damn
fool doctor. We got Dr. for A and I’m glad
I did. If it hadn’t been for Dr. ; he did a wonderful
job.”
CONCLUSION. “They don’t have to go through
it,” said the mother, indicating fear of childbirth pains. There
is also obvious resentment of husband’s neglect while wife
cares for children. The father would prefer another child.
Marital differences obtain here.
REVIEW
It would be wrong to draw conclusions from an analysis
of four family surveys and apply them to the larger National
question. Besides, to complete a true cross-section of opinion,
the unmarried, the prospective husbands and wives, the ado-
lescents, and the clinical view as represented by the medical
profession and maternity services must be considered.
The four surveys demonstrate that two entirely different
approaches on the same person obtain answers at great vari-
ance with each other.
The friendly conversational method shows in three cases,
and maybe in the fourth, that there is a very definite fear
of repeating the childbirth experience. The attendant dis-
comforts of pregnancy are implied. The claims of children
on the mother are realised.
The second direct-question approach shows no hint ot
childbirth fears. The answers all take the form of reasons
why they should not have further additions to the family.
These reasons are suspect. They may form covers to
hide the fears. But we do not discount them absolutely.
It would be safer to accept them as part-truths.
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


It is significant that the first interview records fears of
childbirth; in the second interview childbirth fears are absent.
It is obvious that the friendly interview method of talk-
ing on the subject in a conversational and intimate way is
conducive to a true result. The second method of direct
question leads to distortions and mental subterfuge.
The third and single interview carried out with the
husband in three cases formed an avenue for checking the
information given by the wives. In Family “C” the hus-
band had been previously informed by his wife on the matter,
and his answers had already been conditioned.
Here, in declining birthrate, is an early subject for our
observation. Any help we can give in this direction we owe,
not just to any government we might have, but to the Aus-
tralian people.
MEANWHILE
We have already seen within Australia a social upheaval
greater than any other within the last century. It signi-
fies a new all-time low for disillusion and distress.
As time passes and the war continues so will the turmoil
and strife unfailingly have its repercussions on the individual
and the family. It may even have a permanent major effect
on social, spiritual and industrial life.
Noiu is the time of Sociology to begin investigations.
We the individuals of this community have no better
motive for our research than our own well-being. We, the
individuals, have no better subjects for our studies, than
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


ourselves. There are no more ingenious students than we.
We must if we are to survive become our own sociologists
and scientists.
To-day, right here and now Australians—ourselves, our
friends, our neighbours—need your help, need your patience
and active assistance.
WORKING DETAILS
THE ORGANISATION is strictly non-profit-making
and non-political.
It is formed by honorary Observers operating in indus-
trial towns, country towns and in the capital cities of each
State. Except in the case of Clearing House office workers
the entire staff is voluntary and completely formed by people
who are interested in Mass Observation.
Observations are treated individually and in strictest
confidence, the Observer himself taking the first step in this
direction by treating the subject anonymously.
The data thus collected remains the property of Mass
Observation to be published in journals and books and used
in radio as and when possible.
Report books, for recording public opinion, and all
other stationery, including postage, is supplied to members.
Diaries with duplicate sheets for posting, recording the
observer’s personal opinions, will be supplied if required.
At least once a month the Mass Observation centre
communicates with members by means of a bulletin, giving
analyses and conclusions of its work. At the same time
it includes directive programmes and generally keeps the
personnel acquainted with the progress.
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA


To cover the expenses incurred in organisation, station-
ery, stamps, office personnel, etc., Mass Observation surveys
are available to every size and type of business at a nominal
fee.
The reply paid envelope contains an application form
for membership, together with space for your comment on
M-O. On receipt of your application Mass Observation
will forward to you a membership card and all the material
necessary for you to operate as a Mass Observer.
This includes the Mass Observation “Technique
Booklet,” which shows in simple form the method to be
adopted in approaching any subject indirectly, and how to
classify an individual into his correct group, together with
details of how the organisation meets its financial obliga-
tions.
We will also forward a Report Book and reply-paid
envelopes for posting the reports to the M-O Centre.
None of this involves you in any expense.
MASS OBSERVATION IN AUSTRALIA
