

MATERIALISM
VINDICATED.
BY VENI
IN THREE PARTS.
Part I.—ON BELIEF.
Part II.—ON HUMAN NATURE.
Part III.-THE SUPREME POWER.
H. SOLOMON, Caxton Print., Pitt Street, Sydney.


■», Jf if
'f fJL //i i ? h r
/f g/XUt wf !L bt u- owsl ieUa- /Pf f~ f
Ji fr'/ZLu-/ .£ J j/~~ £y,
, r twUrb. ,
fCnj l&hJieUd* it* o<i
u 4*t*^hrtd*oiJifru l ) £ , '7 y
/jf ” ’ ~ '* " r < . Zs/*
U Hu, .
// fPfh^. , fort*. Ut-i*tC'Cuu6i~ -&X a, '
ftu /
e A4tu
.~rtu) bhJ+- / Z'{isfi+- /2-
CAru/vd*. +fo ffhUs
M*. dLrt,cC £SU<jf\ <ff/
/Uj-tc;:
,.% t / •
'kriurff. , aJh. uf\iArt~<xJL fiPL^uita*JL. l MaL lL{f /f_
Audi(tfrow. hM Ur
H £- &**- tifanjoi**-
f~ P luMjfc'Zi, L*ypn/tytJJ'tA et , Oft .-<"■" cJI/Jhky birh/k+Pl*d-
'■p ■, --r '> t 1 ,>t.. 4Us '%*Jrtry&bu £fc&**-' C T. *ph
.




MATERIALISM VINDICATED.
INTRODUCTION.
BY B. BROTHERS.
In the organization of nature there is a mechanical construction in all bodies, either
hidden or apparent, therefore, force is necessary to produce motion so that motion
is a sensation, an effect produced by power on objects that offer resistance. If there
was no resistance power would penetrate though the object. Thus we .see that the
contact must meet with some impediment before motion can be established, or any
other sensation be produced, beyond that which is inherent in the power. If power
was restrained within a compass there would be an innate sensation to expand, an
energy that would always be on the alert for any disturbance that would admit
action If we apply this to the etherial fluid of space, then expansion is the primary
senation of the universe, and the heavenly bodies are the cause of the commotion
that generates motion within the etherial fluid. If so, there must be in matter a
sensation, to be; and in motion an intention, to do; so. that material force has
within itself a conception, a design, from which it cannot diverge. As there can be
no motion without the movement of a material, there cannot be any being without
a material body ; therefore, material force must be the incentive of the universe.
Motion, to be, continues, must revolve ; this implies repetitions, and denotes an
observance, and also, an obedience to natural forces.. Such force needs no. under-
standing, as it has no contingencies—not like animal life, which requires an
intelligence, to provide. (This faculty is used by animals, and abused by man for his
own wilful purposes). Motion, therefore must be all-sufficient when thus sustained,
as its own action furnishes what is wanted ; with this ability to perform, motion
generates material issues, and these being continually developed produce a natural
progress. If material force controls the universe, there can be no Divine will with
a positive or negative power to interfere. If force be absolute, man cannot in
any way be exempted, so that we can conclude that the human mind, in an indirect
manner, is as much under the influence of material force as the body In that case,
man personally can have only a fictitious power over his actions To deny this would
be a factitious assertion founded on conceit, but unsupported by natural evidence.
If we allow that man has a free and self-directed power over his actions, we must
also that it is possessed by animals; for with them it is apparently displayed with
greater prompitude and exercised with an intuitive judgment not possessed by
man. This superiority is termed instinct, but in reality it shows that the multipu-
city of human faculties tends to create hesitation instead of decision. Thus man is
in a great measure forced to think. If it is admitted that animal instinct is a mag-
netic action, man must be incited by the same force; for this reason it may be more
intricate, yet we know this, that he is capable of doing things in a spontaneous
manner without thinking. In that man resembles animals, and in other respects he
does not differ, for he has to supply his present, and like some animals, to provide
for future wants. However, man is an epitome of all, and the ordinary greed
of animals is in him concentrated and developed into an eager desire for every-
thing he can clutch. From this fact alone we can assume that the uneasiness
occasioned by inordinate desires laid the foundation of a superior intelligence in
primitive man ; bitter experience no doubt taught him prudence, thus by slow


degrees he became wise in proportion, and little more rational than animals, as
regards his own convenience. The amount of reason thus inculcated into mam and
transmitted to his offspring, enabled man not only to provide, but also to contrive,
so that after some thousands of years’ progress in the latter characteristics, we can
affirm that he is now fast becoming a technical expert in order to overcome the
present and gradual increasing difficulty of getting. Is not this enough to account
for the progressed intelligence of man. There has been sufficient romance in the
career of his race to produce fictions of every description, especially the super-
natural. As man is endowed with a tenacious memory, he has in all ages been able
to imitate and repeat, altough not alwayp with exactness, but then has not this
eccentricity, which is not possessed by animals, generated human progression.
If space is not a vacuum, but a fluid, it must be the source of power; and as there
can be no condition or state of being without an adverse, the inertness of matter
must be the counterpoise that regulates and controls the action of the fluid. If
the fluid is the motive power it must be sensible to the resistance of matter. We
know that expansion scatters and also propels; therefore the propulsion of a solid body
rotates on its axis, and instead of being spread asunder like gaseous matter, it is
drawn together, and motion becomes continuous and revolves. This introduces into
the etherial fluid a complex sensation.
If motion is thus sustained, it is evident that the rotation controls expansion,
and in doing so establishes two sensational elements in motion,the one a consolidating
and the other a diffusing force. This is what is termed Magnetism. The last of
these forces is innate power of the etherial fluid, but the first as we have shown,
emanates from the motion of the heavenly bodies. As the fluid permeates all matter
and all the bodies rotate, this action draws the fluid on to the axis, which is sustained
by the surrounding fluid forcing itself into the body to retain an equilibrium, and
the effect of this is, as a current setting towards and into the body. This is called
Attraction, and is that which produces all natural phonomena on and underneath the
surface of the earth, and also in the atmosphere. Gravity is a result. It also explains
the economy of the universe, for it indicates that attractions are intact and rotate with
the body. It accounts for the atmosphere revolving with the earth, and also the
moon, which is within the earth’s attraction. It also reveals a great cosmical prin-
ciple —the utility of resistance to power in the organization of the universe. As re-
gards the atmosphere, it rotates with the attraction, because it is gaseous, and offers
no resistance ; on the contrary, the moon is solid matter, and there is this resistance:
The attraction of the earth has to make over 28 rotations to propel the moon one
revolution round the earth. Again, the attraction of the sun has to perform 14
rotations to enforce the earth in its annual circuit. The planet Venus requires 9, and
Mercury about 3J.
If attractions are intact and tangible to an outer force, they must be self-
supported, so that the fluid force into the body must again return to the attraction.
To do that it must have an outlet. Now if polar action is magnetic outflow, we
can assert that it is the escape of the fluid ; if so, the exit would resemble a jet of
spouting water that returned to a basin, and the basin would be the rotating body.
In this manner attractions are completely isolated, as the motion would be
transverse to an outer attraction.
In conclusion, and from what we have stated, it is apparent that the attrac-
tions and not the bodies are organized into systems. If so, systems can conbine into
systems, and continue to do so until in power and extent they arrive at a state of
perfect equality; and, if these mighty systems of boundless space are conjoined, they
will continue to rotate in all eternity within a defined limit. As these mighty sys-
tems would rotate in a perfect circle, the revolving fluid must be confined within
each sphere, so that no matter how conjoined there would be portions of space in
which the fluid would not revolve; therefore, in these parts there can be no organiza-
tion and no solid matter, but they contain gaseous matter, as the surrounding suns
in the adjoining systems would diffuse the elements of light therein; the force
therefrom accruing from different directions would create commotion and probably
a great disturbance, as there would be no attraction to act as a counterpoise. Is
this a solution of the nebulous appearances in the welkin?
51 West Street, Darlinghurst,
Sydney.


MATERIALISM VINDICATED.
ON BELIEF.
BY VENI
All religions are founded on faith, and the followers of each belief accept
their own particular doctrine as truth. They are instilled into the mind
by training and early associations, and become so firmly fixed that the
reasoning faculties are not strong enough to entirely erase these indelible
impressions. Thus it is, how superstitions are handed down to posterity.
Man seldom strays from the religion of his childhood, altho’ he may make
but an indifferent member. Some religions do not seek proselytes to their
faith ; in others, it is an essential portion of their creed to propagate and
disseminate their doctrines to obtain converts. This has been the cause of
much trouble, as they have not been particular in the means employed to
gain that object. In propagating these beliefs by persuasion, the barrier
to success is in what we have stated, with this additional difficulty, that
they can only advance One belief in exchange for another, and beliefs are
not facts; what one believes to be true, another considers it false ; for
instance, ask a Jew his opinion of the Christian faith, he will tell you that
his forefathers have resided within its influence for upwards of 2000 years,
and it has not prevailed over their own. Seek an intelligent Hindoo, one
who has had the benefit of a thorough European education in the govern-
ment colleges of his native land, he will inform you that he prefers his own
faith, and continues his worship of, what in missionary phraseology is
termed, wood and stone. To him it is what the Bible is to the Christian,
what the one does in words, the other does in symbols, both illustrate the
attributes of the Diety that is worshipped, and each teaches their followers
to do that which is supposed to be their duty.
In all religions there are glimpses of truth, but they are obscured
by traditional observances and other religious ceremonies, yet they all
seek to attain the same end, that is, to better mankind by the inducement
of future reward after death. The wisdom of this proceeding is doubtful,
for how can a man be really good when influenced by that bribe, it can
only be an expedient to produce obedience ; in this respect it has been
eminently successful, for we find that all religions, of which we have
any knowledge, have upheld their influence, and maintained their authority
through hope and fear. This to be effective, requires something more than
our present existence, hence the necessity of a future state, and a con-
tinuance of our individuality to receive these rewards and punishments.
From this we can infer that in early ages, all religion sprung from those
laws that were enacted for the better government of an unruly, ignorant,
and superstitious people, and that time has confirmed many of the ex


pedients then in practice, into popular beliefs. To support this idea, we
have only to refer to the bible, there we find that Moses was equivalent to
both priest and ruler, and as he made his own laws he adapted them to
suit both conditions. To make them more effective he gave them a super-
natural authority, he thus made disobedience a sin. It would appear that
his coadjutors were not altogether of that opinion, and had a greater share
in his removal than they cared to be known, however they continued his
policy, ahd his disappearance added strength to his doctrines With the
exception of Confucius, all the old writers of antiquity tried to enforce their
precepts through fear, he alone appealed to the mind, and therefore dis-
carded all idea of punishment after death \ his is a philosophy, not a
religion.
At the present, there are four distinct religions, of more or less
antiquity, and their followers include the greater proportion of the world’s
population. They are the Christian, including the Jews, the Mohammedan,
the Hindoo, and the Buddhists. - Their writings are known as the Bible,
the Horan, the Veda, and the Soutra. There can be no doubt that the
Veda of the Hindoo is the most ancient j the Koran is a conception from
the Bible ; and the Soutra is reformed ideas arising out of the Veda.
With the exception of Soutra, the others assume a Divine origin,
and believe in a future state, and the immortality of the soul; the Buddhist
also believes in a spiritual world, in combination with the material, which,
when separated, individuality ceases, and the spirit is absorbed. We can
understand the similarity between Christianity and Mohammedism, and
also between the Hindoo and the Buddhist, the latter believes in absolution,
and do not enjoin as a duty the task of propagating their doctrines, as
the two former do, and which has produced so much strife and bloodshed,
all for the sake of a belief and its predominance. The Veda contains a
number of moral truths, many of which are obscured by religious cere-
monies ; and the Soutra teaches a higher philosophy than the Bible. The
latter teaches faith, which engenders zeal; the other, moderation, which
induces contentment.
As a 1! religion must have morality for its foundation, on which to
build their superstructure, or else they could have no prolonged existence,
therefore, the higher the morality, the more powerful the belief. This is
the power of Christianity, the strong moral tone, combined with the freedom
of our social laws, have raised it to the position it now occupies. Faiths
of every kind depend more on the imagination than on the reasoning
faculties, so that great religious zeal, and doubtful morality are often
combined in the one person. If we examine these beliefs, and separate the
moral and social teachings from those that are purely religious, we shall
find that the substance is gone, and only a shadow remains ; the one is a
necessity, the other a fiction. Morality teaches justice and humanity, but
religious beliefs are often opposed to both. The great moral truths in-
culcated by the founder of Christianity, are made secondary to doctrinal
ceremonies, and the result is, that we have piety without goodness charity
without kindness ; and zeal without prudence ; again, religious, faiths, act
as intolerent restrictions on the mental faculties of the human race, unless


restrained by moral influence, and are a barrier to social progress, they
do not advance, but follow the age; they are not composed of practical
facts, morality alone is convincing, therefore all faiths are delusions, myths
made sacred by antiquity.
If we examine the various religions, we find that most believe in an
all-powerful being, a perfect embodiment of man ; others in a spiritual
essence that prevails everywhere. Each faith stamp their dieties with their
own peculiar attributes, which are prominent characteristics of their faith.
For instance, the Mohammedans apathy and love of easje ; the Buddhists
conceited superiority; the devotion of the Hindoo ; and the selfishness of
the Christian. This feature in Christians has become a part of their
nature, they carry it with them on all occasions, self prevades all their
thoughts, and regulates their actions. Blind as a mole to this infirmity, it
is a prominent peculiarity to others, even uncivilized savages, with whom
they come in contact, soon detect it. It is this deformity in the Christian
that prevents them from amalgamating with nations of other religions.
Buddhists, Mohammedans, and Hindoos, can live harmoniously together,
but the Christian never. Whenever there has been any attachment at all,
the devotion is not on the side of the Christian. If we inquire into this
selfishness further, we shall find, that the more reformed the faith, the more
glaring it becomes ; it is more apparent in the Protestants than in Catholics.
The adherents of the Church of England see it in the earnestness of the
dissenters, and the Roman Catholic in the proud sufficiency of Episcopalians.
Selfishness is drilled into the Christian in his earliest youth, for the
first thing that he is taught is self-preservation. This we should say was
unneccessary, for nature has implanted that into every animal, therefore
self is the animal portion of our nature and ought to be checked instead of
fostered, as it is opposed to humanity and consequently to morality,
therefore it destroys the good that is inherent in human nature. If we
teach a child the moral lessons of Christ, it immediately comprehends their
import and accepts them as good because they are not selfish, on the
contrary, all religious doctrines have to be forcibly impressed on the
imagination for the generous spirit of the child rebels against such
dogmas, as save thyself at any price. Instead of so much instruction on
our dead selves we were taught to be good for the benefit of the living,
there would be more humanity.
The moral and doctrinal teachings of Christianity are often so at
variance that we cannot attribute them to the same author, they do not
harmonise ; the one, is full of Justice and Humanity ; the other, that you
shall sacrifice both for your future benefit, no duties, no ties, no matter
how obligatory are to stand in the way of your future welfare after death.
What sentiments to emanate from one who taught and practised kindness
to the living and told his disciples that an unbelieving Samaritan could be
superior to a godly priest or levite, that goodness was in their moral culture
and not in religious observances. Christ was a great reformer, a believer in
the doctrine of Moses, the severity of whose laws he tried to humanise for
doing so, he gave offence to the othodox Jews, this was the cause of his
fall ; to believe in his divinity implies a supernatural existance, by so


doing, we form a very limited idea of the supreme power that governs not
only man and his actions, but the entire universe by unalterable and all
sufficient laws, therefore supernatural agency is not requisite.
Before setting aside divine inspiration, we will endeavour to make
one or two rational remarks upon the subject; Moses in describing the
creation and the subsequent events, could not have written from records,
his only resource would be tradition ; these, he evidently embodied together,
so as to suit the condition of the people, over whom he ruled, obedience to
the laws he had framed, was to Moses the great necessity ; hence the sin
of disobedience in Adam and Eve. When we consider the nature of his
laws and the people for whom they were made, ignorant, superstitious,
unused to order, turbulent, disobedient, and not long redeemed from slavery;
we can understand the motive of their stern and unrelenting character
and their divine origin.
If Moses wrote from inspiration, there would be facts revealed
throughout his narrative, that would coincide with those that are within
our reach at the present. If his statement differ materially from those
facts that are within our knowledge, we can dismiss inspiration and look
upon the whole as tradition. Compare his account of the creation with
that which science has revealed, they do not coincide, again that which
relates to man being created immortal; this idea is inconsistent with all
known laws of nature, we know that this earth contained the elements of
life and death, anterior to the period assigned to Adam’s creation, therefore
immortality could not exist in the midst of mortality, immortality could
: not breathe, for in that there is life and death; immortality requires no
sustenance, so there is no need for a creation, neither could it sin ; so what
is the use of a Tempter. The inspiration of Moses was sadly behind our
knowledge, but his policy in making disobedience a sin deserves our
commendation, for it has answered well for nearly four thousand years.
If sin is doing that which is forbidden, what constitutes the power
to forbid and determines the nature of right and wrong. The one we
must suppose springs from goodness, the other mischief ; therefore goodness
is a benefit and the other an injury. If so, our common humanity asserts
its power, and decides, by silently protesting against that which is inhuman
and proclaims, that sin is an offence against nature and not the infringement
of social regulations. Human laws to be just, must coincide with those of
nature, if they do not, they are only expedients to enforce compulsory
obedience, so that it often happens that there is more merit in the evasion
than in their observance. As nature has ordained that there can be no
actual benefit without it is accompanied by a corresponding amount of
injury ; therefore every action contains the elements of both. This is as
applicable to human laws as to human beings. In communities, we find
that what is a benefit to an individual, may be injurious to the body and
that which is judicious to the whole is an individual restraint on the
members, therefore society being the body possesses the power to forbid,
but that does not constitute disobedience to be a sin, it is a crime against
social laws ; again, to commit any action unconscious of wrong, cannot be
a sin, even when the after results are serious and causes much sorrow and


suffering, but when it is accompanied with the intention to injure, then it
is an offence against humanity and is a sin, except in such cases that arise
from self-preservation. Social laws are necessary for the protection of the
weak against the strong; we do not confine ourselves to mean muscular
strength alone, but those in power and position, for there we shall find the
greatest sinners and some that are far more inhuman than the defiant and
stalwart ruffian. Sins against humanity are not always crimes, according
to our present laws, for our civilization makes a great distinction between
wealth and poverty to be just in its discriminations, but it manufactures
its own crimes, and when it is expedient to call them sins it confounds the
two together for the purpose of exacting greater obedience. If it is a sin
to disobey these laws, then society is responsible for the sin, that is when
the people choose their own rulers; it is not a sin against nature, so
disobedience can only be a crime. There can be no original sin, the
infringement of natural laws, brings its our retribution so that society need
not interfere in those matters except when it is a injury to other members,
then it is a crime as well as a sin, but sometimes the promptings of nature
are grave crimes, and society punishes these acts on the old established
usages of past ages : for instance, it is an unpardonable crime to steal, but
when there is a necessity, man would sin against himself, or those depend-
ing on him, by not fulfilling the demands of nature, thus we see that all
human laws must be subject to circumstances, Nature is not a respector of
private property, and is thus opposed in some instances to the commandment.
“Thou shalt not steal.” Altho’ Moses broke these commands himself,
that is the sixth and eighth, he made them imperative on the people. To
murder the cannanites and steal their country was not a sin in his opinion,
but in other ways he was a great respector of private property, and con-
sidered that as sacred as a man’s wife or his life; yet strange to say, he
destroyed the heterodox followers of the Golden Calf and attributed it to the
vengeance of the diety. We thus see how he governs the people through
their fears, and not through their reason; however, he could not have
completely annihiliated that faith, for its worshippers are awfully numerous
at the present day. So much for divine inspiration.
ON HUMAN NATURE.
The impossible cannot be probable, but credulity which springs
from ignorance assumes that nothing is impossible with the Deity or
Creator. This is gross superstition, and arises from the idea that divine
laws are like human laws, subject to change. If we have any divine laws,
they must be those of nature which never vary, although full of diversity.
We see the days follow each other in regular succession, each day a con-
tinuous round of change, but perfect in its completeness—it is the same with
the seasons and also with years. This is apparent, and from that we
can conceive that the same laws of nature that has produced the past
will also control the future, and that worlds, like years, have their altern-


ate seasons of production and vitality. Thus there is fixity of purpose
in the midst of diversity and change, and the supreme power, the source
of these unalterable laws, must govern the human mind, so that every
action of the body is as certain as the fruit of a tree, and every thought
of the brain as well defined in its origin as the leaf of a plant.
If the human mind was exempt from these natural laws, which is
palpable in things besides, it must be an unknown law, and distinct from
those that govern creation. Such a law, to be effectual, must be superior
to nature’s to enable man to control circumstance so that he can act in
accordance with his judgement, then he would be responsible for his
actions; but if he is biased by circumstances he cannot be a free agent,
for it is impossible to combine the two together; and he must either be a free
agent, or a slave to circumstances. If we desire to know what we really
are, we must study nature and endeavour to solve its hidden mysteries.
Books teach us the thoughts of those who have preceded us in the search •
as such they may assist in the investigation. They are not always reliable’
for their ideas are often derived from writers of bygone times, instead of
from nature itself. Old established beliefs are taken for facts, and through
these miscalled truths all things are contemplated. The fountain of all
knowledge is nature. It was from that source that ancient philosophers
obtained their wisdom. Our perceptions may fail, but its teachings are
always the same. There is no law for this and another law for that,
for all nature is but the result of one supreme power. There can be
but little doubt that this power is expansion, and as expansion is force,
and as like begets like, one force produces others, here then we have
motion—the controller and propeller of the universe. It assigns to the
heavenly bodies their position and functions. It measures the length of
their days, their years, their creation, and their cycles of material existence.
It forces nature into activity and regulates its productions, and it gives to
life its vitality, and to death the process of decay. Elliptical motion pro-
duces the seasons, and the seasons their events, and events are circumstances.
Every circumstance has its results, and every result helps to fulfil
the purpose of life, the work of production and re-production—Man is not
exempted, for his birth depends on circumstances and his existence
afterwards. With all his pride he is but the epitome of animal life; in
courage he is inferior to the lion, in strength to the elephant, the ferocity
of the wolf appals him, and the faithfulness of the dog shames him ; he is
outdone by the ant in perseverance, by the bee in skill, by the bird in
construction, and there is not an animal on the face of the earth that does
not excel in some peculiar quality. Altho inferior to each in their respective
attributes he is a combination of all; thus, he styles himself lord of
creation and assumes that every thing is ordained for his especial benefit.
Contrast, is one of the chief features in nature’s productions, and it
constitutes the beauty or excellence of anything, or the reverse. It never
occurs by accident but the inevitable effect of a cause. The efforts of
nature are direct, it is circumstance that determines the result hence the
diversity of form ; in time these diversities produce fixed traits, and these
varieties develop by the same process other diversities, until the distinction


becomes great, then they are termed different species, but all spring from a
common origin. It is circumstances and not nature that produces the
evolutions of life ; altho circumstance does not generate life, it can destroy,
thus all life is subject to circumstances, nature is thus; supported or retarded.
To take advantage of circumstance and to mitigate its distructive
power. Nature has implanted into all animals a machine called the brain,
which can be used for their protection, but circumstance again interfere
with nature and creates as great a diversity as in form. As circumstances
are always changing and cannot be repeated, however similar they may
appear, so no two living bodies can be exactly alike.
Vegetable life is stationary, therefore it depends entirely on
circumstance, but all life possessing locomotion needs a greater piotection,
thus the necessity that all circumstances affecting the animal should leave
an impression on the brain to remember how to avoid danger. We believe
that animals endowed with memory are not absolute creatures of circum-
stances. Altho circumstance enforce action it is the capacity to understand
consequences, thus memory enables the brain to repel or attract the action
of circumstances for the benefit of the body, this is Intelligence. In Nature
there is a limit to diversity, Cherries will not grow on a gum tree, and it is
as unlikely for an impulsive person, to be gifted with prudence. Impulse
is action enforced by circumstances. Prudence the effect produced by the
fear of consequencs. These extremes are of seldom occurence in man,
altho’ he is a strange mixture of the two, as none are so prudent as to have
no impulse ; however, impulse is the most powerful because it is more
natural We see this in animals and also in young people, therefore
prudence is an acquisition engrafted on the mind by experience, this
enables as to understand what is for our benefit or injury. As the force of
circumstances sometimes overwhelms all obstacles in nature, so will it
overpower the brain, therefore to control our actions within the bounds of
prudence is all that is necessary, for nature requires no extraneous aids to
enforce respect, as all infringements of its laws are rectified sooner or later
whether they arise from the force of circumstances or the fear of consequences.
Nature adapts itself to all circumstances whether they are beneficial or
injurious, therefore there is nothing utterly bad or extremely good. With
circumstances, as with life like produces like, so that in diversity there is
similarity, an admixture of contrasts produces distinctive features. This is
palpable in all life, but in events they are not so apparent, but we know
that they have opposite results, the beneficial and the injurious, connected
together by links of graduated effects, as it is with events, so it is with our
actions; evil can only disseminate evil, that is, what is injurious, altho’
there are objects in nature to which evil is as neccessary, as good is to
others. An action once committed cannot be recalled, it has gone to swell
that stream of events, that is to produce the future; thus, we see the
necessity of self-control, for whatever advantage is gained by an evil action
the benefit can only be tempory, its after results must be injurious ; we
often see good and evil applied to men’s actions according to the light
in which they are viewed. These are ofter synonymous and ha\e only a
social meaning, for a man isolated by himself cannot do either good or evi,


but as a member of a community he becomes responsible for his actions as
to their effect on others, therefore society requires rules to regulate each
members actions, and the pains and penalties attached, are some of the
consequences that control men, the Ten Commandments are principally of
this class, the infringement of these are not sins but crimes against society.
All restraining laws to be just should be founded on human nature, as it is,
not as some suppose it ought to be. It is all very well to say, thou shalt
not do this or that, but if circumstances compel us, where is our responsibility
beyond that which society demands.—lf circumstance force our action it
must do so through the brain or rather through the senses to the brain,
then if these channels of communication were closed the brain could not
perform its functions, for life by itself could not supply it with a single
thought any more than the loom could produce the fabric without the
material; life is the motive power, circumstances the material by which
brain controls the body. The brains of animals are of a more simple
construction than those of man ; they consist of fewer faculties and their
bodies are so constructed so as to develop their capabilities, thus their
reasoning powers are limited ; that they do think is certain for without
thought, they could have no memory. Every thought must have a sound,
and every sound a thought; each cry that is uttered by an animal is
understood by its kind, but not by other species, showing that different
species have not the same faculties ; however few the thoughts of animals
may be they are certainly more intense and acute than in man, this is to
the human mind incomprehensible, therefore we call it instinct. This extra-
ordinary power is produced by the entire strength of the brain being concen-
. trated on the few faculties, assisted by the superior acuteness of the senses.
The human brain is more complex and consists of a combination of
the faculties of all animals, each less intense, but this is more than made
good by their multiplicity which vastly adds to the powers to generate
thoughts, as every thought must express itself in sound, language is
produced ; thus we see how our first progenitors would establish a language
and transmit it to their offspring ; each pair of progenitors doing the same,
for it is difficult to believe that all the diflerent races of the world have the
some origin. In man, the senses, are simply channels of communications,
but in animals they assume the functions of faculties according to the
degree of development of the brain ; in the lower order of animal life where
the brain cease altogether, the senses perform all the functions necessary to
their existence, as the different species assimilate to those of the vegetable
kingdom, the senses also gradually disappear with the exception of
“ feeling.” This sense pervades through all vegetable life, we know how
sensitive all plants are to heat and cold, light and shade, and many even to
the touch, showing how completely all life is controlled by the power of
circumstances, although the brains of men are constructed alike, circumstance
only develops those faculties that are most requisite, the others remain
dormant, and as each life is produced under different circumstances the
same faculties are not brought forth, hence our different dispositions
which generate different thoughts, but all are subject to the same inevitabe
law, the force of circumstances.


THE SUPREME POWER.
One force produces another, that is what we term motion, therefore
the omnipotent power must be the energy to produce apparent motion
that is the movement of material bodies. As there can be no motion without
a material, energy, must be a substance also, as it cannot exist m a
vacuum. As there is no inherent force in matter, it must exist m space, and
as we know that is not a vacuum, therefore the material that it contains is
the Supreme Power we seek ; if so, then there is no inspiration and no
supernatural agency, no mind to regulate and no wi - o e o eyec, u
the one power to create immutable and all sufficient forces to generate life
and to control the universe. We are conscious that there is something
that surrounds us in addition to the air we breath; its influence we are
cognizant of, yet it is undefinable and invisible, we feel its existence and
know it is all potent; it is like unto a spiritual essence, it has affinity yet
it both repels and attracts. Some assert that it is the spirit of departed life,
others that it is animal magnetism; whatever name we give, it penetrates
and influences all life and matter. All science tends to prove that there is
a power the source of all things, tradition asserts that it emanates from a,n
all-powerful being whose individuality resembles man, or ra er la. eis
made after this image and that his presence is universal. To believe m this
hypothesis this Being must have a locality or realm where he individually
presides and the Presence is a spirit which is the prevailing power, n
that case it can only have a controlling power over the creation, therefore,
unless we believe in a miraculous construction there must be a primary
power to produce the circumstance controlled. If creation is the results of
natural forces, then they must have a similar origin. To believe m a divine
will is to raise a phantom and discard the substance, to do that we destroy
immutability, and imply that only matter and mind exist in the universe,
and that all motion is the result of that will ; in that case all natural forces
are needless, besides, this traditional conception is not supported by science,
as that only proves the existence of natural forces, this leads us to assume
that the supreme power is the energy of a material. The question arises,
what is this all powerful material whose force is omnipresent and immutable?
It is not matter for that is inert, it must be invisible. We know that the
rushing of the atmosphere is the motion of materials, we call it wind, it is
invisible but we can feel its existence, it teaches us that there can be no
motion without the movement of a material. Science tells us that light is
«*4y motion derived from the sun, and as it is conveyed from the sun to
the earth there must be an invisible material occupying space to produce
the transit, we know that it is mk in a ray of light. By this we know that
space is not a vacuum, that it is occupied with a material termed m science,
the ether of space, and that it is in constant vibration. This, then is the
energy that gives motion to light, so that we can assert that there is no
will in light, or even a spirit, and that it is only derivative from natural
forces. What we have said of light is equally as applicable to heat, hire is
the consuming of natural formations : and water, is the combination of
electrical motion and the oxygen of the atmosphere, and its dissolution, is


hydrogen and oxygen. If light, fire and water, the essentials to life be
only motion, can life be anything else. They are all vital processes in the
work of creation and derivable from the same source, therefore life
is motion.
The ether of space must have all the attributes which we attribute
to spirit, although we know it is a material; science can tell us what it is
like ; it is different from all other materials, for they are composed of
atoms; this is not, but an elastic substance, as such it cannot be divided,
even by bodies passing through, therefore [it must permeate all other
materials; as this elasticity is illimitable, its powers of expansion must be
the same, thus expansion is the origin of all force; as space is unlimited,
this ethereal substance must be as infinite, if it was not so its power would
be expended by continued expansion, from this it is evident that all space
is filled with expansive energy; and we can infer that matter is also co-existent;
therefore we can assume that there is no limit to the heavenly bodies.
Here, then we can form a conception of the method and design of the
universe, that all space is occupied by immense systems, each revolving in
a circular movement around a fixed centre, this would denote eternity, as
these systems would be composed of lesser systems, or rather of a series of
systems within systems, each of these would in their revolutions revolve
around a moving centre, therefore their orbits would be elliptical, and the
result would be continual change; this is time'; thus time is enveloped in
eternity. In explaining the various phenomona of nature, we have only
made use of those ideas, that are within the reach of our memory; these we
have endeavoured to relate as far as our abilities will permit, to show that
natures laws are not so mysterious as they at first appear to be ; in fact,
there is none so hidden as to be beyond our comprehension, although they
may be difficult to explain owing to deficiency in language. The different
sciences are rendered obscure to a novice from the technical terms employed,
and we also know that those who are proficients are often led astray by
false deductions from correct experiments. The sciences we can liken to
a number of persons, groping their way by different paths, to attain a common
centre. If that central knowledge was known, everything else would be
made clear. Assuming then that the ether of space is the “ godhead ” and
“ expansion” the supreme power we have a central point to start from, and
its correctness can only be demonstrated by the knowledge wdiich is already
in our possession. We already know that there are three distinct motions,
oscillation, rotation and propulsion, these we will endeavour to show are the
results of expansion. The ether of space is not apparent in our atmosphere,
but we know that it must penetrate the foments before it can influence
the bodies, we also know that the atmosphere is compos'ed of atoms ;to be
so, each atom must be distinct and occupy an allotted space and liavefreedom
of action. As this minute space would be filled with vibrating ether, it
envelopes the atom and keeps that also in constant vibration, any extra
disturbance would cause the atom to oscillate, hence the expansion and
contraction of ether which would continue until an equilibrium was restored;
therefore oscillation is not the repulsion and attraction of the atoms but
the magnetic energy of space. As atoms receive their energy so must worlds


do T likewise, for they are only a collection of atoms of dense matters.
then, we have that subtle power which experience has shown, must
exist, and which has puzzled the world and its wisdom in all ages. It is
generally supposed that “ mind ” and “ matter ” are the nature
must be anotheg name for the energy of .space • if it were not
so > there would be required another element, for life can exist without
mind. Metaphysicians say it is the soul or spirit, if that were so, it would
permeate all nature both animate and inanimate, as these elements, the soul,
mind and body are generally supposed to have been clearly demonstrated!
How comes it that the first is a complete mystery, the second an assumption
on the first, and the only one that is self-evident, is the body ? Then again
about life ; is that distinct from the others 1. Jdatter will not produce life
and it has an existence without mind and without soul ; life is only motion!
the energy that produce life is identical, with what mesmerists term the
magnetic fluid. They assert that it emanates from mind ; then if mind
influence mind, that which we term intelligence, is as much a motion of the
brain as light and heat are of the sun.
W e ha\ e shown that the vibration of space produces oscillation in
atoms, let us see if it is not the energy of life. Whenever we see oscillation,
we can assume that it is produced by the action of the ether of space on
the surface of the earth ; for instance, we have oscillation in the tidal wave
of the ocean, is that due to this magnetic energy j again every nerve in our
bodies oscillates, and the pendulous movement of our hearts sends the blood
coursing through our veins and forces it back into the same reservoir. It
is the same with a tree, the sap is driven to the topmost branches and into
every leaf, and in due season it is compelled to return. Again, set a grain
of wheat in the earth, it receives humid heat and swells, room is made for
the germ to oscillate and life begins; what is this germ 1 the magnetic
energy of space. As this vibrating energy produces oscillation, we can
assume that it also is the cause of rotation, that is to revolve. Oscillation
can only evoltve, therefore rotation is neccessary to confine evolution
within certain defined limits. A body violently propelled could not oscillate,
but the same energy that would produce oscillation would cause such a
body to rotate. If we refer to the grain of wheat we find the magnetic
germ is subject to restraint until circumstances give liberty of action
therefore we can assert that rotation is a force or circumstance that draws
the magnetic energy of a body on to the axis. As the ether of space
penetrates solid matter as well as the elements, then, the quicker a body
rotates, the greater would be the absorbtion of magnetic energy. If we
consider the rotation of the earth on its axis, we find that on the equator,
the surface motion would be about I£T miles per minute, decreasing towards
the poles, as the atmosphere rotates with the earth; the outer atmosphere
must move at greater rate than the inner, thus the various densities are
produced, the compression of the outer atmosphere on the inner, the inner
on the earth s surface, and the outer body on its axis j this is simply the
mechanical power of winding, it draws the ether of space around the axis.
This is a solution of that force we term “gravity.” The continual
absorbtion of ether would necessary require an outlet to regain its


equilibrium, this would be at the poles, hence we have •* polar magnetism.”
Thus without rotation a body could have no adhesion.
1 \ ll ■■— l "i — i J —— j .Li lj r
We have endeavoured to show that all motion is derived from space,
and not from a spirit, and that expansion is the energy of the universe,
If this be the primary force, the bases on which it expends its energy must
also be the same, therefore there must be a trinity of material eternities,
the Power, the Material and the Machine ; the power is expansion, the
material, the «4imr elements
and the machine is dense matter, such as the heavenly bodies. Between the
two last, there is a never ending oscillation which may be likened unto the
tide, as it is the flow of elements into matter, and ebb of matter into
gaseous elements.
Here then we have an eternal system of transformation or a progress
of construction and re-construction extending through the universe. We can
notice this feature prevailing all through nature, we see it in our energy
for action, and the desire to rest in the vigorous growth of youth, and the
decrepitude of old age, in the advance of spring, and the decline of autumn.
As it is with the seasons, so it will be with worlds and that the efforts of
nature never cease, only to recommence. That there is a primary power to
produce all things, but no first cause, and consequently there is no
begining and no end.
H. Solomon, Caxton Printing Office, 114| Pitt Street, Sydney.


COSMICAL REVELATIONS.
It is generally assumed that matter is inert; but if the etherial fluid permeates
all matter, every atom must be a sentient being, as capable to be as the body that
contains innumerable atoms, so that each would have internal action as well as
external motion; and no body of matter can possess that solidity which denotes
perfect fixedness. Therefore all matter—solid, liquid, and. gaseous—must be in
constant motion, subservient to the etherial fluid, and follow its course of action in
proportion to the resisting power of the material. Under these conditions, none of
the heavenly bodies can have that immobility in their internal parts so as to be free
from inward mutations. If so, no part of this earth is stationary any more than the
body of a living creature ; in that case, if there is conformity in nature, there is
vitality in worlds as well as in life. Thus no part of the earth can become dead
while the rest is in full vigour. .
If attraction and gravity were separate forces, gravitation would centralise on
the axis, and there stagnate from pressure and excessive contraction. When
motivity ceased, would not the dull and motionless matter of mid-earth become void
of heat, and gradually increase in bulk, until it eventually reached the surface ?
Would not all moisture, instead of percolating into the body, be forced back again to
the surface ? And would not gravitation by its own action cease, and the earth
become a dead lump held together by a minimised rotation ? This does not agree
with our knowledge of the handiwork of nature; but, if we admit that attraction
and gravity are identical —the one an outer, the other an inward, action we can be
assured that there is no stagnation within the earth, but great heat, and that matter is
in motion on the axis as well as on the surface. If solid matter pursues a revolving
process similar to the etherial fluid, it must be from the circumference to the axis,
thence towards the poles, where it again emerges to the surface in a cool state, after
undergoing a smelting process. This, no doubt, accelerates the internal transit.
If this is the action of solid matter, we can assert that water percolates the entire
body either as a liquid or vapour, and exudes at the poles, where it is congealed.
Water, no doubt, assists in produoing chemical actions within the earth. It also
explains another feature of polar action—the supply of ice and the formation of bergs.
The continual increase in the centre of the region of ice would exert .a pressure on
the surrounding mass, the outer margin, by expansion, would be rent into cracks and
fissures ready to drift by wind or water into warmer climates to be dissolved.
Besides this, there is a current running from the region.of ice which can be attri-
buted to the dissolvent properties of saltwater. This action prevents stagnation, and
sustains the ocean at its proper level. The water that exudes at the poles is, no
doubt, less than that absorbed by the surface. We believe that this deficiency is
made good by an electro-chemical in the atmosphere which transforms the gaseous
elements into vapour, and thus sustains the needful supply of moisture.
As regards polar action, there is in the north a vast amount of evidence m
support of the foregoing conclusions ; but in the south, with the exception of. the
region of ice, we know very little. There is, however, one circumstance which indi-
cates that the same action prevails as in the north, which is, that icebergs are met
with by ships in 45° south latitude. As the prevailing wind is from the west, they
could not attain that position without the aid of a current. As thut could, only
result from the liquidation of ice, we can conclude that the anarctic region of ice is
sustained by the exudation of water at the pole. If we can jiidge by the configur-
ation of the surface of the earth, we should say it was greater than at the north ;
but in this respect only, as there is reason to believe that, the north pole from i*s
magnetic influence is more powerful than the south. This may account for the
greater land surface in the northern hemisphere.. . _
If we assume that the earth in course of time has increased in rotundity, how
are we to account for a subsidence of the surface, which is more noticeable about the
tropics than elsewhere ? Volcanic upheavings are extraneous commotions—aggre-
gations of electricity. If this sinking process be continuous, and the land was not
sustained, it would in time be submerged. When we consider the age of this cycle
of the earth’s existence —for we believe that the heavenly bodies are perpetual-
such an event has not, or is likely, to take place. Although the highest mountain
may show indications of having been under water, it only proves that at some early
period it has been emergent. So that water could not have at any time enveloped


the entire earth. We may state that the increase in rotundity is due to the gradual
accumulation of organic matter from natural agencies, and the subsidence to the mo*
tion of matter, which is as necessarY to the existence of a planet in the performance
of its functions as the nervous action of the body is to the animal.
As all geological formations were once superficial deposits, each of which show
signs of the operation of heat, they are strong proofs in favour of our theory. Also
the deep beds of rivers and creeks, which have been formed by the force of rushing
water, and are now considerably below the surface. The geological formations
denote a very ancient action, which may have been repeated several times ; perhaps
each period had its revolution, which may have taken at least four millions of years
to complete. But the latter indications are comparatively of modern date, showing
that the subsidence is continuous and permanent. So that we cannot be far wrong
k in assuming that the motion of solid matter emerges in the frigid zone, and travels
through the temperate to subside in the tropics. Does not this account for the
various formations of the earth being turned over and over, and so mixed that
it is only by their structure, and not by their positions, that the period of construc-
tion can be known.
Any one would imagine that the etherial fluid and electricity were identical.
Although the latter is derivative from the action of the former, it is evidently
antagonistic ; if there is any similitude it is caused by the action of heat.
If heat produces electrical action it is derived from the motion of materials, so
that any etherial action induced by heat must be involuntary on the part of the fluid.
The expansion of the fluid does not generate heat; on the contrary, heat produces
expansions in matter as well as in the fluid ; therefore, we can assume that the fluid
which occupies space is destitute ef heat, ann cannot be produced by its own action
without the aid of other materials. When we consider that the action of the fluid
enforces action in all matter, we must recollect that different materials have not the
same power of resistance, not even when they are formed into one body. Thus there
would be an irregularity in the motion of the materials, and a friction would
eusue that would generate heat. Is not this electricity ? This result would be
greater in solid bodies than in gaseous elements. If this heat is retained by
the materials it accumulates until it explodes, either in the atmosphere or within
the earth. This'is represented by thunder-storms, earthquakes, and volcanic erup
tions. But if the heat expands, and gradually escapes, which is its regular action,
it does not accumulate, but permeates the surrounding materials, and also the
etherial fluid. This produces in proportion to its intensity an expansive power more
forcible than the fluid ; but as its force has to be sustained, it is liable to vicissi-
tudes, therefore its uniform motion is subject to minor irregularities, arising from
aggregations ; these produce those events or forces which are necessary to produce
diversity in development.
To complete these remarks, we must again direct attention to attraction ; for
if that of earth is enveloped in that of sun, there must be an opposing force to the
sun’s attractions to enable the earth to maintain its position in its orbit. To ascer-
tain what this is, there must be internal motion in the heavenly bodies, such as we
have attempted to describe. It will be then evident that the friction produced by the
motion would generate heat, and as this would be intensified in proportion to the
depth from the surface, it would permeate the outer medium and enable rotating
bodies to throw out hfeat. This is an electrical action. This exhalation penetrates
the atmosphere, gives elasticity to its volume and moderates its density; we can go
further and assume that the force is sufficient to counterbalance the attraction of the
* earth and sustain the moon in it's position. If we apply this internal action to the
sun, we can understand the cause that produces light, and also that the outer expan-
sion is the counterpoise that prevents the planets from coming into close proximity
with the sun. We know that light does not penetrate bodies, but rebounds, show-
ing that it is a material and not an etherial force; this foretells a difference in the
action of the sun and the earth but it is readily explained. The action of the earth
is simply electrical (heat), but that of the sun, from its immense power, is an electro-
material action, at least it becomes so in its passage through the sun’s atmosphere.
Therefore light is composed of gaseous elements of intense rarity, which are dissem-
inated, not only through the attraction of the sun, but into those of other suns ; if
it were not so no stars would be visible beyond the planets. This demonstrates
that solar, systems have the same organizations.


Aj tL iAAvildfau 'hid&u- iotfivu-
Anfa , At A Mi
-tzMud MaA, &mL OlJ t-tlc) AstiiUj t-tru*- aJfcUltn^'ijtthitMr
A »*- JLfcuJl W&L. c&Lfa AjraU tLituUy
aU^J.
An-HujitHi, k>*Jti. A ituLduL,
■%“■ fa ALttUAuJ.
UPh***£*u4 AL tjAfafa tL
tMWUytJj >\t fajfa ,"*i I w<i-. off JyAt- : AuJr.e^cL
u™£*. ,AL t <w ctuMuJfa,
A* #fa eA ? aL.
&>*■ fa j£t.
fat■xfau. fjp ti+f.'UAZt.t^ , A/ dtU?cU*j.<L. Jy_ j$L
tLitArPL. fit Ait. ■etALrUtdi AAlutl t rhtx- A-.
64 Iv-ittt UtTnJdj. A- it faevh,-
-IfaJ- utML. Mi 6t>Jt Iu£a_-
-'ktu. toUtoi.aAvu. r a£ltnAhir-oML
£ A At Jo^
ML 'lUtyuitu. 'tfaJUrfafcu, ‘
pdl- fy'La.ftit, f £- (a*&. &apvu &Jhi!ltih Ifc/L-
MtJJjfa aA
■h-oiu-s, At it (1 r'U :tiUit cuutu


}7UXylliJVuiy tciyhtJU l/Jvtl&L. 7?udti#u_
P-j*/Juu trpLux- UrJiiaJ!- U’t&’ij Ouotu^
tyU- (LC&- JJsiVfr iasL bj*-
and _y jJh
A*A**u j JsPo/U .* ~/~ * I / / - /- / <2/yL ~4t.
H fi»T- *W*J iWWWHtj &\Jk J^4,
yV* _ yyy X * a i J m
k y* / . €A/7L&£jl . J/I*JaAL> 1M *- | (fyft ff |
/-iM- Qiusix) h duJ^diuxdi
/Zttjj **j° Jy and
facisjL i/kP wd- Adfcl*}\ ~
/ Af/tMkJ J-tUS^
J) J ±
-4 4y)
hd"-!
h&b J ■
j *A
L'
siJ-&tL £
{/<X.cJz. </Aa/U- . JL.
(!. ( DvmL Jdx. 'vcjs*
&h 4 <d
/
£aJl *“ J


tr- f 'fo'rfh {&}*-
/ *U*■• A^j / k&~ + d*Pr/JU t d£ /As^tfeat
i jfl /f A - ', A
44
\JT ' ■ / X*
iltodtjrfriL,
jkru te /&4u^
JLF/-U., f Uid mx-tf* &t*t
tftjbtr (2u tu Ct, U U
*r ja i# jlj m
fa~ sl*6
l 3 , _.y) filial / . .jf J/L ~//
£t rl si
CluA-Sj ju&Lt** ti&htMuJirK. uid£rs*tfctM^
f I • -
v —
sUa>vi*4U. fhjUriJ ■J+Uii.fiL, till*- Htjivt'iy' vy Uswi+h~
l &4*cL duJeJbt+L iu/a^t ''J&vj /*~4tvvt+£
M\ t £LJ U t ts. A<J' itsw&l} • jJuno\ Aot^Qti&eAJtvi*/
' &uoL Oux/fiti tj4-f Jin... '%£
-"/ / y y 4 ' J.f ft Jj
ZfnUu* A~ %pjU+ytu. M ifilrPit* %.
j ; j Jtyjh**ph~ u{ritdo&+i**£j/bflfy
CyIUA
/f£ ih fe <UaAv) Ur
/h. Ix/tndrcl
f / < 0 , jl/ |la, Jf ■*+-- /.
-£-
/ .
<U<MitiuuuL t JU 4ui. j/uJ&mJecK U


j[pfoCAASL4Si~
}?l-Gslurvuty [/MULL 'hu>-ktru_
/Jit- irduAJL- Urfu-aJ!- {A-tHty CUorZ^ r
I fo'Ac Kffti
(Hi- GAUL JJstVH ueL ~sLt: iij^.
U Qt,^A*£fii+-e*4j
HtZjrC+7f*j £L\A- frgfoa/K. ]
jS* j y// J g A f a A A
t ~*2
/-iM. Q,IUA±J k duJ^MiIJL
feusjj t*ja /-a X- GAt— Jy and
*u&JL i/hddtfo- ftdtuiib&fa umm* •
/ sdUAuj {hwUi
j 3iL ■ dfl / od he y~J
4/4' v
- |
j *A
/XljCWh-T,
/id-&eL h
{/(X-cJc ■du/u* .
t£W Ojfrh (J
J 2Tr , i* * 4 s 4 »/L. jm/nh tU d&:<* •


ifife pj&ti&JzJL *: /ftL 'h*€ H fu*- ''£* & trh.
ft 4-U*s*h+**+
ftjL,
D Oj xl.
■UnjfJL
Jkthy.
' (yuJ t
Jl -tAsLbJst^+d-
pH- dwsvuJj- ft*- iiUjuMLht. £&*£ t&iuJpu+ft&QaJttv
{ft rl Z
V, /V /7 0 y 4. 0 J ? -/ ~*
<jj'}*a£ r&M 'Y*+ PtUf PUtiM***-*-
Skt/Z&ituu., Ccultd lu&LtK, &&£***s
f ; ~ y
Av 'ffi*—
"f~~ fj - y
WfaUtnitJL fyfh/IIPUj fiitAiriJJ+ujloL iUm~ {UJUwTiy ]lwu4*+u~
smLl\ , it/ UtJiAjltrtrUol) . C ST(UU Jft*u>l
fo-filftxrU- tJdjftHtilL AJUcL JhlujL Qu&fflt*-. Ufc ftllftL. '-'rt^~
J _
| £ej{ui*~ & C^rhJ&UrJu^ijr^ {**mL- itrM^
dU^UrJL
IwJ##*- iu pfivuJCtu-. o b£ t#4lmdt cL JuL, altJft** c
■7 i / -hj!, •/■ f!jf h/P f> */7;y
<-
/ */ Wt/~


'fstrd'fc /Ai. f Ld lAx~ (bud 'hrfr i/h-
MLfc
MLd id id J-i&t-u- -dJ^AA-t-, MLst Ms- Ju-AAWk f l f't-dUj) ML- I
Midi 4/ h^Jd*u£
f.vJlctsl C-frU-lcL- 'Hyt^OL'l^tn^vU r I
U&- tOA- / hjrU>-
‘fava ~ftdu , PiAal r?ud ML M {do. 'UiodttA- 44
1 jbtvu dJLs
M 'HuJd i- als+~ ML C-cuUl dM
t£jr l*J+- 'hUt (dt Shtd&u, itnMu~ ML
fit-ud yj ML fi iuMd L , du-e4^J^dud^
fr/hjL LaU*-
IV-iMld $e- UAvidrh- - dt i<nM H -tylndj h *
Mr fit Lir'l/i'uJi Aau
oltrldM tJdd stf Me- fetJLu. PuLLh- ddiAvj , dt*M
Com-thX Llum- a- -id-iMdu-LJe— „ tjL Ml- fountbjj j
dde- jdL&ieJ •
*
oMI S-IA-tL'tAAji -£A 'JIL< CILI&7A aJ , tiL -£-CtfiMl tt-j 9
wjowA-'L tkjte t and, Ovud 1/1/4 ML
fh~ LLjL ( LfiA&~ -6/fa-cJML) JLtluj dp gslrxjo-yi cdi~ /^/ fy-
'Mi'} Maaj- and C - d'lddkuJddu. ‘HeJ-tottAi. A/bJi/MLcJI O&d-


flh. j
'l tt -J-iL. , $L. fymtxA/v)
Jij k1- If MjlUu, , Al4 'LL**- 'Ph*£tuct d~ l-Pk. LtLt-L)t. ll/lul4tirt__
<U 7 it He a AJuaxl
■//aJ- t£id ■U'tnJd. pl- Cop.
\t 44 &*u £ ' ,£ JIlL'm* %* M
& W Ai
r - (H<p
\ 1 '! CiP-cL u
u / 2 ZhAMrlkA* ■ f”-j t -•• £ ;
it <b llUhjtvi. / hvuj-tlb- ttlVH&.t 1*4 U-dl &<J y4i /H<A,
&t(rH. Pt-J/b) lUS $Lcdr 'fib talitu. frfoJbtL ULH- hut 'iit £xUt~ i
■ Di/h*L&- Urilp/urtc t jbli'H-tsu.. dt- /£dt’, Lite- LPh. y f£dt7
j fyti/u* ilML'] dpt /£u*t- A, 9l-£W~
* ££*4 U J+. ttsij£L I'tmJdj
j-t M- Un$L jbjz* j Apt* £~ir£fL U/H-dUn. i£L
d&/?hJ- pljjrd HA* r j. Cl Path. , /JbcJr t £ut(LJpiaA^
i/U* Ml bttLyu/jrLL- id trust cl.
1 '/*£t* iddA/tL- fit 'foLd-bdi/i-td. /% t-C ~ Iz-lAArtcL-
yLollM £zcruu^tljbp/t£ UPicbt- M*J-j*iwplt ttPCAvyi^ftut^, djv<4
dCLPit&uAp Cuuoi CAJiobteA $* dd/lrtJ4#h- , brut tfb-
J 4idr buJltP*- , plzubt flJuj cl fi/hJc. but
dnAtut iitcdi £iL eJLifr-, l4 nri£l


slLn<tlvUr_ ' M L'l'iHH LL ’ '
od Hi & JslviJciZL. dJtSijftt. y4^»t..'
flity Urt- JtL fr-e. -i.
frid: ■ '.'r £*** VaO L&t ebf £ lyti fy**-
&■&**£.. &£dm LVUsf l M SvimQiUw
dWh, .Mj u LL j M frit. g%J ?f
to- / h*t ,4/ ML JUfo- iJ 0 and Itr tlih,
it 2jl «£J »* fc- 1 M
CM- l/hJKfW I**' 1 **' and frhnwvh t>j 9 cyi. and Y
Je/Kw>~ Mm^-Javh. yu*d~duJu*dl / zrifaJci^
JUjLud~fc Jun lm*. $ jhwtutoj, HntLjr U.l
2c/:. A) J+ Mjr JjwhJMttfi ij idluLtve-
f ■ i- a • ’ • d*4ok4
; i?hdtidusL and VhinldL-1 n>
//jAKJifx.% d* Mk- /^L ‘ffVHi9kimk w ***•
> l,i f ifl M •* I
iMvnttr &***■ fi*r dMyH n itp&iAfi fW*
j tvuOuuiU ik drt*j. «/&•/'-**«&*#
w£,
) **" ™ Ia A /* 'fJ * /
A**- Mot: 4u*JC> J
# * ' (kiL;r-‘'.u.
A-
/StsihjA '"' u^/y ' 4^
jj4r/ *w. d~u4uirt*~, &JdJctXt* iJ
! %JimmL ud&i+.*£ d/Ju**~ fatfik Au-r Jutyt 4
*L * U4 tr


.gJfcTsC' / i A' MvufciL
u>
~ v'A/k i 4k*£*H± C,u*£'■s***+ i <s*** ,
J) / / y*£j& (/ J- //* A/r J j *
! t * rii( . *?&*+) ZA^mUaMa+a
*y. / -r M» ' l/ if
Y&f*t&wfAAr* '•*' At- * >*■ * • '
- /4£t Ai /'lfrhJj Am^A^Lj
, A V/htAnAf **
/ IjfUoJr dtypHA J uIA~
yLpMA* d*~. J+- -t+tAy 'r&'bQ A* iAtdy *J A- J T+Wt%^
jj i AHA IJ4 J A- M^oL
IfriewsL
JifaJidifK) • 'its CJtdy tluuj) /dt, C&U irU, }hJt /uJtcf£
‘ j : *4/' » ,'* • / ‘
v C*i+JAtii -v J ljt**vi%x%ij\ fftrv-UM*- *<<j+Ji oh**. *>U.4+)
A*f 1 * *4> Ji&h ''**■* A*** & fk*t„
ttfUL I<A S/I+-C- <Ji*+cl Pi&irti-
j-O-L cs Ta
<P,i«fc4 it h ii* 41 bl&Jl+h^
iuT lA dtfirfuu, J
j S h / * * 9 a
'X* r - 4t~ X\*» O&lxi I#"£ kAOrl*t IJXL * * .t'iith- *.£». /A* { *i/»
J: -x. .. .. H f A W
n 4 s****
5 p V f A ItAIUAbMeL f /V. &tfu44— Jnty Qi\A~ f«v &{*Ai<S f
T


[ru/t~ pLr IhJlesuJr /'P Mtsisiv-t-<rtmt\ */
- Lt pttor-
PAtA-/-*-' /
U /P
itUr u>*- Jkyutl PuJhJ
* U>-c- aJho-Mi fyL jbctti*- Mt~J I
u6 /it~, t"
- • k ■-* t* M '+Ja ■ ; '* M '■' *
■
'«4i ~m i-ft*. // £)i&44*. fh >(yitii »*/ iui!j
‘:' ■ / ? '!
foMica/ti-
/y + ? ,■ y, * f 4 l'i-/ -, / ) J
< JjcU-JtJr yww Am»4% vn '/t%*JL>JltdL I
*d<iru f ildr- A* !ai>J ii+w. * ikpk'tAv. 'iP/Lla lv^
ft jf\AAm~ Mi i'flN CTo tyyiAAvjL- Ij4 *%% |
- / f / 7 y
4V/Vyy— */ fttp m » 4T^W"j
tm , f 7 in. 1
. J / i/TA^ 44\A&€r €MwA*+i*l*~ Ht&MA* /itt- # i f
A- (A} JufcZtip "'•*‘*4
*Jv.* \ £ / * i- fo P j >..* a rfL* t £A
£ t and Jil+sitJ.l e4** *++<*? «"
■ *•*- JsilL*+*L /P /'Pn*. a*i <t Hi h<r {bt*4M.£f ii* r£rt<+*~
i
lu£~ A-


Hpt; ;v . ■fT. • ' |* • - ' *
■' r 4 /r j
. f 4
rrii'c), itd'9h£y £
; £ srtt - ' UfUJi ff^L
kvK.
-m ****h Ch -
Jjh, AJ
£ j a ft- t*
cU fcU'ft m 4A- t**vHM*£ '
LuA-ft^
jstt/h) Otnjr JvynuM
ityLt] jiuvt, Urdlt z 7 JfJtA Mui yU-ttrut
ma* iff j/i ir if 7 f | ) t/jSiiM.
J jS \jh~~ mmm Am/m J
W *fU<**2j .<*) $•/ iu*4J*4 V ,
'Zsffrfarlx, d!ts
JL 'hia/fo*
JirtuHtL jtn.
inJlr f mA*+foi±~
■•■ x A S|#/fc » ff, A (tit a i/*CftAnr}uotf*i //
bd-byvfc' dj!L>fc -fltl i~~
bltJuu. "d***! df"'-'
?
- ■ ji' AispA m. iitidJA w
n j/uat y s


iwuvvdL / dir-
I , &€QA4*+ 0£f0l*»
A /■ “* f~J*/ /
mumAa. ivthUn*. U os+c oMl.s. fo**J*4
/■iLt V, -tot,
QiiMWL4t &U4+ tiuJL. titilM* l4m*t it* V***~ M*JiC filwtlld} tM*4*A.
■ Z' 6 *
JPilt fSiu&A At*- 4. dnU&Ubh*r&K. f tortUttK.
A/ ' /
c%i/i av4LM+u*U tn~du**L itfadtUu.
u^/
dtUL 44*- OMU49 #*< •&i 9 l •Sjiisj h+ #*ndt
fad'
faeL Mi/uk. iJow Mlt (UjUl 'tlJLrf iffrdfovtc kujtdttut,.
Qi/TudL fyfhJ iL fat ft i**U»'
JjhuL jd i4xk**~ \ sua%~ mJOa- A^t%i*P
iej£] §b*d*Jht*juUi+*^
4l 'Phfapu.
/k. /?A dud
dut
. dJ
$ tTi-0 / § . /-A/ w.
(&€.- ~j'td-i lt 4** " tUtKM.
&** lid iudu^t:


4/ii pJuJ^u^Ji&£*. W 2 ! 'iJiJk{y
Wp* m****-***>- M**r *£**&£* fa i£) A*U y J*
.i. M ■ 'f' JU ■ fjQ jT §
fy'JrW f!%m £*> * £ i g£ M WJL J& J% OJ* Jk • £ • *ff ■
7T&4 ./;.... 2^/-
jfy 14aJ£ fk,
0 X -'■ Ji*£. *+ &X t£~ r&4A-. j &&0 sl44Xy . t Ai^H-
‘hurfrn.
4U x '-y fbs%tr\
HpC Ukt4*/T&t £4aMl. i 4 fit£ot\^tH^sUc^**^ .(<w
fap+Jtlyt o*t£* o*a. feuA+dLcL Sf 'Uw3tM*m* a£&as£uh.J&
ti*ni U§ CruiM- *£~oun%, &U£toft &£**£~idJk*fduL
fi/k- t%Jn£~ , £%£ i/ fiuhfdy £a*X oi/(t€- am^^Wa»
MA - ££*&} &/&>*£**- .
/pc £&m- suUri£ id >£V- pf ftfii' £}p&4 £ml£*
i >•
•-V: ..' ;* ; V /;•■* * • /4 a-• .*■ /
/ i/ryuwv^
lit / jjbtaL
(*«-
• J , +{— i £
M-uaM. bj
.4y..« rih£rjttL~ foutAdi*'* Jurzyt^tyi'iZtaJ..
|44iw # dfts~ €&\/i'4£ * id/*H4** JU
£ka~ J /&, $J~


Vrfi'Utu- ; - ‘
9
a- 'fried!
[i/Vuoi Hi- / hunrw J,
• fj '■ MM* i* &£*!* j 3% |
tdrl^^iJL.
e<JL -UJdhc A- AL-
d*. tfrdi
j A •. ■■ . .JL ■)} JL i .» *f- jbA' . / / A
. &/*■ L-i WiAi rjWfH* • J
■ -I 1 ’f'frfrf* kdt/c-J {/l y td%** *&JL 14Vw¥*-'(9iim~
, / ,» //- »»i-A f fiprtty l
g| imA»Jt*u~ llMtf<«j im
&/■
'Jitiff itjvt 7*f «*i< *•'** W j
>4 (jASMudi .
itu*dM«uluLU, umJUu ** i • :
**uj (**&** Ui &uldu*- jL
tA n/i^/*«i /gftf* pci
/
.r
***j~i-.
4 ■
.7 • _ *


.* j /P /jM / 'r' * yUyjr LiTfP / l
l Aum-
Lc fa.
r/ sfrufrK jo-VMflndl
' /
jj/fris XlJtf di^
Ual ,
JbldvL.
bud,
uXI
t ttfhhtojuLj* Dl
As- ';■ V -A* l. ft i ■ '
* ~
J&h^rtVU-
JU


A <L J' m/« - -A/? ../• f/. t\ ' «*f f A
; i iWfVtm** *€t*9~ <*f/c€Ht4 * ifaifttm*. trwr *****- f 1
(L
j t m J A?* fy***
VtWtniA-s . * ' /f i Jr
y /10 n j m /. AmAAI. *yJ£> 44
# JA. j -J ■/• sJJm Aii/A. /
/»4jAj- fftA t&JjLLL.. I** £**' dfhJlMt*-
/ jr w i Pa ’ aP
+r**u-- M****-,"+ j . / -
dtJU+JL *i amdtY&A
2uJt£<* i*i*fi*{ &■
Csbb, %* Ault HLf eluA^-tJ^
*>A
fcu.
/&. fat+M- / »uU*'** / q
Add&* AAAA '•*£'»*
tA
A * d4 * %^> j, , ;V- a * t!) / . a J
j2/it/ / fa#v
U+.U**-, ) ■ m j \
/ $/* jf t~ ..Jl* tli jSutkMsL iM i A
tfW~ 1
i jvr / /j
• A:£2j* fajL e+iJiu***!- &&&*,, aiMt»« t
uA tL lUumltu^fcJUtU
r / '/ " ■ /-? / - ; * / / j


. /A V i
uUZt,*‘
{ f j jf ViV A+M A- * ****/ &a*-*niy
-JL
-t-utX.
/ / f 9 :m— m , . Lji£ £ ~£
'«■■ % A*M’*'**~- I&v&vi+h % frhh^
* k' <J • •/
sjjfaijf9*' ton+tjLp*
• ? •; • . / '4 ,* . fc-
U^Uujh-
* * * m Mm € w
* / £ j,. \.J* /£/j. .• , / 4... /vliL. 7
7k~
eJjtr, /"
,* , *4. 4m- djjkibitt*aZ 1 ‘ > Ur&m* Ipt £A#w^m//
(lAf %jJvUjL
J) J J>±,
%!4arwi
ittArVUJL. htt
I fcfyr'"


A Derelictions
I*t- Ur P / /-/
l. ' i t 4
? f 1 l
rfhudt fa /Ufa /
4 /xMs
favufatfa fa - 4
'juuidt dtAAido/faidA*/t
— — . £. IA/HA/ir-eAufa. rrtvVu
/Id /Au- n
tAs'hvvu r ddhu^
dill) fafrlAt, fatcM&L.
/ /hvU-eri-
£l- O/pjd / dtrni*-
faf-j/j fa msuM? U’v-uJU- l/h%d
-t'U-
/ Ux-
d/l- lis\ 'fa- fa 'dur/irtt. M't tl fau-dttfa-
ALu f ALdfcu l/k- farldM
4i &H tbu. fauna- Bdid/ f faufai fa rA dlMto& ifa
id xlurtfafa Aokj iLvb- ,fa u and fa*- dtu^L
d/tpput- a/L 'fauru* ru ' Hj/\ 1/h,


** W- £, . |
iMfy. 4- #&<{£***- yur
\± rt»L *** b *-
. & jrt+ttu*- &*&**■ , />«~- 9MA&-&
t $L- & 'h*
L. 1 - “* w - / k jJ * / *->
L u *. *>■
*W- J*U*p cul tfLt and ■ urUaaJ*hj>j
!tW foiteH+a-k-s M/Pidu $U*. c^tutidcwi^
l/j +:««. Jr, y fot- tSJU CUhtA+uL
J^uJr/Jb l f
drfrtui* rfuUrtyjLfei
pjptrfcbfa f i/Kllu**4 facie*.) XmC- &<$JJ!uLi Cl J'/ju/l. tfa uduJL
f\ijMtfi > L Jett. u 'kafcu., tf-touatevied
tMvfeeJ* - .J&ueluAfj
s£s4 / UfacL sUo&Uiiy, £L<pUtxtj \


