

MATERIALISM
VINDICATED.
BY VENI.
IN THREE PARTS.
Part I.—ON BELIEF.
Part II.—ON HUMAN NATURE.
Part III.-THE SUPREME POWER.
H. SOLOMON, Caxton Print., 114½ Pitt Street, Sydney.




MATERIALISM VINDICATED.
ON BELIEF.
BY VENI.
All religions are founded on faith, and the followers of each belief accept
their own particular doctrine as truth. They are instilled into the mind
by training and early associations, and become so firmly fixed that the
reasoning faculties are not strong enough to entirely erase these indelible
impressions. Thus it is, how superstitions are handed down to posterity.
Man seldom strays from the religion of his childhood, altho’ he may make
but an indifferent member. Some religions do not seek proselytes to their
faith ; in others, it is an essential portion of their creed to propagate and
disseminate their doctrines to obtain converts. This has been the cause of
much trouble, as they have not been particular in the means employed to
gain that object. In propagating these beliefs by persuasion, the barrier
to success is in what we have stated, with this additional difficulty, that
they can only advance one belief in exchange for another, and beliefs are
not facts; what one believes to be true, another considers it false ; for
instance, ask a Jew his opinion of the Christian faith, he will tell you that
his forefathers have resided within its influence for upwards of 2000 years,
and it has not prevailed over their own. Seek an intelligent Hindoo, one
who has had the benefit of a thorough European education in the govern-
ment colleges of his native land, he will inform you that he prefers his own
faith, and continues his worship of, what in missionary phraseology is
termed, wood and stone. To him it is what the Bible is to the Christian,
what the one does in words, the other does in symbols, both illustrate the
attributes of the Diety that is worshipped, and each teaches their followers
to do that which is supposed to be their duty.
In all religions there are glimpses of truth, but they are obscured
by traditional observances and other religious ceremonies, yet they all
seek to attain the same end, that is, to better mankind by the inducement
of future reward after death. The wisdom of this proceeding is doubtful;
for how can a man be really good when influenced by that bribe, it can
only be an expedient to produce obedience ; in this respect it has been
eminently successful, for we find that all religions, of which we have
any knowledge, have upheld their influence, and maintained their authority
through hope and fear. This to be effective, requires something more than
our present existence, hence the necessity of a future state, and a con-
tinuance of our individuality to receive these rewards and punishments.
From this we can infer that in early ages, all religion sprung from those
laws that were enacted for the better government of an unruly, ignorant,
and superstitious people, and that time has confirmed many of the ex


pedients then in practice, into popular beliefs. To support this idea, we
have only to refer to the bible, there we find that Moses was equivalent to
both priest and ruler, and as he made his own laws he adapted them to
suit both conditions. To make them more effective he gave them a super-
natural authority, he thus made disobedience a sin. It would appear that
his coadjutors were not altogether of that opinion, and had a greater share
in his removal than they cared to be known, however they continued his
policy, ahd his disappearance added strength to his doctrines With the
exception of Confucius, all the old writers of antiquity tried to enforce their
precepts through fear, he alone appealed to the mind, and therefore dis-
carded all idea of punishment after death; his is a philosophy, not a
religion.
At the present, there are four distinct religions, of more or less
antiquity, and their followers include the greater proportion of the world’s
population. They are the Christian, including the Jews, the Mohammedan,
the Hindoo, and the Buddhists. Their writings are known as the Bible,
the Koran, the Yeda, and the Soutra. There can be no doubt that the
Yeda of the Hindoo is the most ancient; the Koran is a conception from
the Bible; and the Soutra is reformed ideas arising out of the Yeda.
With the exception of Soutra, the others assume a Divine origin,
and believe in a future state, and the immortality of the soul; the Buddhist
also believes in a spiritual world, in combination with the material, which,
when separated, individuality ceases, and the spirit is absorbed. We can
understand the similarity between Christianity and Mohammedism, and
also between the Hindoo and the Buddhist, the latter believes in absorbtion,
and do not enjoin as a duty the task of propagating their doctrines, as
the two former do, and which has produced so much strife and bloodshed,
all for the sake of a belief and its predominance. The Yeda contains a
number of moral truths, many of which are obscured by religious cere-
monies ; and the Soutra teaches a higher philosophy than the Bible. The
latter teaches faith, which engenders zeal; the other, moderation, which
induces contentment.
As aT religion must have morality for its foundation, on which to
build their superstructure, or else they could have no prolonged existence,
therefore, the higher the morality, the more powerful the belief. This is
the power of Christianity, the strong moral tone, combined with the freedom
of our social laws, have raised it to the position it now occupies. Faiths
of every kind depend more on the imagination than on the reasoning
faculties, so that great religious zeal, and doubtful morality are often
combined in the one person. If we examine these beliefs, and separate the
moral and social teachings from those that are purely religious, we shall
find that the substance is gone, and only a shadow remains ; the one is a
necessity, the other a fiction. Morality teaches justice and humanity, but
religious beliefs are often opposed to both. The great moral truths in-
culcated by the founder of Christianity, are made secondary to doctrinal
ceremonies, and the result is, that we have piety without goodness ; charity
without kindness ; and zeal without prudence; again, religious, faiths, act
as intolerent restrictions on the mental faculties of the human race, unless


restrained by moral influence, and are a barrier to social progress, they
do not advance, but follow the age; they are not composed of practical
facts, morality alone is convincing, therefore all faiths are delusions, myths
made sacred by antiquity.
If we examine the various religions, we find that most believe in an
all-powerful being, a perfect embodiment of man; others in a spiritual
essence that prevails everywhere. Each faith stamp their dieties with their
own peculiar attributes, which are prominent characteristics of their faith.
For instance, the Mohammedans apathy and love of caste ; the Buddhists
conceited superiority; the devotion of the Hindoo ; and the selfishness of
the Christian. This feature in Christians has become a part of their
nature, they carry it with them on all occasions, self prevades all their
thoughts, and regulates their actions. Blind as a mole to this infirmity, it
is a prominent peculiarity to others, even uncivilized savages, with whom
they come in contact, soon detect it. It is this deformity in the Christian
that prevents them from amalgamating with nations of other religions.
Buddhists, Mohammedans, and Hindoos, can live harmoniously together,
but the Christian never. Whenever there has been any attachment at all,
the devotion is not on the side of the Christian. If we inquire into this
selfishness further, we shall find, that the more reformed the faith, the more
glaring it becomes ; it is more apparent in the Protestants than in Catholics.
The adherents of the Church of England see it in the earnestness of the
dissenters, and the Roman Catholic in the proud sufficiency of Episcopalians.
Selfishness is drilled into the Christian in his earliest youth, for the
first thing that he is taught is self-preservation. This we should say was
unneccessary, for nature has implanted that into every animal, therefore
self is the animal portion of our nature and ought to be checked instead of
fostered, as it is opposed to humanity and consequently to morality,
therefore it destroys the good that is inherent in human nature. If we
teach a child the moral lessons of Christ, it immediately comprehends their
import and accepts them as good because they are not selfish, on the
contrary, all religious doctrines have to be forcibly impressed on the
imagination for the generous spirit of the child rebels against such
dogmas, as save thyself at any price. Instead of so much instruction on
our dead selves we were taught to be good for the benefit of the living,
there would be more humanity.
The moral and doctrinal teachings of Christianity are often so at
variance that we cannot attribute them to the same author, they do not
harmonise ; the one, is full of Justice and Humanity ; the other, that you
shall sacrifice both for your future benefit, no duties, no ties, no matter
how obligatory are to stand in the way of your future welfare after death.
What sentiments to emanate from one who taught and practised kindness
to the living and told his disciples that an unbelieving Samaritan could be
superior to a godly priest or levite, that goodness was in their moral culture
and not in religious observances. Christ was a great reformer, a believer in
the doctrine of Moses, the severity of whose laws he tried to humanise for
doing so, he gave offence to the othodox Jews, this was the cause of his
fall ; to believe in his divinity implies a supernatural existance, by so


doing, we form a very limited idea of the supreme power that governs not
only man and his actions, but the entire universe by unalterable and all
sufficient laws, therefore supernatural agency is not requisite.
Before setting aside divine inspiration, we will endeavour to make
one or two rational remarks upon the subject; Moses in describing the
creation and the subsequent events, could not have written from records,
his only resource would be tradition ; these, he evidently embodied together,
so as to suit the condition of the people, over whom he ruled, obedience to
the laws he had framed, was to Moses the great necessity ; hence the sin
of disobedience in Adam and Eve. When we consider the nature of his
laws and the people for whom they were made, ignorant, superstitious,
unused to order, turbulent, disobedient, and not long redeemed from slavery;
we can understand the motive of their stern and unrelenting character
and their divine origin.
If Moses wrote from inspiration, there would be facts revealed
throughout his narrative, that would coincide with those that are within
our reach at the present. If his statement differ materially from those
facts that are within our knowledge, we can dismiss inspiration and look
upon the whole as tradition. Compare his account of the creation with
that which science has revealed, they do not coincide, again that which
relates to man being created immortal; this idea is inconsistent with all
known laws of nature, we know that this earth contained the elements of
life and death, anterior to the period assigned to Adam’s creation, therefore
immortality could not exist in the midst of mortality, immortality could
not breathe, for in that there is life and death; immortality requires no
sustenance, so there is no need for a creation, neither could it sin ; so what
is the use of a Tempter. The inspiration of Moses was sadly behind our
knowledge, but his policy in making disobedience a sin deserves our
commendation, for it has answered well for nearly four thousand years.
If sin is doing that which is forbidden, what constitutes the power
to forbid and determines the nature of right and wrong. The one we
must suppose springs from goodness, the other mischief ; therefore goodness
is a benefit and the other an injury. If so, our common humanity asserts
its power, and decides, by silently protesting against that which is inhuman
and proclaims, that sin is an offence against nature and not the infringement
of social regulations. Human laws to be just, must coincide with those of
nature, if they do not, they are only expedients to enforce compulsory
obedience, so that it often happens that there is more merit in the evasion
than in their observance. As nature has ordained that there can be no
actual benefit without it is accompanied by a corresponding amount of
injury; therefore every action contains the elements of both. This is as
applicable to human laws as to human beings. In communities, we find
that what is a benefit to an individual, may be injurious to the body and
that which is judicious to the whole is an individual restraint on the
members, therefore society being the body possesses the power to forbid,
but that does not constitute disobedience to be a sin, it is a crime against
social laws; again, to commit any action unconscious of wrong, cannot be
a sin, even when the after results are serious and causes much sorrow and


suffering, but when it is accompanied with the intention to injure, then it
is an offence against humanity and is a sin, except in such cases that arise
from self-preservation. Social laws are necessary for the protection of the
weak against the strong ; we do not confine ourselves to mean muscular
strength alone, but those in power and position, for there we shall find the
greatest sinners and some that are far more inhuman than the defiant and
stalwart ruffian. Sins against humanity are not always crimes, according
to our present laws, for our civilization makes a great distinction between
wealth and poverty to be just in its discriminations, but it manufactures
its own crimes, and when it is expedient to call them sins it confounds the
two together for the purpose of exacting greater obedience. If it is a sin
to disobey these laws, then society is responsible for the sin, that is when
the people choose their own rulers; it is not a sin against nature, so
disobedience can only be a crime. There can be no original sin, the
infringement of natural laws, brings its our retribution so that society need
not interfere in those matters except when it is a injury to other members,
then it is a crime as well as a sin, but sometimes the promptings of nature
are grave crimes, and society punishes these acts on the old established
usages of past ages : for instance, it is an unpardonable crime to steal, but
when there is a necessity, man would sin against himself, or those depend-
ing on him, by not fulfilling the demands of nature, thus we see that all
human laws must be subject to circumstances, Nature is not a respector of
private property, and is thus opposed in some instances to the commandment.
“Thou shalt not steal.” Altho’ Moses broke these commands himself,
that is the sixth and eighth, he made them imperative on the people. To
murder the cannanites and steal their country was not a sin in his opinion,
but in other ways he was a great respector of private property, and con-
sidered that as sacred as a man’s wife or his life; yet strange to. say, he
destroyed the heterodox followers of the Golden Calf and attributed it to the
vengeance of the diety. We thus see how he governs the people through
their fears, and not through their reason; however, he could not have
completely annihiliated that faith, for its worshippers are awfully numerous
at the present day. So much for divine inspiration.
ON HUMAN NATURE.
The impossible cannot be probable, but credulity which springs
from ignorance assumes that nothing is impossible with the Deity or
Creator. This is gross superstition, and arises from the idea that divine
laws are like human laws, subject to change. If we have any divine laws,
they must be those of nature which never vary, although full of diversity.
We see the days follow each other in regular succession, each day a con-
tinuous round of change, but perfect in its completeness —it is the same with
the seasons and also with years. This is apparent, and from that we
can conceive that the same laws of nature that has produced the past
will also control the future, and that worlds, like years, have their altern


ate seasons of production and vitality. Thus there is fixity of purpose
in the midst of diversity and change, and the supreme power, the source
of these unalterable laws, must govern the human mind, so that every
action of the body is as certain as the fruit of a tree, and every thought
of the brain as well defined in its origin as the leaf of a plant.
If the human mind was exempt from these natural laws, which is
palpable in things besides, it must be an unknown law, and distinct from
those that govern creation. Such a law, to be effectual, must be superior
to nature’s to enable man to control circumstance so that he can act in
accordance with his judgement, then he would be responsible for his
actions; but if he is biased by circumstances he cannot be a free agent,
for it is impossible to combine the two together; and he must either be a free
agent, or a slave to circumstances. If we desire to know what we really
are, we must study nature and endeavour to solve its hidden mysteries.
Books teach us the thoughts of those who have preceded us in the search •
as such they may assist in the investigation. They are not always reliable,
for their ideas are often derived from writers of bygone times, instead of
from nature itself. Old established beliefs are taken for facts, and through
these miscalled truths all things are contemplated. The fountain of all
knowledge is nature. It was from that source that ancient philosophers
obtained their wisdom. Our perceptions may fail, but its teachings are
always the same. There is no law for this and another law for that,
for all nature is but the result of one supreme power. There can be
but little doubt that this power is expansion, and as expansion is force,
and as like begets like, one force produces others, here then we have
motion—the controller and propeller of the universe. It assigns to the
heavenly bodies their position and functions. It measures the length of
their days, their years, their creation, and their cycles of material existence.
It forces nature into activity and regulates its productions, and it gives to
life its vitality, and to death the process of decay. Elliptical motion pro-
duces the seasons, and the seasons their events, and events are circumstances.
Every circumstance has its results, and every result helps to fulfil
the purpose of life, the work of production and re-production—Man is not
exempted, for his birth depends on circumstances and his existence
afterwards. With all his pride he is but the epitome of animal life; in
courage he is inferior to the lion, in strength to the elephant, the ferocity
of the wolf appals him, and the faithfulness of the dog shames him ; he is
outdone by the ant in perseverance, by the bee in skill, by the bird in
construction, and there is not an animal on the face of the earth that does
not excel in some peculiar quality. Altho inferior to each in their respective
attributes he is a combination of all; thus, he styles himself lord of
creation and assumes that every thing is ordained for his especial benefit.
Contrast, is one of the chief features in nature’s productions, and it
constitutes the beauty or excellence of anything, or the reverse. It never
occurs by accident but the inevitable effect of a cause. The efforts of
nature are direct, it is circumstance that determines the result hence the
diversity of form ; in time these diversities produce fixed traits, and these
varieties develop by the same process other diversities, until the distinction


becomes great, then they are termed different species, but all spring from a
common origin. It is circumstances and not nature that produces the
evolutions of life; altho circumstance does not generate life, it can destroy,
thus all life is subject to circumstances, nature is thus; supported or retarded.
To take advantage of circumstance and to mitigate its distructive
power. Nature has implanted into all animals a machine called the brain,
which can be used for their protection, but circumstance again interfere
with nature and creates as great a diversity as in form. As circumstances
are always changing and cannot be repeated, however similar they may
appear, so no two living bodies can be exactly alike.
Vegetable life is stationary, therefore it depends entirely on
circumstance, but all life possessing locomotion needs a greater protection,
thus the necessity that all circumstances affecting the animal should leave
an impression on the brain to remember how to avoid danger. We believe
that animals endowed with memory are not absolute creatures of circum-
stances. Altho circumstance enforce action it is the capacity to understand
consequences, thus memory enables the brain to repel or attract the action
of circumstances for the benefit of the body, this is Intelligence. In Nature
there is a limit to diversity, Cherries will not grow on a gum tree, and it is
as unlikely for an impulsive person, to be gifted with prudence. Impulse
is action enforced by circumstances. Prudence the effect produced by the
fear of consequencs. These extremes are of seldom occurence in man,
altho’ he is a strange mixture of the two, as none are so prudent as to have
no impulse ; however, impulse is the most powerful because it is more
natural We see this in animals and also in young people, therefore
prudence is an acquisition engrafted on the mind by experience, this
enables as to understand what is for our benefit or injury. As the force of
circumstances sometimes overwhelms all obstacles in nature, so will it
overpower the brain, therefore to control our actions within the bounds of
prudence is all that is necessary, for nature requires no extraneous aids to
enforce respect, as all infringements of its laws are rectified sooner or later
whether they arise from the force of circumstances or the fear of consequences.
Nature adapts itself to all circumstances whether they are beneficial or
injurious, therefore there is nothing utterly bad or extremely good. With
circumstances, as with life like produces like, so that in diversity there is
similarity, an admixture of contrasts produces distinctive features. This is
palpable in all life, but in events they are not so apparent, but we know
that they have opposite results, the beneficial and the injurious, connected
together by links of graduated effects as it is with events, so it is with our
actions; evil can only disseminate evil, that is, what is injurious, altho’
there are objects in nature to which evil is as neccessary, as good is to
others. An action once committed cannot be recalled, it has gone to swell
that stream of events, that is to produce the future ; thus, we see the
necessity of self-control, for whatever advantage is gained by an evil action
the benefit can only be tempory, its after results must be injurious ; we
often see good and evil applied to men’s actions according to the light
in which they are viewed. These are ofter synonymous and have only a
social meaning, for a man isolated by himself cannot do either good or evil,


but as a member of a community he becomes responsible for his actions as
to their effect on others, therefore society requires rules to regulate each
members actions, and the pains and penalties attached, are some of the
consequences that control men, the Ten Commandments are principally of
this class, the infringement of these are not sins but crimes against society.
All restraining laws to be just should be founded on human nature, as it is
not as some suppose it ought to be. It is all very well to say, thou shalt
not do this or that, but if circumstances compel us, where is our responsibility
beyond that which society demands.—lf circumstance force our action it
must do so through the brain or rather through the senses to the brain,
then if these channels of communication were closed the brain could not
perform its functions, for life by itself could not supply it with a single
thought any more than the loom could produce the fabric without the
material; life is the motive power, circumstances the material by which
brain controls the body. The brains of animals are of a more simple
construction than those of man ; they consist of fewer faculties and their
bodies are so constructed so as to develop their capabilities, thus their
reasoning powers are limited ; that they do think is certain for without
thought, they could have no memory. Every thought must have a sound,
and every sound a thought; each cry that is uttered by an animal is
understood by its kind, but not by other species, showing that different
species have not the same faculties ; however few the thoughts of animals
may be they are certainly more intense and acute than in man, this is to
the human mind incomprehensible, therefore we call it instinct. This extra-
ordinary power is produced by the entire strength of the brain being concen-
trated on the few faculties, assisted by the superior acuteness of the senses.
The human brain is more complex and consists of a combination of
the faculties of all animals, each less intense, but this is more than made
good by their multiplicity which vastly adds to the powers to generate
thoughts, as every thought must express itself in sound, language is
produced ; thus we see how our first progenitors would establish a language
and transmit it to their offspring; each pair of progenitors doing the same,
for it is difficult to believe that all the different races of the world have the
some origin. In man, the senses are simply channels of communications,
but in animals they assume the functions of faculties according to the
degree of development of the brain • in the lower order of animal life where
the brain cease altogether, the senses perforin all the functions necessary to
their existence, as the different species assimilate to those of the vegetable
kingdom, the senses also gradually disappear with the exception of
“ feeling.” This sense pervades through all vegetable life, we know how
sensitive all plants are to heat and cold, light and shade, and many even to
the touch, showing how completely all life is controlled by the power of
circumstances, although the brains of men are constructed alike, circumstance
only develops those faculties that are most requisite, the others remain
dormant, and as each life is produced under different circumstances the
same faculties are not brought forth, hence our different dispositions
which generate different thoughts, but all are subject to the same inevitabe
law, the force of circumstances.


THE SUPREME POWER.
One force produces another, that is what we term motion, therefore
the omnipotent power must be the energy to produce apparent motion,
that is the movement of material bodies. As there can be no motion without
a material, energy, must be a substance also, as it cannot, exist in a
vacuum. As there is no inherent force in matter, it must exist in space, and
as we know that is not a vacuum, therefore the material that it contains is
the Supreme Power we seek ; if so, then there is no inspiration and no
supernatural agency, no mind to regulate and no will to be obeyed, but
the one power to create immutable and all sufficient forces to generate life
and to control the universe. We are conscious that there is something
that surrounds us in addition to the air we breath ; its. influence we are
cognizant of, yet it is undefinable and invisible, we feel its existance and
know it is all potent; it is like unto a spiritual, essence, it has affinity, yet
it both repels and attracts. Some assert that it is the spirit of departed life,
others that it is animal magnetism; whatever name we give, it penetrates
and influences all life and matter. All science tends to prove that there is
a power the source of all things, tradition asserts that it emanates from a,n
all-powerful being whose individuality resembles man, or rather that he is
made after this image and that his presence is universal. To believe in this
hypothesis this Being must have a locality or realm where he individually
presides and the Presence is a spirit which is the prevailing power. In
that case it can only have a controlling power over the creation, therefore,
unless we believe in a miraculous construction there must be a primary
power to produce the circumstance controlled. If creation is the results, of
natural forces, then they must have a similar origin. To believe in a divine
will is to raise a phantom and discard the substance, to do that wo destroy
immutability, and imply that only matter and mind exist in the universe,
and that all motion is the result of that will ; in that case all natural forces
are needless, besides, this traditional conception is not supported by science,
as that only proves the existance of natural forces, this leads us to assume
that the supreme power is the energy of a material. The question arises,
what is this all powerful material whose force is omnipresent and immutable*
It is not matter for that is inert, it must be invisible. We know that , the
rushing of the atmosphere is the motion of materials, we call it wind, it is
invisible but we can feel its existence, it teaches us that there can be no
motion without the movement of a material. Science tells us that light is
only motion derived from the sun, and as it is conveyed from the sun to
the earth there must be an invisible material occupying space to produce
the transit, we know that it is not in a ray of light. By this we know that
space is not a vacuum, that it is occupied with a material termed in science,
the ether of space, and that it is in constant vibration. This, then is the
energy that gives motion to light, so that we can assert that there is no
will in light, or even a spirit, and that it is only derivative from natural
forces. What we have said of light is equally as applicable to heat. Fire is
the consuming of natural formations : and water, is the combination of
electrical motion and the oxygen of the atmosphere, and its dissolution, is


hydrogen and oxygen. If light, fire and water, the essentials to life be
only motion, can life be anything else. They are all vital processes in the
work of creation and derivable from the same source, therefore life
is motion.
The ether of space must have all the attributes which we attribute
to spirit, although we know it is a material ; science can tell us what it is
like ; it is different from all other materials, for they are composed of
atoms ; this is not, but an elastic substance, as such it cannot be divided,
even by bodies passing through, therefore fit must permeate all other
materials; as this elasticity is illimitable, its powers of expansion must be
the same, thus expansion is the origin of all force; as space is unlimited,
this ethereal substance must be as infinite, if it was not so its power would
be expended by continued expansion, from this it is evident that all space
is filled withexpansive energy; and we can infer that matter is also co-existent;
therefore we can assume that there is no limit to the heavenly bodies.
Here, then we can form a conception of the method and design of the
universe, that all space is occupied by immense systems, each revolving in
a circular movement around a fixed centre, this would denote eternity, as
these systems would be composed of lesser systems, or rather of a series of
systems within systems, each of these would in their revolutions revolve
around a moving centre, therefore their orbits would be elliptical , and the
result would be continual change; this is time"; thus time is enveloped in
eternity. In explaining the various phenomona of nature, we have only
made use of those ideas, that are within the reach of our memory; these we
have endeavoured to relate as far as our abilities will permit, to show that
natures laws are not so mysterious as they at first appear to be; in fact,
there is none so hidden as to be beyond our comprehension, although they
may be difficult to explain owing to deficiency in language. The different
sciences are rendered obscure to a novice from the technical terms employed,
and we also know that those who are proficients are often led astray by
false deductions from correct experiments. The sciences we can liken to
a number of persons, groping their way by different paths, to attain a common
centre. If that central knowledge was known, everything else would be
made clear. Assuming then that the ether of space is the “ godhead ” and
“ expansion ” the supreme power we have a central point to start from, and
its correctness can only be demonstrated by the knowledge which is already
in our possession. We already know that there are three distinct motions,
oscillation, rotation and propulsion, these we will endeavour to show are the
results of expansion. The ether of space is not apparent in our atmosphere,
but we know that it must penetrate the elements before it can influence
the bodies, we also know that the atmosphere is composed of atoms ; to be
so, each atom must be distinct and occupy an allotted space and have freedom
of action. As this minute space would be filled with vibrating ether, it
envelopes the atom and keeps that also in constant vibration, any extra
disturbance would cause the atom to oscillate, hence the expansion and
contraction of ether which would continue until an equilibrium was restored;
therefore oscillation is not the repulsion and attraction of the atoms but
the magnetic energy of space. As atoms receive their energy so must worlds


do likewise, for they are only a collection of atoms of dense matters.
Here then, we have that subtle power which experience has shown, must
exist, and which has puzzled the world and its wisdom m all ages. It is
generally supposed that “ mind” and “ matter ’ are the elements of nature,
then the mind must be another name for the energy of space; if it were not
so there would be required another element, for life can exist without
mind. Metaphysicians say it is the soul or spirit, if that were so, it would
permeate all nature both animate and inanimate, as these elements, the soul,
mind and body are generally supposed to have been clearly demonstrated.
How comes it that the first is a complete mystery, the second an assumption
on the first, and the only one that is self-evident, is the body 1 Then again
about life ; is that distinct from the others ? Matter will not produce life,
and it has an existence without mind and without soul; life is only motion,
the energy that produce life is identical, with what mesmerists term the
magnetic fluid. They assert that it emanates from mind ; then if mind
influence mind, that which we term intelligence, is as much a motion of the
brain as light and heat are of the sun. ... . .
We have shown that the vibration of space produces oscillation m
atoms, let us see if it is not the energy of life. Whenever we see oscillation,
we can assume that it is produced by the action of the ether of space on
the surface of the earth ; for instance, we have oscillation m the tidal wave
of the ocean, is that due to this magnetic energy; again every nerve in our
bodies oscillates, and the pendulous movement of our hearts sends the blood
coursing through our veins and forces it back into the same reservoir. _ I
is the same with a tree, the sap is driven to the topmost branches and into
every leaf, and in due season it is compelled to return Again, set a gram
of wheat in the earth, it receives humid heat and swells, room is made tor
the germ to oscillate and life begins; what is this germ? the magnetic
energy of space. As this vibrating energy produces oscillation, we can
assume that it also is the cause of rotation, that is to revolve Oscillation
can only evoleve, therefore rotation is neccessary to confine evolution
within certain defined limits. A body violently propelled could not oscillate,
but the same energy that would produce oscillation would cause such a
body to rotate. If we refer to the grain of wheat we find the magnetic
germ is subject to restraint until circumstances give liberty of action,
therefore we can assert that rotation is a force or circumstance that draws
the magnetic energy of a body on to the axis As the ether of space
penetrates solid matter as well as the elements, then, the quicker a body
rotates, the greater would be the absorbtion of magnetic energy. H we
consider the rotation of the earth on its axis, we find that on the equato ,
the surface motion would be about 19 miles per minute decreasing towards
the poles, as the atmosphere rotates with the earth; the outer atmosphere
must move at greater rate than the inner, thus the various ensi ie
produced, the compression of the outer atmosphere on the inner, the mne
on the earth’s surface, and the outer body on its axis ; this is simply the
mechanical power of winding, it draws the ether of space ar ound the ax
This is a solution of that force we term “ gravity.” The continual
absorbtion of ether would necessary require an outlet to regain its


equilibrium, this would be at the poles, hence we have •* polar magnetism.”
Thus without rotation a body could have no adhesion. As the passage of a
body through space, would receive no resistance from the ether, on account
of its unlimited elasticity, but its progress would cause a displacement in
its volume, and the restoration of such to its equilibrium would propel the
body on its course. This is propulsion, and it is also electricity, and a shock
of electricity, is expansion.
We have endeavoured to show that all motion is derived from space,
and not from a spirit, and that expansion is the energy of the universe,
If this be the primary force, the bases on which it expends its energy must
also be the same, therefore there must be a trinity of material eternities,
the Power, the Material and the Machine; the power is expansion, the
material, oxygen, for all the other elements are generated through motion,
and the machine is dense matter, such as the heavenly bodies. Between the
two last, there is a never ending oscillation which may be likened unto the
tide, as it is the flow of elements into matter, and ebb of matter into
gaseous elements.
Here then we have an eternal system of transformation or a progress
of construction and re-construction extending through the universe. We can
notice this feature prevailing all through nature, we see it in our energy
for action, and the desire to rest in the vigorous growth of youth, and the
decrepitude of old age, in the advance of spring, and the decline of autumn.
As it is with the seasons, so it will be with worlds and that the efforts of
nature never cease, only to recommence. That there is a primary power to
produce all things, but no first cause, and consequently there is no
begining and no end.
H. Solomon, Caxton Printing Office, 114£ Pitt Street, Sydney.




