





Materials Used at the Embalming
of
King Tut- f ankh-Amun


THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART
Papers • No. w
MATERIALS USED
AT THE EMBALMING
KING TUT-ANKH-AMUN
By
H. E. WINLOCK
NEWYORK • 1941


Copyright by
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
1941


Materials
USED AT THE EMBALMING
OF KING TUT- f ANKH-AMUN
There was an event which happened in
Egypt when I was living there that I think I
ought to put down on paper. I have talked to
people about it, but I am afraid that many of
those who were once my listeners are long
since dead and that everybody else who has
heard this tale will be soon. It is the story of
how Theodore M. Davis once upon a time
found the things which had been used at the
funeral of KingTuUankh-Amun in 1360 b.c. 1
A quarter of a century ago no one associated
this material with the king’s tomb, and some
old notes of mine tell of all the finders being
dead within nine years of the excavations.
Sometime early in January, 1908, 1 spent two
or three days with Edward Ayrton, to see his
work for Mr. Davis in the Valley of the Kings.
When I got to the house the front “lawn” had
about a dozen gigantic white pots lying on it
where the men had placed them when they
brought them from the work. At that time
Ayrton had finished a dig up in the Valley of
the Kings just east of the tomb of Ramesses XI
(no. 18). He had quite a job on his hands to
find something to amuse Sir Eldon Gorst, the
British diplomatic agent who was to be Mr.
Davis’s self-invited guest soon. Sir Eldon had
written a very strange little note, which I saw,
saying to Mr. Davis that he had heard that the
latter’s men found a royal tomb every winter
and requesting, as he intended to be in the Val-
ley of the Kings in a few days, that all discov-
eries be postponed until his arrival. This event
was going to take place on Friday, January
17 th, when everything had to be spick and
span and something had to be opened for him.
Davis had found the jewelry of Queen Te-
Wosret in another tomb, but that was not suffi-
ciently spectacular, and as he had opened one
of the great pots and found a charming little
yellow mask in it, everybody thought they were
going to find many more objects in the other
jars.
I had to disappear the day Sir Eldon came,
and so I lunched with Howard Carter and
Erskine Nichol in the Medlnet Habu house
where they were doing water colors. I think it
was that afternoon that I first saw how the two
of them put in their skies upside down so as to
have the paint run at its darkest at the top of
the picture. That evening I walked back over
the hills to the Davis house in the Valley, and
I have still got a picture in the back of my head
of what things looked like. What in the morn-
ing had been fairly neat rows of pots were tum-
bled in every direction, with little bundles of
natron and broken pottery all over the ground.
The little mask which had been taken as a
harbinger of something better to come had
brought forth nothing, and poor Ayrton was a
very sick and tired person after the undeserved
tongue-lashing he had had all that afternoon.
Sir Eldon complimented Mr. Davis on his
cook, and that is the last of him as far as this
story is concerned.
All the jars and their contents were eventu-
ally stowed in a magazine of the house in the
Valley. Mr. Davis used to demonstrate how
(1) R. Engelbach, in Annales du Service des Antiqui-
tes, XL (1940), p. 147, says he ascended the throne in
1369 b.c. and died in 1360 b.c.


strong papyrus could be after over thirty cen-
turies by pulling and tearing apart with his
guests bits found in the jars, but he had no
other use for the find. In fact, it was rather in
the way, and Harold Jones, who had been with
us on our work at Lisht but had taken Ayrton’s
place in charge of Mr. Davis’s excavations in
the Valley in 1908-1909, persuaded him to get
Sir Gaston Maspero to look at the objects and
to let the then struggling Metropolitan Mu-
seum have everything it wanted from the find.
Therefore I was in Mr. Davis’s house in the
Valley again in the spring of 1909, packing up
such pots and pans and such rags and little
bags of natron as were around his magazine for
the Museum in New York. When they got
there they were all laid out in one of the un-
opened Egyptian galleries, sorted, and entered
in the catalogue. 2
The objects found by Theodore Davis had
been buried by the ancient Egyptians in a little
pit, today called no. 54, only 110 meters south-
east of the mouth of the tomb where Tut-
C ankh-Amun’s body had been put (plate i). It
was on the south side of the eastern branch of
the Valley of the Kings, in a spot totally de-
serted in those days. Here on the hillside the
undertakers had dug through the gravel into
the bedrock to make a pit i .90 meters long and
1.25 meters wide, which they oriented almost
exactly north and south. Twenty-five years ago
it was still 1.40 meters deep at the south, up-
hill end and only 1.00 meter at the north end.
The rock at that time was covered with a heap
of chip over three meters high, but it seems
probable that when the pit was cut there was
only a meter of loose stone and gravel lying on
the surface and that the pit originally was dug
two meters deep. The rest of the chip in this
neighborhood was probably thrown out dur-
ing the construction of some near-by tomb,
perhaps that of Harnesses VI.
No one knows actually how many big pots
Theodore Davis found, but about a dozen of
the size and shape of the ones taken to his house
could have been crowded into the pit. They
had been brought up to the Valley, doubtless,
in rope slings 3 —of which, however, no trace
was found and neatly piled in the hole in
regular rows. When I saw them many were
broken, but from the description I had at the
time there must have been at least twelve, or
possibly fifteen, of them, all exactly alike. Six
are preserved in the Metropolitan Museum
(plate vii, a). 4 Of these the average height is 7 1
centimeters, the diameter at the mouth 55 cen-
timeters, and the greatest diameter of the body
46.5 centimeters. They are made of a hard, res-
onant, light red clay. There are no inscriptions
on them. The contents and the packing mate-
rial came to within a few centimeters of the
rim. In each case a layer of Nile mud had been
smeared over all, and a layer of white lime and
sand plaster poured on until it was flush with
the top; this had been smoothed neatly, and
the whole pot then whitewashed. An irregular
spot on the outside of each of the pots at the
very bottom did not get any coloring, and one
of the pots had contained some wet material
which leaked out through the top, leaving a
brown stain. This type of pot is characteristic
of the late Eighteenth Dynasty. We may take
them as typical storage jars of that period, a
little smaller than those in the story of Ali Baba
but otherwise much the same.
(2) M.M.A. acc. nos. 09.184.1-170, 214-697, 788-805.
In subsequent references the serial numbers 09.184. will
be omitted.
(3) Such slings were used everywhere in Egypt, and
examples found by the Museum have been mentioned in
the Bulletin of The Metropolitan Museum of Art, XV
(1920), July, part n, p. 12. XVII (1922), Dec., part n, p. 34,
fig- 34> an d XXXII (1937), Jan., sect, u, fig, 39; and Win-
lock, The Tomb of Queen Meryet-Amiin at Thebes (New
York, 1932), p. 32, fig. 18, pi. xxxi.
(4) Nos. .1-7, including the neck of a seventh pot.


The pots contained embalming materials
and objects from the funerary banquet of
King Tut- C ankh-Amun, piously collected and
packed in clean wheat or barley chaff s —which
had only turned brown and was very little dis-
integrated. The objects found were in excel-
lent preservation.
No one in the Theodore Davis camp knew
exactly what this mass of material was. Mr.
Davis himself seems to have felt that he had
discovered the contents of a poor man’s tomb,
and since there was no mummy there and
manifestly he was the first to have seen the pit,
he thought all the objects had been moved to it
by the necropolis guardians. 8 What he had ac-
tually found, of coui’se, was a cache of materials
which, according to Egyptian beliefs, were too
impure to be buried in the tomb with the dead
man but which had to be safely put not far
away from his body, since the latter had been
in contact with them. It was a perfectly undis-
turbed cache which Mr. Davis found, but in
(5) No. .339. The identification was made by Dr. M. L.
Britton in December, 1916, when he was Director of the
New York Botanical Garden. Other identifications of his
will be found below in the description of the flower collars.
(6) Theodore M. Davis, The Tomb of Queen Tiyi
(London, 1910), p. 4, and The Tombs of Harmhabi and
Toualdnkhamanou (London, 1 g 13), pp. g, 112, 135, fig. 15.
The last reference (p. 135) is in an article by G. Daressy.
Eventually I gave Howard Carter further information
about the find, and he used it in The Tomb of Tut-ankh-
Amen (London, 1923-1933), I, p. 77, and 11, p. 97.
(7) Nos. .260-265.
(8) Cf. H. R. Hall, Catalogue of Egyptian Scarabs, Etc.,
in the British Museum, I (London, 1913). no. 1873. An-
other reconstruction might be ibid., no. 1823
z= Percy E. Newberry, Scarabs (London, 1908), pi. xxxi,
10. Both are of Amen-hotpe 111. See also die Catalogue of
the Sale of die Collection of James Burton (Sotheby 8: Co.,
London, July 25, 1836), no. 268. This is a seal taken from
a door in the tomb of Amen-hotpe 111, which according to
the priced catalogue in die Edwards Library was not
bought by the British Museum.
(9) Among the many examples see Newberry, Scarabs,
p. 8g; Carter and Newberry, The Tomb of Thoutmosis IV
(T. M. Davis’ Excavations: Biban el Moluk) (Westminster,
1904), p. xxx; Davis, The Tomb of Queen Tiyi, p. 8.
some fashion it became confused in his mind
with a faience cup bearing King Tut- C ankh-
Amun’s name and some gold leaf from objects
made by King Ay for King Tut- c ankh-Amun’s
tomb. Although these objects may have been
stolen from the tomb by the thieves who we
know had got into it for a short time, and had
been carried away and hidden in deserted sep-
ulchers near by, they could have had no real
relation to this find.
At first we were all inclined to agree with
Mr. Davis. Every thing looked as though it had
seen hard usage, and none of us was as familiar
with embalmers’ caches in 1908 as we might
have been. But in the early 1920’s I had found
so many earlier and later masses of such mate-
rials that I began to realize what Theodore
Davis had discovered obviously fragments
of embalming materials and scraps from the
funeral meal of King Tut- C ankh-Amun.
The evidence for the date is clear. In the
first place, there are six mud impressions of
ring or scarab seals, broken from tomb furni-
ture (see plate vn, b-e). 7 D appears to have
been wrenched off a box or some other straight-
sided object and has on the back the impres-
sions of a thick grass cord and of linen cloth.
B and C are still attached to knotted strips of
thick papyrus fiber. E again has the impression
of a thick cord such as might have been used on
a chest. There are two other seal impressions,
not illustrated here. D bears distinctly the car-
touche of Tut- C ankh-Amun, and B and C give
his throne name. It seems clear that the epi-
thets “beloved of Khnum,” and |j^,
“of manifold praises,” 8 must qualify a royal
name, here written with the sign
neb broken away. The fourth seal, E, is that of
the priests of the necropolis of the Valley of the
Kings the jackal above the nine bound cap-
tives. 9 The fifth is the impression of one of
those faience rings or scaraboids so popular at


the period, with the device The sixth is
illegible. Five little pats of dried mud (see
plate iv), lu averaging about 7by 2.5 centi-
meters, were probably left over from sealing
articles which went into the tomb of Tut-
C ankh-Amun, where many sealed objects were
found.
Furthermore, the date of the objects in the
cache was toward the end of the reign of Tut-
One piece of linen cloth from
the pots is marked Year 6 of his reign (plate
vni, a). 11 It has been the subject of articles by
Maspero, by Davis, by Daressy, and by Lyth-
goe. 12 This piece of fringed linen sheet, some-
what crumpled up, has an inscription in one
corner written from right to left in cursive
hieroglyphs and reading: “The Good God,
Lord of the Two Lands,
beloved of Min; linen of Year 6.” Its length,
94 centimeters, is the original length of the
sheet, but its original width is indeterminable,
since it is now ripped down to 32 centimeters.
The cloth is of medium texture, with seven-
teen warp threads and twenty-two woof threads
to the centimeter. A fringe 1.5 centimeters
wide is woven into the top. One end has a
selvage and the other a selvage partly raveled
out, as though for fringing. About 25 centi-
meters from the fringed top and roughly mid-
way between the two ends of the sheet there
are what might be taken for parts of two lines
of hieratic, written at right angles to the first
inscription. In color these two lines are blue-
(10) Nos. .235 A-E. (11) No. .220.
(12) For Maspero’s article see Recueil dc travaux,
XXXII (1910), p. 88; the reference to the tomb of Teye is
a misunderstanding. For Davis's and Daressy’s see above,
note 6. For Lythgoe’s see M.M.A. Bulletin, XVIII (1923),
p. 100. Mention of the cloth after Maspero was made by
A. J. Reinach, Revue archeologique, II (1911), p. 332, and
H. Gauthier, Le Lime des mis d’ikgypte (Cairo, 1912), 11.
p. 3G5. The linen sign is as in my copy. Carter seems to say
( Tut-ankh-Amen, I, p. y 8) that this inscription was on a
head cloth. (13) No. .693.
black as are some stains near the hieroglyphs
above while the marks in the corner of the
sheet and those on another inscribed sheet (see
below) are in a very deep brown-black ink.
There has been considerable discussion in the
Metropolitan Museum as to whether or not
these blue-black stains are writing. On the
whole, my final conclusion is that they are
probably not; but if they are, there is too little
left for any intelligible translation.
Of even greater importance is a large piece
of sheet 2.44 meters long and 61 centimeters
wide. 13 Its length is the original length of the
sheet, for one end is rolled and hemmed and
the other shows traces of a selvage. The origi-
nal width cannot be determined, for a piece
has been ripped off each side. The sheet is of
very fine, tightly woven but not heavy linen,
with thirty-six warp threads and twenty-eight
woof threads to the centimeter. Though badly
worn and stained in antiquity and afterwards
very much decayed, it has a date upon it which
was written not more than a year before it was
put into the pit.
The marks are among the most curious I
have ever seen (plate vm, b). Three centi-
meters from the selvage end and 13 centimeters
from a torn side, which was probably origi-
nally fringed, occurs a mark woven into the
material and reading: “Long live the Good
King Nofer.” The signs are in white thread,
the same color as the cloth itself, but, being a
somewhat tighter weave, they are quite legible.
On the opposite side of the cloth from which
one is supposed to read the woven mark, but in
the same corner, is the usual type of ink linen
mark. The tear along the side runs through the
inscription, but originally it seems to have
read; “Year 8. Amun-Re c . Very good.” The
sheet was washed at least once after the mark-
ing, and the ink is now very brown.
The third inscription was written after the


(14) Carter, Tul-ankh-Amen, II, pp. 107 and 185. The
latter is in Lucas’s report.
(15) Nos. .655-660. (16) Nos. .407 ff.
(17) Nos. .424-560 and .662-666 (passim).
(18) No. .664. (19) No. .66g. (20) Nos. .694-697.
(21) Nos. .569. .577, .643 A. B.
(22) Nos. .667-692.
9
fringe had been removed, on the same side as
the ink linen mark above, 2.5 centimeters be-
low the torn side and some 9 centimeters from
the selvage end but in no wise parallel to it. It
reads; “Year 8 of the Lord of the Two Lands,
Neb-kheperu-Re c ” (Tut- C ankh-Amun), and it
is followed at a distance of 2 centimeters to the
left by a private mark of some sort, undoubt-
edly of the same period. On the opposite side
of the cloth and 15 centimeters from the other,
hemmed end are two crosses, written in ink
and of the same period as the third group.
Both dates in these inscriptions are the same,
and it is interesting that one was written while
the sheet still had a fringe and the other some-
time after the sheet had been washed and the
fringe torn off. The eighth year of Tut- c ankh-
Amitn’s reign was probably next to the last
year of his life.
When the floor was swept after wrapping the
body of a king, naturally there were quantities
of pieces of linen some of them bandages and
some wider bits gathered up. In addition to
the inscribed pieces already mentioned, a great
many scraps of linen, the left-overs of the wrap-
ping of the mummy of Tut-hankh-Amun, were
stuffed away in the jars. Carter and Lucas, in
The Tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen, have mentioned
how completely the bandages on the mummy
had become carbonized, 14 and we must con-
sider ourselves fortunate in possessing these
scraps torn from the bandages at the time of
the king’s wrapping.
Usually bandages to be wound on a body
were rolled up to make the wrapping easier.
The ends of some six such bandages still re-
main. 15 All are of fine linen cloth, and still so
tightly rolled that we have not wanted to undo
them. In width the narrowest is 2.5 centi-
meters and the widest 12.5 centimeters.
The majority of the bandages have one or
both ends torn off and so could have been
ripped from sheets of any length. At least 180
were found in the big pots, and these vary from
15 centimeters to 15 meters in length and from
1 centimeter to 15 centimeters in width. 18
About two dozen pieces of cloth, from 1 to 6
centimeters wide, have fringe varying from 1
to 1 1 centimeters in length along the selvage
edge, and now and then there is a scrap with
the warp threads also made into fringe, occa-
sionally 13 centimeters long. 17 Some of the
pieces are only 6.5 centimeters long, some are
as much as 4.55 meters long, and others almost
every conceivable length in between. One very
heavy braided fringe about 38 centimeters
long, with each braid at least 5 millimeters in
diameter, had caught in something and been
ripped back about four or five centimeters, 18
but it had been repaired by tying the two adja-
cent braids together. On another strip of very
much finer material with a smaller fringe the
same repair had been made in the same way. 10
This piece of cloth, like several others, had
double woof threads woven in at a distance of
1.5 centimeters from the fringe end —an effec-
tive stop to deeper tearing. Sometimes the em-
balmers had ripped fringes or edges from the
sheets to make wide smooth bandages, and all
these scraps were carefully swept together and
put away in the jars. 2o
Four bits which measure from 1.5 to 3.5
centimeters wide and from 14.5 to 26 centi-
meters long had been dyed pink before they
were ripped into bandages. 21
For the rest, there are twenty-six wide pieces,
all ripped from linens of different size and tex-
ture. 22 One is from a shirt, with half of the neck


opening still outlined by its hem. These pieces
are the wipers from the embalming shop and
frequently bear obvious traces of their use.
One of the most curious things among the
bandages are fifty pieces of narrow tape with a
selvage on each side. 23 1 do not recall ever hav-
ing seen any ready-made, Eighteenth Dynasty
bandages like them before. Their widths run
from 1.8 centimeters to 11 centimeters. The
lengths to which they were woven cannot be
determined because in every case both ends are
torn off, but the longest is 4.70 meters long and
the shortest a mere scrap 39 centimeters long.
Some half dozen pieces had been in contact
with salt and are still white, but the majority
have turned to a brown of varying darkness.
They are usually very clean, but now and then
one can see fingerprints where someone had
wiped his hands on them. I can conceive of no
use for these strips except as bandages. They
must have been expensive old, ripped sheets
would have been far cheaper and this prob-
ably explains why there were only these fifty
among the hundreds of bandages used on the
body.
There are also two tightly wound-up bun-
dles, one a ball of very fine linen wadded up to
make just a small handful 24 and the other a
tightly wrapped bundle, folded in the middle,
the ends of which were used like a broom to
sweep up dirt until the cloth itself was worn
away to a length of only 8.5 centimeters. 25
Among the pile of rags from the jars three
are of especial interest. 26 These are kerchiefs,
two of white and one of blue linen of double
thickness, with the edges turned in and sewed
over and over (plates n, a, and vn, f). Such ker-
chiefs must have been worn over wigs as a pro-
tection from the dust, quantities of which
must have been blowing around all the time.
All three had seen a good deal of use and had
been washed so often that the edges had begun
to come unsewed. The two white ones have
worn spots on the forehead, particularly in-
side, and had been darned anciently. The blue
one had been used as some sort of scrubbing
rag, so that it was worn all the way through in
the middle and the tapes were completely de-
stroyed. The front of each kerchief is a straight
edge and the back rounded; a tape some ga
centimeters long and about 1.5 centimeters
wide, with free ends about 25 centimeters long,
is sewed across the forehead 12 centimeters
from the two corners (plate vn, f). The lengths
from the middle of the forehead to the middle
of the semicircular back are 40, 51, and 52.5
centimeters, and the widths in front are 53, 66,
and 68.5 centimeters the blue kerchief be-
ing the smallest. All three kerchiefs are made
of very light and fine linen; in two cases the
threads number thirty by sixty to the square
centimeter, and in the third there are as many
as thirty-five by seventy-five. The dye used for
the blue one was probably the juice of the sunt
berry (Acacia nilotica).
When being put on, the front of these ker-
chiefs was probably held betxveen the fore-
finger and thumb of each hand while the back
was thrown up over the head, and the tapes
were then carried back under the kerchief and
tied. In this way they would cover any short
wig effectively. Such kerchiefs must have been
common around Thebes at the time they were
made.
Unfortunately, we can never have an accu-
rate count of the bags of chaff and salt found in
the large pots (see plate in). Some of these bags
have been lost, for I distinctly remember that
(23) Nos. .364, .407 fE. {passim), and .797.
(24) No. .661. (25) No. .653.
(26) Nos. .217-219; Winlock, M.M.A, Bulletin, XI
(1916), p. 238; H. Schafer, Zeitschrift fur agyptische
Sprache und Altertumskunde, 68 (1932), p. 81; Winlock,
The Private Life of the Ancient Egyptians (New York,
fig- 9-


we did not bring them all home. The count of
them given here, therefore, is necessarily short
by at least a half and perhaps more.
Today there remain some two dozen bags
filled with natron the combination of soda
and salt so essential to every Egyptian em-
balmer. 27 In size the bundles run from 20 cen-
timeters square and 7 centimeters thick, the
largest, down to an occasional one 6 centi-
meters square and 5 centimeters thick. Their
makers simply took a square of linen and filled
it with natron, then gathered together the four
corners, twisted them tightly, and wrapped
them round and tied them with a narrow strip
of linen.
At least as numerous are bags of more uni-
form size containing chaff. 28 They run from
about Bto 10 centimeters square and from 3to
5 centimeters thick, with one large one some
15 centimeters in diameter. They contain
mainly chopped straw, which has such a salty
taste today that one is led to believe that the
mixture was intentional, and now and then
one finds that the quantity of salt is so great
that it is hard to separate this class of bag from
the first.
We also found at least five long cloth cylin-
ders, sewed at one end and up one side and,
after being filled, tied at the other end with a
cord. 29 Curiously enough, the longest is also
the thinnest, being 100 centimeters in length
and only 2 centimeters in diameter. Two
others, measuring 85 centimeters and 75 centi-
meters in length, are 4. centimeters in diam-
eter. All are packed with a very fine natron.
(87) Nos. .228-231, .266 ff. (passim).
(28) Nos. .232-234, .267 ff. (passim).
(29) Nos. .224, .225, .313-315. No. .313, the one shown
on plate in, was broken in the middle and was photo-
graphed in such a manner that its full length does not
appear in the plate.
(30) Nos. .226, .227.
(31) No. .798. (32) Nos. .221-223.
Their use is somewhat difficult to imagine,
since none was found half emptied and none
showed any signs of soiling.
We also have preserved two sacks which
probably belonged to a more numerous lot
made like the long cylinders to hold natron
and each measuring 18x8x4 centimeters. 30
After they had been filled and sewed up some
distance above the ends, the excess cloth was
ripped down vertically to make a pair of tapes
20 centimeters long and a little over 4 centi-
meters wide (see plate in). Again it is hard to
explain what the purpose of such curious bags
could have been. There is no mark today to
show any use, and the clean cloth of the two
surviving examples makes it impossible to
make any guess. However, both the long tubes
and these curiously shaped bags can scarcely be
considered as mere storage receptacles, and
their shapes certainly should give us a hint as
to their purposes.
Another puzzling object from the find is a
string of minute linen sacks of chaff, five in
number perhaps some sort of charm, for I
can think of no other earthly use for them. 31
Each is made of a piece of linen folded to make
a sack 1.5 centimeters square and 5 millimeters
thick, and each minute sack is tied at an inter-
val of about 2 centimeters along a central cord.
In the jars there were somewhere between
forty and fifty unbaked, gray earthen dishes, I
should judge from the number of fragments
that were found. Only three of the entire lot
are complete, however, and they vary in size
(see plate x, t). 32 The longest is 15.6 centi-
meters and the shortest 14 centimeters; the
narrowest is 6.5 centimeters wide, and one
which is practically the same length as the long-
est is 8 centimeters wide. They all seem to have
been from 2 to 3.5 centimeters high. Each one
is roughly rectangular, with fairly thick sides
sloping inwards towards the bottom, which is


very thick and has marks from being molded
on a wooden board. I have no suggestion to
make as to the use of these trays other than a
statement made by Daressy, who thought of
them as miniature representations of fields
made of Nile mud and sown with grain. 33 The
mud was certainly soft when they were used
for whatever ceremony they were intended. In
fact, some were so badly handled as to be com-
pletely twisted out of shape, without, however,
being broken. But there is absolutely no trace
of the grain which Daressy suggests was put in
them. Anything adhering to them seems to be
just the packing material. My chief objection,
however, is that Carter does not seem to have
found any examples of such trays in the tomb
of Tut^ankh-Amun.
The object which caused all the excitement
in Theodore Davis’s mind was the little plaster
head which he found right side up on top of
the contents of the first jar he opened (plate 11,
b). Ele carried it back to his house and eventu-
ally to America, where it became part of his
private collection. 34 It looks like a miniature
mummy mask such as we would ordinarily ex-
pect to find on canopic bundles, but there was
only the one there were no others discovered
by him and the viscera were in the four
golden coffins in the canopic jars. 3s The mask
is 15 centimeters high, made up of cloth and
plaster less than 1 centimeter thick all over.
The inside is unpainted, but outside it was
first given a coat of yellow, on which the details
of the mask and jewelry were sketched in blue.
Red is very sparingly used in one of the cross
bands of the collar and on its ties. The eyes are
black and white. The nose had been broken
away before Davis took it out of the pot and, as
far as I know, before the ancient Egyptians had
put it in there. I can suggest no significance for
the mask in the embalming ceremony,
About a score of odd sticks had been tossed
into the big jars. 36 The majority are lengths of
reed, from 5 to 35 centimeters long; two are
pieces of papyrus 14 centimeters long; two are
wood, one with bark on it; five are wrapped
with linen and two with papyrus pith; and sev-
eral are charred from burning. They make a
curious jumble of rubbishy fragments which
defy description, but clearly many of them are
probes. Some may be fragments of wickerwork
objects such as were found in other tombs in
the Valley of the Kings. But it must be recalled
that each of these fragments had been used and
thrown away as rubbish.
A certain number of objects in the pots were
left in Egypt and do not form any part of Mr.
Davis’s gift to the Metropolitan Museum. I
have found mention of a wooden tenon, a
couple of pieces of limestone, and a number of
square limestone blocks, fairly well polished.
These last are certainly, I should say, the
blocks on which the body was manipulated
during the embalming, carefully buried by
those in charge of the operation. We did not
find, curiously enough, anything in the nature
of a bed or platform on which the body could
have been laid out. 37
The material so far described seems to have
been used in the actual embalming of the body
of King Tu- c ankh-Amun, with here and there
(33) Daressy in The Tombs of Harmhabi and Touat-
dnkhamanou,Y>. 106.
(34) Now in his collection in the Metropolitan Mu-
seum, acc. no. g 0.8.231.
(gg) Carter, Tut-ankh-Amen, 111, p. gg, pi. liv.
(36) No. .358.
(37) Equipment from embalmers’ shops is known. An
embalmer’s platform of the XI Dynasty is mentioned by
me in the M.M.A. Bulletin, XVII (1922), Dec., part 11,
p. 34; and a wicker bed and mat of the Late Dynastic
period in tire M.M.A. Bulletin, XIX (1924), Dec., part n,
p. 32. A limestone table in the shape of a bed of the Late
Dynastic period is described by me in Annales du Service
des Antiquites, XXX (1930), p. 102. Several such caches
were found by Lansing in the SAsasif; see M.M.A. Bulle-
tin, XV (1920), July, part 11, p. 12.


some magical object such as the little plaster
mask whose usefulness was now over. From
what I have seen of ancient Egyptian material
I should say that most of these objects from the
big pots are common and could have been du-
plicated in any period from the Old Kingdom
to the Ptolemaic era. They are things which
could not be thrown away because they had
been in contact with the dead man’s body but
were too unclean from this contact to go in the
tomb.
The most interesting part of the find, how-
ever, was unfamiliar to me. Most of the re-
maining material was obviously intended for a
funeral banquet such as we regularly see rep-
resented on the tomb walls. Sometimes, to be
sure, we cannot separate the pottery used at
such a banquet from the pots which have
strayed in from the embalmer’s shop, and
therefore we have to describe all the pottery
together. But certainly many of the pottery
dishes and bottles, the bones of meat and fowl,
and the flower collars from the jars are relics of
this meal.
In the big jars there were some twenty-five
jar lids of different sorts (see plate iv). Obvi-
ously they are objects thrown away when the
jars which they had once covered were empty,
and I think that many of them must have come
from containers of embalming materials rather
than from food vessels. Where the jars they
once covered are now, it is quite impossible
to say.
One of the lids is merely an irregular pottery
chip, roughly 10 centimeters in diameter,
which had been laid over the mouth of a jar
and covered by a lump of plaster about 13 cen-
timeters across and 4 centimeters thick. 38 Six
other jars of the same size had as lids lengths of
(38) No. .339. (39) Nos. .340-257.
(40) Nos. .74, .75, .102-104, .236-238.
papyrus folded back and forth across the cen-
ter to make a rough circle. In some cases they
are wrapped over with strips of papyrus pith.
One has a very thin coating of plaster which
made the whole stopper g centimeters in thick-
ness, and another has a lumpier mass of plaster
which made it stand some 6 centimeters above
the top of the pot. Twelve other lids of papyrus
have neatly coiled, flat cores of that material,
over which a strip of papyrus pith is folded
back and forth and knotted in the center of the
back. The smallest which we can be sure is
complete is 7 centimeters in diameter, and the
largest is 12.5 centimeters. All of these lids
were used for bottles holding dry contents, 31 ’
and one has a heavy, two-ply grass cord, 6.5
centimeters long, as a handle.
More permanent types of covers are repre-
sented by eight lids of baked clay with a red
slip (see plates iv and x, l). 40 Three of them are
very simple saucers, from Bto 11.5 centimeters
in diameter, neatly finished. In the case of at
least one there is evidence that it had been held
in place on top of a pot by very narrow strips of
papyrus pith, which were woven back and
forth to cross in the center like the wickerwork
lids above. Two small saucers of this same type
may possibly have been lids, although there is
no trace of papyrus covering. The other three
pottery lids are more elaborate. Their greatest
diameters vary from 10 to 12 centimeters, and
in each case the rims which form their lower
halves were supposed to fit inside pot necks.
The smallest in diameter is 4 centimeters high,
and the other two, although much larger in
diameter, are only 3 centimeters high. A curi-
ous secondary use of all three of these lids was
as lamps, for the inside of the smallest is thickly
incrusted with black soot, and the other two
contain what looks like the dried dregs of lamp
oil, in one case flecked with soot. Since these
are not real lamps, they could not have been


used for the illumination of a palace hall. 41
Here we should also consider three stoppers
of fiber. 42 We found a bunch of grass which
had been used in a jar of natron to judge
from the taste which it still preserves a wisp
of bast; and a more elaborate stopper of half a
grass, knotted at each end.
Also, for want of a better place to consider
them, we may as well mention here two frag-
ments of circular papyrus jar stands, which
had originally been about 20 centimeters in
diameter and 3.5 centimeters thick, made of
coarse fibers, each about 1 centimeter wide,
and wrapped at intervals with strips of pith. 43
Broken clay vessels made up such a large
part of the contents of the storage jars that our
nickname for the whole lot has always been
the Davis pottery find. Very little from these
vessels has been lost, even though practically
everything in the big pots was broken. It must
be recalled that one or two big pots were
broken on the spot where they were found and
the fragments of pottery in them were not
brought down to Mr. Davis’s house, which
probably accounts for a good many missing
pieces. Any other losses, we may be sure, were
not intentional.
Little cups, too small to have served any
practical use, should probably be considered
as merely representing offerings. Seven, of red-
dish brown pottery, have labels written rapidly
on them in hieratic from right to left in black
ink (see plates iv and vn, g-m). 44 The inscrip-
tions doubtless describe their original contents
and are to be compared with marks on linen,
etc., from other tombs of the same dynasty. 45
They read as follows 46 :
g. ii»OT(K;. &Hi 6,
16"
H. hry't n sr-t, 4, “cakes
(?) of sr 4-covn, 4,”
I. [sntr n ?]kp, 4, “[incense ? for]
fumigation, 4.”
J. dsr-t, (a drink).
K. hnk-t, 5, "offerings, 5."
L. (7, □a e [TTn 1’ gs w -ph- w > 3 1. “half -pk loaves
( ? ). 3'-”
M ' ihr4 > 7> 8’ ra P es - !■'
Besides the seven inscribed offering cups
already mentioned, there are sixty-five identi-
cal cups uninscribed (plate x, r). 47 Another
little cup with a hollow foot has a crudely
painted white rim inside (plate x, q). 48 All are
very rough, and it would be fair to say that
there were hundreds of them in many of the
tombs in Egypt. Intrinsically there is nothing
about them by which they can be dated. Pos-
sibly it would be well to call them “token offer-
ing pots.”
The bottles, cups, and dishes used at the
meal suggest that there were eight persons who
sat around the table together. When the meal
was over the servants broke practically all the
pottery perhaps because broken pottery can
be stowed more closely than whole pots and
put it inside the big jars .with the chopped
straw as a packing. Most of the following ves-
sels are tableware used on such an occasion
(plates v, ix, and x, a-h, j, k, m-p, s) :
A. A wine jar is the only example of its kind
(41) N. de G. Davies, The Rock Tombs of el Amarna,
111 (London, 1905), pi. vn, shows the tall lamps used in
the dining room.
(42) Nos. .316, .317, .321.
(43) Nos. .319, .320. (44) Nos. .107-113.
(45) For instance, Winlock, The Tomb of Queen
Meryet-Amun at Thebes, pp. 33 and 75, pi. xv.
(46) The transcriptions here given were made before
the war of 1914 by Alan H. Gardiner and checked by
Ludlow Bull in 1941.
(47) Nos. .114-170, .798-805. H. 3.5-7 cm., diam.
6.5-10 cm.
(48) No. .106. H. 7 cm., diam. 10.5 cm.


among the Davis pottery. 49 Its flat bottom gives
it a fair stance, and its two handles one of
which still shows papyrus wrapping make it
easy to pour from. It is made of the hue, hard
clay used for water jars kullehs without any
wash, but highly polished. The lip is a slightly
sloping flange, the bottom of which would be
an excellent catch for a string tying on a stop-
per. Sparkling or old wine probably being un-
known, the Egyptian had no need of sealing
his wine as tightly as we do.
B. Four wine bottles, all practically com-
plete, were also found. 50 Three are plain red,
and the fourth is decorated. Each has a very
long, thin neck and an oval body. In two cases
there is a ridge on the outside of the neck; in
the other two the neck is a continuous funnel.
The material of all four bottles is a very good,
smooth, light brown clay. The three undeco-
rated ones have a highly polished hematite
slip all over the outside, up to and including
the mouth. On these the finishing line of the
slip inside the mouth is very crude. On the
fourth bottle, however, bands of floral decora-
tion were painted on the shoulder and neck in
black, blue, and red, and then the slip was
applied to the rest of the surface and into the
mouth, which has a narrow shoulder where
the slip stops. The background of the bands
(49) No. .79. H. 33.5 cm., diam. of body 20 cm., diam.
of mouth 10 cm. Capacity 3500 c.c.
(50) Nos. .80-83. H. 36-37 cm., diam. of body 15-15.5
cm., diam. of mouth about 12 cm. Capacity 1200-2000 c.c.
(51) Nos. .76-78, .98. H. 27.5-28 cm., diam. of body
16-16.5 cm., diam. of mouth 10-11 cm. Capacity about
2250 c.c.
(52) Nos. .85-88 and four unaccessioned (broken).
H. 21-23 cm., diam. of body 10.5-11 cm., diam. of mouth
9-10 cm. Capacity 730-1045 c.c.
(53) Nos. .93-97, .99-101. H. 24.5-26 cm., diam. of
body 13.5-14.5 cm., diam. of mouth 12-13 cm. Capacity
1850-2060 c.c.
(54) Nos. .8, .9, .11. H. of complete jars (nos. .8 and .9)
58 and 55.5 cm., diam. of body 30 and 29 cm., diam. of
mouth 23.5 and 21 cm., capacity 18,300 and 14,650 c.c.,
respectively.
of ornament remains the light brown of the
natural clay.
C. The next set also consists of four bottles,
with wide, straight-walled necks. 51 They are
made of light brown or red clay, with a dark
red hematite slip on the exterior only.
D. There are eight cups which were doubt-
less used for drinking. 52 They are made of a
light brown clay, covered on the outside with a
dark red, highly polished hematite slip, which
stops at the lip. The bottoms are slightly
rounded, and the mouths flare open. On the
inner surface some show deep corrugations
from the wheel.
E. There are also eight jars or drinking ves-
sels, all alike in form and all but two bearing
decoration. 53 They are made of light brown or
red clay, with a deep red hematite slip wholly
or partly covering the outer surfaces. In two
cases the jars are coated with slip from top to
bottom, but in the other six a strip around the
shoulder has been left the natural color of the
clay and decorated in blue with a pattern of
garlands. There is no question, however, that
all were intended to be used in the same way.
My suggestion is that they were made to hold
water; they might, in fact, be called kullehs.
Having no slip of any sort on the inside, they
appear to have sweated freely, the water leav-
ing a thin film of mud in each.
F. Assuming that most of the jars should
appear in sets of four, lam inclined to class the
following pieces together. Three are unques-
tionably alike, and any differences in the
fourth, slenderer one probably appeared to the
Egyptian unessential. The first three jars are
all of one type tall, almost shoulderless jars,
of which two are now practically complete. 54
The third and largest jar, of which the neck is
missing, measures 33 centimeters at the point
of its greatest diameter, and it seems to have
been proportionately tall. The fourth jar is a


great deal more slender than the other three,
but so far as it still exists it is of the same gen-
eral shape. 55 Furthermore, while the first three
jars are made of a fairly clean, thin, hard, light
brown clay, the walls of the fourth are thick
and black on the inside. Such differences, how-
ever, were not very noticeable originally, since
all four jars were whitewashed. None of the
four had any surface wash which would make
it impervious to liquids.
G. Of identical shape with E, but much
larger, are two other undecorated jars. so The
smaller of the two is made of light brown clay
and has a dark red slip crudely painted on the
outside only. The only remarkable point about
it is that a good deal of the outer surface is
black with soot from burning. The larger jar
is apparently of the same shape but has no slip.
Its height is unknown, since most of the neck is
missing; the diameter of the body is 18 centi-
meters. If its neck was proportionately as high,
in comparison with the smaller jar, it would
probably have held half again as much as the
latter.
H, J, K. There are three small jars of various
shapes. One certainly has, and the other two
possibly have, traces of mud inside, showing
that they had been used to hold water. The
first is made of light brown clay without any
slip. 57 The second is of light brown clay and
has an ocher-colored slip even lighter than its
body material. 58 It is decorated with two broad
bands of leaves rapidly painted on the outside
in blue. The third is a little bottle of brown or
red clay with a thick, red, polished hematite
slip over all, 59 For such pots it is hard to state
any use.
S. There are a few chips from a painted
bowl, originally a little over 14 centimeters in
diameter and a little more than half as deep. 60
The body material and the slip are like those
of J, and a band of garlands is painted around
the outer lip in light blue and red with dark
brown outlines. In the middle of the inside of
the bowl the same three colors are used in a
large rosette.
M. Among the dish-shaped vessels one plate
is unique. ol It has a horizontal lip 2.5 centi-
meters wide and is made of light brown clay,
entirely covered over, inside and out, with a
clean, thick whitewash.
N-P. There are some sixty-one dishes of
varying shape, size, and color, but all conform
more or less to the same general type. 02 They
differ in their lips and bottoms. Occasionally
the lip is a straight, horizontal line; sometimes
it slopes down and out, though more often the
reverse is true; but generally the lip is rounded.
A few of the dishes are flat along the bottom,
but usually the outline forms a continuous
curve. Sometimes we should call these pieces
bowls or dishes and at other times plates or
saucers. Most of them have a fine, dark red,
polished hematite wash, but a few have no
wash of any sort, and a couple of saucers have a
crude white strip painted around the lip.
When the dishes were packed away the ma-
jority were broken, but here and there among
the smaller ones from 24 centimeters in
diameter and down there is an occasional
perfect one. There is hardly any question that
the breaking was done on purpose, for some of
the larger bowls, too wide to be forced through
(55) No. .10. H. (existing) 60 cm., cliam. o£ body at cm.
(56) Nos. .91, .92. H. of no. .91, the smaller, 33 cm.,
diam. of body 17 cm., diam. of mouth 14.5 cm. Capacity
3800 c.c.
(57) No. .89. H. 17 cm., diam. of body 12.2 cm., diam.
of mouth 9.2 cm. Capacity 720 c.c.
(58) No. .90. H. 18.5 cm., diam. of body 11.7 cm., diam.
of mouth 8 cm. Capacity 730 c.c.
(59) No. .84. H. 14.2 cm., diam. of body 8.6 cm,, diam.
of mouth 3.7 cm. Capacity 200 c.c.
(60) No. .105.
(61) No. .24. Diam. 22.5 cm., depth 5 cm.
(6a) Nos. .12-23, .25-73. Diam. 9-46 cm., depth 2.5-14
cm.


the necks of the big jars, were shattered into
innumerable pieces.
That we have here the remnants of a ban-
quet is perfectly obvious from the bones which
made up part of the contents of the jars as they
were found by Theodore Davis. 03 Largest
among the bones are the shoulder blade and
connecting bones of a cow, which had been
hacked with some sort of heavy cleaver, and
four ribs of a sheep or goat. The majority of
the bones, however, make up parts of the skele-
tons of nine ducks now and then a head;
occasionally legs and feet; and bits of wish-
bones, breastbones, shoulders, and wings.
There are also parts of four geese wings,
legs, and feet. So few bones are from legs that
it rather suggests that breasts and wings were
the favorite parts of any fowl. Of the nine
ducks there are parts of four small teal (Anas
crecca), two shovelers (Spatula clypeata ), one
gadwall (Chaulelasmus streperus), and two
other ducks, not identified, a little bit larger
than the shovelers. The bones of the geese in-
clude parts of a brent goose (Branta bernicla),
a white-fronted goose (Anser albifrons), and
two large bean geese (Anser fabalis). It is to be
noted that these species do not include the do-
mestic goose of today.
We can assume that all the meat was cooked,
(6g) Nos. .330-406, .788-796. Identification of the
bones has recently been made for me by Dr. James P.
Chapin of the American Museum of Natural History.
Among them he identified the “proximal extremity of a
human ulna of the left arm." This undoubtedly is a stray
which got among these bones in Mr. Davis’s storeroom.
(64) A charming sketch of this period is in E. Denison
Ross, The Art of Egypt through the Ages (London, 1931),
p. 163. A pitcher and basin are shown in Winlock, The
Private Life of the Ancient Egyptians, fig. 14.
(65) Nos. .214-216, .323-328 (fragmentary). See Car-
ter, Tut-ankh-Amen, I, p. 78, and 11, p. 98. No. .214 is
fig. 49 in the M.M.A. Handbook of the Egyptian Rooms
(New York, 1911 and 1916). Like the wheat chaff described
in footnote 5 above, the floral components of the collars
were identified by Dr. Britton.
though it is impossible to be certain of this
from the bones left by the banqueters. The
Eighteenth Dynasty Egyptian did not use any
sort of knife or fork but simply picked the food
up in his hands to chew it; consequently,
among the commonest things in our museums
today are the pitchers and basins so necessary
for washing after every meal. 04
Originally the jars contained perhaps more
than half a dozen flower collars that had been
worn by those present at the banquet. Some
were torn by Mr. Davis to show how strong
they still were, and the total number is there-
fore uncertain. Three have survived almost in-
tact to the present day (plate vi), but the others
are torn into too many fragments to permit a
real count. 05 Their shapes vary considerably.
Two are exact semicircles, 40 and 44 centi-
meters in diameter and 17 and 15.5 centi-
meters wide. The third, 47 centimeters in
diameter and 17 centimeters wide, is practi-
cally a circle, nearly but not quite closed at the
back. Each collar is ingeniously made of sheets
of papyrus sewed together to make a backing
and sometimes bound with red cloth around
the edges. They are completely covered over
on the front with concentric rows of olive
leaves (Olea europea), cornflowers (Centau-
rea), and berries of the woody nightshade
(Solatium dulcamara), these last strung in
groups of four or five rows, beadlike, on thin
strips of the leaves of the date palm. Now and
then there are strands of very thin, bright blue
faience disk beads, about 5 millimeters in
diameter, run in among the berries for lengths
of from 1 to 2 centimeters.
The bright colors of the flowers and berries,
with here and there an edging of red cloth,
surely made these now faded and dried collars
very gay bits of decoration for a few hours.
When they had served their purpose, some of
them were folded and others merely crumpled


up and stuffed into the big jars. None of them,
however, was quite as elaborate as the collar
found by Carter on the innermost coffin in the
tomb of Tut- c ankh-Amun/ i 0 and we therefore
assume that no one at this banquet had the
rank of king.
Two brooms, provided to sweep up sand or
dust and to remove the last footprints of guests,
were found in the jars. o7 They are really noth-
ing but fagots wrapped with a piece of cord
around the middle. The heavier of the pair is
made of some fifteen or twenty pieces of reed,
each one about 5 millimeters in diameter and
all so worn down that the longest is about 25
centimeters, and the shortest 15 centimeters,
long. The binding material in this case is a
piece of cloth. The smaller broom consists of
some eight stumps of grass pulled out of the
ground, each one about 12 centimeters long
and about 2 millimeters in diameter at the
base. They are bound with a piece of fine
string. Both brooms had seen hard use, per-
haps sweeping away the footprints of those who
had attended the funeral ceremonies of King
T ut-ffinkh-Axnun. 08
Embalmers’ caches are known in the Theban
necropolis at least as early as the Eleventh
Dynasty and as late as the end of the pagan
period. Other than the fact that here we have
bits of bandages and bags of natron and salt
and, of course, the charming little mask there
is nothing about this lot of material to recom-
mend it to us particularly, except that, natur-
ally, anything with the name of Tut- e ankh-
Amtin upon it will always have an interest for
us. But remnants of a last funerary banquet
have, so far as I know, not been found hereto-
fore. It would be extremely interesting to
know the names and quality of the persons
who partook of this meal, but even in Egypt it
would be asking a good deal to discover such
details. It is enough to know that it was a meal
which consisted of meat and fowl, and prob-
ably bread and cakes, and that it was washed
down with copious draughts of wine or beer
and water. At the end, as the eight people who
partook of it withdrew from the room, their
footprints were swept away and the door was
closed. Whether or not this gathering up of the
remains of such a meal is to be considered an
innovation of the period of the heresy, I know
of no other trace of it. But then we must always
remember that this is probably the only known
cache of its kind belonging to a king. 09
(66) Carter, Tut-ankh-Amen, 11, pp. 78 and 191 (in
Appendix 111 by P. E. Newberry), and pi. xxxvi.
(67) Nos. .318, .322.
(68) For similar brooms and this ceremony see the
M.M.A. Bulletin, XVII (1922), Dec., part 11, p. 36, and
XXIII (1928), Dec., part n, p. 24.
(69) This account of the Theodore M. Davis pottery
find would never have been made by me without the help
of Charlotte R. Clark. All the drawings are by Lindsley F.
Flail.


PLATES


PLATE 1
THE LOCATION OF THE PIT IN THE VALLEY OF THE KINGS, AND THE
PIT ITSELF


PLATE II
2
w
2;
R u -
l ; "
m co w
m ;
ivj * £
I I £oi
I E W
I
I D-5
I V-l <
P
f w *
(* p
I £ 5
< •
S
<5
o
fn
! 5
w
S 5
i < -
fa w
o <
u
C/3
fa fa
< 5
pi
Z'<
o S
fa 5
S j
a w
u
pi
w
<


PLATE I I 1
BAGS OF NATRON AND CHAFF. Scale i; :


PL ATI- IV
JAR LIDS OF PAPYRUS AND POTTERY; LABELED GUPS; AND
PATS OF MUD. Scale 1:2


PLATE V
POTTERY VESSELS. Scale 1:4


PLATE VI
FLOWLR cor.LARS. Scale 1:5


PLATE VII
u
g g
a)
3 2 f!
u 3 w
w< 2 w
.o n 7
£ y d
h j p 5 vj
O 3 .
* £ fe g
o 2 S o
. (4 $ O
< < a £
i-l w g O
ao r 3
£3Zw
H W pq
2 <
OW j J
W« < 5
2 r
o go
<
zjs-. 1:“ K i J i
J- A * V* §
r js “


PLATE VIII
ll
I
I
©Hr 1
eH=
-D
INSCRIPTIONS ON SHEETS. Scale 4:5


PLATE IX
POTTERY VESSELS. Scale i;8


PLATE X
POTTERY AND MUD DISHES. Scale i:8


Of this monograph
issued as
PAPERS No. w
500 copies were printed
December, 1941, by the
Plantin Press


