

MATRIMONY;
PHRENOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
APPLIED TO THE SELECTION OF CONGENIAL
COMPANIONS FOR LIFE.
including
DIRECTIONS TO THE MARRIED
FOR LIVING AFFECTIONATELY AND HAPPILY.
O. S. FOWLER.
MANCHESTER: JOHN HEYWOOD, 141 A 143, DEANSGATE.
London : F. Farrah, Strand ; J. Burns, 15, Southampton Kow.
Edinburgh: H. Robinson, 15, Grkenside Street.
Glasgow : William Love, 40, St. Enoch Square.
Leeds : T. Barmby.


MANCHESTER :
BUNTED BY JOHN HKYWOOD, AT THE EXCELSIOR WORKS,
HULME HALL ROAD,


MATRIMONY;
PHRENOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
APPLIED TO THE SELECTION OF CONGENIAL PARTNERS FOR LIFE: IN-
CLUDING DIRECTIONS TO THE MARRIED FOR LIVING TOGETHER
AFFECTIONATELY AND HAPPILY.
Man is eminently a social being. This is evinced by his phrenolo-
gical developments, and by his disposition to congregate and form
friendships. His social affections lie at the very basis of his virtue and
happiness. Parental and connubial love are among the highest species
of enjoyment belonging to his nature; while blighted affections and
family dissensions bear the most bitter fruits he can taste the former,
{•lacing its happy possessor almost above the reach of trouble : and the
atter,°being the cankpr-wonn of his every pleasure. The operation of
no element of his character is more conducive to virtue or happiness,
and the destruction of none would leave him more utterly desolate and
wretched. . , .
How beautiful, how perfect throughout are the domestic relations !
How comfortable, how happy, the family group, gathered around
their own fire-side ! Husbands and wives quaffing the unalloyed
sweets of connubial love —parents protecting their children, and children
nestling under the kind wings of parental fondness —the parents pro-
viding for the children, and the children serving the parents, and wait-
ing upon one another—the elder children serving the younger, and the
younger clinging affectionately around the elder—the whole family
■commingling their joys and sorrows ; all bound together by the
strongest and most tender ties of nature ; bestowing and receiving the
caresses of affection, and reciprocating a continued succession of kind
offices. If there be a green spot on our barren earth—a pleasant pic-
ture upon which the fatigued eye can rest with delight—it is the happy
family —it is domestic bliss.
No other class of faculties exert a greater influence upon man than
the dome tic ones. From no other fountain of his nature gushes forth
a deeper, broader, or more perpetual stream of happiness or misery.
Since the obedience or violation of those laws which govern these
social relations cause all this enjoyment or suffering, a knowledge of
these laws is all important, especially to young people. Phrenology,
beautifully and clearly unfolds and expounds these laws.
But, in order fully to appreciate the vast power of the social facul-
ties, or understand those laws which govern their action, we must
briefly analyze them. They are—
AMATIVENESS:
Its reciprocal attachment and love of the sexes for each other.
Its primary function is connubial love. From it, mainly, spring
those feelings which exist between the sexes as such, and result
in marriage and offspring. Combined with the higher sentiments, it
gives all those reciprocal kind feelings and nameless courtesies
which each sex manifests towards the other ; refining and elevating
both, promoting gentility and politeness, and greatly increasing social
and general happiness. So far from being gross and indelicate, its proper
exercise is pure, chaste, virtuous, and even an ingredient in good
manners. It is this which renders men always more polite towards
women than to one another, and more refined in their society, and
which makes woman more kind, grateful, genteel, and tender towards


men than women. It makes mothers love their sons more Jia'u their
daughters, and causes fathers to be more attached to their daughters.
hL-n’s endeai-ing recollections of his mother or wife, form his most
powerful incentives to virtue, study and good deeds, as well as the mo6t
powerful restraints upon his vicious inclinations ; and in proportion
as a young man is dutiful and affectionate to his mother , will he be
fond of his wife, for this faculty is the parent of both.
Those in whom it is large and active, are alive to the personal charms
and mental accomplishments of the other sex : ardent admirers of their
beautiful forms, graceful movements, elegant manners, soft and winning
tones, looks, accents, &c. ; seek and enjoy their society ; easily reci-
procate fond looks and feelings with them ; create favourable impres-
sions, and kindle in them emotions of friendship, or the passion of love ;
and with Adhesiveness (or Friendship*) large, are inclined to marry,,
and capable of the most devoted connubial love.
Those in whom it is deficient, are proportionally cold hearted, distant,,
and ill at ease in the society of the other sex ; and less tender and affec-
tionate, less soft and winning in their manners, less susceptible of con-
nubial love, less inclined to marry, <fcc.
Its combinations, which so modify its action as actually to change
its character from the best of feelings to the worst of passions, will be
given after the other social faculties have been analyzed.
Amativeness is supposed to be sub-divided ; the lower and inner
portions manifesting the mere animal passion, or physical love ; the-
upper and outer portion, next to the ears, giving a disposition to caress,
accompanied with pure Platonic affection.
PHILOPROGENITIVENESS :
Parental love : attachment to one’s children : loye of children general
Man enters the world in a condition truly helpless. Infants requi
t great amount of care and nursing. This infantile condition of mam
nas its counterpart in this faculty. Without its stimulus to provide
for and watch over infancy, every infant must inevitably perish, and
our race soon become extinct. No other faculty can fill its place, or
accomplish its end. Infants cannot be regarded as friends, so that
Adhesiveness cannot help them. Though Casualitv might devise ways
and means for their relief and comfort, yet it would not execute them ;
and though Benevolence might do something, yet it would be far too
little for their physical salvation, or for their moral and intellectual
cultivation ; for, how many are there who are kind to adults, but
unwilling to take care of children.
These vexatious and expensive little creatures, are far more likely
to array Combativeness, Destructiveness, Acquisitiveness, &c., against
them, than to enlist Benevolence, or any other faculty in their behalf-
If parents were not endowed with a faculty expressly adapted to the
nursing and training of children, their burden would be intolerable..
But this faculty not only casts into the shade all the toil, trouble
and expense they cause, but even lacerates the parental heart with the
keenest pangs when death U «irs parents and children asunder. It
* Phrenology has suffered somewhat from the attempt of its founders to
pnt it on a scientific footing, and especially in giving learned names to the
organs, instead of plain English names, expressive of the function of the
faculties. In order t,o make himself more fully understood by all, the author-
will use the term Fri ndship, instead of Adhesiveness ; Parental Love, instead. 1
of Philoprogenitiveness; Resistance, instead of Combativenoss; Appetite,
instead of Alimentiveness; Belief, instead of Marvellousnes?; Observation
instead of Individuality ; and so with others, the names of which do not.
oi/sady express the function performed Kv the organ.


renders children the richest treasure that parents possess ; an object for
which they willingly labour, sacrifice, and suffer more than for all
others. It sweetens their toils by day, and their watchfulness by night.
Scarcely any loss equals that of children. Rut why ? Let the amount
of brain allotted to this faculty, especially in mothers , answer.
The primary distinctive function of this organ is, Parental Love—
attachment to one’s own children : and the more helpless the child, the
more vigorous its action. It also extends to grand-children, and the
children of others; yet its power is far less towards them, than towards
one’s own children. None but parents can ever know the genuine feel-
ings of a parent’s heart. Love of children is still further heightened by
their being born of a wife, or begotten by a husband, whom we dearly
love. Hence children are regarded as * the dear pledges of connubial
love ;’ because Parental Love is located by the side of Connubial Love;
so that the exercise of either, naturally excites that of the other.*
The duties and relations of mothers to their children, require a much
stronger development of this faculty in woman than in man. Accord-
ingly, it is much larger in females than in males. This increased size
of the organ, and greater power of feeling in women, and their adapta-
tion to the far greater demand made upon her by her offspring, not only
evince the truth of Phrenology, by showing it to harmonise with nature,
but show that upon her devolve more of the nursing, training, and
early education of children, than upon man. They peculiarly adapt
woman to develope the minds, and train the feelings of children ; and
hence teachers of little children should always be females. Woman’s
delicacy of feeling and quickness of perception; her tenderness and will-
ingness to do and to suffer ; her intuitive knowledge cf the little wants
•of children ; her gentleness and playfulness, peculiarly adapt her to ex-
pand the tender gerin of their intellect ; to tram their feelings, and to
instill into their susceptible hearts the first principles of moral rectitude;
to cultivate benevolence and piety ; to develope their affections, and to
start the youthful travellers in the paths of virtue and intelligence.
The great development of*this organ in woman, rendering her prin-
cipal duty her greatest pleasure, is a beautiful instance of Divine Wis-
dom and Benevolence. But this delightful task conceded by all to woman
during infancy, is too soon wrested from her hands. Mothers should be
their children’s chief instructors. Happy would it be for families,
happy for society, if woman were to devot h .self more exclusively to
these duties. To you, young ladies—ye luiure mothers of our race, do
we look for the faithful performance of this momentous duty. You are
to form the intellectual and moral character of our race, and should
prepare yourselves accordingly. Is it right, then—does it comport
* This analysis renders the inference clear and forcible, that parents should
nurse and educate their own children. What end in life is more important]
Is it not infinitely more so than making of money, or acquiring fame or office ?
If parents cannot do all they desire, and yet find time to care for aud educate
their children, let them hire the other things done, while they themselves, not
over-see, but actually train aud educate their own children. If they do not
know enough, or if they cannot afford the time, they are bound, by the most
sacred obligations of our nature, not to become parents. Getting children
nursed out; sending them to school just to be rid of them ; employing ‘ wet
nurses,’ and pretending to be too great a lady to nurse or tend one’s own chil-
dren, is a breach of nature’s laws, and will inevitably incur the consequent
penalties. Strange ! that mothers will ruin their children, and violate their
natures, jußt to be fashionable. Let those who cannot get their children taken
care of and educated, count this their gaiti, and those who employ low, igno-
rant, or vicious nurses—a practice as common as it. is reprehensible—bear in
mind the principle brought to view in the text, and also remember, that these
grovelling and often immoral associations are sure to pollute their children.
But more of this in my work on * Phrenology applied to Education and Self-
Improvement,’ in which mothers are presented with a receipe for finding
time to educate their own children.


with this great end of your being—that your time should be spent irv
following the fashions, in acquiring the ‘ graces' (as this fashionable
foolery is called,) or in fashionable boarding schools, where not a thing
is thought of appertaining to a preparation for becoming wives and
mothers? Before you think of receiving a single attention from a gen-
tleman, see to it, I beseech you, for his sake, for your own sake, for
the sake of your offspring , that you tit yourselves to developc all the
physical, the moral, and the intellectual capacities of children.
This powerful development in woman renders it evident, that
primary object of female education should be to fit young ladies for th»
station of wives and mothers. But more will be seen in lefeience to
female education, in another portion of the work.
ADHESIVENESS:
Friendship: the social feeling : love of Society: desire and ability to
form attachments, congregate, associate, visit and entertain friends, &c.
If man had been created a lonely, unsocial, solitary being, nearly
half his faculties, having nothing to excite them to action, would have
lain dormant, and the remainder would have been but feebly exercised.
The activity of a faculty in one, naturally excites the same faculty in
those around him. Hence without the element of Friendship, to bring
mankind together into associations, neighbourhoods, families, <fco., they
could h ive had no opportunity for the exercise of Language, Ambition,
Imitation, and many other faculties, and but little opportunity for that
of Kindness, Justice, &c. ; and all the remainderwould have been far
less efficient and pleasurable than now. With outthis arangement, co-
partnerships, and those public and private works which require the
combined labour and reM.urces of more than one individual tor their
completion, would have remained unknown, and the seihdi propensities
have rendered ail men Ishmaelites ; turning every man’s hand against
his neighbour, rendering each most hateful to all; kindling rising
jealousies, animosities, &c., into burning flames, and for ever blotting
out the p easant smile of growing l friendship the cordial greeting of
old associates, and that silent flow of perpetual happiness which springs
from being in the company of those we like.
The young form attachments much more readily than those who are
older, partly because the latter become hardened by frequent disappoint-
ment in finding supposed friends unfaithful, and partly because they
have been longer separated from the friends of their youth. J his Hunt-
ing of the fine, glowing feelings of friendship, is certainly most un-
fortunate. Friendship should be regarded as most sacred , and never to
be trifled with. We should do almost anything sooner than violate
this feeling. Friends should bear and forbear much, at least, until they
are certain that a supposed injury or unjust remark was premeditated.
Then, when friendship is thus violated, we should think no more ot our
former friend, not even enough to hate him. Dwell not-upon the in-
juries done to you ; banish both them and the traitor from your mind
and let him be to you as though you had never known him. Dwelling
upon broken faith; only still farther wounds and blunts the feeling of
genuine friendship. Never form friendships where there is much danger
of their being broken, and never break them unless the occasion is most
aggravating and intentionally given. Let friends try to nake up little
differences as soon as possible.*
These remarks apply with redoubled power to members of the same
* I have seen a young man rendered crazy, and thrown into a perfect
phrenzy of excitement, by being imposed upon by a supposed friend, one too
of his own sex. Reappeared very much like those who have been recently
disappointed in love.


family. Let parents cultivate affection for one another in their chil-
dren and let brothers and sisters separate as little as possible, corres-
pond much, and, if possible, never allow a breach to be made m their
attachments. Add continually new fuel to the old fire of family friend-
ship. Let the right of hospitality be extended more often than it now'
is, and let friends entertain friends around the family board as often as
possible, instead of allowing them to eat their unsocial fare at the
public hotel. We have too little of the good old Yankee custom of
‘ comining' and of English hospitality, and spend far too little time in
making and receiving social visits. These formal, polite calls are perfect
nuisances. They are, to friendship, what the smut is to the grain-
poisonous. True friendship knows no formality.
UNION FOR LIFE.
There is little doubt of the existence of another faculty, located be-
tween' Adhesiveness and Amativeness, which disposes husbands and<
wives in whom it is large and active to be always together. The absence
of their companion, even for an hour, is quite painful. They feel as
though the time spent away from them, was so much of their existence
lost It is developed before Amativeness appears, and hence this Union
is often formed in childhood. It purifies and refines the sentiment of
love • desires to caress and be caressed ; and is the soul and centre of
connubial love ; creating that union that oneness of feeling, that har-
mony of spirit, and that flowing together of soul, which constitutes true
conjugal affection. It is very reluctant to fasten upon more than one,
and that one the first love.
I have seen several striking proofs and illustrations of the existence
of,this faculty, and the location of its organ. I know a lady in whom
both are marked, who, whenever her husband is about to leave her for
a few days, feels an acute pain in that organ. When she pointed out
the location of this pain, and stated that it always accompanied the
absence of her husband, 1 saw that it belonged to neither Adhesiveness
nor Amativeness, but was located between the two. As the intensity
of the pain rendered this matter certain, I surmised the existence ot
another organ, and, two years afterwards, found it confirmed by obser-
vations made in France. .., » ■»
It is much larger and more active in woman than m man, which
causes and accounts for the far greater power and intensity of lonian s
love than that of man.
INHABITIVENESS :
Or love of home, and the domicile of both chilerm-xl and after-life :
attachment to the place where one lives, or has bred ; unwillingness
to change it; desiro to locate, and remain permanently, in one habi-
tation, and to own and improve a homestead ; Patriotism.
‘ Home, home ! sweet, sweet home / There's no place like home *
The advantages of having a permanent home, and the evils and losses
consequent upon changing it* are both very great, ‘ Three moves, it
is said, ‘ are as bad as a fire ’ Those who have homes of their own, he
thev ever so homely, are comparatively rich. I hey feel that no crusty
landlord can turn them homeless into the streets, or sell their furniture
at an auction for rent. Rent-days come and go unheeded, and the do-
mestic affections have full scope for delightful exercise. Every married
man is bound by this inhabitive law of his nature, as well as in duty to
his family, to own a house and garden spot; and every wife is bound
by the same law and duty, to render that home as agreeable as possible.
* It is estimated, that the expense of moving on the first of May, in the
city of New York alone, exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars.


The prevalent practice of renting houses, violates this law and arrange-
ment of man’s domestic nature, and must necessarily produce evil to
both owner and tenant. This is established by facts as well as theory;
for what observer is not at once struck with the general fact, that
landlords improve their houses only to raise their rents, and charge
enormously for every additional convenience ; and that tenants will
not make improvements because they intend soon to ‘ move.’ All per-
manent improvements, such as fertilizing or beautifying a garden,
rearing fruit trees, of various kinds, setting out shrubbery, &c., raising
stock, and getting conveniences and comforts for a family around you,
require a succession of years; tenants, therefore, are compelled to do
without them. If they wish fruits or vegetables, instead of plucking
the fully ripe cherry, the delicious peach or pear, and the ever-varying
fruits of the seasons, and sitting down quietly to enjoy them ‘under
their own vine and fig-tree,’ by which their relish would be doubled,
they are obliged to take their hard-earned money, pay a four-fold price
in market, and, after all, take up with articles that are green, wilted,
or stale; it being the universal custom to pluck fruit for market before
it is ripe, so that it may keep the longer, and not spoil by being trans-
ported. Who has not tasted the difference in eatables fresh from the
garden, compared ivith those purchased in the market; Again : market
men, being generally too poor to own land, are obliged to demand high
prices in order to cover exorbitant rents, which furnishes an excuse for
those who raise things for market on their o*n land, to do the same.
This, together with the market being forestalled by huxters and specu-
lates, increases the price of provisions so enormously, that one dollar
earned by those who own a house and a bit of land, brings more than
five dollars earned by city tenants. What consummate folly, then, to
emigrate from the country to cities, because a dollar a week more wages
may be given, when the increased expenses of rent, fuel, food, &c., are
perhaps five times more than the additional earnings. This reveals
one cause of the greater degree of poverty, privation, and suffering in
the city than in the country.
Again, city tenants usually buy a small quantity at a time, such as a
pound of meat, half a pound of sugar, a pint of milk or molasses, a
half-penny bunch of onions and radishes, an ounce of tea, a pound of
flour, &c., and hence are obliged to pay double price, or at least all the
difference between the wholesale and the retail prices, besides the in-
creased price of articles in the city above that of the country ; while
those who own land, usually raise, or else lay in, their year’s supply of
provisions at the time of their production, and at a comparatively trifling
cost. To this renting system mainly do we owe the exorbitant, but
merely nominal price of ‘ city property, the rents and the rise of the
property combining to increase them ; whereas, were there but few
tenants, the city prices would sink far below those demanded for country
property, from which a living could be obtained. This renting system
is one of the most efficient causes of ‘ hard times’ and distressing poverty.
For a small room, too contracted to yield scarcely a comfort, and often
in the basement or attic, many tenants are compelled to pay their hard-
earned dollar every Saturday night, or be turned into the streets. This
system has infused its baneful influences into nearly all the arrange-
ments and relations of life. Indeed, so great and multifarious have its
evils become, they will compel men ere Jong to abandon it, and bug a
poorer house in preference to renting a better one. Rents will then
fall and landlords be losers. To own the house you live in, is enough ;
owning more, will injure all concerned.
This faculty and its combinations, plainly indicate that the prevalent
practice of * boarding,’ is not the most profitable or agreeable. The
social feelings cannot find gratification or reciprocation. Besides, boarders
frequently waste more than is necessasy, so that boarding creates a
selfish feeling, where all should be harmony and friendship. And then


to be sick in a boarding-house or tavern! Let those who know its
horrors, bear witness. To be sick at home , with all the attentions that
affection can bestow, is bad enough ; but to be sick among strangers ,
and have only such attention as money can procure, is the climax of
wretchedness. Let young men whose circumstances compel them to
board, choose some good family, and identify themselves with it, and
cultivate the social affections , and then change the boarding-house for a
home as soon as possible. Nor should young men leave their father s
house as soon as they generally do. They should, in most cases, stay
at home till they get homes of their own. . , ...
I have always observed, that children who have lived in one dwelling,
and especially on a farm, till they were fifteen, have this organ large ;
whereas it is small in those who have lived in different places duung
childhood. This says to parents, in the language of nature, ‘ Make as
few moves as possible, and generally keep your children at home.
It is also large in most farmers, and, with Approbativeness large,
gives a kind of pride in having a nice farm, house, furniture, garden,
&c., together with a disposition to improve one’s residence, the lower
portion of Parental Love, is supposed to create a fondness for pets, stock,
and the young and tender of animals, with a disposition to unpiove
their breed ; and the union of the two increases the charms of husbandry
and farming. No life is so independent, so free from care, so healthy,
or so favourable either to virtue or intellectual pursuits. If our far-
mers, instead of labouring with all their might to become ncA, would
labour just enough to earn a livelihood, and devote the remainder of their
time to reading and study, no class of people on earth would be so happy,
or moral, or talented. To leave the farm for the city or counting-room,
evinces a species of folly bordering on derangement, or else sheer igno-
rance of the road to happiness. The best heads I have examined, have
been those of farmers ; and a majority of our great and good men will
be found to have once followed the plough, and reaped the harvest.
This organ also is supposed to be double ; the inner portion creating
attachment to the home of childhood, to the family domicile, to the
stones, trees, and place of youth, and delighting to levisi ’ -,u
outer/creating patriotism, and love of the more recent homestead, with
unwillingness to ‘ move'
THE COMBINATIONS OF THE SOCIAL FACULTIES.
Though the individual action of these social faculties is powerful,
and productive of intense enjoyment or suffering, their com hw'wMJJ
much more so. Their combinations also account for the infinite diversity
of tastes in the selection of friends and companions, and in the manage-
those who have large Amativeness, combined with large Adhe-
siveness, not onlv love the other sex as such, but contract a f-trcmg
friendship for them, and make them their warmest and most, confidential
friends; and, with the addition of large Union for Life, experience
that love for some congenial spirit, some kmored soul, which of
twain one flesh,’ and perfectly unites two willing heaits. leisons
thus constituted are tender and affectionate as companions ; will mingle
pure friendship with devoted love : ‘ cannot flourish alone, but will be
Kin,a to love .nd merry young ; will invest the beloved lone w,tl
almost angelic purity and perfection : magnify their mental and moral
charms and overlook their defects ; feel happy in their company, but
miserable without it ; freely unbosom every feeling ; communicate an
share everv pain and pleasure : and have the whole current of the other
faculties enlisted in their behalf. With large Ideality the menta!
Temperament added, they will experience a purity, a devotion afervor,
an elevation, and intensity, and even ecstacy of love well ni a h lomant c.


especially the first love. They fasten upon mental arid moral, instead
of personal charms, or rather blend the two. They can fall in love
only with one who combines good looks with refinement, good manners,
and much delicacy of feeling ; will be soon disgusted with what is im-
proper, not in good taste, coarse, or vulgar in the person, dress, manners,
conversation &c., of the sex, but exceedingly pleased with the opposite
qualities ; will express love in a refined, delicate and acceptable man-
ner ; be fond of poetry, love of tales, romances, and the sentimental.
With Parental Love also large, they will be eminently qualified to en-
joy the domestic relations of companions and parents ; be as happy in
the family relations as tlipy can be in any other, and stay from home
only "hen compelled. When Inhabitiveness is large, they will travel
half the night to be at home the other half ; sleep poorly from home :
and remove only when they cannot well avoid it. With large Firmness
and Conscientiousness added to this combination, they will be constant,
and keep the marriage relatione inviolate, regarding 1 them as the most
sacred feelings of our nature. With large Combat iv- ness added, they
■will defend the object loved with much spirit, and indignantly resent
scandals or indignities offered them. With, large Approbativeness ad-
ded, they will hear them praised with delight, and greatly enjoy their
approval ; but be cut to the heart by their reproaches. If moderate or
small Self-esteem, and large Ideality, and only average or full Consci-
ent oneness, and Casuality be added, they will be too ready to follow the
fashions demanded by the other sex, and too sensitive to their censure:
(a combination too common in woman.) With large Secretiveness and
Cautiousness, they will feel much more affection than is expressed, ap-
pearing indifferent, espec ally at first, or till the other party is commit-
ted ; and perhaps no' bring matters to a direct issue till too late ; but
with Secretiveness only moderate or small, they will throw wide open
the portals of the heart ; freely showing in every look, word and action
all the love they fiel. With Firmness, Self-esteem, and Friendship all
large, they will not be sttbdned by love, however powerful, nor be bumble
or servile in this matter ; hut hiar its interruption with fortitude ; hut
will be the reveise when Self-esteem, Firmness, and Combativeness are
only moderate or average. With Casuality and the head only mode-
rate or average in size, the v tal or mental temperament ptedom nant,
and Adhe>!veness, Approbativeness, and Ideality large or very large,
they will pr fer the company of the fashionable, dressy, gay, superficial,
witty, showy, <fec. of the other sex, and love to talk small talk with
them, and Jove and marry those of this class. With the moral facul-
ties predominant, they will choose the virtuous, moral, devout and re-
ligious for friends and companions. With the intellectual organs large
or very large, they can admire and love only those who are intellec-
tual, sensible and literary. They will almost adore such : but be
disgusted with the opposite class. With the vital or vital motive tem-
perament predominant, Ideality large or very large, and Casuality and
Conscientiousness only average or moderate, they will be less particular
as to their moral than their personal charms : will love the pretty face
and figure last seen ; and have an attachment by no means exclusive ;
courting many, rather than being satisfied with individual attachment,
and inclined to the merely animal gratification of Amativeness ; and
with large Language and Mirthfulness added, will delight to joke with
and about the other sex ; often he indelicate, fond of hearing if not
relating improper anecdotes about them, and of seeing vulgar prints,
&c. ; and with large Tune also added, be prone to cing objectionable
songs, if not inclined to revelry and profligacy ; and extremely liable
to pervert Amativeness. With large Acquisitiveness added, they will
marry for money quite as soon as for true love, especially after the
irst attachment has been interrupted, &c.
But those in whom Amativeness is only moderate or small, the men-
tal temperament predominant, and the moral faculties more active than


the propensities, will not love or marry young, hut will have more
friendship, and pure Platonic affection than animal feeling, &c.
These combinations are given mainly as a sample of the others, and
also to illustrate the law of love, and account tor different matrimonial
tastes. Additional ones will be found in the author’s work on Phrenology.
LOCATION OF THE SOCIAL ORGANS.
The social organs are located together, in a kind of family group, m
the hack and lower portion of the head, behind the ears. 1 hey pre-
dominate in the head of an affectionate female. This is the usual form
of the female head, and the social faculties constitute the predominant
quality of the female character; though Amativeness is usually smaller
in women than in men. These organs, when very large and active,
elongate the head backwards, behind the ears, and their activity causes
the head to recline directly back towards the spine. Those who have
a slim neck, and a head projecting behind the ears but narrow at its
junction with the back of the neck, are susceptible of much purity and
tenderness of love, which will be founded in friendship and union of
soul more than in animal passion ; but those whose heads abroad be-
tween the ears at their union with the back of the neck, and the back
parts of whose heads do not project much behind the neck, or are
nearly on a line with it, will have more animal passion than pure affec-
tion Though a full development of Amativeness is important m a
companion, yet large Friendship and high moral faculties are quite as
m ln this family group, there may be two or more additional organs
one of which 'is doubtless located between Friendship and the upper
part of Parental Love, and creates attachment to keepsakes or gifts pre-
sented by friends ; to old household furniture which has descended
from parents to children ; also to things long u-ed. Another h pro-
bably located at the sides of Parental Love, which experiences the
emotion of Filial Love, causing children to love, obey, and wait upon
their parents ; to sit at the feet of age and experience, and learn les ; <ms
of wisdom, or listen to their stories ; follow their counsels, especially
those of parents ; and to cherish for parents that filial affection which
delights to serve, nurse, love, and support them, and weeps over their
departed spirits. .
Let parents assiduously endeavour to cultivate filial affection in their
children and av. id everything calculated to wound or weaken it ; and
let children love their parents, and cherish a disposition to serve th m,
so that when they become feehle or helpless, Filial Lr.ve may debght to
return tin a- unnumbered attentions received in childhood at the hands
of Parental Love ! How wise, how admirable, this Parental Love ! How
beautiful, how perfect, this Filial Attachment! The former, giving
parents the highest pleasure in nut sing and providing for their children;
and the latter, giving children equal pleasure in bestowing the same
kind of attentions upon their parents ; the former, softening the pillow
of infancy, and supplying its wants ; the latter, softening the pillow of
a <rp and alleviating the infirmities of dotage, kindly proffering those at-
tentions which Filial Love alone can bestow. What quality in youth
is more praise-worthy; what recommendation for virtue or goodness
more unequivocal, than devoted attachment to parents ? How can vice
or immorality dsvell in a bosom filled with love and devotedness to an
aged needy parent? What, is more meritorious, or what yields a richer
harvest of happiness, than toiling to support an infirm parent?
But, on the other hand, how ungrateful, how utterly depraved, liovv
superlatively wicked, must be those who neglect this pleasing duty ot
taking care of their parents, or who let, them want ; or, above all who
desire their death, or hasten it by neglect or abuse, in order the sooner


to inherit their patrimony ! Give me the glorious privilege of cherishing
my dearly beloved parents—and, at last, when their days are all num-
bered, let them breath their last in my arms, as I myself desire to do
in those of my children ; and let this family feeling be cherished from
generation to generation.
AMOUNT OF BRAIN ALLOTTED TO THE SOCIAL ORGANS.
Nothing exhibits the power rind energy of these social faculties, or
the importance of their proper exercise, in a more striking light, than
the great amount of brain allotted to their organs, which averages from
one-twelfth to one-sixth of the whole. Do not, on any account, marry
one back of whose head indicates predominant Amativeness. Still, an
ample development behind the ears, is a primary and most important
requisite in a companion and parent. Those in whom it is deficient,
will never enjoy a family, nor render it happy.
It is a well established principle of phrenology that, activity and
other things being equal, the larger the amount of brain called into
action, the greater will be the enjoyment or suffering experienced.
This, in part, explains the immense power of the social feelings over
the happiness and misery of mankind. And this power is grea'ly
augmented by their location , or physiological relation to the other por-
tions of the brain, —it being directly calculated to throw much of the
latter into a state analogous to their own. Hence the neutral action of
the social feelings, tends to quiet all the others, which is highly pro no-
tive of virtue and enjoyment; but their fevered or inflamed condition
tends to inflame the whole brain, especially the animal propensities,
among which they are located, which causes vice and misery. This
inflammation renders those recently disappointed in love, irritable, fault-
finding, and displeased with everything and everybody, and unfit for
study or the advantageous exercise of intellect; because their whole
brain and mind are thrown into violent commotion, and all their animal
propensities are highly excited. Nothing excites Combativeness and
Destructiveness to so high a pitch of indignation, if not revenge, as to
be cut out or * crossed in love,’ or to have a supposed friend prove un-
true ; or to lose a child, companion, or friend ; or any other inter-
ruption of the social feelings.
Why are duels fought, and more animosities engendered, by inter-
ruptions in love and consequent jealousy, than by any other cause ?
Let the juxtaposition of the organs of Love and Resistance answer.
Even the moral and religious organs are greatly disturbed thereby.
On the other hand, many readers can bear experimental witness to
that peace of mind, that delightful composure, that happy state of
feeling which follows marriage, or the final and favourable adjustment
of reciprocated love. These, and kindred states of mind, are caused,
and beautifully accounted for, by this principle.
And what is more, the facility and power with which these faculties
combine, individually and collectively, with each and all the other
faculties, is greater than that with which any other classes combine.
This greatly augments their power of exciting all the other faculties to
the highest pitch of pleasurable or painful action, accordingly as they
are properly or improperly placed ; so that their condition reciprocally
affects, if it does not go far actually to control, that of the balance of
the brain, and with it, the state of the mind ; and they proportionally
hold the keys of our happiness or misery.
To illustrate : Though the meal eaten alone may gratify appetite,
yet, even the pleasures of the palate a e greatly augmented by the ex-
quisite satisfaction derived from eating at our own t ible, surrounded by
our family and friends. This increased enjoyment promotes digestion


and health, which redoubles all our enjoyments, besides prolonging
life * . „
Combativeness, or the element of resistance, is called into more power-
fix’ action by indignities offered to one’s family, than by being cheated,
tr reproached, or by any other imposition that can be practised upon
one’s self. What husband or father will not resent an indignity offered
to a wife or daughter sooner than one offered to himself? Our heroic
fathers, actuated mainly by love of their families, and to protect their
fire-sides, braved every danger, endured every privation, and con-
quered the conquerors of the world. To this combination mainly du
we owe our ever glorious Independence. This principle holds equally
true of Destructiveness and Secretiveness.
Marriage doubles and quadruples the energy of Acquisitiveness.
Many young men, who, before becoming husbands and fathers, were
prodigal of their time, and lavish of their money, spending much of
both in what injured instead of benefiting them, after marriage, save
everything, and practise rigid economy, besides converting every hour
to some useful purpose. The best recipe for becoming wealthy, is to
marry, not a rich, but a frugal companion. Marriage renders a home
necessary, and greatly increases efforts to provide one.
Cautiousness is agreeably and continually excited by the cares of a
family, by watching over children, and providing for their present and
prospective wants ; whilst Self-esteem affords parents as much patriar-
chal pleasure in governing their household, as it does a king in ruling his
kingdom. The agreeable exercise of Acquisitiveness greatly increases this
delight in those who have it to say that they own a house and land enough
to live upon ; so that they are independent; can defy the banks and
hard times ; and owe to no man anything.
Approbativeness, or love of the good opinion of others, in the un-
married, is confined mainly to themselves ; that of parents reverts to
their children. The single lady is pleased with marks of commendation
bestowed upon her dress, appearance, attainments, and tilings apper-
taining to herself ; while the mother is doubly delighted with praises
bestowed upon her darling child, taking more pride in adorning its per-
son and improving its mind, than sfshe ever took in regard to herself.
Praises bestowed upon it, sound more sweetly in her ear, and awaken
more thrilling emotion in her bosom, than those bestowed upon herself
ever had the power of doing ; because the latter strike but the single
chord of Approbativeness, while praises bestowed upon the child, sweep
harmon ; ously the two chords of Approbativeness and Parental Love
combined, thereby more than doubling her pleasure, and opening the
shortest and surest way of access to the good-will of parents. What
b n t this powerful combination, uncontrolled, could produce that exces-
sive and almost sickening parental vanity which many parents lavish
upon their children, or account for their conceit that their children
* An extensive census, taken in England, for the purpose of comparing the
ages of a specified number of married persons of both sexes, with the same
cumber of those who were single, shews that seventy-eight married men
attain the age of forty, where forty-one bachelors attain the same age. As age
advances, the difference is still more striking. At six y, there are ninety-
eight married men alive, to only twenty-two unmarried, or four and a half to
one. At seventy, there are only eleven bachelors alive, to twenty-seven mar-
ried men, or nearly three to one; and at ninety, there are nine married men
to three bachelors. Nearly the same rule holds good with regard to the
female sex. Mairied women, at the age of thirty, on an average, may expect
to live thirty-six years lon:er, but. the unmarried, only thirty, (that is, one-
fifth less). Of those who a.tain »h« age of f->rtv five. are -eventv-two
married women alive for fifty-two single ladies—the difference being nearly
one third. Beyond all dou t ihere is o ne-hingin marriage highly calculated,
in both to prolong life, and to render that life more peaceful and happyw


12 INCREASED INFLUENCES OF THE SOCIAL FACULTIES.
excel those of most others, of which the majority of parents are
prffcyl .. „ , ~ . .. 1
The family affords Conscientiousness ample scope for delightful exer-
cise in dealing out even-handed justice to all; and in implanting in the
tender minds of their children lessons of duly, and the pi inciples of
■ right; while Hope feasts itself upon the promises their expanding in-
tellects afford of dawning talents, virtue, and honour ; transporting
Parental Love in view of the brightening prospects of their coming
prosperity, as well as of the enjoyments yet to be realized in the family
To him who delights in prayer and praise to God, the exercise of
Veneration may yield a rich harvest of pure and exalted pleasure ; but
it is when offering the morning and evening sacrifice of prayer and
thanksgiving, around the family altar—when praying with the family
for blessings upon the family, that this faculty is kindled up to its most
devout and fervent action ; ‘melting the heart, purifying the soul, and
reforming the condact. How much more gratifying to go to the church
or chapel in company, than alone! This increase of pleasure has its
origin in the combination of Veneration and these Social Faculties.
Marvellousness, also, delights to commit and commend those objects of
affection to the merciful protection, and gracious guidance of an all-wise
and over-ruling Providence.
Though the exercise of Benevolence towards strangers, or even brutes,
gives a great amount of real pleasure, yet we feel double gratification
in conferring favours upon those we love. The family presents many
an opportunity for doing little acts of kindness, where the world
at large affords one. Indeed it enables us to be doing and receiving an
almost continual succession of kind offices, perhaps trifling in themselves
hut great in ther aggregate, and highly promotive of reciprocal good
feeling. Children can gratify Imitation by taking pattern from their
beloved and venerated parents, while the wife can indulge her Ideality
and Order in keeping the house and children neat, tidy, and clean, and
in cultivating vines, flowers, &c.* The family also affords the wife an
admirable opportunity to exercise her Constructiveness —which is called
into action in nearly everything done with the hands—in making and
repairing garments and conveniences for those she loves, and at the
same time to endear herself to her husband by gratifying his Acquisi-
tiveness, in saving many a tailor’s bill, (fee., while lie will find his Con-
structiveness agreeably exercised in fixing up things, and making
conveniences about the house, repairing a door, inserting a broken
glass, &c., as well as in the daily labour of his hands in th ir support.
With all the freedom allowed in the family circle, Mirthful ness can
let fly its sprightly jokes, its agreeable sallies of wit, and its tart re
partees, without the least fear of giving offence, or any of that, studied,
guardedness or artificial precision required among others. The Lan-
guage and Eventuality of parents and grand-parents, find frequent and
delightful exercise in recounting to their young and eager listeners the
incidents of by-gone days, and the history and geneal of their an-
cestors, and in telling or reading to them stories calculated to strengthen
their memories and improve their morals ; while the children in return,
also indulge their Language, in their incessant prattle.
It is in the family circle, also, that Tune can exert its powerful
* Every good wife will’gladly improve every opportunity to adorn her house,
especially with natural charms, and render it as pleasant and agreeable as
possible. This seems to be one important and leading duty, or ratber plea-
sure, of a wife and mother, and yet that one is too much neglected. Let every
wife have her flower garden, her harbour, her plants, and shrubbery, ana oy
throwing those little charms and niceties around ‘home’ which the hand and
the taste of woman alone can impart, give to it a peculiar and pleasant attrac-
tion. But more on this point elsewhere.


charms, by striking up the cheerful lay, and giving expression to buoy-
ant, elastic feeling in unreserved strains of thrilling melody and pathos,
flow exalted a source of pleasure is music ! How powerful an instru-
ment of good or evil—of moral purity or debasement, of subduing un-
ruly passions and harmonising all the discordant faculties ! To enliven
ami make cheerful home ; to throw a charm around the fireside ; to
dispel the vexations and disappointments of unpropitious business, and
make a family happy, is its peculiar prerogative. What will quell
the turbulent' temper of a child, or assuage the irritability of a
husband, or soothe his depressed spirits as he returns home disappointed
or weary, or angry, from .lie business of the day, so soon as to hear his
wife or daughter strike up a cheerful lay, or play a favourite tune?
Its power in this re pect is underrated, and too seldom applied, and
modern music is often too artificial to awaken or divert the feelings.*
llo*v vast tiie sum total of that quiet stream of the purest, sweetest
enjovments flowing almost continually from the affectionate and happy
familv circle, with their comfortable fire blazing before them, and the
means at hand of gratifying levery returning want ; including their
agreeable conversation, pouring incessently from every month ; the
pleasant chit-chat of the table and parlour, and that ceaseless prattle
provoked by the domestic feelings and family arrangments !
Here, also, Order has a wide field for delightful exercise, by having a
place for every thing, and every thing in its place, so as to have things
forthcoming at a moment’s call ; and Time, by having a time for every
tiling, an 1 every thing in its season ; meals punctually, and all at their
meals at the same time, ifcc. Here too, Casuality and the Social
Faculties combine with Benevolence, in giving advice, and contriving
and arranging mar ter for their comfort : with Language and Compa-
rison, in explaining their conclusions, and in asking and answering
questions : with Acquisitiveness, in devising and executing ways and
means of augmenting their estate : with eautiousnes, in foreseeing
danger ami providing, against it, and securing their good ; and so of
their other combinations. In short, what motive equals that of a needy
or dependant family for putting the Casuality of parents upon the rack
to invent a constant succession of devices for their relief, —to sharpen
up and call forth every power of the intellect, every energy of the body,
every capacity of man, as well as to stir up every fountain of feeling in
his soul.
But this delightful picture is often reversed ; and then, how changed
the scene ! How terrible when Crnnhativeness instead of defending the
family group, is arrayed apainst it, and, calling Self-Esteem to its
assistance, tyrannises over it, and rules with a rod of iron—when
contention supplants protection, and angry looks dispel the smiles
of aff ction—when their Approbativeness, instead of being gratified
by commendation, is mortified by having their faults or follies ex-
posed, or wounded by reproach,—when Conscientiousness is offended
by theif unprincipled immoralities, —when a want of order or punc-
tuality in either, Licences the Combativeness of the others, —when Lan-
guage, instead of engaging in agreeable conversation, is employed to
mortify Approbativeness by administering reproaches or hurling re-
proof,—when miserly acquisitiveness, instead of making money to pro-
cure comforts for the family, array Combativeness against the family
because they are expensive ; in short, when the other faculties, instead
of uniting with the Social Affections to make home a paradise and the
family happy, are brought into collison with them, and make home a
pandemonium—a real family hell—their sufferings are intolerable, and
their warefare is perpetual, because the family relations bring them and
* See (lie author’s analysis of Tune, and criticisms on modern, fashionable
music, in his work oa * i'hrcnology applied to Education and Self-lmprove*
meat.’


keep them in constant contest, the most direct and powerful. Then it
is that the stream of life is poisoned at its fountain-bead, and made to
send forth bitter waters continually. The very quintessence of misery
consists in this collision, this warring of the faculties. As in the case
of magnetic bodies, the nearer their contact, the more powerful their
attraction or repulsion, so the family relations bring every point in the
character of each into direct unison with those of the others, or into
flat opposition to them.
With great emphasis, therefore, I repeat this main proposition, that
the influences of the domestic organs on the rest of the brain, and of the
social faculties on the other mental powers, are so direct and reciprocal,
that their proper or improper exercise—their peaceful or disturbed
action —throws the whole brain and mind into a similar condition, form-
ing a kind of centre of virtue and happiness, or of vice and misery. Is
a man but happy in the domestic relations, he is happy every where,
in spite of all the evils that can assail him. What, though the storms
of adversity beat violently upon his head, and misfortunes thicken upon
him ; though the winds waft tidings of evil; though scandal and re-
proach assail him from without, and sickness appears within ; though
riches take to themselves wings and fly away, and iiis plans and pros-
pects prove abortive ; if he but li\e affectionately with his wife, and see
his children growing up to love and bless him, he is still happy. His
joys are beyond the reach of misfortune.
But let a man be miserable at home ; let his wife prove unfaithful or
unsocial, and his children become a disgrace to him ; and, though the
breezes are wafting to him the wealth of the Indies ; though the trumpet
of fame is sounding his name throughout Christendom ; though the sun-
shine of prosperity beams on his pathway with full effulgence, and suc-
cess every where attends him ; still, a canker-worm is preying on his
vitals —he is most wretched. His joys arc rotten at, their core ; his life
is the dregs of bitterness. It is not in the power of either poverty, re-
proach, or misfortune to blast, or even embitter the fruits of domestic
felicity ; while it is in the power of domestic discord or unhappiness to
poison every sweet that either riches, or fame, or learning can bestow,
and to mar even the consolations of religion. Let the blasting winds of
adversity blow upon me a perfect hurricane of trouble ; let the afflic-
tions of even Job be repeated upon me—only let me live in the bosom
of my family, and let my wife and children be spared to greet me-
with the smiles and the kisses of affection, and my cup of pleasure is
well nigh full.
And if these things be true of man, how much more so of woman,
whose home is the family, whose heart is tenderness, and whose very
being is connubial and maternal love! In her the blighted affections
occasion the most bitter agony beneath the sun ! Indeed, words cannot
express the amount either of the happiness which the social affections
are capable of pouring into the human bosom, or the amount of sighs,
and woes, and bitter sorrow, with which they have the power to curse
man. None but those who have tasted these things can know the full
force of these remarks.
In proportion, therefore, to the power of these social faculties over the
weal or woe of man, is the importance of understanding and obeying
the laws of their action ; that is, of properly placing and regulating
our social affections. If their exercise were productive of f/ood on'y it
would be entirely proper for young people to fall in love and marry as
they often now do—anyhow, just as it happens. It would also be
proper for parents to make pecuniary matches. But as this is not the
case, it becomes all candidates for marriage—nay, it is their duty, to
place and exercise their social feelings with care. But many expe-
rience all the curses they are capable of inflicting—curses proportionate
to the blessings they are capable of conferring. Why is this? Is it
unavoidable ? This would be charging God foolishly, aud blaming him


for our own folly and stupidness. Cannot all be happy in the domestic
relations ? Is not happiness here, like happiness every where else, the
result of the action of certain fixed and invariable laws ? And is not
this equally the case in regard to domestic misery ? By applying to
yourself causes productive of happiness, you will be happy ; but by
applying opposite causes, you have opposite results. And these causes
are mostly in your own hands, so that all have it in their power to say
whether they will enjoy domestic life, or endure it, or have a bitter-sweet.
The question then returns with redoubled force ; HOW can we sc
place and regulate our social affections as to secure all the blessings
they are designed and adapted to yield ? and how avoid all the evils
they are capable of inflicting ? Phrenology kindly replies. It unfolds
the laws of man’s social nature, on the observance or violation of which
these momentous results depend. It even goes farther : it shows us how
to obey them. Mark well its teachings : observe and follow its directions
and you will drink in the joys designed by natura to flow from married
life.
In order to marry so as to be happy in the domestic relations, we
must first understand the precise thing to he done, and then, the means
of doing it. That thing is, to secure Connubial Love, which consists in
the reciprocal exercise of the social faculties of two persons of opposite
sexes, in harmony with all their other faculties. Union of soul, hai mony
of views and sentiments, congeniality of tastes and feelings, and a
blending of the natures of both, so as to make ‘ twain one flesh,’ is
the end to be obtained. This is Love— that wonderful element of our
nature which made Eleanor of Castile jeopardise her own life to save
that of her beloved husband, Edward the first, and suck the poison
from his otherwise fatal wound—which induced Gertrue Van der Wart
to bid defiance to the ribaldry of the soldiers, and stand resolutely by
the side of her racked and mangled husband during the whole of an
awfully tempestuous night, soothing him by her sympathies, and sus-
taining him by her fortitude, till the cruel rack ended his life and
sufferings together —and which makes every fond wife and devoted hus-
band willing, and even glad, to sacrifice their own ease and happiness,
and rejoice in enduring toil, suffering and self-denial, to relieve the
sufferings and promote the happiness of their dearly-beloved companion.*
* There are two kinds of love, —the one healthy, the other sickly ; the one
virtuous and elevating, the other questionable ; the one strong and natural,
and governed by judgment ; the other, a green-hcuse exotic, governing the in-
tellect, springing up before its time, and bearing unripe, unhealthy fiuit. Per-
sons afflicted with this unnatural parasite, are said to be ‘ love-sick, and sick
enough, it sometimes make its youthful victims. This kind of love will ire
quently be found described in novels, and its workings seen in young people
in high life (improperly so called, for it afflicts those of a nervous tempera-
ment and sentiment all cast of mind most greviously. Those who are above
labour who are too good to mingle with the medium classes, or engage m any
useful occupation; who have little to do except attend balls and parties, to
dress in the tip of the fashion, thumb the piano, and such high-life oceup.
ations: those whose parents roll in luxury, or live in affluence ; those boys and
girls whose worth is neither in their heads nor hearts, but in their fathers
name and pockets, are most apt to be attacked by this ‘love-sick.’ They are
usually ‘smitten ’ with it at a party, or dance or sail; they exchange kisses, &c.
and conclude by proposing, and accepting, and sending for the parson. This
love-sick kind of feeling is much more prevalent in the city than country, and
attacks its victims there much earlier; besides rendering them, if possible,
still more soft and sickish there than elsewhere; and it is one of the principal
causes of so many unhappy marriages. ,
The other kind of love appears in our working, substantial swains and dames,
who think little and care less about love and matrimony till their physical
powers are developed, their characters and judgments matured, and their in-
tellects sufficiently unfolded to guide their love understandiugly into tin.
paths of domestic happiness.


Having seen precisely what requires to be done in order to enjoy mar-
ried live, the question returns as to the means of doing it. They. are
brief and simple but plain.
SELECT A COMPANION WKOSE PHRENOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS AND TEMPERAMENT
RESEMBLE YOUR OWN.
That is, select one whose feelings, desires, sentiments, objects, tastes,
intellectual and moral qualities, in all their leading elements, kc., har-
monize with your own.* The fundamental law of both love and friend-
ship is this : We become attached to those whose qualities of intellect and
feeling resemble our own. The reason is, that as the proper exercise of
every faculty gives pleasure, and as the active faculties of each excite
the same faculties of the other, those whose objects, sentiments, and other
qualities resemble our own, most powerfully excite, and thereby gratify
our own organs, while ours at the same time harmonize with theirs, and
thus give them the greatest amount of pleasure. Thus, if your Consci-
entiousness, or sense of justice, be strong, the same faculty in another
will agreeably excite and gratify this organ in yourself, and thus give
you pleasure \ but the want of moral principle in another violates your
sense of right, and gives you pain, and this reversed or painful action of
Concientiousness excites your Resistance, Firmness, Intellect, Appre-
hension, and nearly all your other faculties against him,
As this principle of the reversed or painful action of the faculties bears
with great force upon our conclusions, and will frequently be employed
hereafter, a short digression is necessary in order to explain and illus-
trate it. Every faculty has both its natural, and its reversed or painful
action. Thus, the natural function of Benevolence is to feel that
lively sympathy for distress which induces efforts to relieve it, whereas
its reversed action is that keen anguish, that poignant grief, which the
benevolent heart experiences on beholding distress which cannot be re-
lieved. The natural function of Approbativeness is that pleasure felt
when our laudable actions meet deserved commendation, butits reversed
action is that shame mortification, and chagrin caused by a conscious-
ness of being disgraced. The natural function of Conscientiousness is that
satisfaction derived from a consciousness that we have done right ; but
its reversed action produces the goadings and compunctions of a guilty
conscience. Order is gratified by having a place for every thing and
every thing in its place, but reversed by disorder and confusion. Size
is gratified’ by proportion, but reversed and pained by disproportion.
Ideality, in its natural action, is gratified by beholding the beautiful
in nature or art, but pained and reversed by the vulgar or disgusting :
and so of the other faculties. And what is more, the reversed action of
any faculty calls the other faculties into reversed action. Thus, re-
versed Conscientiousness reverses Cautiousness, which makes the wicked
flee when no man pursueth. Reversed Self-esteem, or wounded pride,
reverses Combativeness and Adhesiveness ; converting the warmest
friendship into the bitterest hatred ; and so of other reversals.
Let us apply thi3 principle to the reversed action of the. Social
Faculties. Though Amativeness in each sex creates a predisposition in
favour of the other, yet how much greater disgust, and even hatred and
abhorrence does virtuous woman feel towards the man who has insulted
her, or who would rob her of her virtue, than she can ever feel towards
* This rule is, as it should be, in direct hostility to a leading doctrine of
Walker, who contends .that opposites unite. Whatever may be the ground of
preferment or law of tastes in regard to merely physical qualities, which are
of little account compared with those of mind and character, Phrenology re-
cognizes no such doctrine in regard to mental and moral preferences. The
text goes into this matter more deeply than the mere shape of the body, color
of the eyes or hair, kc. Both are correct. Like and unlike qualities are both
essential to highest love and matrimonial bliss, as well as to endowment of
offspring.


IMPORTANCE OE SIMILARITY ILLUSTRATED. IT
one of her own 1 No element of our nature is more powerful or in-
veterate than the reversed action of Amativenees and its combinations.
Though Amativeness alone could never turn against the opposite sex,
yet the other faculties may reverse it even against a husband or wife;
the loathing and disgust, the abhorrence and hatred engendered thereby,
can never be told. And then the lingering misery of being chained
for life to a loathed and hated husband or wife, and shut out from the
embraces of those that are loved, can be known to those only who
experience it. Over such a picture, let the curtains of darkness be
drawn for ever ! ,
But to return to the reason why we should select companions whose
developments accord substantially with our own. When Ideality is
large in the one and small in the other, the former will be continually
disgusted and offended with the coarseness and vulgarity of the latter,
and the absence of taste and gentility, of refinement, personal nea -
ness and sense of propriety; while the latter, in turn, will be equally
displeased with the former’s attention to trifles, and preference of the
ornamental to the useful. This disparity of tastes calls Combativeness
into reversed action, and widens the breach made in their affections,
till even Adhesiveness and Amativeness may become reversed, and
both parties be rendered most wretched. But where Ideality is large
in both, each will be continually delighted with the other’s refinement of
manners, delicacy of feeling, and admiration of the beautiful m nature
and art ; which will redouble their love, enable each to administer
pleasure to the other, and thus swell their nuptial happiness. What
pleases one, will gratify both, and what disgusts one, will offend both.
On the other hand, when Ideality is deficient in both, each will be
satisfied with home-made, common articles of dress, furniture, &c.; the
slovenliness of either, so far from offending, rather pleases, the other,
and though they do not enjoy the pleasures flowing from the exercise
of this faculty, yet neither of these will know their want of them.
Large Mirthfulness in the one, will throw out continual sallies of
wit which small Mirthfulness in the other, unable to comprehend or
return, will call upon Combativeness to resent; whereas large Mirth-
fulrress would be gratified by such sallies, and even delight to return
If the husband has large Hope and deficient Cautiousness, and the
wife large Cautiousness but deficient Hope, the husband, hoping every
thing and fearing nothing, will see only sunshine and prosperity before
him, and be careless, continually plunging into new difficulties, and
be utterly incapable of sympathizing with, or soothing the gloomy cast
of mind which afflicts his wife, and even be displeased with it; while
she will be continually dreading the effects of his imprudence, and
reproving him for it, not only without any good effect, but with his
marked displeasure. She, being timid, and frightened almost at her
own shadow, will feel very much in want of some careful, judicious
husband, in whose care she may feel safe, yet will be in fact, in the
hands of an imprudent husband, who, instead of keeping her out of
danger, will be continually exposing her to it, and doubly frightening
her with both real and imaginary dangers. He will be continually
lookin'*' upon the bright side of every prospect; she upon the dark side:
Jus wilfnever see a difficulty or danger ; she will see more than there
are, and see nothing else. How can they love each other 1 or rather,
how can they avoid mutual contention and fault-finding, and the con-
sequent reversal of their social feelings ‘l But if each one is cautious
in reference to the other, and both look at the same measures and
prospects in the same light, this similarity of character will augment
their love and increase their happiness and prosperity.
Suppose your large Benevolence fastens upon doing good ns your
chief delight, your highest duty, how can your feelings harmonize with
a selfish companion, whose god is gain, and who turns coldly away from


suffering humanity : refuses to bestow a charity, and contending with
you for casting in your mite 1 His Selfishness reverses your Benevo-
lence against him, and this not only utterly precludes congeniality in
other respects, but even engenders that displeasure which is the very
opposite of love. But if you see in our companion that same gushing
fountain of humanity which overflows your own heart, how does this
common feeling, this congeniality swell the love and estimation of each
for the other, and endear both to each other 1
If thoughts of God, eternity, and things sacred, be uppermost iu
your own mind, you can no more commingle your joys, sorrows, affec-
tions, and feelings with one who trifles with these things, than you can
assimilate oil and water, to say nothing of the painful apprehension
often entertained by such that death may separate them for ever. Nor
can your irreligious companion esteem or love one whom he regards as
deluded or fanatical. Not only will there be a want of congeniality of
views and feelings in a most important point, but your reversed religious
feelings will reverse yourother faculties against him, and his Combativ-
eness be reversed against you on account of those religious feelings which
you regard as most sacred, and this will be liable to reverse his love,,
and to root out the last vestige of affection between you. But if you
both love to worship God together , to pray with each other, and mutually
offer thanks to the ‘Giver of every good and perfect gift;’ if you can
walk arm in arm to the sanctuary, sweetly conversing, as you go and
come, upon heaven and heavenly things ; if you can mutually and
cordially succour each other when tempted, and encourage each other to
religious zeal, and faith, and good works, this religious union will unite
you in other respects, and enhance your mutual esteem and reciprocal
love. Unless I have seen and felt in vain, and in vain deeply pondered
the volume of man’s nature as unfolded in the book of Phrenology,
this harmony in other respects is but the precursor—the necessary
concomitant, and the co-worker of connubial love. Even when hus-
bands and wives belong to different religious sects, this concord is
essentially marred, in regard both to themselves and their children.
If Approbativeness be large in the one, but small in the other, the
conduct of the latter will frequently incur the reproach of his fellow-
men, which will mortify and displease the other extremely, and be-
liable to create in each unfavourable feelings towards the other ; but
if the desire for the good opinion of others be strong in both, each will
de delighted with praises bestowed upon, and defend the character of,
the other —be ambitious to merit the other’s approbation, and so con-
duct themselves, as to secure for both a respectable standing in society.
How many men abstain from doing wrong, lest they should bring dis-
grace upon their wives and children ? And how many more are incited
to praiseworthy deeds because of the consequent honour shared with
them 1
If the large intellectual organs of the one prefer the paths of litera-
ture to fashion, and philosophical conversation to idle chit-chat, while
the weak intellectual organs and excess of vanity and Ideality of the
other, seek the gaudy splendour and parade of fashionable life ; the
former will be continually disgusted with the fashionable fooleries of the
latter, and the latter equally displeased with the intellectuality of the
former. But if both be intellectual, if both love to think and read, and
especially if both prefer the same class of books and studies—which
they will do if their organs are similar—they will not only be delighted
to hold intellectual intercourse with each other by couversation and
reading, but will be able to promote the intellectual advancement of
each other ; criticise each other’s ideas and productions, and continu-
ally and immensely advance each other in the main object of desire and
pursuit. How exceedingly delighted must President Adams have been
with the highly intellectual correspondence of his uncommonly talented
wife, and how much more with the masterly manner in which she cop-


CONTRASTED WITH THAT OP DISSIMILARITY.
ducted the education of their son, ex-President John Quincy Adams *
and instilled into his tender mind those principles of integrity and un-
compromising moral rectitude which, together with his acknowledged
intellectual superiority, placed him in the Presidential chair, and dis-
tinguished his long and useful life? A correspondence which is all love
would soon cloy and sicken an intellectual companion, while one rich
in ideas and good counsel, and also full of tenderness and elevated love,
is a rare treat, a treasure which must be experienced to be appreciated.
If the Temperament and feelings of the one be coarse and harsh, while
those of the other are fine and exquisite; if the one be phlegmatic and
the other sentimental; one quick and the other slow; one elevated and
aspiring, the other grovelling; one clear-headed, the other dull of com-
prehension ; one frugal and industrious, the other idle and extravagant;
true connubial love cannot exist between them. How can two walk
together unless they be agreed? And if Phrenology be true, how can
they be agreed unless their temperaments and organs be similar'?
How can husbands and wives live happily together whose tastes, dis-
positions, objects, sentiments, views, opinions, preferences, feelings,
&c., &c., are conflicting, when every faculty of the one only excites those
of the other to discordant and disagreeable action; the product of which
is pain, which engenders dislike? The very essence of connubial love,
that in which alone it consists and has its being, is congeniality.
Let the reader now pause and examine the correctnese of this prin-
ciple Inquire at the shrine of your own heart, and question the experi-
ence of the married in regard to its validity. I call upon you who are
married to bear witness whether you do not love each other so far as
your qualities of mind harmonize, wadi, on account of that harmony ? Do
those of you who admire and love each other do so on account of your
mental similarity or dissimilarity ? And do not those of you who in part
dislike each other do so because you are unlike? Is not the main pro-
curing cause of that frequent want of love between husbands and wives
founded in this want of similarity of their feelings and intellectual
qualities ? Does not this dissimilarity account for there being so many
pairs yet so few matches? This is Phrenology—this, is human nature.
If to this you answer by asking ‘how it happens that they love and
marry at all since this similarity is the law and the basis of love, and
since after marriage they find they do not possess it?’ I reply that,
when first ‘ smitten/ they find, on a casual comparison of views and
feelings, that they are alike on some one or two strong points, and
marry before they have compared notes and feelings in other respects.
Before marriage, only the concordant points were brought out; after
marriage their ofc-cordant points are brought in collision, and their
attachments are thus reversed. .
To every unmarried man and woman then, I say, in the name ot
nature and of nature’s God, marry oongenial spirits or none—con-
genial not in one or two material points, but in all the leadvng
elements of character. And to obtain this congeniality, marry one
whose Temperament and Phrenological developments are similar
to your own ! Do this, and you are safe, you are happy : fail to do
this, and you marry sorrow and regret.
But if this principle hold true of the other faculties, how much more
so of the social ? If they be unlike—if Amativeness or Friendship
be strong in the one and weak in the other, the former will be all
tenderness and affection, but the latter too cold-hearted to reciprocate
If any should deem this allusion irreverent or improper, let such read the
published correspondence between President John Adams and bis wife, par-
ticularly in reference to the education of their children , and at the same time
recollect that scarcely any one thing will attach an intellectual man to ms
wife sooner or more effectually than to see her employ a vigorous intellect and
an enlightened judgment in the training and home education of their children.


them which will put the affectionate one upon the rack. Of all other
points of dissimilarity, those in regard to the social faculties are the
most momentous, and disagreement here the most disastrous ! bee
to it therefore, those of you who have large domestic organs, that you.
marry one in whom they are also large, and not p-re-occupied, or fas-
tened on another. „ ~ ,
In case your own excesses or defects are liable, if equally developed
in a companion, to endanger your happiness, or prove • injurious to
your offspring, it may be best to violate this rule, by choosing a com-
panion whose qualities are the opposite of your own in these injurious
extremes. Thus, if your Cautiousness be deficient, you- should not
marry one in whom it is also small, lest your combined imprudences
keep you both always in difficulty; but you should select a companion
having this organ large—one who will take care of things, and stand
sentinel for you both, warn you of approaching danger, and check
your imprudences. Though these admonitions may at times annoy
you, still, if you bear in mind the good conferred upon you by this
dissimilarity, it will only tend to increase your love, especially as this-
course was pointed out by intellect, and required by your own good.
But if cautiousness be so excessive in you as to produce irresolution,
procrastination, or cowardice, you require a companion m whom it is
less, who will be bold and prompt, and encourage you to action, as well
as dispel your groundless fears. Their carelessness may often make
vou afraid, yet this evil is less than its excessive development m both.
Still a full and equal development of it in each is altogether preferable.
If Acquisitiveness be small in yourself* you should by no means
marry one in whom this organ is also small, lest the combined extra-
vagance of both, and the economy of neither* bring you to poverty,
and keep you there; but you should choose a frugal, acquisitive,
industrious companion ; one who will make a good bargain, hold on
to the purse strings, save everything, and check your profuseness.
Though this parsimony may sometimes disgust you, yet, by recollect-
ing that this very quality benefits yourself, this dissimilarity will
only serve to increase your mutual esteem and affection.. And yet,
unless you saw, in the light of this principle, that this disagreement-
worked on you/r own personal good as well as theirs, and was dicta e
by intellect, evil consequences would almost inevitably grow out of it.
But by ‘agreeing to disagree' for the sake of the common good, this
opposition of qualities, instead of breaking in upon your affections,
will only strengthen them.
But these exceptions to this rule are few, and can occur only upon
the animal propensities or lower sentiments. On no account should
they ever occur in reference to the moral sentiments or intellect.
Agreement here is indispensable to true connubial love, while disagree-
ment here is fatal to domestic happiness. This law is imperative.
Whoever marries in violation of it must abide the consequences, and
they will be found to be terribly severe. . , ~
If, however, your own animal propensities predominate, you should
by no means marry one whose animal natvu’e also predominates, or
this will cause a perpetual strife, and continual boiling over of the
animal natures of both. Nor should you marry one whose moral sen-
timents predominate ; first,because their goodness will be a living,ever
present reproof to your badness, tormenting you continually (for mora
purity always rebukes selfishness); and secondly, because your propen-
sities will be a perpetual thorn in the side of your companion. As
well marry a chicken to a hawk, or a lamb to a wolf, as high-moral
sentiments to predominant animal passions. But, say you, if i mus
neither marry one having the propensities predominant, nor one ot pre-
dominant moral sentiments, what shall I do, whom shall 1 marry 1
tell thee, friend : Don’t marry at all. Your own good demands this
course. The farther you keep from the marriage state, the better lor


yourself and all concerned. Till you rid yourself of your selfishness—
till your moral sentiments rule—you are neither fit to marry, nor to
mingle with your fellow-men at all. Your selfishness renders you
necessarily miserable, and also all with whom you have to do. So have
as little to do with your fellow-men as possible, both on your own
account and on theirs. Above all, avoid this closest of all contacts,
and especially refrain from becoming a parent , lest you render your
posterity miserable by entailing upon them that animal organization
which torments yourself.
An extremely active Temperament forms another exception to this
rule. When both parents are extremely active and nervous, then
children will be liable to precocity, and subject to a premature death, j
For the same reason two persons having small chests and weak vital
powers should not become parents, but should off-set these defects by
opposite qualities in their companions on account of offspring. The
domestic felicity of parents, and indeed of the whole family, is greatly
augmented or diminished by the good or bad dispositions of the chil-
dren, by their life and health, their sickness or death, &c., &c.; hence,
this matter becomes an item of no inconsiderable consequence to be
taken into account in selecting a husband or wife.
Since this subject has thus inadvertently been broached, I will just
allude to the manifest impropriety of choosing companions who have
hereditary tendencies to mental and physical diseases, such as insanity,
consumption, scrofula, apoplexy, &c., and show the importance of
choosing a companion who is qualified to become the parent of healthy,
moral, and intelligent offspring ; although to show what qualities are
requisite in parents as parents, in order to prepare them to impart to
their children the most desirable physical and mental qualities does
not come within the design of this work ; it being detailed in one on
‘Hereditary Descent, its Laws and Facts.'
The leading principle of Phrenology in regard to marriage, together
with its reasons, is now before the reader. But the next inquiry is,
How can this harmony be effected ? By what means, and in what way
can it be brought about 1 For, to know how to obtain this harmony
is quite as important as the harmony itself. The answers of Phre-
nology here also are clear and directly in point, and its directions so
plain that ‘he that runs may read/ They are—
First.—Study yourself thoroughly. Study both your physical
organization and your phrenological developments. Ascertain your
own qualities, and that will tell you just what qualities you require in
a companion to harmonize with them. I say, study yourself phreno-
logically ; because no other method is equally satisfactory or certain,
j "Without a knowledge of this science, your Self-esteem, if large, will
magnify all your good qualities, and throw the mantle of charity over
your defects; or, the deficiency of this organ, with large Conscientious-
ness, will give you too low and humble an opinion of yourself; magni-
fying your faults and hiding from you your good qualities. Our own
; organization constitutes the medium, or the coloured glass, through
which we look at all subjects, ourselves included. If that organization
be defective, that is, if our characters be faulty, our standard of self-
estimation is erroneous, and our self-knowledge proportionably deficient
or defective. But in case Phrenology be true, it affords certain and
tangible data for self-examination—data that cannot be mistaken —so
that it leaves scarcely a possibility of our being deceived or mistaken
in regard to our real characters ; especially when we combine our own
consciousness with a knowledge of our phrenological developments.
Secondly. —Phrenology will also tell you the true character and
disposition of your intended, and thereby show wherein each is adapted
to the other, or discover their want of adaptation. Modern courtship
is little else than a school of deception. The time being previously
appointed, the best dress is put on; the mouth put in prim and set off


with artificial smiles ; the gentleman arrayed in his best broadcloth,
and the lady dressed in the tip of the fashion, and corsetted too tight to
breathe freely or appear naturally ; fine sayings, well spiced with flat-
tery, cut and dried beforehand ; faults all hid, and virtues set in the
fore-ground ; and every thing whitewashed for the season. And,
what is even worse, the night season is usually chosen ; whereas this,
the most momentous and eventful business in our lives, should be trans-
acted in open daylight, when both parties are fully themselves, and
have all their faculties in vigorous exercise. One main object of court-
ship should be, to become acquainted, especially with each other’s faults ;
for, if the parties marry, they are sure to find out these bad qualities ;
but it will then be too late. In trying to cheat the other party by con-
cealing your faults, you are only cheating yourselves; for how can those
love you whom you have deceived? And how can you live happily toge-
ther when you both find yourselves taken in by each other l Hence you
should freely disclose your faults : your virtues will exhibit themselves.
Besides, persons in love are quite liable enough to be blind to the faults
of their sweethearts, without any attempts to keep these faults con-
cealed. The great danger—the main point to be guarded against—is a
relapse, a re-action after marriage ; which will be effectually prevented
by both disclosing their faults before marriage.
But even in case your intended should follow this almost universal
custom of practising deception, a knowledge of Phrenology, with one
scrutinizing glance, strips the character of all artificial deceptions that
can be thrown around it, and furnishes an unerring index of character,
talents, tastes, sentiments, pre-dispositions, &c.; for the developments
can neither be inflated nor depressed to suit the occasion, but are fixed
and. permanent signs of the naked character, just as it will be found to be
on acquaintance. This science, therefore, is an invaluable directory to
candidates for marriage. If it were studied and applied, there would
be no more need of making a bad choice, or of mistaking a poor hus-
band or wife for a good one, than of mistaking a thistle for a rose.
But if you have not sufficient time to study the science so as to apply
it with the requisite certainty for yourself, you can employ the services
■of an experienced practical Phrenologist, or if this cannot be done, a
.comparison of charts, carefully prepared by him, may answer. At this
•course, you smile in ridicule ; but what is there in it at all absurd, or
•even improper 1 Is it improper to ascertain the qualities of each other '!
Certainly not; whereas it is ridiculous to marry a stranger, or even one
of whose qualities you know but little. Does this absurdity then con-
sist in the proposed means of obtaining this kowledge 1 In what else
can it consist 1 The only reason for smiling at this proposed method is,
that it is novel, which evinces the folly, not of this method, but of the
laughter. Let such laugh on ; for they laugh only at themselves ; but
let those who would avail themselves of an assistant superior to all
others observe the heads of their intended, and marry phrenologically.
And let matrimony, instead of being treated lightly, and as a matter of
merriment, which is usually the case, be regarded as it really is—the
most momentous business of our lives.
If to this it be objected that Cupid is blind, and that though I
have told how to select a suitable companion, I have not shown how
to get in love with the one selected ; I reply,
FIRST, RECTIFY YOUR STANDARD OF ESTEEM AND ADMIRATION.
If Cupid has always been blind, he has always blindly followed
admiration. We fall in love with whatever we admire and esteem, and
with that only. The young man who admires a delicate hand or hand-
some figure, a pretty foot and ancle, or a fine set of teeth, a small waist,
or fine bust, a beautiful face, or genteel manners, mostly will fall in love
with one possessing the admired quality, and because she possesses it.
But he who admires moral purity, or superior talents, or piety, or


tenderness of love, will love a woman possessing these qualities, and
on account of this quality. Is not this proposition founded in a law
of mind ? Who can controvert or essentially modify it 1 To you whose
experience enables you to judge feelingly in regard to this matter, I
make my appeal for its correctness.
This point being established, it follows that whoever regards par-
ticular fen ms of the head, or certain phrenological developments, as
indication of those qualities of mind admired, will fall in love with
one havin these developments just as deeply and effectually as with
one havin a pretty face, handsome figure, &c., when they are admired,
and for pi ecisely the same reason—namely, because they are admired.
Why shou d this not be the case 1 My position, that love follows admira-
tion, emb idies the entire experience of mankind, and is invulnerable;
and the cc nsequent inference, that those who admire an excellent head
will surely fall in love with it, is conclusive. Whatever, therefore, a young
man or wo nan admires most, whether personal beauty, a sweet smile,
;v talent fo music, or poetry, or painting, or high intellectual or moral
attainmen ,s, or kindness, or industry, or frugality, or wit, or strong
common sense, or a well-formed head, as indicating a superior mind or
excellent feelings, will be fallen in love with first. To this rule there
can be no exception. By applying it you can guide your love in any
channel p( inted out by intellect or sanctioned by the moral sentiments.
This prim iple is to your love what the helm is to a ship, and intellect
should be the pilot. Let your intellect and higher sentiments rectify
your stand ard of admiration and esteem, and this will effectually govern
your love, and guide it into the peaceful haven of connubial bliss.
Allow n e to add that my own experience accords entirely with this
principle, besides fully confirming the preceding, namely, that of
selecting e companion by the developments. I say, with emphasis, and
from expedience, that I would place more confidence in a good phreno-
logical head, in connection with a good physical organization and
training, than in ten years’ acquaintance and courtship added to all
the recommendations that can be produced. They never vary, never
deceive ! hile the latter may be only outside appearances. How
often have they deceived the most cautious? So often—so egre-
giously- -that choosing a companion has been appropriately compared
to buying a ticket in a lottery. You may draw a prize, but the
chances ai e ten to one that you will draw a blank. In hundreds of
instances have I seen the course here proposed, of courting and
marrying by the developments followed, and in as many instances
have been called upon professionally to decide on the fitness and the
adaptation of the parties to each other, and never saw one to terminate
any other than happily. I state my reputation as a Phrenologist on
the success of this direction properly applied, and am entirely willing
to abide any evil consequences resulting from its failure.
But, continues our objector, though you show us how to make our
choice, and then how to get in love with the object chosen, yet it is
quiu« as ’mportant that you show us how to get the object of our
choice in love with us. I reply, that in case the affections of the
other party are not previously engaged, very little difficulty need be
ar-prehc-nd( d about engaging them ; for both young men and young
women are apt to get in love quite easy enough without effort. In
fact, the great difficulty consists in keeping them from loving till
they are fully matured and prepared for marriage.
And now, good reader, let us pause and review the ground already
gone over. The three points thus far presented are :
1. THE POWER OP THE DOMESTIC FACULTIES OVER THE HAPPINESS OR
MISERY OF MANKIND.
2. THE NECESIITY OP HAYING A COMPANION SIMILAR TO YOURSELF


3. THE NECESSITY OF RECTIFYING YOUR STANDARD OF ESTEEM AND
Admiration, and thus enabling you to control your love.
If this last direction should call out the question, “ By what model
shall we rectify our standard 1 On what principles- shall this esteem
and admiration be based 1 ” I answer, on
A FULL DEVELOPMENT OF THE MORAL SENTIMENTS.
This, according to Phrenology, is one main condition of virtue and
happiness. Not only does their proper exercise give a great amount of
enjoyment of the purest, highest kind, but the action of the other
faculties can be productive of their proper amount of pleasure only when
exercised in harmony with them, and under their sanction. The exer-
cise of the animal propensities without their sanction, or in opposition
to their dictates, is a violation of God’s law, and brings down penalties
on the head of the offender. By the still small voice of these sentiments,
man instinctively feels that he should be governed. He is intuitively
conscious of his obligation to yield obedience to their mandates. He
feels their dictates to be imperious and sovereign. When large Acqui-
sitiveness would fain take what belongs to another, Conscientiousness,
even though less in size, resists the enticement with more energy and
success than Acquisitiveness urges it. It is only after the moral senti-
ments have been disarmed of their power by having been perverted that
they allow the propensities to lead astray. No exercise of these pro-
pensities without their sanction, orat least in oppositiontotheiv sanction,
can ultimately produce happiness, but always pain. It is a law of our
nature, that selfishness and sin-only another nameforthepredominance
of the propensities—shall invariably punish themselves ; and, on the
other hand, that virtue and moral purity—only other names for the as-
cendancy of the moral sentiments properly directed—shall make their
possessor happy. To enjoy the domestic relations, your moral faculties
must/rs;; be exercised and gratified; and, in order to this, you require
their proper development in your companion, so that this companion may
continually and agreeably excite your moral faculties. If, therefore,
you do not wish to be put in perpetual torment, by having your own
propensities continually excited by their predominance in your com-
panion, or if you would inhale, day by day, and year by year, the
balmy breezes of high moral sentiments, of pure and holy emotion, see
to it, I beseech you, that you choose a companion having large moral
organs, so that your own may be continually and agreeably excited.
To woman this principle applies with double force : first, because she
is much more under the power and subject to the caprice of her hus-
band than he is to hers, and therefore her happiness depends mere on
his being a good-feeling man, than his happiness depends on Ziergood
feelings ; but what is more, man is less likely to be moral and virtuous
than woman ; that is, woman has generally better moral developments
than man, and secondly, woman is more social, affectionate, and do-
mestic than man; that is, she enjoys a good husband and suffers
from a bad one more than it is possible for a man to enjoy a good
wife or suffer from a bad one.
The reader hardly requires to be told that a predominance of the
moral sentiments is indicated by a high head, and one that is long,
especially on the top; while a large neck, and a thick, broad, conical
head, one that runs up as it were towards a peak upon the top, some-
what resembling a cone, largest at the base, and neither high nor long,
indicates the ascendancy of the propensities. Do not marry a man with
a low, wide, flat head; for, however fascinating, genteel, polite, tender,
plausible, or winning he may be, you will repent the day of your
espousal. I would not have you marry a head too long, or too thin,
lest your husband should lack the requisite force of mind and energy of
character tcfsupport yourself and children; but marry a well-propor-


tioned head and body. In my work on education, I have shown that,
other things being equal, the best heads are those in which the organs
are the most evenly and harmoniously developed and balanced—a
principle which should be borne in mind in selecting companions for
life ; for, the better their characters, the greater the enjoyment you
will derive from their society and affection, and, education and other
things being right, the more equally developed their organs, the more
perfect will be their characters, and the greater amount of brain in
your head that will be called into action by them, and, consequently,
the greater your happiness.
Let us now look at a few illustrations and applications of our second
leading principle, namely—the importance of marrying so as to gratify
the whole brain, or the moral and intellectual faculties in conjunction
with the propensities, rather than to gratify the propensities merely.
If your standard of admiration be beauty, and you love and marry this
quality, you .gratify Amativeness only, combined perhaps with Ideality
and Form, so that but a small portion of your brain is exercised or
gratified, nor that too long : for beauty soon fades.
So, if you admire a singing-bird, and love and marry her because
she gratifies your organ of Tune, combined with one or two others,
the cares of a family, blended with another kind of music, are liable
to drown the tones of the piano or harp, and compel you to exclaim
with Micah, “Ye have taken away my Gods ! what have I more 1”
If Acquisitiveness determine your choice, and you love and marry
for riches, though you may gratify a single faculty, and that a lower
propensity, still, you thereby violate the main law already presented,
which requires the ascendancy and dictation of the moral sentiments.
And you incur its penalties. Married gold generally vanishes; but even
if it remain, the other party cannot fail soon to discover your motive
for marrying, so that this very money is likely to become a bone of
contention between you for life. Is'o ! you cannot violate this law,
without incurring its penalties, and these penalties are terribly severe.
The rage of American gentlemen seems to be for rich wives and small
waists—both curses to any man. The habits of women brought up in
affluence are anything but those calculated to make a husband happy.
They usually know little or nothing of domestic matters; are neither able
nor willing to work; and, worst of all, are fashionable: and fashionable
life is one continual round of deception, a tissue of hollow-hearted pre-
tensions. Rarely have such women much sterling sense, much energy of
character, or much powerof intellect. They expect all around them to be
their waiters. They must have their every whim gratified, and all their
requisitions implicitly obeyed. And then, too, most of them have been
in love beforehand, and many of them several times over. The parties
they have attended and the company they have seen have brought
with them love scenes and disappointments, till their elements of love
have been seared and blighted. And as we have hinted before, those
who marry for wealth do not often secure to themselves that very
wealth for which they marry ; for rich girls, besides being generally
destitute of both industry and economy, are frequently extravagant in
their expenditures. They generally have insatiable wants, yet think
that they deserve to be indulged .in everything, because they placed
their husbands under obligation to them by bringing them a dowry.
And then the mere idea of living on the money of a wife, and of being
supported by her, is too much for a man of an independent spirit. What
spirited husband would not rather prefer to support both himself and
wife, than submit to this perpetual bondage of obligation. To live upon
a father, or take a patrimony from him, is bad enough ; but to run in
debt to a wife, or to owe her a living, is too aggravating for endurance,
especially if there be not perfect cordiality between the two, which
cannot be looked for in money matches. Whoever violates the
sacred relations of matrimony by marrying mainly for riches, is ac-


cursed. He deserves to drink deep, and to drink through life, of the
cup of matrimonial bitterness.*
Still, I would not have you marry a companion from the depths of
poverty; for extremes either way are unfavourable. The prayer of
Auger, ‘ Give me neither poverty nor riches / is the golden medium in
this respect.
And to you, young ladies, let me say with great emphasis, that those
who court and marry you because you are rich, will make you rue the
day of your espousals. When they get your money they will neglect
or abuse you, and probably squander the money itself, leaving you
destitute, and abandoning you to your fate.
Do not marry an idle girl. Ladies take too much pride in cultivating
delicacy and softness ; refusing to labour, lest they should spoil their
hands. But if working spoil their hands , its absence spoils their brain;
for labour, or at least a degree of exercise, is indispensable to vigour
and strength of body, and this, to a vigorous brain and strong mind.
Marry a working, industrious young lady, whose constitution is strong,
flesh solid, and health unimpaired by confinement, bad habits, or late
hours. Give me a plain home-spun farmer’s daughter, and you may
have all the rich fashionable belles of our cities and villages.
Marrying small waists is attended with consequences scarcely less
disastrous than marrying rich and fashionable girls. An amply-devel-
oped chest is a sure indication of a naturally vigorous constitution, and
a strong hold on life; while small waists indicate small and feeble vital
organs, a delicate constitution, sickly offspring, and a short life. Beware
of them, therefore, unless you wish your hearts broken by the early
death of your wife and children. Temperance ladies have wisely
adopted the excellent motto, ‘ Total abstinence, or no husbands Let
men adopt the equally excellent motto, ‘ Natural waists, or no wives.’
Tight-lacing is gradual suicide, and almost certain infanticide, besides
exciting impure feelings.t
But to return to the necessity of amply-developed moral organs in a
companion and parent. A story or two from real life will illustrate
and enforce this point better than all the reasonings that can be adduced.
* ‘What!’ you exclaim, ‘should the rich never marry?’ It is not against
riches as such that I exclaim, but against those things that usually accompany
them. I have elsewhere shown, that the possession of great wealth violates a
law of man’s constitution, and therefore brings its punishment along with it.
These punishments are inseparable from wealth, and therefore follow it into
married life as well as everywhere else. Wherever riches go, they entail
unhappiness, and parents who leave their children wealthy, in this very act
entail a curse upon them proportionate to the amount left them above a mere
competency, including the means of intellectual and moral improvement. Let
facts be my vouchers. Do they not bear me out in this assertion ? Take it
which ever way you please, rich girls make poor wives : and yet they are the
first selected. Shame on sordid wife-seekers, or, rather, money- seekers ; for, it
is not a wife that they seek, but only filthy lucre ! They violate all their other
faculties simply to gratify miserly Acquisitiveness ! Verily such ‘have their
reward.’
+ The object of the ladies in thus padding some parts and compressing others,
is, to make themselves more handsome; though corsets destroy the very
beauty they are designed to impart; for beauty depends upon health, and
tight-lacing impairs health, besides shortening the period of youth. Better
far adopt the Chinese method of lacing the feet, or even the flat-headed Indian
method of compressing the head; for the compression of no other part is so
detrimental as that of the waist, because it retards the action of the vital
organs, which sustain life. Abundance of exercise and fresh air, is the best re-
ceipt for promoting beauty. Those who keep up the tone and vigour of their
physical organs, will be sprightly and interesting, and even though coarse-
featured, their freshness, their wide-awake appearance, and the animated glow of
their cheeks, will make a far deeper impression than laced but sickly beauty.
For a full exposition of the evils of this practice, the reader is respectluSJj
referred to my work on this subject, just published.


It was in a country village, and just before tea-time on a scorching hot
day, that a boy, returning tired and hungry from the blackberry-field,
entered the store of a very pious member of a church, and asked how
much he would give for the berries. £ A sixpence,’ answered the man
of prayer, though his practised eye saw that they were amply worth
double that sum. On turning them out the poor boy saw that he had
not obtained half their value, and began to cry, for his heart was set
upon this money to procure a much-desired gratification. ‘A bargain
is a bargain,’ said the praying man of little conscience, as he ordered the
berries to be prepared for the supper-table. ‘Do let the boy have his
berries or their full value,’ said his conscientious and benevolent wife.
This occasioned an altercation, which ended in his wife’s crying along
with the boy, and refusing to partake of the berries, and even of her
supper. How could she relish a repast the purchase of which outraged
her Conscientiousness and Benevolence, as well as exposed her husband’s
utter want of moral principle and good feeling] But if Conscientious-
ness and Benevolence had been large in him also—if, when he saw that
the sobbing boy repented of his bargain, and had not been paid enough
for his berries, she had seen him pay the boy the full value of his
earnings, instead of swindling him, she would have admired the noble
act, loved her husband the better for his staunch integrity, and eater
the berries with a relish. But how could she love a cheat ]*
Another wife, of great kindness and a nice sense of justice, saw he*
husband wrong her mother, and prove ungrateful as well as untrue
to his promise, and declared that for ever after this she loathed and
even hated him. * .....
Another wife caught her husband in a trifling deception, unim-
portant in itself, and not calculated to injure anyone, but it. threw
her into such an agony of feeling that the cold drops of perspiration
covered her face, the colour fled from her cheeks, hope departed from
her soul, and she became almost deranged ; nor is the impression
effaced to this day, though she never saw a similar instance after
This single trifling deception reversed her Conscientiousness, and
came near reversing her devoted love for him.
Reader, suppose you bury your face in your hands, and think over
similar occurrences between husbands and wives which have fallen
under your own observation, and then ask yourself if all the gods in
Christendom would tempt you to be similarly situated ] And if you
ask how to avoid such a fate, I answer, marry a companion having
amply-developed moral organs. _
These remarks have incidentally evolved another principle, which
accounts for a phenomenon of frequent occurrence, namely, the fact
that some husbands and wives can neither live together nor apart.
Their organs of Adhesiveness makes them love each other too well
to be happy when separated; yet, some of their other faculties having
become reversed, repel a close contact, and forbid their living together.
They love and yet hate each other, and are in a dilemma, either horn
of which is most painful, yet both might have been avoided by
marrying one of kindred developments.
Other facts and illustrations on this subject might be added ; bu*.
these are sufficient.
Without the strictest fidelity of each party to the other without
unreserved candour and perfect good faith—reciprocal love cannot
exist, for that esteem will be destroyed on which, as already shown,
true love can alone be founded.
A similar train of remark applies to marrying an economist or a
* The sequel of this story is that the next January this praying cheat was
imprisoned for stealing. The wife’s grief on the occasion of the berries was
trifling compared with that on his being imprisoned ; yet such a result might
have been almost predicted ; for the man who will cheat a ooy out or a cent
will cheat his fellow-men in large matters.


worker. Each is excellent in its place, though subordinate to the
character as a whole. Many men, especially in choosing a second wife,
are governed by her known qualifications as a housekeeper mainly, and
marry industry and economy. Though these traits of character are good,
yet a good housekeeper is far from being a good wife. A good house-
keeper may indeed prepare you a good dinner, and keep her house and
children neat and tidy, yet this is but a part of the office of a wife. Be-
sides all her household duties, she has those of a higher order to per-
form. She should soothe you with her sympathies, divert your troubled
mind by her smiles and caresses, and make the whole family happy by
the gentleness of her manners and the native goodness of her heart.
BEING A GOOD WIPE IMPLIES BEING A GOOD HOUSEKEEPER.
Far be it from me to underrate a good housekeeper as a constituent
'part of a good wife. I know her value, and I tell every young man that
he cannot have a good wife without her being a good housekeeper; and
I tell you, young ladies, that to be good wives you must be good house-
keepers. True, this is but one duty, but it is a most important one.
You cannot love a husband without wishing to make him happy, and
to do this you must know how to economise ; how to make his hard-
earned money go as far as possible, and procure as many of the comforts
of life with it as can well be obtained ; how to prepare his meals pro-
perly, and gratify his appetite; how to make his home agreeable, and
feed and clothe his children; how to make and mend things promotive
of his comfort; and howto wait on him; for there is acertain mysterious
something in the relations subsisting between husbands and wives,
which renders the meal prepared by a beloved wife far more palatable
than the same meal prepared by a servant; an agreeable beverage still
more agreeable by its being served by her; and even a bitter medicine
less bitter when administered by her. For the correctness of this remark,
I appeal to every man who has a good cook and housekeeper in the
person of his wife. To all young men in search of a good wife, let me
say, let the woman of your choice be familiar with the kitchen and the
smoothing-iron. If to these she adds those graces and accomplish-
ments requisite to shine in the parlour, so much the better; but at all
events select a good housekeeper. I despise the modern notion that
a wife must be too pretty and too accomplished to work. As soon
would I deem it a recommendation in a woman not to know how to
eat or sleep. What! a woman look for a husband, when she does not
know how to make bread or wash dishes !
Every girl should be taught to sew, spin, weave, make dresses, &c.,
as well as to sweep, wash, cook, &c. Before you make an offer, see
what kind of bread your intended can make ; for I assure you that
home-made bread is better and cheaper than baker’s bread. To young
men who are poor, and even to those in moderate circumstances, the
qualifications on which we are insisting are invaluable, and even indis-
pensable ; and to the rich, especially in these times of pecuniary em-
barrassment and uncertainty, they are scarcely less so.
And let the ladies, before giving their assent, see to it that their
would-be husbands have some occupation which can be relied upon tc
support a family. Industry and economy are invaluable in a husband.
The man who is without them may possibly make a good one, yet he
must have virtues many and rare to make up for these deficiencies.
Shun the dandy; dismiss the young man of leisure who has drawn his
support from a father’s pocket. If he can love you (which is doubtful),
he cannot support you, and therefore, at the farthest, cannot be more
than half a husband, just as you can be only a part of a wife if you do
not understand domestic matters. Get a whole wife or husband, or none;
for, while you require congeniality of feeling as the foundation, you also


require these household excellencies-as no inconsiderable parts of the
superstructure.
A GOOD PHYSICAL ORGANIZATION AND A STRONG CONSTITUTION.
Another leading element in this standard of admiration should be a
good physical organization, or a strong, healthy constitution. On the
importance of health in a companion and parent it is hardly necessary
to dwell. Many of the pains experienced by mothers as mothers have
their origin in feeble constitutions or physical debility, and indicate
sickly, peevish, scrofulous, consumptive, short lived children, or their
pains while alive, and their premature death, to the feeble, broken con-
stitutions of their parents. And, what is more, the state of the mind
takes its origin from that of the body. Hence those who are subject to
dyspepsia, liver complaint, indigestion, ennui, a sour stomach, heartburn,
hypocondria, &c., &c.—which are all only different forms of the same
disease, namely, the morbid excitement or predominance of the brain
and nervous system—are continually oppressed with sad, melancholy
feelings; w th that depression of spirits which turns everything into
occasions o: trouble, and sees impending misfortune in every trifling
event. It renders them miserable, and goes far towards making all
connected with them unhappy. How much more enjoyment can be
taken in the company of a husband or wife who always has a cheerful
and happy flow of spirits; who requires little nursing; who is generally
healthy and able to endure fatigue and exposure, and to take a rural
ramble, or turn off a smart day’s work; who does not sink under mis-
fortune, and is not the creature of morbid feeling, &c., than in the
company of a companion who is misanthropic, irritable, weakly, and
often requires the doctor, or continually excites your sympathy!
Nearly all the ladies’ fashions of the present day are calculated to
destroy the health and ruin the constitutions of ladies,so thatthey must
be patched up, though injured ultimately, by tea, coffee, and those other
nostrums employed by invalid ladies. Let the medical profession,
and especially the vendors of quack medicines, but speak out on the
subject and they will astonish all. I refer to females, not because their
health is more important, or their debility more disastrous, but because
they are generally the greatest sufferers. Behold their pale and sickly
forms; extreme delicacy and frailness; their deficient vital organs;
their excessive nervousness; their small waists, and slim, feeble
muscles ; their sufferings as mothers, and their mental and physical
debility ! And all caused by their ignorantly or fashionably violating
the laws of Physiology. Even girls must be shut up in-doors and
laced tight, and never be allowed to romp, because it is so ungenteel.
No ! she must be a lady. Shame on such mothers ! Shame on such
ladies ! Let girls romp, and let them range hill and dale in search of
flowers, berries, or any other object of amusement or attraction : let
them bathe often, skip the rope, and take a smart ride on horseback ;
often interspersing these amusements with a turn of sweeping or
washing. They will thus develop their vital organs, and lay a sub-
stantial physical foundation for becoming good wives and mothers.
The wildest romps usually make the best wives; while quiet, still,
demure, sedate, and sedentary girls are hardly worth having.
! Confinement often induces gloomy feeling, if not peevishness, which
may usually be dispelled by a smart walk or ride, or any situ :lar r !cre-
ation. Many wives suffer extremely from debility and bad feelings,
induced by excessive care and labour, and by-seldom taking that re-
creation which is so indispensable to mental health and happiness.
Many husbands could not more effectually promote their own happi-
ness, or the happiness of their companions, than by diverting them by
means of a ride, sail, ramble, a visit to the Museum, passing an after-
noon or evening with a friend, spending an hour in cultivating the


garden, &c. To every husband I say ‘ take special care- of the
health of your wife ’ —it is an invaluable treasure.
In concluding the directions for choosing a companion, I say marry
so as to gratify, not one faculty, nor a few faculties, but all ; for it is
the harmonious exercise and gratification of all which secures the
height of human enjoyment. But if you cannot do this in its full
extent, which might, perhaps, be too sweet a cup for erring mortals
to drink, gratify as many as possible. If you are prevented from
attaining the acme of human bliss, ascend as high as you can. Let
no one quality of body or mind, however desirable, determine your
choice ; but examine the character as a whole. And bear in mind
the fact that our tastes vary much between youth and mature age.
In the former period the animal feelings are much more vigorous
than in after life, yet by far the greatest and best portion of life
is that passed after the propensities begin to wane. Let those youth,
therefore, in whom Amativeness especially is strong and ardent, or
who seek to marry for personal beauty, remember that this ground of
preference is not to continue always. And let them cater, not for
their animal natures mainly, but for their moral and intellectual
faculties, whose fountains of happiness never dry up, and whose
streams of pleasure are always rich, and pure, and abundant.
HINTS IN REFERENCE TO CONDUCTING COURTSHIP.
To make a good selection is by no means the only important point
connected with getting married. The proper method of conducting the
courtship is also important. In forming the matrimonial relations let
special care be taken properly to blend the qualities and assimilate
the affections of each with those of the other. Not only should the
faculties be similar in point of size, but, from the first, should be trained
so as to act in unison and harmony with those of the other. Every
unpleasant feeling during courtship is sure to have its bitter taste
through life. How often do petty feelings of pride, proceeding from
the jealousy, or distrust, or guilty conscience of the complaining party,
construe a fancied neglect or imaginary provocation, wholly undesigned
by the other, into occasions of disaffection, which frequently widen into
reciprocal coldness, if not into mutual accusations, and thereby break
off' at least for a time, their growing attachments, leaving both most
wretched. Each loves the other, and yet, while their affections incline
them one way, their pride or Combativeness drives them the other.
This clashing of the faculties is the most unhappy state of mind
imaginable, beware how you set your faculties at war with each other.
Why make yourslf miserable merely to tease and torment the object
of your affections 1 Recollect your liability to become jealous without
cause in consequence of the principle before explained, and, therefore,
make abundant allowances, as well for yourself as for your intended.
Close the breach ; heal the wound ; make mutual concessions ; and
never let your pride conflict with love. And let young gentlemen
especially remember that they are more liable to give occasions oi
offence than young ladies; for it is almost impossible for a woman who
is in love to ill-treat the object of her love. Then again, young ladies
suffer more from these interruptions of affection than young men,
because their attachments are so much stronger and more tender, and
they have so much less to divert their minds from the cause oi their
grief Follow the advice already given, in first choosing intellectually ,
and then let no petty feeling of pride or anger interrupt your love.
Give no occasion of offence, and be slow to receive one. The acknow-
ledged principle that we dislike those we have injured shows that
those who are angry first, or most, are usually the most in iaul .
THE AGE MOST SUITABLE FOR MARRYING.
On this point a great diversity of opinion exists. The number of
years is not material. The vigour and youthfulness of the constitution


are most important. Some are older at twenty than others at twenty-
five. Never ask how many years old one is, but only how much
animal and mental vigour, or how much youthfulness and ardour there
is. A broken constitution begins to decline at seventeen, while a strong,
unimpaired constitution is in its prime at forty. These remarks ap-
ply both to the absolute age suitable for marrying and to the com-
parative ages of the two parties. I incline to the opinion that between
twenty and thirty is the age designed by nature, a,nd the one most
suitable in itselfi yet persons from short-lived families mature much
earlier, and are inclined to marry much younger than those from long-
lived families. Those who are inclined to marry very young. are
generally prematurely developed, and often die early. Exceptions
occur, yet this principle forms a law of our being.
, Franklin, in a letter to a newly married friend, advocated early
marriage, on the ground that nature would indicate the most suitable
time by imparting the requisite feeling or instincts. In this he was
philosophically right, hut practically wrong, as will appear on referring
to those causes which develop Amativeness prematurely. Let nature
have her perfect work, and she will then indicate the proper time by
implanting the requisite feelings; but that artificial state of society m
which we live violates her laws, and causes her to lead men wofully
astray in this respect. One thing is certain, that, at all events, mar-
riage should be postponed till the growth is completed, the physical
organization well nigh consolidated, the judgment matured, and till
both parties have obtained a tolerably good practical knowledge of phy-
siology as well as of the best method of nursing and educating children.
Early marriages have one important advantage,—-that of the more
easily assimilating the feelings and adapting the habits to each other;
but they have the disadvantage of a judgment too immature to select
the best object of affection; while late marriages have a disadvantage of
far greater magnitude,—that of marrying a second or twentieth love,
which is well nigh sufficient, as we shall presently see, for ever to blast
true connubial love. As society now is, it is my unequivocal opinion,
that early marriages, say from fifteen to twenty, are the best, if not
almost indispensable to virtue and connubial happiness* Of the two
evils, of marrying without judgment, or of marrying with judgment
but without love, choose the former, for it is the least. But a more con-
clusive reason for this opinion will be given uuder a subsequent head.
AN IMPROPER OBJECTION TO EARLY MARRIAGES.
Many mothers object to their daughters marrying young, on the
ground that married women not only take little or no enjoyment, hut
are rendered unhappy by the cares of the family, and by being shut
out from all the pleasures of society. What an idea this . What a
reflection on this heaven-born institution ! Those whom marriage
renders unhappy, or even those whose pleasures it abridges, had
better not marry at all
But what is the origin of this blasphemous idea? Why, that all the
pleasures of young ladies are summed up in attending balls, parties,
sleigh-rides, pleasure-excursions, love-scrapes, courting, flirting with
the°beaux, to secure a more advantageous match, and things of this-
class' It certainly can have no other origin. It is an impious reflec-
tion on the marriage institution and on the family relations. I scorn,
the mother who would postpone marriage an hour to allow the daughter
an opportunity to take a little more pleasure. In so doing, people con-
demn marriage as an evil, and imply that matrimony is a hateful altar
on which woman with all her hopes and prospects must be sacrificed,—
* This is said in reference to Americans. From twenty to twenty-four may he the
best time for people in England. The Americans are men and women a few years
earlier than the English.


that married life is a slavish and intolerable drudgery, and therefore to
be postponed as long as possible. And to those women who do post-
pone marriage from this wicked motive, married life is all that they
fear ; for they marry from interest, not from love, and therefore ex-
perience all the miseries, and none of the blessings, already described.
Those mothers who entertain so repugnant an idea of marriage, only
show what land of wives and mothers they have been. The. sooner
this relation is entered into, after the intellect of the parties is suffi-
ciently matured to choose the proper object, the better.
SINGLE BLESSEDNESS.
But some choose not to marry at all, but prefer a life of single blessed-
ness. And I grant that it is better not to marry, than to marry a bad
husband or wife; for it is obviously better to let the social organs remain
unexercised, than to have them reversed or painfully exercised. Still
marriage is just as much a part of our nature as talking or eating, and
cannot therefore be dispensed with without serious detriment.*
To those whose social organs are both large and active, Phrenology
says, with all the emphasis of a law of our being,— Maury ! Many
soon, or else cease exercising your social faculties ; because, besides
foregoing the virtuous pleasures of that quiet, unchecked, and lecip-
rocal exercise of the social faculties afforded by marriage, their ungra-
tified action, or their vicious indulgence, will inevitably make you
miserable.
Phrenology, therefore, recognizes and enforces this, as one of the first
commands of God: ‘Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth.’
Become husbands, wives, and parents ; so that your social faculties
may have full scope for action, together with the delightful objects
for the combined exercise of the other faculties. You cannot be a
whole man or woman, unless all your faculties are brought into plea-
surable action upon their legitimate objects.
Many persons, particularly young men, refuse to marry, because
they cannot support a wife in the style they wish. To this I reply,
that a good wife will care less for the style in which she is supported
than for vou. She will conform to your necessities cheerfully, and be
happy with you in a log cabin. She will even help you to support
yourself. To support a good wife, even if she have children, is gene-
rally less expensive than to board alone, besides being, one of the surest
means of acquiring property. This false pride of wishing to support
a wife in style, is reallv pernicious in its influences both on yourself
and on woman. It tends to divert its entertainers from the proper
motive of marriage, namely, domestic enjoyment.
* I really pity those young people, especially young ladies, whose domestic
feelings are strong, whose hearts are gushing fountains overflowing with love
and tenderness, but who have no fit object on which to bestow them. Who
does not pity the cooing dove without its mate? Such anomalies rarely, if
ever, occur in nature generally, nor should they occur in reference to man or
woman. How many maiden ladies who are every way qualified to make the
best of wives and mothers are doomed to live unmarried and to die un-
mourned ! And many of this class are the very BEST of the sex—those
whose feelings of love are of that exquisite character which, once disappointed,
for ever afterwards refuse to violate the sacredness of their first love by a
second engagement. Some of them are doubtless too particular, others too
cautious, but the majority too tenderly endeared to some congenial spirit ever
to cast an eye of love upon any other than him who bore off only to blight
their first full-blooming affections. Let them not be ridiculed, but rather let
tliem be commended for being thus true to nature, or rather, for having so
much nature in them. And then, too, they render themselves very uselul in
families, neighbourhoods, and societies, as teachers, nurses, makers of gar-
ments, &c. But they should not expect to live as long or as happdy as they
would had they married well while young.


TARENTS SHOULD ADVISE, BUT HOT CONTROL THE CHOICE. 83
HARRYING FOR A HOME MERELY.
Do not, however, marry for a home merely, unless you wish to be-
come even more destitute with a home than without one ; for it is on the
same fo 'ng with ‘marrying for money.’ I know a lady, who, wdien an
orphan -1, lived with a relative who abused her beyond measure, and
•who, at an early age, married, not because she had tire least spark of
affection for her husband, but to free herself from her uncle, and be in-
dependent of her friends. But, to use her own expression, ‘she jumped
out of the frying-pan into the lire.’ I will not enter into particulars,
but suffice it to say, that she describes her situation as horrible beyond
description, and that of her daughters as scarcely less so. Ihe father
who shoo Id have loved and cherished his daughters for her sake as well
as his own, hates and abuses them on her account. She could not live
with her husband, because his physical abuse was intolerable. She there-
fore obtained a divorce. Nor could she be comfortable seperated from
him, on account of her children ; so that her sufferings can only be
ended with her life. What a wretched life would the timely perusal of
this work have saved her! ‘He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.*
MARRY TO PLEASE NO ONE BUT YOURSELF, NOT EVEN YOUR PARENTS.
I know a lady who, to please a widowed mother, and provide her a
liome, married a man foi’ whom she had not a spark of love, and who,
to obtain her, had artfully courted the mother more than the daughter.
Her marriage was the destruction of her pleasures, and the grave
of that very mother who hail persuaded her into it. Because the
mother would not give him the command of a thousand dollars. (U wae
this thousand dollars that he courted and married !) the interest of
•which was her main support, he became her enemy, and made her life
most wretched, and then exposed her in such a manner as to cause her
death as effectually asi f he had poisoned her.
Parents can no more love for their children than they can eat or
sleep for them. They may give advice, but should leave the decision to
to the judgment of the parties themselves. Besides, such is human
nature, that to oppose lovers, or to speak against the person beloved,
only increases their desire and determination to marry. The beloved
one is considered as abused, and this sympathy strengthens 10, and
■weakens the influence of those who oppose, and thereby furthers the
match, by preparing the way for an elopement. Many a run-away
match would never have taken pi ice but for unwise opposition. Rea-
son with them mildly, and then throw the responsibility on them.
Never disinherit, or threaten to disinherit a child for marrying against
your will. If you would make your daughter marry a man whom yo*
do not wish her to marry, oppose her violently, and she will he almost
sure to marry him ; so also with a son.
The fact is, however, that such should be the relations between
parents and children, that the latter should apply to parents for advice
on the first pulsation of love. Let the father properly train his
daughter, and sue will bring her first love-letter to him, and give him
an opportunity to cherish a suitable affection, or to nip an improper
one in the germ.
There is, however, one way of preventing an improper match, and
that is. not to allow your children to associate with any one you are
unwilling they should marry. It is cruel as well as unjust, to allow a
daughter to associate with a young man till her affections are rivetted,
and then forbid her to marry him. Forbid all association, or consent
cheerfully to the marriage.
‘But,’ answers a purse-proud mother, *my daughter has fallen in love
with our hired man! Uow could I prevent them being together?’
Good madam, if your hired man he immoral or unworthy, exclude him
from your family ; if he De intelligent or worthy, he may be as good


as your daughter ; for labour is neither a dishonour nor a crime, but
just the contrary. If you are still determined that your daughter shall
not marry a poor man, and yet must have a young man to do your
drudgery', I see no other way but f nr you to hire a rich young man to-
do your’drudgery, or else to break your daughter’s heart, and render
her misearble for life.
no HOT XARRT AN INTEMPERATE COMPANION.
So many and so aggravated are the instances of matrimonial suffer'
ing produced by marrying companions of intemperate habits, that &
passing allusion to this subject is required. Intemperance is the parent
of all the vices. Such is the relation between the body and the base of
the brain, or the animal propensities, that the stimulant afforded by
alcoholic drinks excites these animal propensities, while it disables the
moral sentiments or intellect, and hence induces vice in all its forms.
Do not flatter yourself that your intended is only a moderate or an oe
•wsional drinker ; for moderate drinking is the only cause of drunken
ness. 1 never see a young lady tip a glass of wine in company
without feeling troubled on her account. Wine is as bad for ladies
and for the higher or sede tavy classes, as rum or brandy is forth
labouring clashes. To every young man, then, I say, do not marry a
wife who drinks either wine or porter ; if you do, you will rue. You
will, ten to one, find her irritable and peevish, and liable not to be vir-
tuous. Every form of alcoholic drink excites Amativeness, which ex-
poses any woman when slightly exhilarated, (I do not mean intoxica-
ted,) to be taken advantage of. If the exhilarating effects of ardent
spirit render a man liable to betaken advantage of in business,* then
surely the exhilaration produced by any kind of ardent spirit, even by
wine, exposes a woman to be taken unawares, and robbed of her most
costly jewel. No wine drinking woman is safe, even though she drink*
only enough to become slightly exhilarated; for it is the exhilaiation
that does the mischief. Let those young men who gallant the ladies
home from balls and parties where wine is drunk, be my vouchers.
For a woman to drink wine or any kind of exhilarating drinks, I deem
immodest and vulgar. Only wine-driuking women will object to this,
and they know it to be true.
And to every young woman I would say, adopt the motto, ‘ Total
abstinence or no husband ;’ for there is a world of philosophy in it. Un-
less a young man abstains totally from every form and degree of intoxi-
cating drinks, he is in danger, aye, almost sure to become a drunkard,
and not only to neglect to provide fora wife, but to drink up even her
earnings, and abuse her in at the bargain. It is infinitely better to have
no husband than a drunken one. I appeal to you, wives and mothers of
drinking husbands, if you would not infinitely prefer never to have mar-
ried ? Are not words inadequate to describe your sovrows and your
sufferings, both on your own account and on account of your children?
Do not flatter yourselves that you can wean a drinker from his cups
by love and persuasion. Intoxicating drink, at first, kindles up the fires
of love into the fierce flames of burning licentiousness, which burn out
the very element of love, and destroy every vestage of pure affection.
It over-excites Amativeness, and thereby finally destroys it, —producing
at first, unbridled libertinism, and then an utter barrenness of love; be-
sides reversing the other faculties of the drinker against his own con-
sort, and those of the wife against her drinking husband. Read my
work on ‘ Intemperance,’ and you will never wish to marry even a mod-
erate drinker, though it be a moderate drinker of wine only.
But another direction more important if possible, than any vet
given is,
* And this is conceded on all hands; for, the most effectual way to take
vlvantage of a man is first to treat him, not till he is drunk, but till he be*
comes excited and exhilarated.


SEARING THE DOMESTIC AFFECTIONS.
SO HOT Allow tub domestic faculties to become engaged until tou
HAVE MADE I’OUK CHOICE AND OBTAINED CONSENT.
It has heen already shown, that no small part of man’s happiness or
misery depends upon the condition of his Social Faculties. Love is one
of the most sacred elements of our nature,*- and the most dangerous with
'which to tamper. It is a beautiful and delicately contrived organ,
£->.iucing the most delightful results, but easily thrown out of repair,
i'nc domestic faculties are generally easily injured. It is with them
ms with Conscientiousness, Benevolence, Approbativeness, Veneration,
&c. How pungent, how overwhelming, are the first compunctions
«f a guilty conscience ! but every new violation wears off its ten-
der edge, and blunts the moral sensibilities. So when Approbative-
ness in a child, especially in a girl, is first wounded by reproof or re-
proach, her feeling of shame and mortificat ion are so intolerable, that
«he knows not where to hide her head. Her face is crimsoned with the
blush of shame and sense of disgrace. Bur. reproaches and blame fre-
quently administered, sear this faculty, and she now cares little for all
the reproaches that can be heaped upon her. So aho when a man whose
heart is all alive to the miseries of sensitive beings, sees an animal killed
for the first time, or a fellow-being racked with pain, reversed Benevo-
lence inflicts greater agony than that endured by the object pitied ; yet
m number ot such sights so effectually harden the heart, as even to pre-
pare him to take part himself in killing animals. His Benevolence is
eeared. never again perhaps to experience that exquisite pity which ac-
companied its primitive, un> ioiated tenderness. So with regard to Ven-
•eratmri, Ideality, Cautiousness and every other faculty. This principle
applies to the social faculties. And since thesp organs are very large
the evils attendant upon their violation are proportionality great.
But how are these faculties seared ? By the interruption of love
Intel i opted love places its sufierer in the same position, with regard to
loving subsequently, that violated Conscientiousness does with regard
to moral principle, or being disgraced with regard to character, or wit-
ire.ssm” pain with regard to sympathy. To love after this interruption
with the same purity and tenderness as before, is peihaps impossible.
Candidates for marriage, remember this law of mind See to it, if
posable, that your love is never interrupted. Do not allow your affec-
tions to become engaged, till you have made your choice, and are toler-
»bl' certain of marriage.
t mi-ring without intending to marry, and parental interference with
then- children’s affections, besides causing an incalculable amount
of prostitution and wretchedness, renders a large portion of the mar-
riages of the present day unhappy. Good people mourn over
these evils, hut seldom dream of their cause. They even pray for
moral reform, yet do the very things that increase the evil. Do
you see yonder godly mother, weeping over her fallen son and
xemonstrating with him in tones of a mother’s tenderness and im-
portunity ? That very mother prevented that very son’s marrying
the girl he dearly loved, because she was poor, and this interruption
of his Jove was the cause of his ruin. If she had allowed him to marry
this beloved one, he would never have thought of giving his ‘strength
unto strange women.’ True, the mother ruined her son ignorantly, but
none the Jess effectually. That son next courts another virtuous fair
one, engages her affections, and ruin* her, or else leaves her broken
hearted so that she is the more easily ruined hv others, and thus pre-
pares the way for her becoming an inmate for a house ‘ whose steps take
* What is called sudden Jove, has its origin mainly in the action of Amative-
Bess, and is another name for animal passion. True love, is slower of growth,
—always mutual and reciprocal, and founded fn esteem, and in an admiration
of moral and intellectual qualifies, while sudden love is excited by physical
chainas.


gg the primary cause of moral impurity#
hold on hell.’ Meanwhile, this spuriously godly mother pray* daily
for the ‘ Magdalen cause.’ and gives monthly to Moral Ueform Societies
She mean no harm (only to have her son marry ictalth or fashion ),
but does dly, and ignorantly perpetrates a crime of the blackest
dye. Ah, proud, hut foolish mother ! Oh, ruined and abandonee son !
Alas, wretched victims! ! If the painful consequences attached to this
violation of the social feelings by this courting and loving without
marrying, were confined to the principal offender, the evil would be
lees, for every voluntary agent has the privilege of doing for liimselt as
he pleases; but he certainly has no right to plant thorns of anguish-
under the pillow of his wife, or, rather, of his victim.
I say, then, that no man should ever pay his addresses to a woman,
until lie has made his selection. He should first make his selection in-
tellectually, and love afterwards. He should go about the matter
coolly and with judgment, as he would undertake any other important
matter. No man, when blinded by love, is in a fit state to judge ad-
vantageously as to what he requires, or who is adapted to his wants.
I know, indeed, that this doctrine of choosing first and loving afterwards
of excluding love from the councils, and of choosing with the consent
of the intellect and moral sentiments, isoften at variance with the feelings
of the young, and the customs of society ; but, for its correctness, I appeal
to common sense. This is the only proper method. Phrenology requires
as an indispensable condition to virtue and enjoyment, that
sities (that of love included), should be governed by the moral sentiments
and intellect, and the more momentous the matter, the more imperious
this requisition. Shall we, then, in this the most momentous and
eventful transaction of our lives, he governed by blind animal feelings t
Science forbids it. You own happiness forbids it. Hold then a
tight rein upon your love till intellect shall have lesignated a suitable
time, and selected a suitable object on whom it may rest for ever, and
the full fruition of all those joys designed by God toflow from marriage,
will abundantly reward you for this temporary self-denial.
And especially let no young lady ever once hi ink of bestowing her af-
fections till she is tolerably certain they will not be broken off—that is,
until the match is fully agreed upon. Let her keep her heart whole till
she bestows it for life. This requisition is as much more important, and
its violation as much more disastrous to woman than to man. as her
social faculties are stronger than his. You cannot be too careful in
your love— it is the pivot on which turn your destinies for life.
But here an apparently insurmountable difficulty rises to prevent
putting this direction in practice. These matrimonial instincts usually
develope themselves early , long before the judgment is matured, and
often rage to a degree well nigh ungovernable, refusing to wait till the
tardy intellect has made its selection, and has all things ready. In such
cases, what must be done ? Kind reader, listen ; moralists and philan-
thropists, attend, while I strike the very root of this poisonous tree of
domestic bitterness —while I lay open the cause of this unblushing licen-
tiousness, which constitutes the sin of this sinful age—this nucleus of
all the vices—this hell upon earth, whose fierce flames are continually
consuming the life and souls of millions, by inflicting upon them all
the nen at and physical agonies which our nature can bear. That cause
is, the PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT aild the ARTIFICIAL STIMULATION of
Amativeness. I will expose a few of those causes, kept in constant
operation by nearly all classes of the community, which tend to bring
forward the passion of love prematurely, and to keep it constantly and
morbidly excited.
1. The improper conduct and conversation of adults befokb
children and youth. Nothing could more effectually wear off that
natural delicacy, that maiden purity and hashtulness in youth, which
form the main barrier against the influx of vitiated Amativeness, than
the couduct aud conversation of some who are even parents. How often


do those whose modesty has been worn smooth, take pleasure in saying
and doing things to raise the blush on the cheek of youth and innocence,
little dreaming perhapsthat theyare thereby breaking down the barriers
of their virtue, and prematurely kindling the fires of animal passion!
As puberty approaches, the evil magnifies. The prematurely kindled
embers of love now burst forth into the flames of licentiousness or
self-pollution. The machinery of balls and parties, of dances, of the
other amusements of young people, tend to fan the flame. Thus
they court and form attachments long before either their mental or
physical powers are matured. .
2 Reading novels, love tales, etc., etc. The fashionable reading
of the day is still more objectionable. Whose sales are the greatest ?
Whose patronage is the most extensive 1 ? Those who publish the most
exciting love tales. Country newspapers must have a part or the
whole of some love tale every week, or else run down. These stories
girls are allowed to read. How often have I seen girls not twelve years
old as hungry for a love story as they would have been for their dinners!
Their minds are thus sullied with impure desires. Shame on novel
reading women ; for they cannot have pure minds or unsullied feelings!
3. k. stimulating diet preternaturally excites and prematurely
develops this organ. There is an intimate relation between the state
of the body and that of the animal propensities. Whatever artificially
stimulates the body stimulates the animal propensities. Tea, coffee,
flesh, tobacco, spices, &c., as well as wine and ardent spirits, are highly
stimulating, and therefore powerfully excite these propensities, the
inference is clear that stimulating food and drink tend to develop
this organ prematurely, and keep it in a morbid, feverish state of
action. Children, therefore, should not be allowed a stimulating diet,
nor is it exactly proper for young ladies. .
4. Want of exercise is another means of exciting impure desires;
while labour tends to subdue them. As the energies ol the system
are continually accumulating they must have some door to escape.
Labour and exercise carry them off through the muscles ; but when
this door is closed by fashionable idleness, their next medium of egress
is through the propensities. This is established by facts. What
classes of society are most virtuous ? The labouring. Who are the
most licentious'? The idlers—men and women of leisure— those who
are too good to labour. When the labourer retires he falls asleep at
once, while those who are too proud or fashionable to work retire to
indulge the nightly reveries of their fancies, mingled with unclean
thou >hts and stained with impure desires. Labour is as indispensable
to moral purity as breath is to life. This is a law of our being. All who
break it, even fashionable ladies included,must abide the consequences,,
one of which is a depraved imagination and unclean desires.
This principle applies with increased force to children and youth.
Keeping them housed up in-doors, from play or labour, tends to ripen
Amativeness prematurely, and then to keep it morbidly active. 1 Ins la
the cause of its appearing two or three years earlier in the city than in
the country, and several years earlier even there than unthwarted nature
would develop it. Were these and other causes of its premature,
development done away it would not probably appear till between the
twentieth and twenty-first year, and then be five years longer m ripen-
ing up to a maturity sufficient for marriage, and by this time the
iudmnent would be sufficiently matured to make a proper selection.
5? Theatres and theatrical dancing also inflame Amativeness, and
are ‘ the broad road ’ to moral impurity. Much of the fashionable
music is another, especially the verses set to it, being most love-sick:
* Every labourer will bear me witness that these feelings are more active
when they do not work than when they do.


$} MODERN FEMALE EtotTCA KI\)V
Cities, or sentimental odes, breathing this passion. Improper print*
often do immense injury in this respect.
6. But nothing perhaps tends to develope or inflame tnis passion so
much as modern female education. It seems as though the one
snain object of the education of fashionable females, was to excite and
gratify the Amativeness of fashionable gentlemen, to enable them to get
a dashing beau, and a rich husband. Most of our fashionable boarding-
schools are public curses. These schools teach the graces and accom-
plishments mainly, which are only polite names for beau-catching, cap-
setting, and such like fashionahle attainments. They efface almost every
clement of the true woman. They teach her to screw her waist into
artificial forms, and her face into artificial smiles, and to learn to say
soft things very softly. They inculcate in effect the sentiment that tha
chief end of woman is to please the men, and pander to their depraved
appetites ; that to engage personally in domestic duties, is a violation of
good breeding, and even down-right vulgarity ; that a lady must know
bow todraw, embroider, sing, write letters ; that dress, and show-, and
fashion, and splendid style, must supersede all other considerations;
that extravagance is a virtue, and economy meanness; that making
morning calls and fashionahle parties, and telling polite lies, (that is,
pretending to be very glad to see persons whom they dislike, and press-
ing them to call again, when they hatethe very sight of them,) together
■with a thorough knowledge of the art of making love and playing the
coquett, and such like fashionable flummery, constitute the main duty
of woman. A recent English work devoted to teaching ladies manners ,
occupied some fifteen pages in teaching them how to get into a caniage,
so as to show just enough, but none too much, of their handsome an-
cles, feet, &c.,&c. If there be any one thing in civilized society more
utterly destitute of common sense, and evincing more c nsummato
folly,—or if there he anything more totally at war with the designs and
arrangements of nature than any other, it is the modern fashionable
method of conducting female education.
In view' of these evils, one gentleman of this city said— ‘ I would
sooner let my daughter run wild, than receive a imidern fashionable
education;’ and another observed, ‘Though I w r ou Id not go to that ex-
tent, yet I would sooner eee my daughters get their living by beg mg,
or follow them to their graves to-morrow, than brought up fashionably.
Over no evil do I mourn more—no crime do I deplore more—than the
perversion of woman’s nature by modern education.* I call upon wo-
man to pause, and consider the oppressive evils under which she
groans, and to rise and shake off her'chains, and follow the dictates of
her nature ; to assert and maintain tier Independence ; to rise from her
abject servitvide,f to assert and maintain her rights and her freedom,
and be herself.
* As soon as T can command the time, I intend to publish, in a neat little
book, a Ladies’ Edition of this work, which, besides being free from all ex-
pressions and allusions to which even prudish fastidiousness can object, will be
expressly adapted to woman in the matter of marriage and education, showing
her how she should be educated to become a wife and matron, and then how to
choose and obtain a suitable husband.
+ For yearn, the fact that Self esteem is small in nearly all women, and
Firmness rather feeble, surprised me; but Phrenology soen opened my ejes to
•the true situation ot women, —that of abject slavery to a dozen mastets—-to t a
fashions, which make her pinch her feet and screw in her waist till she can
Jjaveuo peace of her life; a slave to man, especially to the worst class of
men— the yent<el class; and a slave to the aUficial wants ot man, u in*
family and out of it; a slave as regards property ; lor, as a wife, she is not
allowed to hold property independently ; a slave in aimostevery fo»-Jl m
■which it is possible lor a man to command or woman to obey.


MARAT TOUR FIRST CATS.
MARRY YOUR FIRST LOVE.'
1 have before stated that interruptions in love sear and benumb the
element of love. Ido not say that you cannot love a second time;
but I do say, that first love experiences a tenderness, an exquisite-
ness, and a poetry not always belonging to subsequent attachments.
MUTUAL LOVE CONSTITUTES MATRIMONY.
How absurd, how preposterous the doctrine, that the obligations of
marriage derive their sacredness from legal enactments! How it
profanes this holy of holies. Marriage is wholly divine both in its
origin and obligations. No human tribunal or legislature can increase
or diminish those obligations.
The happy, loving pair are always married in heaven, before they
are on earth , for their agreement to live together in nature's holy wed-
lock is marriage in the sight of God, and constitutes them hnsband and
wife. Still, since a ceremony has been instituted, it may be well to
observe it as a form . if we can do it conscientiously.
The perpetuity of love nature has provided for. and infinitely better
than man can do, and therefore man need not feel concerned about it.
Let men rely on the affections of the heart alone ; for their very nature
is self-perpetuating. They need no law, and are above all law. Let
them be properly placed at first, and they will never desire to change
their object. The more we love an object, the more we wish to continue
loving it; and the longer husbands and wives live together affection-
ately, the stronger their love. Love increases itseif. We no more need
a law requiring husbands and wives to love each other, than one requir-
ing us to eat, sleep, or breathe. True love recoils from a change of ob-
jects. Let men but rely upon the law of love instead of upon the laws
of the land, and they will have far mors connubial happiness, and the
country would hear of far fewer discords and petitions for divorces.
Nor should the law ever compel two to Jive together who do not love
each other. At the same time, the laws respecting marriage are cruelly
oppressive, especially upon woman , whom they ought to protect.
The inference, therefore, is clear, that those whose legal marriage is
prompted by motives of property, or honour, or any consideration
other than mutual love, are no more husbands and wives than if they
had never assented to the marriage ceremony. Does tbeir nominally
assenting to a mere man-made ceremony make them husbands and
wives? It simply legalizes prostitution. It is licensed licentiousness.
If they do not L-ve each other, they cannot become husbands and wives,
or be entitled to the sacred relations of wedlock.
So on the other hand, if two kindred spirits are really united in tll«
bonds of true, reciprocal love, whether legally married or not, they are
to all intents and purposes, man and wife, and entitled to all the rights
of wedlock. If they have reciprocated the pledge of love, and agreed
to live together as husband and wife, they are married. They have
nothing to do with law, or law with them, except so far as they may
consider it expedient. It is a matter exclusively their own. And for
proud and selfish parents, from motives of property or family distinct-
ions, to interfere or break up the match, is as criminal and cruel as
eeperating husband and wife : it is seperating them. It is a violation
of the married relations —it is putting assunder those whom God hath
joined together. Ambitious mothers, selfish fathers, and young men
seeking to marry a fortune, may stare or startle at this ; hut any other
view of marriage makes it a merely human institution, which divests it
of its sacredness and dignity.
• First love, as employed here and elswhere in this work, refers to the first
strong, reciprocal at tachment, founded in esteem, and formed after the parties
arrive at an age sufficient to experience the full po»M of levs.


A wain. For a man to court a young woman, and excite her
to love till her affections are rivetted, and then (from sinister motives,
such as to marry one richer, or more handsome) to leave her, is the
very same crime as to divorce her. So, also, for a young woman to
play the coquette, and sport with the sincere affections of an honest
and devoted young man, is one of the highest crimes that human
nature can commit. . , .
Young men and women, let these things sink deep into your hearts.
Pause and reflect! and, in every step you take towards loving and
marrying, remember that mutual love constitutes matrimony \ and
that interrupting love is separating man and wife!
SECOND MARRIAGES.
11l case a companion dies, marrying again may be a less evil than
living unmarried. But I maintain that the death of a companion
need not occur till too late to marry again. The proof of this start-
ling declaration is, first, that every physiological law of our nature—
every physical contrivance and adaptation of the body—fully estab-
lishes the inevitable conclusion, that, in case of the laws of life, health,
and physiology were obeyed, sickness would be unknown, and death
would occur only after the body was literally worn out with old age;
and secondly, that sickness and death are merely the effects of their
appropriate causes, and governed by fixed laws, and therefore within
our control. By applying the appropriate means (which are in the
hands of ourselves, our parents, and mankind) all may be healthy,
and live to a good old age ;* so that husbands and wives need not he
separated from each other or from their children by death until the
former are too old to marry again, and the latter old enough to pro-
vide for themselves (extraordinary cases, of course, excepted). This
renders the inference clear and most forcible , that all married men
and women are under obligations the most imperious and sacred to
their families to take care of their health; and to avoid all exposures
calculated to shorten life. Their duties to their families are amongst
their first duties. Their obligation to preserve their health is para-
mount y so much of the happiness of their families depends upon their
health, and the sufferings caused by their sickness and death are so
excruciating and aggravated.
It should be added, that it is the duty of parents to be at home as
much as possible, and in the bosom of their families, making them
glad by their presence, and causing them to enjoy the sweets of
domestic life. They should banish as much as possible all those
unpleasant feelings engendered by losses, impositions, vexations in
business, &c., and place their domestic feelings and higher sentiments
on the throne, relaxing their souls, and even playing with their chil-
dren. How often are angry and unpleasant feelings carried into the
family to mar their joys, and how natural to pour them out upon its
innocent members, not because they have done anything wrong, but
because we were previously in anger! When anger has been excited,
how natural to direct it to those about us, though entirely innocent;
but how unreasonable, especially if they be an affectionate wile or
innocent children.
In regard to marriage, then, the order of nature, as pointed out by
Phrenology, is unquestionably this: Ist. that the matrimonial instinct*
or feelings should not appear till from the twentieth to the twenty-first
* If this doctrine be deemed heretical or chimerical, I answer, Ist that
Charles G. Finney advocates it; 2ndly, that Physiology establishes it to a
demonstration ; and 3rdly, that any other view of this matter substitutes chance
in the place >f cause and effect. It is high time for mankind to that
sickness and death, in the prime ut life, are merely the penalties of violated
physical laws, and therefore wrong.


year: 2nd, that true love requires from three to five years to ripen into
a preparation for marriage : 3rd, that by this time the moral and in-
tellectual faculties will generally have become sufficiently matured to
select the proper object upon which they may nx for life in virtuous
wedlock : and 4th, that then, the happy pair, hand in hand and heart
in heart, should climb the hills and walk the vales of life together,
commingling their joys, their sorrows, and affections, until each be-
comes too old to marry again ; so that both may pay the common
debt of nature nearly together, loving and marrying but once ; thus
combining all the intellectuality of a mature mind with all the poetry
of FIRST LOVE. This is marriage in full fruition—marriage as ordained
by God, and as woven into the nature of man.
DIRECTIONS TO THE MARRIED FOR LIVING TOGETHER AFFECTIONATELY
AND HAPPILY, AND FOR MAKING FAMILIES HAPPY AND NEIGHBOUR-
HOODS AGREEABLE.
1. Excite each other’s faculties agreeably. The following
principle shows how to do this : —The activity of any faculty in one
naturally excites the same faculty in others. Combativeness in one,
for instance, excites Combativeness in others, while Benevolence ex-
cites Benevolence, &c. Thus, when kindness in a brother does you a
favour, you are anxious to return it, Benevolence in him exciting
Benevolence in you ; but anger kindles your own anger, and causes in
you a spirit of resistance and resentment. For example :
Mr. Sharp* said, angrily, to a lad, ‘ Go along, and bring me that
basket yonder. Be quick, or I’ll flog you !’ The boy went tardily
and poutingly, muttering as he went. ‘ Why don’t you hurry there,
you idle vagabond, you 1 Come, be quick, or I’ll whip your lazy hide
off your back, you saucy, impudent rascal, you,’ re-echoed Mr. Sharp,
still more imperatively. The boy went still more slowly, and made
up a face still more scornful, for which Mr. Sharp flogged him and,
in return, the boy conceived and cherished eternal hatred to Mr. Sharp,
and eventually sought and obtained revenge. But Mr. Benign said,
kindlv, to the same boy, ‘John, will you please to run and bring mo
that basket V ‘Yes, sir,’ said John, and oft he started on the run,
glad to do the good old man a favour.
2. ADAPT YOURSELF TO THE PHRENOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS OF YOUR
COMPANION.
Thus, if Hope he large in the husband, but small in the wife, he
magnifies every prospect, and underrates difficulties and dangers ; but
she, especially if her Cautiousness be large, looks at them in a, light
directly opposite. She fears, and perhaps frets ; he hopes and rejoices.
If Anver be large or active, each will be inclined to blame the other
for this difference of views. The husband, instead of chiding his wife
for her groundless fears, should encourage her, and the wife should
not place herself in opposition to the hopes and efforts of her husband,
though they be exaggerated, but express her opinion, and make sug-
gestions, and then aid him what she can. Thus should the intellects
of each correct the failings of the other, and make allowance for each
other’s erroneous views, mutually conceding a little, till both come
nearly together, and unite in a correct judgment. _
If Ideality be larger in the wife than in the husband, in all matters of
taste, let herdecision govern the choice; and if Order be also large, seeto
it, that, on entering the house, you clean your feet, and do not carelessly
make a grease spot, or soil, or displace anything about the house, lest
* I emp’oy this form of expression, because it enables me to. personify the
organs, aim thereby to embody and bring the full >orce of the idea presented
and the principle illustrated directly before the mind m a manner more tan*
gible and. easily remembered than any other.


you excite her anger, or permanently sour her temper. In other words,
do what will gratify this faculty as much as possible, and offend it as
little as may be. But let the wife remember that, if these organs be
very large in her, she is liable to bo too particular, and make her
‘ apple-pie order ’ cost herself and her family more than it comes to.
If your companion be frugal and saving, do not wantonly destroy
even a paper-rag or fragment of food, or incur any expense that is
not necessary; but take pains to gratify this faculty as much as is
consistent, remembering that you thereby promote the happiness of
your companion, and thus promote your own.
The application of this principle will be found a sovereign remedy—
a real panacea—for all differences between you. Try it. That is,
ascertain the phrenological developments of yourself and your com-
panion, and then adapt yourselves to them by acceding and yielding
to each other as the comparative size of the organs in each may
require, and, depend upon it, it will only need an obliging disposition
in you both to heal all differences that may arise.
If you ask ‘ How does this principle direct me to conduct myself
when my companion becomes angry V Phrenology answers :
Do not get angry yourself; for this, instead of quelling his or her
anger, will only excite it still more, and raise it into a hurricane of
fury ; but just remember that it is only the momentary workings of
excited Combativeness. Say nothing till your companion becomes cool,
and then always address the higher sentiments. This will produce
repentance and reform. Blaming the person will only make matters
worse, and render you both more unhappy. ‘A soft answer turneth
away wrath, but grievous words stir up strife/ ‘ Leave off contention
before it be meddled with/ Let your own moral sentiments dictate
all your conduct towards them, and this will excite their better
feelings towards you, and render both of you infinitely more happy
than the opposite course.
Besides, your companion may be fretful or disagreeable, because
worn down by labour, care, or anxiety in business, or because feeble or
fevered in body. Physical indisposition usually excites the animal
propensities, producing peevishness, irritability, a sour temper, unkind
remarks, &c. Such should be doctored, not scolded —they should be
borne with and pitied, not blamed. Remember your own failings, and
make liberal allowance for those of your companion. Try the mild,
persuasive course. Avoid collision : and, on points of disagreement,
* agree to disagree/ Endure what you cannot cure ; and, where you
cannot attain perfect harmony of feeling, at least strive for peace; and,
if you cannot live together quite happily, live together as happily as
possible. Never, on any account, allow a harsh remark to pass between
those whose relations are so sacred as those of man and wife. Nor
will this be often the case where true love exists, unless it should be
caused by that fevered, irritated state of the body already mentioned;
for there is something in the very nature of love calculated to break
down and subdue all minor points of disagreement, overlook defects,
place the favourable qualities in their most exalted light, and produce
a forbearing, forgiving spirit. And if those who are married do not
possess this spirit and pursue this forbearing course, they do not
really love each other.
Another important suggestion is to be careful about giving offence
in small matters. You cannot be too particular about little things.
So exceedingly tender is the plant of connubial love, and so sus-
ceptible of being lacerated, that even trifles impede its growth and
embitter its fruits. A single tart remark, or unkind tone of voice,
will penetrate the susceptible heart of a wife who loves you, and
render her most wretched ; whereas, if she did not love thus
devotedly, her feelings would not be so easily wounded.


fIRATIFY EACH OTHER’S FACULTIES.
That is, if your companion have any predilections in regard to food,
dress, habits, friends, &c., not only should you pursue the indulgent
course, but you should assist in procuring the desired indulgences.
True you should not go beyond the bounds of reason, or violate your
conscience, or indulge any positively injurious habit; but in non-essen-
tials, and in matters of gratification merely, you should oblige and aid
your companion as far as possible. If your wife insist on lacing your
daughter tight, or on anything else that is wrong or hurtful in itself,
it is your duty to resist such wrong, though it may place you and your
wife in opposition to each other ; but, if she relish any little delicacy
in diet, &c., gratify her appetite as often as you can. If she fancy a
particular dress, do your best to obtain it ; if she love a particular
book, or study, or pursuit, or amusement, not injurious in itself, do
what you can to obtain it for her ; but never compromise moral prin-
ciple.
In like manner, wives, also, can often gratify their husbands by
cooking some favourite dish, or decorating a room, or playing or sing-
ing a favourite piece of music, &c., <fec.
Let husbands and wives take pleasant rides, rural excursions, and
rambles, agreeable promenades, and make visits together to their friends,
as often as possible ; and let them hold frequent conversations on sub-
jects of interest and importance to both, freely exchange views and feel-
ings. ask and receive advice ; and, above all things, let them be open
and frank. If you have committed errors, confess them and beg par-
don ; and let there be no item of business, no hidden corner in the heart
of either, into which the other is not freely admitted. Scarcely any
thing is more destructive of love than concealment or dissembling.
Another means is, to read to one another, and entertain and instruct
each other. Let the husband, while his frugal wife is sewing, or
attending to her domestic duties, read to her from some interesting,
work, or explain something that will store her mind with useful know-
ledge, enlarge her range of thought, &c., and he will kindle in her
breast, a feeling of gratitude that will redouble her love, and make her
still more anxious to be in his company. Let him make valuable sug-
gestions, and aid her all he can in cultivating and exercising her intel-
lect. As he comes in to his meals, let him tell her the news of the day
as well as matters of interest that may have happened to himself while
absent. Especially let him be kind to her about the house, in seeing
that she has good fuel prepared at her hand, abundance of water, and
all the materials and conveniences required in the family in good order.
Be kind and affectionate to the children also, and amuse them, and
even play with them ; for, as the mother loves her children most de-
votedly, nothing will gratify her more, or more effectually promote her
love, than seeing her children caressed. To make much of your chil-
dren is to make much of your wife. Nor is it incompatible with the
dignity of parents to play with and amuse their children, indeed, the
relations between parents and children should be of the most familiar
and intimate character, and calculated to endear them to each other.
Austerity in pan-nts te tyranny in its worst *erm. rJe ,annual wun
your children, and, as early as possible, let them become cheerful and
welcome social friends in the family circle.
But there are some things which should not he done. Husbands and
wives should never oppose each other in regard to the government of
their children. Lrcthere be a mutual m del-standing and agreement
between them touching this point, and let a plan be concerted before-
hand. so that tlie feelings of neither may be wounded by the interference
of the othei.
By doing and avoiding these and a thousand similar things, may love
be cherished and fostered till it Likes deep root in the hearts of both,


extend its fibres into every nook and corner of your souls, and imbues
with its soft and endearing influence every look, word, and action.
Practice these things, and those who even dislike each other at first
(by thus removing the cause) may live together comfortably ; and two
who do not positively cherish ill-will for each other, may render them-
selves affectionate and happy.*
RENDERING NEIGHBOURS AGREEABLE.
A single remark, in regard to rendering neighbourhoods agreeable,
and I close. Next to an affectionate family, an agreeable neighbour-
hood and good society become objects of desire. A contentious, tattling
neighbourhood, where each is backbiting his neighbour, or indulging
unkind feelings, is exceedingly annoying, besides souring the temper
and lowering the tone of moral feeling. The amount and prevalence
of neighbourhood scandal is really surprising ; nor are religious deno-
minations exempt from its contaminating and unholy influence. This
ought not to be so. The relations of neighbourhoods should be of
the most friendly and accommodating character. Let village scandal
be frowned down by every respectable citizen.
One of the best means of promoting good feelings among neigh-
bours is, to manifest and excite public spirit, to form literary and
other societies.
That this work may make more and better wives and husbands,
and also improve the social and domestic condition of man, is the
object of its publication and the ardent prayer of its author.
* There is another cause and remedy for disagreement between husbands
and wives, mention of which, however important in itself, might offend, and
therefore I pass it, with the remark, that I am prepax-ing another work on a
similar subject, to be entitled “The Causes and Remedies of Perverted Ama-
tiveness,” which, besides giving suitable warnings to the young, and disclosing
an easy and efficient remedy for morbid or powerful Amativeness, will point
out one cause of disagreement between husbands and wives, certainly not less
prolific of discord and unfaithfulness than all others united, together with its
easy and effectual remedy, as well as a perfect cure for both jealousy and un-
faithfulness.
