

Saturday, Jar[?]
THEATRE ROYAL, commencing
ONE WEEK ONLY.
Prices:—
Box Plan at Marshall’s.
MAUD ALLAN
AND HER COMPANY,
INCLUDING
LEO, JAN, MISCHEL
CHERNIAVSKY
Manager: HOW ARD EDIE.
Under the Direction of W. ANGUS MacLEOD.


MAUD ALLAN.


The New Dancer.
By W. B. WALKLEY.
MISS MAUD ALLAN is the mode of the moment. “ All London,” as the posters
say, or, at any rate, as much of London as can squeeze itself into the Palace
Theatre of Varieties, is making a point of seeing her. For the serried ranks
of gentlemen, old and young, equipped with opera glasses, it is easy to account by the
rumour —not at all accurate —that the lady is attired for one of her dances in little
else than beads. But the mundane dames are there, too, to see and be seen, and a careful
scrutiny may even reveal a genuine amateur of dancing for dancing’s sake. When
Miss Allan’s “ turn ” arrives there is the sudden silence that betokens eager expectation.
The stage is unfurnished save b_y a few pedestals for flambeaux, and for background
there are plain velvet curtains of a subfusc hue. Then the violin bows glide softly into
the first strains of Chopin’s valse in x\ minor (Op. 34, No. 2) —and the dream begins.
The figure of the dream is a young girl; you perceive her, that is to say, to be a girl when
you awake again, but to your dreaming sense she is a nymph or a Tanagra statuette.
Timidly she slips through the curtains and then appears to be drawn unconsciously into
movement by the music. Say rather that she becomes part of the music—music made visible.
She wears light classic drapery that seems not so much to clothe her as to serve as am-
bient air wherein she floats. Her limbs and feet are bare ; slender and supple limbs,
feet that seem rather to caress the ground than to be supported by it. When her arms
wave it is a wave in the true sense that they form ; a ripple runs along them, slowly dying
out at the finger-tips. Her hands have something of the leaf or petal about them, gently
opening and folding or curving back upon their stem, like Daphne’s hands in that picture
of Giorgione where the god has caught her and she is just turning to laurel. For ex-
quisite felicity of expression we can only compare them with the hands of Duse —whom
D’Annunzio has so well called dalle belle mani. Here they express —how we cannot
guess, we merely state the fact —a pensive melancholy, the vague sad reverie of Chopin’s
music. But the A minor valse, as every one knows, modulates at times into the relative
major, and then the dancer’s face changes, and expresses hope and joy, and her hands and
limbs and all the movements of the body express hope and joy. Only for a moment,
however, for again the music sinks back into the minor key and you see the joy fading out
of the girl’s face, and leaving her arms and hands, and she dances as one oppressed, falling
at last into a wan despair. The music ceases ; the dancer is quite still, with head bowed
over hands that seem lifeless ; then she glides quietly through the curtain —and you


awake from your dream. It is a strange etat d'ame to have passed through in this
Palace of Varieties, amid its very worldly-looking crowd of aigretted women and cigar-
smoking men—like reading de Q jincey on a racecourse or at Ranelagh.
Your next dream is to the familiar, rather too familiar, tune of Mendelssohn’s
“ Spring Song,” the dream-figure flitting hither and thither —allegretto grazioso —in
pursuit of an imaginary butterfly. This is, of course, no time for languorous melan-
choly ; the girl’s movements are brisk and rapid ; she makes little rushes backwards
and forwards or, like “Camilla, skims along the plain.” Now she is on tip-toe with
arms outstretched, now swiftly bending to the ground, now “ settling ” for a moment
like the butterfly she pursues—in short, gives you the quintessence of the papilionaceous.
This you count a day-dream, you feel the warm summer-breeze—again an impression
curiously incongruous with your actual surroundings. In the true sense of the word,
then, this dancer’s art is entrancing. It converts you into a hypnotized subject.
But the dance, has reserved her master-stroke for the last. This “ Vision of
Salome ’ has not only made her famous, but has so haunting a fascination that, to our
own knowledge, many people cannot keep away from it, and return to the Palace to see
it rnght after night. For many of us in this world will go anywhere in search of
dreams, taking Calderon’s vida es sueno for our motto, and caring little whether our
dreams come to us through the Gate of Ivory or the Gate of Horn. This time our
dream is sensuous, decadent, macabre. To the strains of weird Oriental music Salome
slowly descends the palace steps. There are jewels on her neck and bosom, and she
wears a tunic of black gauze. It is of the essence, of course, of Eastern dancing to
show rhythmic movements of the body round itself, so to speak, as a pivot, which
means, of course, that it may become, as in the notorious case of the danse du ventre,
something lascivious and repulsively ugly. Now
it is obvious that this dancer could make no move-
ment or posture that is not beautiful, and, in fact,
her dancing as Salome, though Eastern in spirit
through and through, is absolutely without the
slightest suggestion of the vulgarities so familiar
to the tourist in Cairo or Tangier. She achieves the
distinction —we admit it risks being a nice distinct-
ion, but she achieves it —between the lascivious and
the voluptuous. Salome dances as one fascinated,
slowly advancing towards the head and swiftly
receding from it, gradually drawing nearer and
nearer, then falling upon hands and knees and
gloating, half savagely, half amorously, over it, then
pouncing upon it like a hawk upon its prey. There-
after she dances fear, a quivering, shuddering dance
and finally collapses, a huddled—but still graceful,
still beautiful—-mass. And there you have the
secret of her art, sheer beauty ; every line in it,
every rhythm, every movement, every posture, every
pause, is beautiful. And so Maud Allan gives you
beautiful dreams, and we do not wonder that all the
dreamers in London and all the lovers of beauty for
beauty’s sake are crowding to see her, and return to
see her again and again.


Most Wonderful of Dancers.
By RALPH E. RENAUD
(San Francisco).
TO all who love pure beauty, to all who worship the loveliness of created things, to
all who seek the true soul of music, and to all who are awake to the romance and
emotion which lie just below the rough surface of everyday life, last night at the
Garrick Theatre was a night among 10,000 to be remembered, treasured, and I am
tempted to say, reverenced. Maud Allan, an exile for the fifteen years which have made
her one of the world’s great artists, appeared in the home of her girlhood and won the
city to complete subjection. Henceforth San Francisco will be to her at once a city of
tears and a city of laughter and love.
Within my time no such personal triumph has occurred twre. The theatre was packed
and fully half had come merely from curiosity, perhaps from morbid curiosity. It was
an audience of Americans, and not exuberant Italians prepared to applaud their favourite
tenor. Yet, at the conclusion of her wonderful interpretation of Grieg’s “ Peer Gynt ”
suite, the whole house, from gallery to pit, was yelling and stamping an ecstatic approval.
If they had not lost their senses, they had at least abandoned all dignity in a frantic
appreciation that the mere patting of palms could not express.
It caused a stress and strain, which the emotions of no human being could with-
stand. When Miss Allan had finished the last number of her programme, the poignantly
graceful “ Valse Caprice ” ot Rubinstein, she crept forward to the footlights, with moist
eyes and quivering lips, to make a little speech. Her voice trembled and was scarcely
audible for the sobs she tried to suppress, but she spoke the most sincere and touching
thanks I have ever heard. She referred to the happy days of her childhood here. She
declared that when she left San Francisco she had determined never to return until
she could bring back with her the success she dreamed of, and that of all cities on earth
she vearned most for the appreciation of this.
“ Take me to your hearts,” she ended, with the catching breath that just precedes a
burst of tears. “ 1 know you have, but, oh, keep me there ! ”
To call Maud Allan a dancer seems almost puerile. She makes school dancing, that
of the rigid toes and slippered feet, appear as a distemper in the land, and the habitual
gvration of the chorus a pestilence. Her rhythmic movement is a graphic realisation of
the visions and vague dreams which master music suggests to every poetic imagination.
And before proceeding with any description it may be as well to establish one thing in
the beginning, her art is neither moral nor immoral. It is the art of absolute beauty.
She dances as she should with bare feet, bare legs, bare throat and arms. There could


be no offence whether she were more or less attired than she is. It is all as modest as
the sunrise, as chaste as the leaves of the forest, and as sweet as the spring blossoms.
Indeed, you scarcely stop to consider that she is a woman at all. She is a figure stepping
delicately from the swelling round of a Greek vase.
Her method is Greek in conception, atmosphere and spirit. It may not have the
regularity we are accustomed to associate with Greek art forms, and the complexity of
her interpretations is doubtless due to the modern over-laying which none of us can
escape. Yet she might be a Dryad, playing in the checkered shade of her forest home,
a nymph dallying by still mountain pools, or an Attic maiden speeding the news of
Salamis. Other forms accompany her. The stage seems full of dancers. She evokes
strange memories of a golden age which never existed. Let us recover our sanity in
remembering the Homeric picture :
“ Ardent youths yonder, and shepherd maids danced, holding each other by the
wrists. Delicate veils wore the maidens ; coloured chitons, handsomely woven and dully
shining with oil, covered the boys. The first came wreathed in flowers, the second bore
golden swords suspended from silver rings. Thus they circled on twinkling feet, lightly
as the skilled hand of the potter turns the plate to assure himself that it revolves ; they
ran, again in pairs, one side against the other.”
Above all Miss Allan’s dancing displays simplicity and grace, which are the essence
of all works of pure beauty. Her costumes are mere half-drapes. She has no tortured
“ fancy steps.” She employs no accessories. And yet the rhythmic harmonies she
weaves are infinitely varied and irresistibly alluring. It may be that, in repose, Miss
Allan is not ravishingly beautiful, either as to form or features. Many a slender girl is
her equal. But her face is marvellously expressive, and her body, swaying in motion,
expresses more than we are accustomed to trace in the facial changes of the most subtle
actors. Her arms supply t; ~c most wonderful part of the harmony. They are what the
violins are to the composite instruments of the orchestra. Miss Allan’s body, of course,
is the instrument through which she produces her effects, but her
arms appear to be the most essential part of it. In the dance of
the Gnomes, for instance, her arms twined and intertwined like
tongues of flame until her visible form seemed to be consumed in
their weird activity.
The music of the symphony orchestra is not an accom-
paniment, but an integral part of the performance. It is an
accurate commentary on the dance, which follows every emotional
change of tone, or time, as the dancing leaves interpret their
own shadows on the grass. Miss Allan could not even conceive
her dances unless she wexe a skilled and sympathetic musician,
and she is, most literally, to her finger-tips. The movements
of the “ Spring Song ” are charmingly light and graceful, but
somewhat obviously suggestive of the melody. In other numbers,
however, in the “ Peer Gynt ” Suite for example, the interpretation
was more subtle, but always inevitably linked and associated with
the music. Her last encore, “ The Blue Danube ” waltzes, which
she offered out of the fulness of a grateful heart, with but one
rehearsal with Mr. Steindorff’s excellent orchestra, was one of the
loveliest of her efforts.
They were all so utterly lovely, however, that it is difficult
to discriminate. Her performance was one of the keenest pleasures
and purest delights I have ever experienced. She gives everyone
something beautiful to take away, a golden memory to ponder
and dream over.


MAUD ALLAN —A Few Press Tributes.
THE TIMES. —February 13th, 1909.
“ BETTER THAN BEFORE. It was quite
clear that her art is even better than it was before.
A host of ‘ classical ’ dancers have been seen in
London since she came here, but Miss Allan has
no rival in the purely musical side of her art.
It would be possible to imagine the stage as a vast
keyboard, from which the notes should bo actually
called forth by the skilful feet, and for the first
time it would be easy for a deaf person to realise
what the composer meant by his unheard strains.
This was particularly beautiful in more than one
movement of Grieg’s first ‘ Peer Gynt ’ suite, in
which ' Anitra’s Dance-’ was the most charming
of the sections. The ‘ Passepied ’ from Delibes’
Le Roi s’amuse music, was a delicious little poem.
From beginning to end one could not but feel
that the dancer so ennobles the music she chooses
that it must lose something in the future when-
ever it is heard without her.”
DAILY^TELEGRAPH. —March 7th, 1908.
“ Her flexible body answers to every change
in the sad and mournful music ; now she raises
appealing hands to Heaven ; at another moment
she sinks prostrate on the ground in an abandon-
ment of despair. More expressive of anything,
however, is the movement of arms and hands ;
one- can almost see the thrills, instinct with a
fearful -melancholy run from shoulder to finger-
tips. It is here, indeed, that Miss Allan shows a
truly original power. Never, it may be safely
asserted, has any artist used hands and wrists in
so marvellously eloquent a> fashion. Thqy seem
to flutter through the air with the action of a
butterfly in flight ; their pliabilty is perfectly
astounding.”
February 13th, 1909.
” SHE CAME AND CONQUERED. She
came arid conquered, as swiftly, and easily, and
masterfully as ever. There can be no doubt as to
the warmth of her reception. . . Her absence
from the stage had deprived London of something
rare and beautiful, which must be recovered without
delay. . .
” Charm and grace—these are the keynotes of
Miss Maud Allan’s dancing. . . . Miss Allan
expresses the thoughts which she suggests, the
underlying notion of something imaginative and
allegorical. But the grace, instinctive in all her
movements, ‘ leaps to the eyes,’ as the French
would say, a rhythmic, beautiful, sinuous grace,
full of poses and attitudes of unconscious beauty,
lit up now and then by a rare and fleeting smile,
or illustrated with fugitive gleams of childish joy.
. . Anitra’s dance and the Dance of the Gnomes
from Grieg were wonderfully captivating, especi-
ally the last, in which, for the first time probably
Miss Allan gave us a suggestion of the wild, cha-
otic dancing of the Dervish, something mad and
tempestuous, and exhausting, after which the
dancer falls inert, breathless, nerveless on the
ground, and made the house so enthusiastic that
the curtain had to be raised six or seven times
before the applause ceased. . . It was indeed
‘ Roses, roses all the way.’ ”
DAILY MAIL. —March 7th, 1908.
" IN MISS ALLAN—ALL THE NOBLEST
ARTS, the music of the masters, the rhythm of
imaginary poems, the triumph of Greek sculpture
and of Botticelli’s brush, are expressed or suggest-
ed in the measured movements of a perfectly
shaped body. The subtlest nuances of the music
are echoed in the quivering movement of her body
—movements the like of which have not been
seen in modern days and in Western countries.
Ancient Greece may have known such dancing.
Who knows ? Again and again, Miss Allan trans-
lates into life the dancing and piping maidens
painted on Greek vases and carved in Greek
reliefs. Her body shrinks and expands with the
movements and accentuation of the music. Now
she is an impish sprite dancing in angular maun-
dering rhythm across the stage ; then suddenly
she becomes a Diane chasseresse of the French
eighteenth century ; and then with the growing
intoxication of the music, a reeling Bacchante,
reeling, but still rhythmically moving until she
collapses with the same grace with which she was
just spinning round the stage. She makes us
realise, as we have never realised before, the close
links that connect the plastique and pictorial art
or periods divided by many centuries—from the
Etruscan vase, through Botticelli to Carpeaux.
Miss Allan dances not only with her legs and feet,
but with every part of her body and with her very
skin, that has thrills and shivers such as are pro-
duced by the sudden contact with cold water. . .
The movements of her arms are indescribably and
strangely beautiful. She moves them not as we
have seen other dancers move them, but as though
longitudinal wavq-. were running from shoulder
c 1 finger-tip. Ami her hands dance ; every fi iger
dances ; everything becomes movement and
rhythm.”
THE ACADEMY.— March 31st, 1908.
“The rudiments of the Western art, can be
mastered by any agile young body, such dancing
as Miss Allan’s is only possible to an imaginative
artist, who can create, without conventions or
symbols to save trouble, the poetic impression
desired. It is not possible to dance in the Western
manner like Mile. Genee, unless, like Mile. Gence,
you are a great artist. It is not possible to dance
in the Eastern manner at all unless, like Miss
Allan, you are a great artist. . . For the essence
of this art —which is Eastern, though Miss Allan
is not of the East—is that it is dramatic.
“ Did Miss Allan realise when she came to
London how bold a thing she was doing ? It was
nothing less than beginning our education in a
branch of art which we have persistently neglected
and mainly through our uncomfortable suspicion
of its ‘ propriety.’ Courage is usually rewarded,
and Miss Allan has conquered. Night after night
crowds flock to sec this princess of the East.
“ Not all the visitors to the Palace, we suspect
have read Browning’s ‘ The Lady and the Painter,’
but it looks as if all had realised its message—the
‘ absolution ’ in Browning’s mistaken phrase, won
by artist’s model and dancer alike.”
THE DAILY MAIL. —February 13th, 1909.
" A POEM IN ACTION. Those were wrong
who thought hers would be merely a passing
popularity. It was sneered at here and there as a
‘ boom,’ a caprice. Nothing could be further from
the truth. Miss Maud Allan’s is an art which
charms and refreshes the more it is seen.


It is so utterly different from the usual self-
conscious style of stage dancing. She does not
seem to know that she has an audience. She
marries to melody the most exquisite motion
solely, one might imagine, for the joy of swaying
her lithe body and her rippling arms and her deli-
cately poised Tanagra head to the strains that set
her soul vibrating with emotion.
“ One is moved by the essential youthfulness
and innocence of her interpretations just as one is
moved by the dainty sweet seriousness of children
dancing. . . All that one sees is a faun-like
figure with limbs of surpassing lightness gleaming
through wind-blown draperies, as she moves,
wrapt in her own beautiful imaginings, through
the delicate steps of some woodland measure. .
That is what makes Miss Maud Allan so fascin-
ating—her absorption in the music, an absorption
which communicates itself to the spectator. Her
form has rather the elusive grace of a child than
the firm-set beauty of a woman. Her appeal is
not to the senses, but to the imagination. She is a
poem in action, a delight to all imaginative minds.
” And as for Maud Allan, one cannot say more
in praise of her than that she is Miss Maud Allan
still: improved in technique perhaps, but quite
unspoiled by success ; the same artist in beauty,
in harmony, in joy.”
Mr. J. T. GREEN in THE SUNDAY TIMES, and
SUNDAY SPECIAL.—March Bth, 1908.
"... MISS MAUD ALLAN IS AN
ARTISTE in her dancing, in her conception, and
in the unmistakable earnestness which pervades
the whole of her work. . . She creates atmos-
ph ices. . . She mo.es her guns in wond’.rfnl
undulations, which are as original as they are
bewitching. . . She outrivals Isadora Duncan,
because she conveys feeling and emotion.”
THE DAILY GRAPHlC.—February 13th, 1909.
“ Novelty touching the key of pubhc humour
can easily create a sensation ; but novelty unaided
can seldom renew her triumphs. They must be
something of genius, some strain or element of
natural spontaneity, to hold public enthusiasms
constant and undeviating in their allegiance.
This was very clearly evidenced yesterday after-
noon at the Palace Theatre, when Miss Maud
Allan made her long-expected re-appearance.
The matinee was in a sense a severe and trying test
for the young dancer. There could be no absolute
novelty in her dancing. Her audience knew
exactly what to expect. . . Yet the afternoon |
provided its surprise, the general surprise that ,
Miss Allan’s art should wear so well, and breathe
in these later days the charm of freshness, the life
and spontaneity of ingenuous youth. All the new
dances were individual successes . . But no
sum total individual successes can explain with
exactitude Miss Allan’s triumph yesterday after-
noon. It was not this dance or that dance which
surprised us. The glad surprise was found in the
acknowledgment that her art endures.”
NEW YORK REVlEW.—January 23rd, 1910.
“ Maud Allan achieved a triumph upon her debut
at Carnegie Hall on Thursday afternoon.”
CHICAGO EXAMINER—January 24th, 1910.
“ Now we have seen them all—and after all
there is only one Maud Allan. . . Miss Allan
is so much more than a dancer. She is one of the
greatest actresses in pantomime. I had heard
‘ The Blue Danube ’ all my life, several times with
the younger Strauss himself dancing at the leader’s
desk, but this was the first time I ever really saw
it. Yet even more wonderful in tragic thrill was
her dark spot in Ibsen. She did not do it beaut’-
fully, as Hedda would say, but she died for us.”
MANCHESTER DISPATCH.—Feb. 13th, 1909.
" For over four and a half hours, people waited
in the biting wind to gain admission to the cheaper
parts of the House, and the place was packed long
before the curtain rose, Society being well repre-
sented. . . In all she gave nine short dances.
. . . In two items from Grieg’s ‘ Peer Gynt ’
Suite she proved herself a true artist. . . ' Ani-
tra’s Dance ’ was an exquisite piece of work and the
‘ Dance of the Gnomes ’ a very riot of mad frolic.”
SAN FRANCISCO BULLETIN—ApriI 6th, 1910.
“ Her name sets forever in the crown of San
Francisco as one of its greatest glories. Art has
never performed a greater miracle. . . . Two
years ago I had seen Maud Allan dance, and then
thought it one of the most wonderful, beautiful,
chaste exhibitions I had ever enjoyed. Last even-
ing she was even more wonderful. . . . You
may pour upon that wonderful body the oil of
your finest adjectives. The myrrh and incense of
your most poetical praise is fit tribute.”
LIVERPOOL DAILY COURIER.—Feb. 13th, 1909
“ . , . . Like a craped Greek statue, swaying
in the ecstasy of some sublime inspiration. .
It was a wonderful performance ; an exquisite
and apparently spontaneous expression of divine
harmony, in rhythmic classical movement, the
very poetry of motion and the incarnation of
song. . . . She reduces with infallible grace
classical melody to sculptured gesture. . . You
seem to see the immortal figures of Keats’ Grecian
urn stepping into life, and weaving before your
eyes the forgotten ecstasies of the days when the
World was young. . . ” v
REVIEW, New York.—January 30th, 1910.
” What is it that awakens this marble Galatea ?
Earth mould does not cling to her light draperies
nor do her alabaster limbs show the ancient
Paphian curves. Yet she is as Hellenic as a form
on a Greek vase. When the rising music inspires
her to give us the spirit of the dance we are called
to sacerdotal revelation. She seems as a native
of Rhodes in the time of Aristodicus, who danced
to the piping of his neatherds whilst Priapus and
the fountain nymphs came to wonder at her grace.
. . . It is safe to say tfiat no other artist has as
yet given us as vividly a translation to motion' of
sculpture and poetry. Maud Allan has already
made a far-reaching impression on the minds of
those who love this new art.”
THE GLASGOW HERALD.—Feb. 13th, 1909.
” ... In the power of illustrating the
music to which she dances lies one of the charac-
teristics of Miss Allan’s art. . . The ‘ Dance of
the Gnomes’ was full of variety and weirdness. It
was one of the best things Miss Allan has yet done.”


MISS MAUD ALLAN.


the following are among ihose who have witnessed the bances of Miss MAUD ALLAN:
HIS MAJESTY KING GEORGE V.
HER MAJESTY QUEEN MARY
HER MAJESTY QUEEN ALEXANDRA
HIS LATE MAJESTY KING EDWARD VII.
T.R.H. THE DUKE & DUCHESS OF CONNAUGHT
H.R.H. PRINCESS VICTORIA
H.S.H. PRINCE FRANCIS OF TECK
H.H. MAHARAJAH OF COOCH-BEHAR
H.H. THE DEWAN OF NEPAL
H.I.H. CROWN PRINCE OF GERMANY
T.I.H. PRINCE AND PRINCESS EITEL FRITZ
H.H. PRINCESS VICTOR HOHENLOHE
PRINCE BATHANY r
THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR (HON. WHITE-
LAW REID)
THE FRENCH AMBASSADOR (M. CAMBON)
THE GERMAN AMBASSADOR (COUNT WOLFF-
METTERNICH, G.C.V.0.)
THE AUSTRIAN AMBASSADOR (COUNT MENS-
DORFF)
THE RT. HON. H. H. ASQUITH, M.P.
DUKE OF NORFOLK
DUKE AND DUCHESS OF SOMERSET
DUCHESS OF DEVONSHIRE
DUKE AND DUCHESS OF MARLBOROUGH
DUKE OF RUTLAND
DUKE AND DUCHESS OF PORTLAND
DUKE AND DUCHESS OF MANCHESTER
DUCHESS OF SUTHERLAND
DUKE AND DUCHESS OF WESTMINSTER
THE MARQUESS AND MARCHIONESS OF WIN-
CHESTER
MARCHIONESS OF HAMILTON ■.
EARi, OF EGLINTON J
EARL OF SUFFOLK
EARL OF KINNOULL
EARL OF WEMYSS
THE RT. HON. THE EARL OF ROSEBERY
EARL OF ONSLOW
EARL OF CARNARVON
EARL AND COUNTESS DE GREY
EARL OF DUNMORE
EARL OF ELLESMERE
EARL AND COUNTESS DUDLEY
EARL OF CLONMELL
LADY YOUNG
LADY RIVERS WILSON
LADY STANLEY
LADY DIMSDALE
LADY GWENDOLINE GUINNESS
LADY MACNAGHTEN
CAPT. THE HON H. STANHOPE
HON. SIDNEY GREVILLE, C.V.0., C.B.
THE RT. HON. WINSTON CHURCHILL, M.P.,
AND MRS. CHURCHILL
THE RT. HON. LEWIS HARCOURT, M.P., AND
MRS. HARCOURT
THE RT. HON. A, J. BALFOUR, M.P.
THE RT. HON. COL. MARK LOCKWOOD, C.V.O.
M.P., AND MRS. LOCKWOOD
FIRST LORD OF THE ADMIRALTY, RT. HON.
REGINALD McKENNA, M.P.
ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET, SIR JOHN FISHER.
G.C.8., 0.M., A.D.C., Etc.
SIR MARTEINE LLOYD, BART
SIR WILLIAM HUMPHERY, BART.
SIR WILLIAM HOLDSWORTH, BART.
SIR E. A. SASSOON, BART.
SIR CUTHBERT QUIETER, BART.
EARL AND COUNTESS OF LYTTON
LORD A. CAMPBELL
LORD HAMILTON OF DALZELL
LORD HERBERT VANE-TEMPEST
LORD LEWISHAM
LORD CHURCHILL
LORD CRICHTON
ADML. LORD CHARLES BERESFORD, G.C.V.O.
LORD DUNGANNON
LORD AND LADY ESHER
LORD AND LADY IVEAGH
LORD LUCAS
LORD ACHESON
LORD WESTBURY
LORD AND LADY ALINGTON
LORD ROTHSCHILD
LORD WELBY
LORD GLENESK
LORD ROSMEAD
LORD ALVERSTONE
LORD REDESDALE
LORD BURNHAM
LORD NORTHCLIFFE
LORD NEWBOROLGH
LORD COLEBROOKE
COUNTESS OF GALLOWAY
COUNTESS OF CROMER
LAD', KILMOREY
X.ADY HELEN VINCENT
lady wantage
COUNTESS OF CRAVEN
LADY ULRICA BARING
LADY ALASTAIR INNES-KER
LADY ALWYNE COMPTON
VISCOUNTESS COKE
LADY BATEMAN
LADY DAWKINS
LADY REAY
LADY TREE
LADY C. SOMERSET
FIELD-MARSHAL SIR GEORGE STUART WHITE
V.C., G.C.8., 0.M., Etc.
SIR ALFRED HICKMAN, BART.
SIR F. OPPENHEIMER
SIR WILLIAM HULTON, BART.
FIELD-MARSHALL SIR EVELYN WOOD, V.C.
G.C.8., Etc.
SIR WALTER ARMSTRONG, BART.
COL SIR EDWARD WARD, K.C.B.
SIR VEST RIDGWAY, G.C.8., G.C.M.G., Etc.
SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE
COL. SIR CLEMENT ROYDS, C.B.
BARON A. GOLDSCHMIDT
BARON DE MEYER
CANON WILBERFORCE
COL. HALL WALKER AND MRS. WALKER
MISS WHITELAW REID
MRS. AND MISS VIOLET ASQUITH
MRS. BRADLEY MARTIN
MR. ALFRED DE ROTHSCHILD
MR, WILLIAM WALDORF ASTOR
MR. BERNARD SHAW
The Late MR. W. T. STEAD


THE CHERNIAVSKYS
Music is a moral law. It gives a soul to the universe, wings to the mind, flight to
the imagination, a charm to sadness, gaiety and life to everything. It is the essence of
order, and leads to all that is good, just and beautiful.”-
Plato.
These brilliant young geniuses who visited Australia and New Zealand, and created
such a furore in musical circles six years ago, under the direction of Edward Branscombc,
have since made a world-wide reputation, and also wonderful progress in their music.
It is doubtful if any more interesting and successful musical attraction ever visited
Australia than the Cherniavsky Concert Party. Beyond all question, the Cherniavskys
are far and away more musically astounding, and artistically excellent than any instru-
mental trio we have heard of. A huge amount of continuous practice was necessary to
reach their extraordinary pitch of technical perfection, and coupled with this, nature
has endowed them with an abnormal wealth of temperament and abundance of passion,
and an artistic perception, which makes their renderings of the world’s masterpieces the
wonder of musicians in every country.
Since their last visit, the Cherniavskys have scored a number of triumphs in England
and the Continent. The critics there are absolutely unanimous that the Cherniavskys
are the most striking examples of musical geniuses of the present day.
A critic of the “ Neue Freie Pressc,” Vienna, writing of the three young master-
musicians has said : “ It would be difficult to over-estimate the quality or to over-praise the
exalted attainment of the gifted Trio. Surely some re-incarnate attributes of the melodic
spirit seeks for expression here ! Who knows ? They have won golden opinions and
their fame is still going up and their name should some day prove familiar in our mouths as
household words.”


LEO. JAN and MISCHEL
CHERNIAVSKY
‘Pianist, Violinist and ’Cellist,
WHO WILL APPE/R AT MAUD ALLAN'S RECITALS.
Atlas Press, Melbourne
