

[?]


Maud Allan
and
Her Art


Miss MAUD ALLAN


MY ART AND AIM.
“ How came it about that you adopted the classic methods of dance ? "
“ How did you set about acquiring the art of antique dancing ? ”
“ What gave you the idea of reviving the style of the ancients in your dances ? ”
These are the earliest questions of the curious critic.
“ Her manner of interpreting the emotional phases of music is a revelation."
“ This method of dancing is a remarkable novelty.”
“ She lias introduced wonderful innovations in the art of dancing ! ”
These are the pronouncements of the kindly and courteous critic.
They arc wrong ! wrong ! ! wrong ! ! !
How I dance, and why, and what is my method ? A- searching cry from one of the
woodwind instruments in the orchestra —a deeper sigh from the violoncellos, a sudden
impulsive throb from the great bass, or a warning muffled note from the horns, and what I
have to express as I dance above them on the stage changes, as a chance word said in a new
tone in a conversation alters the whole. Many who have watched me time after time have
asked me why I can never dance to the same measure twice in exactly the same manner —
1 cannot answer, I only know that as the music calls, so every muscular fibre that responds to
the beating of my heart, responds to that particular voice, and the tone becomes movement.
A novelty —an innovation ? No, indeed !


APPEARANCE IN LONDON.
When first I came to London, one of my earliest friends, a critic, who was perhaps
more poet than critic, and perhaps more seer than either, said to me : “ You danced, I
think, in Syracusan groves, and on the slopes of Mount Etna, for the pleasure of Dorian
and lonaian immigrants, when Sicily was a peaceful colony of ancient Greece. You danced
whilst Theocritus read his idylls in the Mediterranean twilights, and then you went to sleep
and have awakened again just now. But you have not forgotten how you danced to the
wailing and the laughter of Sicilian flutes and to the command of Sicilian tabors.”
I wonder !
I think I can see the boats from Argolis, seven hundred years before Christ, landing
their companies upon the Trinacrian sands, 1 can skip five hundred years, and stand
in the theatre at Taormina, as it was then, listening to the tired voice of Theocritus, himself
a settler upon those whispering shores, reciting the Idyll, compelling my limbs to sway to the
music of his thought, whilst the chorus took up the burden of his tale. And then the
Carthaginian wars, the struggle for our Island, the purple splendours and brutalities of the
Roman Triumph. The Sicily of Theocritus was crushed, its groves were hushed and
dead, and I—l1 —I think they laid me in a little niche beside a stream under the hedges of
cactus, and the geraniums stained by the sun-rise—and I waited—-waited !
Syracuse in Sicily, B.C. 210, London in England, A.I). 1908.
What a wild fancy ! and yet —I do sometimes think that 1 was one with those ancient
dancers, whose duty in life was to express in motion the hopes, fears, passions, regrets, which
rose in men’s and women’s hearts, and found expression in movement when theworld was
younger, and simpler, and more accustomed to what Carlyle has called “ all sorts of sudden
sincerities.”


ORIGIN OF DANCING.
The origin of dancing is panoplied with tire dim magnificence of Myth. “We arc not
to believe,” says Lucian, in a well-known dialogue, ‘‘ that dancing is of modern invention,
born recently, or even that our ancestors saw its beginning. Those who have spoken with
truth of the origin of this art affirm that it takes its birth from the time of the creation of
all things, and that it is asok! as Love, the most ancient of the gods.” Cybele herself, daugh-
ter of the Earth and Sky, wife of Saturn, and mother of the gods, taught the art of dancing
to the Corybantes on Mount Ida and to the Curetes in Crete ; among the servants of the
Pantheon her priests were called Baxxatores — the Dancers— and the dance of the. Curetes
was said to he that of ILedalus, engraved, as Homer tells us in the Iliad, upon the shield of
Achilles.
When the cloud-curtains of mythology are raised and historic times begin, we hear first
of all of the Hieratic dances of Egypt, and find representations of them upon Egyptian
monuments front 2500 to 1200 B.C. These dances interpreted the Music of the Spheres and
the Harmonic progression of the Stars. We have representations of tire dances in honour of
Apis the Bull, and Diodorus Siculus (that tender master of Chronicles) tells us that Osiris
was served bv nine maidens skilled in all arts that relate to musical expression, who came
to he called by the Greeks the ” Mine Muses.” You have in your midst, on the tablets and
vases from Thebes in the British Museum, pictures of the dances that accompanied their
funerals and festivals, and modern travellers in Egypt may sec in the dances of the Gazawis
—the dance of ” the Bee,” and of “ the Bottle -the survival of the very modes depicted
upon those ancient decorations.
GREEK ART.
Bom in Egypt, the Dance became nurtured in the cradle of the Arts—-Greece.
Greek Art represents the whole kingdom presided over by the Muses, —cither parrs
not discriminating from one another and specialised, as in modern times, but regarded
generally as the necessary culture of a free-born citizen. Thus art would include dancing,
and singing, and music, and poetry, and the whole sphere of literature. There was no idea
in Greece of divorcing either dancing or singing from other forms of artistic culture. The
free-born citizen must be so trained, that alike, body and mind should be subservient to the
highest ideals of humanity.
How can one form an idea of what Greek Art was ? The easiest fashion perhaps, to
study the evolution of Art, to see how it rises on the dead stepping-stones of its old self to
higher things, is to go to the British Museum, and pass from the Egyptian Hall to the
Assyrian Rooms, and thence to the Elgin Marbles of the Parthenon. There we sec how


Greece had achieved its mission in art, had succeeded in de-
lineating the human form in its ideal excellence.
Side by side with the artistic evolution you observe there,
and not in any sense dissociated from it, come those arts of
song, and music, and dance, which, in their various ways, also
exhibit the human form in its utmost perfection. Nearly
everyone was taught to dance in Greece, just as everyone was
taught the sterner gymnastic exercises. There were three
elements in a gentleman’s education —gymnastic exercise,
isic and dancing. Possibly we may find it difficult to understand
why the philosophers and the moralists of Greece attached so much
■ nportance to the various kinds of danse. But the reason is clear.
Modern dancing is a mere amusement, mainly an exercise for the
lect. Ancient dancing was an exercise for the whole body : and,
instead of being on the level of an entertainment, was closely con-
nected with religion and the drama. In the East, as we are all
aware, dancing was and is the language of religion. In Greece it
was the prose gesture of high emotion, just as song, was the poetic
gesture. King David, in order to show his religious fervour, danced
before the ark with all his might, despite the scorn of his wife, in order
to prove his religious fervour. In Greece choral dancing was at once
the ritual of religion, and the ordinary accompaniment of a festival, the highest form of
music, and the most perfect form of physical exercise then discovered. It was both educa-
tional and symbolic. So far as it was educational, being closely connected with appropriate
music, it produced, according to the Greek idea, the proper religions atmosphere. So far as
dancing was symbolic, it was the immediate ancestor of the drama. The boy who danced
in honour of Dionysius was trying to make himself resemble the god, trying to bring out
pictorially, as it were, the history and personality of the god. Thus Dancing became expres-
sive of very different kinds of feeling and action. The very movements of the chorus in
Greek dramas helped to attune the minds of the spectators to the kind of play that was being
enacted before their eyes.
I love to see in imagination the Nine Muses, led by Terpsichore, as the} - were seen by
Hesiod, treading, in their beautiful measures, the violets of Hippocrenc. And in other
moods my mind conjures up the Bacchantes encircling Silenus with their riot of spontan-
eous movement. We have it from Aristotle that, in dancing, all the passions of man found
illustration three hundred years before the Augustan era, and no Athenian festivity was
shorn of this art which Simonides aptly described as “ silent poetry.”
We remember the dances that Homer describes at the banquets in the Odyssey —if you
would have them brought more vividly before you, spend an hour among the exquisite
figures from Tanagra and Myrina in the British Museum, and in the Galleries of the Louvre.
GREEK DANCES.
The Emmaleia, which are referred to by Plato, and which were in the nature of sacred and
tragic invocations to the gods. The Hyporchema, religious dances, accompanied by a
singing chorus, which were executed in honour, originally, of Apollo, and later of Dionysins
and Athene. The exquisite Gymxopwdia, simulating an attack and defence, was danced by
' naked boys crowned with chaplets of palm, and the Exdymatia, which were more secular
dances, characterised by brisker action, and executed by performers clad in the richest
draperies.
From these four all the dances of antiquit}/ took their derivation, and among them, what
more idyllic than that known as Caryatis, the dance sacred to Diana, danced by noble
Spartan maidens in the woods near Caryae ? It was the Dance of Innocence, danced naked


around the altars of the goddess, the maidens carrying upon their heads baskets containing
the materials and implements proper to the sacrifice, and their chaste rites have been im-
mortalised in our modem architecture by the pillars that are known to us as Caryatides.
The Virgin Goddess claimed, too, the dance known as Cnossia, a dance executed by
girls in chaplets of flowers, and youths girt with golden swords and bearing golden shields ;
it was a war-like measure representing the labyrinth of the Minotaur at Cnossus. To her
also was sacred the Purple Dance, so called from the colour of the tunics in which it was
executed. Sparta, again, was the home of another dance sacred to Diana, the Honuos,
a kind of farandole instituted by Lycurgus to inculcate in the youths and maidens, who dance
it without draperies, the (earless modesty which was the boast of the Spartan national
character. Even in such early days there were those in whom nudity in woman awoke
base thoughts, to whom Lycurgus replied (Plutarch being historiographer), “ I wish them to
perform the same exercises as men, that they may equal men in strength, health, virtue
and generosity of soul, and that they may learn to despise the opinion of the vulgar.”
THE GREEK STAGE.
On the Greek stage, the Hyporchematic dances readied their highest developments of
music, dance and statuesque pose, and they were directed by a leader who punctuated the
measures with the click of oyster-shells, a practice that finds its parallel in the use of the
modern castanets.
It is not surprising that with the intrusion of pantomime and of the comic element the
dances degenerated, and we read of the Cordax (named after Cordax, the satyr), which
was an indecent buffoonery, for the dancing of which Theophrastus reproaches a man
who danced it when sober.
The dance known as Sikinnis was of even baser sort, and the Kolia was little other than
the twitching of the body muscles that lias its modem equivalent in the Danse du Veilin'
of the latter day Almees and Gazawis. The names of a vast number of these mimetic
dances have been handed down to us by historians of classic manners and
customs, and Mons. Vuillicr, in his “ Historic de la Danse,” gives a list of
them, the titles of which sufficiently indicate their nature.
But contemporary and co-existent with those were many very beautiful
dances peculiar to women, representations of which have charmed us all
as we see them depicted in the mural paintings of Pompeii and HerculancuiA.
Such were the Hygra, the Kallabis, and the Oklasma, exquisite and graceful
measures danced to the music of single and double flutes. Would that I
could go back in dreams to see a Greek maiden dancing the flower dance
that was known as Anthema !
THE HEBREWS,
But the Greek; were not the only pupils of the ancient Egyptian dancers.
The Hebrews during the time of the Egyptian captivity, without doubt
learnt much of this art from their task-masters, and one might easily quote
the vast number of passages from the Old Testament having reference to the
dancing of the Israelites. “ Praise Him with timbrel and with dance,”
commands the Psalmist, and the dance of King David before the Ark requires
but passing mention. The pitiful episode of Jepthah’s daughter springs to
one’s mind, and we learn that the daughters of Shiloh were dancing when the
sons of Benjamin descended upon them, as the Romans upon the Sabine
women. There were dances in honour of Judith when she returned bearing
the head of Holofernes, probably a kind of “ country dance ” danced »y
two rows of girls.


THE ROMAN’S.
We must next trace the History of the Art in Rome, and while doing so, it must be
borne in mind that Rome was still in a condition of barbarism when the civilisation of
Greece was almost at its zenith. Passing over the war-dance called Bellicrepa, said to have
been invented by Romulus to celebrate the Rape of the Sabines, the earliest account we
have of Roman dancing is that of the Salii, twelve priests appointed by the pacific Numa
Pompilius to celebrate the gods in ceremonial and warlike dances. It was not long, how-
ever, before the Romans adopted the arts of Greece, as it had already adopted its gods,
and we may take it that the Greek methods of dancing found a ready acceptance, and that
dancing in Rome speedily attained a development that fell not far short of the Greek
originals. It is not surprising, regard being had to the nature and origin of the Roman
people, that what was bad in the art of dancing, soon gained a firm foothold, and that the
art rapidly reached the condition of degeneracy which it attained by slower degrees in
Greece. Scipio Emilios records his visit to a school where noble children were educated,
and where" a boy of twelve performed a dance worthy of the most degraded slave.” The
Bacchanalia, originally of a religious and ceremonial character, soon became corrupted into
mere orgies ; the Lupercalia, dances in honour of the god Pan, shared the same fate, and
it may be said that, until the Augustan era, dancing as a distinct art was confined to
Tuscan buffoons. It was, however, a condition of affairs that led insensibly to a high
development of the art of pantomime, which at the dawn of the Augustan age had become
the mania, the rage of the Roman populace. The Ludiones of the rival pantomimists,
Bathyllus and Pyladcs, divided the city into factions, and men and women alike vied
with one another in their adhesion to, and patronage (to the point of imitation) of, these
rival leaders. Cicero and Horace both stigmatised dancing as an infamous practice, and
we have it on record that Sallust reproached a Roman lady with the taunt that “ she
danced with too much skill for a virtuous woman.” The most famous female dancers
in Rome were the Gaditanians, a class of women who came from Cadiz, and, so great
was their renown, that we find their eulogies in the works of Martial, Pliny, Petronius,
Appian and Strabo. The “ Gaditanian Delights,” as they were called, may be said to
have been the earliest prime ballerine in the history of the art
THE CHURCH AND DANCING.
The power of dancing as a means of appealing to the feelings of the populace did not
escape the Fathers of the Early Christian Church, and many accounts have come down to us
by way of reference to the Ritual dances of that Church. As early as 744 A.I), these dances
were forbidden by a decree of Pope Zacharias. In the 12th centurj religious dances were
banned by Bishop Odo of Paris, and they were again interdicted by a decree of Parliament
in 16(57, but the clergy, in whose hands was the sale of licences to institute these functions,
did all in their power to resist and set at naught the decrees. Such dances still obtain
upon anniversary festivals to-day in many Continental cities, especially in Spain, and the
religious dances at Limoges in honour of St. Martial are a notable case in point. The
dancing Dervishes of the East afford another instance of a survival of the kind.
Purely secular dancing of the earlier classic kind appears to have enjoyed a revival
amongst the early Gauls, but it was of a debased type, and we find it forbidden in the year
554 by Childebert.
RENAISSANCE OF THE DANCE.
With the birth of chivalry in the early middle ages we note the real renaissance of the
dance, and it is easy to trace the influence and traditions of the early Greek School in the
Rondes, Bourees and Branles of Auvergne, and the Minuets and Farandoles of Languedoc
and elsewhere in the South of France, where the popular dances of the country people


differ little to-day from those that were danced a thousand years ago. These were the
dances of the Provinces. At Court, dancing had developed into Masquerades, and from
thence to the Ballet was an easy and natural step. At one of the earliest of these (still
known as the “ Ballet des Ardents ”) Charles VI., being present, dressed as a savage,
his costume caught fire, and he suffered a shock that brought about his madness.
TH EAT RICA LI) ANT.IN G.
Theatrical dancing, as we know it to-day, had its origin in Italy, where, at the end of
the loth century, Cardinal Riario, nephew of the Pope, composed Ballets and had them
performed bv his own company in the Castle of St. Angelo. In Italy the Medicis revived
the dances of ancient Greece and Rome. The art flourished in the Kith and 17th centuries,
and side bv side with the stately Pavanes and Courantes, associated with the names of
Louis XIII., Richelieu and Henry IV., we have the contrasting pictures of the Dances of
Death that owed their existence to Albert Diier and Holbein.
The apogee of the Art of Dancing was reached in the reign of Louis XIV., who founded
the Academic de la Danse in Kifil with Ouinault as director, and J. B Lully as composer.
It was not, however, until 1681 that women dancers appeared again upon the stage, and
we have an account of the performance at this time of four ladies in a Ballet entitled,
“Li Trioinphe de I’Amour.” Dancing continued to become more and more elegant and
refined during the reigns of Louis XV. and XVI. . when the Gavotte ami Minuet recalled
some of the stately graces of old times. But suddenly the end came, the music was silenced,
the lights extinguished, and in the'place of the elegant dances in the palaces, men and
women ran riot in the streets, dancing dancing madly.
It was th<’ Carmagnole, the dance of the Revolution '


DANCING-NATURE’S ART.
In the foregoing short sketch of the History of Classical Dancing, 1 haveYtricd to
show, within the restricted limits to which I am necessarily confined, that in all ages in
which dancing properly so-called has flourished, it has been, not so much the aim, as the
natural condition of flic Art, to express the nature, the characteristics, the emotions of
those who have pursued it. Nations dance—-when they dance naturally—to the tune
of their destinies. The moment that dancing becomes bound by rules and conventions
it loses the very rationale of its existence. Who then shall say that true dancing can
be taught ? As well might we try to teach the birds to sing, the butterflies to soar by rote
and measure among the glades and the flowers.
It was not with taught precision of scholastic methods, it was not in ambition to
realise perfection in a given mode, that we danced in the shady groves and sunlit meads of
Argolis, or by the murmuring seas of the Sicily of Theocritus.
CLASSICAL ARTISTS.
Facts like these enable us to understand why classical dancing is so absolutely different
from the modern forms of saltatory exercise. It means something entirely different from
amusement. It is in the highest degree symbolic. But in its immediate appeal to the eye
it represents not only emotions, but also, according to the Greek idea, thoughts. Unless
one looks at it from the proper historic standpoint, the whole meaning and value arc missed.
If the exponent of classical dancing brings before us strongly emphasised emotions, thoughts
in the presence of death, or, in lighter mood, the mere jote ile nivre, with a, background of a
dark blue sea breaking on shores of eternal beauty she is merely carrying out for us some
of those high purposes for which dances existed in the olden times, and which have been
forgotten or effaced in modem culture. The dancing master in the" Bourgeois Gentil-
homme,” it may he remembered, asserts that the destinies of the nations depend on the
science, of dancing. Paradoxical as this is to a modern ear, it would mean something true
and real to the philosopher or artist of Hellas. Even we ourselves, inspired by the beauty
of rhythmical movement, can at least understand and echo the enthusiastic comment of
Florizel to Perdita, in “The Winter’s Tale.” "When you do dance,” says Florizel, " 1
■wish you a wave of the sea.” And when the classical dancer moves before our eyes, we,
too, feel the inspiration of movement, the rhythmical sway and pulse of the ocean.


WHAT I AIM AT.
I am so often asked what I mean by my dancing, and what arc my aims and intentions,
that I would like to explain them as briefly as possible, and once for all. To begin with,
I wish to say that my dancing has nothing to do with the dancing of the ballet school,
which, exquisitely beautiful as it is at its highest, is evolved out of a studied and con-
ventional technique.
Absolute spontaneity is the first principle of my method. Ido not, as many people
suppose, profess merely to dance “in time to ” the music, and to express its rhythm.
It is what the music suggests to me personally, its emotional content, that I try to express.
Music is the tonal expression of all feeling and emotion ; of nature in all her moods and
phases ; and my dancing in so far as it realises my intention, is an expression in visible
motion of those feelings which have inspired the composition. I may not yet succeed
as I one day hope to, yet I shall not despair, for there is a fascination in the study of these
allied arts which I find irresistible. Music itself is the result of vibration ; and vibration is
the basis of all movement. Music is written, like the spoken word, in sentences which,
in turn, have their phrases. We all know that it is the “ reading ” and “ phrasing ” of
the very many notes which are put down on paper by the composer to perpetuate his
ideas and impressions which either makes or mars his composition for the hearer. The
notes themselves express nothing, nor can a profuse use of marks and signs (which are
only put in as a guide to those who arc perhaps very able technicians, but less gifted as to
“ feeling ” the messages the sentences contain) bring out the emotional meaning which
the composer wishes to convey. But the musician, who understands them, can repro-
duce them. How different do the same masterpieces sound and impress one under the
fingers of various artists ! When the master interprets, we feel within us something
stirring, for the notes have begun to live ; a soul has been infused into them, we feel creeping
over us a vague sense of other worlds, of joy or sorrow, submission or rebellion —a medley
of sensations, hard actually to explain in words.
It is these feelings which the music arouses in me that I try to catch and give form
to. I take the music phrase for phrase, and try to see clearly what its meaning is to
me. Perhaps the composer meant something different ; but no one can be sure ; we
can only, even the most learned, draw conclusions from the impression the music leaves
upon us for there is no fixed rale in the physical world, that certain combinations of sound
mean certain things.


I seek tor the corresponding phrases of movement, and augment these movements
by facial expression in accordance with the emotional colouring of the music. This part of
my study is perhaps the most delicate thing I attempt, and there are certain changes of
expression in a long phrase of movement which arc' apt to be lost in a big place in the
attempt to translate them in the dance. And then again, the emotional meaning of music
is so elusive. As I said before, no one but the composer himself can tell you exactly the
emotion which passes through his mind at the moment of composition. His music conveys
so much, and is yet so vague, that it never stirs any two people quite alike. It is extra-
ordinary how very few people are able to express in words the emotion they feel at hearing
certain music ; or to explain what it means to them. But it is that very emotion to which
I endeavour to give tangible expression in my dancing. Strauss’s “ Hero Life in Nature,”
always appeals to me, for instance, as the utterance of a man walking through a forest and
hearing the music in the air—the sighing of the trees, the murmur of the bees, the per-
petual melody of nature —and his endeavour to express what he hears and what other
people cannot hear, and to put them down in tonal form for the vast multitude. Well,
that is what lam trying to do. lam trying to give a natural form of expression to all I feel
concerning music and all the world of nature around me.
After all the characteristics of music arc simple. Gaiety, sadness, yearning, triumph,
mystery, or the very obvious--all these characteristics arc essentially simple. They may
be complicated, in their technical working out, but not in the beginning of things.
Music is the expression of what goes on within your soul and the soul of nature. We have
all experienced more or less the fundamental emotions of life. And to these emotions the
poet gives expression in his verse, the painter in his pictures, and I, as far as I can, in my
dancing. Sometimes the music inspires a childish mood, and then the joyousness of life
gushes forth in irresistible spontaneity, but lam just as readily thrown into a mood of
sadness. And in the interpretation everything is a case of one’s own individual feeling
with regard to music. You must put soul into music, and soul into dancing, and you
cannot do it by marking the passage “ staccato ”or “ piano ”or ” forte.” People some-
times say to me, “ Oh, but you danced that wrongly ; it is marked ‘staccato.’” ‘‘No,"
I reply, “ marks are only put there for the ignorant, they arc only meant as indications
for the beginner, I must dance the music by the marks that my own soul puts to it."
When I was studying music in Berlin, my professors bade all pupils bring all musical com-
positions without any fingering or marks, in order that the pupil’s own musical instinct
should not be hampered by “ revised fingering ” and ideas of expression put down by
another.
Movement frequently interprets music better than anything else. Look what splendid
use Sir Henry Wood or Nikisch or any of the great conductors make of their arms and hands.
The whole orchestra moves as one by these varying movements, and all tin* beauty and
colour is thus brought out, not by the mere beating of the indicated time. The Hungarian
Zigermer know but little printed music. Their music is almost all by ear, and yet there
is no more magnificently rhythmical playing than theirs in the whole world ; they singe
and sway you through life, the}-' make the blood dance through your veins. Anti it is
because the dancing of the ancients was evidently so emotional that I am trying to revive
it —especially that of the Greeks, with whom dancing became a culture, a form of ex-
pression for all the emotions of human life. Compare their dancing with that of the
ballroom of to-day. The dancing in a modern drawing-room excites only pity. The
dancing of the ancient Greeks was the outcome, as well as the expression, of the primal
emotions of human life ; it was saturated in emotion, and therefore it was full of spontaneity,
purity of thought, depth and meaning.
Nor is it necessary for such dancing to be unrestrained. On the contrary, the quality
of restraint is the one thing that serves it from degenerating into the mere!} corybantic.
There can be no art without restraint. Without restraint, such dancing as 1 aim at would
lack that very soul which should give it all its meaning and be its very essence and life's
blood.


SALOME.
I. —THE DANCE OF SALOME.
II.—THE VISION OF SALOME.
I am glad that I am writing this article, for the reason, if for none other, that it
gives me an opportunity to explain what is the meaning that I wisli to convey by my
danse “The Vision of Salome,” a meaning that has been dimly guessed by some, hinted at
by others, and perhaps more widely misunderstood by what in Jacobean times were called
“ the groundlings ” than any dance in my collection.
I. — This is the Dance of Salome.
I want you to see, as / can, in imagination or memory, those apartments in the palace
of Herod Antipas, by the will of his father Herod the Great, the late Procurator of Judina,
'Petrarch of Galilee and Perea, set apart especially for the use of the Princess Salome,
daughter of Herodias, and granddaughter of the late Procurator. You see the sombre splen-
dour of those pillared halls, strewn with rare draperies and Tyrian purple —the sumptuous
couches to the decoration of which all Arabia had contributed her embroideries. Amid
them the Princess Salome, hardly more than a child—fourteen I take her to have been
-surrounded by the Galilean maidens who were her attendants, her playmates and her
slaves. Little she recked that these painted and embroidered stuffs were part of the
marriage portion of her aunt, the daughter of Aretas, King and Lord of Arabia-Petraea,
whom her uncle, the Tetrarch, has put away from him that he might marry her mother,
Herodias. I want you to try and realise what her life must have been, cloistered at the
dawn of womanhood in the luxurious seclusion of an Oriental Princess. Did any thought
of her father, Philip, haunt her mind ? How long was it since she had known what it
was to be petted by the father to whom she had been but an exquisite plaything ? The
memory of childhood is, thank Heaven, short for such things, and the luxury of her uncle’s
house had become part of her life, part of herself.
Only amid the soft glamour of her days had one harsh perplexing note jarred upon
the harmony of her existence. Hardly had she become accustomed to her new surround-
ings, hardly become reconciled to calling Herod Antipas by the dearer name of “ father,”
when she witnessed one never-to-be-forgotten day, the fury of her mother, the impotent
rage that made her attendants, both male and female, cower before her, and in her own
apartments the girls whispered- -half fearful of being overheard and of being whipped -
that this new luxury that surrounded her, nay, her very presence in the palace itself, had
been denounced, that the vengeance of Almighty God had been invoked upon her mother
by the voice of “ one crying in the wilderness ” ; that the new marriage of her stepfather
had been lashed with the denunciations of the Baptist, John —John, who had called with
clarion voice the people of the land to the consecrating waters of the river Jordan. Can
you not hear the frightened speculations of the little maidens behind the curtains of their
hanging garden upon the palace roof ?
The Princess Salome sat surrounded by the maidens, their pastimes interrupted now
and again by a burst of sound from the great halls of the palace far below them. It was
the birthday of the all-powerful Tetrarch, and Herod “ made a supper to his lords, high
captains and chief estates of Galilee.”
Suddenly the gong that hung at the entrance to her private abode reverberates with
a great clang ! A Nubian slave crouches before her. Bidden to speak, he delivers himself
of the message that half terrifies and half enchants her, Remember she was only a child.
She must tire herself in the jewelled robes and delicate fabrics which are hers of right as
a Princess of the Royal house, and repair to the great hall, where she shall dance before
the “ lords, high captains and chief estates of Galilee.” The gift has come down to her,
brought by them from Egypt, from the earliest settlers of the land whom she claims as her




ancestors. It has been her pride, her mother’s delight, the pleasure of
her dead father in days gone by, and now of thegreatTetrarchhimself.
He has spoken to his guests of the Egyptian wizardries of her dance,
she must not shame his words. To hear is to obey.
The rude, plaintive cadences of the native musicians restore her
faltering confidence as she springs into the great hall ; blind to the
circle of inflamed eyes that devour her youthful beauty, she sees only
Herod himself, and at his side his sister-in-law and wife —Herodias,
her mother. For them, and for them alone, she weaves her most
ingenious witcheries of dance. The hall grows filled with silence, a
spell has come over the semi-barbarians assembled to do honourto the
festival of the Tctrarch, and it has fallen most heavily upon the Tet-
rarch himself.
The music dies away in a wail of passion. The little figure lies
panting in obeisance before the throne. And the great ruler, leaning
forward, speaks with dull eyes and parched tongue :
“ Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt and I will give it thee ! ”
She raises her hand above her bowed head in deprecation of so
great a promise.
“Whatsoever thou wilt ask of me,” he pants, “I swear that I will
give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.”
Then dazed, frightened by she knows not what, that flames suddenly from the eyes
of Herod, she takes refuge in her mother’s bosom.
" What shall I ask ? ” she whispers.
And on the instant her mother replies—personal hate overcoming allother feelings or
ambitions —“ The head of John the Baptist.”
Once more she bends, Royal Princess though she be, before the throne of Herod.
“ I will that thou give me, by and by in a charger, the head of John the Baptist.”
How can we tell what happened then in more pregnant words than those of the Evan-
gelist, Maik ?
“ And the king was exceeding sorry, yet for his oath’s sake and for their sakes which
sat with him he would not reject her.
" And immediately the king sent an executioner and commanded his head to be
brought; and he went and beheaded him in prison.
“ And brought his head in a charger and gave it to the damsel, and the damsel gave it
to her mother."
Think of the terror of that moment to the child. She had heard of John as of a great,
good man, who preached purity and higher things than she had ever known in the debasing
luxuries of the court. Buoyed up by the excitement of her triumph she had put the ghastly
trophy of her skill into the hands of her mother.
Then she had fled, on naked, horror-stricken feet, back to the terrace-garden of her
apartments. With a terrified gesture the attendants have been dismissed. She stands
panting, aghast, her hands pressed to her young breasts ; she raises them, and bowing her
head to meet them, sees upon her naked flesh, upon the hands that seek her smarting eyes,
the purple, sticky stain that she has not been able to avoid—it is the blood of the Baptist,
John.
The sight turns her for a moment to stone. Then it brings the whole ghastly scene
back, as in a vision.


ll,—This is the Vision of Salome.
Drawn by an irresistible force, Salome in a dream descends the'marble steps leading
from the bronze doors that she has just flung to, behind her frightened attendants. The
sombre stone obelisks, backed by the inky darkness of the cypress trees, shut out the silver
rays of the moon, and, save for the flickering red light of the cresset flames that the slaves
have lit, all is mystic darkness, and to Salome’s overwrought brain all is fantastic, vague.
She lives again the awful moments of joy and of horror which she has just passed
through. Alone in the gloom the poor child’s fancy assumes dominion over her.
Slowly, to the strains of the distant music, reminiscently' she raises her willowy' arms.
Tire movement thrills her whole slender frame and she glides as if in a dream. A voice
whispers " Your duty —your duty'! Does not the child owe obedience to its mother ? ”
On, on- -wilder and more reckless than ever before ! She sees once more the greedy glitter-
ing eyes of her stepfather she hears again the whispered praises and encouraging words
of her mother, and Salome, child that she is, realises a power within her and exults. She sees
again her triumph approach, her swaying limbs arc in readiness to give way', when suddenly
from out of the sombre death-still hall the wail of muffled distress —and a pale, sublime face
with its mass of long black hair arises before her-—the head of John the Baptist 1 There is a
sudden crash. She is horror stricken ! Suddenly a wild desire takes possession of her.
Why', ah I why, should her mother have' longed for this man’s end ? Salome feels a strange
longing, compelling her once more to hold in her hands this awful reward of her obedience,
and slowly', very slowly', and with ecstasy mingled with dread, she seems to grasp the
vision of her prize and lay' it on the floor before her. Every fibre of her youthful body
is quivering ; a sensation hitherto utterly unknown to her is awakened, and her soul longs
for comfort. Hark 1 a sound of approaching feet. Frightened lest her treasure be taken
from her before she has solved its mystery, she stands guard over it, and when the foot-
steps die away in the distant halls her relief knows no limit ! In the mad whirl of childish
joy she is drawn again to dance—dance around this strange silent presence. Soon ex-
haustion breaks the spell. Salome, Princess of Galilee, lies prone on the cold grey marble.
The awakening is that of her childish heart. The realisation of a superior power
has so taken possession of her that she is spurred on to sacrifice everything even unto hersel 1
to conquer. Roared in luxury' -her every wish granted since her days began -was it
to be thought possible she would subject herself to the will of another, a stronger and an
intangible force at that, without a fierce conflict ?
What passes in those few moments through this excited, half-
terror-stricken, half-stubborn brain makes of little Salome a woman i
Now, instead of wanting to conquer, she wants to be conquered,
craving the spiritual guidance of the man whose wraith is before her ;
but it remains silent ! No word of comfort, not even a sign ! Crazed
by the rigid stillness, Salome, seeking an understanding, and knowing
not how to obtain it, presses her warm, vibrating lips to the cold life-
less ones of the Baptist ! In this instant the curtain of darkness that
had enveloped her soul falls, the strange grandeur of a power higher
than Salome has ever dreamed of beholding becomes visible to her, and
her anguish becomes vibrant.
She begs and pravs for mercy of the stem head alas, without
response ! Saloon' flees in despair, and though her pride, her princely
rank, confront her, and she halts, it is but for a moment. The Revela-
tion of Something far greater still breaks upon her, and stretching out
her trembling arms turns her soul rejoicing towards Salvation, It is
gone ! Where, oh, where ! A sudden wild grief overmasters her,
and the fair young Princess bereft of all her pride, her childish gaiety,
and her womanly desire, falls, her hands grasping high above her for
her lost redemption, a quivering huddled mass. It is the atonement
of her mother’s awful sin !


Main' tin- silent centuries that haw; passed since this woeful happening. But through-
out the peoples whose souls have; awakened to the teaching of the Divine Nazarene, the
anguish of this tale finds echo in human hearts, and night winds breathing over Syrian
deserts whisper to the pitying stars the story of Salome.


THE CHERNIAVSKYS AND IDEALS
LEO CHERNIAVSKY
Was born in 1890 (August 30th), at Unuui, near Odessa. Hr; is the second son of
Abraham Cherniavsky, violinist and conductor, for many years at the Opera Odessa. At
six years of age, he first touched the violin through the influence of his elder brother Gregor,
who was a pupil of the great Auer of St. Petersburg. Gregor received the Tschaikowsky
gold medal in 1906, and was and is still considered Auer’s
best pupil. Leo’s first instruction was from his father at
the age of six and a half years. His first public appearance
was with an orchestra under his father’s baton at Ekater-
inoslv. After a few months, the child made a short
tour of Russia, with enormous success. He studied
with his brother Gregor during his holidays several
months each year, for over four years, and made phenom-
enalprogress in Auer’s method. At the age of twelve, he
appeared before the Russian Royal Family in Lividia,
thus becoming the first Jewish artist to be honoured by the
Royal Family. Under the Royal Patronage, a tour
of the large cities was made during 1904, and the child
made a sensation with his wonderful technic and art in
playing.
Leo Cherniavsky
The road was now open to the world-wide reputation which the still youthful artist had
gained. Early in 1905 he appeared in Berlin and Vienna. On this tour Leo was as-
sociated with his younger brothers, Jan and Mischel, who also created a furore. The greater
part of the year, 1905, was given up to study with Ysaye, the great master, who
considered Leo’s talent to be extraordinary.


JAN CHERNIAVSKY
Was born in Odessa. This brilliant artist is two years
younger than his brother Leo. At the age of seven,
Jan C'heniiavsky, then quite a little mite, was carried by
his father on to the platform to give Ins first public
performance, which needless to say created a great sensa-
tion. Subsequently, Leschetizky took him in hand,
and gradually Jan evolved into a finished performer.
Before associating himself with his two brothers, he won
great fame as a pianist, and to-day possesses a reputation
many hum ms artists might envy. He has carved out
for himself a name that stands out boldly in the small
duster of geniuses that represent the world’s greatest
pianists.
Jan Cherniavsky
MISCHEL CHERNIAVSKY
Is the youngest of the Trio, being one year younger
than Jan. His musical proclivities showed themselves at
an exceptionally early age, and his “ love” was the ’cello,
the playing of which instrument lie has assiduously cul-
tivated under Prof. Popper, of Buda Pesth, and more
recently under Herbert Walenn, of London. To-day
he is recognised as one of the three greatest 'cellists in
the world.
THE
CHERNIAVSKYS AS A TRIO.
Mischel Chernivsky
It was in 1906, when the brothers visited London, that the idea came to them of joining
their forces to form a permanent Trio, with the object of specially developing the peculiar
powers essential to that class of work. No three great soloists had up to then attempted


to institute a permanent Trio, so that by years of concerted work, something like perfection
in that class of work could be attained. This the Cherniavskvs have accomplished without
detriment to their solo work and greatly have their efforts been appreciated by many
nations. To-day they arc- amongst the youngest of the “ World’s Celebrities.’’ Their genius
for musical expression seems to be daily expanding and what they will accomplish with (heir
powers eventually it is difficult to say.
On October the 20th, 1906, the Brothers gave their first London recital with extra-
ordinary success with both Press and public.
In 1907-8 they toured England and Scotland.
During 1908, May, and 1909, October, they toured South Africa and Australasia.
The winter of 1909-10 was devoted to hard study, and in the Spring of 1910 thev made
their second English tour which proved an enormous success.
From 1911, September, to 1912, May, a second tour was made in South Africa, with
triumphal success, when 180 concerts were given. Thev returned to London in May. 1912,
for four months, then proceeded in November, 1912, to India and China, where thev pre-
sented 6o concerts . Back again they came to London, in July, 1913, to absolve engage-
ments in England during the Autumn, and in October, 1913, the three brothers returned
to India, and the Far East, with Maud Allan, and gave from January Ist, 1914, to March
14th, 1914, 45 concerts, ending at Manila.
The Cherniavskvs discourage comparison of artists, as they maintain that all artists
are trying to express an idea] and each individual effort only succeeds in each artist ex-
pressing an aspect of the ideal that many may hold, therefore, complete expression can only
he attaint'd by snperphysical beings ; lienee the futility of comparisons. They think
that artists should be measured only by the appeal the}' make to their audience and the
message they carry to humanity in general. One cannot compart' a Violet to a Bans}',
although both are coloured alike. Yet froth are a manifestation of the one Divine mind,
and so it is with artists - -the true artist interprets life, intellectually and spiritually, as he
perceives and senses it and emotionally as he feels it, and it was such unity of thought that
drew
MAUD ALLAN AND THE CHERNIAVSKYS
together with the belief—-which they have since- daringly demonstrated— -that by using the
dual arts of music and dance, in the form of expression, which thev aim at, that thev could
show to the world a more comprehensive and illuminated phase of the "ideal ” that up to
now has showed itself an illusion, and like Aerial has flown through the clouds to elusive' and
fragrant bowers away up into the ethereal, whenever the artist has essayed to catch and
express a more illuminating glimpse of it.
That the combining of Maud Allan’s art anel the- Chcrniavsky music has succeeded
in interpreting the " Masters ” more adequately than heretofore, no one who has witnessed
their work will deny. Their faculties of imagery and powers of drawing the inspirational
forces to them, their artistic taste and general musical perception and intellectual develop-
ment have bet'ii the means of proving to the world that all the arts an- one and can he
blended, that music, dancing, painting, sculpture are merely different manifestations of the
intellectual-spiritual and emotional powers inherent in man. Thus have Maud Allan and
the Cheruiavskys succeeded in creating in the world of art a spirit of unitv hitherto undreamt
of except bv the great philosophers of all ages.
ATLAS PRESS PTY, LTD, off 328 COLLINS ST, MELBOURNE,


