

#
#
PRICE - - SIXPENCE.
f
Pen+
MAY TOURNAMENT
A TENNIS KHYME.
H. B. BIGNOLD.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.,
? 361 and 363 George Street.
- 384 to 390 Little Collins Street.
? Freeman Street.
- 37 Queen Street.
- 17 Warwick Sq., Paternoster Row, E.C.
Sydney
'M t
Melbourne
Adelaide
Brisbane
London


.


]V[flY TOUHfIfI]VIE]N[T.
A TENNIS EHYME.
Up, up my muse, for never laggard wing
May scale the shining heights I seek to sing.
Where cloudless sky makes passing fair the scene
And beauty?s smile sheds sunlight on the green ;
Or stately matron or light tripping fay
The pride of Sydney Tournament in May.
What bard can hymn the heroes of the day,
W hat critic duly criticise the play.
From every land beneath the live bright stars
They come?the votaries of mimic Mars.
Lo ! in the van from far New Zealand shore
Comes Lady Championess of many a war,
Not small the victories that herself has won,
Not slight the deeds that slender hand has done ;
For voice of Fame across the ocean fanned
Tells her?s were triumphs won on English land.
Parker, the champion, shares with her the bay,
In Auckland won twelve hundred miles away.


Froib Queensland too, tanned by the tropic sun,
Comes sturdy band, an athlete every one,
Their day not yet ?but it will dawn at length?
When practice weds to skill athletic strength,
Shall future triumphs present loss atone,
And Queensland athletes fairly hold their own.
Fraser and Dunlop from Victoria came,
A mighty double, masters of the game,
Whose skill and judgment stemmed the adverse tide,
And crushed the victors in the hour of pride.
In vain strove New South Wales ?her star had set
Avenging Dunlop volleyed at the net!
With him his partner, Miss Victoria, came,
Demure and graceful ?adept at the game.
Her skill and prowess well uphold her fame,
None can believe who has not seen, I wist,
What strength can centre in go slight a wrist.
Not small the champions New South Wales has sent,
To hold her laurels in the Tournament.
Dewhurst and Rice, Mackenzie, Curtis, Cox,
From Goulburn, Windeyer; and from Sydney, Fox,
Courteous as ever vaunted knight of yore,
He held the vantage and to press forbore.
When gallant Hooper, from the Orient shore,
Worn with long travel?all that it implies,
The heaving ocean, topsy-turvy skies,
The days of agony too recent passed ;
The straining timbers and the swaying mast,
Ghost of himself prepared to face too great
A task for one late buffeted by fate,
Took in the case with comprehensive view,
And, courteous gentleman, himself withdrew.
The Muse rejoicing sings a louder strain,
The days of chivalry come back again !
The Goulburn sisters well uphold their fame,
The prefix ? Miss ? sounds foreign to their name.
Fair Maitland sends a lady to the fray,


' Whose brow shall claim a laurel wreath one day,
! Her ankle sprained, the whole long afternoon,
She mocked at pain,?l see her triumph soon !
Twould take too long each varying fight to tell
What divers fates contending hosts befell.
Rice overmatched Colquhoun the great and tall,
Whose hand is heavy on the passing ball,
Hughes Dewhurst beat, himself in turn to fall
Before the slender foe, whose magic skill
Can place secure the lightning stroke at will.
And now the victor steps upon the sward
To challenge Crossman, Tennis Overlord?
For twice two sets did issue dubious look
Till Rice himself in turn was brought to book.
Still bravely strove of right heroic race
With soul invincible and ashen face,
A Regulus his countrymen may claim
Defeat itself adds lustre to his fame, ?
Hail Crossman, Overlord, victorious twice,
A splendid triumph his who conquers Rice.
A glorious role the brave and courteous play,
The trophy Grossman?s* Rice divides the bay !
One battle picture more?a burst of song,
Look to the lists where glad spectators throng.
Here on this court and on this classic ground,
Join issue challenge pairs?a world renowned,
With mien assured, the challengers appear,
The even glance mocks semblance of a fear.
On many a conquering field their valour tried,
Has stemmed ?gainst whelming odds the adverse tide.
The champions next appear upon the scene,
With even beating pulse and step serene.
The victors they of many a storied field,
And warriors tried they will not lightly yield,
Till Fate herself their glorious doom has sealed.
The lady well has learned with generous art,


The more effective if less showy part.
To toss the ball the net securely o?er?
To win the stroke and let her partner score !
Her skilful foe across the narrow net
Her part misreads or has not learnt it yet.
A glorious struggle?point by point they score,
And well his part each chosen champion bore.
Who that has seen could Parker?s drive forget
Thy form Colquhoun large looming at the net!
Thrice glorious spectacle, thrice splendid sight,
The varying phases of the changing fight,
For brave Colquhoun the Fates declare once more
No challenge shield shall see New Zealand shore !
And now the pleasant Tournament is done,
And victor each his shining trophy won :
To each contestant may it long recall
The crowded lists, the swiftly flying ball,
And beauty?s smile that like a witch?s charm
Can steel the heart and nerve the failing arm.
Last, last and best to every gallant there
The sweet approval of his lady fair.
H. B. BIGNOLD


*
1 I
4
.
0
3 1508 00333802


V
*
