

McCORMICK REAP ER CENTENNIAL
1837 1931
For thousands of years the human race was
hungry. White bread was the food of the
nobles, the wealthy. Even of black bread
there was not enough. Only those were well
fed who could command the labour of slaves.
This long age of hunger outlived great
nations. Rome said, "The first thing is empire."
Egypt said, "The first thing is fame." Greece
said, "The first thing is genius." Not one of
them said, "The first thing is bread."


The Cradle was the Most Efficient Means of Cutting Grain before
McCormick's Invention of the Reaper in 1831. With it an Ex-
perienced Man Could Cut Two Acres a Day.
IN the year 1831 farmers were using
* much the same crude, primitive tools
and methods that had been used thou-
sands of years before by the Egyptians
and the Israelites. Hand implements
were the only harvest tools.
With the cradle, which had evolved
from the reaping hook and scythe, a
strong man trained to its use could
cut two acres of grain in a day. A
second man could gather up and bind
this grain into sheaves. Harvesting was
a thing of pitiless toil for pitiful results.
Ninety per cent, of the population lived
on farms and toiled for their daily
bread.
Into this picture of hunger-need,
which throughout the ages had kept


humanity chained to the soil, came
Cyrus Hall McCormick. He was born
February 15, 1809, on the family farm,
Walnut Grove, in Rockbridge County,
Virginia. As a boy, he showed a bent
for things mechanical. When he was
fifteen and not yet strong enough to
swing a heavy cradle, he made a smaller
one for himself. At eighteen he made
some surveying instruments for his own
use. He also invented a hillside plow.
In the veins of this Virginia farmer
boy flowed the blood of his stubborn,
tenacious, fighting Scotch-Irish ancestry
—the blood of pioneers. In his mind
lived the inventive genius of his father,
who had so often tried to. build a reaper
—and had so often failed. •
Cyrus Holl McCormick’s First Reaper, Invented and Built on
Walnut Grove Form, the McCormick Homestead near Steele's
Tavern, Virginia, in 1831.


About the year 1816, Robert McCor-
mick, father of Cyrus, made the first of
several attempts to build a mechanical
reaper. Cyrus was familiar with these
attempts and even • may have helped
him prepare his last machine for its
unsuccessful trial in May,’lB3l. Out of
the father’s failure came the inspiration
that produced the son’s success.
Between May and July of 1831,
Cyrus Hall McCormick, then only
twenty-two, conceived his own new idea
of a reaper, entirely unlike any idea his
father had developed, made one or more
models, and out of them designed and
built a machine which cut grain suc-
cessfully. This great achievement was
accomplished in six weeks at the most.
The Log Blacksmith Shop on the Walnut Grove Farm it Very
Little Changed by the Passage of a Century.


The farm where the reaper was
invented is still owned by the McCor-
mick family. The home in which the
young inventor lived and grew to man-
hood still stands. It looks today much
the same as it did then, in that his-
toric summer a hundred years ago.
The farm blacksmith shop, where the
boy inventor out of his own genius de-
signed and with his own hands built the
first reaper, is there too, little changed
by the passage of a century. It rests
against the side of a hill on a high stone
foundation. Inside is a work bench and
the old brick forge with its tub bellows.
first public trial of McCormick’s
' invention took place in July, 1831.
There is no record of the exact date.
The reaper was tested in a small field
near Steele’s Tavern, not far from the
Walnut Grove homestead. Neighbours
had assembled from the countryside,
curious and expectant. Harvest hands
were there with their cradles and scythes.
The young inventor walked behind
the machine. Jo Anderson, a faithful
negro helper who had toiled with him
to build the reaper, walked beside the
machine, raking the platform clear of
cut grain.


The World's First Reaper—Public Test of Cyrus Hall McCormick's
Invention, July, 1831. Reproduced from a Painting by the Famous
Artist, N. C. Wyeth.
The doubts of friends and neighbours
of the McCormick family changed to
congratulations when they saw that
the. machine worked. It continued to
operate, and in half a day had reaped
several acres of grain, as much as
four men could cut with cradles in the
same time.
Thus McCormick proved to a skep-
tical and needy world that machinery
could be brought to the aid of man
in meeting his hunger-need. Thus he
began the emancipation of the human


race from hand-labour enslavement to
the soil. Thus he began the age of
plenty—the age of cheap and abundant
food.
IN the construction of the world’s
* first successful reaper, Cyrus Hall
McCormick combined for the first time
and in their true balance and proportion
the basic principles which have ever
since been found essential in virtually
all grain-cutting machines. McCormick’s
seven basic principles were as follows:
The straight knife with serrated
edge and reciprocal or vibrating
motion which cuts the grain.
Fingers or guards extending from
the platform to prevent the grain
from slipping sideways while
being cut.
The revolving reel which holds the
grain against the knife and lays
the cut stalks on the platform.
Platform behind the knife for re-
ceiving the cut grain and holding
it until raked off.
The master wheel which carries
most of the weight of the machine
and, through ground traction, fur-
nishes power to operate the reel
and the knife.


Forward draft from the right or
stubble side by means of shafts
attached in front of the master
wheel.
A divider on the left side to separate
the grain to be cut from that to
be left standing.
At the time of the invention of the
reaper and for several years thereafter,
young McCormick had not the slightest
idea that he was not the original dis-
coverer of these seven principles. .He
originated them all independently and
alone. In the case of six of them he
was paralleling the prior discoveries of
other inventors. Only the main wheel
was strictly original with him.
He did, however, combine for the first
time in one device the seven elements
which resulted in a practical machine. He
is legitimately honoured as the inventor
of the world’s first successful reaper be-
cause an invention need actually be no
more than a new combination of known
features producing a novel result.
It is not strange that young McCor-
mick, in that far-off valley of Virginia,
had never heard nor read of these other
attempts. The little backwoods Vir-
ginia community was self-contained and
had little contact with the outside


McCormick's First Reaper at Work in the Field. The Machine
Cut 8 to 10 Acres a Day, and 4 or 5 Hand Binders were Required
to Bind and Stook the Grain.
world. His sole experience was with
his father’s unsuccessful attempts. He
was also aided by the fact that his
entire boyhood had been spent on the
farm and in the smithy where his
brilliant mind had acquired and stored
away much practical knowledge. He
knew that a reaper to be successful
must do more than cut grain under
favourable conditions. It had to cut
wheat where the straw was down and
tangled by wind and rain.
While the reaper of 1831 worked and
proved to have the fundamental prin-
ciples necessary to a practical machine,
the young inventor was not satisfied
with his efforts and did not seek to
patent it until 1834. The years from
1831 to 1840 were years of toil and


ceaseless effort by the young inventor
to improve and perfect his machine.
In 1833 he built a larger reaper. With
this machine and one built in 1832 he
cut the grain on Walnut Grove Farm as
well as the wheat of several neighbours.
The year 1840 marks the first real
reaper sales nine years before the
invention bore its first fruit! Experi-
mentation continued through 1841, and
in 1842 seven McCormick reapers were
sold. Sales rose to 29 in 1843 and to
50 in 1844. In that year McCormick
sold reapers in New York, Tennessee,
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, and
Wisconsin, as well as his home state,
Virginia. All these early machines were
made in the blacksmith shop on the
Walnut Grove farm.
McCormick's Reaper of the Early Fifties. Seats had been Added
for Raker and Driver. It had Improvements in the Cutting
Mechanism and was Pulled by Two Horses.


The McCormick Automatic Self-Rake Reaper was Patented in 1858
and was Manufactured and Sold in Large Numbers between 1862
and 1875. A Crew of 4 or 5 Men was Required to Bind the
Grain in Sheaves.
A S soon as the Virginia harvest of
** 1844 was over, McCormick set out
on a journey to investigate for himself
the possibilities for reaper sales in the
western states from whence unexpected
orders had come. The broad expanse
of fertile prairies in the Middle West
challenged his imagination. He wrote
to his family that while reapers were
luxuries in Virginia, they were neces-
sities in Ohio, Illinois, and on the great
plains of what was then called the West.
Observations on this trip crystallized
in his mind the necessity for moving his
reaper business to some place in the
West where he would be closer to the
reaper market. In 1845 he sold 123
machines and the next year sales
mounted still further.


In 1847 McCormick moved to Chicago
and built his first factory. By the end
of 1849 he was employing 120 men, and
in that year he sold ISO reapers. Just
as the McCormick reaper of 1831 was
the basic device around which the later
models were constructed, so the first
Chicago shop was but the modest
beginning of a great industry. By 1856
the McCormick Reaper Works had a
capacity of 40 reapers a day and 4,000
were actually made that year.
McCormick’s interest and activity in
improving his machines never waned.
His original machine was improved
from year to year. In 1862 it was
equipped with a rake arm pivoting near
the axis of the reel which raked the
grain off the platform and to the side
of the machine. This eliminated the
work of one man—the raker.
Following the self-rake reaper came
the Marsh-type harvester, which made
hand binding of sheaves more con-
venient. In 1874 the wire binder was
patented and in 1881 appeared the
McCormick twine binder.
THE years from 1881 to 1902 were
years of gradual improvement and
refinement in grain harvesting and hay


ing machines. During that period maize
harvesting machines were also developed
and added to the McCormick and
Deering lines.
In the first decade of the twentieth
century the basic elements of the first
reaper, combined with a threshing device,
took form in the combined harvester-
thresher. The revolving reel, platform,
outside divider, knife and guards, master
wheel, and forward draft—all were
retained in the first harvester-threshers.
The main-wheel drive has been re-
placed by the more efficient mechanical
drive from an independent power unit
or by means of power derived through
the power take-off on the tractor. The
McCormick-Deering harvester-thresher
of today is a direct descendant of
McCormick’s first reaper, just as surely
as the modern locomotive is a direct
McCormick Harvester and Wire Binder Built in 1876, First Manu-
factured In 1874. This Machine Bound the Sheaves with Wire
and Eliminated Hand Binding.


A McCormick - Deering Harvester - Thresher Operated by a
McCormick-Deering Tractor. This Outfit, in One Operation, Cuts
and Threshes the Grain from 40 to 50 Acres in a Day.
descendant of the first wood-burning
railway engine of early days.
After the reaper, if not directly from
it,' came the long line of machines
whereby agriculture has been changed
from the sheerest drudgery to the
greatest of industries—the machines
that have conquered wilderness and
desert, built new empires, founded new
civilizations, set millions of men free to
create new industries, converted yester-
day’s luxury into today’s common
comfort.
THE story of hand labour was want;
the story of machinery is plenty.
The transition from want to plenty,
from manual to mechanized agriculture,


began with the invention of the reaper
one hundred years ago by Cyrus Hall
McCormick.
How many of us realize what the
reaper’s emancipation of man from
age-long enslavement to the soil has
meant in the evolution of the human race
toward its higher destiny. Of all human
needs, the need of food comes first; and
yet through all the thousands of years
in which man had been struggling and
striving to improve his lot on earth he
had been unable to contrive any means
of importance whereby his greatest
need—the need of food—could be more
competently met.
The International Harvester Com-
pany observes the centennial of the
reaper with particular pride because it
is the direct inheritor of Cyrus Hall
McCormick’s inventive and commercial
genius—because it is the trustee of his
tradition of service to the farmer. The
task that he began, the International
Harvester Company carries on—the task
of lightening the farmer’s labour and
increasing the fruits of his toil, the task
of making farm work more and more
worth doing and farm life more and
more worth living.


ITERNATIONAL HARVESTER COMPANY
OF AUSTRALIA PTY. LTD.
•294 Roma ST. 229-231 Castlereagh St.
BRISBANE 543-555 BOURKE ST. SYDNEY
114 North Terrace MELBOURNE, ct 789-795 Wellington St.
ADELAIDE PERTH
ROBT. NETTLEFOLD PTY. LTD.. HOBART. AGENTS FOR TAS.
5 PRINTED IKHUSTrAIIA
