

McLaren Vale Congregational Church
CENTENARY
1844 1944
FEBRUARY
10th-02th
1944.
Souvenir- Price 1/6


The present Church Building. Erected 1860. Cost, £1,087.


100th ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS. 1944.
Thursday, February 10th, to Sunday, February 20th.
Thursday, 10th—
-2.30 p.m.—LADIES’ GUILD RE-UNION IN INSTITUTE. Speaker: Rev,
Gwen Hewett (Relative of early foundation members).
8.00 p.m.—CHURCH RE-UNION SOCIAL IN INSTITUTE. Speakers: Mr.
E. Taylor, Chairman of Congregational Union, and Rev. L. Farr,
L.Th., Vice-Chairman.
Saturday, 12th —
8.00 p.m.—CHORAL CONCERT IN McLAREN VALE INSTITUTE, Hen-
ley Beach Congregational Choir, (Tickets and Boxplan from
Secretary.) Advisable to book early.
Sunday, 13th—
-11.00 a.m.—PIONEERS’ SERVICE AT BLACKFELLOWS’ WELL. Preacher;
Mr. Howie Harris (Relative of early founders). Open air service.
3.00 p.m.—BACK TO SUNDAY SCHOOL FOR OLD SCHOLARS, TEACHERS
AND FRIENDS. Speaker: Rev. Rees Thomas, B.A. (Chairman
Congregation Youth Fellowship).
7.00 p.m.- THANKSGIVING SERVICE, FOLLOWED BY COMMUNION.
Preacher: Rev. Watts Grimmett, Moderator Congregational
Union.
Saturday, February 19th—
-8.00 p.m.—CENTENARY CELEBRITY CONCERT, McLAREN VALE
INSTITUTE. Tickets and Boxplan from Secretary. (Advise
early bookings).
Sunday, 20th—
-11.00 a.m.—SERVICE AND COMMUNION. Preacher; Pastor T. C. Rice, of
Salisbury.
3.00 p.m.—PILGRIMAGE TO BLACKFELLOWS’ WELL. Speaker: Rev.
J. E. Creswell, F.R.G.S., Secretary of Congregational Union and
Parkin Mission.
7.00 p.m.—RECONSECRATION SERVICE. Preacher; H. A. Parrott (present
Pastor). Subject: Rebuilding the Walls.”
Accommodations—
Visitors and friends are asked to make known their wants in the way of
accommodation to Mrs. T. W. McMurtrie (Hospitality Convenor), McLaren Vale.
(Phone 61).
Those requiring tickets for the Concerts can obtain same from Mr. R. Radford,
Church Secretary and Secretary of Centenary Committee, McLaren Vale.
(Phone 53).


Let us arise and go to Bethel.
We love the venerable house
Our fathers built to God:
In heaven are kept their grateful vows,
Their dust endears the sod.
Here holy thoughts a light have shed
From many a radiant face,
And prayers of tender hope have spread
A perfume through the place.
From humble tenements around
Came up the pensive train,
And in the Church a blessing found
That filled their homes again.
They live with God, their homes are
dust;
Yet here their children play,
And in this fleeting life-time trust
To find the narrow way.
—R. W. Emerson, 1803-82.
Original Chapel. Erected 1843 or 1844.
Now used as Sunday School Hall.
IN MEMORY OF THE PIONEERS WE WILL BUILD
FOR POSTERITY.


100 YEARS AGO.
It was in a house “not built by hands’’ that the pioneers of the
McLaren Vale Church worship first met together. Reliable informa-
tion indicates the assembly site to be near Blackfellows’ Well, where
a huge gum tree, charred fragments only of which remain, made a
leafy canopy to shade them from the sun. About 1843 or 1844, enough
money had been subscribed to erect a small, unadorned, but as time
has proved, substantial chapel on the corner of an acre of ground given
by Mr. John Morphett. Services were conducted here whenever
preachers were available, but no definition was given the Chapel, nor was
any Church membership formed.
The first steps to ensure regularity of preaching was made in
1845, when Messrs. J. Brown, Wm. Cotton, sen., and John Turner
instigated a move which resulted in the building being invested under
trusts as a Union Chapel. For the first five years, the Rev. Isaac Prior,
a Baptist Minister, conducted regular services, and in April, 1850, while
Mr. Prior still ministered there, the deed of the Chapel was executed as
a Congregational Chapel.
This came about because most of the members were from Freeman
Street Chapel, Adelaide, and desired to form a regular Congregational
Fellowship. In July, 1851, Rev. Chas. Hall, of Aldinga, accepted the
pastorate, and two months later the first Lord’s Supper was celebrated,
the following being present; Mr. and Mrs. J. Brown, sen., Mr. and Mrs.
Jas. Stacy, Mr. and Mrs. R. B. Aldersey, Misses E., M. A., and A. H.
Aldersey, Mrs. C. T. Hewitt, Mrs. Kate Hewitt. At a previous meeting,
Mr. C. T. Hewitt had been elected secretary, Mr. Jas. Stacy, Treasurer
and Mr. J. Brown one of the committee. Despite the fact that the
Victorian gold rush drew off many from the district, Mr. Hall main-
tained his consecrated labours until 1858.
On the recommendation of Rev. T. O. Stow., Rev. James Howie,
a recent arrival from Scotland, commenced a ministry which is still
remembered, for after 35 years, it was terminated only by the beloved
Pastor’s death in 1894. Soon after Mr. Howie arrived, increasing con-
gregations made a larger building imperative, and on July 25th, 1860,
the Hon. Wm. Peacock laid the foundation stone of an edifice that has
since dominated the landscape. The building cost i 1,087 to complete,
and was opened on February 17th, 1861. By 1865 it was clear of debt.


and before the year 1873 was out a Manse of large dimensions on free-
hold property, was also erected and paid for.
About this time the opening of the northern and south-eastern
portions of the State attracted many people from the south, and as
the ground in many parts of the south was considered “worked out,”
many folk left the McLaren Vale district. There was in the McLaren
Vale at this time, the famous Tsong Gyiaou School for girls, conducted
by Misses Aldersey, and this helped Mr. Howie and his loyal band of
officers and members to maintain a strong Church during the ’sixties
to early ’nineties. In 1881, the Church was incorporated at a cost of
£22 for legal expenses.
To the ministry of the Rev. James Howie may be traced the begin-
nings of the spirit of co-operation which has been such a feature in
Rev. Chas. Hall,
who formed first Fellowship.
"Praise we the wise and brave and
strong,
Who graced their generation;
Who helped the right, and fought the
wrong,
And made our folk a nation.”


Church life in the district. As far back as 1877 it is recorded that “the
Wesleyan Chapel Anniversary was conducted in the Congregational
Church.”
A hearty community spirit was fostered by Mr. Howie ; those who
worshipped under him became leaders in the community. An example
of this is found in the support given by the Church to the erection of
a Town Hall. On several occasions, lectures were held in the Church
in aid of the Town Hall building fund.
There was not a family in the district which did not mourn the
death of James Howie on September 10th, 1894. His scholarly, warm,
evangelical preaching, his indefatigable zeal in every branch of the
Church’s work, his brotherliness, and his faithful daily living all marked
him as a true man of God. During the past 84 years, many prayers of
thanksgiving must have risen to God from those who were privileged
to come under the influence of his spirit. Mr. Howie’s family assisted
him greatly in both Church and Sunday School work. One daughter.
Miss Jane Howie, who married Capt. Auld, and another, who married
Mr. Chas. Hope Harris, a well known Congregational layman, who often
took services at McLaren Vale, will be specially remembered. Other
family names also appear prominently in Mr. Howie’s records, many
of them with descendants still attending the Church, among them
Colton, Prime, Adams, Sykes, Burgess, Manning, Liddiard, Scotcher,
Radford, McMurtrie, Brown, Davie, Wilson, Budgen and Aldersey.
The successor to Mr. Howie was Rev. Chas. Hodge, previously
well known as Pastor of the Churches at Victor Harbour and Port
Elliot. For the greater part of his life, Mr. Hodge was dogged by
ill-health, but despite this he was held in high esteem as a minister of
Jesus Christ. Though he held a high conception of his office, he was
simple and unaflfected both in his preaching and in his daily living: and
it was probably this which endeared him to so many in all walks of
life, and enabled him to commend His Lord to so many “just ordinary
folk.” He maintained the high traditions of the Church for over twelve
years, retiring in 1907. He continued to reside in the district, however,
and befriended many until his death in 1915. The Church had a strong
Literary Society, Endeavour Society and Choir during his ministry.
Mr. Hodge’s family are all well known in Congregational circles,
notably Mr. C. R. Hodge (formerly Registrar of Adelaide University),
Misses Hodge and Mrs. J. D. Brown (wife of J. D. Brown, grandson of


one of the founders of the Church, and himself secretary and treasurer
for many years), all of Victor Harbour, and Rev. Alfred Hodge, of
New Zealand.
Rev. S. A. Faulkiner followed Mr. Hodge, and in many ways
laboured untiringly for the Church, which was now beginning to feel
seriously the strain of departures by death and change of residence. It
is to this time that the beginnings of the Church at Port Noarlunga can
be traced. At the instigation of the then Secretary of the Congregational
"Praise we the glorious names we
know;
And they—whose names have
perished,
Lost in the haze of long ago—
In silent love be cherished.”
Rev. James Howie, Pastor 35 years,
1859-1894


“So praise we great and famous men.
The fellows, named in story;
And praise the Lord Who now as then
Reveals in man His glory.”
Rev. Chas. Hodge, Pastor 1895-1907.
Union and Home Mission of S.A. (Rev. Penry Jones), Mr. Faulkiner
and the members of McLaren Vale, with commendable missionary zeal,
commenced services in the old Barn, Port Noarlunga, on 27th June,
1909. Within eight months, the foundation stones of a church building
were laid. Just before Mr. Faulkiner departed in 1831, this church,
which except for five years under a separate pastorate was worked in
conjunction with its mother church, celebrated its jubilee.
From this time on, unfortunately, McLaren Vale Church history
is not so inspiring. The Great War, gaps in the Pastoral succession,
the financial depression, have all been contributors to a gradual decline.
Revs. H. G. Nelson, G. Mueller, W. G. Cowley, L. Pleass, H. C. Noll,
P. H. Rowland, J. Douglas, H. R. Ballard and S. W. Parker all laboured
faithfully amid many difficulties to raise the Church to its former level,
and it is largely due to their witness and service that the work has
been maintained. During their ministries various improvements were


made in the Church property, and a goodly number led into Church
membership and Christian service. Among the families prominent in
those years may be mentioned Brown, Cook, Manning, Hum, Reeves,
Potter, McMurtric, Nottage, Shapter, Carmichael, Foggo, Semrnens,
Radford, Blackler, and Beaumont. Gratitude must also be expressed
to several Moderators who have faithful!}' served the Church. The
inspiration and wise council freely rendered by such men as Revs. J.
C. Kirby, L. B. Fletcher, W. Penry Jones, Les. Robjohns, 8.A., J. E.
Cresswell, F.R.G.S., Geo. Rayner, A. C. Stevens, M.A., If. J. Stacy and
H. S. Grimwade, 8.A., have been invaluable during some of the Church’s
most difficult times.
Prior to Mr. Rowland’s coming in 1927, the Church entered into
an agreement with the Churches at Happy Valley and Port Noarlunga
to unite under one minister. This involved considerable dependence
upon lay assistance, and a warm tribute must here be paid to the
manner in which laymen, both of our own and other branches of the
Christian Church, have always been ready to help in the great work
of proclaiming the Gospel.
During the pastorate of the Rev. J. Douglas, L.Th., iIOO was
outlaid in renovations and the Sunday School was re-organised.
With the coming of the present minister, Pastor H. A. Parrott,
the three Churches in the Circuit unanimously agreed to ask the
Governors of Parkin Mission to take the oversight. This arrangement
is working satisfactorily. Just at this point, however, is where further
limitations resulting from the present war are being experienced by
the faithful band. Due to the absence of many laymen who used to
assist in the services and many also being prevented from helping by
the restriction to travel, only one service is held each Sunday, with the
exception of the fourth Sunday, when two services are held. Mr. Ross
Radford, the present Secretary, is the only available lay preacher, and
assists the Pastor by taking two services each month. There are also
no male teachers on the Sunday School staff, and Mrs. Beaumont
valiantly carries on the superintendency.
A Junior Church has been formed on New Testament lines, and
provides a training in membership for young people. The young people
hope to be able to plant another tree to replace the one under which
their forefathers first worshipped in McLaren Vale.


The old original Chapel of 1844 still serves well as Sunday School,
and the 1861 Church still dominates the landscape. Its early beauty
is hallowed by age and enhanced by its setting ; but like all old things
is showing signs of its age. The present congregation is seized of its
responsibility to preserve the house of God for their children and
children’s children, but they are too few to be able to provide all that
is necessary by way of repairs and renovations to both buildings,
especially the Church.
The Present Pastor, H. A. Parrott, 1943.
“We are watchers of a beacon whose light must never die;
We are guardians of an altar that shows Thee ever nigh :
We are children of Thy freemen who sleep beneath the sod;
For the might of Thine arm we bless Thee, our God, our fathers’ God.


It is probably due to the fact that it is slate tiled that the roof is there
still, lighter material must surely have been blown off by this time. The
danger is that the wind will get under the roof and lift it off. It
urgently needs attention. This Church is a monument to our Congre-
gational pioneers, and its Centenary provides an opportunity for Con-
gregationalists everywhere to express their veneration both of the
beauty of its witness and of its structure in a practical way.
The Thanksgiving of the people of McLaren Vale in its practical
side, is addressed to the renovation of the Church their forefathers
founded, and they warmly elicit the support of all their well-wishers.
The future is bright with promise, but its brightness emanates from
the Church. So —more bricks for the gaps, more oil for the lamps,
more power to follow in the train of those who never let their light
go out.


FORMER PASTORS OF THE CHURCH.
184S-18S0 Rev. Isaac Prior
1851-1858 Rev. Chas. Hall
1859-1894 Rev. James Howie
1895-1907 Rev. Chas. Hodge
1907-1911 Rev. S, A. Faulkiner
1911-1916 Rev, H. G. Nelson
1917-1919 Rev. G. Mueller
1920-1922 Rev. W. G. Cowley
1922-1924 Rev. L. Pleass.
1925 (part) Rev. H. C. Noll
1927-1932 Rev. P. H. Rowland
1933-1934 Rev, J. Douglas
1935-1939 Rev. H. R, Ballard
1939-1943 Rev. S. W. Parker
PRESENT OFFICERS OF CHURCH AND AFFILIATED
ORGANISATIONS.
Church:
Pastor: Henry A. Parrott.
Secretary: Mr. R. Radford.
Treasurer: Miss M. Nottage.
Deacons; Messrs. R. Radford, McMurtrie and H. J. T. Potter.
Organist: Mr. R. Radford.
Reporter: Miss M. Nottage.
Deaconesses: Mesdames A. Gates and Semmens.
Sunday School:
President: Pastor Parrott.
Superintendent; Mrs. Beaumont.
Helpers: Misses Pat Neil and E. Davy.
Woman’s Guild:
President: Mrs. T, W. McMurtrie.
Secretary and Treasurer; Miss M. Nottage.
Junior Church:
President: Pastor Parrott.
Chairman; Miss P. Neil.
Secretary: Miss M. Gyer.
Treasurer: Miss D. Neil.
Usual Services:
11 a.m. —Every Sunday,
7 p.m.—Fourth Sunday.
11 a.m. —Sunday School.
Usual Meetings:
7.30 p.m., Mondays—Junior Church.
2.30 p.m., First Wednesday in Month—Ladies’ Guild.
H unkin, Ellis & King, Ltd., Pirie Street, Adelaide.
