

EacaEa^aEaßaEaEHßaEaisaßaßaßaßaEaEaßaEaEaEaEaEaßaEiaEa
LJk.JkJk^kJk.JkJkJkJk^kJk^kac:JCakJkJkJkJkJkJk:Jk.Jlk:jSk.JkJ
.
Meat Export.
—BY—
D. ROBERTS.
\
raranraranrarararararararararararaEarar^rar-ifrarar^
kJkktkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJk^k^kJkJkJk^kJk^kakJkJkJkJkJi-jkJ
W. A. Pepperday & Co., Printers, 16 Hunter Street, Sydney,




MEAT EXPORT.
OVERSTOCKED RUNS.
THE SQUATTERS’ THREATENED RUIN.
THE ONLY SUBSTANTIAL RELIEF.
A PRACTICAL ECONOMICAL SYSTEM.
METHOD OF WORKING.
INITIATION OF THE SYSTEM.
By D. ROBERTS.
f (4U5 2.




INTRODUCTION.
rT7HIS pamphlet is written with the hope that stock-
P I owners, and others directly interested in sheep and cattle-
breeding, who read it, will give the subject their best consideration,
and not allow it to pass from their notice until they have
put forth some effort to bring about a gigantic co-operative
endeavour to relieve the overstocked runs of the colony by
meat export.
This momentous question is not one that can be thoroughly
discussed in a small pamphlet like this; but that which is written
should arouse every stock-breeder to a sense of his danger. The
contents are not a statement of anything theoretical or imaginary,
but an expression of the thoughts and conclusions of one who
has had exceptional opportunities of gaining information, and
studying this subject, combined with several years’ purely
practical experience in refrigerating operations.
Sydney, l°2th December, 1891 ,




PART I
Overstocked Runs. Squatters' Threatened Ruin. The only Sub-
stantial Relief.
On Meat Export. Its Relation to the Wool Industry. Present
Meat Exporters. Subsidies. Reduction in Breeding-Ewes.
Boiling-down.
75,000,000 Sheep! —The number is astounding! Yet this
is the estimated total in New South Wales including this season’s
lambs, which are put down by an excellent authority at twenty
millions. Thinking men may well look upon these figures with
alarm, knowing the enormous losses sustained in 1884, when the
number was but thirty-eight millions. A much lesser number is
mentioned by press writers as being beyond the carrying capacity
of the colony, viz., sixty millions; but, as the larger figures will
be found to represent the present sheep, there can be no doubt
that runs are overstocked. It is impossible that the country can
go on supporting these millions and their increase, which, if good
seasons continue, will not be much checked—for it is now when
the numbers are so enormous, that the increase is severely felt.
Let sheepowners for a moment imagine the dire effects of a
dry season, with this immense number of stock on their runs.
Let them think of the sufferings of millions of sheep dying slowly
by starvation and thirst, of their own worry and anxiety at being
unable to alter this condition, of the certain reduction in the
wool clip of survivors, and ask themselves the question, what
will it lead to? It will mean ruin to a great majority of
present sheep-breeders, unless a large reduction in the numbers
is made without delay. A few already recognise this, but the
many are content to let things take their own course. The large


majority of squatters work along in the stereotyped groove, each
one thinking the old markets are and will be open to him, that
selectors and others will continue to buy up his surplus; but the
present ruling prices at Homebush must surely arouse them from
their indifference, the extremely low prices accepted on some stations
lately will force them to recognise the seriousness of the situation.
Perhaps I am wrong in thinking so many are indifferent, perhaps
squatters have not a full knowledge of the opportunities available,
probably they have never felt sure of the practicability of ex-
porting frozen meat in a large way.
To avoid loss, and take advantage of the production of
bountiful seasons, an outlet must be found for sheep in millions,
not a paltry few hundred thousands a year, and squatters must
bestir themselves, they must put their hands in their pockets, and
help themselves out of a serious difficulty, they must not look
quietly on and wait for the outside capitalist to assist, or for
some more enterprising ones among their number to individually
clear out a few sheep. The question must be grappled with by
the squatters of the country as a whole; they must combine in a
great and determined effort to avert the threatened calamity which
will otherwise gradually develope into the most terrible one yet
experienced here. They must export meat largely, every squatter
must subscribe his moiety, and successful and profitable relief will
promptly ensue. The effect will be felt even before operations
can be commenced, which must necessarily take a little time.
It is just such an opportunity as the ruin of squatters, that
allows of the creation of a Vanderbilt or Jay Gould. Such men
would prepare for converting sheep into a marketable condition,
and when ready make their own terms with squatters. They
would take care to secure the best sheep at such prices as would
enable them to amass enormous profits; they would so regulate
their operations as to obtain the best market without any con-
sideration for squatters, who might even pay them a subsidy to
take sheep at ruinous prices, and they would take care not to
handle more sheep than could be sold at good figures, while the


wish of sheepowners would be to dispose of very large numbers.
It is by the ruin of many that millionaires are often made, and
squatters should not give this chance when by a little energy and
judgment, a little unselfish effort, a small individual subscription
of capital, they can secure the utmost benefit from the export
of meat. It is not that a profit is desired in the operations
of exporting meat, but that the surplus stock should be got
rid of at prices which render the working of stations profitable,
that the transport of stock from runs to the English consumers
should be carried out in the most economical manner, under a
simple, practical system, involving an outlay of a minimum amount
of capital, and returning the largest possible proportion of the
price realized in England to the squatter. Some sheepowners, more
enterprising than others, have combined to establish premises for
slaughtering and chilling meat in the vicinity of their runs, to
enable them to forward dead meat to Sydney market; but this
does not get rid of a sheep more per annum. It simply changes
the system. It substitutes an improvement upon Homebush and
the Abbatoirs, and however desirable this is, it does not provide
any additional outlet for stock, and, therefore, does not assist in
the least to avert the disastrous losses with which squatters are
threatened. The most it will do, is to provide these enterprising
stock-owners with a little better market for their stock by the
economy of the substituted system.
On Meat Export. —One or two Proprietory Companies have
made praiseworthy efforts in the direction of Meat Export; but
what are the conditions of the business in the most important
instance 1 We find that sheep are driven from their runs to
some country railway station where they are stuffed alive into
trucks for transport to Homebush, and during the journey, which
sometimes extends over two days, or oven longer, through want
of food and drink, the sheep lose several pounds in weight per
head, and, by crowding, a number die. The sheep are sold by sales-
men at Homebush, and removed by road-travelling to slaughtering
yards about 30 miles from Sydney. Here they are slaughtered
and the carcases sent down in ordinary louvred meat vans to


freezing-rooms in Sydney—receiving two handlings in transit.
From these freezing works they reach the steamers by cartage
or lighterage, and after this round-about journey will, on arriving
in London, be bundled into other freezing chambers, to be again
removed by cartage to market. It would be strange, indeed, if
some arrangement, more direct and economical than this, could not
be devised. When we examine the people to be supported by
the process of getting this meat to London consumers, we find
an incredible number of open hands, and very great chances
of diminishing its value. The cost of trucking is something;
the Railway Department take too much freight, when we
remember it is dead meat that is handled ; the trucking to
Homebush results in direct loss by weight, deaths, and
deteriorated quality. The commission for selling sheep, and
brokers’ charges are an addition to the cost. The re-conveyance
away by road to another part of the country is a further charge,
and more wear and tear. , The syndicate which conducts the
business must be supported, and if it cannot make the business
pay, must have a subsidy. The slaughterman must receive
payment for, and make a profit out of his work. The meat is
not frozen until it is again twice handled, involving expense, and
is trucked in unsuitable cars causing more deterioration. The
freezing Company comes next for their share of the returns in
exchange for services rendered in freezing and preparing sheep
for shipment, which must also be profitable to them. The cartage
or lighterage is not only one more charge, but a disadvantage,
however carefully it may be carried out. The sheep are now
placed in the freezing chambers of the vessels conveying it to
London, and the freight charged is exorbitant, because the
Company make a speciality of it, and a profit. Another
handling from the steamer to docks has to be paid for, likewise
the charge for use of these freezing chambers. Further outlay
is made for the cartage from docks to markets, where an agent
or factor receives a commission for selling to butchers, who in
their turn look upon the purchase as a special opportunity to
make a large profit by selling the best carcases for high prices
as English or Continental mutton.


This description, which is not in any way exaggerated, ought
to satisfy squatters that there is great scope for improvement, and
that some plan can be devised by which a large proportion of
the two-pence and more per lb. on mutton exported, would be
transferred to their pockets. Surely the price obtained for this
meat, which is deteriorated by so much handling, will not be
taken as a standard of probable values.
The projected operations at Aberdeen are certainly an advance
upon past efforts here ; but fall far short of what is required.
If the Frozen Meat Export Trade is taken up by squatters with
energy and determination, and without too much vexatious delay
in preliminaries, it will not be long before benefits are felt. It
is in this direction that the greatest efforts must be made.
Stockowners must not only subscribe themselves, but should do
their utmost to persuade neighbours that it is a question of success
or great loss to every one of them, and that they, too, must do
their share to get the price of stock raised or kept up. No
outside capitalists will take up the trade on the extensive scale
necessary to benefit squatters, and even if they were induced to
do so, their main consideration would be to profit themselves.
The business must be done by a gigantic Co-operative
Association of squatters, and it will then be carried out thoroughly
and with the greatest economy. Let a majority of sheepowners
combine to form this Association, and it will become an easy
matter to compel the unpatriotic and selfish few to do something
towards the support of an industry which favorably affects every
stockowner, even in the most remote corner of the country, and
must before long be worked up to a magnitude second only to
wool export.
We must export very largely, and every squatter will accord-
ingly benefit thereby. They will not be asked to individually
provide a large amount of capital. They will not be asked to
subscribe to a concern in which a large portion of their money
would be paid to promoters. Every penny of their cash would
be at the disposal of their representatives, and they would receive


a fair rate of interest upon it. The result of their investment
would be the improvement in value of every station in the land,
of every sheep raised, and the removal of much anxiety in the
management of stock.
It is no use dealing with the matter piecemeal, it would be
puerile to establish Freezing Depdts, without at the same time
arranging for cheap freights, and it would be absurd to ship meat
to England without first preparing markets for its distribution.
Every detail must be dealt with simultaneously, and only a huge
concern could do this effectively, and none so well as a Co-opera-
tive Association of the interested parties.
We are not now in any doubt about the ability to export
frozen meat; we have arrived at a time when that point is settled
and beyond dispute. The prejudice of English consumers has
been greatly removed, and the time has arrived when the New
South Wales’ squatters should take advantage of the pioneer work
done by their New Zealand friends, and further develope the
London and British markets. The field for improvement in this
trade is a very large one, and if the representatives of a combina-
tion of stockowners, sufficiently powerful to fully conduct the
trade, grapple with the subject, and rely on their own common-
sense, business acumen, and judgment, in effecting reductions
in the present lowest cost of getting sheep placed in the
hands of English consumers, they will meet with a success
beyond expectations, and will not fail to build up one of
the most gigantic co-operative concerns of the time, which
will fully reward their best and most strenuous efforts. The
opinion of men, who personally know the English market as now
worked, is strong, that the British public can absorb many
millions more sheep, and large numbers of cattle at a reasonable
price, and it only comes to a question of economical slaughtering,
shipment and introduction. It is not necessary to dilate upon the
advantages of co-operation in general ; the principle is now applied
in so many cases with the best possible results, that every one
must see its benefits, Co-operation is urged by many press-


writers as necessary to be applied to the enlargement of subsidies,
and the reduction of breeding-ewes, but none have seemed to
notice the extreme necessity of applying the same principle to
the most important and vital subject—the actual freezing and
export operations.
Its Relation to the Wool Industry.— One or more
wool companies have made meat export one of their objects,
doubtless seeing no better scheme j but the business is so
distinct from wool, its details so numerous and varied, and
the necessary operations so vast and intricate, that its satis-
factory working demands the management of a separate stall,
and an enthusiastic hard-working board of directors. The
enormous and still growing proportions of the wool trade, its
many attendant businesses, and the banking transactions carried
on in conjunction with it, require the full and free attention of
the staffs of those companies now conducting it, and their
time and energy are far too fully occupied to allow of their
taking up the meat export business with any chance of good
results. It will be a vast improvement to their own business to
have a large meat export trade developed by the combined effort
of their constituents, and every bank, financial institution, or
wool company, should hail it with satisfaction, and should not
hesitate to join them in the subscription of the necessary capital.
The ultimate result will be larger and better clips, assistance in
the fulfilment of financial obligations, and an enhancement in
the value of securities held.
Present Meat Exporters. —The Sydney Meat Preserving
Company—an instance of the success of partial co-operation—
cannot be detrimentally affected by the export of meat as proposed.
This Company deserves more support by squatters than it has
received. It must be borne in mind that the accumulated profit
of this Company has been largely brought about by the share-
holders not receiving any interest on their capital invested The
great benefits, however, of this Company’s operations have not
been in its conducting its business profitably, but in its prevent-


ing a glut at Homebush, and keeping up prices there, benefiting
large numbers of squatters who have never rendered any assist-
ance or contributed in any way to its support.
The Syndicate and Company conducting the present small
frozen meat trade from New South Wales likewise deserve equal
consideration; but the fact cannot be hidden, that the formation
and working of a Co-operative Association of Squatters must soon
render the operations of this Syndicate and Company unprofitable,
in spite of any subsidy they may be paid. In the one case,
however, the premises and plant can be adapted to other purposes,
and, in the other case, the Depot might at some future time
be taken over at valuation. These plucky pioneers should not be
subjected to any loss of capital expended in a bona fide connection
with frozen meat; but at the same time, no compensation for
loss of prospective business should be thought of.
Subsidies. —Subsidies are already being paid to meat expor-
ters, and it is sought to have them much enlarged. Subsidies are
very useful and necessary in some cases; bnt where a certain
industry is represented by so many persons, who have it in their
power to work it so much better, cheaper, and more extensively
than can be done by outside enterprise, the economy of the
subject will be best attained by the payment of the subsidy to a
combination of themselves. One writer in the press suggests an
increase in the Stock Tax to provide for subsidies. Let this be
the means of compelling every stock-owner to assist those of his
neighbours who have combined, and who will combine, to establish
the meat export trade, which will so materially increase the value
of every sheep and every holding. What a great many stock-owners
are likely to object to would be the investment of their money to
develope an industry from which their neighbours reaped equal
benefit without contributing. A tax on all sheep and cattle is
equitable and just enough, and overcomes this objection; but
how much more satisfactory it would be were it known that the
payment of the tax only went to make up any shortage of expenses
for carrying on the trade, and a fair rate of interest on neighbours’
invested capital, and not to swell the dividends of some profit-


making company with its own interest to serve, and a high price
for stock its last consideration. The enforcement of this tax cannot
be brought about so readily and certainly by any other means as
this proposed Co-operative Association, so that one of its objects
should be to demand the collection of this tax.
Reduction in Breeding-Ewes. —More than one writer has
suggested as a remedy for overstocking, the reduction in number of
breeding-ewes, and consequently the increase. No suggestion such as
this should be lightly passed over, but to carry it out is apparently
a present loss, which most squatters are apt to consider, and, unless
it were carried out generally, little benefit would result. When
it is remembered that the country contains a large number of small
sheep-farmers, who are likely to multiply with the throwing open
of more land for selection, and inasmuch as these small men, when
practicable, will want to rear every lamb they can, it will be seen
that the chances of getting these men to fall in with this idea are
small. Then the diversity of stations, their varied soils and
climatic differences, offer great difficulties for many stations are
essentially breeding-stations, and a reduction by percentage would,
in their case, be unjust to the owner. Other stations again are
principally worked by purchasing stock from neighbours, little
breeding being done. An owner of such a station would contend
that his number of breeding-ewes was within fair limits, and
would not deem it right to be subjected to any reduction. Even
squatters, who might admit the fairness of reduction, would be
reluctant to lose the chance of ge J young, and, in many cases,
improved sheep, when seasons were good : and it must not be
hoped that very much practical benefit can be had in this direction.
Still, pending the establishment and completion of freezing works,
it will be well that this subject should receive most careful
consideration at the hands of sheep-breeders, and all connected with
them ; and let every man possible be persuaded, by example and
suggestion, to keep his stock within holding limits. The number
of ewes used for breeding this season has been enormous—much
above the general average, and far beyond what is warranted by
the present facilities for disposal.


It must not be thought by any squatter that the regu-
lating of breeding-ewes would be a fair effort on his part
to make towards the relief of overstocked runs; for, take
any well-managed station, there should always be a certain
number of sheep got rid of each year, viz., those ewes which are
considered too old, or for any other reason are unsuitable for
breeding purposes, or the production of good wool, those wethers
which are too old, or can profitably be replaced by lambs, and the
proportion of lambs which it is wished to reject. These numbers
make up a large percentage of the whole flock, and, if averaged
for the whole colony, aggregate many millions. This is the natural
and regular surplus which must be got rid of, and no amount of
regulation of flocks can overcome it, or avoid the necessity of dis-
posing of this percentage, if stations are well managed. This fact
is stated to impress those who may think they can so regulate
their flocks as to be independent of export.
We must export the great bulk of this natural and regular
surplus, and it is so evident that export offers so much greater
benefits and scope for work, that squatters will not be satisfied
with any scheme which interferes with the good management of
their stations in a manner that appears to cause them loss, and
they are not likely to yield their support for long to the proposed
reduction in breeding-e ves. It can only be asked of them, as a
reasonable request, if preparation is at once made to establish the
export trade upon an undeniably strong foundation by a compre-
hensive, expansive, and practical system.
Boiling-down. —An extensive system of boiling-down has
been suggested as an immediate remedy for the present critical state
of affairs. The gentleman who suggests it, however, has not taken
into account the effect on the market of even a large propor-
tion of the tallow he proposes to produce. Supposing a large
portion of it were stored, and even one or two million pounds
worth of additional tallow placed on the market—the price not
only of the additional supply, but of all tallow in stock would
be immediately reduced, and his favourable looking figures


would at once become incorrect. Then, again, his example of
production per sheep, upon which he bases his calculations, is
the utmost that could be expected —the average would be very
much below 50 lbs. of tallow per sheep. This plan will not do;
but the system submitted herein covers this subject to the extent
it will be wise to work, for it must be borne in mind that a
large amount of tallow is procured in slaughtering for freezing,
in slaughtering for local consumption, in canning, and in boiling-
down those sheep rejected for either of these purposes, without
making a special slaughter for the production of tallow. Even
the quantity obtained from—say four millions additional sheep
per annum must affect the market.
Pending the completion of the necessary establishments for
freezing, &c., the slaughtering and boiling-down plant connected
with each establishment might be pushed on so as to take a large
number of sheep for boiling-down, if squatters could not hold them ;
but the great and final object to be kept in view, is to so handle
the surplus as to work it up into different marketable com-
modities, viz., chilled meat for local consumption, frozen meat,
canned meats, extract, soups, tallow, offal products, manure,
skins, &c., for exportation.
The excellence of a system operating in this manner must be
apparent at once ; but the full extent of its benefits cannot be
fully realised. Ultimately the squatters, forming such an Associa-
tion, and working such a system with a number of establishments
in the best centres, properly equipped, will be able to so regulate
the quantities of chilled meat sent to Sydney, and other large
towns, as to entirely avoid a glut in local markets, and it will
be through their efforts that the abbatoirs’ question will be settled
by its natural abolition. The Homebush yards will become of
minor importance, giving squatters the benefits of saving in freights,
sale-charges, and the large profits now secured by carcase-
butchers, whose occupation will be gone; while consumers will get
meat very much superior to any they now buy. The time has
arrived when squatters are forced to avoid all unnecessary


expenses in connection with the sale of stock, and losses by the
indiscriminate consignments for sale.
This result will be obtained simply by the facilties established
for using up the stock in various ways as before stated, and in
regulating the quantity sent to Sydney markets.
Having dealt with the existing position of affairs, and criticised
the various suggestions made from time to time, and demonstrated
the best means of creating a large outlet for surplus stock, I now
pass on to part Part 11. of this pamphlet, which is intended to-
contain an outline of the details of a practical, economical system,,
its working, and the process of its initiation.
■n<®:


PART 11.
A Practical and Economical System. Method of Working.
Country Depots. Railway Cars. Frozen Meat. Vessels.
Markets. Initiation of the Association. \
As already stated, the system under which squatters can best
conduct the meat export trade is co-operation. A large capital
must be subscribed by a moderate contribution from every stock-
owner in the country, if possible, forming the Association proposed.
The capital ought to be divided into series, and the first issue
should be for one million pounds, to be paid-up to a quarter
of subscription. I imagine I hear squatters exclaim, “It cannot
be raised.” But let them think of the enormous subscribed
capital of companies now working the wool industry and
kindred pastoral businesses, and they will recognise that this
branch cannot be worked without large capital. Capital
must be provided, and it is no use tinkering with so great a
necessity with a small amount. Within three years, squatters
should send to slaughter fully ten million sheep per annum, and
the various means of disposing of stock in large numbers can
only be properly provided by a liberal expenditure of money.
The capital should be divided into sufficiently small shares, say
ten pounds each, to allow of subscription by small men, as well
as the wealthy pastoralists. Let such a capital be subscribed in
this manner, and twice the amount would be immediately obtain-
able in England on debentures. If there is any combination
which could borrow a large sum of money in London, it would
be an association of squatters, with the object of carrying on a
large and profitable meat export trade.
This Association should control the whole operations of the
trade, from the purchase of stock from squatters to the sale
of it to consumers in England, and should be directed by a


central Board of representative men in Sydney, which would work
the business with a special staff of managers and operators,
both in New South Wales and London, assisted by an active
London Board—efficiency and economy being the two essentials.
The Association should be expansive, its shares being issued in
series, and always available; so that as progress were made,
fresh capital and interested parties would be brought in.
Six per cent, interest should be paid shareholders on their
capital invested, and any profits made over and above this should
be paid pro rata to stock vendors, according to the profit realized
by each depdt, this is the true principle of co-operation.
The mode of procuring sheep from squatters is one of the
most difficult problems. It may be treated in many ways, but
no concern could settle this matter so satisfactorily as a Co-
operative Association of Stock-owners. To ship on owners'" account
must involve a large amount of detail, and in a co-operative
concern there would be no advantage by it. It would moreover
prevent the proper classification of stock when slaughtered—a very
important consideration. There can be no such thing as partial
participation in profits, when the object aimed at is to give all
profit to the stock vendor. Outright cash purchase must be the
plan adopted. The difficulty then arising is, how to arrive at
the values of the numerous varieties and qualities of stock so as
to leave the least possible opening for vendors to find fault. The
most effective means, and the simplest, would be to have a capable,
responsible valuer or buyer at each Depot, to make and value each
purchase, and upon whose certificates payments should be made
less a certain small per centage to be retained by the Depots to
make up any general loss that might arise by over-valuations,
otherwise such percentage would be paid over to vendors at the
end of each half-year, together with their pro rata share of
profits. In this way the man with superior sheep would
receive his fair value, while the man with something indif-
ferent would be treated accordingly. As a matter of fact,
in the great majority of sales made at Homebush, the salesman


makes the price—that is to say, he values the sheep, and works
up the price as well as he can to his value.
The four essentials for working are: Slaughtering and
Freezing Depdts, Refrigerating Cars, Frozen Meat Vessels, and
Markets. It must be at once seen that the Association would
inquire to deal with every one of these items simultaneously.
The frozen meat would be taken from country Depots in special
cars direct to the ship’s side, at the Railway Wharves, Darling-
Harbour, and shipped to London, where, if convenient, it should
be loaded direct into barges or railway trucks for distribution and
sale, otherwise removed to a central storage depot there.
Slaughtering and Freezing Depots. —The designing of
these works should be followed out with the greatest care, the
best experience and talent should be brought to bear upon them,
and they should be complete in every feature. Each one should
be capable of the slaughter of from three to four thousand sheep
per day, and some cattle. Freezing accommodation for two thousand
sheep per day, and chilling for a thousand per day, should be
provided; storage for about twenty-live thousand frozen sheep
would be necessary. Each establishment should have its complete
canning plant, apparatus for boiling down a thousand sheep per
day and the waste from three thousand, tallow refineries and
dessicating plant, together with any machinery for working up
offal products, so that all offal and ordinary waste might be utilized.
No large premises such as these would be complete, or could be
worked satisfactorily, without the various plants named. The
objects to be kept in view are to slaughter as many sheep as possible,
to sort the carcases so that those most suitable would be frozen,
others chilled and sent to local market, and others again partly
canned and partly boiled down, as quality warranted, to can the
many small parts of animals such as tongues, &c., to save every
pound of tallow and prepare it for market, and to convert the
offal into manure, and other saleable products. Six such establish
ments should form the first instalment in this particular, to be
erected in the most suitable localities, keeping in view the centres


to which the largest number of sheep could be conveniently
brought.
As to machinery to be used in these works for refrigerating
purposes, machines compressing air and ammonia have both been
proved satisfactory for many years, and carbon oxide machines
have been worked successfully. It is not now necessary to under-
take anything of an experimental character. It is simply a
question of which machines can be efficiently worked the cheapest.
The writer favors a combination—an air machine and an ammonia
machine, or machines, working in conjunction would be found to
give very satisfactory results.
The air machines, however, have proved so good, that when
the first exporting attempt was made by New Zealand pastoralists
for four years, not one tainted carcase was received in London,
and the price of mutton was got up to nearly sixpence per lb.
Of course the management was exceptionally strict, and the
greatest care taken in slaughtering, dressing, and' handling; but
these machines must also have worked exceedingly well.
The utmost care will have to be taken to provide apparatus
to avoid handling as much as possible.
The buildings need not be elaborate, but strong and durable ;
and the greatest attention is required in the construction of non-
conducting walls, the floors of slaughtering sheds, and in providing
facilities for cleanliness in every part.
Refrigerating Cars. —The construction of refrigerating cars
has received very little attention, from the fact that necessity has not
yet compelled their use for frozen meat, still there are cars which will
carry frozen meat in a proper manner, although somewhat expensive.
The writer has spent much time and study in designing a car
specially for the frozen meat and chilling trade, and has succeeded
in effecting such improvements as to provide a most simple car
meeting all requirements—a car in which every inch of storage
space shall be available, which can be cooled at very little
expense in the shortest possible time, and which will start on


its journey at the same temperature as the rooms from which
the meat has been loaded, and maintain the temperature- for any
journey necessary in this colony. This car is about to be
patented throughout the Colonies, and in Great Britain, and
America, and will be placed unreservedly in the hands of any
combination of squatters working on the co-operative principle for
use in New South Wales. The full details of the Car will be
published in due course.
Frozen Meat Vessels. —The most expensive department of
this trade is the transport of meat to the English market, but it is
specially important that the vessels necessary should be owned by the
Squatters’ Association proposed, so that complete control could be
exercised, and the trade conducted on the cheapest lines. It is also
important that the vessels which this concern should build, shall
be of the finest description, only inferior to the largest vessels
running here in the elaborateness of fittings that are unnec-
essary. The writer is of opinion that these vessels should be
purely cargo-carrying, and be capable of making three complete
runs in twelve months. It would be a question for consideration
whether passengers should be carried. To transport the full
capacity of the freezing establishments already mentioned,
would require a large fleet of vessels, which would take some
time to build, and, in the first place, it might be necessary
to make arrangements with owners now in possession of suitable
vessels, but no time should be lost in contracting with ship-building
firms to launch a number of these large vessels, to ultimately organize
a weekly service.
Return cargoes would be a very important item in economy,
but such a gigantic Co-operative Association of squatters as
proposed, would be powerful enough to influence the shipment from
London in their own vessels of a large proportion of the enormous
requirements of the pastoralists of this colony, and the Association
would much more readily obtain return freights than an indepen-
dent shipping company. Large vessels are recommended as being
cheaper to work in proportion to their carrying capacity. The


large cost of these vessels would be met by capital raised in
London by the Association on debentures; for, if One Million were
subscribed by sheep-owners here, Two Millions would be obtainable
for such a purpose at a moderate rate of interest in London.
The national importance of such a splendid fleet of vessels
owned by this Association must be noted, and its value reckoned
as an additional advantage in determining their building.
The ownership of these vessels by the Association is one of the
most important necessities of the trade, for the present freight charged
(although reduced), is the heaviest charge in connection with the
business, which would represent, at one penny per lb on three
million sheep at 50 lbs. per carcase, the enormous sum of six
hundred and twenty-tive thousand pounds for freight. This is at
the rate of nearly ten pounds per ton, and there cannot be a
doubt that a large reduction in this can be made by the Association
owning and working the vessels.
Markets —Britain offers all the material for markets that
will be necessary for some time to come, and which need be
considered for frozen meat in the first effort of an Association
of Squatters. Here again is a splendid field for improved
conditions. The energy which was originally displayed by New
Zealand pastoralists in creating a market, has been to a large
extent allowed to flag, and there has been no special attention
given to distribution, without which a steady market cannot be
maintained with increased quantities.
There is already too much meat offered in the few centres
where it is sold. It is not to be supposed that the present facilities
for sale in London will allow of a vast increase of frozen meat
being placed on the market, without causing a glut and reduced
prices, therefore the preparation of the markets is a matter of
primary importance, and will require as much attention as any
branch of the industry; indeed, this must be thoroughly looked
after before any large shipments are made. The Thames is a
wonderful natural artery of London, allowing of an enormous cheap
distribution by barges, which have been lately introduced to a


small extent; but the greatest difficulty is to get the meat
into consumers’ hands. Whatever facilities now exist may be
embraced to the fullest extent, and the best effort should be made
to induce butchers to more universally sell this meat. These
butchers are, however, as conservative as most other retailers,
and if they do not take up the business in a more decided
manner than hitherto, shops in suitable places, will have to ,be
opened up, either under the supervision of the Association, or by
some scheme of encouragement. The cost of opening up a hundred
of these shops in London would not be large, and the increased
price obtained would soon clear off the cost incurred. The popu-
lation is there to take all the meat we can ship, but only a
comparatively small number of them have been educated up to its
use. A strong prejudice still exists against frozen meat, although
quite unreasonable, and if the present means of distribution and
sale are unfavourable, other efforts will have to be made, and
any plan that reaches the consumers in a direct manner, is most
likely to lead to the greatest success.
The network of railways all over England offers every oppor-
tunity for placing meat in any large town there, and the greatest
possible distribution should be made, either direct from vessels or
from a central freezing depot by railway cars.
The market for canned meats may be looked upon as world-
wide, and there is no doubt we may pack a much larger quantity
of preserved meats, and dispose of them without reducing the prices.
But, like the frozen meat requirements, it is necessary that
representatives of those specially interested must look for contracts
and customers. America provides England with about live times
as much canned meat as Australia, and we want to substitute our
meat for American. The organization of a London staff will help
us to do this. We cannot shut our eyes to the probability of
war in Europe, and there is no reason why stock-owners here
should not be prepared, through the Association recommended, to
supply large quantities of tinned meats to any part of the world
where it might be required, more especially as the vessels of the


Association could be directed to put in or discharge at any port.
Indeed, apart from the possibilities of war, a large continental
trade could be worked up.
Initiation of the System. —The initiation and establishment
of a Co-operative Association on the lines laid down is a most
delicate undertaking, and will probably be met with a good deal
of adverse criticism, indifference, and perhaps, some sinister ob-
struction.
The variety of conditions of squatters and their holdings,
and their general disinclination to help themselves, all go to
discourage the efforts of the few who must be the originators of
such a scheme.
There are always some men who will look upon any scheme
with a conservative eye, who will designate them the effusions
of a dreamer perhaps, and who will look upon the statements
made as too hopeful, too sanguine, and not likely to be attained.
But it must be clear to everyone that, if the trade can be carried
on successfully at all, there is no plan so likely to succeed as
co-operation pure and simple, by those parties immediately interested.
This has been amply demonstrated in New Zealand. The
alists there were absolutely compelled to find an outlet for their
surplus stock, and they went to work in earnest, sparing no trouble
or expense, sending man after man to England to encounter and
overcome all difficulties existing or ahead. These men had almost
insurmountable difficulties to face —had, indeed, pioneer work to do,
so to speak, but the result is proof of how excellently that work
was performed.
Even when machinery was in an unproved state, when the
strongest prejudice existed in London and elsewhere against frozen
meat, when almost certain loss for a time stared them in the face,
they did not hesitate one moment to enter into the trade in a
business-like and thorough manner, and although they did not,
and could not, direct their efforts under such favourable conditions
as New South Wales’ squatters can do at the present time, or adopt
a system so economical as the one proposed; in the face of all


obstacles they did well, and built up a splendid and profitable
trade, which doubled the value of their whole stock and enhanced
the value of their holdings.
New South Wales’ squatters can do an equally and probably
a more profitable trade, although they may not realise so much
per head of stock, and I have no fear of their neglecting this
matter for long.
I believe the large majority will readily see the excellence of
co-operation on the basis submitted, that the details of the system
are eminently practical, and that th results stated are certain to
be realised. I am confident of their wish to enlarge the meat
export industry,, to assist in relieving the overstocked runs of the
country, and to create markets for their natural and regular
surplus, but they must see how to accomplish these things. It
is therefore proposed that a Committee of representative men of
varied experience and ability should be requested, with the least
possible delay, to draw up a Prospectus and Constitution of an
Association such as described, and that such request shall be made
by squatters, who subscribe a nominal sum to a Preliminary or
Provisional Association, giving a status to the Committee, and pro-
viding funds for their expenses. This Committee would thereupon
submit Prospectus and Constitution beforementioned, to the
squatters of the country, who will then have a chance of giving
effect to the proposals of this pamphlet, by subscribing the
necessary capital and forming a Stock-owners’ Meat Export
Association.




APPENDIX.
VT7HE following opinions obtained by Lord Onslow, Governor of
New Zealand, by sending six frozen sheep to the gentle-
men named, extracted from the New Zealand letter of the
Sydney Morning Herald , December 15th, are positive proof that
the proper distribution of mutton in England is neglected. There
is no other tangible reason why frozen mutton should be sold at
less than half the price of English and Continental mutton. —
Baron de Worms, M.P., Under-Secretary for the Colonies :
“We found it quite excellent. The freezing did not hurt it in the
least; in fact, the greatest epicure would fail to discern that it was
not home-grown.”
Lord Rosebery :
“ The mutton was excellent, and not to be distinguished from
English mutton.”
General Sir H. de Bathe, of the Beefsteak Club:
“Last Friday we had a large assemblage at B.S.C. to eat your mutton.
The consensus of opinion was that it was most excellent. Dick
Grain, Frank Burnand, Y. Bancroft, G. A. Sala, Alf. Watson, and
some dozen others all so agree. I, who am a dweller on the South -
downs, can safely aver that your individual sheep was better than
what I can buy in Chichester, where it always wants age and colour.
It was as tender as a chicken. Could the Club make arrangements
for a regular supply of mutton of same quality ; and if so, should
we have to pay more than our London butchers’ prices ? ”
Mons. Waddington, French Ambassador in London :
“ The New Zealand mutton was a great success. I had recommended
it to my cook, and it was carefully roasted. All present pronounced
it quite equal to the best English mutton. The freezing of the meat
had produced no appreciable difference.”
Sir Morell Mackenzie ;
‘ ‘ Last w r eek we had a little dinner of connoisseurs on purpose to
sit in judgment on the mutton. I can only say that my friends and
I were unanimous in giving a most favourable opinion. It had a
great deal of flavour, and was very tender; in fact, I only recollect
tasting mutton as good on one or two occasions. I suppose, however,
that the specimen you w r ere good enough to send me was much
better than the ordinary consignments from New Zealand.”
Sheriff Sir Agustus Harris, Drury Lane Theatre
“We duly received the sheep. Had it cooked and eaten. It was
really delicious. Never have I tasted anything more tender or better
flavoured. All I can say is the trial was perfectly successful if, as
I suppose, it is an experiment of some new process.”


Afp
B(6L(0
F 2.
kl OQfV
W. A. PEPPERDAY AND CO.,
PRINTERS,
26 HUNTER ST., SYDNEY.




