

SEVILLE’S TELEGRAM GO., 305, GEORGE STREET, SY T
; \
‘ * ■ *^-®PBHH


Occidents occur ||aily.
—■
The Law of Accidents is no Respecter of Persons.
-^oocw
1 in 11 DEATHS OCCUR by ACCIDENT.
:o:
Trust not to Spirits, or Spells, or Guardian Angels,
TAISS: Otrr A POUCT
IN THE
-A.TJST’Ti-A_lj.A-ST-A.TT
Imteut iHiitaiitr tomato
CAPITAL, £lOO,OOO.
EAD PfFICES 294, jST., CORNER OF jSx.
A Policy in this Society secures a Fixed Sum in Case of
v Death and Weekly Compensation in Case
of Disablement,
Already more than 20 claims for Compensation
have been settled.
Agencies in Every Town, and Branches at Melbourne,
Adelaide, and Brisbane.
JAMES INGLIS, Manager,


MEDIUMS
THEIR DUPES.
A COMPLETE EXPOSURE OF THE
CHICANERIES OF PROFESSIONAL MEDIUMS,
AND EXPLANATION OF
SO-CALLED SPIRITUAL PHENOMENA
2. Slade and the Spirits (By Samvel T. Knaggs, M.D.) .. 12
3. Another Seance with Slade. (By T. T. Wilton) .. .. 20
4. Hindoo Juggling and Christian Credulity. (By “Maori”) 28
5. Spiritualism Considered as an Infectious Mental Disease.
(By Samuel T. Knaggs, M.D.) .. .. .. .. 39
6. The Spirits, at Albury .. .. .. .. .. 40
SYDNEY:
GREVILLE’S TELEGRAM COMPANY, 305, GEORGE-STREET:


C. E. FULLER, PRINTER,
387 & 389, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
AND
“ STATIONERS’ HALL,” PARRAMATTA.


nrinrc
J REFACE.
This pamphlet is published by the several authors
of the different papers, not for the sake of profit
nor gain, but from a higher motive. They, as honest
recorders of events and public critics, each from their
own different point of view, have taken up pen to
expose and lash one of the greatest impostures of
modern times which during the last few years has
acquired such firm hold on many dupes in Australia.
The authors claim the support and sympathy of all
Christian and sober-minded citizens in their endea-
vours to frustrate the designs of the professional
mediums whose fraudulent machinations have unseated
the faith of hundreds and have sapped the foundations
of Eeligion, Morality, and Social Order.
Sydney, March, 1879.




THE WORLD OF DUPES.
Robert G. Ingersoel has well said primal man “ dwelt in an unreal
world. He mistook his ideas, his dreams for real things. His fears
became terrible and malicious monsters. He lived in the midst of
fairies and furies, nymphs and naiads, goblins and ghosts, witches
and wizards, spirits and spooks, deities and devils The obscure and
gloomy depths were filled -with claw and wing, with beak and hoof,
with leering looks and sneering mouths, with the malice of deformity,
with the cunning of hatred, and with all the slimy forms that fear can
draw and paint upon the shadowy canvas of the dark.” The God of
primal man has ever been a malignant spirit ready to devour his
human children unless propitiated by costly offerings and terrible
sacrifices. Amongst all people and through all ages certain cunning
mortals have endowed themselves with supernatural and magical
powers trading on the fears of the majority,—their dupes. “ Medicine
men,” sorcerers, and “ Obi-men” manufacture ehftrms and perform
incantations and are handsomely rewarded for the exercise of the powers
over the spirits of good or evil fortune which they alone are supposed
to possess. One extraordinary fact shows how the world is and has
ever been duped. The gods or spirits never work for nothing. The
priests of Baal, of Jove or Apollo, of Isis and Osiris, of Vishnu and
Siva, these the representatives of the highest form of intellectual
superstition have always been on a par with the medicine man of the
Red Indian, or sorcerer of the South Seas, in that, if anything special
was required from the deity whose acts they claimed to influence, they
themselves had first to be directly paid, or indirectly through offerings
being made to the God who was appealed to.
In civilized communities we have changed all this, Christianity
and Science have swept away the cobwebs of superstition. We have
gauged the forces of Nature and fear them not. The Catholic Church
it is true still claims for its priests certain powers, and peculiar virtues
are still supposed to hang around the relics of the saints. A new
miracle has been invented in the apparition of Our Lady of Lourdes,
and the excursion trains carrying the Pilgrims to her shrine have
greatly benefited the French railroads. But the Catholic priest de-
rives his power only from the church and does not claim any personal
attributes. Except amongst the most ignorant or savage races,
sorcerers, witches, and wizards are things of the past. This is in
truth an Age of Unbelief. To the educated, science demonstrates
everything. By “ evolution” we are what we are. In a few millions
of years we shall be diffused by some regular process of nature, and


the atoms of our world will help to form another, and it is to he hoped
a better one. Thus science! To the ignorant, except those who
remain bound to the Catholic Church, infidelity has been arrived at by
many causes; but all over the world, in America, England, and in
most countries on the Continent, amongst the masses scepticism
increases, and there is not the same implicit belief in the old faiths.
That they are in any way worse than their equals in former ages I
am not prepared to admit.
They have forsaken the Gods of their fathers ! They believe not
the teaching of the Churches! Yet amongst many there is still a
fear, a dread of, or a curiosity concerning the unknown. There may
be an “ undiscovered country.” And many have -also fond yearnings
to meet again in the spirit the loved ones who have gone before.
The churches with their cold dogmas satisfy them not. Each man
wishes a sign for himself, and so in this enlightened sceptical
nineteenth century with steam and electricity and phonographs and
telephones, the redvciio ad absurdum of superstition and gullibility has
been arrived at. The world is still full of ready dupes, and the
medicine men and sorcerers of the savage who sell you protecting
charms, or will perform some mummery supposed to make you lucky
in the war or chase, for a moderate sum payable in the currency of the
country, have their equals in the “spiritualistic mediums” who for
half a guinea will rap you out a communication from the unseen
world. It is the same old fraud ! Certain individuals pretend to be
alone endued with faculties of communication and powers over the
unknown, which they exercise for the benefit of their dupes and for
dollars. No rash, no show !
The “ spirit rapping ” mania sprung up about a quarter of a
century ago. This with “table turning” has been a source of
amusement in many private families. I have been present at domestic
seances and I have seen things I cannot account for. But certainly I
never gave “the spirits” credit for their manifestations. Rather I
attributed them to the unconscious deception (of which Dr. Knaggs
speaks further on) of some members of the circle. I admit that there
may be some “ force ” within ourselves which is not yet properly
understood. But it is not with the parlour phase of spiritualism that
I now deal. It is with those professional impostors who trade on our
weakness. They have evolved the most ludicrous surroundings to their
manifestations. The spirits it appears take delight in the silliest of
puerile means to demonstrate their presence to mortals, and they
generally require a darkened room in which to perform third-rate
conjurors’ tricks. Some fifteen years ago the Davenport Brothers
commenced their career with the celebrated rope tying business.
They have been exposed time after time yet still found dupes to
believe in them, and two years back when in Melbourne were claimed
by the Banner of Light as true mediums. The Davenports first
introduced the cabinet, as inside that they were free from scrutiny.
Thus what believers think adds to the wonder of the “ manifesta-
tions ”is in reality quite otherwise. These jugglers first evolved the


“ spirit hand ” which in a darkened room appeared at the edge of a
table. This it was discovered was only a stuffed glove attached to the
boot of one of the Brothers. The rope tying trick is now done by
many clever professional conjurors, and in a manner superior to the
Davenport’s.
Some new trick was required to gull the world of dupes and the
latest outcome of imposture is the slate writing business, the chief ex-
ponent of which is now in the colonies. “Dr.” Henry Slade is a
charlatan and rogue of the first water. Recent proceedings of his
which have come to my knowledge prove him to be a dangerous
cunning villain who deserves to be lashed naked through the world.
In the following articles his trickery as exhibited here is fully exposed.
But let us first see what is his record in the old world. I know noth-
ing of the earlier career of this arch-imposter who has found so many
ready dupes here. Bat in 1876 “ Dr.” Henry Slade made his ap-
pearance in London, and fools flocked to hear him and paid their
sovereigns to communicate with the spirits of the dead through the
agency of a table, a slate, and a pencil. Made however was very
cautious at this time and unless he perceived a dupe who would
swallow everything “ the spirits” said, deceased relatives would not
always give “ manifestations.” But as his clients must have some-
thing for their money he evolved the spirit of a presumed departed
wife with whom he held affectionate intercourse, and who gave
general but vague information as to affairs in spirit land Slade at
this time had an accomplice, one Simmons. Dupes and sovereigns
multiplied, and the impostors would still perchance be piling up their
wealth in the Modern Babylon, but that certain sceptics belonging to
the varied walks of science, literature, and the stage (as is the case in
the production of this pamphlet,) each working from their own point
of view at last succeeded in fully exposing the fraudulent modus
operandi of the “ medium.”
On October 2nd, 1876, Henry Slade was charged at Bow-street
Police Court, before Mr. Flowers, with obtaining money under false
pretences. The case lasted for more than three weeks, and created
much excitement in the minds of the spiritualists. The chief witnesses
were the well known novelist, Mrs. Ross Church (daughter of Captain
Marryatt), Miss Kate Field of New York, Professor Lankester, Doctors
Donkin and Carpenter, and Mr. Maskelyne, the celebrated “ conjuror”
of the Egyptian Hall. The evidence as to Slade’s performance, proves
that they were exactly of the same character as those with which he
has been lately treating the dupes of Sydney in Wynyard Square.
None of the witnesses however appear to have had the ingenious
inspiration of Dr. Knaggs in seeing what Slade did underneath the
table by the aid of a mirror. The table used in London was exactly
the same as that in Australia, “an ordinary kitchen table about four
feet square. It had the ordinary frame work around the central por-
tion of the table and the legs, to the depth of six or eight inches,
outside which the flaps projected.” Mr Maskelyne’s evidence was
most interesting. Of the slate writing he says, “Itis a very good trick
and the point is this. It seem impossible that a man with a heavy


slate can hold it and produce writing with the same fingers beneath
the slate. It is however very easy, especially if there is a cross peice,
as in the table in court, to push the slate against it and help to
support it. The slate can then be supported by the thumb, and the
whole of the fingers left at liberty. The best way of holding the
pencil is, not under the finger nail for that is impracticable, but by an
apparatus like this (producing a little thimble with attached pencil,
fastened by elastic beneath his sleeve, which disappeared of itself
when let go.) With this instantaneously fixed on the end of his finger
he hold the slate before him witn the left hand, and resting the thumb
of the right hand on one side and having the fingers loose on the
other, rapidly wrote a few words, which, when tie slate was handed
up to the bench, Mr. Flowers read amidst great laughter, thus, ‘ The
Spirits are present .’ ”
Mr. Maskelyne went on to say, “ The peculiarity of writing in
this way is that the lines are necessarily somewhat curved. In pro-
ducing such writing under a table the operator would by twitchings or
shudderings take off attention for a second, and that would suffice to
turn the slate over. Another short message would then be written on
the under side, and on the slate being produced there would be the
appearance of writing on the side which had apparently been next the
table. Having two messages written on a slate is of course convenient,
for the performer would read the upper one and rubbing it out would
say, ‘ Now we will try again.’ Then he would place the other side of
the slate against the table and say to his visitor, ‘ You hold the
corner.’ Of course the point of the trick is that he turns the slate over
beneath the table and then after it has been held close against the
table, the writing appears again on the upper surface of the slate.
It is easy for a clever conjuror to change the side of a slate in this
way.” Mr. Maskelyne then demonstrated in court how even with a
locked slate writing can be made to appear, The medium would first
take the opportunity to write a message on the slate, and then hastily
passing a damp sponge over it and rubbing it dry, it would seem to be
perfectly clear. The slate would be locked, but in the course of a few
minutes the writing would distinctly reappear. This is an easy trick
performed with a special pencil, yet by this thousands have been
deluded into the belief that they held converse with the dead. Mr.
Maskelyne’s exposure was most complete. The evidence of some of
the other witnesses was most amusing, one gentleman having received
affectionate messages from a presumed deceased friend who never
existed he having given the “medium” a fictitious name.
On the 29th October Mr. Flowers gave judgment, and said that
recollecting the grave results involved, he felt it incumbent upon him
to sentence the defendant to three months imprisonment with hard
abour. Notice of appeal to the Middlesex Sessions was given, and
Slade was released on bail. In January following the appeal was
heard. Dr. Slade was represented by three of the ablest counsel at
the English bar, and on a legal point the conviction was quashed.
Exit the exposure had been so thorough, that Slade took an early oppor-
tunity of flitting to the continent. All these thixxgs can be read in the


files of the London journals for the dates given I have quoted the
reports verbatim.
Slade next turned up in Russia, where, since the days of Home,
spiritualism has been fashionable. Then in the end of the year 1877
he appeared in Berlin. In foreign countries as the medium is un-
acquainted with any language but his own, the spirits could not send
written messages, consequently we find Slade’s seances chiefly made up
of “ manifestations” of hanky-panky with rings and chairs. These
took place in a dark room and from the published accounts, there was
nothing that an expert conjuror could not do. The whole imposture
has been fully exposed in the last volume of that highly interesting
work, “ Wissenschaftliche- Abhandlungen ” by Frederick Zollner,
published in Leipsio last year. On several occasions, however, the
slate trick was performed. The answers were always in English of the
stereotyped kind, such as, “we will try,” “we cannot tell.” “ I will
answer.” The work mentioned c mtains two lithographs of slates with
spirit writing. The first in alack hand runs, “ Man’s doubts can’t
change a fact a fact will change his doubts.” Spirits do not
punctuate, and the second example shows that they are equally reck-
less of grammar, a circumstance noticed at the seances of the medium
in Sydney. This is in a scratchy uneducated handwriting “We
feel to bless all those that * * * * * to envesfigate a subject to
unppnlar as the subject of spiritualism is at the present but it will
not always be so unppnlar it will take its place among the * * *
of all classes and kinds.” The last omitted word is supposed to be
“professions.” Shortly after this Slade received an intimation from
the police that his absence was necessary, and he left seeking fresh
fields and new dupes in Australia.
Slade has f mud many believers here having reduced his charge to
ten shillings. The most intelligent of us are often made the fools of
our senses, but then we recognize when we are deluded. But the
world is still full of dupes, who are everywhere waiting for impostors
to defraud them. These are generally of a weak affectionate disposi-
tion, often sceptics in religion, or belonging to those branches of the
Protestant Church where no great belief is required to enable them to
pass tnvough life as fair everyday Christians. The Catholic faith
furnishes few spiritualists. The Dupes if they belonged to the old
church would give strict adherence to all its rites and be the most
ardent supporters of its most extreme doctrines. These are those who
must renounce possession of their wills and intelligence—either to an
Absolute Church, a woman or a medium. Many may call themselves
sceptics but in truth they are miserable in that condition and yearn for
something to believe in. They may know or care nothing at all about
spiritualism, but attracted to a seance, at first by mere curiosity, a
shrewd impostor at once detects his victims. Surprised at first,
these will end in a short time in believing not only what the medium
tells them but a great deal more. Dr. Knaggs’ paper gives the
psychological explanation of this.
And now' I have a very pa'nful duty to perform in drawing attention
to the long advertisement in the Argus of February 18th, inserted by


Mr. Cyril Haviland. This gentleman is a friend of mine, I esteem
him highly, and I respect the memory of the lady whose name has so
imfortunately been thus thrust before the public I would gladly pass
over this in silence, but Mr. Haviland has thrown down the gauntlet to
unbelievers in such a defiant style, as the champion of Slade, that it is
impossible to do so. I am afraid that anything that appears in this
pamphlet will not change his views, but at least it may prevent others
from being deceived. Mr. Haviland lam sure believes every word he
has written. I again refer to Dr. Knaggs’ paper on this point. Let
us first see under what conditions this advertisement is framed. For
more than a fortnight Mr. Haviland had been under the moral sway
of Slade. The medium had passed several nights in his house, and
they had travelled to Melbourne together, Mr. Haviland having no
earthly business whatever there, but anxious for as long as possible to
receive those messages from his wife’s spirit, which Slade professed to
furnish him with. The advertisement shows the influence under
which Mr. Haviland labours. He believes that Slade said this, and
did that at their first interview, when as I think all this was brought
out afterwards, when the impostor had been often received into the
family circle and would pick up words and phrases and nowledge of
past events which he would readily udlise. The fraud is too obvious.
The hand is that of Haviland, but the voice is Slade’s.
I am not going to analyse or attempt seriatim to account for the
manifestations described in this advertisement. I refer to the papers
of Dr. Knaggs and Mr. Wilton as to Slade’s doings here. Ex unodisce
omnes. If he is detected in one fraudulent trick, I believe all his
manifestations are of the same kind. The evidence at the trial in
London shows compl. tely how the slate business is managed, and I
have tested this myself. Chevalier Thorn, a member of that very
clever company, “The Royal Illusionists” now performing here, has
privately gone through the evidence of Slade’s trial with me and has
demonstrated how easy it is for the slate to be manipulated in the
manuer described. In fact I believe the seance with him was much
more interesting than one with Slade. Certainly “The Illusionists”
every night perform tricks which eclipse anything that Slade or any
other medium has attempted. lam much indebted to Chevalier Thorn
for his practical explanations showing how a clever conjuror can outdo
a medium. He publishes a challenge to Slade which I hope, but
hardly think, will be accepted.
But I wish to point out two things to the readers of Mr. Havi-
land’s advertisement. He promises future contributions to the
Banner of Light, a paper which “has the cause at heart.” Now this
journal is the same foolish or fraudulent one which when the Daven-
port Brothers were in Melbourne, and I exposed them, claimed these
known and played-out impostors as spiritualists. I have no doubt
it will father anything Mr. Haviland says about Slade, But there is
one thing in the advertisement which I can contradict. Mr. Haviland
states that Slade “ whether in Russia, China, Fiji, or any other foreign
country” furnishes communications from the spirits in the language of
the people to whom they are addressed. Mr, Haviland makes a


solemn declaration of the truth of his assertion, and he shows how
deeply he is in the clutches of this imposter, when he writes of his own
knowledge what Slade must have told him. Now the German work
before quoted, which gives an impartial account of Slade’s doings in
Germany, and lithographs of the “ spirit writing” and “ spirit foot-
marks” gives all the answers procured from the spirits. They were
in English, and bad English at that. And the other day when a
friend of mine visited Slade (merely out of curiosity you may
he sure), and was asked to write a question to a deceased friend she
did so in French. The answer came back from the spirit of her
husband in English, a language he did not understand ! Tins proves
the fa sity of the statement which Mr. Haviland is called upon to
swear to.
People who wish to be further enlightened as to the fraudulent
practices of professional mediums, are referred to Barnum’s “ Hum-
bugs of the World,” and Maskelyne’s “ Modern Spiritualism.” If in
this paper I use strong words it is because I feel strongly, a friend of
mine having been duped and the holiest feelings of his nature preyed
upon by a scoundrel who I trust will yet meet his just reward. To
many who will tell me of strange “ manifestations” they have seen, of
the mysterious sounds and sights Ihey could not account for, of the
vagaries of the planchette, &c., I will reply in the words of Hotspur to
the spiritualist G 1 ndower, When the latter boasted of his influence
over the power of evil, the plain straightforward courageous English-
man claimed to have a more potent spell:
“ And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth!
If thou have power to raise him bring him hither
And I’ll be sworn I’ve power to shame him hence.”
“THE VAGABOND.”


DR. SLADE AND THE SPIRITS.
(.Reprinted from the S. M. Herald, after revision.)
It was with much pleasure that I received a brief communication from
my friend Mr. F., inviting me to Sydney on purpose to visit Dr Slade,
with the view of personally investigating the so-called spiritual
manifestations produced under his influence My friend Mr. F. prides
himself upon his liberality of opinion, and in several arguments with
me upon the subject, he has maintained that no judgement should be
formed upon the subject of Spiritualism without patient, diligent, and
exhaustive inquiry. He has for several years been pursuing the
matter with that spirit, but up to the present has come to no very
decided opinion beyond the conclusion that there is some very
mysterious influence at work, which to him is inexplicable. My
reputation as an amateur conjuror, and perhaps the very flattering
opinion that he had formed of my perceptive faculties, combined with
a latent suspicion that Dr. Slade’s spiritualism consisted of a very
clever illusionist performance, combined to make him select me to
assist him in coming to a determination regarding the phenomena as
exhibited at Dr. Slade’s seances.
In accepting the invitation, I stipulated that my friend, Mr.
Matthew Dawson, also an amateur prestidigitarian, should assist us by
being present. It was arranged that our seance should take place at
half-past 3 in the afternoon of February 7 ; but hearing that I could
possibly have an extra one in the morning, I took advantage of the
chance, and, accompanied by a lady friend, I waited upon the doctor
at half-past 9 o’clock on Friday morning, and we were courteously
afforded an interview. My object in going in the morning was to have
a general survey of the method of procedure ; this would enable me
to plan for the afternoon any feasable means for the detection of
jugglery or fraud, should I have reason to suspect such. I may now
state that my sole object was an investigation into the truth, —and 1
went with an unbiassed and impartial mind —determined to give Dr.
Slade every courtesy and fair play. In this paper I shall avoid any
personalities or exjmession of opinion with regard to the subject of
Spiritualism. I merely record facts as observed by myself, and Ido so
conscientiously and for the public good.
I explained to Dr. Slade that I had come from the country
expressly to visit him; though I had arranged for a seance that
afternoon I was so anxious to investigate the subject that I hoped
he would permit me to see his manifestations at once. He, without
hesitation, complied, and ushered us into his room arranged for that


purpose. The room was a well-lighted room, carpeted. The furniture
consisted of a plain deal table, a few chairs, a small round table, and
in the far corner of the room a side' table containing a few slates, slate
pencils, and other miscellaneous articles of no general import to this
paper. At his request I examined the deal table in the centre of the
room. I cannot better describe it than an ordinary pine dressing-
table, without drawers, having its width extended by the addition to
each side of a fixed flap, about a foot wide. The framework, each
corner of which was supported by the legs, was of small size, so that
the top of the table extended about eighteen inches beyond the frame
on every side. I estimated that the top of the table was about four feet
square. I carefully examined the table, turned it completely over,
and looked into every joint. I was convinced that it was bona-fide,
and no mechanism whatever existed in it. Upon replacing it, I
purposely altered its position on the floor, so as to place its legs out of
reach of any electro-tnagnets, should such be concealed beneath the
carpeting —illusionists, amateur or professional will know the import-
ance of this proceeding. I carefully examined the carpet for holes
through which concealed rods or levers might project to raise tables or
chairs. This examination having been satisfactorily concluded, we
were seated in such places as requested by Ur. Slade. The light, I
think, entered the room on the west side ; I)r. Slade took Ids position
at the north side of the table. I was seated on the west side, with my
back to the window, my lady friend at the south side, facing the
doctor. The east side of the table was vacant. On sitting down the
doctor specially drew our attention to the way he sat —sideways—he
facing the window, and his feet clear of the table. He asked us if we
had ever been present at anything of the kind before. He then
requested us to place our hands in the usual manner near the centre
of the table. We were in this position without any result for about
one minute, when he said, “ The influence is very strong, I feel great
power, you ” turning to me “ are very mediumistic, we shall soon get
some knocks, they 11-111 come about there,” pointing to the centre of
the table. We then heard some knocks in the spot indicated and near
to Dr. Slade’s side. He informed us they were quite different to
ordinary knocks, being in the wood. He then asked the spirits if
they would write ? three knocks responded, which he informed us was
an affirmative. He then, from the side table, produced an ordinary
school slate, which I examined. He carefully cleaned it with a
sponge, rested a piece of pencil about the size of an oat seed upon it,
and held it partly under the table. He said that the influence was so
strong that he could not hold it steady. His body, arms, and
hand twitched and tremored in a convulsive manner. All this
time one of his hands and both of my and my friend’s hands
were touching in nearly the centre of the table—for fully two
minutes this oscillation of the slate continued, sometimes under the table
completely out of view, and sometimes over the table. He then
requested us to listen, and a distinct scratching sound was heard, as
though some writing was being transcribed by a pencil upon the slate.
This having ceased, he endeavoured to withdraw it from the table,


but said it stuck to the table, and he bad to use much apparent fore*
in drawing it from under the ledge of the table. He then exhibited
to us the upper surface of the slate and a piece of pencil was found
resting upon it with the following message written lengthways across
the slate in a bold distinct hand : “ The more man investigates, the
more he will know the laws of the spirits; one day’s investigation
will not do much good, investigate at your own homes. Having
expressed our astonishment at this remarkable manifestation, Dr.
Slade said he would ask the spirits if they would raise the table, and
presently the slate was produced, having written upon it— “ We will
try.” He then grasped the leg of the table nearest him, between his
Xnees, buried the ledge of it into his abdomen, requested me to iest
my foot upon his toes. He requested us to keep raising our hands
upwards. We did so several times, when suddenly the table bodily
rose to a height of about 5 inches, remained poised there for twenty
seconds, and then descended to the floor with a crash. I must note
that during this and the following experiments the doctor’s legs were
not sideways—aw T ay from under the table as he always s professed
them to be, but he changed his position and placed them directly
under the table. He now said he would try and cause a small table
to be lifted. This he placed on the floor against the unoccupied side
of the square table, exactly facing me, resting his left hand lightly
upon it; in a few* seconds it oscillated, and tilted towards my lady
friend, which, Dr. Slade informed her, signified that she possessed
mediumistic powers. After a lew* more tiltings the table eventually
rose up from the ground to a height of about eight inches. My lady
friend here made an efiort to look under the table, which caused Dr.
Slade suddenly, as if in great pain, to remove his hand from the risen
table, wdien it fell heavily to the ground. I then asked for a special
experiment. I told him that I had heard of a handkeichief being
placed on a lady’s lap and being whisked by some invisible influence
into a corner, when it was found to be tied into intricate knots. He
gave me the remarkable reply that he never asked the invisibles to do
anything for a successful seance, it must be leit to their ow*n w r ill to
make whatever manifestations they themselves elected. My lady
friend incautiously suggested that in the last experiment the small
table w*as touched by his feet, but he asserted that such was im-
possible, as he sat in such a position that he could not possibly reach
it. He now* declared that all power had left him, and after making
another careful examination of the table, we gave our honorarium,
and withdrew. ,
This seance was very satisfactory to me, and I congratulated
myself on having so good a preliminary view* of the subject I hoped
more fully to investigate that afternoon. In half-an-hour my friend
Daw*son and 1 w*ere closely closeted, and during the clay had matuied
our plans.
Punctually at half-past 3 o’clock w*e presented ourselves accord-
ing to appointment at Carlton House, Mr. Dawson, Mr. 1., Mr. P.,
and myself. Dr. Slade being engaged, we went into the waiting-
room ; in a few* moments he came out. X asked him if four persons


were too many. He at once recognised me and appeared disinclined
towards my being admitted. He said that three with himself would
attain better results, that I had better remain out, but Mr. F. at once
retired in my favour. We were ushered into his room and the table
was carefully examined by Messrs. Dawson and P.
We were arranged by the doctor in a manner just suited to our
plans. Mr. Dawson occupied the seat I had used in the morning to
Dr. Slade’s right. I sat opposite to Dr. Slade, and Mr. P. at the
vacant side. This time it will be seen the four sides of the table were
occupied Dr. Slade as usual sitting sideways, having his feet clear of
the table, and impressing us with that fact.
The manifestations slightly varied from those that I had seen in
the morning, thus, while we were hearing knocks elicited in reply to
questions by Dr. Slade, Mr. Dawson’s chair was suddenly dragged in
the direction of Dr. Slade. The doctor declared that he then saw a phos-
phorescent light upon Dr. Dawson’s coat; we couldn’t see the pheno-
menon, but while trying to do so the chair was again dragged in a
similar manner, and while our attention was being thereby attracted
towards it, Mr. P’s chair, to his consternation, suddenly took a
lurch, also in the direction of Dr. Slade. General notice was now
directed towards me, and my chair was requested to move but without
avail. Next followed the slate writing upon the plain slate, which
was done as in the morning I next produced a log slate which I had
brought with me. This was carefully cleaned and a piece of pencil
put inside. This slate was held closed in Dr. Slade’s hand, and
the spirits requested to write upon it. The doctor expected some diffi-
culty to be experienced, in consequence, as he told us, of the slate
having a varnished wooden external cover. He requested me and Mr.
Dawson to hold the school slate and pencil under the corner of the
table between us, and specially directed our attention to listen if any
writing took place upon it. While intently doing so, the slate which
we held, was twice rapidly pushed outwards in a direction from Dr.
Slade by some invisible force. He then drew the log slate from under
the table, and having opened it to show us there was nothing written
upon the bottom leaf of it, he placed it upon the corner of the table,
under his right elbow. He told us to listen, when we heard a scratch-
ing sound apparently within the slate, which he at once opened, and
the following sentence was found imperfectly written within it :
“ Many a-e p —sent but emit —nor emat it mst —ook w inform.”
Probably the intention was to say : “ Many are present, but must
not communicate it—must look for information.” This was in reply'
to a query from Dr. Slade,, asking if many spirits were present, and
would communicate. The seance concluded with the experiment of
causing the table to rise bodily from the floor, which was done in a
manner exactly similar to that described as having taken place in the
morning. Dr. Slade then declared himself exhausted and unable to
proceed any further.
I have so far minutely, and with an accuracy almost to tedious-
ness, described the two seances of Dr. Slade at which I was present.
Since boyffiood I have been an ardent admirer of conjuring and


juggling tricks, find, by dint of earnest and continiiGd practice have
attained myself an amount of skill in tlie art rather unusual for an
amateur. * I mention this as I consider it an eminent qualification for
an inquirer into a subject of this nature that he should have some
familiarity with the usual procedures necessary for carrying out an
exhibition in which deception of the senses forms a conspicuous
feature. I was thus enabled to carefully note byplay, and
apparently trivial occurrences which played an important part in Dr.
Slade’s entertainment. I shall, therefore, first point out what circum-
stances there are in Dr. Slade’s performance which favour deception.
The very simplicity of the apparatus forms a most conspicuous feature,
and makes his manifestations appear the most wonderful and super-
natural. Amongst the ancients, and even now with savages and the
uneducated, whatever they could not or cannot rationally explain they
attributed to the devil. In our days, and amongst many educated
people, similar circumstances under similar conditions are attributed
to spirits. ' ...
At the beginning of each seance the doctor draws special attention
to the fact that he always sits sideways, with his foot clear of the
table; but it is a strange fact—and to which public attention has
never yet been directed —that when the operator and his sitters are
seated at the table, with their hands together near its centre, the flap
of the table shuts the doctor’s legs from out the sitter’s vision. Each
phenomenon is introduced in an unexpected manner. Dr. Slade
tells his sitters that everything must be taken as it comes. Another
special feature is the vacillatng ways and the uncertainty of the spirits
manifesting at all. The slightest exhibition of curiosity on the part
of the sitters, or any attempt to take a furtive peep under the table
appears mortally to offend the immortals their manifestations at
once cease. The removal of the hands from near the centre of the
table, which should be done in order to peep under the table, at once
breaks the circle. A psychological feature in the case also is what is
claimed by all spiritualists, I believe, namely—the greater the faith
there is hi spiritualism on the part of the sitter the more remarkable
will be the manifestations. In other words, an individual having such
faith in Dr. Slade to take as gospel all that he states, will see more
wonderful and barefaced things done by him than an inquisitive
unbeliever, the deterrent influence of whose presence with sharp
scrutinising - eyes is at all tunes most formidable
Thus had I the benefit of two seances with Dr. Slade, which I
attended expressly with the view of examining into the subject of
spiritism as demonstrated by him, and having already anticipated the
advice of his spirits, written so mysteriously on the slate—“ The more
man investigates, the more he will know of the lav s of spuits.
One days’s investigation will not do you much good; investigate at
your own homes.” I have spent many days upon the subject. 1 have
experimented and investigated at my own home. Ihe result of my
study at home as well as my experiences at his seances has been to
convince me that Dr. Slade is an exceedingly clever man, but lie has
nothing whatever to do with spirits. He is no conjuror or illusionist


in the ordinary acceptation of the terms. His is quite a new line, one
stamped by originality and novelty, and carried out with an energy
and dash worthy of admiration, were they only employed in a better
cause.
The performance exhibited by Dr. Slade requires all the mental,
manual, and mechanical abilities of a first-class prestidigitarian ; and
in addition, the suppleness of limb and elasticity of joint that can only
be acquired by the long continued practice and privations that make a
first-class contortionist. With these qualities he has in combination a
strong will, a penetrating mind, and a thorough knowledge of human
nature in all its phases ; he is also an astute physiognomist. For Dr.
Slade’s performances in this sense I have the greatest respect. I
honestly confess that I paid with pleasure the unasked honorarium of
half a sovereign at the termination of each sitting. I considered I had
value for my money in the lessons I had learnt at his exceedingly
clever performances.
The few appliances he has at hand to carry on his deceptions, and
the simplicity of the modus operandi, while it makes them marvellous to
the believing beholders —to unbelievers it remains an extraordinary
fact, how he can so long continue to dupe thousands, and notwith-
standing so many exposures, to still retain the confidence of the
multitude.
The explanation that I am now about to give of the means that
he adopts in producing his manifestations will surprise many, and no
doubt may cause controversy. I, however, supply as a test the means
which I used myself whereby many persons may judge for themselves
of the truthfulness of my observation as well as my interpretation of
Dr. Slade’s spiritual manifestations. The means I adopted and
which I now suggest for discovering the deception is to obtain a plain
mirror of silvered glass, say two and a half inches wide and five inches
long. “ Investigate at your homes,” and after a few experiments you
will soon discover how to place this mirror between your legs at such
an angle that when you look down upon it you can, while sitting at
the table, reflect the doctor’s legs and the underpart of his table. Of
course, should the person who proposes to adopt this plan innocently
explain his intention to the doctor, the probability will be that
he will give his smiling assent, and say that nothing affords
him greater pleasure than to give every opportunity for the fullest in-
vestigation. Unfortunately the spirits will think differently. There
will be no manifestation whatever while the mirror remains in situ
beneath the table.’ Spirits easily take offence and don’t like to submit
to the indignity of being tested. A knowing person, however, with
some sleight of hand, will be able to keep his own counsel and use the
mirror to his own edification, without either the doctor or the spirits
being any the wiser.
The first thing to strike the observer will be the remarkable
facility the operator has of moving his legs independently of imparting
any motion whatever to his body. Sitting sideways towards the table
with his legs apparently in front of him, he is capable of shooting out
either leg in any direction, reminding one of the movements of the


ANOTHER SEANCE WITH DR. SLADE.
In confirmation of the account given by Dr, Knaggs, of the two seances
which he had with Dr. Slade and “the spirits,” I wish to give a
narrative of the occurrences that fell within my own experience at a
similar exhibition of the so-called medium’s powers.
Like Dr. Knaggs, I have ever been fond of conjuring feats, and
have attained, by practice, some little proficiency in their execution.
I am therefore not a novice in the artifices necessary to be employed to
secure success in the performance of tricks of illusion, and in witnessing
them, am not easily thrown off my guard at those critical moments,
when, for the accomplishment of his purpose, it is necessary that the
exeexitant should distract the attention, and elude the vigilance of his
audience by some cleverly executed feint in an opposite direction.
Here, let me say that I know nothing of spiritualism, except what I
have read, and that previous to my interview with Dr. Slade, I had
only once been present at “a circle” where, however, the “manifes-
tations ” were of an exceedingly poor character, and ever since they
have been associated in my mind with an easily explained self-
deception on the part of those engaged in their production. I have
often essayed to evoke the phenomena with the assistance of friends of
a practical turn of mind, but have always utterly failed to produce any-
thing whatever. Tables refuse to tilt themselves at my bidding, chairs
remain stoically fixed. No knocks come in response to any entreaty
addressed to the “spirits,” or “intelligences.” Pianos won’t play
without hands, tambourines won’t fly round and hit people on the head,
no bell will ring, concertinas remain dumb, and I never can get a
handkerchief, by any coaxing, to tie itself into knots. Believers in
the “ spirits,” when I tell them these things, condescendingly bestow
sweet smiles of pity upon me, shrug their shoulders at my benighted
state, and say that I shall never obtain “manifestations,,” because I
am not a believer. They assure me I must approach the Unseen (with
a capital U, please) in an entirely different spirit. I must repose
unfaltering belief in them, and solicit their confidence with the
simplicity and confiding trust of a child ; then, and not till then, shall
Ibe rewarded with their intimacy. I have tried the childlike sim-
plicity business, and offered myself as a votary to the belief of any-
thing ; presenting my mind to the Spirits free from guile (its normal
state, as my friends will admit) but all to no purpose, the spirits remain
obdurate, and treat me as a Pariah. I approach them humbly, asking
for something to believe—anything they like to offer, but they will
give me nothing, evidently determined to let me die of the hunger and
thirst I have for knowledge. I have sometimes thought that I have


not the right sort of furniture for spiritualistic purposes, though it
looks like other people’s ; but I am assured hy true believers that the
sole cause of failure lies in my want of faith: that my desire to
investigate any phenomena that may he presented, gives mortal offence
to the spirits, and that in resentment they withhold all “manifesta-
tions ” from me. However, I have no desire to enter into a controversy
with spiritualists, or to question the grounds or genuineness of their
belief. All I know is that I can get none of the indications out of
chairs and tables that are vouchsafed to other people, and am firmly
convinced I never shall. My present business is with Dr. Slade, whose
spiritual performances I most unhesitatingly declare to be nothing
more than cunningly devised illusions throughout.
In the interview I had with Dr. Slade (which I will describe
presently) some two or three things occurred that puzzled me at the
time, but which the excellent narrative and explanation given by Dr.
Knaggs have rendered perfectly plain now to my comprehension. I,
on the other hand, noticed occurrences which, if they did not escape
his observation, have not been alluded to by him, and they certainly
cleared up all doubt in my mind as to the manner in which certain
other effects were produced. So if Dr. Knaggs did not notice them,
my allusion to them here will perhaps serve to strengthen his con-
victions upon the subject.
It was in the beginning of February that Mr. X. (a firm believer
in the genuineness of Dr. Slade’s mediumistic powers) called upon me
at 11 a.m., and invited me to accompany him to Carlton House,
Wynyard Square, to have a seance with the doctor, a proposition with
which I gladly complied. Arriving at the house we found the
doctor to be engaged, and were shown into a waiting-room until
he was at liberty to receive us. In a few minutes a tall well-
dressed gentlemanly man entered the room, smiling, with whom my
friend shook hands, and announced as Dr. Slade. I was intro-
duced, and the object of our visit being explained, the doctor said he
would give us a sitting at once, and we then adjourned to the room
which has been so minutely described by Dr. Knaggs, and the sur-
roundings of which I mentally took in directly we entered. My
chief interest, however, was centred in observation of Dr. Slade him-
self. His figure was well proportioned, and showed much muscular
power, while his movements exhibited great litheness and activity.
His features were handsome and pleasing in their openness of expres-
sion, his manner engaging, attractive, and self-possessed, while the
tones of his voice were suggestive of much candour and simplicity.
He had a slight American accent, and altogether was most prepos-
sessing in deportment and general appearance. In the centre of the
room stood the deal table described by Dr Knaggs, which X. tilted up
and said I was at perfect liberty to examine. I did so and am con-
vinced there is no mechanism about it. It is about four feet square,
and its only peculiarity is that its legs and their connecting frame-
work are placed close enough together to allow the top to project
beyond them about 14 or 15 inches. In describing this table Dr.
Knaggs speaks of its width being “ extended by the addition to each


side of a fixed flap,” and this, I find, has given to many readers a
wrong impression of its construction, nearly everybody associating the
word “ flap” with something which can he moved at will. Suffice it
to say, that the boards of which the table top is made have simply
been cut to the length required, and are perfectly immoveable. It
presents the peculiarity of a table in the construction of which the
maker has by accident fixed on a top intended for a much larger
framework, and except that it is .exceedingly light, it has nothing
remarkable about it but its extreme simplicity of construction, a
feature, by the way which Dr. Slade pointed o ( ut with the remark that
it had been made in Sydney “by an honest Chinaman.” Having
examined the table, it was placed upright again on the carpeted floor
by X. and Dr. Slade evinced no anxiety in its adjustment, clearly
attaching no importance whatever to its precise situation.'
We were then requested to be seated. There were four chairs in
position around the table —one at each side facing each other. My
friend was told to take the one at the end facing Dr. Slade, and I was
requested to occupy that at the side on the right hand of the doctor,
which placed me with my back to the window. It has since occurred
to me that by this arrangement I was removed from the observation of
any shadows which might have been cast beyond the line of the table
by any movements of the medium beneath. As we sat, we occupied
three sides of the table, and opposite to me stood the vacant chair, of
which more anon. We then placed our hands on the table in the
centre in a heap, Dr. Slade’s covering ours, when instantly a slight
tapping sound commenced, which I could not connect with the table ;
but of which no notice was taken by X. or the doctor. The latter,
however, directed my attention to the fact that he was sitting with his
feet sideways in the direction of the window, and looking down I
ascertained that to be the case, observing at the same lime that the
doctor’s feet were encased in those morocco slippers which, having no
heels, enable the feet to glide in and out so comfortably without
trouble. I also observed that the texture of his socks was as fine as'
silk—a feature of some importance if his feet are required, at these
seances, to produce effects demanding delicacy of touch and dexterity
in movement. No other knocks came, and Dr. Slade produced a com-
mon deal-framed little slate with soine tiny pieces of slate pencil. The
latter he threw upon the table while he cleaned the former with a
piece of sponge. Here let me say that throughout the interview Dr.
Slade kept up a running fire of small talk, uttered in a charmingly
natural manner, and which I very soon set down as “ patter.”
Having cleaned the slate to his satisfaction, the doctor placed a thin
piece of pencil upon it, about an eighth of an inch long, and keeping
his left hand on ours, removed the slate in a horizontal position with
his right hand, and placed it, or tried to place it, under the ledge of the
table. He was, however, prevented in the accomplishment of this
design by a sudden tremulousness which agitated his wrist and hand
to such a degree, as to make the slate clatter against the table
like a castanet. He said he was “ always like this,” and lowered
his hand with the slate down to about the level of his


knee, and writhed his shoulder like one suffering from
rheumatic pains in that joint. X. (who had had many
previous interviews) here exclairiled that he should like to try “ the
experiment with the compassand the slate business, whatever it
was to be, was stopped while the doctor produced an ordinary little
brass pocket compass with what appeared to be the usual spring
movement to set the needle out of gear when not in use, but which of
course, it will be perceived, might have been connected with other
concealed mechanism within, required to produce the effects that
subsequently occurred. The doctor adj listed the spring so as to set
the needle free and placed the compass on the table when X. drew it
towards himself. The doctor said he would ask the spirits if they
would cause the needle to oscillate, and then, after some tremor of his
hand and furtive glances at the slat >, still down in the direction
of his knee, clapped it up flat to the table underneath, placing his
thumb on the upper side, and his fingers below out of sight.
In this position I was enabled to see his forefinger for about half an
inch below the knuckle, and X. particularly pointed this out to me with
the remark that it was impossible anybody could write anything with
his hand so fixed. I watched what I could see of the forefinger
closely, expecting to observe some muscular movement communicated
by the action of the other fing. rs but none occurred. This however
amounts to nothing, for in subsequent experiments, which anyone may
verify for himself, I found that a slate may be retained in the
position described by the thumb and forefinger, and the other
fingers can bo moved to and fro underneath without creating
the slightest muscular disturbance in the portions of the hand that
remain in view. In this case, I think, it was perfectly unnecessary
for the doctor to resort to any extraordinary manipulation to produce
the writing which in a minute or so was shown to us, for what with
“patter” and the interruption caused by the arrangement of the
compass, there was time enough to scribble anything on the slate
without risk of observation. The doctor held the slate up flat to the
underside of the table, and a sound, as of some one wilting on it with
a pencil, became distinctly audible, lasting but for a second or so, and
ending with three rapid taps. The slate was then brought to view,
and there appeared on it the words—“We will try.” Nothing,
however, happened to the compass till Dr. Slade stretched his hand
over towards it, and made a quick circular movement above it, back-
wards and forwards, when the needle commenced to move violently,
just as it might if the doctor had a small piece of steel concealed beneath
his finger nails. In all fairness, however, I must add, I took particular
notice of his finger nails, and observed that they were so closely pared
down as to forbid the supposition that he could fix anything as large
as a grain of wheat beneath them. But then, again, a very trifling
thing will disturb a compass —such, for instance, as a strong magnet,
grasped by the operator’s toes, and deftly applied to the underside of
the table. The doctor told X. to try if he could cause the compass to
move, adding, that as he had some mediumistic powers, he plight be
successful. X. tried his hand, but the movement imparted to the


needle by the doctor had not subsided, and I do not think it was
prolonged in the slightest degree by any effort that X. made, though
he and the doctor thought differently. The compass, however, was
very obedient to the doctor, and moved whenever he stretched his hand
(and, by the way, it was his left hand ) over to it. With his right hand
he had, in the meantime, cleaned the slate (having had ample time
and opportunity to do anything else with it, while our attention was
attracted to the compass), and had taken it again beneath the table.
At this moment X. gave a start, and Doctor Slade almost instan-
taneously gave another. “ Wal, wal!” exclaimed the latter, with a
surprised look, “ what was that ? Did you feel anything ?” “ Yes,”
said X, “ I felt my leg pushed !” “ And I,” said the doctor, “ nearly
had the slate pulled out of my hand!” Up to this point nothing
had occurred to me. I was sitting with my left leg (that nearest to
Doctor Slade) doubled under my chair, while my* right leg was thrust
under the table, somewhat in a slanting direction towards X., and
away from the doctor. Of a sudden, X. said : “ There, I have been
touched again !” and then I distinctly felt two very r light, but distinct,
pressures rapidly given, as if by a hand on my right leg, just above
the knee. I, however, said nothing, and remained stolid and silent.
Doctor Slade then declared that he could see a small light hovering
over the compass, but as I could see nothing of the kind, I made no
remark ; but the reader will notice that all these observations, though
seeming to arise naturally, served to prolong the interval between the
slate “ manipulations,” and gave ample time to the “ spirits ”to
prepare something extraordinary, for all the while the slate was kept
below the line of our sight, and I frequently observed the doctor
casting stealthy glances down in its direction. At length, after
shaking the slate to and fro, as if trying to get the pencil in the centre,
he fixed it again beneath the table-top in the same manner as described
before, and exclaimed : “ Intelligences ! will you favour us with along
message ?” Thereupon there was a scratching as of some one writing,
which lasted for quite two minutes ; and, while this was going on, I
felt two more rapid pressures on the right leg, but gave no outward
sign. The result was just what I expected. Still holding the slate
against the table, the scratching sound going on without intermission,
Dr. Slade threw himself slowly back in his chair, as if changing his
position, merely to give relief to the muscles of his back ; but watching
liim I saw his eyes glance rapidly beneath the table, in the direction
of my leg, as if to make sure of its exact position. He then leaned
forward again, and, in a second or so, I was favoured with two more
touches, but, as before, took not the slightest notice of them, and
they were not again repeated. It wanted no spirit to produce such an
absurd manifestation as this. An extension of Dr. Slade’s leg beneath
the table, and a prehensile movement of his foot were the causes to
which I attributed the effect directly I felt the first touches. By
remaining silent, I thought, I should puzzle him, and it fell out as I
expected. Having administered two doses of “spirit” touches,
without producing in me any visible sign of astonishment, it occurred
to him, I fancy, that he had been giving my friend X. the experiences


he intended for me, and hence the necessity for his leaning hack and
gauging the exact position of my leg. Making sure then that he touched
me the next time, and finding that I preserved silence, he became
aware that I was on the watch, and stopped all further ‘‘ manifesta-
tions” of that kind. The scratching beneath the table having ceased,
the slate was produced, and the whole side of it was covered with
writing, in a clear, bold, regular hand, entirely different to the clumsy
characters in which the message—‘ ‘we will try, ” —had been written.
This difference, I suppose, will be hailed as proof by some people of
the genuineness of the “manifestation;” but as after the receipt
of the first message X. had told the doctor that many people
alleged the writing to be always the same, I was not at all
surprised to find the next communication in another hand. There
were about twenty lines now on the slate, which the doctor read
out to us, and almost immediately afterwards commenced to rub out.
The precise wording of the message I cannot remember ; but its pur-
purport was to the effect that the “ angels ” were pleased to find us
devoting ourselves to such an investigation as we were engaged in—
that we were to search diligently and patiently, and in time great
truths would be revealed to us, and it ended with the admonition that
the “intelligences” were indisposed to hold any communication with
those who were impressed with unbelief. X. said the latter remark
must be intended to apply to me. I replied, “ possibly so, but that
any unbelief I might feel did not take an offensive form.” And now
a circumstance occurred which is worthy of note. The doctor had
risen from his chair during X’s remark, and having placed one of his
feet upon it commenced to rub and move the joints like one who
suffered from twinges of cramp. He had had plenty of time to use
his fingers ; but had he been writing with his toes ? Or had the pre-
hensile movement necessary to produce “spirit” touches given him
the cramp ? Without saying anything, however, he resumed his seat,
and taking the slate in his right hand, leaned over in my direction and
placed it underneath the table in front of my body, leaving about an
inch or so exposed to view immediately beneath my eyes. On the
instant, before I could look up, the vacant chair opposite to me was
flung violently backwards against the wall. X. gave a start of sur-
prise, and l)r. Slade threw himself back in the chair, with a rolling
motion, as if recovering his balance and exclaimed in tones of amused
astonishment: “ Wal, wal! Really, I declare now! Ain’t it cur’ous ?”
I said nothing, though I am convinced the disturbance of the chair
was due to a vigorous kick administered by the doctor himself, while
our attention was directed to his manoeuvring with the slate.
X. now suggested that I should ask some questions of the spirits,
and the slate was handed to me by Dr. Slade and I wrote this : “ Can
you tell me how met with his death ?” The slate was taken
from me by Dr. Slade with that side of it on which my question was
written turned downwards. He placed a small piece of pencil on the
blank surface, and went through the usual nervous performance,
carrying the slate far below the level of the table, and again I saw
his eyes glance stealthily down in its direction, and I felt quite certain


he turned the slate in his fingers, and so read what I had written.
While this movement was being executed some general talk was
indulged in, and then the slate was brought up against the under side
of the table. An audible scratching again occurred, which terminated
with the taps as before, .when the slate was brought to view with this
answer legibly written upon it: “We do not know how he met with
his death.” This answer, if disappointing, was certainly candid.
Moreover it had the additional merit of getting rid in a decisive
manner, of a very awkward question. There are so many ways in
which people may die. The “ spirits” perhaps objected to particularise
the precise disease or manner of death in this instance. Perhaps they
objected to being run into such a corner! The slate was again
cleaned and placed under the table, more scratching was heard, and
this time the message, written on it was alleged to be intended for my
friend X., and had reference to something that had occurred at pre-
vious seances with the doctor of which I had no knowledge, nor are
the public interested in knowing more than that my friend seemed
perfectly satisfied with its genuineness.
So far I had seen nothing which in any way puzzled me to ex-
plain or account for ; or, in other words, that could not have been
produced by any clever manipulator, by natural means, without the
aid of mechanism of any kind. Now came two “ manifestations ”
which I could not understand, but which, thanks to Dr. Knaggs and
his mirror, I comprehend now. X as' ed Dr. Slade to try if the spirits
would -take the slate out of his hand, carry it to the other end
of the table, and return it him again. He assented, and then
turned to me, saying that, in order to show there was no trickery
of any kind, lie woidd place his two feet close together and allow me
to place my left foot upon them. Accordingly he did so, but in the
position in which I sat I could only effectually cover and feel his
right foot, and though the toe of my boot projected somewhat over
his left it was at an upward angle, and I doubt if it did more than
rest gently on the surface of the slipper which covered his left foot.
Bending over to my side of the table he then thrust nearly the whole
of the slate horizontally beneath it, some two or three inches below
the top, and in a second or so it left his hand, and could be heard
banging against the framework below in its passage to the other side,
where it showed half of its length above the line of the table, flapped
i self forcibly against the edge, disappeared, repeated the banging on
its way back, and delivered itself into the doctor’s hand. This looked
mysterious at the time, and I confess puzzled me exceedingly; but
on reading Dr. Knagg’s communication to the Herald I saw at once
the feat could be performed with perfect ease by anyone who had
trained his pedal extremities to any moderate degree of muscular
flexibility. In my opinion the unseen power that took the slate from
Dr. Slade’s hand was situated in the toes of Dr. Slade’s left foot,
which he had withdrawn from its slipper for the purpose and deftly
returned to its place on completing the performance, for it was
there when I looked down again. Talking of slippers, by the way,
how easy it would be to have a framework in them which would with-


stand pressure, and leave the wearer at perfect liberty to withdraw
both his feet and return them again, without running any great risk
of discovery!
The last and crowning manifestation was the raising of the table
bodily, from the floor; but this in the first attempt was marred by
my want of experience in the means to be adopted to produce the effect.
We sat with our hands clustered on the table, and in a second or so,
the doctor and X raised their hands up perpendicularly with a
tremulous motion, when I felt a weak but distinct motion in the table,
as if attempting to rise ; but it could not get off the ground on ray
side, and after an ineffectual struggle for a second or so it dropped
again, and Dr. Slade turned suddenly towards me and said “ Oh, you
must lift up your hands too.” I apologized, saying that I was not
aware of what was required of me, and asked him to try the
experiment again. We all raised our hands simultaneously clear of
the table next time, and it followed them with a steady motion
•straight upwards for a distance perhaps of a foot, and then suddenly
dropped. I observed nothing which solved this seeming mystery,
and to Dr. Knaggs the credit is due of discoveringthoartifi.ee employed
to secure the “ manifestation.” The doctor then announced that the
spirits would do nothing more, which remark, like the. playing of the
National Anthem at an ordinary entertainment, was simply a polite
way of informing us that the seance was oyer and thereupon X. and I
took our leave.
Now, in conclusion, I wish to reiterate that I have no desire to
ridicule those who believe in Spiritualism, or to impugn their veracity
in the accounts they give of their experiences. I only speak of things
within my own knowledge; and, while pitying my crass ignorance,
perhaps Spiritualists will extend their forgiveness to me if I have not
that india-rubber quality of faith which prevents my blindly accepting
as mysteries, occurrences which if submitted to critical investigation,
appear to me to admit of an easy solution as flowing from natural
causes. I consider Dr. Slade’s “manifestations” to be nothing more
than clever conjuring or juggling. In some respects they exceed the
feats of ordinary professionals, because they are done in broad day-
light, and immediately under the eyes of his audience. But in other
respects they show much inferiority. The professional conjuror goes
to work in a more straightforward manner, for he generally lets you
know what effect he is going to produce beforehand, and challenges
you to detect him if you can. But your medium does not, except in
rare cases, admit you to any share of his confidence. He deals in
surprises, and to secure them, he adopts all sorts of ruses, as for
instance, in the kicking over a chair, as described above. Then again
he evades inquiry, by laying down the convenient fiction that the
spirits will not be dictated to, and that you must accept what manifes-
tations they choose to give and not what you would like to have.
Further, that the spirits are so capricious that, while they appear to
be very ready to hold communication with the living, they will have
nothing to do with unbelievers, or persons anxious to elicit the truth
and- reality of their proceedings. Give an ordinary conjuror such


conditions as these and he would produce “manifestations” of a far
more astounding character than the silly tricks which form the stock-
in-trade of the so-called spiritual mediums. But, I know of old, it is
of no use arguing with those who accept as genuine the pretended
phenomena evolved under the superintendence of accepted mediums.
They will hold no argiunent upon the subject, nor will the mediums
submit their feats to any satisfactory test. If any grievance is felt as
to the manner in which Dr. Slade’s performances have been criticised,
it will be very easy to give a practical refutation to all that has been
written. Let Dr. Slade submit his manifestations to a committee of
practical men, under conditions that will ensure a crucial test. If he
will not do this, neither he nor his disciples must complain if his
pretended mysteries are denounced as a villainous imposture and
fraud.
THOMAS T. "WILTON.
HINDOO JUGGLING AND CHRISTIAN
CREDULITY.
I have been asked for a paper descriptive of a few of the “cunning
tricks of hand” and seemingly inexplicable phenomena which as a long
sojourner in the interior of India, that land of mystery, it has been
my privilege ofttimes to witness. Some of these phenomena are to my
mind, far more wonderful than even the most marvellous manifesta-
tions claimed by the so-called mediums, yet they are all I believe
capable of an explanation consistent with well known mental or
physical laws, and in no case that I am aware of, is supernatural or
spiritual interposition even suggested much less claimed in their
accomplishment
The manifestations of mediums differ from ordinary juggling in
this, that they claim direct spiritual interposition. I fully and frankly
admit there may be phenomena which are difficult of explanation to
the ordinary observer. Many of those who have been the most
patient investigators of these phenomena for years are yet unable to
account for them, while rejecting the hypothesis that the spirits of the
dead perform them, while one amiable but rash goihe mouche of a
convert, after a few week’s experience of Slade’s trickery, publishes to
the world his adherence in toto to all that Slade says, and boldly
avows that his mushroom religion is “gnawing away the roots
of the old church.” Poor fellow! his half-guineas had much
better be expended in buying advice from Dr. Tucker, than in filling
the coffers of the so-called Dr. Slade. The rappings and tappings, the
scratchings, movements of tables and chairs, and writing, &c., are done


they, the mediums, say by the spirits of the dead, who have been
summoned from the “ unknown land beyond the grave” to revisit these
“glimpses of the moon” to, in some undeniable cases at least, gratify
a silly curiosity, pander to a morbid craving after excitement, put
money into the pockets of proved knaves, or obey the behests and
questionings of persons of impure lives, unfeeling hearts, greedy
grasping natures, and last though not least limited or imperfect
grammar. Detected as quacks, frauds and impostors in one city, they,
the mediums, betake them to “ fresh fields and pastures new,” where
they practice their impudent and sacrilegious trade of imposture, and
gull and cheat and despoil a fresh set of credulous victims : and such is
the gullibility of human nature, that, taken in conjunction with the
finer feelings and cherished longings and yearning after renewed inter-
course with dear departed friends, which are more or less present in the
heart of every affectionate mourner, these unfeeling despicable knaves
basely betray the tenderest and holiest aspirations of our natures,
desecrate the shrine of purest affection and most ardent love, and
degrade and defile the memories of our lost friends by making their
so-called spirits, stoop to meannesses and puerilities, which they would
have been the first to reprobate with abhorrence when they lived
amongst us, loaded with all the imperfections and weaknesses of
earth.
We are all so prone to invest what we do not understand, or can-
not readily explain, with a supernatural character, that many ill-
balanced minds take upon trust the wonderful tales they hear of what
mediums can do. They see a few juggling manifestations which
deceive their senses, but which are really less wonderful than thou-
sands of the tricks a second rate conjuror can do, and straightway they
take all for granted, yield up their whole belief to the delusion and be-
come an easy prey to the spoiler whose trade it is to fatten on credulity,
and grow rich on the self deception of the multitude.
There are hundreds of our readers who pooh pooh all this as the
language of exaggeration. Convinced in their own minds of the absur-
dity of the pretensions put forth by these charlatans, the mediums,
they think a publication of this kind very supererogatory, in fact cal-
culated to do more harm than good. Are they aware that spiritualism
as preached and practised by convicted felons, by meretricious adven-
turers, by procuresses, by clever plausible scoundrels, has sapped and
is sapping the foundations of the religious faith of many, has brought
discord and disunion into many a happy home, has impoverished many
an impressionable loving credulous nature; has even caused reason to
totter on his throne, and is now working incalculable ill to hundreds
of families and friends in our very midst.
As a writer in the Quarterly Review pertinently says, “ To the class
of earnest and rigorous inquirers, whom the true philosopher, what-
ever be his pursuit, welcomes as his most valuable coadjutors, the
spiritualists and their allies have ever shown a decided repugnance.
‘ All or nothing ’ seems to be the motto of the latter, who act as if a
rational explanation of any one of their marvels were a thing to be
deprecated. In order to reconcile this discouraging treatment with


their professions of readiness to court investigation, they have had
recourse to the hypothesis, that just as a damp atmosphere around an
electrical machine prevents a high state of electric tension, the pre-
sence of even a candid sceptic weakens the mediumistie force, or
willingness of the spirits to copimunicate ; an 1 this not merely when
he manifests his incredulity hy his language, his tones, or-his looks,
but when he keeps it concealed beneath the semblance of indifference.”
Being myself a “ candid sceptic” in so far as regards a belief in
so called spiritualistic phenomena, I n ed not of course address myself
to believers in spiritualism. If they are not convinced by the expose
of Dr. Knaggs, no argument of mine would affect them. “In all
ages” says the same reviewer, “ the 1 possession’ of men’s minds by
‘ dominant ideas’ has been most complete when these ideas have been
rdigious aberrations—the origin of such aberrations has uniformly lain
in the preference given to the feelings over the judgment —in the
inordinate indulgence of emotional excitement without adequate con-
trol on the part of the rational will. Such persons are no more to be
argued with than are insane patients. They place themselves beyond
the pale of any appeals to their reasoning faculty, and lead e thers
into the some position. They cannot assent to any proposition which
they fancy to be in the least inconsistent with their prepossessions ;
and the evidence of their own feelings is to them the highest attain-
able truth. It is not to these we have addressed ourselves.”
“ Ephraim is joined to idols ; let him alone.” But we would
save from this pseudo-religious pestilence, those who are yet unharmed
by it, and who may find themselves unexpectedly smitten by its bale-
ful poison.
My descriptions and statements can be substantiated by hundreds
of gentlemen who have lived in India, and have seen the same tricks
that I have seen. I state on the word of a gentleman that lam not
exaggerating or falsifying in any way, and my readers will perhaps
therefore dispense with the formula of an affidavit or oath before any
magistrate or notary, and where I obtrude my own opinion, they will
just take it as they would take that of any ordinary sensible, educated,
observant, and thinking person of their acquaintance.
Dr. Slade claims or professes to be able to call up any spirit that
may be wanted, and if at Pekin, Hongkong, or Fiji, the spirit will
answer in the language in which it is accosted. If he will call up any
of my old factory servants, and give or write me an answer to one
query, which I will write beforehand and give to a friend, to show
there is no wish to deceive on my part, and if the answer be in good
Tirhutya Ilindostanee, I will then begin to doubt my present judgment.
If it be objected that I am a sceptic, and the spirits will not come at
my call or on my account, let the most bigoted believer in spiritualism
ask the question, and if he or she elicit the answer, I will with-
draw all present allegations of fraud and imposture, and humbly
apologise.
A much-respected friend has gently chid me for wishing to bet
on the subject, as he says if the spiritualists are only anxious for an
elucidation of the truth, no money stimulus or hope of gain is neces-


sary. It would only be an insult to a conscientious medium to imagine
that be would* do for tbe love of igain, what he would refuse to
do from an honest, single-hearted wish to establish right and elicit
the truth.
■ Witchcraft is a firmly settled and popular belief in India. In
my lately published bo k* in Chapter YIL, I give a few instances of
some rather curious cases I have seen. There are a class cf lazy,
good-for-nothing, plausible, hypocritical, scoundrelly Brahmins, called
Ojahs, who correspond somewhat to our modern professional mediums.
These Ojahs are professed witch-finiers. They lay claim to great
powers, to command occult influences. Some of the tilings I have
seen them do- are really wonderful. Yd they never lay claim to do any-
thiny by the agency of spirits. I doubt not many of them are mes-
merists, and mesmerism admits of quite a scientific explanation, as
does electro-biology, hypnotism, and other kindred forces. Here is
an extract frm my book. At page 66, speaking of witches, I say as
follows: —“ A blight attacks the melon or cucumber beds; a fierce
wind rises during the night and shakes half the mangoes off the frees ;
the youngest child is attacked with teething convulsions; the plough
bullock is accidentally darned, or the favourite cow refuses to give
milk. In every case it is some ‘ Dyne ,’ or witch that has been at
work with her damnable spells and charms. I remember a case in
which a poor little child had had convulsion The Ojah or witch-
finder—in this case a fat, greasy, oleaginous knave, was sent for.
Full of importance, and blowing like a ‘ porpus,’ he came and caused
the child to be brought to him under a tree near the village. I
was passing at the time, and stopped out of curiosity. He spread a
tattered cloth in front of him, and muttered some unintelligible gib-
berish unceasingly, making strange passes with his arms. He put
down a number of articles on the cloth—which was villainously tat-
tered and greasy —an unripe plantain, a handful of rice, of parched
peas, a thigh bone, two wooden cups, some balls, &c., &c., all of which
he kept constantly lifting and moving about, keeping up the passes,
and muttering all the time.
The child was a sickly looking, pining sort of creature, rocking
about in evident pain, and moaning and fretting just as sick children
do. Gradually, its attention got fixed on the strange antics going on.
Tire Ojah kept muttering away, quicker and quicker, constantly
shifting the bone and cups and other articles on the cloth. His body
was suffused with perspiration, but in about half-an-hour the child
had gone off to sleep, and attended by some dozen old women,
and the anxious father, was borne in triumph off to the house.”
Can any of Dr. Slade’s spirits do as much for a sickly, suffering
child? Another time one of Mr. D’s. female servants got bitten by
a scorpion. The poor woman was in great agony, with her arm
swelled up, when an Ojah was called in. Setting her before him,
he began his incantations in the usual manner, but made frequent
passes over her body, and over the bitten place. A gentle per-
* Sport and Work on the Nepaul Frontier.—Macmillan and Co., 1878.


spiration began to break out on her skin, and in a very short time
the Ojah had thrown her into a deep mesmeric sleep. After
about an hour she awoke perfectly free from pain. In this case
also no doubt the Ojah was a mesmerist.
I had an old fihowkreydar, or factory watchman, named Seonath
Gopel. He was a very tall, muscular, finely-made man, but totally
blind. Our factory allowed him four rupees a month, merely for the
protection of his name. So long as Seonath got his four rupees the
factory bullocks were safe. He levied a sort of black-mail from the
ryots, or cultivators, all round. If they paid Seonath a little present
every year, their bullocks and cattle were safe from theft. Other
indigo factory managers, from far and near, whenever their bullocks
were stolen, sent the chowdkrey, or bullock-keeper, with a present to
Seonath ; and in every case he would tell them where to find the stolen,
strayed, or lost cattle. Seonath was a professed medium ! He professed
to get his information from a spirit. He was held in great reverence
by all the natives for leagues around. Many European planters
actually believed in him. The cattle of those who paid him money
were never stolen. Often, if the payments ceased, the cattle mysteri-
ously disappeared. On one occasion, three of my finest plough
bullocks were stolen. M y jemadar, or head man, said: “ Send for
Seonath.” I did. I did not ask him to communicate with his spirits,
but I peremptorily told him that, if the bullocks were not back in
three days, I would fine him twenty rupees. The bullocks were brought
back within the time. No one could say by whom, but they were
brought back. I could multiply instances. Seonath was revered.
He was a sacred man among the poor deluded natives. They
thoroughly believed in his pretensions. Cattle certainly were stolen,
but a visit to Seonath, and a transfer of coin, resulted in a message
from the spirits that the cattle would be found after a certain time at
a certain specified place. In no instance did the spirits speak falsely.
Just at that time, and at the very place, the cattle would be forth-
coming. It was mysterious; it was marvellous to the native mind—
inexplicable. What more could a spiritualist wish in the way of
evidence ?
I was a “ candid sceptic.” So was our District Superintendent of
Police. So were some of his astute native detectives. After much
patient investigation, cunningly devised traps, and lung weary
waiting, we solved the mystery—we actually captured the spirits.
Seonath had nine sons of his own, —six brothers with families of sons,
and they were all, every man Jack of them, experts in the art and
science of cattle-lifting. It was a family confederacy. Never existed
more practised thieves. Seonath himself planned every theft. A
victim was selected, and on the determined night, his fold would be
visited, relays of the clever thieves hurried the animal by jungly paths
and devious ways, miles and miles away. ’Ere the theft would be
discovered the stolen animal might be, perhaps, beyond the Ganges.
Then, of course, followed the application to Seonath. The spirit
spoke; the bullock or cow was reconveyed to the specified spot, and
each successive restitution was hailed by the credulous natives as


another proof of Seonath’s wondrous communication with spiritland.
Most of the members of the gang- were seized and sent to gaol;
Seonath himself, blind as he was, escaped to Nepaul. Possibly, he
was warned by the spirits of what was in store for him. AVith his
departure cattle-stealing ceased in that district. Spiritualists are not
so numerous there either as formerly.
We hear much of Slade, lifting a chair with a nine-stone female in
it bodily from the ground, by merely placing his hand on the back of the
chair. The spectator is, of course, in front. Slade is behind the chair,
and the drapery of the occupant thereof conceals Slade’s legs. What
more easy then for him, practised athlete as he is, with the muscles of
his legs educated well to do this kind of work, to lift the chair by the
bottom bar. Let my reader practice this trick himself, beginning
with slight weights. After he has been at it as long as Slade, ho will
attain equal success. Will Dr. Slade do this, if Dr. Knaggs and
myself, or any other “ candid sceptic,” are standing behind the chair ?
No. ‘‘Sometimes the spirits do it, and sometimes they don’t.”
I have seen a village juggler do a much more wonderful trick
than that. It was at Sonepore fair, in 1872 or ’73. It is called the
floating trick—suspending a body in the air without any visible
support. Dr Sylvester did the trick here, but experts well know that
an iron or steel rod projects from the back of the stage, being hidden
by the seemingly floating body. The conjuror passes his sword
apparently all round in every direction, meeting no resistance on any
side. It does seem inexplicable. In the case I saw in India it was
done in a shamiana, that is, under a covered canopy. A, young girl
was seemingly suspended in mid-air. The green turf was beneath,
the canvas walls of the shamiana above and on every side. ’Tis true,
the English spectators all sat on oqe side. Yet there were natives all
round, and they seemed as astonished as we were. I could not account
for it, but the jadugar, or juggler, expressely told us, in answer to
repeated queries, that it was a trick learned from his father, —a pure
deception of the senses. Let spiritualists say it was the spirits if they
choose. I believe the juggler himself, although I cannot explain how
the thing was done.
The same juggler on the same occasion did a trick which I have
often seen done, and have heard explained, but which always seemed
to me very wonderful. It is the well known basket trick. I never
saw it better done than by a handsome young juggler from Benares
who hsed to amuse me by his “hanky-panky” one time I was
confined to my couch by an attack of rheumatism. The scene of opera-
tions was my own verandah. A well built, plastered brick floor. Natives
squatting on their hams all around, watching with eager interested
looks, every movement of the light, supple, handsome young “Jadugar.”
His body was bare from the waist upwards, and his long coal black
hair was tied behind in a knot. He had none of the ordinary
impedimenta or accessories. He produced a narrow oblong cane-work
basket which I was allowed to examine. It appeared simple enough.
No false bottom, side, or lid was perceptible. Next he introduced his
son, a handsome little fellow about ten years old. The boy was


enveloped in a net which I myself examined, tied firmly round the
ends, and sealed the knots with my own seal. The boy was slung like
a rabbit in a net and I swung him myself off the ground. Thus
enclosed, the boy was put in the basket. A cloth was borrowed from
an adjacent native and spread over the basket, and the lid then put
over the whole. The juggler then went through some other antics,
but I did not take my eye from the basket. After a very short time
the man removed the lid, took a leap into the air and came down
with all his weight, right in the centre of the basket. Had
the boy been there, the shock was enough to rupture his diaphragm,
we only heard a groan. Again the lid was put on the basket. The
juggler took a sharp long slender rapier like sword, and ran it through
and through the basket. Blood issued freely. The natives looked
horror stricken and gasped out their cries of pity. I must confess I
was puzzled. I was still more dumbfounded when the juggler
began to call out loudly in Hindoostanee for his boy. A childish
voice seemingly from a great distance answered him. The call and the
answer was repeated, this time little a nearer, until at length the boy
smiling and uninjured, came tripping through the crowd from the
outside of the verandah. The basket was opened and there at the
bottom, lay the empty net, seals intact, and not a tittle of evidence to
show how the trick was done.
Now surely you will admit that this was more wonderful than
any of the so called spirit manifestations that the most gifted medium
has ever received. Every sense was deceived, and yet the explanation
to those who know the trick is very simple. The spirits have nothing
to do with it. I might go on to describe the mango tricks and other
equally wonderful and equally capable of explanation, but space
forbids.
Some people make a great point of having taken different coloured
pencils to Slade’s seances. One gentleman took a green pencil, which
was put upon one corner of the slate and the writing was green —
ergo, the spirits must have written with it, because Hr. Slade could
not have known what colour the pencil was, and he denied having
written the message. A most convincing test indeed. The same
gentleman is not, however, satisfied. He wishes to have a seance,
during which one of the company (let us hope a candid sceptic)
will lie beneath the table. That seems fair. I have seen a
common village juggler in India mix five or six different coloured
powders together, put them into a tumbler full of water, and drink
them off. I have examined his mouth to see that the powders were
not concealed there. Then with his hands tied behind his back, I
have asked him to produce a yellow powder. He grates his teeth and
out comes a pile of DliY yellow powder on the top of his little drum
Ask for blue, the blue is produced. Ask for white, the white succeeds
the blue, and so on, whatever colour you name, that colour instantly
appears. Surely this is more wonderful than all the knocking and
tapping and vague answers to leading questions, and deflections of the
compass, which anyone can cause by manipulating a piece of iron
under the table with their feet or hands, or by other mechanical


means. And so with all the other exceedingly commonplace pheno-
mena of spirit mediums which credulity invests with a supernatural
character, and which in not one solitary instance have been found to
stand the rigid scrutiny of a calm unbiassed scientific investigation.
Some fond loving grieving impressionable one, is perhaps crushed
beneath the staggering blow of some sudden bereavement. Oh he
thinks if I could but hear the loved one’s voice once more. If I could
only get a loving tender forgiving message. If I only knew my lost
one was happy. The professional medium takes advantage of this
state of feeling, professes to satisfy the yearning of bereaved affection,
and for money —“ no dollar, no show ’’—sports with this sacred feeling,
desecrates the sanctuary of grief; juggles with the most tender and
sacred sentiments of humanity, and out of the purest and tenderest
throbbings of a wounded heart’s deep emotion, forges the most
iniquitous and pernicious fraud that ever assumed the sacred name of
religion. Oh it is a shame —what a vile atrocious libel on the
immortality of the soul—what a ghastly parody on the beatitude of
eternal union with our Creator after death. Is this the “liberty of
the children of God” “wherewith he makes us free? Mourner,
wouldst thou not rather believe that thine honoured and lamented
dead, was with the angels before God’s throne, mingling their
hallelujahs with the eternal choir, than in a state of constant thraldom
and subjection, at the beck and call of every knavish mercenary
wretch, who for the sake of a miserable coin, pretends to call them
from their sphere of glory, from the presence of the God of the whole
earth, to do what ? To rattle amongst a few ricketty chairs and tables
or give inane maundering ungrammatical answers on a slate, to
questions propounded by ignorance, presumption, cupidity, or
curiosity.
This, lam aware, is not scientific argument. It is sentimental.
There are some more easily touched by sentiment than by scientific
demonstration. I only want to expose an unhallo wed_ nefarious fraud,
and I do not like to see gentle loving natures despoiled and deluded
by scheming tricksters.
If these spiritualistic mediums court the f ullest investigation, as
they say they do, why is it that they advance the hypothesis that doubt
defeats elucidation ? Why are the phenomena confined to those places
and occasions only, when the medium can do as ho pleases in the dis-
position of his paraphernalia ; can dictate his own terms as to the
method of enquiry; can claim only those points that tell in favour of
his own assertions, assumptions or pretensions, and repudiate every
thing unfavourable contradictory or antagonistic, can under the most
favourable circumstances only achieve the baldest and most barren
results, and in face of detection and exposure take refuge in the most
barefaced subterfuge and brazen effrontery of denial. These are ques-
tions which the “ candid sceptic” may surely require answered before
he is asked to swallow the mass of crude transcendental rubbish, the
pseudo-German mysticism, the false physiology, and spurious psychology
that go to make up the religion of spiritualism. There is not a
practised speaker at our bar or in our pulpits, who will not pre ich as


eloquently as logically and as lengthily, as any trance lecturer who
ever assumed to embody the thoughts and opinions of the most illus-
trious defunct orator, be he John Stewart or Demosthenes. Thomas
Walker was in my opinion a most third rate speaker. Dr. Beg
thoroughly exposed his ignorance and blasphemy, yet are there hun-
dreds in Sydney who believe him to have been all he asserted himself
to be. Thomas with all his spiritualism had a most material regard
for the nimble shilling, and when the coin no longer flowed into the
treasury, he took his sleepy orations elsewhere. I hear he is back
again. Will some shorthand reporter report him verbatim et literatim,
and show the hollow nature of his pretensions ?
One very heavenly characteristic of the spirits noticed by pro-
fessional mediums is their great obligingness as a rule. The answer
expected is generally the answer received. A friend of mine in Calcutta
being at the seance of a professional biologist and medium called up
the spirits of Shylock and Palstaff. This was proof positive that
Shakespearean characters were all drawn from the life, and my friend’s
estimate of Shakespeare’s genius sank somewhat. He was somewhat
reassured however to find Shakespeare sinning in such good company
as Charles Dickens, for on wishing a message from the immortal Mrs.
Arris, Sairey Gamp’s apochryphal friend, a message was straightway
received from that mythical lady. This is not one bit more absurd
than the experiences of a certain very elevated and refined spiritualist
circle in Sydney. The manifestations in this favoured circle are
generally from titled relatives, the very rank of the dead being thus
made to pander to the vanity of the living, but more than this, they
have embodied or materialised an abstract idea which under the guise
of the spirit of Purity, rattles the chairs and tables about much to the
comfort and delectation doubtless of these egregiously self deluded in
vestigators after truth. Could the force of humbug farther go ? In
marked contrast with this pure circle we have another so shadowed by
the dire and baleful influences of evil spirits that a very well known
gifted spiritualist writer, lecturer and medium, on a recent occasion on
entering a judge’s room was seized with excessive tremors and had
fairly to bolt from the private sanctuary of this representative of
Ehadamanthus, owing as she said to the abnormal prevalence of evil
spirits in the room. It is such fustian as this that common sense
Christians are required to found a new religion upon.
What wonder with so many gulls and pigeons to be plucked that
hawks and vultures abound. IN ext to religious aberrations, hypochondria
and monomania affect the medical atmosphere. After nostrums to
“ minister to a mind diseased” to heal the of the soul, come
quackeries and empiricism for the “ ills that flesh is heir to »Slade,
Madame Yon Halle, the well known New York notoriety, Clara
Antonio and others, affect the treatment of mental ailments. Ihey
(Walker and others) bring healing to the weary longing soul, from the
realms of spirit land. There are others who use the spirits in the most
impudent empiricism and who number their dupes by hundreds. Isot
a medical man in this town but could give scores of cases where simple
people have been ruined in health, reputation, pocket, and peace of


mind, by these rapacious mediumistic quacks. There was a Miss
Armstrong for instance from Melbourne, another burning and shining
light among the spiritualists, whose modest fee is from a guinea to half-
a-guinea for a prescription, and who claims to be the medium of a
deceased Indian herbalist, Dr. Pierce She had hundreds of clients in
Sidney. Peelingthe pulse of the patient she gives a snort and a kick
as Walker used to do, closes her eyes and in a shaky character writes
out a prescription which a little diligent search might discover in any
old housewifes book of recipes. Mr. Cole was another of this class.
Who then can wonder that when fools were so plentiful and so lavish
with their fees, that the Heathen Chinee with the precocity which is so
characteristic of the followers of Confucius, should not make an
endeavour to intercept a few drops of the golden shower.
A Chinaman accordingly Ave find setting up shop Avith a con-
venient theory of his own. He pretends to be able to see through the
human body. The principles of his medical practice are charmingly
simple. All disease is just so many clots of blood in your “ innards.”
These his medicines profess to remove. He draws a diagram in
Chinese. I have seen several of them myself. Makes up a com-
pound of some abominable filth, and he also is growing rich from the
fees which credulous fools are found AA r illingto give him. The Chinese
doctor is, like Slade, a cute observer, quick in an emergency, and a
clever student of character. A patient went into his place the other
day who had a habit of twisting his whisker and putting the end in
his mouth. Sing Song, as we shall call the Heathen Esculapius,
twigged this peculiarity in a moment. Giving the hypochondriac a
sounding slap on the stomach which made him jump, he said : “ Ah,
you welly bad. I know what the matter with you. You chew
whisker. You got ball hair youl tomack. A 1 right, I culee you.”
His rapid action disconcerted the patient. Before he had time to
think the pig-tailed Galen had administered a strong purgative. He
prepared a ball of hair from the stripping of an old chair, and ere the
patient left the premises he made him believe that his medicine had
relieved him of a ball of horse hair. This is a fact. And yet we
wonder at spiritualism making converts and gaining adherents in the
face of such Brobdignagian credulity as this Another well knoAvn
sporting character of Bathurst thus details his experience of the
Chinese doctor’s diagnosis : —“ He came up and slapped me on the
breast,” said he, “ looked at me through a bloomin’ S| y-glass sort of
thing, shook his head —said ‘ You welly bad.’ Then began to count
on his fingers. Said, ‘ You welly bad —awful bad. You welly bad
with wind. No can live long. You live one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven years and three months.’ ” The old sport when he got
thus far said : “ The bloomin’ three months cooked me and I
left ! ”
Now this reads very funny, but it has its sad and serious side.
Worse than the men of ancient Athens, hundreds of us are drifting
from all anchorage, abandoning all faith in God, eagerly seeking
“ something new ” to satisfy tho morbid craving for religious excite-
ment and new spiritual experience. They will not let their common


sense speak. It has been proved that professed mediums do many of
their seemingly mysterious manifestations by jugglery. If they
employ trickery in one part of their performance, and claim that the
spirits of the dead are doing what they have been detected in doing,
is it not fair reasoning by analogy that their answers and other mani-
festations are also the re.-ult of trickery and imposture. We hear :
“ Oh, but how could he have known so-and-so ? How could he have
answered such-and-such ?” All these stories utterly collapse before
calm analysis. They are only privileged to receive messages who are
prepared unhesitatingly and fully to credii and believe the medium. They
are consequently biassed observers. In every case I have yet heard
recorded pitiable self-deception is present. Exaggeration —often uncon-
scious—is apparent, and even, with all this, the manifestations under the
most favourable circumstances, are clumsy, imperfect, unprogressive,
unsatisfying, mo'notypical, redolent of trickery and jugglery, an in-
sult to our spiritual natures and a libel on our common sense. None
the less are they dangerous and disquieting. They fascinate many
weak-minded people. They unsettle the judgment of the facile and
timid. They are edged tools in the hands of unscrupulous knaves,
and they should be reprobated, exposed, and denounced by every
honest lover of truth. «
There is no need to run after mediums, if the spirits can tell us
no more than the cleverest medium has yet elicited from them. The
deflection of a compass needle, the imitation of a dead friend’s hand-
writing, however cleverly imitated, is a poor exchange for humble
trust in Grod. All the knockings, and scratchings,' and rappings, of
the most successful seance, seem mean and pitiful, beside the
smallest revelation of Clod’s infinite power and goodness in the
humblest of his works. If you wish to pry into the unknown, to
fathom the mysterious, to unravel the puzzling problems of mental
and physical being, to unveil the future, and look into the great
“ beyond ” —slate scratchings, table rappings, planchette writings,
and all the tinsel and tag-rag and flimsy frauds of the cleverest
medium that ever lived, will not advance you a scintilla of the dis-
tance, which one hour’s silent prayerful communion with Nature and
your own thoughts will give you.. “ The beginning of knowledge is
fhe fear of Glod,” and a much better and more spiritual authority than
Thomas Walker or Dr. Slade has written.
“In the multitude of dreams and many words, there are also divers
vanities ; but tear thou Gtod.”
“MAORI.”


SPIRITUALISM CONSIDERED AS AN
INFECTIOUS MENTAL DISEASE.
Ix 1876, the Physical Society of St. Petersburg nominated a Com-
mission to examine into the phenomena of Spiritualism. After a
prolonged and impartial inquiry, the conclusion arrived at was, “ that
those so-called spiritual manifestations proceed from unconscious
movements, or from conscious imposture, and the spiritual doctrine is
a superstition.”
Later, in the same year, Dr. W. B. Carpenter, in a lecture on
Spiritualism, delivered at the London Institution, insisted that in the
inquiry into the so-called phenomena and facts of Spiritualism, nobody
was to be trusted ; that almost everything in it must be the result of
either deception, or self-deception, and that there was an immense
difference between the fact itself, and the observer’s idea of the fact.
In conclusion, he said, that these investigations and practices were
calculated to produce insanity, because insanity was nothing more
than the possession of a “ fixed idea ” which tinctured everything with
which we had to deal.
Following out the ideas suggested by the Physical Society of St.
Petersburg and Dr Carpenter, it is my intention to enter into an
analytical investigation of certain phenomena, associated with
Spiritualism, and place the result in a light heretofore either over-
looked or ignored, before the public, many of whom have hitherto
appeared incapable of judging these so-called phenomena by any
logical process.
Notwithstanding the assumption that a healthy brain is an
essential condition upon which depends the normal state of the human
mind in its full vigour, there are many and various conditions of the
brain and nerves capable of producing certain results upon the mind
which we reckon as manifestations of disorder, aberration, and disease,
the many phases of which bridge over the gap that intervenes between
rationality and insanity. Several wonderful examples of unnatural
and morbid states are known to the medical profession under the
heads of hysteria, hypochondriasis, catalepsy, ecstasy, and trance, to
which may be added the curious conditions known as double con-
sciousness, and somnambulism, or sleep-walking: any of which
various conditions may not only occur during the progress of some
well-known malady, biit sometimes happen spontaneously without a
known cause, or in consequence of powerful emotions. It also is
sometimes possible (and, indeed, to the exclusion of all deception) to
induce them artificially. As is known, this may be accomplished in
perfectly healthy people, but, nevertheless, more frequently in nervous
and especially in hysterical people, by various manipulations. It


appears to be a point in all contrivances undertaken for this purpose,
to fix the attention on one object, or to direct the attention very stead-
fastly in one direction. The condition is most frequently induced by
the subjects directing their eyes fixedly upon a dazzling object;
sometimes it may be called forth by one placing the fingers for some-
time upon the eyeballs, or by spreading a cloth over the head of the
patient. It may sometimes be produced by passing the hand over the
skin, or by various mysterious gestures -which arrest the attention of
the patients, or finally by a determination of the latter to subjugate
themselves to certain ideas. On some animals also, it is well-known,
one might induce quite a similar condition by keeping their bodies
fixed for some time, or by holding dazzling objects to their eyes.
This is simply a scientific explanation of the condition popularly
known as mesmerism ; which is, in other words, an hysterical condition
artificially induced. To be a suitable subject for mesmerism implies
an individual of an hysterical tendency.
Spiritualists acknowledge that spiritualism and mesmerism differ
only in one respect: namely, that in the former a mortal is operated
upon by a disembodied spirit, whereas in the latter one mortal is
subjected to the will of another mortal.
There are very many forms of unconscious hysteria, and slight
mental aberration, which we daily witness without thinking of, or
even recognising them. For example, the propagation of a yawn, the
irresistible slumber under the drone of a dull preacher, or the
unconscious imitation of certain peculiarities of an individual with
whom we may be continually thrown into contact. A very familiar
form of hysterical ilbision occurs in the case of a young mother, who
deems her offspring to be the most beautiful and amiable creature in
existence, notwithstanding the very frequent fact of its being the very
opposite.
From these very slight disturbances of the natural harmony and
equilibrium of the human mind, from a state of perfect health, there
is possible, a gradual deflection to varying conditions of disease,
graduating imperceptibly from the main road of common sense into
the byroads of peculiarity, eccentricity, derangement, aberration, and
incipient madness, finally terminating in the broad and terrible
thoroughfare of permanent insanity.
In hysteria, acting as it does upon the most subtle instincts of
the human mind, do we find the groundwork for modern spiritualism.
This is the mysterious something so inexplicable that at first fascinates,
and then awes the unscientific inquirer into the subject. Add to
certain natural phenomena, hysterical influences, credulity, deception,
human gullibility, and cruel imposture, then behold before you the
ghostly structure of the latest human craze—Spiritualism, a highly
infectious mental disease!
The object of this paper is to clearly and distinctly point out the
extent of natural psychical phenomena associated with this subject,
to define where it terminates, and where self-deception and culpable
imposture becomes incorporated with, and superadded to, it. Truly
the most insidious kind of deception is that in which truth and
falsehood are skilfully interwoven.


Independent of a hysterical condition there are certain processes
by which ideas become associated in eur minds by habit or otherwise,
and one idea being awakened, brings another or others, thus forming
a train of thought ; this arising as it does within us, is termed the
process of internal suggestion. Impressions coming from without
originate or modify these trains constituting what is termed external
suggestion. While awake and in a normal condition, the will
interferes with and directs these trains of thought, selecting some
ideas to be dwelt upon, and comparing them with others and present
impressions. Now, in the various phases of an hysterical condition
the will and with it the judgment seem completely suspended; and
under its own internal suggestions the mind becomes a mere
automaton, while external suggestions, if they act at all, act as though
upon a machine. Again, it is known to psychists that the effect of
concentrated attention on any object of thought has the effect of
intensifying the impression received. This may proceed so far, in
morbid states of the nervous system that an idea or revived sensation
assumes the vividness of a present impression, and overpowers the
evidence of the senses. Ideas thus become dominant, over-riding the
impressions of the outer world, and carrying themselves into action
independently of the will, and even without the consciousness of the
individual. These dominant ideas play a greater part in human
actions and beliefs than is generally known. ‘ Expectant attention ’
acts powerfully upon the bodily organs, and often makes the individual
see and hear what he expects to see and hear, and, without his
consciousness moves his muscles to bring it about. These are
recognised facts in the sciences of physiology and psychology.
Now concerning the manifestations connected with table turning
as practised at seances; Such of them as are genuine, can be
explained by the induced hysterical condition, and our acquired
knowledge of ‘ expectant attention.’ The inquirers are seated round a
table, being impressed with the idea that it may or will move, the
direction of the expected movement being also agreed upon.
Accordingly if none of the party being are sceptical, it generally
does move after a time, all declaring in perfect good faith that they
did not press. Faraday however proved by a very clever contrivance,
that there always is a pressure, though without the will or conscious-
ness of the performers, and this is only what is to be looked for, from
the voluntary effects of a dominant idea. So far we have a scientific
and rational explanation. The same applies to table rapping in which
by certain oscillations, the table knocks with one or other of its legs
upon the floor, and by a preconcerted code of signals answers
questions. True, this explanation does not by itself suffice for many
of the wonders related by believers to have happened. But all such
are to be received with suspicion, and that without accusing the relaters
of bad faith.
This is the point in table turning and spirit rapping where
natural phenomena ends, and unconscious deception begins. The very
disposition to look for something out of the usual course makes the
inquirers incapable for the time of distinguishing what actually


happens from what they expect to happen. The agency of the
expectant ideas of the performers in these eases is apparent in their own
narratives. Would it not he strange that spirits should reveal heaven
to Eobert Owen otherwise than as organised on his own social theory,
while a protestant clergyman finds the world of spirits pervaded by a
horror of the pope, and to pious Scotch Presbyterians, every revelation
regarding it is completely in accord with the Calvinistic theory ?
The operation of the planchette in its mystic writings can now be
understood, the peculiar function of writing by its means is one that
by some is easily acquired, by others it requires a long devotion and
continued practice before the requisite mental abstraction can be
attained to induce the necessary automatic action of the hand, un-
consciously controlled by the mind'and guided by unsuspected hopes,
and aspirations. The result of my own observation is that the greater
the hysterical tendency of the subject, the more easily is the habit
acquired.
The next, and certainly a more serious symptom of this strange
malady to be considered, is the subject of trance-speaking. As a
means of elucidating the subject in a medical aspect, I shall quote the
words of the most recent medical authority, as well as other writers,
upon a certain modification of hysteria *:—“ Finally, as regards
the attacks of somnambulism, sleep-walking , wakefulness, magnetic sleep,
hypnotism, and ecstasy, and whatever else those attacks have been
named, which are met with in the hysterical, they are merely varieties
of the form of catalepsy known as hysterical trance. We have always
in such cases to deal with dreamy conditions. When thus affected,
patients can, actuated by the promptings of their dream, execute
various complicated movements, when, like animals, whose brains
have been removed, without noting their surroundings, they are
guided by stimuli affecting the senses, cleverly avoid obstructions, and
under the most dangerous circumstances preserve their corporeal
equilibrium. Sometimes they answer particular questions addressed
to them, in a perfectly rational manner; in these answers the
influence of the revelations of their dream is frequently to be re-
cognised. Moreover, as the sensory apprehension, as already
mentioned, .is occasionally quickened, so apparently wonderful powers
of distinguishing objects and persons by means of different senses are
observed. One must, however, be very sceptical in testing such
statements. For, on the one hand, there frequently exists in the
patients themselves, who suffer from such attacks, a tendency to ex-
aggeration and deceit; and, on the other hand, they are easily misled
by their friends, who are either themselves superstitious, or trade upon
the superstition of others. The peculiar conditions are then ascribed
to a supernatural or divine influence, and in order to render the
pretended wonder still more wonderful, it is embellished with all
manner of falsehood.”
Abercrombief states that there is a remarkable peculiarity in
many cases of mental aberration, inducing great activity of mind and
* Ziemssen’s Cyclopedia of Practice of Medicine, Yol. XIY., page 534.
t Abercrombie’s Intellectual Powers, p. 243,


rapidity of conception, a tendency to seize rapidly upon incidental or
partial relations of things, and often a fertility of imagination, which
changes the character of the mind, sometimes without remarkably
disturbing it. The memory in such cases is entire, or even appears
more ready than in health : and old associations are called up with a
rapidity quite unknown to the individual in his sound state of mind.
One gentleman is mentioned who enjoyed his paroxysms with
pleasure. He said : “ Everything appeared easy to me. No obstacles
presented themselves either in theory or in practice. My memory
acquired all of a sudden a singular degree of perfection. Long pas-
sages of Latin authors occurred to my mind. In general, I have great
difficulty in finding rhythmical terminations, but then I could write
verses with as great facility as prose.”
Dr. Copeland mentions a curious fact in connection with this sub-
ject. He says that many of the Italian Improvisator! are in possession
of their peculiar faculty only when they are in a state of ecstatic
trance; and that few of them enjoy good health, or consider their
gifts as otherwise than something morbid.
Sir Thomas Watson quaintly remarks : “ I take it for granted
that they who were in the habit of speaking, a few years since, in
some of our places of worship, in what they called unknown tongues,
were either gross impostors who deserved to whipped, or persons
labouring under this disease and wanting physic.’
I need not prolong this paper by adducing further authorities,
examples, or illustrations in order to identify well-known diseased
conditions of the human mind with modern so-called spiritual trance
speaking. The symptoms of both are exactly the same, in no in-
stance does the victim of the malady exhibit a capacity beyond his
possible ability, of course, making allowances for the mysterious in-
fluence of his temporarily diseased brain, which is capable of inducing
sublime hallucinations, visions, and soul-inspiring dreams ; the senses
abnormally quickened, the mind revived and re-enriched b} the
renewed impressions of long-forgotten scenes, often the memory of
languages, learnt, but since forgotten, is revived. To the surprise of
those present, volubility of tongue and elocution, which in ordinary
life the patient was deemed incapable of producing are now ex-
hibited.
For the benefit of those who may not have witnessed a trance
speaking seance, I shall out line the proceedings I witnessed on such
an occasion in Sydney a short time ago. The medium on this occasion
was a quiet looking, delicate, nervous, excitable gentleman, for whom
I entertain the highest respect. I fully believed him when he assured
me that he was perfectly insensible during his trance condition. I
have since written to the husband of the amiable lady of the house,
assuring him it never for one moment entered my mind that any wilful
deception or collusion was practised on the occasion. The room having
been partially darkened, we assembled round the table, and placed our
hands in the usual manner; I watched the medium closely, to me he vas
a phvsiological study. The usual gyrations and rockings of the table
having commenced, nervous twitchings of his hands and arms ushered


in the hysterical attack. The eyelids became tremulous, the features
worked and perspiration began to ooze from every pore. He broke
the circle by spasmodically rising up. He called out a name, I think
itwasPaoton. He jerked out some unintelligible gibberish. I was
now informed that he was in a spiritual trance and controlled by an
Indian Chief, he who was speaking through him in his native dialect.
I must acknowledge that he acted the savage’s part to life. In a short
period certainly shorter than an hour he personated various individuals
among them an organ blower, a musician, an exponent of mesmerism,
and Loid Brougham. While under the musician’s influence he
strummed upon a piano, not unharmoniously, yet not musically, there
were rhythm and chords, yet no music, plenty of sound, no execution.
During the fit, for it was a well marked fit of hysteria, this gentleman
was at times totally insensible to pain for I pinched him several times,
and he did not wince. The pupils of the eyes were dilated, the eyes
extremely sensitive to light. At one time he became so exhausted by
his physical exertions that by an effort of will he stopped the proceed-
ings and took a rest, after which he with a surprising facility resumed
his fit and impersonations. During the whole of this phenomena he
displayed no capacity beyond what I took to be his ordinary abilities.
Lord Brougham’s speech was very mediocre for such an eminent
statesman. Yet the spiritual believing portion of the audience by
whom I was surrounded, not knowing any reasonable explanation for
what they saw and heard, attributed it to spiritualistic influence. Their
logic was on a par with that of the blackfellow in a cave, who hearing
a voice that he could not explain, exclaimed “ Debbie, Debbie, he
jump out of the rock !”
From the result of my own observation and the admissions of
spiritualists themselves, it appears that many of the erroneous beliefs
connected with spiritualism are not only fostered but progressively
developed by education and practice. This brings me to the highest
stage of spiritualistic perfection, in which the disease leads to a
deception of the senses : namely, materialisation.
It takes a considerable time to educate oneself to that condition
in which true visionary hallucinations are produced, such as are often
associated with ecstasy. A spiritualist told me that it takes persistent
sittings in a darkened room for two or more years before materialisation,
or the property of seeing spirits as though in the flesh, can be attained.
Somewhat antecedent to this stage, excitations and aberrations of the
senses of hearing and seeing are induced. While worked up to a
certain pitch of hysterical ecstasy, subjects become av are of event*
frequently unobserved by the healthy, and a greater acuteness of
hearing may be artificially induced by the avoidance of all possible
sounds. But there occur also cases of actual exaggeration and
perversion of these faculties in consequence of the progress of the
disease. Tims the subjects frequently think they hear the ringing
of bells, blowing of horns, and so forth. True hallucinations of
hearing are suggested by external impressions. Thus the senseless
strumming on a piano appears to be most heavenly music. Sounds
like a band playing have been heard inside a piano, the keys of which


remain, untouched. An eccentricity of vision also induced is that
heavy inanimate objects, such as pianos, beds, and tables appear to
dance, jump, and follow the deluded victim about the room. These
are serious symptoms of the disease, and frequently constitute that
transition which leads to definite mental aberration.
Hitherto I have limited myself to the description of certain
natural phenomena and delusions of the human mind leading up to
certain results, and to an induced diseased condition combined with
these results; added to which are various misinterpretations and
misconceptions consequent upon the inability of certain individuals
to grasp the whole subject so as to elucidate clearly the result of a
natural process from the fallacy superadded thereto. To ordinary
minds, especially such as are not educated to logical processes of
reasoning, this chaotic combination is very puzzling, and tends to keep
the reason confused and poised in an unbalanced state of uncertainty.
Thus have we multitudes standing upon the brink of spiritualism—
unhappy, doubting, and perplexed. At this j uncture comes into play
the element that I cannot otherwise stigmatise than as cruel imposture.
I allude to the malpractices of professional mediums, who by a series
of cleverly contrived illusions, so manage to mystify, delude, and lead
them for ever into that track which robs them of their Christianity,
leads up to atheism, and terminates in insanity.
SAMUEL T. KNAGGS, M.D., F.E.C.S. &c., &c.
Newcastle.


“THE SPIRITS” AT ALBURY.
/
The following interesting account of the doings of Dr. Slade and the
Spirits on the Border is taken from the Albury Banner of January
11th. An amusing fact to be noticed herein is that whether in the
Biverina, in Sydney, or in Germany, the Spirits are unable to spell
their favourite word ‘‘investigation.” The lithograph of the slate
writing in Berlin, mentioned in the article “ The World of Dupes ”
shows that there, as in Australia, they always write “ enveshgallon.”
Beally Dr. Slade should take a few lessons in orthography! The
Albury Banner deserves great credit for its fearless exposure of the
medium’s tricks.
In compliance with a polite invitation from Dr. Slade, a reporter from
this journal was present at a private seance , attended only by
representatives of the press, held at the Globe Hotel. Dr. Slade at
the commencement of the seance intimated that he only desired those
who witnessed the phenomena to describe what they actually saw;
and our reporter, acting upon this hint, has endeavoured to narrate as
clearly as possible what came under his observation. His narrative is
as follows:—“ I went into the room and found Dr. Slade had been
obliged to send over to Mr. F. A. Selle’s for a table. There was a
table in the room, but it was not apparently the right article for the
spirits to operate upon ; more particularly in the slate-writing demon-
stration, which requires a certain amount of flat surface under the leaf
of the table free from beading or any other obstruction, so that the
slate, being pressed against the under part of the leaf, may move
about freely. Besides Dr. Slade and myself, there were three other
gentlemen present, and under instructions from the medium we all
joined hands to ‘ complete the circle.’ I should state that of the four
visitors, one only was understood to be a believer in the reality of
spiritual manifestations. The other three were connected with the
Press, and therefore not prepared to take anything upon trust, but as
a matter of course unprejudiced and impartial recorders of facts.


After we liad sat watching our hands for a few minutes, the medium
asked, ‘Do you feel it ? ’ The gentleman who had a leaning towards
spiritualism said he did feel the electric current quite plainly. For
my part I felt nothing of the kind, nor did the other two gentlemen.
Dr. Slade, however, said that he felt it very strongly, and he several
times snatched his hands up from the table as if he had received a
galvanic shock. Presently there was a very perceptible vibration of
the table, —a kind of rapid rocking motion. There was no mistaking
this movement, which was obvious to the most sceptical observer. It
was produced by spirits. That is to say, if the spirits did not do it
Dr. blade did. Dr. Slade told us he did not do it, ergo the spirits did.
It is my business to record facts, therefore I mention this quite
candidly.
There were, however, two other facts which it may be as well
to refer to also. In the first place, the vibrating movement could
asily have been produced by any one of the party who chose to press
witli his wrists on the table in a peculiar way. Secondly, the motion
always ceased when Dr. Slade removed his hands from the table. I
state these things merely to afford the public all possible data they
could desire in the investigation of these phenomena. I am aware
they do not account for the vibration, because Dr. Slade says he did not
shake the table, and lam sure no other of the party did. But won-
derful as was this manifestation, it was a trifle to what followed. A
slate having been procured, it was held by the medium just under the
flap of the table, and a question was then asked by one of the party
as to whether the writer of this was a medium. There was a good
deal of flapping about of the slate before the query elicited any
response, ‘ the current ’ apparently being unusually strong and mani-
festing a general disposition to twist the slate out of the Dr’s hand.
Ultimately, however, a faint scratching sound was heard, and on f!he
slate being exposed to view there were the words plainly legible,
albeit a trifle ‘ smudgy,’ ‘He can be.’ These words had been written
by the spirits. At least the medium frankly told us all that he did
not write them, consequently the inference is that the spirits
must. But the mysterious Powers had not half exhausted themselves
yet. A double slate, or rather, to be more accurate, two slates, were
employed; the one slate being placed on the top of the other, with a
small piece of pencil between the two surfaces. Here, again, a reply
was vouchsafed after the usual preliminary flapping about caused by
the force of the ‘ current.’ The absolute bona Jides of the medium, and
the absence of anything in the shape of trickery, were proved to
demonstration by the doctor’s giving one of the party a slate to hold
himself. It is true that the writing did not then appear, but this was most
satisfactorily accounted for by the fact that the person in question was
not a medium. After some ten minutes passed in receiving these
mysterious messages from the spirit world Dr. Slade inquired of his
intangible acquaintances whether they would favor the circle with yet
one more manifestation. Quick as thought came the reply in the
shape of raps somewhere in the vicinity of the legs of the table. In
connection with these raps, which were pronounced by the medium to


be a reply in the affirmative, a curious fact came under my notice
which proves to my mind that the spirits are not absolutely immaterial.
The substance of which they are composed is probably a very subtle
ether, ordinarily visible to the human eye, but still, under some condi-
tions, opaque. And the way that I arrived at the conclusion was in
this wise. When the knocks came under the table I chanced to be
looking on the floor of the room. The medium sat between me and
the window, and I could not see his feet, but simultaneously with each
rap I saw a shadow pass rapidly over the floor, as though some sub-
stance had been moved quickly at the moment that-each knock was
given. I mention this in order that nothing, even of the most trivial
character, may be lost to the public with regard to this very interesting
seance. Of course the shadow I saw was not the shadow of Dr. Slade’s
feet, because he told me the knocks were not made by him ; the
circumstance is, however, interesting as opening up in connection with
these remarkable phenomena a new field of psychological inquiry.
The crowning manifestation of tlf& sitting w T as the sudden raising of
the table to a height of eight or ten inches from the floor, Dr. Slade’s
feet the while being se&ningjy placed under mine. I say “seemingly”
because I know some sceptics would aver that the medium slipped his
feet out of his shoes, and that it was only the Dr.’s Oxonians upon
which I maintained a firm pressure in the interests of science. But
Dr. Slade told us all that he did not move the table, so the question as
to the whereabouts of his feet lapses after all into insigni-
ficance.
I paid Dr. Slade another visit in company with two of the
party present on the preceding day. The manifestations were
of pretty much the same character as those witnessed previously,
but perhaps a little more fully developed The slate-writings,
for example, were more lengthy. And in reference to these
writings I noted two fresh facts the one corroborative of the
theory I have before propounded as to the materiality of the Powers,
the other affording a singular proof of their lack of elementary
education. The first fact was this—Whilst the medium held up the
slate on the table for us to hear the scratching sound caused by the
Invisibles when at work, the light from the window threw the
shadow of a finger —a fat finger—on the table, and this shadow could
plainly be seen through a crack between the slate and the table.
Fact the second ln one of the letters written by the spirits occurred
the word ‘ investigation ’ —these illiterate spirits spelt it ‘ envestigation .’
It occurred to me that the medium also, after long converse with these
parties, might be demoralised in his orthography. I therefore asked
him if he would kindly write one of the sentences given by the
spirits at my dictation. He consented, and I chose the passage con-
taining the ill-used pollysyllable, which, sure enough, Dr. Slade
wrote out as ‘ envestigation .’ This struck me as such an extra-
ordinary coincidence, that the subsequent manifestations, including as
they did a performance upon an accordion, ending with an acrobatic
feat hy that instrument, failed to arouse in me any further feelings of
awe or even of astonishment. To speak seriously, there was not


much in the whole exhibition to excite either feeling- in the mind of
any person possessed of ordinary common sense, and not previously
imbued with faith in the manifestations. From beginning to end very
little was done that the very clumsiest of professional conjurors could
not easily have performed! and any little mystery connected with the
slate performance (certainly the cleverest item on the list) could easily
be accounted for if I were to assume that the medium possessed a
tithe of the dexterity in slejght-of-hand displayed by every ‘ three-
card-man ’ on a racecourse.” Thus, our reporter. We had purposed
appending a few words of comment to his “plain, unvarnished story,”
but on second thoughts we incline to the belief that comment is
unnecessary.


PEAPES AND SHAW,
338, 340, 342, GEORGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
11, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, LONDON.
Hinjjarter 5 au i) ill a nufartum-;;.
MOTH & WMMUUBH HMRAIKB3BS,
TAILORS AND HABBIT MAKERS.
LIST OF DEPARTMENTS :
Men’s Mercery. Fancy Gaods. Manchester Goods Millinery.
Hosiery and Gloves Ribbons Flannels Costumes
Shirts and Collars Haberdashery Calicoes Fancy Dresses
Hats and Caps Trimmings Sheetings Evening Dress
Sheetings Evening Dresses
Gent’s Umbrellas Parasols Towellings Silks & Shawls
Waterproof Clothing Ladies’ Umbrellas Quilts X-Counterpanes Mantles
Ready-made Clothing Gloves and Hosiery Irish Linens Ladies’ Under-
Portmanteaus Flowers and Feathers Table Linens clothing
Travelling Bags. Real Laces
Blankets Children's Un-
Imitation Laces
l ace and Muslin derclothing
Curtains Stays it Corse
Muslin Embroidery.
Stays it Corsets.
Cambric Ha’dkerch’ts
WILL BE PUBLISHED IMMEDIATELY,
In Croton Bvo., Handsomely Illustrated , Boards,
Price Half-a-Crown,
COMMUNIST & CANAQUE:
VAGABOND ROVINGS in NEW CALEDONIA;
And Notes on the Communist Settlements, the Convict System, the
War with the Natives, Missions, Mines, Agriculture, &c.
• V/I(i/1IM)\UI’/ll’KKS. •
Five Series of the above Highly Popular Works,
DESCRIPTIVE of LIFE in VICTORIA, NEW SOUTH WALES,
and QUEENSLAND, have now been issued.
ALL BOOKSELLERS.
GEORGE ROBERTSON,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY. AND ADELIADE.


A MONTHLY MAGAZINE,
CONTAINING
Talas, Sfestofeas, Essays,
POETRY, HISTORY, METEOROLOGY,
fctagg, Jrartat £tum, mh JMmwwg.
EACH ISSUE COMPRISES OVER 140 PAGES
READING MATTER,
And is the same size and thickness as the Oomhill, Tinsley’s, &e.
The list of Yearly Subscribers to this
POPULAR MAGAZINE
101 811 Oil TBOUSftKB.
THE SUBSCRIPTION IS
•*6pY T TWELVE T gpiLLIpJS T T JiWW,*'
Sent to any address in the Colonies.
Second Volume Commences with the April Number


spiKiTHHusTir mmm) § mm
SUPPLIED BY
ti SAT W $11;
4 STREET. STTdDITIB Y.
SLA(D)TE WRITING.
“ It pleeseth me mighty lie, goocle frende, Saywelle, to
fynde in your preparations of ye Indian weede, (wych J I
introduced firste to ye Courte of my deere Mistresse
Queene Elizabethe), ye true flavoure and ye bcnevolente
and healthe-giying essence of ye herbe fullye preserved.
“Praye sende some more packages of ye best* cutte
cutte to Slade (butte minde and gette ye moneyed )
and he will contryve to forwarde them to mee.
u Thy frende
“ WALTER RALEIGH.”
Whether for Family use or Manufacturing is
THE NEW DAVIS VERTICAL FEED,
The only Machine in the World possessing the inestimable advantage of
FEEDING ABOVE THE WORK.
Awarded Grand Medal of Honor at the Centennial, 1876, the Scott Legacy Medal
(the highest distinction attainable) by the Franklin Institute of America, and
First Prize for Simplicity, Efficiency, and Durability at the Sydney Exhibition
0 I Tho NEW DAVIS is a Double-Thread Lockstitch, Light Running Machine,
will sew from Lace to Leather, has fewer parts than any other machine, will last a
Lifetime, can be used by a Child, and is in short The Most Perfect Machine in
Existence.
The Cheapest Machine in the Australian Market
iLIBERAL TERMS OF PAYMENT IN TOWN AND COUNTRY.
All particulars on application. Samples of work post free.
SOLE AUSTRALIAN AGENTS ;
9* O. & Co.,
42 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


SPORT & WORa
ON THE
NEPAUL FEONTIBE;
12 YEARS SPORTING REMINISCENCES OF AN INDIGO PLANTER
“ MAORI.”
OIPTHSTIOItTS OIF 1 THE PRESS.
“ By far tRe Lest Look of its kind we have ever read.” — Examiner.
“ Capitally written, fresh, vigorous, and full of the true sportsman’s fire, such a
Look deserves to Le popular. It is gossipy without being tedious, and
iformatory without being dull.”— Scotsman.
HANDSOMELY BOUND IN CLOTH AND ILLUSTRATED 16s.
To Le had of Messrs TURNER & HENDERSON, or WM. BULLARD, late
J. READING & Co.
R PEDKIM3 >
I, CHEVALIER THORN,
Member of “The Royal Illusionists Troupe” of Professional Conjurors, now
performing in Newcastle, N. S. W., do hei’eby
Challenge ** 36> *■
OR ANY OTHER SPIRITUALIST MEDIUM,
Uroduce §ny
OR DO ANY TRICK IN MY PRESENCE WHICH I ALSO CANNOT DO
OR EXPLAIN ; AND I WAGER
HIE HUNDRED (100) POUNDS
ON MY ABILITY TO DO SO.
CHEVALIER ERNEST THORN,
THE ROYAL ILLUSIONISTS.
Witness - CHARLES WEIOHTMAN.
Victoria Theatre, Newcastle, N. S. W., March 12, 1879.


THE AUSTRALIAN,
A Monthly Magazine,
PUBLISHED IN SYDNEY, N. S. WALES
FIRST OF EACH MONTH.
ISSUE OF 1600 GUARANTEED.
Among oiher Contributors
will be found the Names of
Tasma, ” u The Vagabond, 5 ?
CHRISTINE BaRDISBAN, JJaYID BIAIR,
Garnet Wa-oh, A. Patohett Martin,
J. P»r;jnton Stephens, “ Maori,”
W. W. Carlile, M.A., T. T. Wilton,
Dr. Maloney, T. S. Parrott, C.E.,
Oapihoornus r N. Bartley,
J. J. Shillings aw, Thos Moser,
; A. W. Pet re, u Trovatore,”
U IiIRYC.”
14 *“ 4 ♦ • One SUUi» ? ,
Or 12s. pej annum by post to any address in the
Colon ies.
PUBLISHERS
TURNER AND HENDERSON
16 and 18 Hunter Street, Sydney.
