

"MEDICINE AS A
CAREER."
BY
PROFESSOR ANDERSON STUART, M. D.,
DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE, SYDNEY UNIVERSITY.
THE ANNUAL LECTURE,
Delivered before the Medical Students' Society of the Melbourne
University, Wilson Hall, August 19th, 1898.
“A wise man will make more opportunities than he finds.”
(Bacon, Essays Civil and Moral, No. LII.)
Melbourne:
THE AUSTRAL PUBLISHING Co., 528 ELIZABETH STREET.
1898




"MEDICINE AS A
CAREER."
BY
PROFESSOR ANDERSON STUART, M. D.,
DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE, SYDNEY UNIVERSITY.
THE ANNUAL LECTURE,
Delivered before the Medical Students' Society of the Melbourne
University, Wilson Hall, August 19th, 1898.
" A wise man will make more opportunities than he finds.”
(Bacon, Essays Civil and Moral, No. LII.)
/Melbourne:
The Austral Publishing Co., 528 Elizabeth Street.
1898.


THIS REPRINT IS DEDICATED TO
THOMAS McKIE, Esq.,
ADVOCATE, EDINBURGH,
TO WHOM THE AUTHOR IS EVER INDEBTED FOR
KINDLY ENCOURAGEMENT IN EARLY YEARS.


“MEDICINE AS A CAREER.”
BY PROFESSOR ANDERSON STUART, M. D.,
DEAN OF THE FACULTY
OF MEDICINE, SYDNEY UNIVERSITY.
“ A wise man will make more opportunities than he finds.”
(Bacon, Essays Civil and Moral, No. L1I.)
I was warned by your secretary, Mr. Nattrass, that the
audience to-night would include, as well as Medical Students,
many of their friends, who had only a general interest in medical
matters, and I have therefore treated my subject in a general
way. I have drawn largely on my own personal experience,
and, indeed, much of this address has been compiled from notes,
made at the time of the occurrences, which gave occasion
for the thoughts. Since I have no reason to suppose that my
experience is in anywise peculiar, I assume that the thoughts
which have occurred to myself, may have application more or
less, to the circumstances of those who are following on in the
medical career.
MEDICINE A LIBERAL EDUCATION.
I have endeavoured to say something to Students at their
several stages of advancement. To beginners it might be worth
while to say that in my opinion you have done well in choosing
the profession of medicine. Ido not forget that “ there is noth-
ing like leather,” but, though there are no prizes in medicine
such as fall to the successful soldier, lawyer, divine and others,
yet lam sure that there is nothing like medicine. It is a most
liberal culture, for it includes all sorts of studies in literature
and science, and to some extent in art, and it brings the prac-
titioner into contact with humanity in all its phases. Disease
and injury are inevitable; they are merely the wounds received
by the body in its ceaseless struggle for existence. Your help,
therefore, is needed at all times and places ; no self-respecting
infant would venture into the world without your presence ; in
after years he would almost certainly seek your services, and,
even in quitting the scene, he would probably require your
assistance. And this goes on in all times, in all countries, with
nations barbarous and civilised. There is thus a field for your
work, and with this a delightful sense of freedom, such as no other
calling can offer. It is, accordingly, safe to say, that you, here
present, will before long probably be scattered in many colonies,
if not in many lands, and we heartily desire and pray that each
may find the niche for which nature fashioned him. The


square man in the round hole is not happily placed ; he can do
justice neither to the place nor to himself. In this regard care
must be taken that in any scheme of federation, which may
ultimately be adopted for Australia, no possibility may be left,
that a graduate of the medical schools of one colony may find
the doors of another colony closed against him. This warning
is not unnecessary, for the Dominion of Canada has constantly
been put before us as a pattern in the shaping of the coming
Commonwealth of Australia, and yet this is what I found in
Canada, just twelve months ago. I found that the graduate of
Toronto, the capital of the province of Ontario, is not allowed
to practise over the border in the province of Quebec, and vice
versa, the graduate of Montreal, the capital of the province of
Quebec, is not permitted to practise in the province of Ontario.
METHOD IN WORKING.
Speaking now specially to those who are still undergraduates,
I think I can say something that may interest and perhaps
instruct as to a method of working, because in my earlier years
at college I wasted much precious time and energy by working
in wrong ways and at wrong times, simply for want of guidance
and system. Ido not say that the methods which I ultimately
adopted were the best that could be devised, but at all events
they were better far than the absence of method.
To begin with, I have often heard students express their
deliberate intention of doing just enough work, as undergrad-
uates, to get through their examinations, but at the same time
saying, that when they were through, they would do all sorts of
fine things in the way of study and work. Now, I have fre-
quently observed that, with rare exceptions, the man who does
not work as an undergraduate does not do so afterwards. There
are the thousand and one things that come in the way, so that
the time for systematic, steady, serious work is now, when you
are at college and hall.
There is truly no royal road to learning, but it may be
safely said, that regular work, on at least five nights a week, is
better than the same amount of work irregularly done. The
work of each day should be done that night, so that you are pre-
pared for the instruction of the following day. It is important
to begin as early in the evening as possible, for you should not
work when it is late and you are tired. When you find your-
self gazing blankly at the page, when you have constantly to go
back to find what you have just been doing—you are losing the
thread of the argument and you are losing your time : better go
to something else, or perhaps better still, go to bed.
The method of learning which I adopted proved of the
utmost service to me, as it has done to others who have adopted
it. I believe that it cannot fail to be of benefit, more


-or less, if only it be faithfully carried out. Briefly it is the
following:—After carefully getting up each part of the sub-
ject, stand up actually on your feet and imagine that you
are a teacher of the subject; imagine that you have before
you a mass of eager, expectant faces waiting to be taught, and
now proceed to propound and expound to them, just as your
teachers do to you every day. You may be quite sure that if
you cannot make the subject clear to your students, you will
not be able to make it clear to your examiners, and you may be
equally sure that it is not clear to yourself. The method is
indeed a means of constant self-examination, by which you
ascertain as you go along, whether or not you know the work.
Further, it is a means of practising the expression of ideas, the
throwing of ideas into words, of the utmost value, not merely at
examinations, but in almost every other affair of life. There
must be no slovenliness of expression and pronunciation ; if you
do not get it right the first time, you must go back and repeat
it again and again, till you do get it right. By that time, but
not earlier, you can be sure that you know your work. The
whole value of the method lies in your being a strict disciplin-
arian with yourself. Further, in actually getting up the work,
never be content with a simple statement of fact. If the reason
be not given, ask yourself the reason why. The reason being
known, it is always much easier to remember the fact, and your
consideration of the possible causes leads to fuller comprehen-
sion of the subject. One of my earlier pupils told me the other
day that even now the word WHY, in large letters, stares at
him over his writing table.
■Having got one examination out of the way, do not be too
long in thinking of the next ; if you put it off, you will have to
“ bolt ” your work, and this as surely leads to mental indigestion,
want of assimilation and malnutrition, as bolting your food leads
to the like conditions physically. Moreover, illness, accident,
misfortunes of all sorts may intervene to prevent you even
bolting the work. Happily Ido not know by actual experience
what it is to go up for a regular examination insufficiently pre-
pared, but curiously enough, for some six years past my one
form of nightmare is to find the anatomy exam, very near, and
absolutely no work done for it. The sensation is indescribably
horrid. It seems cruel, too. Perhaps it is by way of compen-
sation ; if it is so, those who do not follow my wise counsels,
may perhaps look forward to passing their exams, with flying
colours—unhappily it will be only in their dreams.
“ MENS SANA IN COPORE SANO.”
Be most careful about your general health and bodily fitness.
I have seen many men ploughed, who had simply worked them-
selves done, or who, from want of exercise along with perhaps
excessive work, had allowed themselves to become physically


unfit, and therefore mentally unfit, for the ordeal. “ Mens sana
in covpove sano ” is often quoted, but rarely really understood and
adopted as a guide in practice. Indeed, you should be as care-
ful to see that your body is able to bear its burden, as you gener-
ally are about the burden itself. Adopt my method of learning
while in session, never work on Sunday, have a really good
holiday during vacation, and I will guarantee that your examin-
ations need not trouble you, provided of course that you have a
little brains to go upon. It does not want so very much brains
for the ordinary examinations, but it always wants some ; how
much—but that is another story, as Rudyard Kipling would say,
and we have not time to tell it now, but briefly, ordinary exam-
inations for a pass should require ordinary work from an ordinary
student; with more brains, less work ; with less brains, more
work.
Some high-toned people may object to my laying such stress
on working for examinations. Let them go on doing so, say I,
for in my opinion, the ordinary student should not attempt to be
original: he should be very well content to learn what others
teach. I have seen many men who affected originality during
their student career and who never did any good afterwards. To
the really exceptional student, I have nothing to say, or rather,
I do not say anything: he is a law unto himself; but most
students are ordinary.
HOW TO DO AN EXAMINATION.
The examination day arrives in due course—or rather earlier
as most of us at times have thought. It does not follow that
because you have got your work up well, you therefore will do a
good written or a good viva voce examination. You may, for
instance, be a very slow, or, what is more likely, a very bad
writer, or in the viva you may be very nervous, or what is less
likely perhaps, very shy. Taking one thing with another, howr-
ever, a good method is a good thing, even in being examined,
and I will tell you of the one which I finally developed for my
own use. It may be of service to you too.
Read the questions through twice before you begin to answer
any, ponder over each word and try to make out just what the
question means, because if you answer the wrong meaning, you
are answering another question altogether, and a strict examiner
would give you nothing for it. After you have finished answer-
ing the paper, read the questions over again. My old master,
Professor Rutherford, used to say that “ as the pen goes to the
paper, thoughts go to the brain.” Thus after finishing the
paper, you have a much fuller present knowledge of the subject
than you had, when you had merely read the questions. When
you read the questions now, you may readily discover a meaning
which escaped you before, and, it may be, still have a chance of
recovering lost ground. The number of men who go down


because of thus answering the wrong question is amazing.
Hard, you say ? Not so, for how is the examiner to know that
the examinee did not apprehend perfectly well what was wanted,
but did not know it, and so put something else in, by way of
doing something, on the off-chance of scoring a little by it ?
But a good examiner is no fool.
Before you begin to write the answers, make a short scheme
of each and all of them, on a sheet of foolscap, merely a plan, as
it were, and giving plenty of room to each. This will serve to
show about how much time is available for each. It will remind
you of much that you remembered when fresh, but might forget
when, towards the end, you are fagged and tired. When
writing one answer, matters properly belonging to another
answer keep coming into your head —you may forget them by
the time you want them, or if you strive to remember them it
worries you—jot them down in your scheme and they all come
up in their proper place. This scheme will always prevent your
having to say “no more time at the end of the paper before
you have answered it completely, thus losing all the marks
belonging to the unanswered portion. It enables you to give a
more orderly sequence of ideas in your answers. It enables
you to avoid diffuseness, and so saves time, and if you have
followed my method of learning you have now, as it were,
merely to write down what you have already marshalled into
words, for you are bound to have answered, in some form or
other, all the questions which can be reasonably put in the
subject in your examination. Give what is essential first and
add the “ trimmings ” as time permits : no examinee can ever
justly say he had no time to do the paper—how does he know
how much the examiner wants ? A good examiner will never
want more than can be given in the time allowed, for it is not
what you can say, if you are allowed three weeks to do it in,
but what you can do in three hours, let us say. These are the
main points, but I may add, take your own pen, it is a great
comfort, and my experience of the pens supplied is that they are
not good. Write decently —remember that examiners are
human, and that examining is much more tiring than being
examined —students are apt to think otherwise, but they know
only one side of the matter—for an undecipherable manuscript
is tantamount to a blank. It is not what the examiner can
worry out of it, given an unlimited amount of time, but what he
can do with a reasonable amount of time and trouble. Abbrevia-
tions are an abomination : it is not always clear what they
mean, and the examiner has no time to puzzle them out. Bad
spelling, faulty English, and slang expressions are all blemishes
that make at least a bad impression, and may be of serious
consequence even in a professional examination. Finally,
arrange your answers in their proper order—it is worrying to


the examiner to jump about from column to column in his
marking paper. Write your name on every sheet and fasten
all together, for you do not want another to get the credit for
your work, nor do you want it to be mislaid or lost. When all
is finished and time permits, read it all through as a whole,
something may strike you even at the last moment. All this
seems to imply that you are to do things very deliberately : so
you are, for you will gain more time by not wasting any, than
you will by hurrying.
Mnemonics as usually employed are of only limited applica-
tion, but I had a system of my own which differed from any I
have seen in treatises on the subject—and they are numerous
enough—and which I used constantly with capital effect. I do
not hesitate to tell it to you, since it is not pernicious, as many
memory devices are. It is founded on the system of Peter
Mark Roget, a Doctor of Medicine, who wrote that wonderful
book the “ Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases,” in 1852,
since which time it has gone through numberless editions.
Ordinary dictionaries give the meaning when the spelling is
known ; Roget’s Thesaurus gives the word when the meaning is
known, so that it does the converse of the ordinary dictionary.
I daresay many of you have seen cases of aphasia, in which the
patient with his enfeebled cerebration uses something of this
plan—he cannot recall the word “ wheel,” for instance, but he
gets out of the difficulty by saying “ the thing which goes
round.” In precisely the same sort of way we ourselves,
especially when tired or pre-occupied, are often “ at a loss for
a word,” it is “ on the tip of our tongue,” but it stays there,
when we know quite well what we want to express. Following
in these lines, it is obvious, that, if a student knows his work, it
would be of the greatest service to him in an examination, if he
had some internal mentor to remind him to set down the things
which he knows. I therefore made certain barbaric words, the
component syllables of which called up to me at any time,
many of the classes and categories of Roget. What these words
were I shall not tell you, for such as are interested must read
Roget’s Introduction to the Thesaurus, and then make their
own words to suit their subjects and circumstances. Such
mnemonics as I describe are quite harmless to people who know
their work, and quite useless to people who do not; they merely
prevent one from forgetting to state it when they do know it,
but that is a very important and beneficent function.
THE ART OF PUBLIC SPEAKING.
I may likewise point out that the method of learning which I
I have described to you, also enables you to cultivate an art of
extreme value both before and after the period of graduation,
although it more particularly is valuable after you have made
your entrance into the profession—l refer to the art of speaking


in public. Some are gifted by nature in this direction as in
others—the great public speaker is born, not made, just as the
poet is. Nevertheless all benefit by practising their art. Medi-
cal men in a special way should have the matter brought before
them early in their career, because in the exercise of their calling
they deal with people as individuals, and when they are ill,
rather than when vigorous in mind and body. They do not
deal with assemblies of more or less alert and energetic people
as lawyers, clergymen and politicians, for instance, do. Medical
men thus have but little opportunity of practising the orator’s
and the pleader’s art. I was much struck with the schools of
oratory to be found in every American city of any size, showing
how the citizens of the eminently practical Great Republic value
the art, and at the same time showing their appreciation of the
part played by the school in its development. lam far
from imagining that every doctor should be an orator, but I
am convinced that the profession would exercise a wider and
greater influence in public life, if its members were oftener able
to advocate well the various interests touched by medical
science. Indeed the trend of affairs seems to me to make the
art increasingly valuable to us, for on the one hand, the public
are taking a greater and greater interest in our work, and, on
the other, the expansion and extension of medical studies,
especially in relation to preventive medicine and public health,
are daily increasing the points of contact between medical and
general public thought. This interest in our work is a good
thing if it be unprejudiced and intelligent; it is a bad thing if it
be the reverse ; and what it is, depends largely upon ourselves
—how we bear ourselves and express ourselves in public. Re-
member the words of Sophocles in the Philoctetes so aptly
quoted to Thomas Carlyle by Mr. Scot Skirving, of Edinburgh,
father of our colleague in Sydney, when Carlyle had just said,
“Young maan, I hope you will live to get sense, and learn that
words are no good at all : it is deeds, and deeds only.” Upon
this Mr. Skirving repeated what Ulysses said to Neoptolemus :
•' Son of a noble sire ! I too in youth
Had a slow tongue and an impatient arm ;
But now, time-tried, I see in words, not deeds,
The universal ruler of mankind.”
Carlyle’s reply you had better read for yourselves in the letters
of Jane Welsh Carlyle—it is much more forcible than polite.
THE VALUE OF MERIT.
While still at College I was under the impression that a
knowledge of the articulations of some abominable little bone,
as of the carpus for instance, was of the first importance, and
that the results of some really trivial examination were of the
last importance: that, in short, academic events were necessarily


the making or marring of a man. But I have lived long enough,
and have seen enough of careers, to know that the academic
standing and strictly professional merits of the individual do not
necessarily command success. I might here read to you what
is said by Dr. Johnson in his Lives of the Poets under the
heading of Akenside, who was a medical man by vocation :
“ A physician in a great city seems to be the mere plaything of
fortune ; his degree of reputation is, for the most part, casual;
they that employ him know not his excellence ; they that reject
him know not his deficiency. By any acute observer, who has
looked on the transactions of the medical world for half a cen-
tury, a very curious book might be written on the ‘ Fortunes of
Physicians.’” Nevertheless it cannot be doubted, that it is
unwise to set out in life without the greatest attainable profes-
sional merit, everything having been done by honesty of pur-
pose, persevering endeavour and careful training under com-
petent masters, to inform and educate a mind, in the first
instance capable of due development. Work is undoubtedly
the key to the position, for even accidents often have a knack of
happening to the right man. For instance, it was, and yet was
not entirely, an accident, that Rontgen discovered the now
famous X rays, for by his previous work and experience he was
just the man to whom the accident should have happened. He
saw and grasped the importance of the phenomena, to which
most other men would have been blind.
As a matter of fact the reasons for which a man obtains the
confidence of his patients are very various : it could not well be
otherwise, for there are all sorts and conditions of men in this
world. That which in a man appeals to one sort only repels
another sort. Some value him on account of what they hear as
to his success at college, or on account of his management of
some particular case of which they have cognizance; others
judge of him by the colour of his hair or the cut of his coat,
while many judge by his attendance at a place of worship,
especially if it be their own place of worship too. It has accord-
ingly been one of the great disillusionments of my life, while
taking part in the promotion of young men to positions which
they coveted, to have seen the variety of interests concerned and
to have noted the complicated ways in which these interests are
brought to bear in particular cases. Young So-and-so is the
son of old So-ano-so and therefore ought to have the post. This
is one of the simplest, most natural, and least objectionable, of
these cases, but when someone is to be elected because he or
his friends belong to some particular church, some political
party, or some particular nationality, then it is that real wrong
is done. My reading of history tells me it was ever thus in
the past, and I believe that it will be the same in the future,
because human nature changes slowly if at all. While, then,,


many of the conditions of success must remain beyond your
control, there is still one which is within it, viz., making your-
self worthy of everything you aspire to and may attain, so that
if the gods favour you by choosing you, you shall occupy the
post to your patients’ welfare and your own satisfaction. That
this condition is really important is shown by the undoubted
fact, that taking one thing with another and as it is in every
other walk of life, it is somehow generally the best physicians
and surgeons that get the best practices, and thus clearly the
surest way to command success is to deserve it.
Speaking of the different sorts of folk in the world reminds
me, that it is not always the uneducated people who distrust the
educated physician. I have seen some curious examples of
men in high positions and of great general attainments, consult-
ing the most ignorant charlatans, and I have frequently had
occasion to point out, that quacks do not disappear, no matter
what restrictive legislation may be enacted, no matter to what
degree of education the people may have attained. Thus we
are accustomed to think of Germany as a well educated land,
and yet in Saxony in 1896, according to official returns, it was
just as bad as N.S.W., where we are rather notorious for our
absence of enactments regulating the practice of medicine, and
where in consequence quacks and charlatans of every sort over-
run the land. In Saxony there were in that year 1761 regular
doctors and no less than 765 irregulars—one irregular for every
two regular. 220 irregulars were “ nature healers,” whatever
that may mean. 106 cured by “ sympathy,” and it is noted that
163 irregulars were women. No less than 19 made a specialty
of tapeworms. The fact is that there is a very large number of
cases of chronic ill-health, bodily, mental and moral, for which
medical men can do very little, because these cases are but little
amenable to treatment in the ordinary sense, and the patients
will not follow the discipline of body and mind recommended.
These are the unfortunates who wander from doctor to doctor
and finally, after a course of patent medicines, make the fortune
of the quack. Now, these people will go to the quack, nothing
will stop them, and if the quack does not yet exist in any neigh-
bourhood, the demand for his services will very speedily be
supplied. But there are other kinds—the domestic kind, for
instance, who treat grave cases with homoeopathic remedies till
the case becomes manifestly too serious, and they send for a
doctor, after that precious first period is gone, during which
much might have been done to arrest the malady or to obviate
its worst results. To my certain knowledge these remedies
have much to answer for in this way. Finally I may mention
the superior intellectual person who has no knowledge, but
plenty of ideas, on medical matters, on which he will expatiate
with much insistence. From these you will have much to bear


and to suffer ; argument is useless, for they are superior to logic
and they do not know fadts; silence is perhaps best, with per-
haps a smile or a sneer, it depends upon circumstances, for it
does not do always to turn the cheek to the smiter.
There is a set of circumstances that may fairly be called
merits, and that certainly have a considerable influence, viz.,
personal appearance, habits and manners. We are not all born
of commanding stature or with genius writ large upon our brow,
but we can all be cleanly in our habits and polished in our man-
ners. I run the risk, I know, of its being said, that I am
descending and becoming too particular and even commonplace.
Be that as it may be, I more or less design this to be an address
on more or less commonplace matters, and it is certain that
attention to these matters greatly helps any.man, while I know
that neglect of them has damaged, or even ruined, men other-
wise worthy of every confidence. I have heard of an applicant
for a hospital position being positively objected to, because a
nail brush apparently formed no part of his armamentarium.
And the objection was perfectly sound,even from a scientific stand
point, for of what use is it to provide the most superb brass and
glass fittings and furniture for an operating theatre if such as he
were to operate there ? To dwell upon the influence of manners
is indeed superfluous. Let me remind you of the motto of the
famous Bishop of Winchester and Chancellor of England,
William of Wykeham, a self-made man in the most honourable
sense of the phrase. This is what Lord Campbell in his Lives
of the Chancellors says of him : “ He did not attend much to
his spiritual duties, but he showed great dexterity in civil busi-
ness, and a natural aptitude for every situation in which he was
placed, so that he escaped the envy that might have been ex-
pected to attend his elevation, and was a general favourite.
Conscious how much he owed to his delicate attention to the
feelings of others, when he had from the Heralds a grant of
arms, he took for his motto, “ Manners makyth man.” This is
the motto which he gave to the famous school at Winchester
which, as well as New College, Oxford, was founded by him,
and where I read it only a few months ago.
AFTER GRADUATING.
Every young graduate should do his utmost to secure a
hospital residency and go through the routine of all the wards;
this failing, he or she should try to work under some experienced
practitioner outside for a time; trying in fact, to get the good
parts of the old apprenticeship system without its drawbacks.
The year’s residency is about as important as the curriculum
itself—it just rounds off, completes and finishes the education in
the medical schools. Then again, though lam perfectly certain
that this education in the medical schools, except as regards cer-
tainjspecialties, can be just as well had in Australia as it can else-


\\ here, nevertheless,there can be no doubt as to the value of foreign
travel to a man, after he has obtained his degree, and this whether
the man has been educated here or in Europe or in America. I am
not saying so much that the young Australian should go and
recommence medical studies if he visits Europe, for in many
ways the study of men and manners, the visiting of historic
scenes and so forth, will probably be better, or at least as good,
for him as poking in a laboratory or hospital all day. The
judicious combination of both is best really, only I have known
so many young men go to Europe, and return to Australia,
without just that kind of culture which a well spent visit to
Europe alone can give. The time to go is just after the
hospital residency, not before : he is not ready to profit by his
\isit before that time, and not later, because once a man settles
down in practice it is very difficult for him to get away. It is
often possible to go and come as a ship’s surgeon and by the
thrifty it is wonderful how much can be done with a very small
outlay. It is of course in dealing with educated patients that
an acquaintance with the things of the old world is of most
direct service, but in view of its powerful influence for good on
the practitioner himself, it cannot fail to be to his advantage in
almost every situation of life.
Coming now to extremely practical matters, it ought to be
the aim of every practitioner setting out in his career, to be able
to retire from practice somewhere between the ages of sixty and
sixty-five. Doctors as a class are not long lived. His constant
exposure to infection, irregular meals, broken rest, the harassing
early years of practice when he has to keep up appearances and
most. likely has a wife and family to support (since the public do
I believe prefer a married man) at a time when the income is at
its least, all conspire to make his income and his life precarious.
Then, too, his very work is anxious—life itself may depend ori
him : he must be always at his best, always ready to act
promptly and to give his whole attention to the case, for patients
are exceedingly exacting, each considers his own case most im-
portant and will not brook delay or slackness. “ Mine is a
\ aluable life is said, both by the poor widow, struggling to
bring up a family, and by the miserable old bachelor without
child or friend in the world. Then it should be remembered,
that a medical man’s goods are all personal services his
patients want him and no other, so that the higher he rises
in the profession, the more successful he is, the harder he must
work, for he cannot have an office full of clerks or a factory
or warehouse full of hands like the solicitor, the manufacturer
and the merchant. The help which assistants give him is very
limited indeed. Taking all these conditions into account, the
fruitful working period of a medical man’s life is comparatively
short. Owing to his education and the struggles of his earlier


years, he cannot begin to save, as a provision against disable-
ment or old age, or for the benefit of his family, until he is
already not young. Then at the other extreme of life, it is a
general observation, that, after a certain time, the practice
of even the best of men falls away. I have heard it said that
a London physician who became a baronet, wrote a great
treatise and lived to a great age full of honour, in the end sat
in his consulting room until patients had practically ceased
to visit him. He had outlived his time. The practical outcome
of all this is that you (I am speaking to men of course) should
not get married too early, and even very long engagements are
to be avoided, and, in the second place, you should insure your
life on the endowment principle as early as you can. I do not
expect you to give much heed to my first advice. With regard
to the second there is no doubt as to its soundness. In any case
keep out of speculation. Remember that the promotor is on the
look out for you ; for he knows what is perfectly true that
doctors are generally poor men of business, and they therefore
often fall an easy prey to the financial vulture.
“ honour thy father that thy days may be long
UPON THE LAND.”
Let me turn for a little to the relations of the young to the
old medical practitioner, because the young is rather apt to
’think that the older man is behind the time and that, taught by
the most modern methods, armed with many graphs and scopes
and meters and other instruments of precision, the young man
must needs be a better practitioner than the older. Let the
young beware j the tcictus cvuditus of the old physician told
him far more about most cases than the sphygmograph
tells us, and generally, however useful in original and
scientific investigations these instruments are, the carefully
educated senses of the man are still the sheet anchor of the
physician. .
Then the old have a fund of accumulated experience which
the young cannot have, and the old often have wisdom which
the young as often lack. It has been said that the young men
think that old men are fools, but old men know that young men
are fools. Old men have a kind of shrewdness—they may not
know exactly what is wrong, but as Professor Sir T. Grainger
Stewart used to say, they see that “ the patient is evidently ill,
and they are cautious as to what they say, especially in the way
of predicting how the case will end, for the most startling
surprises occur. A patient comes through, who by ad the
canons of our art should die, and on the other hand, we see
patients die with as little discoverable reason as in the case of the
South Sea islander who says he is going to die, lies down and
just dies. As a rule it is better to say less than you might,
in case you should say more than you ought. Silence is indeed


golden, and great reputations have been built upon little
else. But the silence must be properly managed, as I may
illustrate by reading to you the 139th apophthegm of
Bacon : “ Many men, especially such as affect gravity, have
a manner after other men’s speech to shake their heads.
A great officer of this land would say ‘ It was as men shake
a bottle, to see if there were any wit in their heads or no.’ ”
ON TACT.
Then again, the experience of the older man enables him
better to understand the weaknesses, the foibles, the ways gen-
erally of his patients, and thus to manage, so that he remains
their adviser and they his clients. This kind of understanding
is called “ tact ” and is worth the consideration of every man,
for it is neither more nor less than an adaptation of one’s self to
one s environment, so that one may be among the fittest who
survive. Tact is not mere cunning ; it ranges from veneration
and reverence at the one extreme, to simple deference to station
or authority at the other extreme. How often have we not all
seen men doing the right thing at the wrong time, and thereby
just the reverse of the desired effect, simply from want
of this tact. Some men doubtless are by nature tactful, but on
the other hand tactful ways may undoubtedly be acquired, and
I give you an infallible recipe—do unto others as ye would that
they do unto you, or as Christ put it in the Sermon on the
Mount, “ All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them : for this is the law and the pro-
phets. . Every consideration of prudence and humanity incul-
cate this : you will not be truly happy unless you do, nor can
you do what is best for your patient unless you have his entire
confidence and esteem, and want of tact will surely militate
against your having either.
“ GET THEE BEHIND ME, SATAN.”
There are still a great many things which I would have liked
to speak to you about, but your patience and our time have
limits, but there are two of which I might perhaps briefly say a
word. In the first place few doctors have been long in practice
before they have been tempted, almost in as many ways as was
ot. Anthony, who indeed was a bit of a doctor himself, and a
specialist too, for his intervention in cases of erysipelas (possibly)
was said to be particularly successful, so that to this day that
affection is called “ St. Anthony’s Fire.” Now putting aside for
the present the moral side of the question, it is safe to say, that
no good ever comes of laxity of conduct on the part of the
medical man. As a matter of fact, I honestly believe that it is
marvellous how seldom the medical man does err, considering
the nature and circumstances of his calling. Nevertheless, he
must always be on his guard, and always rather too careful, than
not careful enough.


“ ÜBI TRES MEDICI DUO ATHEI.”
The other matter may be introduced by quoting the mediaeval
proverb —Where there are three physicians, there are two
atheists. I do not believe it: it is not so in our day, and as
regards men who have been in the profession for a time, though
I think that students often pass through a period at least of
agnosticism. I admit that doctors are somewhat negligent of
the externals of religion, but that is not the same as being irre-
ligious, and the nature of the work of the profession of medicine
has a great deal to do with this neglect, such as it is. In serv-
ing their fellows, doctors often forget to serve their Maker, and
yet, could any sin of omission be more pardonable than this one
in their case ? After all, it is a negative wrong—what is worse,
and bad positively, is unbelief, and irreverence towards things
sacred in the minds of the greater part of the community in
which one lives. These things are deserving at least of the
respect of silence, and no man who openly makes light of the
religious beliefs current in his neighborhood —unless, of course,
his object be conscientiously that of the missionary—and no
matter what the religion and the country is, can hope to exercise
his full influence for good in the place. From this it is clear,
that I do not limit the full duty of the medical man by the giving
of drugs and surgical relief. He must exercise a moral influence
too, on the community, as well as on individuals, and he who
fails in this larger view of the duties and privileges of his office
will assuredly miss many opportunities of doing good.
CONCLUSION.
In conclusion, let me tell you frankly, that I do not expect
any one of you to practise in their perfection all the virtues of
the good doctor, as I have set them forth : anyone who did would
be the “ angelic doctor,” in a new sense, but, nevertheless, what
may not suit one man’s temperament and circumstances, may
suit another’s, and perhaps there may have been something for
everybody. We know too well that the preacher’s words not
unfrequently fall upon deaf ears and upon minds that have no
understanding, and yet no one would venture to assert that
sermons are useless : every now and then something strikes one
that may strike home, and send one away resolved to do better.
One word and lam done —I have spoken of success.. do not
forget the meaning of the term which I have sought to impress
upon it and upon you —your success in practice is to carry with
it, and to carry in it, the welfare of your patients, that they may
be spared pain, may be shielded from disease, may enjoy
increased comfort and happiness, and that their days and your
days may be longer upon the land.
The Austral Publishing Co., 528 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.




