

THE ASSOCIATION TO
PROTEST AGAINST THE
DUPLICATION OF INCOME
TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE
MEETING OF MEMBERS TO ADOPT
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE’S REPORT
AND BALANCE SHEET,
Held at WINCHESTER HOUSE,
LONDON, E.C.
FRIDAY, AUGUST 4th, 1916
Argus Printing Co., Ltd,, Temple Avenue, E.C.
Published by the Association to Protest against the Duplication of Income Tax
within the Empire.
Office of the Association:
27 Clement’s Lane, London, E.C.


MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF
THE ASSOCIATION
TO PROTEST AGAINST THE DUPLICATION OF
INCOME TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
FREDERICK DUTTON, ESQ., Chairman.
HENRY BULL, Esq., Honorary Treasurer.
GILBERT ANDERSON, ESQ.
PERCY ARNOLD, ESQ.
J. B. BRAITHWAITE, ESQ.
NEVILLE D. COHEN, ESQ.
FREDERICK DYER, ESQ.
W. H. GARDINER, ESQ.
LESLIE HARRIS, ESQ.
W. E. HEARSON, ESQ.
W. E. LANE, ESQ.
P. D. LEAKE, ESQ.
HON. H. S. LITTLETON.
ERNEST MAKOWER, ESQ.
C. C. MCLEOD, ESQ.
HON. M. L. MOSS’
SIR CORNTHWAITE H. RASON
ROBERT- REID, ESQ.
GEORGE SCALES, ESQ.
GEORGE SLADE, ESQ.
ANDREW WILLIAMSON, ESQ.
Hon. J. G. Jenkins, Secretary , 27 Clement’s Lane, E.C.


DUPLICATION OF INCOME-TAX.
MEETING OF MEMBERS TO ADOPT EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE’S REPORT AND BALANCE-SHEET,
HELD AT WINCHESTER HOUSE, LONDON,
E.C., ON FRIDAY, AUGUST 4, 1916.
A meeting of the members of the Association
to Protest Against the Duplication of Income-
tax Within the Empire was held on Friday,
August 4, at Winchester House, Old Broad-
street, E.C., “to consider the report of the
executive committee from its appointment to
the end of July.” Letters of apology for their
inability to attend were received from Lord
Desborough, the High Commissioner for New
Zealand, the Agents-General for Ontario, New
South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and
many others. Mr. Frederick Dutton (the chair-
man of the association) presided.
THE ORIGIN OF THE ASSOCIATION.
The Chairman; Ladies and gentlemen, it is
now a little over six months sinde, on the initia-
tion of our hon. treasurer, Mr. Bull, and
our secretary, Mr. Jenkins, this association
was formed, and, with the passing of the
Finance Bill for this year through the House
of Commons, your executive committee thought
it would be a convenient time to call you
together for the purpose of laying before you a
report of the action taken by them since their
appointment at the Bank of Adelaide meeting,
a statement of their receipts and disburse-
ments, and to confer with you as to our future
Course of action. .That report has been in
your hands, and has no doubt been perused
by all of you who have received it, so that
I may, no doubt, assume that for the purpose
of our proceedings to-day I may take it as
read. Most of you will, also, have received,
and I hope digested, the explanatory memo-
randum published jointly on behalf of this asso-
ciation and the London Chamber of Commerce.
If so, you will doubtless have been struck with
the number and diversity of the protests which
have been voiced from time to time, from
1896 onwards, against tins double, and, in
some cases, treble, taxation of the same income
within the Empire. So far back as 1896
I brought this question before the Coun-
cil of the Royal Colonial Institute, when
the different Colonial Parliaments in
Australia passed Acts for the taxation
of income created within their own borders,
and energetic written protests were made by
the institute to the Treasury against a system
which the council recognised at onge as being
certain, sooner or later, prejudicially to affect
the practical unity of the Empire and it:
welfare as a whole, to say nothing of the in
equality of taxation which was involved as re
gards those who have to pay the double taxes.
These protests, so begun, have been renewed
from time to time as opportunity offered, am
have been taken up bv the Chambers of Con
merce throughout the Empire, and by no means
the last in importance of such protests was
one addressed in April, 1905, to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies by the whole body of
Commissioners and agents-generals re-
presenting the Dominions. These protests, use-
ful as they may have been in raising and em-
phasising the importance to the Empire of re-
moving this great error of Imperial statesman-
ship, were, however, isolated, and in that
condition did not obtain, and were not likely
to obtain practical results from Treasury
officials, who, in the pursuit of revenue, were
determined to disregard sound and just prin-
ciples of taxation.
THE FINANCE ACT OF 1914.
The action taken by the Imperial Govern-
ment in the Finance Act of by throwing
over what had always previously been pro-
claimed as the fundamental basis of the in-
come-tax laws of this country, that only that
income was taxed which was actually created
or brought into the country, and imposing
under Section 5 a tax on all income belonging
to any person residing in this country, whether
it was brought here or not, followed by the
great increases of taxation, and especially of
income-tax, rendered necessary to meet some
portion of our huge war expenditure, had this
effect, that what had previously been wrong
in principle became at once unbearable in
fact. This has led to a new position—to a
lack of which must, I think, be ascribed the
absence of results in the earlier period to
which I have alluded, viz., the bringing into
existence through the formation of this asso-
ciation, working in common with the Special
Committee of the London Chamber of Com-
merce, of an active organisation to force the
Government by the only means that seem to
count nowadays, >dz., the development and
pressure of public opinion, to give relief from
this great injustice and to remove from the body
politic of the Empire a condition in the
highest degree prejudicial and detrimental to
its unity and development. You will not ex-
pect that at such a meeting as this I should go
into the general arguments beaming upon this
question; but, in expr jssing to you the
opinion of your committee, that, considering
the short time which has elapsed since the
association was formed, very considerable pro-
gress has already been made. You will allow
me shortly to state the grounds upon which
we have formed, and I hope you will confirm,
that view:
CONSIDERABLE PROGRESS ALREADY MA!^.
In the first place, let me remind you of the
words in which the Chancellor of the Ex


chequer referred to this question when intro-
ducing his Budget this year:
Two points in connection with the
income-tax proposals must be mentioned.
There is the question which is known as
the double income-tax question',, a matte
which affects those who pay income-tax or-
flhe same income in our Dominions and
here. The subject is one which will have
to be dealt with in the promised recon-
stitution of our income-tax laws, hut I
have fedt that, for the present, the utmost
that I can do is to leave the matter where
it stands now—(“hear, hear,” and
laughter)—and content myself, where the
Dominion tax is not less than Is. 6d., with
not imposing any fresh burden on such
persons, who will be entitled to claim re-
payment of the additional rate now im-
posed.
An Hon. Member: What does that
mean?
The Chancellor of the Exchequer: It
means that whatever they suffer, they
suffer, but they won’t suffer more.
Upon this has been based what is now
Clause 43 of the Finance Bill, under which,
on proof of payment of colonial income-tax, a
repayment can be claimed to the extent of
not exceeding Is. 6d. in the £ from the tax
paid here, } viz., the difference between the
rate of 3s. 6d., imposed for the second half
of 1915, and 65., the rate imposed for this
year. We are conceited enough to believe
that tho activities of this association and its
publications had reached the inner recesses
of .the Treasury, and convinced the Chancellor
that danger lay ahead, and so I think that
we have established this position that, if the
exigencies of the war should in the future in-
volve any furiher addition to the income-tax
in this country, those who pay colonial income-
tax will not be asked to contribute to any
further increase, except after allowing repay-
ment to them against any amount by which
the rale here may exceed 3s. 6d. of the whole
sum they may have paid in a colony. It will
have been noticed by you all in regard to Hie
provisions of the clause in this year’s Bill that,
as things stand, the effect is to allow to those
who derive income from investments in India,
repayment of the whole of the Indian tax,
which at present is only Is. 3d. in the £, and
to those deriving income from South Africa,
where the present maximum rate is 2s.
in the £, very nearly all they pay there. m It is
those who pay the much higher rates in Aus-
tralia on income derived from that country
who are left at present tue greatest sufferers.
A PROTEST AGAINST INEQUALITY.
And, lest we should be misunderstood, may
I here again emphasise most strongly, that
what we are objecting to is not the rate of
income-tax, but the inequality of the present
system. We are not complaining that the in-
come-tax in this country should be at a pheno-
menal rate of ss. in the £, nor shall we com-
plain if the essential requirement of the Em-
pire that this war should be carried on until
the peace of the future can be secured by the
complete defeat of the Central Powers, and
especially of Germany, should necessitate a
still higher rate being imposed, so long as we
are onlv asked to bear the same measure of
ourden for the war expenditure, whether im-
posed here or in Australia, or in any other part
of the Empire, as falls upon the rest of the
community who only have to pay one income-
tax-
Secondly, I think there is no doubt that the
meetings we have held, and the documents we
have published, have had a great educational
effect upon the public men of this country,
who, as Mr. Jenkins and I have abundant
reason to know, had previously a very imper-
fect and, in many instances, no knowdedge
whatever of the real issues involved in this
question. There is a general recognition now
of its great Imperial importance. You will
have read the reprint contained in the appen-
dix to our report of the debate which took
place in the House of Commons on the amend-
ment moved on our behalf by Mr. J. Annan
Bryce on June 22, and there exists in the
House of Commons now a much vaster sym-
pathy with the claim to relief from double in-
come-tax than is indicated by the division list.
The present political situation under the com-
bined influence of the concentration of the
national energies on the war, and the existence
of a "'Coalition Government, make it almost
hopeless that at this juncture you can get
members to vote in any large number against
the Government on any detail of the Finance
Bill.
LARGER CONCESSIONS ANTICIPATED
What we hoped was that the Government,
recognising, as they do, the justice of our com-
plainb k , would themselves have made a larger
concession than that indicated by the Chan-
cellor on the introduction of the Budget, and,
in view of the fact that the Government showed
a determined opposition to Mr. Bryce’s amend-
ment (and we wish here publicly to express our
appreciation for the active assistance Mr.
Bryce has given us) the probability is
that he and those members who supported
him in the House would not have gone
to a division at all if it had not been
necessary as a protest against the extremely
unsympathetic, and I am tempted to add,
offensive nature of some of observa
tions that fell from Mr. Montagu, as Finan
clal Secretary to the Treasury, during the
course of the debate. , Mr. Jenkins and I were
both present in the House during the whole o f
the discussion, and neither of us will easily
forget the altogether uncalled-for, excited, and
sneering tone adopted by that right honour-
able gentleman. It is right here that I should
also say how surprised we were at the mis-
statement of fact as to the basis of the Aus-
tralian Income-Tax law contained in the speech
made by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in
closing the debate. We have addressed a
communication to him on this subject, to
which, so far, we have not received any reply
beyond a formal acknowledgment of receipt
of our letter. Thirdly, the press have shown a
much greater interest in this question. The
power of the press on such matters as the
greatest of all factors in developing public
bpinion we gladly recognise, and wdiile grateful
to them for the recognition and support we
have already received, we are hoping that in
the near future this question of double income-
tax will receive still greater attention in their
Columns.


A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT.
Fourthly, we have gained the complete
public admission by the Government of the
grievance, also that the clause inserted bv
them in this year’s Finance Bill is to be re'
garded, in the words of the Financial Secre
tary, “ at best as a temporary expedient until
the restoration of peace,” and that one of the
subjects on the agenda for the first Imperial
Conference will have to be the subject of
double income-tax. , If you decide that this
association shall continue its work, your com-
mittee will take every possible step not only
to hold the Government to their undertaking,
but, if possible, to accelerate a permanent and
complete relief from double taxation; for it
must not be forgotten that it is now, under
war conditions, that the 'grievance presses so
harshly and unequally, and we do not intend
to acquiesce in the idea that any further reliei
can be put off into an unknown and perhaps
distant future. This question, as you all know,
was discussed at the Imperial Conference in
1911, and .put off because the then Chancellor
urged strongly that he afford to
make the concession, and the' Chancellor in
office when the next Imperial Conference is
held may not unlikely endeavour to repeat
this manoeuvre under cover of the many im-
portant questions that the Conference will
have before it.
Lastly, we have the still more emphatic and
complete recognition by the Prime Minister of
Australia of the great Imperial importance of
this question, and the essential justice of the
claim to be relieved from double taxation of
income,'. In his reply to the deputation he em-
phasised clearly and concisely how this double
taxation operated in “ impairing the full right
of a Dominion to tax for its own purposes ;
how impossible it was for his own Government
to fashion an equitable system of taxation if
in regard to a very great portion of the corpus
of the income to be taxed a separate Legisla-
ture had the power also to impose taxation
on a scale, and in circumstances about which
they were not consulted, and which might
be in violent conflict with their own objects.
Such a condition tended to impair the effect
of their own taxation, and might compel them
to resort to other systems of taxation or to a
higher rate,” and he added that when an Im-
perial conference was convened the power of
taxation of incomes derived in the Dominions
and remitted to the United Kingdom would
have to be considered most seriously. He
might well have spoken still more strongly if
he had remembered at the time he was speak-
ing that other gross injustice, which we also
endeavoured without success at present to get
remedied within the confines of the Empire,
that the income is taxed in this country if it
is owned by a person resident here within the
meaning of the Income-tax Acts when it is
not remitted here at all.
AN UNSOUND SYSTEM.
And this leads me to the last observation I
wish to lay before you and to ask you to keep
in view. There is a dawning glimpseOof re-
cognition by the Treasury here that excessive
income taxation and large excess profits taxa-
tion are in themselves unsound, and only to be
Justified by extreme necessity, Mr. Fell, the
member for Yarmouth, moved an amendment
to reduce the rate of taxation from ss. to 45.,
justifying his amendment on the principles 1
have just stated. In replying for the Govern-
ment, the Chancellor stated that “ he felt as
strongly as any of the critics of the tax the
harm that was done to the general trade of the
country—to which I would add the trade of the
Empire—by the long continuance of an income-
tax at an excessively high rate,” and he went
on to say that: “In ordinary circumstances
much of the income of one year became the in-
dustrial capital of the next, and it was exactly
that income that was earned by the most ener-
getic and progressive firms in the country.
Trade was developed by men who put earnings
into their business, and if too large a propor-
tion of the earnings ot each year should be
taken from the men who secured them, the effi-
ciency of our captains of industry would be
affected.” Excellent and sound sentiments,
indeed, ladies and gentlemen, if the Chancellor
would only put them into practice. But if the
fact that he was imposing a tax on income of
ss. in the £ moved him to speak as he did,
what is to be said about the continuance of a
system of double taxation of income, which
obliges many of these captains of Imperial in-
dustry to submit to upwards of 10s. in the £
on their incomes being taken from them. How
can capital be created, how can the trade and
industry of the Empire be developed, under
such conditions? To continue for one moment
a system producing such a result seems to me
to be the bankruptcy of statesmanship, and is
an unanswerable reason why your-committee
are justified in recommending to you, as they
do, that this association should continue to
prosecute vigorously the work for which it was
formed.
I beg to move: “ That the report of the com-
mittee and statement of accounts now sub-
mitted be, and the same are hereby, received
and adopted.” I have only pne word that I
would like to add before I move the resolution,
and that is to express to you what I am sure
is the opinion of every member of this com-
mittee, and will, I believe, be the opinion of
everyone in this room, the debt of gratitude
that every payer of double income-tax, and
everybody else for the matter of that, owes to
our worthy hon. treasurer Mr. Bull and to
our worthy secretary Mr. Jenkins for the steps
taken by them in bringing about the original
meeting which caused the formation of this
association. I can personally testify to, as the
chairman of this committee, the great labour
and industry which Mr, Jenkins has put into
the whole of the detailed work which has been
so vast and important. (Hear, hear.) There
is nobody that I know of who has a greater
mastery of the subject in all its intricate de-
tails than Mr. Jenkins, and I feel very grate-
ful to him indeed for the very great assistance
he has given to me and this committee in the
not altogether light task that we undertook
when you were good enough at the Bank of
Adelaide to appoint us for that purpose. I
now have to move: “ That the report of this
pommittee and statement of accounts now sub-
mitted be. and the same are hereby, received
Bjnd adopted.” I will ask Mr. Bull to second
that. (Applause.)


“PRACTICALLY CONFISCATION.’-
Mr. Henry Bull; Ladies and gentlemen, In
rising to second the adoption of the report, I
may tell you that it is one of the most painful
meetings, from some points of view, that 1
have ever had to address in my life, I should
like to say, and it might be of some interest
to the meeting, that in the year 1792 my
grandfather went to Australia during a time
of stress in that country, and at that time
the population was very unruly and almost
unmanageable. My grandfather volunteered
to go out to Australia and help to make
things peaceful. Therefore it is very painful
to me to-day to get up, as his grandson, to
second a resolution of this kind. I am sure
you will all agree that this heavy taxation will
amount practically to the confiscation of our
property in Australia, and we are here to-day
to protest against that confiscation. We are
also here to protest against the manner in
which the Financial Secretarv to the Treasury
dealt with this matter in the House of Com-
mons. I might say that he not only unfairly,
but almost rudely, dealt with the matter of
colonial income-tax. He said—and I take the
report of his speech from Hansard—that “ We
do not want our people now to invest in
colonial securities. ’ He (that was Mr. Bryce)
talked about the flow of the population of this
country to the colonies. We do not want
emigration to our colonies at this moment.”
He referred, as I say, only to “ our people,”
but I should like to know whether we in Aus-
tralia are not “our people,” and whether we
are not fighting the same battle to-day, and
whether we are not paying in Australia for
the cost of the war? Can anybody tell me
here that when a young branch of a family
grows to age it is right for the parents to say
that We are going to block every avenue of
capital to help you in your work. I should
like to say that we have gone to Australia, not
only for the benefit of Australia, but also for
the support of the Mother Countrv, and I do
not think we have failed in our object right
the way through. (Hear, hear.)
ATTACK ON MR. MONTAGU.
I feel very keenly about this matter, because
I think the manner in which Mr.,Montagu
dealt with this matter is unjust arid unfair.
I should like to go further, and say that if
these are the men that are going to unite the
Empire, I am sure that the unification, or the
attempt at unification, will be a failure. In
the same debate he goes further, and says that
when an Australian father sends his ‘family
here for education, and when men who have
borne the brunt of the labour in Australia,
come over here in their latter days, that we
wealthy shareholders in the City’ of London
have made this an instrument of getting a
boon. I do not know where the boon comes in
when we have to pay 10s. in the £. Further
on he says that a much larger boon would be
given to the wgalthy Australian merchants in
the City of London if this tax were not im-
posed, but I think you will agree that the im-
position of this additional tax is absolutely un-
fair. there is another matter which I
think is almost despicable for a member of
the Government to say. He appealed to Sir
George Reid that, if we were allowed to forgo
the taxation of money made in Australia and
the income derived from that money and left
in Australia, that that would end the con-
troversy, and he appealed to Sir George Reid
to know if that would end our agitation for
getting'something more. This is the reply
which Mr. Montagu made to a question of
Sir George Reid : V T‘ Ha ! but we want this as
a factor in the settlement.” Is not that dis-
graceful for a man in his position? ,He asked
to get an unfair amount of money in taxation,
and when he gets it he glories in the fact
that he was getting it for the purpose of
making a better bargain when the time came
to adjust matters. Ladies and gentlemen,
I cannot find words to convey my feelings upon
that matter. I wish to go further than this,
and to show how unfairly this matter was put
before the House of Commons.
TAXATION IN AUSTRALIA.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, who, I
presume, is not responsible for these mis-
takes or inaccuracies, said : “ At the present
moment any person in this'country who has
property in Australia from which he draws a
profit which he brings into this country pays
income-tax here, and he pays income-tax in
Australia. JThat is quite true. Any Australian
who has property in this country from which
ho draw’s a profit pays income-tax in this
country and pays income-tax in Australia.”
That is not true. If a man lives in Australia,
and has property here in England, he pays tax
only in England, and we in Australia admit
the justice of that claim. He pays the income-
tax here, and if the income goes to a man
living in Australia, Australia does not claim
any tax upon that income. The Australian
law taxes only the money which is earned in
the Colony, and they do not tax money which
Is earned here in Great Britain. It was further
stated that “ hon. members go further, and
say that in both cases we ought to lose the
whole income-tax up to ss. if the Australian
tax is at the same rate. That is to that
if the Australian Government put their tax
up td 55., we should lose the whole of our
income-tax, not merely on Australian money
remitted to this country, but on British money
remitted to Australia, while the Australian
Government would get the’ whole ss, from
both.” There is no sense whatever in that,
because in Australia we claim nothing in taxa-
tion for money which is made here.
ELIMINATION OF WAR TAX SUGGESTED.
What this association claims is that the war
tax should be eliminated from the tax that we
pay in this country. What we say is that if
the war tax in Australia is ss. in the £ and the
tax here is ss. in the £ is that we are quite
willing to pay the pre-war tax in this country,
because we live here, and that tax would
amount to Is. 6d. in the £. We think we are
entitled to claim this providing we can show
that we have paid the war tax in Australia.
Surely nothing can be more fair than that.
The money coming into this country ought to
bo a great inducement to the Mother Country
to try to get the Australians to spend it here,
and it must be a great advantage to the
Mother Country if the Australians residing
here spend their money in the country, what


I have said is intended to point out how very
unreasonable this double taxation is, and how
very keenly we feel the injustice of it. I do
not think it is possible for me to explain the
situation more explicitly. I am not used to
public speaking, but I have done my best to
put the matter before you as clearly as
possible. I have now much pleasure in second-
ing the adoption of the report. (Applause. ]
A LETTER TO THE CHANCELLOR.
The Chairman : I do not know whether it is
the wish of the meeting that Mr. Jenkins
should read the letter that we sent to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer. (Hear, hear.) .
Mr. Jenkins thereupon read the letter, which
is as follows :
“July 11, 1916.
“ The Rt. Hon. Reginald McKenna, Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, Whitehall, S.W.
DOUBLE INCOME-TAX.
“Dear Sir, —On June 221 had the privilege,
together with the chairman of this association,
of listening to the debate in the House of Com-
mons on the above subject, and I am desired
by my committee to point out to you certain
statements made during the debate which may
have influenced members in their voting on the
amendment moved by Mr. Bryce to Clause 28
of the Finance Bill. The late Financial Secre-
tary to the Treasury, in the course of his
speech, referred to the ‘ wealthy Australian
merchants, in the City of London,’ and inferred
that the agitation for relief from the existing
system of double income-tax was being carried
on mainly on their behalf. This inference is
not in accordance with fact. The number of
Australian merchants in London and British
shareholders in the City who have protected
against the payment of double income-tax are
not more numerous than those who reside in
this country and derive part or the whole of
their income from land or money left in
India or the colonies in connection with
business undertakings when they returned to
this country. Regarding your own speech at
the conclusion of the debate, my committee re-
gret to have to record their opinion that you
must have spoken under a misapprehension.
Your statement that ‘ any Australian who has
property in this country from which he draws
a profit pays income-tax in this country, and
pays income-tax in Australia ’ does not coin-
cide with the Commonwealth Income-Tax
Assessment Act No. 34 of 1915, Section 10,
which reads: ‘ Income-tax shall be levied and
paid in and for each financial year upon the
taxable income derived directly or indirectly
by every taxpayer from sources within Aus-
tralia.’ The Income-tax Acts in the different
Australian States are also clear and distinct
in their provisions that income-tax is only pay-
able on income earned or produced in the
State. The position is as follows : A person
living in Australia may receive £IO,OOO a year
from investments in this country upon which
he pays inconle-tax here, but no income-tax is
claimed from him in Australia op such income,
even if the whole of it is forwarded to him. Ir
a person lives in this country who derives an
income of £IO.OOO from investments or business
in he would pay the Australian in-
come-tax on tfya£ yicome ; ag it is produced
‘ from sources within Austrafia,’* and he would
also pay income-tax in this country on the same
income, 'Whether such income is remitted to
this country or left in Australia for investment
or the extension of business. To my com-
mittee there appears no argument in support
of the continuance of such an ineauitable law.
“ The late Financial Secretary to the Trea-
sury stated in the course of his speech that
the Government in the concession made were
doing something which is not done by the
Dominions which have the same income-tax
principle as this country, and he mentioned
British . Columbia and New Zealand as
examples. Mr. J. W. Wilson later on in the
debate called attention to a recently passed
‘ income-tax in Canada where they have made
a reciprocal arrangement with regard to
avoiding double tax.’ So far as the law in
New Zealand corresponded with the law in
this country, it should have been pointed out
that Sir Joseph Ward in his Budget speech on
June 16, as reported in the press on the 17th,
distinctly stated that they proposed ‘ to abolish
the duplication of income-tax by exempting in
New Zealand income earned elsewhere within
the British Empire which has already been
taxed there.’ It is quite evident that some
members of the House, owing to the speeches
made from the Treasury Bench, and the lack
of explanation in reference to Australia and
New Zealand, were not clearly acquainted with
the position; this is borne out by the fact that
one member of the House has written to me
seating that he intended to vote for the amend-
ment moved by Mr. Bryce until he heard you
speak ; no doubt others were similarly per-
suaded. My committee wish to emphasise the
fact that the Commonwealth of Australia in-
come-tax has been imposed solely and exclus-
ively as a means of providing for the Aus-
tralian war expenditure. With equal truth
may it be said as regards the United Kingdom
income-tax that everything above Is. 6d. in
the £ has been necessitated by the same cause.
It, therefore, follows that those who have to
pay the Australian and the United Kingdom
war tax on the same income are being com-
pelled to pay twice over for the war expendi-
ture. /This tact is, in the opinion of my com-
mittee, an unanswerable argument, and should
ensure most earnest consideration and every
possible endeavour to rectify such an unjust
system of taxation.
“ For a temporary addition to the Treasury
funds my committee consider a serious in-
justice is being adhered to, which has already
engendered a bitter feeling in the minds of
many of those who lived for years in India or
the colonies, and have left their hard-earned
capital invested in those countries. And it is
also resulting in business houses being re-
moved from and homes broken up in this
country, as well as other injurious effects on
the unity of the Empire and the development
of our Dominions, which have been clearly
pointed out in the publications of this asso-
ciation, copies of which have been previously
Forwarded to you. My committee have there-
fore felt it to be their duty, on behalf of those
who to their knowledge are suffering from
these admittedly unjust impositions, to bring
the matter to your personal notice, and to most
earnestly urge, not only in their interest, but
in the interest of the* future development and


unity of the Empire, that you should, even now,
give the subject further and favourable con-
sideration. It is therefore respectively sug-
gested that the Government themselves should
on the Report stage of the Bill consider : (1)
The advisability of amending Section 5 of the
Finance Act of 1914, as was proposed • \2) to
regard the question of Clause 28, in the Bill
as introduced, from the pojnt of view of ante-
war conditions, as we point out all additions to
the rate of tax here abeve Is. 6d. in the £ are
‘ war taxation,’ and that the whole of the Aus-
tralian Commonwealth income-tax is * war
taxation ’ pure and simple. should not
the Government enlarge Clause 28, by allowing
to be repaid to any ineome-tax payer in this
country- anything he has paid here over and
above Is. 6d. (instead of as now only over and
above 3s. 6d.) to the extent of the amount
proved to have been paid for Colonial income-
tax on the same income? These concessions,
if granted, would greatly ease the situation,
pending the whole subject being dealt with al
the next Imperial Conference, as promised bj
the Government.”
SIR J. G. WARD ON THE INJUSTICE OF THE
SYSTEM.
Mr. Jenkins added that the extract from
Sir J. G. Ward’s (Minister of Finance) speech,
in introducing the New Zealand Budget for
1916, was as follows: “I will ask the House
to make provision for exempting from assess-
ment of income-tax in New Zealand any in-
come earned elsewheye, and which has al-
ready been taxed in the United Kingdom or
any British Dominion, with a view to avoid-
ing as far as we can the duplicate taxation of
income within the Empire. There is no room
to doubt that the present system is unjust,
and acts as a constant barrier to the full and
free development of commerce within the
British Empire.”
The resolution was then put and carried
unanimously.
A RESOLUTION OF PROTEST.
Mr, George Slade: Mr. Chairman, ladies
aqd gentlemen, you have heard Mr. Dutton
allude to the work performed by Mr. Bull and
Mr. Jenkins, but I think we should include
with those two gentlemen the chairman him-
self. (Hear, hear.) His work has been very
arduous, and he has given a great deal of time
and intellectual thought to this association.
The indefatigable labours of Mr. Jenkins will,
I think, have made you familiar with the
whole of this subject, and it will need very
few words of mine to explain the resolution
which I am asked to put to you. The resolu-
tion is thus ;
“ That this general meeting of ithe Associa-
tion to Protest Against the Duplication of
Income-tax Within the Empire reaffirms the
resolutions unanimously carried and opinions
expressed at the meetings held at the Bank of
Adelaide on December 10, 1915, and at the
Great Hall, Cannon-street Hotel, on February
28, 1916, that double ineome-tax within the
Empire is unjust, inequitable, contrary
to Imperial interests, that it will of necessity
materially restrict and penalise trade an 4 in-
vestments within the Empire, that in the in
threat of tih>e unity and development of the
Empire it is essential that such .atepf should
be taken by the Imperial Government as will
enable immediate relief to he given, and,
further, that the association continue its work
until the objects in view have been attained.”
I think that from what you have already
beard, you will realise that the efforts put for-
ward have had their effect in the House of
Commons, and I think it is to that fact that the
petulant outburst of the Financial Secretary
to the Treasury was due. He found himself
up against a great many more members of the
House of Commons taking an interest in this
subject than lie expected, and he allowed him-
self to forget himself. One fact is that it has
been well ventilated there.
AN INJURY TO THE COLONIES.
I think the next step is that our labours
should be continued, in order that the repre-
sentatives of the Governments of the various
Dominions should have it pointed out to them,
also, how injuriously this taxation is affect-
ing colonial interests. To my certain know-
ledge money is being withdrawn as fast as it
can be from Australia. I speak of Australia
because I know most about it. If that is
continued, it means there will be increased
rates and heavy taxation to be paid there to
make up for the moneys which go away. You
know what these countries have done to assist
us in this war, and that cannot be done' with-
out taxation. If the sources of income are
taken away from them, and they are burdened
with heavy rates of interest in order to induce
money to go there, they will have to pay a
very heavy penalty for coming to the assist-
ance of this country. ** I think that will appeal
to you as a reason why the efforts of this
society should be continued. I therefore have
great pleasure in proposing the resolution.
(Cheers, j
Mr. Jessop (Messrs. Townend and Co.):
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, I have
great pleasure in seconding the resolution. You
who have followed the work of this association,
especially the very heavy labours of the execu-
tive, and have had an opportunity of reading
the report, will entirely endorse the senti-
ments of this resolution. First of all, we re-
affirm the justice of our cause, and, secondly,
wo wish these efforts to be continued with un-
diminished and, if possible, with redoubled
energy. I read the report of speeches made
in the House of Commons with very great in-
terest, and, in common with many others, in
parts with great amazement, the replies
vouchsafed by the Government, and the words
in which those replies were couched. Thero
was just one point which seemed to afford some
slight approach to a basis for the Govern-
ment’s hesitation—that is to say, the difficulty
of applying any measures of relief which
would be fair both to the colonial and the
British Government at the same time. The
Financial Secretary to the Treasury seemed
to suggests that the only alternative was to
lose £18,000,000 a year ; but it does not seem
to me that this is the alternative at all.. Wo
do not suggest, I take it, that the colonial
Governments should abapdon all rights of tax-
ation, and I should like to suggest, if I might,
that this association might usefully give some


lead to the Government as to some fair and
practicable way in which the matter could be
adjusted between the two sides.
A SUGGESTION.
Take the businesses which are carried on
partly in this country and partly in Australia.
At present these are going to be taxed twice
over. Is it not possible to come to some ar-
rangement by which the partners in this coun-
try should pay their share, and the partners in
Australia pay their particular share? The Go-
vernment seem to say: “It is impracticable,
and therefore we will have nothing to do with
it until after the war.” We all feel that we
want to deal with it during the war, while we
arc having to face these heavy rates of taxa-
tion. I have very great pleasure in seconding
the resolution.
The Rev. iSt. J. P. Pugbe said lie spoke not
as an Australian merchant, but he had been
associated with Australia for thirty years.
It seemed to him tlhey wanted to arrive ait ft
basis of taxation, whether it was to be a resi
dential basis, or whether it was to be based
upon the locality in which the capital was
employed. Some understanding on that was
necessary. It was undoubtedly unjust that a
Britisher should be penalised because he was
an Imperialist. He had heard the debate in
the House of Commons, and he could not help
feeling that the House of Commons had yet
to be convinced of Imperialism; they were
not conscious of the Empire, ' _lf and when
they had money to spare for such a purpose, he
thought they should found a few scholarships
for Members of the House of Commons ; they
should be sent adrift into this great Empire
of ours, iso that they might learn what a few
already knew, namely, that the greatness of
the Empire was not here, but at its circum-
ference. It was at the confines of the Empire
where the pioneers of the race were battling
with floods, drought and fire, and other diffi-
culties to found our great Empire, and when
their children came home to live what was the
welcome that the British Government' gave
them? So far as he was concerned, he could
no longer go on living over here under such
taxation. Where he formerly had a pound it
only meant 10s. that day, and there were
others interested in the Commonwealth who
were in the same position. Did Australia ask
Great Britain to pay for her Army and Navy
in Australia, and was it just and fair to ask the
Australians to pay a double exaction ?
PROBLEMS OF PEACE GREATER THAN THOSE
OF WAR.
He thought they should take steps to press
the point upon members of Parliament in Eng-
land before the war was over, if possible, be-
cause the problems of peace were going to be
greater than the problems of War, and now
was the time that the iniustice should cease.
All that they asked was that they should
be consistent, and also have some reciprocal
arrangement with regard to this unjust
double income-tax. He protested against
Mr. McKenna’s having sprung upon the HoUS§
at the very last moment what was a false state-
ment by virtually telling them that they were
only asking the House to do what was being
done in Australia—charge a double income-
tax. The facl was Australia did not charge
double income-tax—they welcomed all their
English friends out there ; even if they had
£IO,OOO a year they would, be free of income-
tax altogether there if they paid at home. It
was quite right, as 'Mr. Jenkins had told them,
that there was an arrangement between State
and State. The present position, he urged,
was impossible; they were putting a check
upon the development of the Empire. Money
was no longer flowing to Australia, or out into
the great Empire, and in that way they were
checking its development. His view was that
every encouragement should be given to the
free flow of money throughout the Empire.
(Applause.) _ _
Mr. Hogg said he did hot think that Mem-
bers of Parliament should bring insinuations
against the object for which the association
had been formed. It had been stated that
the association was inaugurated only to help
merchants in London, who were already very
wealthy ; but he thought it would be better
to give concrete instances of how the tax
affected the members of the community at
large. They all knew that numbers of young
men had come over from Australia, many of
them owners of considerable property out
there, solely and entirely with the object of
doing all they could to fight for the Empire.
They had become officers in British regi-
ments, and these men, who had given up their
work in Australia, whose incomes were going
on in Australia, had, when they came over
here, to spend what was necessary in this
country and to pay income-tax on the remit-
tances which they received from Australia.
In addition, they had to pay income-tax again
on the money when it arrived in this country.
In fact, they paid on the whole of their in-
come out there, and would be called upon to
pay ss. in the £ to British Commissioners as
well.
THE CHAIRMANS REPLY.
The Chairman, in reply to the points which
had been raised, said that details of how the
double income-tax had acted unfairly on indi-
viduals had been given in the schedule to
the memorandum. They were out for a
principle, and the principle for which they
had been contending was very clear. He
thought it was necessary, in an agitation
of that kind, to be guided by principle
as much as possible. The great principle
for which they had been contending, and
for which they were still contending, was that
within the Empire income which was earned
anywhere should be taxed once, and once only.
That was the guiding principle upon which
their agitation was based. blow they came
to the question of taxation in Great Britain
and in Australia. The principle of the in-
come-tax over here was that it w T as governed
mainly by residence —that was to say, per-
sonal residence here. Whoever received an
income in this country was taxed upon that
income, and it did not matter where that in-
come was produced. In Australia the taxation
was not governed by residence. They taxed
the income in Australia because it was created
in Australia, and if they considered which of
those principles were the most just he would
unhesitatingly say that the principle which
prevailed in Australia was far more just


than the one which prevailed in this
country. Supposing that principle was once
admitted, then the matter would become a
question of adjustment between the Imperial
Government and the Government of the Domi-
nion. If they had an income-tax in this coun-
try and an income-tax in the colonies, then
the Governments must arrange between them-
selves as to how the payment of that income-
tax should be divided. It was a matter for
the statesmen in the countries interested to
devise the means of apportioning the taxation.
What they were doing was. as far as pos-
sible, to put pressure upon the Imperial and
Dominion Governments, in order to make them
discuss this question between themselves dur-
ing the time that was going to elapse before
the next Imperial Conference was held.
The resolution was unanimously agreed to.
Mr. Jenkins then proposed: “ That copies
of the above resolution be forwarded to the
Prime Minister, the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
the Secretary of State for India, and the Pre-
miers of the Dominions.”
Mr. C. C. McLeod seconded the resolution,
which was carried.
A vote of thanks to the chairman was pro-
posed by Mr. F. W. Moore, seconded by Mr.
E. J. Pounds, and carried with acclamation.




Printed by the
Argus Printing Company, Ltd,,
Corner of Temple Avenue
and Tudor Street,
London, E.C.
