

MELANESIAN MISSION.
NOTES
VISIT TO NORFOLK ISLAND,
11ST NOVEMBER, 187 S,
FROM THE JOURNAL OE THE BISHOP OF AUCKLAND:
WITH A
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR 1872, LIST
OF SUBSCRIBERS, &c.
AtTCKLAND;
WILLIAM ATKIN, CHURCH AND GENERAL PRINTER, HIGH STREET.


HOW THE MISSION WAS PLANTED IN NOEFOLK ISLAND,
More than fifteen years ago Bishop Selwyn desired to fix the
central station of the Melanesian Mission at Norfolk Island.
There were strong reasons in favour of the transfer of the work
from New Zealand thither; especially the greater suitableness
of the climate to the Melanesian Scholars, and the shortening of
the voyages of the Mission schooner.
His plan was opposed strongly by Sir W. Denison, the then
Governor of New South Wales, and by the Pitcairn Island
Committee in London; and was for the time abandoned. After
some years it was found necessary by the Governor of New
South Wales (Sir John Young, now Lord Lisgar), to make
provision for certain objects —for the benefit of the population of
Norfolk Island. Money was needed, but the island had no
revenue of its own ; and nothing could be drawn for the purpose
from the revenue of New South Wales, Norfolk Island not
forming part of that colony. Accordingly, Sir J. Young was
authorised by the Home Government to sell a limited quantity
of land in the island, exercising due caution as to the character
of the settlers to be introduced thereby. Sir J. Young, knowing
that the sale in any way would be unacceptable to the islanders,
was anxious to render it really beneficial to them. He therefore
proposed to Bishop Patteson that the Mission should purchase the
block, and his proposal was agreed to. Thus the Mission was
in 1866 established in Norfolk Island as its permanent home.


VISIT OF THE BISHOP OF AUCKLAND TO
NORFOLK ISLAND.
The Southern Cross Mission schooner, returned to Auckland
from her cruise among the Islands on October 14, bringing me a
letter dated September 23, from the Rev. R. H. Codrington, the
present head of the Melanesian Mission at Norfolk Island, from
which the following is an extract: —
‘I cannot at length tell you about our voyage, but it has been
very successful indeed, thanks in great part to Mr Tilly ; but it is
necessary for my purpose to tell you in some detail the state of
things in the Banks’ islands. It was there, at Mota, that as you
well know our dear friend spent the last months of his life in giving
a start to the lingering conversion of the people. He left a large
proportion of the children baptized and a good number of adults,
under the care of G. Sarawia. In that very trying interval, after
they heard of the Bishop’s death, and before our vessel returned to
them in May, the little Christian party not only stood firm, but
their number steadily increased. When I got there, Mr Palmer
had been there three months, but he found everything going on
well at his arrival. Now that we are all gone again, there is
George alone. There are three other schools besides his own
central one on the island. There is one side of the island you
may say Christian and the other still heathen; and he has besides
the neighbouring islands to visit as he can. I mean to shew that
he has more than he can to do. Again, on a neighbouring island
two young men, whose education has been carried on as far as it
could go, were left last year with their wives to do what they
could for their people. The influence of Mota has been felt, and
they have worked steadily and have now a little Christian party
round them and a good sized school, and many calls to go and
teach elsewhere. A man of more ability and knowledge is wanted
to take the lead. Again, on another island, where alone (besides
Mota) there is now a large population left by the slave trade, they
very much want a teacher; will build a house and do everything
for him. Most happily in each case we have just the very man
who is wanted. From Mota, George’s brother is ready and most
able to help him. We have from Ara one of the oldest and best


ISLAND.
to fix the
Island.
; the work
uitableness
Drtening of
n, the then
lirn Island
aed. After
>r of New
'), to make
opulation of
uid had no
liuixuiu.
revenue of its own ; and nothing could be drawn for the purpose
from the revenue of New South Wales, Norfolk Island not
forming part of that colony. Accordingly, Sir J. Young was
authorised by the Home Government to sell a limited quantity
of land in the island, exercising due caution as to the character
of the settlers to be introduced thereby. Sir J. Young, knowing
that the sale in any way would be unacceptable to the islanders,
was anxious to render it really beneficial to them. He therefore
proposed to Bishop Patteson that the Mission should purchase the
block, and his proposal was agreed to. Thus the Mission was
in 1866 established in Norfolk Island as its permanent home.


VISIT OF THE BISHOP OF AUCKLAND TO
NORFOLK ISLAND.
The Southern Gross Mission schooner, returned to Auckland
from her cruise among’ the Islands on October 14, bringing me a
letter dated September 23, from the Rev. R. H. Codrington, the
present head of the Melanesian Mission at Norfolk Island, from
which the following is an extract: —
‘I cannot at length tell you about our voyage, but it has been
very successful indeed, thanks in great part to Mr Tilly ; but it is
necessary for my purpose to tell you in some detail the state of
things in the Banks’ islands. It was there, at Mota, that as you
well know our dear friend spent the last months of his life in giving
a start to the lingering conversion of the people. He left a large
proportion of the children baptized and a good number of adults,
under the care of G. Sarawia. In that very trying interval, after
they heard of the Bishop’s death, and before our vessel returned to
them in May, the little Christian party not only stood firm, but
their number steadily increased. When I got there, Mr Palmer
had been there three months, but he found everything going on
well at his arrival. Now that we are all gone again, there is
George alone. There are three other schools besides his own
central one on the island. There is one side of the island you
may say Christian and the other still heathen; and he has besides
the neighbouring islands to visit as he can. I mean to shew that
he has more than he can to do. Again, on a neighbouring island
two young men, whose education has been carried on as far as it
could go, were left last year with their wives to do what they
could for their people. The influence of Mota has been felt, and
they have worked steadily and have now a little Christian party
round them and a good sized school, and many calls to go and
teach elsewhere. A man of more ability and knowledge is wanted
to take the lead. Again, on another island, where alone (besides
Mota) there is now a large population left by the slave trade, they
very much want a teacher; will build a house and do everything
for him. Most happily in each case we have just the very man
who is wanted. From Mota, George’s brother is ready and most
able to help him. We have from Ara one of the oldest and best


instructed of all our scholars, who was always destined to be the
first Native Minister of the place. And for Santa Maria, we have
another connected by family with the place and very acceptable to
the people. These men Bishop Patteson intended to have ordained
last Christmas, and we all very much wish them to be ordained
before they go to the work which is waiting for them. What I
want to beg you to do is to come and ordain them for us ; and I
feel sure that if you can you will. I shall begin to prepare them
at once, though they are very much prepared already. It will
give an immense impetus to our work both in Norfolk Island and
in the Banks’ islands. If I did not think it a matter of great
importance I would not ask it, but there is no time to lose.
Suppose any arrangements to be made about our Bishopric, these
men could not be ordained within the next few months by their
own Bishop. Pray give your best consideration to the matter, and
come if you possibly can. The mission could well afford to provide
a vessel for you. We should have a few for confirmation also and
perhaps Mr Nobbs some more. lam sure of two things, that you
will come if you can manage it, and that if you do you will be
very pleased and make it useful.’
Mr Codrington informed me at the same time that he had
written to the Bishop of Tasmania, in whose jurisdiction Norfolk
Island when a penal settlement was placed by the British Govern-
ment, asking him to delegate to me, as the nearest Bishop in New
Zealand, the necessary authority for holding the Ordination which
was considered essential to the progress of the Mission.
I felt that I could not but comply with Mr Codrington’s request;
and as I should not have been able without very great inconvenience
to leave New Zealand after November, I decided on setting out for
Norfolk Island as soon as the Mission schooner could be got ready
for sea.
I accordingly left Auckland on Thursday November 7, accom-
panied by the Rev. G. Maunsell my Chaplain, and Mr F. D. Yonge,
a cousin of the lady of that name to whom the Mission is so
greatly indebted.* Mrs Jacob, the Captain’s wife, was also on
board. I went to the schooner in a boat which met me at the reef
below S. Stephen’s chapel in Judge’s Bay, the point from which
Bishop Selwyn used to embark for his island cruises in former
days. Sir W. and Lady Martin, Archdeacon Maunsell, Mr
• Miss Yonge has devoted the whole proceeds of her book, the Daisy Chain, amounting
now to between £2,000 and £3,000, to the purposes of the Mission.


Swainson, the Revs. B. T. Dudley and J. Palmer, Mrs Palmer,
Mrs Wyatt-Watling, and Mrs Cowie saw me off.
November 8, Friday: After being becalmed for 12 hours at a
distance of 40 miles from Auckland, we made a start after sunset
with a fresh S.W. breeze, which increased in strength during the
night.
November 10, Sunday: The wind now from the S.B. continued
to increase, and our progress was very rapid; but the sea became
so rough that even the sailors were ill. The schooner being very
light was tossed about like a cork, and was struck occasionally by
three seas at once, so that ‘ the poor thing,’ as Captain Jacob said,
< did not know what to do.’ The motion was particularly unplea-
sant, justifying all that had been told me of the liveliness of the
vessel; but notwithstanding the heaviness of the sea very little
water 'was taken on board. The Southern Gross is of 92 tons
register,—about the size of the vessel in which Columbus first
crossed the Atlantic.
November 11, Monday: After 6 p.m. we were becalmed. The
wind having gone round to the north and the weather become
warm, enormous cockroaches in great numbeis, and swarms of
light coloured ants made their appearance in all parts of the
vessel. The former are at least as odious as the cockroaches of
the P. and O. ships on the Indian side of Suez; some of the
crew occasionally finding that their toe nails have been eaten down
to the quick by them in a night. The ants are not so objectionable,
though they are to be found on almost every piece of bread that one
puts into one’s mouth; they are supposed, however, to act as
scavengers of the vessel, and so to make amends for the annoyance
they occasion.
November 18, Wednesday: We were becalmed the greater part
of yesterday and to-day about sixty miles from Norfolk Island. It
would be a great advantage if the new schooner were provided
with auxiliary steam power, to save the time of the missionaries
on the occurrence of periods of calm; during which also the sails
and rigging suffer much damage in the swaying to and fro of the
vessel on the long swell of the ocean. Steam power is, however,
chiefly needed to enable the schooner to keep off the reefs which
are numerous among the islands, and to move away quickly from
danger of whatever kind. During her last cruise, the vessel was
at one time six days accomplishing about 30 miles, owing .to the


continuance of calm ; and at Florida she was with difficulty saved
from drifting on to the rocks at a very critical time. The necessary
discomforts of the missionaries during a cruise among the islands
are sufficiently trying, without these dangers and annoyances which
might be prevented. lam told that auxiliary steam power suffi-
cient for the purposes specified would occasion little extra expense,
considering the saving that would in many respects be thereby
effected.
November 14, Thursday: We reached Norfolk Island at 5 p.m.,
and landed at the Cascades on the North side, as it was thought
useless to attempt to go ashore at the Settlement, owing to a heavy
swell that was setting in there from the South, and making the sea
near the landing place a sheet of foam. The coast in the neighbour-
hood of the Cascades, as in other parts of the island, is rocky and
precipitous; and landing there is sometimes difficult even with the
wind from the opposite quarter, as one has to step out of the boat
on to a rock, against which the waves are continually breaking.
Norfolk Island is between 15 and 20 miles in circumference,
about the size of Holy Island to the W, of Anglesea; its
highest point being about 1000 feet above the sea.* From the
place where we landed to the Mission Station (S. Barnabas) is
about 5 miles, by a good grass-grown road. Everything was
looking very beautiful at the time of our visit, brilliantly green
and fresh after recent and heavy rain, —the island resembling a
magnificent emerald in a deep blue setting. The land generally
is very undulating, and well-wooded; the principal trees being
the formal Norfolk pine and what is called the white oak; with
frequent groves of wild lemon trees now laden with large
yellow fruit. I heard the notes of a good many birds, but none
that I recognised, and saw one pheasant of the kind that we have in
New Zealand. About half-way to the Station, I was overtaken by
Mr Codrington, who was hurrying home to evening chapel, and
had just heard of our arrival. We reached the Station at
sunset, and found the Melanesian boys standing about in groups
waiting for the service. A person well acquainted with the
islands might almost tell the home of each of them by the fashion of
* Norfolk Island, lying in the Southern Pacific, in latitude 29 3 45 South, and longi-
tude 167° 58' 6" Past from London, was discovered by Captain Cook in 1774. it is about
600 miles from Auckland (New Zealand), and about 900 miles from Sydney (Australia,-.
It appears to have been formed by the eruption of volcanic matter from the bed ot the sea;
and is estimated to contain about 10,000 acres. Until 1788 the island had remained unin-
habited ; but in that year a small number of convicts with a party of Marines was sent
there from Australia. The convict establishment was finally withdrawn in 1855; ana m
the following year the inhabitants of Pitcairn’s island (4i miles m circumference), the
descendants of the mutineers of the Bounty, who had outgrown their diminutive home,
were at their own request removed to Norfolk Island.


Sunday
Morninq.
2 113
114
Evening.
122 148
Monday
19
87
...
110 105
Tuesday
67
96
97
115 106
Wednesday
51
101 145
Thursday
8
15
...
24 47
Friday
22
23
...
• •t
103 146
Saturday
121
130
...
Ml
135 136
his hair. With some it is long, lank, and rusty-looking; while others
wear it in huge frizzy masses, in shape somewhat resembling the
modern ‘ bearskin ’of H.M.’s Guards. The moon was at the full
and the sky cloudless, so that I could not have seen the Station at
night under more favourable circumstances. It is not unlike a
village in lower Bengal in the rainy season, when the vegeta-
tion is luxuriant and the air filled with the chirping of the tree-
cricket, Soon after 7 p.m. the bell summoned us to chapel.
The lights in the windows reminded me of winter evening
‘chapel’ at Cambridge; but vespers at S. Barnabas is a
very different service from that to which we were accustomed at
Trinity Hall. On entering the building, which is of wood and
unsubstantial, we found it nearly filled by Melanesians, dressed
in trousers and flannel shirts, sitting quietly on long benches
arranged across the chapel and along the side walls; the latter
seats being set apart for the clergy and other teachers, and for
females. The service consisted of part of the Evening Prayer, said
(in Mota) by the Rev. R. Jackson, who appeared to be very
familiar with the language, saying the prayers almost by heart.
The Magnificat and Nunc Dimittis were chanted by the whole congre-
gation, in a manner that quite astonished me ; indeed I never heard
the canticles sung with more spirit, or more devotionally by any
congregation. Bach word was distinctly pronounced and with the
proper emphasis. The harmonium accompaniment, played by the
Rev. C. Brooke (to whose skill and perseverance the excellence of
the singing is due), was just what an accompaniment should be,
and so seldom is in our churches, —a support to the singers,
exact in time, with expression, and subdued in tone. The chants
moreover were particularly well chosen, suited to the voices of the
Melanesians, and appropriate to the words sung. The precision
and spirit of the chanting, together with the almost metallic ring
of the boys’ voices, recalled to me the inspiriting tones of the
band of an English cavalry regiment. The Psalms for
the evening, devotionally ‘said’ by the whole congregation,
were the 24th and 47th, according to the following Table, drawn
up by Bishop Patteson for the daily services :


A Lesson from the New Testament was read by one of the Mela-
nesians, and there was a hymn after the third collect. The scholars
evidently took pleasure in the service, and their behaviour was in
every respect most becoming. As I looked at their happy faces, and
observed their quiet orderly manner —in standing, sitting, and
kneeling, I could not but feel that the system of which I saw before
me so striking a result must have in it some special virtue of its own.
It was difficult to realise the fact that the boys composing the con-
gregation were, for the most part, sons of men as wild as those by
whom the Mission was last year deprived of its head, and that
the words which they sung at the service had not been until recently
reduced to writing. As to the boys’ enjoyment of the service,
something is no doubt due to the charm which ‘ truth combined
with novelty invariably possesses,’ for- Melanesians as well as for
Europeans. Of their circumstances it might literally be said
“ Old things are 'passed away; behold, all things are become new.”
The appropriateness of S. Peter’s metaphor, “ the washing of
regeneration ,” in regard to those whom God “ hath reconciled
. . to Himself by Jesus Christ,” is strikingly illustrated by the
present condition of these islanders. The physical change denoted by
birth into the world can alone express the alteration experienced
by those who, like the Melanesian scholars, in baptism are
delivered from the power of darkness and “ translated into
the kingdom of His dear Son.” As Bishop Patteson said of
them, ‘ they are indeed most docile loveable fellows; we all become
very much attached to them ; but they were rather different when
first we made their acquaintance.’ A good deal of the success of
the work, in this as in other and more important matters, is
explained by what I afterwards saw of the terms on which the
teachers and taught live together at S. Barnabas school.
When the service was ended the congregation remained kneeling-
in private prayer for several minutes, during which there was
perfect stillness; and then quietly left the building, the females
and the teachers going out first.
After chapel I went with Mr Codrington to his house close by,
which contains, besides his own two rooms, a long apartment
suitably furnished, in which his Mota scholars sleep and keep
their things. Each member of the European staff has a similar
‘ house,’ —as it is technically called at Eton and other public
schools, where are lodged under his care the scholars from the
particular island with which his work is specially connected. Thus


the Florida boys are lodged with Mr Brooke, those from San
Christoval with Mr Jackson, and the Ambrym boys with Mr Kenny;
and Mr Bice has charge of the boys from Lepers Island, The young
girls live with Mrs Palmer and Mrs Bice, who are their principal
teachers. As with Englishmen in India, so with our Missionaries
in Norfolk Island, there is no such thing as private life; every
window in the mission houses being also a door, in fine weather
always open; and, in addition, no member of the Mission looks upon
his house as his castle. Accordingly, a dozen or more boys accom-
panied us from the chapel to Mr Oodrington’s quarter’s, into which
some entered with us, while others stood about the door in the
brilliant moonlight, scrutinizing the fresh arrival from New
Zealand. Their conduct was, however, in no way obtrusive or
prying—all evidently feeling that they were welcome, and to each
visitor a kind word was said by Mr Codrington as opportunity
offered. In one corner of the room there was a sick boy lying in
a cosy looking bed, with various little comforts on a chair by his
side; and at the table one of the candidates for Deacons’ Orders
sat down and commenced writing quite at his ease. Whilst Mr
Codrington and I talked together on matters connected with the
Mission, bare-footed boys and young men came noiselessly into the
room and left it again, as they chose, not speaking unless spoken to
by Mr Codrington; who would now and then take one of his visitors
by the hand, and, drawing the lad to him in a kindly manner,
would ask some question or say a few words to interest him. The
present head of the Mission, like the late Bishop Patteson, is thus
accessible to all the scholars of S. Barnabas at all hours of the
day: indeed what I am now attempting to describe went on
after nine o’clock at night. No one of them is kept by Mr Cod-
rington at arm’s length; but all are encouraged to treat him as
sons should treat a father, with confidence and respect. As in a
well commanded regiment of soldiers (where threatening and
scolding are not needed), or in a well brought up family, perfect
discipline is maintained, and all are kept in their places,
by the uniform administration of the ‘unwritten law of love.’
The effects of such a rule are to bo seen on every side at S.
Barnabas, There are no menial offices connected with the Mission ;
the Melanesian boys and girls not being required by the Missionaries
or their wives to do for them anything that they would not do for
themselves. Some of the scholars who assist in the household work
as volunteers receive a small payment for their services, but there
are no regular servants; the work of the community of what-


ever kind being distributed among the whole body, Europeans
and natives alike, —each one giving his more particular attention
to that branch of the household and other duties for which his
strength and natural tastes, or his antecedents, specially fit him.
Thus Mr Codrington directs the higher education of the school;
Mr Palmer superintends the farm, and works on it more
diligently than any day labourer would be expected to do,
being assisted by Messrs Brooke and Bice; Mr Jackson is
head gardener; Mr Kenny has charge of the horses, cows, carts,
&c.; whilst the superintendence of the married women is left to
Mrs Palmer and Mrs Bice. Until lately Mr Codrington
acted as head cook, in addition to his other duties; but
he is now relieved of this office by one of the Melanesian
deacons. It is by such brotherly and Christian co-operation,
in all matters connected with the work of the Mission,
that self-respect, mutual trust, and a spirit of independence are
cherished and maintained among the residents at S. Barnabas.
The wildest children of the wildest islanders are perfectly gentle
in their intercourse with their teachers, sitting quietly by their side
in their rooms, handling with much care their lesson-books, doing
no injury to the furniture, and keeping their fingers from the
private property of the missionaries which lies about them on
every side. In the countenances of several of these hopeful
scholars I thought I could discern signs of more than a glimmering
of ‘ sweetness and light.’
The walls of Mr Codrington’s sitting room are furnished
much as they might be if the house stood within the boundaries
of Wadham, and he were still living there on his Fellowship.
Over the wooden mantel-piece, above the usual clock, is an
engraving of Nicolaus Wadham, A.rmiger; one wall is almost
hidden by shelves filled with handsomely-bound books, and on
the others are some large water-colour drawings and photographs.
At 9.40 p.m. the bell rang for bed. The quarters occupied by
me during my stay were those of the late Bishop, forming part of
the same building with the chapel, and now tenanted by Mr
Brooke. The sitting room, from which the chapel is entered
through doors covered with red cloth, has on two sides shelves
filled with the Bishop’s books; and on the others there are
engravings and photographs, —Raphael’s Last Supper resting on
the mantel-piece, and a large head of the Saviour, engraved by
Lewis, being suspended above the shelves at the further end. The


room, about 30 feet by 20 feet with a high-pitched roof, contains a
long table covered with oil-cloth; at which I found the Florida
boys and other catechumens seated and reading their books, when
I entered it after the chapel service. Along one side there is a good
verandah, into which two doors open, not closed day or
night during my visit. After the 9.40 p.m. bell several boys
passed quietly through the room from the verandah into the chapel
—the doors of which are of course never locked, to say their prayers
before going to bed. Having been accustomed to make such use of
the chapel and to see their seniors do so, from their earliest connec-
tion with the Mission, the boys do not think it anything strange,
but would rather be surprised to learn that any church is not con-
stantly used for private prayer by Christians living near it. The
Bishop’s bedroom is entered from the sitting room by a door oppo-
site to the verandah. It was here that Bishop Patteson, as he told
me himself, was comforted in his illness by joining in the
daily chapel services, when confined to his bed in the early part of
1870, There is very little furniture in the room ; and on the walls
are engravings of John Keble and Bishop Coleridge, and photo-
graphs of the late Sir John Patteson and other members of the
family.
November 15, Friday : The first bell rang at 6 a.m.; but nearly
an hour before that time members of the community were up and
about. At 6.30 a.m. all assembled in the chapel, when Mr. Cod-
rington took the service, the Lessons being read by Melanesians.
From the chapel all went to the Hall close by to breakfast. It is
a detached building with the kitchen at one end. Down the centre
of the long room is placed the high table, for the Mission staff,
including all the teachers clerical and lay—European and Melane-
sian, Mr Kendall the carpenter, and occasionally the mission,
aries’ wives; and along three sides are other tables for the scholars,
the women and girls having one apart to themselves. After a
short grace said by Mr Codrington in Mota, all sat down to a
suitable meal; each person present being supplied with food “ con-
venient for” him, —with fare wholesome, substantial, and abundant,
such as is conducive to the ‘ plain living and high thinking
which have ever been associated with the Melanesian Mission.
Silence is not enforced during meals at any of the tables; but the
conduct of all present —about 150, then as at other times, is per-
fectly orderly, almost the only voice heard above the rest being
the occasional crowing of some child in arms. After breakfast all


disperse to their various duties until 1 o’clock when they meet
again for dinner. During my visit lessons had for the most part
to be dispensed with, as the clergy were engaged all day preparing
candidates for ordination and confirmation. I did not, therefore,
see the boys in school, but had many opportunities of judging of
the progress they were making in reading and writing, and in
other branches of their education.
In the afternoon I rode to the Settlement, about three miles
distant from the Mission station, accompanied by the Rev. E.
Jackson, who had to see his English-speaking candidates for
confirmation. We went by what are called the ‘ downs ; 1 from
which there is a charming view across to Philip Island, a hug©
uninhabited rock about three miles south of Norfolk Island.
The day was very fine; and the colours of the land, sea, and sky
were as beautiful as ever I saw them in any part of the world.
Near the deserted-looking Settlement, with its forsaken and
dilapidated barracks*' and gaol, the long rollers were breaking
on the rocks with great fury, under the force of the southerly
wind, —forming a broad white belt of surf all along the coast,
and filling the air with a din, like the roar of not very distant
artillery. I called at Government House, a large and well
situated building, in which Mr Wyatt-Watling the doctor of the
island, and Mr Revel the schoolmaster, at present have quar-
ters; there having been no resident Governor for sixteen
years, that is, since the convict establishment was removed from
the island. An enormous sum of money must have been spent
on this and the other large stone buildings of the place. At the
back of Government House, and separated from it by a planta-
tion of handsome Norfolk pines, is the house of the Rev. G. H.
Nobbs,f chaplain of the settlement, who came with the Pitcairn
Islanders from their former home, and is now 73 years of age.
Mr Nobbs is hale and hearty, notwithstanding the rough expe-
riences of his earlier years; when he was an officer in the Royal
Navv, and afterwards in the service of the Chilian Government.
He took me to see his new church, All Saints, which was built
last year, and is very creditable to the island architect, and to the
inhabitants who provided the chief part of the cost.
* Norfolk Island was abandoned as a penal settlement in 1855, and the Pitcairn
Islanders were brought there in 1856. ~On their arrival they were 194 m number, and are
now 335. The Head Quarters of the Melanesian Mission removed to the Island from
Auckland (New Zealand) in 1866.
+ Mr Nohbs arrived at Pitcairn’s Island in 1828, and became schoolmaster of the commu-
nity. Since 1852 he has been tneir Minister. In the latter year he visited England, and was
ordained by the Bishop of London,


In the evening I was instructed in reading the confirmation
and ordination services in Mota, by Edmund Baratu ; of whom
Bishop Patteson said, in his address to the people of Sydney,
that he 1 was perhaps the ablest of all his scholars with the
exception of another lad named Henry Tagalana’ —one of the
candidates for deacons’ orders.
November 16, Saturday: I had a class of young people from
the Settlement (i.e. the home, of the quondam Pitcairners) who
were to be confirmed on the following day, the boys having
been prepared by Mr Jackson and the girls by Mr Brooke. My
class was held in S. Barnabas chapel. Afterwards I
received a visit from two young men, James Eussell McCoy and
Benjamin Stanley Young (brother of Pisher Young, killed at
Santa Cruz in 1864), who had recently come by a whaling
vessel from Pitcairn’s Island.* They wished to be admitted to
confirmation; and I was very glad that they should be, after
having some conversation with them upon the subject. Vessels
very rarely touch at Pitcairn’s Island, which is situated nearly
4000 miles to the east of Norfolk Island, and no clergyman
had been there since 1863, when H.M.S. Tribune called,
having a chaplain on board.
At Mr Codrington’s request I wrote an examination paper
which he put into Mota for the candidates for deacons’ orders.
He also made me a literal translation of the answers, some of
which shewed much thought. I may here mention that the writing
was particularly good, in form like that of an educated English-
man. In the afternoon I had some conversation with the candi-
dates, Mr Oodrington acting as interpreter. Compared with the
Maori deacons whom I lately ordained, the three Melanesians are
not so much of men , being considerably younger and less experienced,
besides being by nature more shy and reserved. Their know-
ledge of the Bible is necessarily not equal to that of the
Maories, inasmuch as the Old Testament has not yet been trans-
lated into Mota, nor the whole of the New. The Melanesian
deacons are, however, well instructed in the Scriptures, consider-
ing their few years of teaching and that much of it has been
oral only; and their answers to my questions shewed plainly that
they had been taught to be methodical. As Bishop Patteson
once said of some of them, 1 they exhibit a capacity for thought
* A few families returned to Pitcairn from Norfolk 1., preferring their old home.


and reflection which is not always possessed even by educated
people.’
After evening chapel I rode down to the Settlement to hear
the Norfolk Islanders sing. At 8 p.m. the greater part of the
adult population assembled in a fine room of one of the deserted
Government buildings, according to their custom, and sang
hymns and other songs until 10 o’clock. Their voices are par-
ticularly good, with a sweetness of their own, and they have
been trained and are well led by Mr Driver Christian, the
grandson of Fletcher Christian of the Bounty* These interesting
people were first taught to sing by Mr Hugh Oarleton, who was left
behind at Pitcairn’s Island in 1850, on his way to San Francisco,
and whiled away the time during his detention (three weeks) by
imparting to the community a knowledge of music, which has
been carefully cherished by them to the'present day.
On my return to S. Barnabas at 10.30 p.m. I looked in at Mr
Codrington’s quarters, where I found some of the boys ot his
house saying their prayers, before going to bed in the adjoining
dormitory.
November 17, Sunday xxv. after Trinity : I ordained Henry
Tagalana, Robert Pantutun, and Edward Wogale, at All Saints’
church Norfolk Island, for the Melanesian Mission.
The following particulars of the antecedents of the three
deacons were supplied to me by Mr Codrington:
< Henry Tagalana is the eldest of six brothers and one sister
who have been with the Mission; of whom four brothers are now
at Norfolk Island, and the other brother and the sister are em-
ployed as teachers in their native place. This is the little island
of Ara, joined by a reef to the larger one called Saddle Island,
one of the most considerable of the Banks’ group, and before the
labour trade began inhabited by a considerable population.
Tagalana was the first from Ara, and one of the three first from
that part of the Banks’ Islands who joined Bishop Patteson, and
he has remained continually in the Mission to the present time, at
first in New Zealand and now in Norfolk Island. He was about
eleven years old when he came to Bishop Patteson in 1860; he
is consequently now about twenty-three. He was one of the
first Banks’ Islanders baptized, and was named after the present
* The Norfolk Islanders are descended from some of the officers and crew of the
Ttomio who mutinied off Tofoa, one of the Friendly Islands, Pacific Ocean, April 28,
vl'he mutineers went first to Otaheite, where they married natives of that island;
ind of "hem afterwards proceeded to Pitcairn, where they settled. The island is
situated in Lat. 25° 4' south, Long. 130° 8' west.


•
Primate of New Zealand. He was one of the first confirmed by
Bishop Selwyn, who had also baptized him. He was admitted
to the Holy Communion, with George Sarawia, at Christmas
1865, the other confirmed scholars not being considered suffi-
ciently advanced. He was always from the first the leading boy
from his own part of the Banks’ Islands, and, though consider-
ably younger, ranked with George Sarawia in Bishop Patteson’s
consideration, and above him it may be said in his affections.
It was Bishop Patteson’s declared intention to have
ordained him at Christmas 1871. He has considerable natural
ability, is a good teacher, and has an impressive manner in
addressing natives. He has twice, in the year 1870, and in 1872,
been at the head of a little body of Christians at Ara. In 1870
they were found carrying on daily worship together, and teach-
ing in their own villages, and in the neighbourhood, those who
came together to learn. On Henry’s return to Ara in the present
year he found that the work of his brother Edwin, and his
brother-in-law William, had already gathered large congrega-
tions and many scholars, and that eight converts had been
already baptized by George Sarawia. He took what was
naturally his place at the head of the teaching, and was actively
engaged in it for three months. On the day when the last
candidates presented by him and his brothers were baptized,
there was a very devout congregation of native Christians, and a
school of 146 persons of all ages. He is no doubt looked upon
both by the Christian, and the still heathen people of his native
place, as their natural leader and teacher. The little island of Ara
where he will settle, as it is hoped, next year, will probably soon
become Christian, and the centre of operations which will extend
over the two districts of Saddle Island still containing a popula-
tion, and reach also to the large island of Yanua Lava. Henry
has now been married nearly four years, and has two children.
His wife Joanna is a regular communicant and an intelligent
woman.
‘ Robert Pantutun is a native of Mota, and came first
away with Bishop Patteson to New Zealand in 1861.
With the exception of the one year 1864, when he was
persuaded to absent himself, he has constantly remained
with the Mission, and has always been much valued for his
intelligence and good nature, and particularly since he has grown
up for his industrial services; which have certainly interfered
with his intellectual progress. He has passed these many years


free from any known cause for serious reproach, and among the
Norfolk Island scholars, and at home at Mota, is universally
liked and respected. As an example of the estimation in which
he is held, it may be mentioned that his long list of god-children
in his Prayer book shews boys from almost all the islands
whence we have Christian scholars, who have chosen him for a
witness at their Baptism. He was baptized by Bishop Selwyn,
confirmed by Bishop Patteson, and became a communicant in No-
vember 1867. He was married in November 1870, to Emily, a
very intelligent native of Saddle Island. They have one child,
John Patteson.
< It is proposed that Robert should begin a Mission station on
the island of Santa Maria in the Banks’ Group, in a place with
which he has a family connection. There are already a few
Christian boys and young men from 'that Island at Mota and at
Norfolk Island; who will go with him as assistants, having been
preceded by Robert’s step-father, himself a native of Santa
Maria, though long resident at Mota, who will prepare a proper
house for school and Divine Service. The people of the place
ask anxiously for a teacher, and there is still a large population
there. Robert had been designed by Bishop Patteson for Star
Island, where there are now very few people left; and he will
in his boat be able to visit that and other neighbouring islands.
It is not proposed that he should settle at once at Santa Maria,
but begin a branch Mission there, with a view to his permanent
residence.
1 Edward Wogale is a native of Qakea, a little sand islet close
to Yanua Lava, Great Banks’ Island, to which his family
belongs; but he practically counts as a Mota man. He is
younger brother of George Sarawia, and will now go to help
him at Mota in the work which has become too heavy for the
hands of one man. He came to Bishop Patteson in the year
1863. Of his conduct from first to last, it is not too
much to say that it has been blameless. He is decidedly
the most thoughtful and the most intellectual of our
Melanesians; his mind cultivated and refined by long, close,
and affectionate intercourse with Bishop Patteson, and by his
teaching in higher subjects, begun in his case at an unusually
early age. There is much hope of his being peculiarly useful at
Mota under present circumstances, when the activity of the
work, and the attention that has been roused, require more
intellectual ability, and a more sympathetic mind than that of


the excellent Deacon now in charge. Edward is a particularly
good teacher; and a good teacher who can carry the more
intelligent scholars onwards is very much wanted at Mota.
‘ln the year 1870 he was at Mota with Bishop Patteson,
during part of the time in which so much enquiry and move-
ment towards the Gospel was going on, and he took a quiet but
very effective part in it. He then went to the island of Florida
with Mr Brooke, but, suffering very much from his eyes, was
not able to do much during his stay there. On the voyage
back he was in the Southern Cross when the disaster took
place at Nukapu. Before his eyes suffered so much as for a time
to threaten blindness, he was at the head of the printing office
in Norfolk Island. He is unmarried. He was baptized by
Bishop Selwyn, and confirmed by Bishop Patteson at the same
time with Robert, and has been a regular communicant since
1867.’
The Ordination was held at 11 o’clock; Morning Prayer having
been said for the Norfolk Islanders at an earlier hour, by Mr
Nobbs, the Chaplain of the settlement. It was at first intended to
hold the Ordination at S. Barnabas; but, as in that case the Nor-
folk Islanders could not have been present at the service, owing to
the smallness of the Mission chapel, it was thought better that
the Melanesians should go down to the settlement (three miles
distant); the new church there, All Saints, being large enough to
hold all the church-going population of the island. To save time,
I had drawn up a programme of the service before leaving New
Zealand, and brought with me a number of copies printed in Mota
and in English for the use of the mixed congregation. Had Mr
Nobbs been all his life accustomed to arrange for such * functions,’
the preparations for the “decency and order” of the service could
not have been better made; and the programme was followed in
every particular.
The clergy entered the church by the west door, the three
junior members of the Mission staff, viz: Messrs. Bice, Brooke,
and Jackson going first, each leading in one of the Melanesian
candidates for deacons’ orders. Psalm LXXXIV". (in English)
was chanted as the clergy walked up the church to the chancel.
The seats in front were occupied by the Melanesians (140 in num-
ber), and the rest of the building was filled by Norfolk Islanders.
The service began with a hymn in Mota, very heartily sung by
the Mission scholars. Then followed the sermon, preached by Mr


Codrington, first in Mota, and then in English, a very simple and
touching address, which was listened to most attentively by all the
congregation. He spoke a few words of him who was most missed by
them all on that day, ‘ the very thought of whom, without the men-
tion of his name, brings tears to our eyes.’ The Litany was said
(in Mota) by the Rev. C. Bice; the commandments and the Epistle
were read by the Revs. C. Brooke and R. Jackson; and the Gospel
by the Rev. Henry Tagalana. The venerable pastor of the
quondam Pitcairn Islanders, the Rev. G. H. Nobbs, assisted me at
the administration of the Holy Communion, as did also the Rev. G.
Maunsell, and the newly ordained deacons; the communicants
numbering over a hundred. Whilst the clergy were communi-
eating, Heber’s beautiful hymn, ‘ Bread of the world in mercy
broken,’ was softly and sweetly sung by the congregation. After
the service the Melanesians returned to S. Barnabas with Mr Cod-
rington, and I with the other clergy remained to dinner with the
Rev. G. H. Nobbs.
In the afternoon at 3 o’clock I held a confirmation at All Saints for
the Norfolk Islanders, Evening Prayer to the end of the third collect
was said by the Rev. G. Maunsell; the Lessons were read by
Messrs. Jackson and Brooke, and the Preface to the confirmation
service by the Rev. G. H. Nobbs; whose grand-daughter, Catherine
Nobbs, played the harmonium accompaniment at both the
services. Twenty young people were confirmed (including the
two lately arrived from Pitcairn’s Island), nearly all being descend-
ants of the Bounty mutineers. The hymns were particularly well
sung by nearly the whole congregation, one of them to the tune Cam-
bridge New, said to have been a great favourite with Bishop Patteson.
A son and a daughter of James Adams of the Bounty, viz., George
Adams and Rachael Evans, both over 70 years of age, were at the
service; and I went to see Arthur Quintal, now quite imbecile, the
son of another of the mutineers.
In the evening I rode back to S. Barnabas, where a second con-
firmation —of Melanesians was held at 7 p.m. The boys confirmed
(seven in number) were from the Solomon and Banks Islands.
Prayers were said by one of the Melanesian deacons, and the
Lessons read by the two others. My address to the candidates
was interpreted by Mr Bice, with a fluency that won the admira-
tion even of the Missionaries. The service was very bright,
and the bearing of the candidates grave and becoming. From the
chapel I went with Mr Codrington to his room, where I confirmed
the sick boy Harry Silter, who was able to sit up in bed during the


prayers. Many of his schoolfellows accompanied us to his bed-
side.
This day, November 17, is one much to be remembered at S.
Barnabas, and by all who took part in its services; a day full of
hope for the future of the Mission, and of encouragement to the
devoted little band of missionaries engaged in the work. It would
be impossible for Evangelists to give themselves more entirely to
the labour of love in which they are spending their lives than do
the members of the staff at S. Barnabas. They evidently take
delight in their work, and are occupied in it from sunrise until all
are asleep at night. Soon after five o’clock in the morning
boys are hovering about the missionaries’ rooms, and after
ten o’clock at night some of the elder scholars are still taking
counsel with their teachers.
I was rejoiced to find in what good heart the latter were, with
regard to the carrying on of the work; their chief want being
one which will soon be supplied, by the accession of the Rev.
J. R. Selwyn and the Rev. J. Still to the European staff of
the Mission.
The organization of the Mission, in every department, is
excellent; realising all that Bishop Patteson led me to expect,
by his repeated commendation of the work of the Rev. Lonsdale
Pritt,* to whom he considered the Mission chiefly indebted in
this matter.
November 18, Monday: I left Norfolk Island on my return to
Auckland. The schooner had been standing off and on since
Thursday ; it not being considered wise to anchor near the land,
owing to the rocky nature of the bottom, and to the suddenness
with which gales spring up in the neighbourhood of the island.
As it was, we embarked only just in time, —before the east wind,
which was blowing strong, had rendered the sea too rough for a
boat to get out through the surf.
Mr A. Kenny, a son of Colonel Kenny of Auckland, returned
with us to New Zealand. From his devotion to work and general
usefulness, it is expected that he will in time supply the place of
the Rev. Joseph Atkin, the loss of whom is at present felt by the
Mission staff to be irreparable. Much more could not be said
in commendation of a young lay member of the staff.
November 23 : The wind, which had gone on increasing since
we left the island, became a strong gale from the East, with a
* Now Archdeacon of the Waikato, New Zealand


heavy sea running from the N.E. The schooner was hove to
for 18 hours, and in the afternoon we were battened down. This
experience helped me to realise the misery not seldom under-
gone by the missionaries in rough weather among the islands;
when there are 80 Melanesians or more —many of them sea-sick,
cooped up with the clergy in the cabin (which is badly ventil-
ated at the best); with the thermometer over 90°, and
with swarms of cockroaches at night running over the berths,
and flying about in every direction. The new schooner should
certainly have a deck-house, like those of the American
steamers now carrying the mails between San Francisco and New
Zealand.
November 27: I reached Auckland before sunset; thankful
for having been permitted to tak© part in the work of the
Melanesian Mission, and to see some of the results of the
system initiated by Bishop Selwyn, and carried on by Bishop
Patteson, for the evangelization of the islanders of the S.W.
Pacific.
W. G. A.
The founders of the Melanesian Mission had reflected much on
the history of Christian Missions in other parts. They knew that
the due effects of Mission work, though done most heartily and
devotedly, had been marred in some cases by imposing too strict
rules upon the converts, by a rigid and burdensome observance
of the Lord’s Day, and by over long religious services; in others,
by a ceremonial and pompous worship which did not reach the
intelligence or the heart; and in most, by too marked a distance
being kept up between the teachers and even the most advanced
of their pupils: which tended to hinder the growth of a Native
Ministry and to obscure the sense of Christian brotherhood.
In working upon the convictions he had gradually formed,
Bishop Patteson was aided by the training of his own youth and
early manhood, and by the kindly, considerate and unassuming
spirit which that training and the example of his father had
made strong within him.
Of the youths who were selected each season in a rough way
on the beaches of their several islands little could be known for
some time after their arrival at the Mission Station. It became


gradually apparent that some had come with an eye to fish-hooks
and axes, and cared for little else. Others showed a readiness to
receive Christian teaching, and some even showed qualities of
mind which gave promise of fitness at some future day to be
teachers and guides of their own people. To them the broad
principles of the Christian religion were conveyed, no pains being
spared by the Bishop to secure the clearness and intelligibleness
of the language used for that purpose. The Bishop often ex-
pressed the comfort he felt ip escaping from the minute and
subtle questions which perplex and divide Christians among
themselves, into the large considerations which fill the mind of a
man who is engaged in the great conflict of Christianity against
Heathenism, Those great principles were left to do their work
quietly and secretly. No artificial stimulus or pressure was used.
Few men have had such an opportunity of realising the power of
the fundamental truths of the Christian religion; of observing
the slow struggle of the light and the darkness in the minds of
men not devoid of a natural gift of discernment, however clouded
by evil tradition or evil habits.
To many of them it was a solemn stirring change to put away
the belief in many powers, arbitrary or malignant, and to receive
the belief in the One Great Power loving all things He has made
and reconciling all races to Himself in Christ. It is hard for us,
who from childhood have assented to these truths, to view them
as they are viewed by men to whom they come for the first time
in all their simplicity. From time to time the mind of one or
another would become deeply moved by the strange contrast
between the new belief and the old, and between the practical
consequences of the one and the other. In such cases all knew
whither to betake themselves, for on all subjects, great and small,
the Bishop had always shown his readiness to supply such help
and comfort as a father would give to his children. At nightfall
they would steal into his room one by one, and sit down and open
their hearts. And those hours were among his happiest: for
then he knew that the work of Christ was in very deed advancing
in Melanesia.
The Services at the Mission Chapel were short and very hearty.
The Bishop trained his pupils to worship God with such reverence
of manner as is required by the Church. All knelt, and as with
one voice repeated the responses, and took part in the singing.
At the same time nothing could be more manly and healthy than
the training the boys got. While religious influences pervaded
all, the daily life had much of the routine of a public school,
work and play by turns. —Church Gazette,


SUBSCRIPTION LIST TO THE MELANESIAN MISSION
EOR THE YEAR 1872.
Subscriptions may he paid to Rev. R, T, Dudley , Auckland; ot transmitted
through the Union Bank of Australia to the account of the Mission with that
Bank in Auckland.
1. NEW ZEALAND.
(a.) Auckland :
Epiphany Offertories — £ s. d. £ s. d. £
S. Paul’s 19 11 0
, (Ordination of Native
Deacon) 3 11 10
S. Matthew’s 30 9 2
S. Mary’s, Parnell 13 16 8
S. Sepulchre’s 10 11 10
S. Mary’s, Taranaki ' 7 6 11
Onehunga 5 12 11
North Shore 6 0 6
6 0 6
S. John’s College 3 0 1
Eemuera 3 1 1
Epsom 2 4 8
S. Peter’s in Forest 0 11 8
Drury 0 6 5
Papakura 0 13 2
Coromandel 2 3 0
Bishop’s Chapel 1 0 0
Kaitaia 2 2 9
Howick 0 9 0
S. George’s, Thames 4 15 0
ll7 7 8
Sunday Schools —
S. Paul’s (for 1871) 10 0 0
S. Matthew’s (for 1872) 20 12 0
S. Mary’s (for 1872) 10 0 0
Eussell (for 1872) 1 10 0
42 2 0
Donations and Subscriptions—
W. Swainson, Esq 5 0 0
A Hater of By-Laws 1 0 0
Taranaki (Pot Archdeacon Govett) 410 0
Bishop of Auckland 2 0 0
Mr Bartlett 0 10 0
Mr Barton 1 0 0
Mr W. Atkin (High Street) .... 1 0 0
Sir W. Martin 6 0 0
W. O. Kensington, Esq. 1 1 0
Miss Atkin (Special) 5 0 0
F. D. Yonge, Esq 5 0 0
Per Mrs Hetley—
Sir W. Martin 5 0 0
Hon. Colonel Kenny 1 0 0
Mrs McKellar 1 0 0
Mrs Hetley 1 0 0
S. Mattingley 0 5 0
Carried forward 39 6 0 159 9 8


Brought forward 39 6 0 159 9 8
Miss L. McKellar 0 2 6
A Friend 0 2 6
Per Dr. Ford—
Henry Williams, Esq
John W. Williams, Esq
Joseph Williams, Esq
I 0 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
W. G. Hingston, Esq 2 0 0
Venerable Archdeacon Clarke.... 1 0 0
E. C. Barstow, E.M 1 10 0
S. H. Ford, Esq 2 0 0
S. H. Ford, Esq 2 0 0
Mr Ernest Ford 1 0 0
Mrs Williams, sen 1 0 0
Per Miss Lusk —
E. B. Lusk, Esq 4 0 0
E. Lusk, Esq 1 0 0
56 1 0
(b.) Waiapu:
(c.J Wellington:
Diocesan Collections, Per O. D.
(d.) Nelson :
(e.) Christchurch :
Diocesan Collections—
Per E, Pavitt, Esq.—
Akaroa Offertory ..... 012 0
Avonside „ 5 2 7
Addington „ 1 14 11
Burnham ~ (Weedon) .... 112 2
„2 0 0
Christchurch —
S. Michael’s Offertory .......... 11 15 7
S. Luke’s „ 18 17 6
S. John’s „ 13 3 4
Ch. Coll. Chapel „ 1 4 4
Geraldine Offertory 0 13 9
Heathcote ~ 4 16 3
Hokitika ~ 5 0 0
Kaiapoi „ 4 7 9
Lyttelton „ ............ 8 9 6
Papanui ~ 1 13 10
Merivale „ 3 16 0
Prebbleton „ 1 5 4
Templeton „ 1 9 7
Eiccarton ~ 0 14 5
Halswell ~ 0 10 9
Eangiora „ 7 13 0
Flaxton ~ 1 2 0
£ s. d. £ s, d. £ s, d
216 10 8
Eev. S. Williams, Napier, donation 20 0 0
Barraud, Esq 37 0 3
Diocesan Collections, Per J. J.
Lowe, Esq 46 1 0
Donation, D. Eough, Esq 3 0 0
49 I 0
Carried forward 97 14 7 321 11 11


Sunnyside „ ............ 014
Temuka ~ 0 12 4
Timaru „ 2 19 8
jlimaru pf ••••«! »•••*•
Waimate „ 2 13 7
lO4 14 2
Hon. J. B. A. Acland, Donation 6 0 0
Mr Jacombs 2 0 0
7 0 0
Missionary Boxes —
Holmbrook, per The Dean ...... 111 10
Mr Stewart’s box 0 12 6
S. Luke’s Sunday School 4 7 6
Timaru 0 19 0
7 10 10
£ll9 5 0
Less Balance
(f.) Dunedin;
Per E. Quick, Esq.—
S. Paul’s Offertory 28 4 8
„ Sunday School 10 0 0
Oamaru Offertory 11 8 I
~ Sunday School 613 6
Invercargill 2 11 4
Clyde 2 8 6
Riverton 1 IS 10
63 1 11
Per Rev. E. H. Grainger—
All Saint’s Offertory 12 11 0
„ Sunday School, for 1871 418 7
4 18 7
17 9 7
2. AUSTRALIA.
(a.) Sydney:
Per Rev. E. H. Codrington 29 18 9
(i.j Melbourne:
Diocesan Collections, Per J.
Moore, Esq 231 7 10
Richmond Sunday School, per Rev.
C. J. Perks, for 1870-71 .... 20 0 0
S. Paul’s Sunday School, Per A.
N. Reed, Esq 15 0 0
S. Peter’s School, Per E. Curtis,
Esq 10 0 0
Cressy School, Per E. Curtis, Esq. 16 0
10 0 0
S. Paul’s Sunday School, Per C.
Chase, Esq 10 0 0
C. Chase, Missionary box 220
Rev. S. L. Chase 110
1 1 0
£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Brought forward 97 14 7 321 11 11
11 6
Missionary Meeting 914 6
M. Metcalfe, Esq 600 0 0
539 13 2
290 16 10
Carried f0rward........ 1351 14 6


£ s. d. £
Brought forward
(c.J Adelaide:
Remittances—
Per G. W. Hawkes, Esq 70 0 0
30 0 0
10 0 0
10 0 0
(d.i Tasmania
Per Rev. F. H. Cox—
8 18 6
8. David’s Cathedral, Offertory ~ 10 0 0
„ Two Sunday Schools., 8 18 6
New Norfolk Church, Offertory., 2 6 6
2 6 6
Trinity Church, Launceston .. 6 5 8
„ Sunday School .. 4 10 4
Perth, Franklin Village and Bread-
albane, Offertory 22 1
Deloraine, Offertory 311 6
Ware Street, Hobart, Sunday
School 2 0 0
Two little Girls 0 2 0
W. Sharland, Esq 5 0 0
Rev. F. B. Sharland 1 0 0
W. Turner, Launceston .. 110
Mrs Turner 1 0 0
Dr. Moore, New Norfolk 0 10 0
Rev. G. Wright 1 0 0
Rev. A. Wayn, 1871-72 2 0 0
Per Rev. H. B. Bromby—
(e.) Perth :
3. NORFOLK ISLAND.
Rev. J. Palmer, Scholarship 1871 10 0 0
„ „ 1872 10 0 0
Mrs Palmer, Scholarship 1871 .. 10 0 0
10 0 0
„ „ 1872 .. 10 0 0
Rev. R.S. Jackson, Scholarship 1871 10 0 0
„ „ 1872 10 0 0
Rev. R. H. Codrington, 2 ditto 1872 20 0 0
10 0 0
20 0 0
Subscriptions: Norfolk Island—
Esther Quintall 0 10 0
Francis Nobbs 3 0 0
Chas. Christian 1 0 0
Wm. Quintall 10 0
Jas. Quintal! 1 0 0
Stephen Christian 0 11 0
Arthur Quintall. sen. 0 4 6
Josiah Adams 0 5 0
Mr Revel 110
811 6
Carried forward.
14 6
S. John the Baptist Church and
Sunday School 20 3 0
7O 10 7
Per W. Knight, Esq. 1000
88 11 6
1640 16 6


£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Brought forward
4. ENGLAND.
1640 16 6
Collected by Miss Yonge 5 3 3
J. Mackenzie, Esq 10 0 0
Miss Ashwell.. 10 0 0
~ Drawing-room Sale 10 0 0
Offertory at S. Martin’s, per the
Rev. the Rector 5 10 0
4O 13 3
£l6Bl 9 9
The following sums were received too late to he included in the account
for the year 1872; they will be again acknowledged in the Report for
!873.
£ s. d.
S. John’s College Scholarship, per H. H. Lusk, Esq 20 0 0
Subscriptions fob 1872 —
Rev. J. Kinder 5 0 0
Rev. E. Thatcher 5 0 0
Miss Stothard 2 0 0
Mrs Flower 0 10 0
Christchurch Ladies’ Scholarship, per Mrs Tancred .... 10 0 0
S. Sepulchre’s Sunday School boxes and collection .... 11 15 3
S. Paul’s Sunday School, 1872 10 0 0
In addition to the pecuniary support, the Mission has received valuable help from
the ladies in Auckland, Adelaide, and Norfolk Island, who from time to time have
forwarded contributions of clothing for the use of the School; and also from those
members of the Norfolk Island community who have freely given their aid with the
boats in landing goods, sc., %c.
The subjoined “Abstract of Norfolk Island Accounts” from October 8, 1872, to
December 31, 1872, was not received in Auckland until the Annual Account of
the Mission had been Audited, and was already in print. — B. T. D.
It. *• d -
Cash Balance Melanesian
Mission Account Oc-
tober 8 22 10 0
Cash, —Bishop Patteson’s
Estate 58 17 0
Sale of Goods 5 2 8
Donations 12 0 0
5 2 8
£9B 9 8
fe. s. d.
I. Stipends of Clergy 3 0 0
11. Wages 13 18 6
IY. Landing Goods .. 3ip 0
Y., Food 22 16 8
YII. Building 51 18 6
YU!. Farm 2 6 0
XIII.. General 1 0 0
£9B 9 8


THE TREASURER IN
ACCOUNT WITH THE
MELANESIAN MISSION, E0R THE
QO
rH
3
1872. RECEIPTS. £
5.
d. £ s.
i.
1872. EXPENDITURE.
£
s.
d. £ s.
d.
I. Balance in Bank and at Norfolk Island
564 0
9
I.
Stipends
455 0
II. England, Capital, proceeds “ Daisy
II.
Salaries and Wages
475 2
Cham
235 11
0
2 !
1176 11
A'
III. S.P.G. Grants for 1871.. .
299
17
III.
Ship Account
for 1872 .
100
0
0
Ilia.
“ Prima Donna” Charter and Stores for
216 17
,, Ladies’Association.... 10
0
0
Island purposes
fljsHv
409 1 7
0
IV.
Y.
66 5
IY. Melanesian Trustees (also Executors
Food
344 I
WL
Bishop Patteson)
Y. Interest of Loan
700 7
7
Y a.
34 17
vl
6 0
0
YI. Subscriptions. Collections. Donations :
YI.
Clothing
119 14
3
1. New Zealand—
YII.
Building
1C4 13
8
Auckland
£215 10 8
YIII.
Farm
54 17
6
W aiapu
20 0 0
IX.
School
9 9
3
Wellington
Nelson
37 0 3
49 1 0
X.
Store
113 3
4
Christchurch ...
119 2 0
XI.
Printing, Stationery, &c
38 10
4
Dunedin
80 11 6
XII.
Island Stations .’
25 13
7
2. Australia—
Sydney
Melbourne
521
6
5
XIII.
General
57 17
3
539 13 2
290 15 10
XIV.
Balances in Treasurer’s Account
Capital
235
11
2
Adelaide
120 0 0
Ditto ditto Income
59
7
6
Tasmania
70 10 7
Ditto in Agent’s hands
3
6
10
Perth
10 0 0
1030
19
7
Ditto at Norfolk Island, Oct. 8
22
10
0
3. Norfolk Island .
88
11
6
uZu it)
4. England
40
13
3
1 fiRl Q
9
VII. Farm Account
21 8
0
VIII. Passenger Per “Prima Donna”
5 0
0
IX. Private Accounts
47 4
6
X. Discounts
2 12
2
£3673 10
U
£3673 10
11
Audited and found Correct, {
• B
T.
Dudley,
January 29, 1873.
Treasurer.


&(6UO
flaws*.
•'LIST OF SCHOLARS MAINTAINED IN NORFOLK ISLAND BY
SUNDAY SCHOOLS, ASSOCIATIONS, &c.
GIRLS.
St. James’s Sunday School, Sydney Luke Tevegbah
St. Philip’s ~
St. Barnabas’ ~
Holy Trinity ~
Christ Church ~
St. Paul’s, Redfern
Paraiteku
53
„ Andrew Lelenga
~ John Ngongono
„ Ambrose Tavrowar Biku
„ Alfred Popohe Matil
Matilda Tavrowar
St. Peter’s, Woolloomooloo „ Harper Mara
St. Michael’s, Surrey Hills „ Owen Wonvasevraw
St. Andrew’s Sunday School ~ Gogoragwia
Petersham ~
Burwood ~
~ Bele
~ Nelson Menesgal
„ Montague Maru
„ 1 Dudley Laukona
2 (?)
Queenbyan ~
Paramatta „
St. Stephen’s, Newtown Maurice Ohairangi
Christ Church, Newcastle Harry Silter
St. John’s Melbourne Makensi Manawo
East Leigh & Winchelsea „ ... Emily Milerawe
East Leigh & Winchelsea ~
St. Peter’s Sunday School „ Bugumangara
St. Paul’s „ „ Clement Maraw
Richmond „ Renata Semwelgan
All Saints’ Sunday School, Geelong Leewe Wevhoglem
St. Paul’s „ „ Mark Wotporpor
St. Paul’s ~ Ballarat Arthur Napaspas
St. Peter’s Coll. School, Adelaide Katlavleh
St. Paul’s Sunday School ~
Holy Trim, Launceston, Tasmania Geo. Dudley Matagoro
St. Paul’s Sunday Sch., Auckland David Yarqalraw
St. Matthew’s „ „ John Takisi
St. Sepulchre’s „ „ Benjamin Taro
St. Mary’s, Parnell „ ... Matakvagalo
St. John’s College Edward Wogale
St. George’s, Thames Haggortang
St. George’s, Thames
Bav of Islands Samuel Devi
Bay of Islands Samuel Devi
Christ’s College, Christchurch
(lapsed ?), Canterbury Demraet
Christchurch Ladies’ Scholarship,
Canterbury ... Salo
S. Paul’s, Wellington, Scholarship
Ladies’ Assoc., Lichfield, England ... Louisa Rogan
Sunday School, Windsor „ Thos. Stevenson Ulgau
St. Michael’s School, Derby ~ Gura
St. George’s, Bloomsbury „ Simeon Nongia
Denstone ~ Doraadi
Horsham ~ Tosswill Baewa
St. Peter’s, Wolverhampton ~ Ardolwar
N.B. —This list does not include the scholars maintained either wholly or in
part hy individuals in England, the Colonies, and Norfolk Island.
WILLIAM ATBK.IN, CHURCH PRINTER, HIGH STREET, AUGJj
lo • NOV 1992
