

Te-XVr PPrvvi
io
llltlbunit International (febilrition
1880
List of Commissioners.
The Hon. WILLIAM JOHN CLARKE, M.L.C,
fifc-frestknts.
The Hon. JAMES JOSEPH CASEY, C.M.G., M.P.
The Hon. JAMES MUNRO, M.P.
The Hon. SIR BRYAN O’LOGHLEN, Baronet, M.P.,
Attorney-General.
The Hon. GRAHAM BERRY, M.P., Chief Secretary.
The Hon. JAMES MACPHERSON GRANT, M.P.,
Minister op Justice.
The Hon. Major WILLIAM COLLARD SMITH, M.P.,
Minister of Mines and Minister of Public Instruction.
The Hon. FRANCIS LONGMORE, M.P., President op
the Board of Land and Works and Commissioner op
Crown Lands and Survey.
The Hon. JAMES BROWN PATTERSON, M.P., Com-
missioner op Public Works, &c.
The Hon. JOHN WOODS, M.P., Commissioner of Rail-
ways.
The Hon. PETER LALOR, M.P., Commissioner of Trade
and Customs.
The Hon. HENRY CUTHBERT, M.L.C.
The Hon. JOHN GUMMING, M.L.C.
The Hon. CALEB JOSHUA JENNER, M.L.C.
The Hon. ROBERT DYCE REID, M.L.C. ,
The Hon. WILLIAM WILSON, M.L.C.
The Hon. SIR CHARLES GAYAN DUFFY K.C.M.G.,
M.P., Speaker Legislative Assembly.
JOHN ANDREW, Esq., M.P.
HENRY BELL, Esq., M.P.
GEORGE BILLSON, Esq., M.P., J.P.
JOSEPH BOSISTO, Esq., M.P., J.P.
ROBERT BOWMAN, Esq., M.P.
ALFRED THOMAS CLARK, Esq., M.P., J.P.
EDWARD JOHN DIXON, Esq., M.P., J.P.
JOHN L. DOW, Esq., M.P.
JEREMIAH DWYER, Esq., M.P.
JAMES FERGUSSON, Esq., M.P., J.P.
GEORGE RANDALL FINCH AM, Esq., M.P.
JAMES H. GRAVES, Esq., M.P.
THOMAS HUNT, Esq., M.P., J.P.
ROBERT DE BRUCE JOHNSTONE, Esq., M.P., J.P.
The Hon. SIR GEORGE F. VERDON, K.C.M.G., C. 8.,
F.R.S,
The Hon. SIR SAMUEL WILSON, M.L.C,
GEORGE D. LANGRIDGE, Esq., M.P., J.P.
JOHN LAURENS, Esq., M.P., J.P.
JAMES MIRAMS, Esq., M.P., J.P.
JOHN NIMMO, Esq., M.P., J.P.
WILLIAM JOSEPH O’HEA, Esq., M.P.
JOHN ORR, Esq., M.P., J.P.
RICHARD RICHARDSON, Esq., M.P., J.P.
ALEXANDER KENNEDY SMITH, Esq., M.P., C.E., J.P.
JOSEPH STORY, Esq., M.P., J.P., Mayor of the City
of Melbourne.
EPHRAIM LAMAN ZOX, Esq., M.P., J.P.
The Hon. SAMUEL HENRY BINDON.
The Hon. THOMAS LOADER.
The Hon. WILLIAM MOUNTFORD KINSEY YALE.
RICHARD BOWEN, Esq., J;P., Member op City Council.
JOHN MTLWRAITH, Esq., J.P., Member op City Council.
THOMAS O’GRADY, Esq., J.P., Member op City Council.
JOHN PIGDON, Esq., J.P., Member op City Council.
ROBERT RICHARDSON, Esq., Member of City Council.
JOSEPH ANDERSON PANTON, Esq., P.M.
JOHN BUNGLE, Esq., J.P.
JOSEPH AARONS, Esq.
JAMES DALLAS, Esq.
JOHN DANKS, Esq.
GEORGE DOUGLAS, Esq.
WILLIAM GILLBEE, Esq., M.R.C.S.E,
WILLIAM G r VY, Esq.
JOHN HALFEY, Esq., J.P.
WILLIAM BUSHBY JONES, Esq., J.P.
EDMUND KEOGH, Esq., J.P.
ROBERT KNAGGS, Esq., J.P., M.R.C.S.E.
ALEXANDER MARKS, Esq., J.P.
L. L. MOUNT, Esq.
DAVID MUNRO, Esq.
WILLIAM E. MURPHY, Esq.


MEMBER S— continued.
JOHN OWEN, Esq.
J. A. REID, Esq.
D. C. STERRY, Esq.
WILLIAM KERR THOMSON, Esq., J.P.
WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Esq., J.P.
E. A. WYNNE, Esq.
WILLIAM R. YEOMANS, Esq.
JOHN ZEVENBOOM, Esq., J.P.
LOUIS THONEMAN, Esq., Consul for Austria-Hungary.
GUSTAVE BECKX, Esq., Consul-General for Belgium.
JONATHAN BINNS WERE, Esq., Consul for Brazil,
Chili, Denmark, Peru, Sweden and Norway, and Consul-
General for Portugal.
CHARLES FAUCONNET, Esq., Consul for France.
WILLIAM ALEXANDER BRAHE, Esq., Consul fob the
German Empire.
GEORGE N. OAKLEY, Esq., Consul for Hawaii.
HENRI J. HART, Esq., Vice-Consul for Italy.
JONKHEER DANIEL PLOOS VAN AMSTEL, Vice-
Consul-General for the Netherlands.
THOMAS CHA.RLES NAPIER COOPER, Esq., Consul for
Portugal,
JAMES DAMYON, 1!I!sq., Consul for Russia.
ROBERT MURRA'?' SMITH, Esq., M.P., Vice-Consul for
Spain.
GUILLAUME DE PURY, Esq., Consul for the Swiss
Confederation.
0. M. SPENCER, Esq., Consul-General for the United
States.
SAMUEL PERKINS LORD, Esq., Vice-Consul-General
for the United States.
SAMUEL M. GIBBS, Esq., Consul for Venezuela.
tonttiw (Stommitte*.
The Hon. WILLIAM JOHN CLARKE, M.L.C., President.
The Hon. JAMES JOSEPH CASEY, C.M.G., M.P., Vice-President.
The Hon. JAMES MUNRO, M.P., Vice-President.
The Hon. SIR BRYAN O’LOGHLEN, Baronet, M.P., Attorney-General, Vice-President.
The Hon. SIR GEORGE F. VERDON, K.C.M.G., C. 8., F.R.S., Vice-President.
The Hon. SIR SAMUEL WILSON, M.L.C., Vice-President.
The Hon. JAMES BROWN PATTERSON, M.P., Commissioner of Public Works.
The Hon. WILLIAM WILSON, M.L.C.
JOSEPH BOSISTO, Esq,, M.P., J.P.
ALEXANDER KENNEDY SMITH, Esq., M.P., C.E., J.P.
JOHN PIGDON, Esq., J.P., Member op City Council.
JOSEPH ANDERSON PANTON, Esq., P.M.
JONATHAN BINNS WERE, Esq., Consul for Denmark, Chili, Peru, And Sweden and Norway,
Vice-Consul for Brazil, and Consul-General for Portugal.
The Hon. JOHN WOODS, M.P., Commissioner of Railways.
The Hon. WILLIAM MOUNTFORD KINSEY VALE.
WILLIAM KERR THOMSON, Esq., J.P.
The Hon. THOMAS LOADER.


No. 1-BUILDING.
A. K. SMITH, Esq., M.P., Chairman. | JOHN PIGDON, Esq., J.P., Vice-Chairman,
JOSEPH STORY, Esq., M.P.
G. DOUGLAS, Esq.
G. D. LANGRIDGE, Esq., M.P.
Hon. JOHN WOODS, M.P.
JOSEPH AARONS, Esq.
W. E. MURPHY, Esq.
ROBERT RICHARDSON, Esq.
JOHN MTLWRAITH, Esq., J.P.
Hon. W. M. K. VALE. ’
THOMAS O’GRADY, Esq,, J.P.
Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G., M.P.
R. BOWEN, Esq., J.P.
GEORGE BILLSON, Esq., M.P.
No. 2—FINANCE.
The Five VICE-PRESIDENTS.
The PRESIDENT, Chairman.
E. L. ZOX, Esq., M.P.
Hon. W. C. SMITH, M.P.
R. MURRAY SMITH, Esq., M.P.
JAMES MIR AMS, Esq., M.P.
Hon, W. M. K. VALE.
Hon. THOMAS LOADER.
JOHN HALEEY, Esq., J.P.
E. J. DIXON, Esq., M.P.
COMMITTEES.
The President is Ex-Officio a Member of all Committees.
No. 3.—GREAT BRITAIN.
Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G., M.P,, Chairman. | Hon. Sir GEORGE F. VERDON, Vice-Chairman.
Hon. GRAHAM BERRY, M.P. W. K. THOMSON, Esq., J.P. Hon. FRANCIS LONGMORE, M.P.
Hon, Sir BRYAN O’LOGHLEN, Bart., Hon. THOMAS LOADER. Hon. P. LALOR, M.P.
M.P. Hon. Sir SAMUEL WILSON, M.L.C. Hon. J. MACPHERSON GRANT, M.P.
Hon. W. C. SMITH, M.P.
No. 4.— EUROPE.
Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G., M.P„ Chairman.
! JONATHAN BINNS WERE, Esq., Vice-Chairman.
LOUIS THONEMAN, Esq. , Consul for Austria-Hungary.
GUSTAVE BECKX, Esq., Consul-General for Belgium.
CHARLES FAUCONNET, Esq., Consul for France.
WILLIAM ALEXANDER BRAHE, Esq., Consul for the
German Empire.
JONKHEER DANIEL PLOOS VAN AMSTEL, Vice-
Consul for the Netherlands.
THOMAS CHARLES NAPIER COOPER, Esq., Consul for
Portugal.
JAMES DAM YON, Esq., Consul for Russia.
ROBERT MURRAY SMITH, Esq., M.P., Vice-Consul
for Spain.
GUILLAUME DE PURY, Esq., Consul for the Swiss
Confederation.
Hon. Sir GEORGE F. VERDON.
JOHN ZEVENBOOM, Esq., J.P.
HENRI J. HART, Esq., Vice-Consul for Italy.
No. S—INTERCOLONIAL.
Hon. Sir SAMUEL WILSON, M.L.C., Chairman. | Hon. JAMES MUNRO, M.P., Vice-Chairman.
Hon. Sir GEORGE F. VERDON.
Hon. R. D. REID, M.L.G
JOHN PIGDON, Esq., J.P.
Hon. GRAHAM BERRY, M.P.
Hon. THOMAS LOADER,
W. K. THOMSON, Esq., J.P.
W. B. JONES, Esq., J.P.
Hon. P. LALOR, M.P.
J. NIMMO, Esq., M.P.
JAMES MIR AMS, Esq., M.P.
No. 6.— ASIA, AFRICA, AND AMERICA.
Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G., M.P., Chairman. | J. B. WERE, Esq., Vice-Chairman.
S. P. LORD, Esq., Vice-Consul-General S, M. GIBBS, Esq., Consul for Venezuela G. N. OAKLEY, Esq., Consul for Hawaii.
for U.S.A. and Peru. O. M. SPENCER, Esq., Consul-General
JONKHEER DANIEL PLOOS VAN ROBERT MURRAY SMITH, Esq., for the United States.
AMSTEL, Vice-Consul for the Nether- M.P., Vice-Consul for Spanish Posses- W. B. JONES, Esq., J.P.
lands Indies. sions, ALEXANDER MARKS, Esq., J.P
No. 7.—CEREMONIAL.
Hon. Sir GEORGE F. VERDON, K.C.M.G., Chairman. I Hon. Sir SAMUEL WILSON, M.L.C., Vice-Chairman.
Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G., M.P., Chairman pro tem. | J. B. WERE, Esq., Vice-Chairman pro tern.
Hon. Sib CHARLES GAVAN DUFFY, T. C. N. COOPER, Esq. W. GILLBEE, Esq., M.R.C.S.E.
K.C.M.G., M.P. O. M. SPENCER, Esq. HENRI J. HART, Esq., J.P.
Hon. THOMAS LOADER. A. T. CLARK, Esq., M.P. JAMES H. GRAVES, Esq., M.P.
S. P. LORD, Esq. ALEXANDER MARKS, Esq. J.P. JAMES MIRAMS, Esq., MiP.


No. 8-DISTRICTS OF VICTORIA.
Hon. WILLIAM WILSON, M.L.C., Chairman. | Hon. J. B. PATTERSON, M.P. Vice-Chairman.
HENRY BELL, Esq., M.P. GUILLAUME DE PURY, Esq.
Hon. HENRY CUTHBERT, M.L.C. Hon. JOHN WOODS, M.P.
R. De BRUCE JOHNSTONE, Esq., G. R. FINCH AM, Esq., M.P.
M.P. R. BOWMAN, Esq., M.P.
RICHARD RICHARDSON, Esq., M.P. JOHN ORR, Esq., M.P.
Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G., M.P. E. A. WYNNE, Esq.
No. 9.—GARDENS.
Hon. JAMES MUNRO, M.P., Chairman,
THOMAS O’GRADY, Esq., J.P.
JOHN HALFEY, Esq., J.P.
J. H. GRAVES, Esq., M.P.
JOSEPH BOSISTO, Esq., M.P.
J. B. WERE, Esq.
No. 10-WINE.
J. A. PANTON, Esq., P.M., Chairman.
CHARLES FAUCONNET, Esq.
T. C. N. COOPER, Esq.
W. B. JONES, Esq., J.P.
W. GILLBEE, Esq., M.R.C.S.E.
W. J. O’HEA, Esq., M.P.
GUILLAUME DE PURY, Esq.
EDMUND KEOGH, Esq., J.P.
No. 11-MANUFACTURES.
Hon. W. M. K. VALE,
Chairman.
JOHN ZEVENBOOM, Esq., J.P.
JOHN DANKS, Esq.
JOHN MTLWRAITH, Esq., J.P.
GEORGE DOUGLAS, Esq.
R. BOWMAN, Esq., M.P.
G. D. LANGRIDGE, Esq., M.P.
JAMES FERGUSSON, Esq., M.P,
WILLIAM GRAY, Esq.
L. L. MOUNT, Esq.
JOHN OWEN, Esq.
WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Esq., J.P.
W. R. YEOMANS, Esq.
D. C. STERRY, Esq. , Mayor of Sandhurst.
THOMAS HUNT, Esq., M.P.
JEREMIAH DWYER, Esq., M.P.
G. BILLSON, Esq., M.P.
J. L. DOW, Esq., M.P.
| J. A. PANTON, Esq., P.M., Vice-Chairman.
O. M. SPENCER, Esq.
JOHN LAURENS, Esq., M.P.
J. B. WERE, Esq., Vice-Chairman.
R. BOWMAN, Esq., M.P.
G. BILLSON, Esq., M.P.
JOHN ORR, Esq., M.P.
Hon. THOS. LOADER, Vice-Chairman.
R. BOWEN, Esq., J.P.
JOHN ANDREW, Esq., M.P.
A. T. CLARK, Esq., M.P.
JOHN NIMMO, Esq., M.P.
JOHN LAURENS, Esq., M.P.
W. E. MURPHY, Esq.
No. 12-ANIMAL PRODUCTS
Hon. Sib SAMUEL WILSON, M.L.C., Chairman.
Hon, WILLIAM WILSON, M.L.C., Vice-Chairman.
R. Dk BRUCE JOHNSTONE, Esq., Hon. P. LABOR, M.P.
M P. Hon. FRANCIS LONGMORE, M.P.
J. H. GRAVES, Esq., M.P. E. A. WYNNE, Esq.
Hon. JOHN GUMMING, M.L.C,
Hon. R. D. REID, M.L.C,
S. P. LORD, Esq.
No. 13-VEGETABLE PRODUCTS.
JOSEPH BOSISTO, Esq., M.P., Chairman. I Hon. W, WILSON, M.L.C., Vice-Chairman.
W. J. O’HEA, Esq., M.P. Hon. W. M. K. VALE. J. H. GRAVES, Esq. M.P.
E. L. ZOX, Esq., M.P. J. L. DOW, Esq., M.P. W. GILLBEK, Esq., M.R.C.S.E,
ROBT. KNAGGS, Esq., J.P., M.R.C.S. E. J. DIXON, Esq., M.P. R. BOWEN, Esq., J.P,
EDMUND KEOGH, Esq., J.P. G, R. FINCHAM, Esq., M.P.
No. 14-MACHINERY.
A. K. SMITH, Esq., M.P., Chairman. 1 Hon. JOHN WOODS, M.P., Vice-Chairman.
JOHN MTL WRAITH, Esq., J.P.
JOHN DANKS, Esq.
JOHN BUNGLE, Esq., J.P.
JAMES DALLAS, Esq.
DAVID MUNRO, Esq.
G. DOUGLAS, Esq.
W. K. THOMSON, Esq., J.P.
W. B. JONES, Esq., J.P.
R. RICHARDSON, Esq., M.P.
J. L. DOW, Esq., M.P.
No. 15.—FINE ARTS.
JOHN NIMMO, Esq., M.P.
W. E. MURPHY, Esq.
JOHN ANDREW, Esq., M.P.
G. R. FINCHAM, Esq., M.P.
J. A. REID, Esq.
Hon. Sib G. F. VERDON, K.C.M.G., Chairman. i J. A. PANTON, Esq., P.M., Vice-Chairman.
Hon. Sib CHARLES GAVAN DUFFY, R. Dk BRUCE JOHNSTONE, Esq., HENRI J. HART, Esq., J.P.
K C.M.G. M.P. M.P. JEREMIAH DWYER, Esq., M.P.
Hon. S. H. BINDON. Hon. J. M. GRANT, M.P. J. L. DOW, Esq., M.P.
W. J. O’HEA, Esq., M.P. O. M. SPENCER, Esq. A. T. CLARK, Esq., M.P.
JAMES FERGUSSON, Esq., M.P. WILLIAM GILLBEE, Esq., M.R.C.S.E.
No. 16-REGULATIONS AND PRINTING.
Hon. JAMES MUNRO, M.P., Chairman.
W. K. THOMSON, Esq., J.P,
Hon. THOMAS LOADER.
JOHN MTLWRAITH, Esq., J.P.
JAMES MIRAMS, Esq., M.P.
DAVID MUNRO, Esq.
JOSEPH AARONS, Esq.
JOHN LAURENS, Esq., M.P.
| Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G., M.P., Vice-Chairman.
JAMES FERGUSSON, Esq., M.P.
THOMAS HUNT, Esq., M.P.
A. T. CLARK, Esq., M.P.
No. 17-MINERALS AND MINING.
J. A. PANTON, Esq., P.M., Chairman. | A. K. SMITH, Esq., M.P., Vice-Chairman.
JOHN HALFEY, Esq., J.P. Hon. J. B. PATTERSON, M.P. J. L. DOW, Esq., M.P.
RICHARD RICHARDSON Esq., M.P. Hon. J. WOODS, M.P. G. R. FINCHAM Esq., M.P.
KK'MAKJJ KIUJtIAJttJJSUJN U3Q., M.±*. M.ON. 0. WUUJUO, iVl.r". Ur. XV. riirvurim,
HENRY BELL, Esq., M.P. D. MUNRO, Esq., J.P. D. C. STERRY, Esq.
G. N. OAKLEY, Esq.
4


THE
MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION, 1880.
In accordance with a Commission issued under the great seal of the Colony of A ictoria,
and with the co-operation of the Imperial Government of our Gracious Sovereign the
Queen, an International Exhibition of Arts, Manufactures, and Agricultural and Industrial
Products of all Nations will be opened at Melbourne on the Ist day of October, 1880,
and will close on the 31st day of March, 1881.
The Exhibition will he held in buildings specially erected for the purpose m
Carlton Gardens, centrally situated in the City of Melbourne, and the cost of erecting
such buildings, and all expenses incidental to the Exhibition, will be defrayed out of funds
voted by the Parliament of Victoria.
The Commissioners are empowered to invite the British, Foreign, and Colonial
Governments to take part in this Exhibition, and they will be glad to learn that steps have
been taken to provide for the representation of every country and colony thereat.
The fact that Australasia has been represented at all the great Exhibitions
of the world since their inception in the year 1851, and the advance she has made
in productive industry, the extent of her commercial relations, and the high position
to which her imports and exports have attained, indicate that she has now reached the
period when she may profitably invite the great manufacturing countries to send the most
complete products of their skilled industry to a people who are in a position to become not
only good customers but generous competitors.
1. Applications for space, with full particulars, are invited as early as possible.
Copies of the official form of entry can be obtained upon application to the Secretary
to the Commissioners.
2. Excepting under the circumstances specified under Article 4, applications for
space must be made through the representatives of the country or colony to which the
applicants belong.


3. Governments intending to take part in this Exhibition are requested to forward
an intimation to that effect not later than the Ist of June, 1879.
4. In the event of no representatives being appointed by the country or colony to
which an intending exhibitor belongs, he can communicate direct with the Secretary.
5. Applications for space should be made not later than the 30th day of June, 1879.
6. British, Foreign, and Colonial Governments, or Commissioners appointed by
them, are requested to inform the Melbourne Commission not later than the Ist day of
January, 1880, whether they require any increase or diminution of the space offered
them, and the amount. They are also requested to state whether there will be any
exhibits for which special space should be provided, together with a description showing
their nature and quantity.
7. Before the Ist day of June, 1880, the representatives ot countries or colonies
should furnish approximate plans, showing the manner of allotting the space assigned to
them, and lists of their exhibitors, and other information necessary for the production
of the Official Catalogue.
8. Commissioners representing countries or colonies, and private exhibitors, may
adopt one of three courses, viz.:—
(a) They can ship their exhibits direct to Melbourne, and make their own arrange-
ments for their shipment, reception, and exhibition.
(b) Or consign their exhibits to
The Secretary International Exhibition , 1880,
Melbourne , Australia ,
with specific instructions as to what is desired,
(c) Or, having previously forwarded an entry to the Melbourne Commission, they
can forward the goods, together with invoices and descriptions, to any of the following
firms or companies:—
London — Messrs. James M‘Ewan & Co., 27 Lombard-street; or to Messrs.
MTlwraith, M‘Eachran & Co., Leadenhall-street.
Liverpool — Messrs. John Swire & Sons.
Glasgow — Messrs. Aitken, Lilburne & Co.
Antwerp —Messrs. Jules Eenard & Co.
New York— Messrs. R. W. Cameron & Co.
San Francisco— Pacific Mail Company.
All Ports where the Company has Agencies—The Peninsular and Oriental
Company.
9. Packages forwarded from countries and colonies represented at the Exhibition
should be addressed—
To the Commissioner for
at the International Exhibition of 1880,
Melbourne ,
Victoria ,
Australia ,
6


and have two labels bearing the flag of the country to which the exhibitor belongs; or
where no representative has been appointed:—
To the Secretary
International Exhibition of 1880,
Melbourne ,
Victoria ,
Australia ,
and two labels, affixed to different but not opposite sides of the package, giving the
following information:_(l) The country from which it comes. (2) Name or firm of
exhibitor. (3) Residence of the exhibitor. (4) Group and class to which exhibits belong.
(5) Total number of packages sent by same exhibitor. (6) Serial number of that particular
package. Each package must contain a list of the exhibits it contains.
Packages from foreign countries containing goods intended for the Exhibition must
likewise have painted on them, as distinctive marks, the letters M.I.E. surrounded by a
circle I m.i.e.
Packages from foreign countries must all be marked in such a way as to show distinctly
whence they come, viz., with the colours and devices of their national flag. Foreign
Commissioners are particularly requested to forward to the Melbourne Commission, as soon
as possible, copies of the forms of address and the distinguishing marks which they have
severally adopted.
10. In cases where exhibits are forwarded to Melbourne through any of the above-
named agents of the Commission, all expenses of freight, marine insurance, &c., should be
prepaid by the exhibitor, but if that be inconvenient, the exhibits will be forwarded,
and the charges and freight paid by the agents. The sum advanced by the agents will. be
regarded as a first charge upon the exhibits, to be deducted from the net proceeds, in
the event of their being sold. Should such exhibits, however, not be sold, but
be claimed by the exhibitor or his authorised agent at the close of the Exhibition, then
such sums as may have been disbursed by the Commission or any of its agents must be
paid before such goods are delivered.
11. Customs entries, transportation, receiving, unpacking, and arranging the
products for exhibition will, if required by the exhibitor, be undertaken by the
Commission, at the expense of the exhibitor.
12. Arrangements will be made for transporting goods from the port of Melbourne,
or the several railway stations, to the Exhibition grounds at ja, fixed rate of charges.
13. Exhibits will be admitted free of duty. The removal of goods, except under
special circumstances, will not be permitted prior to the close of the Exhibition. Facilities
will be given for the sale of exhibits, delivery to be made after the close of the Exhibition.
14. The protection of inventions capable of being patented and of designs is
secured by the patent laws of Victoria.
15. The placing and fixing of heavy articles, requiring special foundations or
adjustment, should begin by special arrangement as soon as the progress of the work upon
the Exhibition Buildings will reception of articles in the Exhibition
Buildings will commence on Ist «ftHreflßßo, and no articles will be admitted after 31st
. pry
7


August, 1880. The plans for the display and accommodation of such objects as may
require either special arrangements or exceptional works for their erection must receive the
approval of the Commission before they are executed, and the works must be carried out
under the supervision of its agents The special preparations of which mention has been
made will be commenced as soon as the buildings and various annexes are sufficiently
advanced. The works of general fitting-up must be commenced not later than the Ist of
May, 1880, and must be ready to receive goods before the 15th day of July, 1880.
16. Space assigned to countries and colonies, and not occupied on the first day of
September, 1880, will revert to the Commission, and will be subject to rearrangement.
17. If exhibits are not intended for competition it must be so stated by the
Exhibitors, and they will be excluded from examination by the International Jurors.
18. An Official Catalogue will be published in English by the Commission, by which
the sale of Catalogues is reserved. Every country and colony will, however, have the right
of producing at its own expense, but in its own language only, a special Catalogue of the
objects exhibited in its section. No work of art, nor any article whatever, exhibited in the
buildings, parks, or gardens, may be drawn, copied, or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever, without the permission of the exhibitor. The Commission reserves the right
of authorising the production of general views.
19. The representatives of countries and colonies, when appointed, will be allowed
to group their exhibits as they may think fit in that portion of the Exhibition Buildings
allotted to the country or colony which they represent.
20. Exhibits, from any country or colony, whose Government is not represented,
will be grouped according to some one of the following classes. The same direction will
be followed in the Catalogue: —
1. Works of art.
2. Education and instruction—Apparatus and processes of the liberal arts.
3. Furniture and accessories.
4. Textile fabrics, clothing and accessories.
5. Raw and manufactured products.
6. Machinery—Apparatus and processes used in the mechanical industries.
7. Alimentary products.
8. Agriculture.
9. Horticulture.
10. Mining industries—Machinery and products.
Each of these groups is divided into classes, according to the system of general
classification annexed to these regulations (Appendix). This Appendix includes for each
class a summary enumeration of the objects which it will comprise.
21. A limited quantity of steam and water power will be supplied gratuitously.
The quantity of each will be settled definitely at the time of the allotment of space. The
Commissioners desire to encourage the display of machinery in motion, and they will
endeavour to provide adequate power to meet all reasonable demands. Any power required
by the Exhibitor in excess of that allowed, will be furnished by the Commission at a
moderate price. Demands for such excess of power must be settled prior to the 31st
August, 1880.
8


22. By the introduction of steam power it is proposed to afford facilities for
presenting not only the machinery for any given manufactures, but the manufactures
themselves; and it is further intended that space shall be afforded for the production in the
Exhibition of interesting objects by manual labour.
23. Exhibitors must provide at their own cost all show-cases, shelving, counters,
fittings, &c., which they may require; and all shaftings, pulleys, belting, &c., for
the traces and measures of power from the main shafts; but the Commission is
prepared, if required, and upon being furnished with full particulars, to make arrangements
for the construction of show cases by contract at a price per cubic foot, the cost to be borne
by the Exhibitor using the same. All artistic decorations and arrangements must be
approved by the Commission.
24. The Commission reserves the right of rejecting or returning any proposed
exhibit.
25. The following special regulations are framed for the reception and admission
of works of art. The works admissible include the five classes mentioned below:—
1. Paintings.
2. Drawings, water-colours, crayon drawings, miniatures, enamels, porcelain,
designs for stained-glass windows (with the exception of those which
merely represent subjects of ornamentation), and mosaic work.
3. Sculpture and die-sinking, and engraving on precious stones.
4. Architecture.
5. Engraving and lithography.
26. The following are excluded:—
1. Unframed pictures or drawings.
2. Sculpture in unbaked clay.
27. The duty of deciding upon the admission of works of art will devolve upon a
special jury. Special and suitable rooms will be reserved for the exhibition of such ancient
pictures and works of art as may be admitted by a special jury. Other regulations will
give information as to the despatch and reception of works of art.
28. Facilities will be given, upon application to the Commission, for the erection
of special constructions, whether in the buildings or grounds.
29. The Commission will take precautions for the safe preservation of all objects
in the Exhibition, but will be in no way responsible for damage or loss of any kind, or
acciderits by fire or otherwise, however caused.
30. Facilities will be afforded the representatives of countries and colonies, and
private exhibitors, for insuring their goods; and they may also employ watchmen of their
own choice to guard their goods during the hours the Exhibition is open to the public.
The appointment of such watchmen will be subject to the approval of the Commission.
These persons shall wear a special dress or distinctive badge, and they will always have
the power of calling the police to their aid.
31. Articles that are in any way dangerous or offensive, or injurious to public
decency and morality, will not be admitted into the Exhibition.
9


32. Sketches, drawings, photographs, or other reproductions of articles exhibited,
-will only he allowed upon the joint consent of the Exhibitor and the Commissioners; but
views of portions of the building may be made, upon the sanction of the Commission alone.
33. The following is the system under which the awards will be made:—
The awards shall be based upon written reports adopted by the Jurors.
The Jurors shall be selected for their known qualifications and character,
and shall be experts in the departments to which they are especially
assigned; the British, Foreign, and Colonial Jurors shall be appointed by the
representatives of each country or colony exhibiting. The Jurors for Victoria
will be appointed by the Melbourne Commission.
Jurors will be reimbursed their personal expenses.
Reports and awards shall be based upon inherent and comparative merit,
the elements of merit being held to include considerations relating to
originality, invention, discovery, utility, quality, skill, workmanship, fitness
for the purposes intended, adaptation to public wants, economy, and cost.
Each report shall be delivered to the Commission as soon as completed.
Awards shall consist of gold, silver, and bronze medals, and a certificate of
honourable mention, together with a special report of the Jurors on the
subject of the award.
Each Exhibitor shall have the right to produce and publish the report awarded
to him, but the Commission reserves the right to publish and dispose of all
reports in the manner it thinks best for public information, and to embody
and distribute the reports as records of the Exhibition.
34. Immediately after the close of the Exhibition, Exhibitors or their duly
appointed agents shall remove their effects and complete such removal by the Ist June,
1881. Goods then remaining will be removed by the Commission, and sold by auction,
or otherwise disposed of, under the direction of the Commission, and the net proceeds
handed to the Exhibitors or their duly-appointed agents.
35. Every person who becomes an Exhibitor thereby acknowledges, and undertakes
to observe, the rules and regulations established for the government of the Exhibition.
36. The Commission reserves the right to alter, explain, amend, or add to these
regulations whatever may be deemed necessary.
Information upon any question of details can be obtained upon application to
The Agent General for Victoria,
8 Victoria Chambers,
Victoria Street,
Westminster,
London, S.W.
10


Gi’oup 1. (Works of art)
Pink.
Group 2. (Education and instruction, apparatus and processes of the liberal arts)
- White.
Group 3. (Furniture and accessories)
Group 4. (Textile fabrics, clothing and accessories) ------
Bright-yellow.
Group 5. (Raw and manufactured products) -------
- Brown.
Group 6. (Apparatus and processes used in the mechanical industries)
Red.
Group 7. (Alimentary products) - .......
Violet.
Group 8. (Agriculture) - ..........
Dark-green.
Group 9. (Horticulture)
Light-green.
Group 10. (Mining industries—Machinery and products) - ...
Grey.
REGULATIONS
CONCERNING THE DESPATCH, RECEPTION, ARRANGEMENT, AND RETURN OF THE
GOODS EXHIBITED, AND DISPOSAL OF SPACE.
I.—Every person admitted as an exhibitor will receive, in due time, and with the least possible
delay, an exhibitor’s ticket, showing his rotation number and the dimensions of the space allotted to him.
He will receive at the same time printed address labels to be affixed to the packages he may send to the
Exhibition.
2.—The address labels supplied to exhibitors will be printed on paper of different colours, according to
the group to which the products to be exhibited may belong.
The conventional colours adopted are as follows:
3.—The Commission places at the disposal of countries and colonies all information and plans which
may be useful for their arrangements.
4.—Exchange of spaces between countries and colonies cannot be made without the consent of
the Commission.
s.—Exhibitors will not have to pay rent for the space occupied by them in the Exhibition.
The flooring will be provided in sound condition and ready for use within the whole of the main
building, with the exception of the hall for machinery; but the flooring must not be altered, removed,
or strengthened for the convenience of arrangement, except with the consent of the Commission, and at the
expense of the exhibitors.
6.—The spaces reserved outside the exhibition allotments being strictly calculated with a view to the
necessities of circulation, packages and empty cases will not be allowed to remain there.
Cases must, therefore, be unpacked as early as possible after their reception, and the empty cases at
once taken away by the exhibitors or their agents.
Should the exhibitors neglect to carry out in the manner thus indicated the unpacking of the goods
and the removal of the empty cases, the work will be undertaken by the Commission, but in no case will
the Commission incur any responsibility whatsoever in the execution of this duty. The Commission will
have nothing to do with the warehousing and preservation of the empty cases; neither have any arrange-
ments been made, nor any space reserved for the purpose. Exhibitors who may be unable to provide for the
removal and preservation of their empty cases are advised to communicate with the Secretary.


GENERAL ARRANGEMENTS.
7. Certain products, which it may be found impossible to display in the main buildings, will in
some exceptional cases be exhibited in the surrounding parks and gardens, in buildings erected for the
purpose.
8. With regard to the Victorian section, the Commission will place itself in communication with
the committees established in each locality. The duties of these committees are:—
1. To make known the rules concerning the organisation of the Exhibition, and to distribute
the forms of application for admission, as well as all other documents relative to the
Exhibition.
2. To point out as soon as possible the principal artists, agriculturists, and manufacturers whose
exhibits would appear to be particularly calculated to promote the success of the under-
taking.
3. To encourage the exhibition of the mineral, pastoral, agricultural and horticultural products
of the district.
4. To encourage and to organize when necessary the collective exhibition of groups of similar
products of the district, and to accredit to the Commission the delegate charged with the
representation of each collective exhibition.
9.—Spirits, or alcohol, oils and essences, corrosive substances, and generally all substances which
might spoil other articles or inconvenience the public, can only be received in solid and suitable vessels of
small size.
Percussion caps, fireworks, chemical matches, and other similar objects, can only be received when
made in imitation, and deprived of all inflammable ingredients.
10.—Exhibitors of objects of a disagreeable nature, or such as may be prejudicial to health, will be
bound at all times to conform to such precautionary measures as may be laid down for them.
11. The Commission reserves the absolute right to cause the removal of any product, from what-
ever quarter it may come, if on account of its natuVe or appearance it seems to be detrimental to, oi
incompatible with, the object or the decorum of the Exhibition.
ADMINISTRATION AND POLICE.
12.—A1l goods must be exhibited under the name of the person who has signed the application for
admission.
13.—Exhibitors are entitled to insert after their name or that of their firm the names of their
assistants of every class and grade who may have taken part in the production of the goods exhibited.
14. Exhibitors are particularly requested to mark the trade price of the articles exhibited, so as to
facilitate the judgment of the jury, as well as for the information of visitors.
15.—A general supervision will be established for the prevention of robbery and embezzlement.
16.—1 n the Victorian section, the exhibitors of each class must arrange among themselves as to
the organisation of a staff of attendants independent of the general supervision established by the
Commission. Private agents of this description must be approved by the Commission and must wear badges
bearing the number of the class to which they will be attached.
17. It must be distinctly understood that the Commission declines all responsibility for any theft
or embezzlements which may be committed.
18.—All communications relating to the Exhibition must be addressed—
The Secretary to the Commissioners,
International Exhibition,
Melbourne, Australia.
19.—Persons desirous of exhibiting articles not mentioned in the Appendix may apply to the
Commission.
12


APPENDIX.
SYSTEM OF GENERAL CLASSIFICATION.
First Group.—Works of Art.
Class I. —Oil Paintings.
Paintings on canvas, on panel, and on other grounds.
Class 2. —Various Paintings and Drawings.
Minatures, water-colour paintings, pastels, and drawings of every kind; paintings on enamel, earthenware, and
porcelain; cartoons for stained glass windows and frescoes.
Class 3. —Sculpture and Die Sinking,
Sculpture in high relief, bas-reliefs, chased and repouss6 work. Medals, cameos, engraved stones. Niello work.
Class 4. —Architectural Drawings and Models.
Studies and details. Elevations and plans of buildings. Restorations based upon existing ruins or documents.
Class 5. —Engravings and Lithographs.
Engravings, coloured engravings. Lithographs executed with pencil and with brush, chromo-lithographs.
Second Group.—Education and Instruction, Apparatus and Processes of the Liberal Arts.
Class 6. —Education of Children, Primary Instruction, Instruction of Adults.
Plans and models of orphan asylums, infant schools ; system of management and furniture of such establishments ;
appliances for instruction suitable for the physical, moral, and intellectual training of the child previous to its entering
school.
Plans and models of scholastic establishments for town and country; system of management, and furniture
for these establishments. Appliances for instruction: books, maps, apparatus, and models.
Plans and models of scholastic establishments for adult and professional instruction. System of management and
furniture for these establishments? Appliances for adult and professional instruction.
Appliances for the elementary teaching of music, singing, foreign languages, book-keeping, political economy,
practical agriculture and horticulture, technology, and drawing.
Appliances adapted to the instruction of the blind and of deaf mutes.
Works of pupils of both sexes.
Libraries and publications.
Class 7. —Organisation and Appliances for Secondary Instruction.
Plans and models of establishments for secondary instruction, lyceums, grammar schools, colleges, industrial and
commercial schools. Arrangement and furniture of such establishments.
Collections, classical works, maps, and globes.
Appliances for technological and scientific instruction, and for teaching the fine arts, drawing, music, and singing.
Apparatus and methods for instruction in gymnastics, fencing, and military exercises.
Class 8. — Organisation, Methods, and Appliances for Superior Instruction.
Plans and models of academies, universities, medical schools, practical schools, technical and practical schools,
schools of agriculture, observatories, scientific museums, amphitheatres, lecture-rooms, laboratories for instruction and
research.
Furniture and arrangement of such establishments.
Apparatus, collections, and appliances intended for higher instruction and scientific research.
Special exhibitions of learned, technical, agricultural, commercial, and industrial societies and institutions.
Scientific expeditions.
Class 9.— Printing, Books.
Specimens of typography; autographic proofs; lithographic proofs, black or coloured; proofs of engravings.
New books and new editions of books already known; collections of works forming special libraries; periodical
publications. Drawings, atlases, and albums.
Class 10.— Stationery, Bookbinding, Painting, and Drawing Materials.
Paper; card and pasteboard; inks; chalks; pencils; pastels; all things necessary for writing-desks and offices;
inkstands; apparatus for weighing letters, &c.; copying presses.
Objects made of paper: lamp shades, lanterns, flower-pot covers.
Registers, copybooks, albums, and memorandum books; bindings, loose covers for books, cases, &c.
Various products used in water-colour painting and tinting; colours in cakes, pastels, bladders, tubes, and shells.
Instruments and apparatus for the use of painters, draughtsmen, engravers, and modellers.


Class 11. —General Application of the Arts of Drawing and Modelling.
. . Designs for industrial purposes; designs obtained, reproduced, or reduced by mechanical processes. Decorative
paintings, lithographs, chromo-lithographs, or engravings for industrial purposes. Models and small articulated wooden
models of figures, ornaments, &c.
Carvings. Cameos, seals, and various objects decorated with engraving. Objects modelled for industrial purposes
produced by mechanical processes, reductions, photo-sculpture, &c. Oasts.
Class 12. —Photographic Proofs and Apparatus.
Photographs on paper, glass, wood, stuffs, and enamel. Heliographic engravings, lithographic proofs. Photo-
lithographic proofs, photographic stereotypes, stereoscopic proofs, and stereoscopes. Enlarged photographs. Colour
photographs.
Instruments, apparatus, and chemicals necessary for photography. Materials and appliances used in photographic
studios.
Class 13. —Musical Instruments.
Non-metallic wind instruments: with common mouth-pieces, with reeds with or without air reservoirs.
Metallic wind instruments, simple, with lengthening pieces, with slides, with piston, with keys, with reeds.
Wind instruments with keyboards : organs, accordions, &c.
Stringed instruments played with the fingers, or without keyboards.
Stringed instruments with keyboards : pianos, &c.
Instruments played by percussion or friction.
Automaton instruments, barrel organs, bird organs.
Separate parts of musical instruments and orchestral appliances.
Glass 14. — Medicine, Hygiene, and Public Relief,
Appliances, instruments, and apparatus requisite for anatomical and histological works.
Plastic anatomical models.
Instruments of medical research.
Apparatus and instruments for dressing wounds and for simple surgery, general and local; anaesthetic apparatus.
Surgical instruments grouped according to their purposes: instruments for amputations and dissection. Special
instruments, obstetrics, ovariotomy, urinary channels, ophthalmology, dentistry, &c,; electro-therapeutic apparatus.
Apparatus for plastic and mechanical prosthesis, orthopedic apparatus.
Trusses.
Apparatus for restoring persons apparently drowned or suffocated.
Baths and hydro-therapeutic apparatus; gymnastical apparatus for medical and hygienic purposes.
Plans and models of hospitals, various asylums, houses of refuge, poor-houses, lunatic asylums. Arrangements and
furniture of such establishments. Various apparatus for infirm persons, invalids, and lunatics. Accessory objects for the
medical, surgical, and pharmaceutical services in hospitals or infirmaries.
Chests and cases of instruments and medicines for military and naval surgeons. Means and apparatus for succouring
the wounded on battle fields. Civil and military ambulances.
Appliances, instruments, apparatus, and all things requisite for veterinary surgery.
Class 15. —Mathematical and Philosophical Instruments,
Apparatus and instruments used for mathematical purposes.
Apparatus and instruments illustrating practical geometry, land-surveying, topography, and geodesy; compasses
calculating machines, levels, mariners’ compasses.
Apparatus and instruments for measurement: verniers, micrometric screws, dividing machines, &c.; scales for
scientific uses.
Optical instruments. Astronomical instruments. Physical and meteorological instruments, &c. Instruments and
apparatus requisite for laboratories and observatories.
Weights and measures of various countries. Coins and medals.
Class 16. — Maps, and Geographical and Cosmographical Apparatus.
Topographical, geographical, geological, hydrographical, and astronomical maps, atlases, &c.
Physical maps of every kind. Plans in relief.
Terrestrial and celestial globes and spheres. Statistical works and tables. Tables and ephemerides for the use of
astronomers and sailors.
Third Group.—Furniture and Accessories.
Class 17. —Cheap and Fancy Furniture.
Sideboards, book-cases, tables, dressing-tables, beds, sofas, couches, billiard-tables, &c.
Class 18.— Upholsterers' and Decorators' Work,
Bed furniture, stuffed chairs, canopies, curtains, tapestry and other hangings.
Decorative furniture made of costly stones and substances. Composition ornaments and objects moulded in plaster
carton-pierre, papier-mach6, &c. Frames. Paintings and decorations for churches and houses.
Class 19.— Crystal, Glass, and Stained Glass.
Drinking glasses of crystal, cut glass, plated and mounted crystal, &c. Table glass. Common glass-bottles
Window and mirror glass. Cast, enamelled, crackled, frosted, and tempered glass.
Glass, crystals for optical purposes, ornamental glass, &c.
Stained glass. Mirrors, looking glasses, &c.
Venetian glass.
Class 20. — Pottery.
Biscuit ware, hard and soft paste porcelains. Japanese, Indian, and Chinese porcelain.
Fine earthenware with coloured glazing, &c. Earthenware biscuit. Terra cotta. Enamelled lava. Bricks and tiles.
Stoneware.
Class 21. — Carpets, Tapestry, and other Stuff’s for Furniture,
Carpets and rugs, moquettes, tapestry, terry and velvet pile, &c. Felt carpets, matting, &c. India-rubber floorcloth, &c.
Furniture stuffs of cotton, wool, or silk, plain or figured. Horse-hair fabrics and leather cloths, moleskins, &c.
Leather for hangings, for covering furniture, &c. Oilcloths.
Class 22, —Paper Hangings.
Printed paper hangings. Flock, marbled, veined paper, &c. Paper for covering, bookbinding, &c. Artistic papers.
Varnished and enamelled paper. Imitations of wood and of leather. Painted or printed blinds.
Class 23.— Cutlery.
Knives, penknives, scissors, razors, &c. Cutlery of every description.
14


Class 24. Goldsmiths' and Silversmiths' Work.
Church plate, ornamental plate and table plate, gold and silver toilet articles, writing materials &c. Electrotypes.
Enamels, cloisonne, champlev<s.
Class 25. —Bronzes and various Art Castings and Eepouss6 Work.
Statues and bas-reliefs in bronze, cast-iron, zinc, &c. Castings coated with other metals by galvanic action.
Hepouss6 work in copper, lead, zinc, &c.
Class 26. —Clocks and Watches.
Separate parts of clocks of large or small size.
Watches, chronometers, pedometers ; various time-keepers, &c. Time-pieces and clocks working by springs or
weights, regulators, metronomes.
Astronomical clocks; marine chronometers ; travelling clocks. Alarums, &c. Water clocks and sand glasses.
Electric clocks. Turret and church clocks.
Class 27. —Apparatus and Processes Jor Heating and Lighting.
Fire-grates, fire-places, stoves, and hot-air stoves. Accessory objects for heating. Kitchen-ranges and apparatus
for heating and cooking by gas.
Apparatus for heating by the circulation of hot water, steam, or heated air. Ventilating apparatus. Drying
apparatus; drying stoves.
Enameller’s lamps, blow-pipes, portable forges.
Lamps for illuminating purposes, fed with various oils.
Accessory objects for lighting. Matches.
Apparatus and accessory objects for lighting by gas.
Lamps for the electric light. Apparatus for the use of the electric and magnesium light.
Class 28.— Perfumery.
Cosmetics and pomatums. Perfumed oils, essences, extracts and scents, aromatic vinegar; almond paste; perfumed
powders, pastilles, and scent bags; perfumes for burning. Toilet soap.
Class 29. —Leather Work, Fancy Articles, and Basket Work.
Dressing cases, work boxes, small articles of fancy furniture, liqueur-cases, glove-boxes, caskets. Cases' and bags,
jewel-boxes. Purses, pocket-books, note-books, cigar-cases.
Turned, engine-turned, carved, or engraved articles in wood, ivory, tortoise-shell, &c. Snuff-boxes. Pipes.
Fancy toilet combs and brushes.
Lacquered ware.
Fancy basket work; wicker work for bottles; articles in fine straw.
Fourth Group.—Textile Fabrics, Clothing, and Accessories.
Class 30. —Cotton Thread and Fabrics.
Cotton, dressed and spun.
Pure cotton fabrics, plain and figured.
Mixed cotton fabrics.
Cotton velvet.
Cotton ribands and tapes.
Class 31. —Thread and Fabrics oj Flax, Hemp, &c.
Flax, hemp, and other vegetable fibres spun.
Linen and drills. Cambric. Linen fabrics mixed with cotton or silk.
Fabrics made from vegetable fibres as substitutes for flax and hemp.
Class 32. —Worsted Yam and Fabrics.
Carded wool, worsted yarn.
Muslins de laine, Scotch cashmere, merinos, serges, &c.
Ribands and laces of wool, mixed with cotton or thread, silk, or floss silk. Hair tissues, pure or mixed.
. Class 33. —Woollen Yarn and Fabrics.
Combed wool and woollen yarn.
Cloth and other woollen fabrics.
Blankets. Felt of wool or hair for carpets, hats.
Shoes.
Woollen fabrics, unmilled or slightly milled; flannel, tartans, swansdown.
Class 34. —Silk and Silk Fabrics.
Raw and thrown silk. Floss silk yarn.
Silk fabrics, pure, plain, figured, brocaded. Silk fabrics mixed with gold, silver, cotton, wool, thread.
Manufactures of floss silk, pure or mixed.
Velvet and plush.
Silk ribands, pure or mixed.
Class 35.— Shawls.
Woollen shawls, pure or mixed.
Cashmere shawls.
Silk shawls, &c.
Class 36.— Lace, Net, Embroidery, and Trimmings,
Thread or cotton lace made with the distaff, the needle, or the loom.
Lace made of silk, worsted, or mohair.
Gold and silver lace.
Silk or cotton net, plain or figured.
Tambour embroidery, crotchet-work, &c. Gold, silver, and silk embroidery. Church embroidery. Embroidery,
tapestry, and other work done by the hand.
Lace-work and trimmings of silk, floss silk, worsted, mohair, horsehair, thread, and cotton; laces.
Lace-work and trimmings, real or imitation; lace-work for military uniforms.
Class 37. —Hosiery and Underclothing and Accessories of Clothing.
Hosiery of cotton, thread, wool, cashmere, silk, or floss silk, pure or mixed. Elastic fabrics. Underclothing for
men, women, and children; baby linen. Flannel and other woollen garments.
Stays, scarves, gloves, gaiters, garters, braces, fans, screens, umbrellas, parasols, walking-sticks, &c.
15


Class 38. —Clothing for both Sexes.
Men’s clothes; women’s clothes. Waterproof clothing.
Men and women’s head-dresses; artificial flowers and feathers.
Wigs and works in hair.
Boots and shoes.
Children’s clothes.
Clothing peculiar to various professions and trades.
Native costumes of different countries.
Class 39. —Jewellery and Precious Stones.
Jewellery in precious metals (gold, platinum, silver, aluminium), chased, filagreed, set with precious stones, &c.
Plated and imitation jewellery.
Ornaments in jet, amber, coral, mother-of-pearl, steel, &c.
Diamonds, precious stones, pearls, and imitations.
Class 40. —Portable Weapons and Hunting and Shooting Equipments.
Defensive armour: cuirasses and helmets.
Blunt weapons; maces, life-preservers.
Side-arms: foils, swords, sabres, bayonets, lances, axes, hunting knives.
Missile weapons : bows, cross-bows, slings.
Fire-arms: guns, rifles, pistols, and revolvers.
Accessory objects appertaining to every kind of small arms : powder-flasks, bullet-moulds, &c.
Round, oblong, hollow, and explosive projectiles. Percussion-caps, priming, cartridges.
Hunting and sporting equipments.
Class 41. —Travelling Apparatus and Camp Equipage.
Trunks, valises, saddle-bags, &c. Dressing-cases and travelling-cases. Various objects. Travelling-rugs, cushions,
caps, travelling-costumes and boots, iron-shod sticks, grapnel-hooks, sun-shades, &c.
Portable apparatus specially intended for scientific voyages and expeditions ; travelling photographic apparatus and
instruments for astronomical and meteorological observations; equipments and implements for geologists, mineralogists,
naturalists, colonists, pioneers, &c.
Tents and camp equipage. Beds, hammocks, folding chairs, &c.
Class 42.— Toys.
Dolls and playthings; dolls and figures in wax.
Games for the amusement of children and adults.
Instructive games.
Fifth Group.—Raw and Manufactured Products.
Class 43. —Products of the Cultivation of Forests and of the Trades appertaining thereto.
Specimens of different kinds of forest trees.
Wood for cabinet work, for firewood, and for building. Timber for ship-building; staves ; cleft timber shingles,
Cork : bark for textile purposes. Tanning, colouring, odoriferous, and resinous substances.
Products obtained from forests; charcoal and dried wood; raw potash; turnery; basket-work; straw-work;
wooden shoes, &c.
Class 44. —Products of Hunting, Shooting, Fishing, and Spontaneous Products. Machines and Instruments
connected therewith.
Collections and drawings of terrestrial and amphibious animals, of birds, eggs, fishes; of cetacea, of mollusca, and
Crustacea. , , , ~ , , , .
Products of hunting and shooting: furs and skins, hair, bristles, undressed feathers, down, horn, teeth, ivory, bone,
tortoise-shell, musk, castoreum, and analogous products.
Products of fishing: train oil, spermaceti, &c. Whalebone, ambergris, shells of mollusca, pearls, mother-of-pearl,
sepia, purple, coral, sponge.
Vegetable products of the earth, obtained without culture: mushrooms, truffles, wild fruit, lichens used as dyes,
food, and fodder; fermented sap; Peruvian bark; useful barks and filaments; wax, resinous gums; india-rubber, gutta-
percha, &c.
Traps and snares; fishing lines and hooks, harpoons, nets, bait, and fishing apparatus.
Apparatus and instruments for gathering the products obtained without culture.
Class 45. —Agricultural Products not used for Food,
Textile materials: raw cotton, flax and hemp, scutched and unscutched; textile vegetable fibres of all kinds; wool,
washed or unwashed; cocoons of the silkworm.
Various agricultural products used in manufactures, in pharmacy, and for household purposes; oleaginous plants;
oil, wax, resin. . .
Tobacco in leaves or manufactured, German tinder. Tanning and dyeing substances.
Preserved fodder, and substances specially intended for feeding cattle.
Class 46. —Chemical and Pharmaceutical products.
Acids, alkalis, salts of all kinds. Sea-salt and products extracted from mother water.
Various products of chemistry: wax and fatty substances; soaps and candles; raw materials used in perfumery;
resins tar, and the products derived from them; essences and varnishes; various coating substances; blacking. Objects
made of india-rubber and gutta-percha; dyes and colours.
Mineral waters and natural and artificial aerated waters. Raw materials used in pharmacy. Medicines, simple and
made up.
Class 47. —Chemical Processes for Bleaching, Dyeing, Printing, and Dressing.
Specimens of threads and fabrics, bleached or dyed. Specimens of fabrics prepared for dyeing.
Specimens of printed or dyed linen, of printed cotton fabrics, pure or mixed. Specimens of printed worsted or
woollen fabrics, pure or mixed, combed or carded.
Specimens of printed silk fabrics, pure or mixed.
Specimens of printed felt or cloth carpets. Oilcloth.
16


Class 48. —Leather and Skins,
Raw materials used in the dressing of skins and leather.
Raw hides, salted hides. Tanned curried, dressed, or dyed leather. Varnished leather,
Morocco and sheepskin; skins grained, shamoyed, tawed, dressed, or dyed. Prepared skins for glove-inaking.
Skins and furs, dressed and dyed. Parchment,
Gutwork; strings for musical instruments, gold-beater’s skin, sinews.
Sixth Group.—Machinery—Apparatus and Processes Used in the Mechanical Industries.
Class 49. —Agricultural Implements and Processes used in the Cultivation oj Helds and Forests.
Plans of culture, distribution, and management of crops. Apparatus and works for agricultural engineering,
draining, irrigation, &c. Plans and models of farm buildings. . ,
Tools, implements, machines, and apparatus used in husbandry, sowing and planting, harvesting, preparation and
preservation of crops.
Various agricultural machines worked by horse-power or by steam.
Carts and other rural means of transport.
Locomotives, engines, and horse-powers.
Manures, organic or mineral.
Apparatus for the physical and chemical study of soils.
Plans of different systems of re-planting, managing, and cultivating forests.
Apparatus used in the cultivation of forests, and in the trades appertaining thereto.
Apparatus used in the manufactory of tobacco.
Class 50. —Apparatus and Processes used in Agricultural Works, and in Works for the Preparation of Food.
Apparatus used in agricultural works : manufacture of artificial manures; of drain pipes; cheese factories, dairies;
apparatus used in preparing flour, fecula, starches, oils ; apparatus used in breweries, distilleries, sugar manufactories and
refineries; workshops for the dressing of textile materials; silk-worm nurseries, &c. .
Apparatus used in the preparation of alimentary products, mechanical appliances for kneading and baking ;
apparatus used in making pastry and confectionery. ~
Apparatus for the manufacture of vermicelli, macaroni, &c. Machines for making sea biscuits. Chocolate machines.
Apparatus for roasting coffee. .
Apparatus for making ices and cool drinks; manufacture and preservation of ice.
Class 51. —Apparatus used in Chemistry, Pharmacy, and Tanning.
Laboratory utensils and apparatus.
Apparatus and instruments used in assays for industrial and commercial purposes.
Processes and apparatus used in the manufacture of chemicals, soaps, and candles. .
Processes and apparatus used in the manufacture of essences, varnishes, and articles made of india-rubber and
gutta-percha.
Processes and apparatus used in gasworks.
Processes and apparatus used in bleaching.
Processes used in the preparation of pharmaceutical products.
Processes used in tanyards, and in leather dressing.
Processes and apparatus used in glassworks and in china and earthenware manufactories.
Class 52. —Machines and Apparatus in General.
Separate pieces of machinery: bearings, rollers, slide-bars, eccentrics, toothed wheels, connecting rods, cranks,
parallel joints, belts, funicular apparatus, &c. Gearing, spring and oatchwork, &c. Regulators and governors.
Lubricators. „ ,
Machines for counting and registering. Dynamometers, steam gauges, weighing machines. Gauges for liquids
and gas.
Machines used for moving heavy weights.
Hydraulic machines for raising water, &c.; norias (chain pumps), scoop wheels, hydraulic rams, &c.
Hydraulic engines, water wheels, turbines, hydraulic lifts, centrifugal, steam, and other pumps.
Accumulators and hydraulic presses.
Steam engines. Boilers, steam generators, and apparatus appertaining thereto.
Apparatus for condensing steam. .
Machines set in motion by the evaporation of ether, chloroform, ammonia, or by a combination of gases.
Machines set in motion by gas, hot air, and compressed air.
Electro-magnetic machines. Windmills and panemones. Air-balloons.
Glass 53. —Machine Tools,
Travelling circular saw benches, self-acting, for breaking down heavy timber. Machines for boring timber used in
fencing.
Engines and tools for preparing wood for the workshop. Machines for making casks. .
Machines for cutting cork. Lathes, boring and planing machines. Slotting, drilling, and shaping machines.
Screw-cutting engines and riveting machines. Various kinds of tools used in machine workshops. •
Tools, engines, and apparatus for pressing, crushing, working up, sawing, polishing, &c. Special tools and engines
used in various trades.
Class 54, —Apparatus and Processes used in Spinning and Rope-making.
Hand-spinning apparatus. Separate parts of spinning apparatus. Machines and apparatus used in the dressing and
spinning of textile materials. Apparatus and processes for the subsidiary operations appertaining thereto; for drawing,
winding, twisting, throwing, dressing. Apparatus for separating the qualities and numbering the thread.
Materials used in rope manufacture. Round, flat, tapering cables, cord and twine, wire-ropes, cables with wire
core, rope matches, quick-matches, &c.
Class 55. —Apparatus and Processes used in Weaving.
Apparatus used in the preparation of materials for weaving: warping mills, spooling (winding) machines. Card-
making for the jacquard looms. „ ~
Hand looms and mechanical looms for the manufacture of plain fabrics. Looms for the manufacture of figured and
brocaded stuffs : damask looms, electric looms.
Looms for the manufacture of carpets and tapestry.
Mesh weaving looms for the manufacture of hosiery and net. Apparatus for making lace. Apparatus used in the
manufacture of lace-work. . . , , . ,
High warp looms and different modes of preparing the bobbins for weaving. Accessory apparatus; machines for
fulling, calendering, figuring, watering, measuring, folding, &c.
17


Class 56. —Apparatus and Processes for Sewing and for Making-up Clothing.
Ordinary implements used by tailors and seamstresses. Sewing, quilting, hemming, and embroidering machines.
Implements for cutting out materials and leather for makfcig garments and shoes.
Machines for making, nailing, and screwing boots and shoes.
Machines for the application of india-rubber.
Class 57. —Apparatus and Processes used in the Manufacture of Furniture and Objects for Dwellings.
Machines for cutting veneers. Turning webs, vertical and circular saw frames, shingle cutters, &c.
Machines for cutting the mouldings and beadings of frames, the squares of inlaid floors, furniture, &c. Lathes and
other apparatus used in carpentering and cabinet-making.
Machines for stamping and burnishing. Machines and apparatus for working stucco, papier-machd, ivory, bone,
and horn.
Machines for pointing, carving, and reducing statues; for engraving, engine-turning, &c.
Machines for making bricks and tiles; machines for making artificial stones.
Machines for sawing and polishing hard stones, marbles, &c.
Class 58. —Apparatus and Processes used in Paper-making, Dyeing, and Printing.
Materials and products of the manufacture of pulps for making paper, of wood, straw, alpha, &c.
Processes and products of the bleaching of wood fibre.
Apparatus for making paper by hand and by machinery. Apparatus for pressing, glazing, watering, embossing, and
ruling paper. Machines for cutting out, paring, stamping paper, &c.
Apparatus for bleaching and dyeing, and for the preparation of paper and tissues.
Apparatus for printing paper-hangings and tissues. Machines for engraving cylinders for printing.
Materials, apparatus, and products of type-founding, stereotypes, &c.
Machines and apparatus used in typography, stereotyping, copper-plate printing, autography, lithography, chal-
cography, paniconography, chromo-lithography, &c. Machines for setting up and sorting types. Printing of bank notes,
postage stamps, &c.
Class 59.— Machines, Instruments and Processes used in various Works.
Coining presses.
Machines for making buttons, pens, pins, envelopes; packing machines, brush-making machines, machines for making
cards, capsules ; for affixing lead seals to merchandise; for corking bottles, &c.
Tools for, and processes of, making clocks, toys, marqueterie, baskets, &c.
Machines for binding books. Writing machines.
Class 6 0. —Carriages and Wheelwrights' Work.
Separate parts of wheels and carriages: wheels, tires, axles, axle-boxes, iron- work, &c. Springs and various methods
of hanging carriages,
Different systems of harnessing. Breaks.
Wheelwrights’ Work; Waggons, tumbrels, drays, and other vehicles for special purposes.
Carriages; public, state, and private carriages; sedan chairs, litters, sledges, &c., velocipedes.
Class 61. —Harness and Saddlery.
Various articles used for carriage horses and saddle horses ; pack-saddles, saddles, bridles, and harness for saddle
horses, beasts of burden, and draught horses ; stirrups, spurs, whips.
Class 62. —Railway Apparatus.
Separate parts: springs, buffers, breaks.
Permanent way; rails, chairs, crossings, switches, fish plates, turn-tables; buffers, feeding cranes, and tanks; optical
and acoustic signals.
Permanent way for tramways.
Rolling stock: waggons for passengers, for carrying earth, goods, cattle; locomotives, tenders.
Self-moving carriages; locomotives, for roads.
Special tools and machines for the maintenance, repair, and construction of railways.
Apparatus for inclined planes and self-acting planes; apparatus and engines for atmospheric railways; models of
engines, of systems of traction, of apparatus appertaining to railways.
Models, plans, and drawings of platforms, stations, and engine houses, and other buildings necessary for the working
of railways.
Glass 63. —Telegraphic Apparatus and Processes.
Appliances for telegraphs based on the transmission of light, sound, &c.
Apparatus for the electric telegraph, post, wires, stretchers, &c.
Batteries and apparatus for sending and receiving messages.
Bells and electric signals.
Telegraphs for military purposes. Objects appertaining to telegraphy: lightning conductors, commutators, prepared
paper for printing messages and for sending autographic messages.
Special apparatus for pneumatic telegraphy.
Class 64. —Apparatus and Processes of Civil Engineering, Public Works, and Architecture.
Building materials : stone, wood, metals; ornamental stone; lime, mortar, cements, artificial stone and concrete;
asphalte; roofing tiles, bricks, paving tiles; slates, pasteboard and felt for roofing.
Apparatus and products of processes used in the preservation of wood. Apparatus and instruments for testing
building materials.
Apparatus for earthworks, excavators. Apparatus used in building yards. Tools and processes used by stone
dressers and cutters, masons, carpenters, tilers, blacksmiths, joiners, glaziers, plumbers, house painters, &c.
Locksmiths’ work; locks, padlocks, railings, balconies, bannisters, &c.
Apparatus and engines used in making foundations; pile-drivers and pile work, screw piles, pumps, pneumatic
apparatus, dredging machines, &c. Apparatus used in hydraulic works connected with harbours, canals, rivers; machines
used in reducing stones, quartz, or other hard substances.
Apparatus used in the supply of water and of gas. Apparatus used in the maintenance of roads, plantations, and
public walks.
Models, plans, and drawings of public works; bridges, viaducts, aqueducts, drains, canal bridges, dams, weirs, &c.
Lighthouses. Public buildings for special purposes; buildings for civil purposes; mansions and houses for letting;
workmen’s towns, industrial dwellings, &c.
18


Class 65. —Navigation and Life-saving.
Drawings and models of slips, graving docks, floating docks, &c.
Drawings and models of vessels of all kinds, sea-going and for rivers. Models of the systems of ship-building
adopted in the navy.
Boats and barges.
Materials for the rigging of ships. _
Flags and signals. Apparatus for the prevention of collisions at sea. Buoys, beacons, &c.
Apparatus for swimming, diving, and life-saving exhibited in action; floats, swimming belts, &c. Diving belts, cork
jackets, nautilus life-belts, &c. Submarine boats; apparatus for saving life at sea, rocket apparatus, life-boats, &c
Apparatus of all kinds used for saving life from fires and other accidents.
Pleasure boats, yachts, &c.
Class 66. —Materials and Apparatus for Military Purposes,
Military engineering and fortifications.
Artillery, gun-carriages, and weapons and projectiles of every kind.
Military equipment, clothing, and encampments.
Military transport service.
Military topography and geography.
Seventh Group.—Alimentary Products.
Class 67. Cereals , Farinaceous Products, and Products derived from them.
Wheat, rye, barley, rice, maize, millet, and other cereals in grain and in flour.
Grain without husk, and groats.
Fecula from potatoes, rice, lentils, &c., gluten.
Tapioca, sago, arrowroot, cassava, and other fecula, compound farinaceous products, &c.
Italian pastes, semolina, vermicelli, macaroni.
Alimentary preparations as substitutes for bread, home-made paste, &c.
Class 68. —Bread and Pastry.
Various kinds of bread, with or without yeast, fancy bread and bread in shapes, compressed bread for travelling
military campaigns, &c. (See Biscuits). ~, , ~ ~ . ,
Pastry of various kinds peculiar to each country. Gingerbread and dry cakes capable of being presen ed.
Class m.-Fatty Substances used as Food. Milk and Eggs,
Fatty substances and oils good for food.
Fresh and preserved milk; fresh and salt butter; cheese.
Eggs of all kinds.
Glass 70. —Meat and Fish.
Salt meat of all kinds. Meats preserved by various processes. Meat and soup cakes. Hams and prepared meats.
Poultry and game. , . „ ~ „
Salt fish, fish in barrels: cod, herrings, &c.; fish preserved in oil: sardines, tunny, &c.
Crustacea and shell-fish; lobsters, shrimps, oysters, potted oysters, anchovies, &c.
Class 71. — Vegetables and Frujfr.
Tubers: potatoes, &c.
Dry farinaceous vegetables : beans, lentils, &c.
Green vegetables for cooking: cabbages, &c.
Vegetable roots: carrots, turnips, &c.
Vegetables used for flavouring : m onions, garlic, &c.
Salads, cucumbers, gourds: pumpkins, melons, &c.
Vegetables preserved by various processes.
Fresh fruit; dried and prepared fruits; prunes, figs, raisins, &c.
Fruits preserved without sugar.
Class 72. —Condiments and Stimulants, Sugar and Confectionery.
Spices, pepper, cinnamon, allspice, &c.
Table salt.
Vinegar.
Compound condiments and stimulants : mustard, kan, English sauces, &c.
Tea, coffee, and other aromatic beverages, chicory and sweet acorn coffee.
Chocolate.
Sugar for household purposes: grape sugar, sugar of milk.
Confectionery; sugarplums, bonbons, nougats, angelica, aniseed, &c., preserves and jellies.
Dried and preserved fruits ; cedrates, lemons, oranges, pineapples.
Fruits preserved in brandy.
Syrups and liqueurs.
Class 73. —Fermented Drinks.
Vin ordinaire, red and white.
Sweet wines and still wines.
Sparkling wines.
Ale, porter, cider, perry, and other beverages made from cereals.
Fermented drinks made from vegetable sap, from milk, and sweet substances of all kinds.
Brandies and alcohols.
Spirits; whisky, gin, rum, tafia, kirsch, &c.
Eighth Group.—Agriculture.
Class 74. —Specimens of Farm Buildings and Agricultural Works.
Examples of the farm buildings of various countries.
Examples of stables, cattle-sheds, sheepfolds, pig-sties, and of premises for rearing and fattening such animals.
Utensils used in stables, cattle sheds, kennels, &c.
Apparatus for preparing the food of animals. .
Agricultural machinery in motion : steam ploughs, reaping and binding and mowing machines, hay-making machines,
threshing, finishing, and dressing machines, &c.
Specimens of agricultural works : distilleries, sugar-mills, sugar refineries, breweries, works for the preparation of
flour, fecula, starch; silkworm nurseries, &c. Apparatus for artificial hatching.
Presses for wine, cider, oil.
19


Ninth Group.—Horticulture.
Class 75. —Conservatories and Horticultural Apparatus.
Gardeners’, nurserymen’s, and horticulturists’ tools.
Apparatus for watering and keeping turf in order, &c.
Large conservatories and apparatus appertaining thereto. Room and window conservatories.
Aquariums for aquatic plants.
Fountains and other means for ornamenting gardens.
Class 76. —Flowers and Ornamental Plants.
Species of plants and examples of culture exhibiting the characteristic types of the gardens and dwellings of each
country.
Class 77. — Vegetables.
Species of plants and examples of culture exhibiting the characteristic types of the kitchen gardens of each country.
Class 78. —Fruit and Fruit Trees.
Species of plants and specimens of products exhibiting the characteristic types of the orchards of each country.
Class 79. —Seeds and Saplings of Forest Trees.
Species of plants and specimens of products illustrating the processes followed in each country for planting forests.
Class 80. —Plants for Conservatories.
Illustrations of the mode of culture adopted in various countries, with a view either to pleasure or to utility.
Tenth Group.—Mining Industries—Machinery, and Products.
Class 81. —Apparatus and Processes of the Art of Mining and Metallurgy,
Boring apparatus for artesian wells and wells of large diameters. Boring machines and apparatus for breaking down
coal and cutting rocks. Apparatus for blasting by electricity.
Models, plans, and views of the mode of working in mines and quarries. Works for obtaining mineral waters.
Machines and apparatus used for extracting ore, and for lowering and hoisting miners.
Winding, pumping, and crushing machinery.
Safety cages and hooks; signals and other appliances for lessening the danger in mines.
Machines for draining; pumps.
Ventilating apparatus; ventilators.
Safety lamps ; lamps for electric light.
Apparatus for the mechanical dressing of ores and mineral fuel.
Apparatus for compressing fuel into cakes.
Apparatus for the carbonisation of fuel. Smelting furnaces. Smoke-consuming apparatus.
Apparatus used in metal works.
Special apparatus used in forges and fbiindixes, electro-metallurgiesl apparatus.
Apparatus used in metal manufactures of all kinds.
Drawings of different classes of machinery used in mining.
Class 82. —Mining and Metallurgy.
Collections and specimens of rocks, minerals, ores. Ornamental stones. Hard stones. Refractory substances.
Earths and clays. Various mineral products. Raw sulphur. Rock salt; salt from salt springs.
Mineral fuel, various kinds of coal, coal dust, and compressed coal. Asphalt and rock asphalt. Bitumen. Mineral
tar. Petroleum, &c.
Metals in a crude state: pig-iron, iron, steel, cast-steel, copper, lead, gold, silver, zinc, antimony, &c. Alloys.
Products of washing and refining precious metals, of gold-beating, &c.
Electro-metallurgy; objects gilt, silvered, or coated with copper, steel, nickel, &c., by the galvanic process.
Products of the working of metals: rough-castings, bells, wrought-iron, iron for special purposes, sheet-iron and tin
plates, iron plates for casing ships and constructions, &c.
Sheet-iron coated with zinc or lead; copper, lead, and zinc sheets, &c.
Manufactured metals: blacksmiths’ work, wheels and tires, unwelded pipes, chains, &c.
Wire drawing. Needles, pins, wire-ropes, wire-work, and wire-gauze, perforated sheet-iron.
Hardware, edge-tools, ironmongery, copper, sheet-iron, tinware, &c.
Other metal manufactures.
M'Carron,
Bird and Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.
20
