

PiArv*
'f.’s C.
A r * .
18 8 0.
MELBOURNE SOCIAL SCIENCE CONGRESS.
DEPARTMENT No. 5-ECONOMY, TRADE, MANUFACTURES.
C|£ Inaugural
OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE DEPARTMENT,
HON. THOMAS LOADER.
Published by the Authority of the Council of the Congress.
PROFESSOR J. S. ELKINGTON, M.A.,
Hon. Gen. Secretary.




ADDRESS.
The inhabitants of Australia, and the people of all civilized nations,
living in this interesting age of progress, possess numerous advantages
over those who have lived in previous generations ; and the Anglo-Saxon
race especially find very much to interest them during their short
journey through life in the seventies and eighties of the nineteenth
century.
1. The modem discoveries have been wonderful, and widely
applied for the uses of the people.
2. With electricity, distance is comparatively annihilated.
3. The telegraph enables the several nations of the world to hold
daily converse.
4. Newspapers bring all the news of the world to your breakfast
table.
5. The use of steam practically prolongs life, by reducing the time
of travel, and the toils of manual labour to a minimum.
I am afraid that in conferring upon me the honour of this chair, for
which I return you my sincere thanks, you have imposed a task upon
me which I shall very inadequately perform, and which many of our
members could have undertaken with a better result. The multiplicity
of subjects within the range of this department of economy—trade,
manufactures, and mining—presents a field so extensive that I can only
with difficulty select a starting point. Perhaps the best plan will be to
keep in mind that this is the first organized Australian Social Science
Congress. We may, therefore, confine our leading thoughts to Aus-
tralian subjects, as, without saying anything which is new, we are more
likely to feel unanimous upon Australian affairs than upon questions of
Asiatic or European moment.
The very first meeting of British scientists ever held in Australia
might be traced back over one hundred years ago, to the time when
Captain Cook and his officers, following the discoveries of the French
and the Dutch, landed upon the shores of this island continent, and, in
the name of the British Sovereign and race, secured possession of
Australia to the British crown and people. Captain Cook, when
making his scientific voyages in the service of our nation, was the
cause of the first British settlement upon the Australian shores—one
then designed to establish a military station for civil offenders. The
immediate effect of such settlement was to announce to the other
nations of the world that Australia had been annexed to the British


empire; but larger results were destined to follow. Social science
directs us to make diligent scientific investigation of social facts and
knowledge; and when tracing the original cause which has produced
certain effects, we sometimes will find that causes expected to produce
one effect have produced others quite beyond, or even different from,
those expected; and thus it was, also, that the military stations in
Australia, first established upon a small spot in the island of Tasmania,
and upon the lovely shores of Botany, upon the mainland, have
produced effects far beyond the original thought.
In the first place, the discovery of the pastoral capabilities of
Australia about the coast line, which knowledge being a new cause,
produced new effect in attracting adventurous men to embark into
pastoral and commercial pursuits in the new country; and,
In the second place, led to a shepherd, while in pursuit of his lonely
peaceful calling, in 1850, discovering gold in New South Wales.
This discovery proved a new and powerful cause of attraction, which
completely changed the prospects of Australia, and produced a startling
effect, as discovery of gold succeeded discovery in all the colonies—viz.,
that of establishing in the unknown solitudes of Australia, by the arts of
peace and the social sciences, the solid foundations of an Australian
arm of the British empire within the short space of one generation.
The development of Australia into national dimensions after the gold
discoveries of 1850 was rapid and well defined. The first important
occurrence was the sepai’ation of Victoria from New South Wales;
this, however, had been arranged before the gold discoveries. Shortly
thereafter, and during the decade of the fifties, many hundreds of
thousands of people from Europe and elsewhere crowded to the shores
of Victoria and New South Wales; and upon gold being discovered in
South Australia, and in the northern and eastern parts of New South
Wales, and also in New Zealand, many thousands swarmed off and
away from the Victoria gold-fields to the sites of the newer discoveries ;
first to Port Curtis and the northern parts, secondly to Otago and the
New Zealand ports, until the rapid increase of people into the eastern
portion of Australia caused the colony of Queensland to arise into
existence as a separate dependency, and a similar influx of population
into New Zealand stimulated the early settlers of that colony into such
active energy that it has frequently been called the Britain of the
South. Victoria contributed so very largely to the development, of
Queensland and New Zealand, and more recently has supplied the Fiji
islands with population to such an extent, that she may have some
consideration to be called the Mother of Colonies.
The gold-seekers of the period found the gold, it is true, but they
also discovered sources of national wealth for which they were not
looking. This cause here produced an unexpected effect, and they
discovered a vast interior of splendid country, rich in timber, rare gems
and metals, and abounding with pastures of vast extent and variety.
These discoveries had the further effect of projecting schemes for the
pastoral occupation of the interior of Australia. Whereupon, in
August, 1860, Victoria fitted out, at her own sole expense, the Burke and
Wills exploration party—the first party of white men who ever lived to


-cross and recross the Australian continent. This exploration feat was
very stimulating, for it exploded a foolish fallacy, and proved the
interior of Australia was not an arid wilderness, but was a fine pastoral
country. The diary left behind by these unfortunate explorers
contained such favourable reports of the country over which they had
passed, that this new cause induced other exploration parties to proceed,
until, finally, settlement extended the foundations of this Australian
arm of the British empire all over the regions of northern, western, and
central Australia and of Australasia. Thus, by the aid of social
scientific forces, stimulated by the discovery of gold, and developed by
pastoral enterprise, commerce, and social laws, and without any naval
or military war, or conquest of native races, the British people have
become the inhabitants of the finest island continent on the face of this
planet—one upon which no wild animals exist, beyond a few wild
dogs; one upon which no vestige of having been previously occupied by
any civilized race has yet been discovered; one which is now known to
be a bounteous country, the fame of whose natural wealth and beautiful
scenery is being proclaimed in every land where social science is known.
The characteristics of the British family race have been, and now
are, actively working in Australia as well as elsewhere, and we have
made ourselves at home very much in the subjugation and occupation
of the new land of Australia, which has provided a new home for the
remarkable race to which we belong. The fact is very observable, that
the English-speaking nations in different portions of the world are
rapidly increasing in power, and will soon number nearly 100,000,000
of people, speaking one common language, with one common origin,
using the same system of laws, order, and religious doctrine. These
people possess dominion over nearly half the surface of the earth, and
have room in their British, American, Australian, and Canadian
homes for comparatively indefinite expansion. If these people were to
unite together for defensive and offensive purposes, they could create
and command a power which could probably resist, or might even
control, the national forces of the rest of the world. The seven
Australian colonies form a vigorous young branch nation of this
powerful family. A separate form of government exists in each of the
seven colonies, without any constitutional bond to confederate them
upon any legislative point, except the common allegiance which all
render loyally and gladly to the British sovereign and empire. Thus,
a wide difference often appears in the application of political science or
laws (such as differential tariffs) in the different colonies; and
although the subdivision of Australia into political districts, upon a
local self-government system, has been a very wise and superior policy
for harmoniously developing internal progress, signs are not wanting
that the identity of the common wants of the people of Australia as a
whole in many things is so universal that a general confederation of
the seven colonies for higher purposes of political commonalty is
rapidly approaching, and will probably be accelerated by the solid
advances and growing operations of social science.
I shall not enumerate the advantages predicted by the leading
statesmen in Australia as the probable outcome of a mutual confedera-


tion, although two of the great difficulties may be noted. Ist. The
adoption of an uniform customs tariff. Nevertheless, the solution of
this difficulty has been already achieved in the American States, where
the population is over fifteen times greater than in Australia, where
the diversity of soil, climate, and productions is as extensive as with
ourselves ; and I see no reason whatever for delaying the adaptation and
adoption of an Australian united tariff. I, indeed, believe that a
plebiscite of Australians upon this subject would give an overwhelming
vote against the seven local parliamentary differential tariffs now
existing, and in favour of one combination tariff for the Australian
States. Sooner or later a ■ combination tariff must come. Australian
manufacturers can hold their ground better in a large market than a
small one, and should join with freetraders in demanding a uniform
tariff for Australia. 2nd. The selection of the seat of Confederate
Government. The claims of the two cities of the most populous
colonies are so nearly equal that it will be difficult to decide which shall
be the centre seat of confederation; and the distance between them will
be so very short, when completely railed over, that it is of very little
importance which may be selected. Sydney has natural advantages in
coal and iron mines, and which may ultimately, perhaps, force her into
the front position as the chief seat of Australian manufactures after
she has a large infusion of new blood in the form of British arrivals.
Melbourne may always retain the distinguished honour of being the
foremost seat of learning, science, and art in Australia; and the
advantages derived from her temperate climate, and the persistent
energy of her population, will always bring votaries to pay homage to
her attractions. Her present skill in manufactures secures her a large
Australian trade and the premier position.
There are, however, many questions upon which uniformity of
practice might be resolved upon without waiting for a federal union.
An Australian supreme court is one. The quixotic dispute over the
border duties is another; and while it is the laughing-stock of all
Australia, those who are resident in Victoria are the sufferers, and those
in New South Wales the gainers, by this squabble between colonial
potentialities. A border disturbance signalized the commencement of
these duties; perhaps another border quarrel may be necessary to
abolish their collection. The boundary line between the two colonies
might be in the clouds for all the good it is worth to anybody; and the
true way to abolish the dispute would be to abolish the frontier
boundary, and to unite the two colonies into one large State, with only
one parliament, one governor, and one supreme court. The blunder of
successive Victorian Governments in levying border duties will drive
trade from the port of Melbourne, and help to make Sydney the premier
port of Australia. The Government of New South Wales are actively
alive to take every advantage of this Victorian blunder. A political
amalgamation between the two colonies would prove of great
advantage to the trade of both, which would never again be impeded by
rival parliamentarians. The people of New South Wales and Victoria
are in advance of politicians upon this subject, and are uniting in
commerce, marriage, friendships, and by frequent inter-communication.


Very little difference of opinion stands in the way of political union,
■except the opinions of local politicians who will not readily climb into
a larger arena. A proposal for the union of New South Wales,
Victoria, and South Australia has been formally propounded by the
foremost Australian statesman of the times. Tasmania might be
included in this family party, and the question will have more general
support from the people of all the colonies than from many of the
parliamentary representatives of the same. A congress of leading
ministers from New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria, West
Australia, Queensland, and New Zealand is now in meeting at this
•city of Melbourne to arrange a basis for the settlement of certain
leading questions. Although all the questions may not be adjusted, it
is almost certain that some minor ones will be, and thus a foundation
be laid for future Confederation.
1851 to 1880.
The population of Australia, in 1851, was about 431,293, or less than
half a million; and now, in 1880, it is—say, about 2,700,000, or over
two and a half millions. In the former year, and for many years in the
fifties, the chief industries were gold-mining and pastoral pursuits ; but
the innate enterprise of our race burst forth at all points, and soon
discovered new and unexpected sources of natural wealth in the mineral
and vegetable kingdoms, which were speedily developed into fountains
of material prosperity. Not content with these —or, rather, it might be
said, consequent upon new causes—efforts were also made to introduce
and establish mechanical industries in some of the colonies even by the
aid of legislative encouragement, while all the social scientific forces and
influences of modern times for increasing and administering to the
comfort of living in this century were rapidly introduced by the adoption
of railroads, steamboats, telegraphs, gas, the drama, and literature.
Let us pause to notice, from the social science point of view, a few
direct contrasts between the two periods. In the former—which we may
call the fifties—the colonies were emerging from the chrysalis position
of Crown colonies. To-day, they freely possess all the privileges of a
parliamentary form of government, and, like unto sovereign states, each
colony is reigned over by the Queen’s agent, who is locally termed the
Governor, except in New South Wales. There we find the Queen’s
agent is termed the Governor-General of Australia, which infers that
it was the original design of Imperialism to confederate Australia.
Each Queen’s agent holds his vice-regal court in each capital in her
Majesty’s name. The colonies are also represented in London by
perplexed Agents-General. We sometimes catch glimpses of their being
found gaily flitting about the staircases of her Majesty’s court of St.
James, or, accompanied by an embassy, gravely consulting with her
Majesty’s ministers, in Downing-street, upon constitutional laws, or
elegantly lounging with the ambassadors in the saloons of Pall Mall or
of the aristocracy ; and in these and various other social and scientific
ways—while earning knighthood —the famous riches of Australia are
-supposed to be made known by these indefatigable Agents-General to
the middle and the working classes of the United Kingdom. These


Australian Government agents —call them what you choose —am
usually appointed for political reasons, and are only so many rival
agents, representing—not separate and distinct, but only one and the
same country, and might advantageously be merged into one general
united Australian officer and office, with a complete museum of Aus-
tralian products attached, and with a man at the head who would, without
going in for a handle to his name, secure attention from the British
Government, and make the name and famous riches of Australia in
Great Britain and Europe as familiar as household words, and thus
induce some of the annual thousands of British emigrants to select our
splendid country of Australia as their land of adoption.
In the early fifties, the communication with the capitals of Europe
was chiefly only by sailing ships, and about 125 days was the frequent
period of the voyage of the mail and passenger ships : now, in the
seventies, we have four distinct mail services performed by first-class
steam vessels, and letters are delivered and passengers landed within
thirty-six days, with the prospect of this time being further considerably
reduced. The cable telegraph was then an unknown luxury : we can
now use this daily to any portion of the world, and may possibly
expect shortly to use the telephone—or, better even than that, the
pantelephone—to Europe and other places as a daily means of com-
munication.
Then, in the early fifties, the only communication between the inter-
colonial capitals was by second-class steamers and sailing ships: now
there is a daily service for mails and passengers overland, covered
partly by rail and coach, between some of the capitals, with good
hotels along the route • while first-class steamers convey passengers and
cargo by sea between all the principal seaport cities and towns on the
Australian coast. This paper is being partly written upon a passenger
steamboat in New South Wales and Queensland waters. In the
fifties, a large portion of the people lived under canvas or in small
wooden cottages: now they are housed in substantial and elegant
modern mansions and villas, built of stone, bricks and cement—many
luxuriantly furnished and beautifully embellished, and most having
spacious verandahs. Although, in the early fifties, railways were
talked of and one or two short lines were made in Victoria, thfr
different Australian colonies did not then, as now, each rejoice in a
railway system differing in gauge from that of its neighbour—Victoria,
5.3 ; N. S. Wales, 4.8^; Queensland, 3.6 ; Adelaide, 5.3 and 3.6. Even
in this first year of the eighties, no provision has been made by
engineer or statesman to secure uniformity of Australian railway
gauge; as the railways have not yet united to each other at the
terminal stations, the full force of this absurd error of the three
different gauges is not realised by Australians. Whether it be regarded
from a social science view or from a commercial or defensive platform,
a serious blunder of an expensive character will be found to have been
made, and one which must be corrected. Railway affairs generally are
in a backward state in Australia. Although this is a railway age, and
the principal cities of the world can be reached by rail, and the natural
conditions for making railways in Australia peculiarly favourable, no*


main lines connect the capitals of Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne,
Adelaide, and Perth, and no transcontinental lines at present exist to
develop the riches of the interior of Australia, although two are
talked about, one from Adelaide to Port Darwin, and one from
Brisbane to Point Parker, Gulf of Carpentaria. Much has been done
in each colony ; much more remains to be done, and could be accom-
plished by a Railway Congress arranging a basis upon which all the
colonies could be united as a whole Australia, for the construction upon
a joint cost system of main railways between their capitals. The
postal and telegraph services have been arranged, bridges over border
rivers, lighthouses on the coast, are made and maintained upon a
principle of proportionate cost: then, this being so, why should a
subject of such everyday social importance as railway unification
between the Australian capitals be overlooked, when we remember that
a traveller, or an army with equipments complete lor defensive
purposes in case of invasion, could be thus conveyed with precision and
safety by land in eighteen hours from capital to capital, instead of
undertaking a perilous sea voyage which might run the risk of
extending over sixty hours and exposure to a possible enemy. The
Victorian Government purpose to establish a system of tramways as
feeders to the main lines in certain districts; feeders are sometimes
suckers. Main lines are the want of Australia.
The colonies, in the fifties, imported almost everything, especially
breadstuffs, wine, beer, butter, cheese, oats, horse-feed, oilmen’s stores,
and so forth; now, almost everything is locally produced, and a large
surplus of many things is exported. The products in the fifties were
chiefly wool, gold, and leather ; whereas, now, corn, tobacco, wine, fruit,
and oil; gold, silver, copper, and other metals ; coal, building stones, and
clays are abundantly produced for the use of man; while, also, in the
higher latitudes of Australia, sugar, cotton, arrowroot, tea, coffee, cocoa,
rice, ginger, spices, indigo, cork, castor oil, and all kinds of eastern
produce, can be grown to an indefinite extent. So varied is the climate,
and so fertile the soil, that the products of India, China, Portugal,
Spain, France, Arabia, and Great Britain can all be grown freely and
profitably, if a supply of suitable labour can be provided; and when
we remember that many densely-peopled countries are employed solely
in the growth and preparation of eastern products for the consumption
of Europeans, amounting to hundreds of millions sterling per annum,
we can form some idea, from a social science view, of the vast interest
these industries may become in the future economy of Australia. The
rapid growth of Australia since the fifties has not only been accom-
panied by a large development of industrial science, but also by a large
increase of substantial wealth. The cities and suburbs, the boroughs
and shires, are found to be approached by fine roads and intersected
by spacious, well-paved streets, with gas and water mains in all
directions, and to contain ample evidence of the opulence of the people
in the public improvements, buildings, parks, and botanic gardens ; the
private club houses, banks, theatres, insurance and building societies’
offices and private warehouses in every city, and the elegant mansions
and villas to be seen in every suburb, embowered in beautiful,


acclimatised trees, shrubs, and exotics, at once prove the skill of our
architects and workmen, and the cultivated taste of our horticulturists.
In the fifties, not much had been achieved in educational establish-
ments, although the efforts of one who is deserving of lasting honour
and renown were then directed to the foundation of the noble university
of which he is the chancellor.* Sydney and Melbourne have
universities which are endowed by public and private gifts, and are
admitted to take rank with the universities of the parent island.
All the cities of Australia possess numerous high-class educational
schools, and national schools are found in all the colonies. Ido not,
however, remark that much technological education is imparted,
although everyone declares in an idle, abstract sort of manner that such
teaching is necessary, and that the Australian youth should be taught
mechanical trades. If such teaching is so very desirable, why is it not
enforced by parliamentary laws?
In the early fifties the arts and sciences were very feebly represented;
a wooden semaphore on the old Flagstaff Hill, signalling with one at
Williamstown, was then thought a scientific arrangement for reporting
shipping arrivals. Now the arts and sciences have noble homes here
in picture and statuary galleries, natural history and technological
museums, royal societies, public libraries, public and private observa-
tories, mining schools of art, reading rooms, and last, though let us hope
not least, in a social science congress. And if Melbourne is rather in
advance of her sister cities in some of these respects, it may be the
effect of the early cultivation of the elegant tastes of her people so
assiduously promoted by Sir Henry Barkly during his residence in
Victoria. Not the least remarkable feature of Australian social life is
the daily newspapers. Even in the fifties the press was well represented
at the “ diggings; ” but now there is a large issue of newspapers
publishing daily telegrams from every portion of the world, and
conducted with ability admittedly equal to any of the dailies of Europe
and America. The newspaper reporter of the present day is a social
scientist of the first order when describing industrial and scientific
proceedings; indeed, many of the daily press articles by reporters upon
these topics are nothing less than essays, very ably written, and
supplying technical information and details which could only be expected
from the pen of a skilful expert.
The frugal habits of the people are proved by the spread of temperance
societies, the deposits in Government and Post-office Savings Banks,
the extension of life assurance all over Australia, the remarkable
increase of building societies, and the large accumulations of private
capital in the several banks and friendly societies. Theology is inter-
preted by bishops, priests, and deacons, as well as ministers of other
sects; and cathedral churches and chapels—many of which are beautiful
buildings—have been erected everywhere in Australia for every form
of Christian worship. Although in the fifties very little skilled labour
was employed in manufacturing, it is very different now, as almost every
ordinary kind of manufacture not requiring high art culture can be
* The late Sir Eedmond Barry died the day following the delivery of this
address.


made in the cities of Australia. The stupid habit of depreciating Aus-
tralian manufactures is fast becoming an exploded fashion, as the young
Australians now growing up to manhood do not believe that the articles
made elsewhere are generally superior to those made in their native
land; and as practice makes perfect, it follows that the various articles
—including ships, dredges, steamboats, engines, locomotives, sugar mills,
iron bridges, and carriages—made in Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide, and
Melbourne must have, in time, produced an excellent race of skilled
workmen. I know a foundry in Queensland where the workmen placed
upon some work sometimes are all of Australian birth and apprentice-
ship. Sugar machinery, steam hoppers, barges, dredges, and caissons
of very superior construction, equal to any European work, are made
at those works by native workmen, to the entire satisfaction of the
Government engineer. In other directions we find flour, woollen, and
paper mills—some of the daily and weekly papers are regularly printed
on Australian paper-—dynamite, stearine, and glass works: also,
factories working in metals and various raw products. The richly-
grained timbers of Australia encourage her workmen also to produce
the finest cabinet work and household furniture.
The habits of the people in the fifties were hard-working, enter-
prising, persevering, and self-reliant, whether in the pursuit of business,
travelling, or pleasure. They are now much the same, but more
orderly and ease-loving ; and the Anglo-Australian youth is remarkable
for his love of temperance, combined with much energy and courage.
The people have a general knowledge of all political questions, as every
man possesses the right of voting for members of Parliament. A strong
love of holiday-making and outdoor amusements is common to all
-classes ; the young men are enthusiastic as volunteers ; all athletic sports
flourish, and rifle-shooting, cricket, boat-racing, football, and yachting
compete for and divide attention with races and excursions by sea and
picnics by land upon public holidays. They are also very fond of music
and the drama ; in short, the people are well-fed, light-hearted, and fond
of fun. The youthful Australian has proved to the old folks at home
that he is a worthy scion of the old stock in more ways than one, and
why not ? his pluck and endurance having given him splendid victories
in cricket and aquatics over veteran chieftains, while he has secured
high honours in the universities, medical schools, and paths of
literature of the old country. The carriage of Australian produce to
home markets is arranged by fleets of tine steamers and sailing ships
trading between Europe and these ports, and the carriage of our fresh
beef and mutton is now being commenced on a large scale, and the
successful experiment by the Strathleven is to be followed by shipments
of frozen meat in the Protos and other vessels of the P. and O. and Orient
lines, so that in a few months the people of Great Britain will have a
regular supply of Australian fresh grass-fed beef and mutton; and as
much of this future trade will be despatched from the Queensland
ports, as well as from the other southern markets, the question as to
the disposal of the surplus meat of that fine colony will be satisfactorily
solved. The Orient steamship on her last voyage from London supplied
450 passengers with fresh meat daily from the cold room, and it could


not be distinguished from fresh killed meat. The balance of meat
which was not consumed on the voyage was found, upon arrival in
Sydney, to be as perfectly sound and fresh as it was the day it was
packed in London.
The modern steamboat is a wonderful achievement of the exact and
social sciences combined. First, aided by steam, she distils fresh water
from the briny ocean, and from that inexhaustible reservoir supplies
her passengers and crew. Again, with steam power she converts the
water into ice, even in the hottest latitudes ; with this ice she freezes the
meat, fish, poultry, fruit, butter, and vegetables placed on board at her
port of departure, and to be used by her passengers and crew during the
voyage. Steam is used for driving and steering and pumping the ship,
for loading and unloading her cargo, for hoisting spars and weighing
anchors. Her passengers, in addition to fresh meat and bread daily,
are often supplied with a daily newspaper; and her splendid saloons
are lighted with electricity and embellished with art. And yet, if
we should live to see electricity overcome steam, we may be told
that this modern wonder of 1880 is an old-fashioned steamer of the
seventies, and, like a lady with her last season’s bonnet, we may cast
it aside to be replaced by a vessel of a newer fashion. Already, by the
electric marine lamps, the depths of the ocean can be examined; and
a diver, with a reservoir of compressed air strapped on his back, can
now descend for 60 feet and remain under water for some hours.
Moreover, if any mishap occurs to the air reservoir, the diver’s dress
is declared by science to contain sufficient air for twenty mimites, in
which the diver could save himself from danger.
Indeed, one would fancy that science is running a race with nature as
well as grappling with divine truths, and would almost undertake to-
prove that if you would but trust yourself to her laws alone, you would be
much safer than you could possibly be when you trust wholly to the laws
of nature. Already man can travel at a higher speed, and for a greater
distance, on earth than any other living animal; and there are scientists
who believe that man, with the aid of science, may one day hope to fly
like the birds and to swim like the fishes. If Captain Cook and his
officers in their cocked hats and knee breeches, who held that initial
scientific meeting on the shores of Botany Bay in the last century, after
a twelve months’ voyage in the Endeavour and the Enterprise,
provisioned with salt junk and hard biscuits, could sail to-day into our
harbour and behold the modern steamboat which performs her passages
in about thirty-three or thirty-five days—pause for a moment to imagine
the mutual wonderment and curiosity with which we should examine
the ships of each period, and exchange experiences about the past and
present navigation of the ocean.
Great Britain has a population of about 35,000,000 of people requiring
animal food. The price of meat in the suburbs of London is thus given
by a correspondent of the Sydney Town and Country of the 23rd
October. A London butcher named Harris, with a shop at the
Pavement, Brighton, and at 87 Duke-street, Southwark, and at Chelms-
ford, issues a circular in September, 1880, quoting following prices for
cattle :


Beef. Per lb.
Sirloin ribs ... ll^d
Top side of round ... lid
Silver side ... lOd.
Aitchbone ... Bd.
Rump steak ... Is. 4Jd.
Gravy beef shins ... 9d.
Veal ... 9d. to Is. 3d.
Brisket ... ... 6|d.
Mutton. Per lb.
Legs ... ... IH<L
Loins ... ... Is.
Haunches... ... ll^d.
Saddles ... ... Is.
Shoulders... ... 10^d,
Necks ... ... 10d.
Best end ... ... lid.
Chops ... ... Is. 3d.
Now, in the following month of October, the Graziers’ Butchering
Company, in Brisbane, having one central amd six branch shops, quotes
the following prices in its circular :
Important Public Notice.
Family customers are supplied all round for mutton and beef at 3d. per lb.
Saddles and haunches ... ... ... 3d. per lb.
Pork, veal, and pork sausages ... ... 6d. ~
At these rates orders are delivered.
Wholesale Carcase Prices :
Beef ... Id. per lb. | Mutton ... 2|d, per lb.
Shipping orders, 2d. per lb. all round.
We know that meat can be purchased below the retail rates in both
markets. However, for our social science purpose we will contrast the
retail prices in the two countries, and suppose that beef and mutton
ranged from Bd. to Is. 4d. per lb. in England, and from 2d. to 3d.
per lb. in an enterprising nation like France, at one and the same
time. Would not a large trade arise between the two countries ? Why
so? Well, in the first place, there are over 3,000,000 of people in
London, and allowing 8 ozs. per diem, a total of 670 tons of meat per
diem would be required ; and if the calculations be followed, it will be
found that in London alone about £21,000,000 per annum, or £7 per
head, is paid for meat in excess of the price which would be paid in
Australia, where we use meat so recklessly. As the Londoners are
only about one-twelfth of the nation, it follows that £252,000,000 is
paid by the consumer for mutton and beef annually in Great Britain in
excess of the Australian prices. If only one hundredth part of this
trade were secured to Australia, it would equal about 5,000,000 of
sheep or 250,000 bullocks annually, or about 150 ships, each carrying
1,000 tons cargo of frozen meat. There appears a margin here, which
France would soon avail of, if she had the opportunity. Well, as
nothing but distance varies the relative positions of France or Australia
towards England on the meat supply question, it follows that the only
problem to be solved is, how to overcome the difficulty of distance ?
Shall we send the Australian meat to the old folks at home ? or,
shall we assist them to come out here to our Australian pastures?
The best solution would be to do both, and while our capitalists are
arranging for the exportation of dead stock to Great Britain, we might
also provide for the return of living people therefrom in the same ships
which would carry home the frozen meat, upon an Australian! uniform
system of assisted family immigration, based upon local nomination.
I cheerfully express my opinions on this point, that Australia requires


population; and all the Australian Governments, and the British
government also, should devote attention to this question, and arrange
for the adoption of a family emigration scheme, with local nomination,
to be administered by one central Australian Bureau in London, where
passages could be arranged for to any of the colonies by those holding
nomination papers from colonists. The great outcry of all the colonies
is, Give us population to make nations. Seven distinct forms of
government now exist in Australia for the benefit of less than three
millions of people. These civil establishments are equal to the govern-
ment of ten millions of people, and, with some expansion, then of any
possible number which the country could carry. So great is the outcry
for people in the northern parts of Australia, that Kanaka and Asiatic
labour is freely employed, and hordes of the Asiatic races may
probably one day permanently settle upon the northern shores of this
continent, and dispossess the British race of their ownership, unless
prevented by the previous occupation by a British population. The
whole of Australia, and of the colonies, require more people. Consider
the position of Western Australia, of South Australia, with her
northern territory, and of Queensland.
The demand is not simply for labour, nor for the narrow question of
labour, but for people; and even those who object to assisted immi-
gration for labour would, I venture to declare, hesitate at opposing a
scheme of colonisation which would include people from all classes of
society. Some freetraders hold that no State assistance should be given
to immigration; the fact, however, that the same people approve of
mail and telegraph subsidies, of government railways, highways, and
bridges at the expense of the State carries the case against them, for
in bridging the ocean we simply increase facilities of travelling by sea
in the same manner that government roads, railways, mail subsidies,
and so forth assist the conveyance of passengers and mails by other
means of travelling.
This question of questions for all new countries of the empire is not
understood by British parliamentarians ; it should be considered, how-
ever, as of equal living importance by the British statesmen as the
scientific frontier of Afghan—indeed, it is of vital importance to the
Imperial existence of Britain.
Australia and other British colonies are so many splendid nurseries
for raising the British race into increased power and strength. The
scientific frontier is a graveyard for the flower of her army. The mania
for little wars with semi-barbarous nations which prevails with our
present military commanders, presents attractions to British men of
good descent and arms. These little wars also carry off the highly
trained and educated youth and energy of British people to paths of
death or glory. The warlike conquest of some useless barren spot
required for military supremacy, and the destruction of a few thousand
half-savage people, whose life is held cheap, may cost ten millions
sterling and the lives of many thousands of British soldiers. The same
expenditure would place a million of the people upon the shores of the
numerous colonies of the empire. The settlement of the surplus
population of the British Isles in such grand national possessions—


British nurseries—as those of Canada and Australia is decidedly the
duty of the Imperial Government equally with the preservation of
Britain’s supremacy in conquered countries. The day may come when
posterity will pronounce that the British statesmen of this age, while
fighting the shadow, lost the substance. The empire requires a states-
man who will acquire, and tenaciously hold, new territory, and spread
the surplus people of the old country over the large British possessions
already under our flag, that the millions who are nearly starving in the
older portion of the empire may be transferred by the direct aid of the
Imperial Government into the newer colonial settlements, where they
may become prosperous and mighty arms of the nation, until the whole
Imperial fabric, octopus-like, can extend its tentali over each quarter
of the world with equal mighty power.
The coming race is a question of fertile speculation. If our race
would hold their own in the present, and dominate the Asiatics in the
future, now is the only time for British statesmen to prepare for the
coming conflict by spreading the population over the colonial territory
of the empire, that the various possessions conferred upon our nation
by a bounteous Providence may never be taken from us by any other
race of people. And, in this connection, I would direct attention, from
a social science point of view, to the neglected question of Indian coolie
labour for Australia, for the cultivation of rice, sugar, tea, coffee, and
Eastern products. British India, teeming with people who are inured
by birth to a hot climate, and who grow therein products in latitudes
which are unfitted for European labour. The employment of Indians in
Australia would keep out Chinese, and would assist the British empire
in the future. The question is one of great Imperial interest and
importance, one upon which the South Australian and Queensland
Governments might open correspondence with the Indian and Home
Governments with probable advantage.
Another of the indispensable requirements of Australia is an
abundant water supply throughout the whole interior of the continent.
The colony of Victoria has already accomplished much in this direction,
and New South Wales is inaugurating works to conserve water, upon a
large combination system, upon the vast plains of that fine colony. A
small initial sum of £54,000 has been devoted to that purpose, and a
large future expenditure is contemplated. The colonies of Queensland,
South Australia, and Western Australia will require to adopt A similar
policy at an early period, until a bountiful supply of water is secured
for all Australia, which will amply repay the outlay, and have also the
effect of changing the climate by encouraging the growth of vegetation
and settlement in districts where little, if any, can now be found.
Although the exciting times of the gold-mining era may be looked
upon as a thing of the past, and the alluvial gold-fields be regarded as
having been principally worked out, and all the large monster nuggets
as having been unearthed; nevertheless, the comparatively inex-
haustible quartz reefs to be found in numerous portions of
Australia, and which are now so easily worked with labour-saving
machinery and appliances, have caused this industry to settle down into
a recognized and lucrative business, attractive to both the speculator


and the investor, and offering a rich source of healthy employment to
many thousands of people, who, in following their occupation, neither
know nor care whether scientists are divided or agreed upon the
speculative theories of the gold giving out at certain depths, or of the
still more debatable point of the quartz formation being of igneous or
aqueous origin. I cannot detain you to enlarge upon the growing
importance of many of our products, or of our vineyards, or of our corn-
fields as a future source of great wealth, and only desire to refer to the
subject of the
PUBLIC DEBT.
The Australian public debt has been mainly incurred, as you know,
in all the colonies for permanent and reproductive works. Australia
is not a needy, but an opulent borrower—one who deliberately decides to
take advances to improve her valuable country, and who has already
supplied gold to the value of about two hundred and seventy millions
sterling, since 1851, to the world ; Great Britain taking the lion’s share
of this in exchange for the products of her workshops. Australia has
an immense supply of wool, gold, and cheap food for sale annually to
British purchasers; and, having no territorial wars to fight away her
money over, she may be estimated to offer a more sterling security to
the British capitalist than many of the favourite stocks of Bartholomew-
lane—even than the Russian, Turkish, Egyptian, and other bonds of
states who would fight England to the death anywhere if they found a
favourable opportunity ; and in the event of a combination of European
debtors ever succeeding in defeating the British forces to the extent of
conquest, the inevitable result would be the confiscation by the
victorious nations, as ransom money, of all the public indebtedness of
their nations to the British creditor; and the greater the debt, the
larger would be the prize and the temptation to the ambitious enemy.
The private money obligations of Australia to the old country are not of
a large extent. The several banks and finance companies may be taken
as holding the principal advances ; and if many of their shareholders
are not locally Australians, but are absentees, I shall, in connection
with this paper, prefer to treat them as denizens of Australia.
There is a lack of desire on the part of the British holder of capital
to make direct individual loans in Australia, or any loans except to
incorporated companies. The feeling exists in his mind that the place
is too distant, and too new and unsettled ; he prefers European nations—
with courts and armies for Britain to overawe—if the interest be not paid
promptly to the British bondholder.—He is a great believer in govern-
ment pressure.—Well, we ventifre to inform him that he could hold
mortgage securities, giving six or seven per cent,, here as secuijely as he
can hold four per cent, securities in Yorkshire or Aberdeen, or any
foreign bonds in Europe.
AUSTRALIAN INTERNATIONALS.
I will close vVith a passing allusion to the very important International
Exhibitions of Sydney in 1879 and of Melbourne in 1880. Both have


been valuable—social science agents of the highest order—and good
results will follow and extend to the British people in all parts of the
world. By these exhibitions the great value of Australia is brought
prominently to the notice of kings, rulers, and governors, and to
thousands who otherwise would have remained unacquainted with its
territorial wealth and national importance. Having arrived at the
Exhibition, a brotherly feeling requires that we should pay a short visit
to the Australian courts. The limits of our paper and time will preclude
us from the pleasure of calling upon our friends and relations from
foreign countries, and from America and Great Britain and her other
■colonies, who have done honour to Australia upon this occasion in
visiting Victoria.
Western Australia, as the largest colony, is first entitled to our
respects. We will follow territorial greatness in order. The following
table will show that the largest colony has the smallest population; the
next largest comes with the next smallest, and so forth through the five
Australian
COLONY.
SQUARE MILES. POPULATION,
1,000,000 28,668
669,520 214,180
380,070 255,087
714,012
88,198 888,500
26,215 111,208
105,342 448,124
2,580,282 i 2,659,779
West Australia
Queensland
South Australia ..
New South Wales
Victoria
Tasmania
New Zealand
Total ... 2,580,282£ 2,659,779
I am indebted to the New South Wales court for the above mean
figures as in 1879.
Western Australia exhibits natural wealth in lead, iron ore, copper,
wool, pearls, silk, and wheat, with boundless acres of splendid forest
timbers, Jarrah, Kauri. At present, for some reason, this colony is
much neglected ; nevertheless her great wealth, her immense seaboard,
and enormous forests and inland territory, will certainly soon attract
the British race to settle freely upon her cheap lands.
Queensland is lavish in her exhibition of her great wealth ; she revels
in showing her sugar, gold, forest timber, silk, copper, wool, tin, tea,
-coffee, spices, and is proud of them. She has given us a duplicate
telegraph wire, a separate mail route, and proposes to run a railway
for 1,400 miles from Brisbane to the Gulf of Carpentaria, to open her
splendid luxuriant high tablelands in the interior. Taking her all in
all, she is a grand colony, with some of the finest rivers and land in
Australia.
South Australia always modestly asserts her place as one of the
grandest of the group In a quiet way she gave us the first telegraph
overland—a most plucky undertaking for a colony singlehanded, and
probably she will give us a railway across the Australian continent to
Port Darwin, some few years hence, if the whole of the colonies do not
unite and construct one before. Her exhibits of wine, wheat, flour,


maize, olive oil, preserved and dried fruits, muscatel raisins, Zante
currants, almonds, and Mediterranean products, are splendid and are
very remarkable. She shows marbles, slates, clays, copper, silk, and
leather. The Northern Territory shows rice, sugar, tea, &c.
New South Wales ponderously asserts her unrivalled wealth in coal,
iron, silver, tin, copper, and lead, and challenges comparison in forest
timbers, shale, and freestones. She also exhibits gold, sugar, maize,
wool, tobacco, wine, kerosene, paper, and leather. Her workshops and
manufacturing classes are represented by splendid exhibits of various
industries.
Victoria shows gold, silver, copper, wool, wine, wheat, tobacco, hops,
barley, fruits, leather, and a splendid exhibit of essential oils from
forest trees (Eucalypti) ; also manufactured products, cloth, leather,
stearine, glass, chemicals, sulphuric acid, sheet lead, copper, carriages,
steam engines, and railway locomotives; stones, clays, slate, and coal
are shown, with fine specimens of pottery, and a little art-pottery, and a
large variety of articles showing the active manufacturing character of
the population of this colony.
New Zealand shows fine flax, splendid timber, gold, hops, grain,
grass seeds in variety, and freestone, coal, and various manufactures.
New Zealand is a favourite colony everywhere.
Tasmania comes well up to the front with coal, iron, slates (equal to
blue Bangor), tin, freestone, corn, timber, leather, fish products, wool,
gold, and acclimatised salmon. This tight little island has a good
prospect of a successful future upon any confederation being arranged.
Fiji shows up as the youngest, if not the boldest, of Britain’s colonies,
with a population of 2,500 whites and 150,000 natives. She displays
sugar, tobacco, cotton, ginger, rice, coffee, and mai£e in splendid
variety.
In conclusion, I hope that a memento of the Exhibition of 1880 may
remain by the conversion of this Melbourne Social Science Congress
into an Australian Social Science Congress, with a muster-roll of
members in all the different colonies. The day will come when
Australia will be one of the British nations of the world, of whom
scientists will be recording the salubrity of her climate, the variety
of her productions, the magnitude of her railways, her fleets, her
manufactures, the fertility of her soil, her vineyards, her flocks and
herds, the learning of her universities, the discoveries of her men of
science, the wisdom and just administration of her laws, the beauty and
virtue of her people, and the splendour of her sunny skies; and, while
future generations will remember with the pride of race the ancestry of
their nation, may they ever continue to use the motto—
Advance Australia !
And may the first and favourite sentiment for generations and for ever
be the same then as now—
God save the reigning Sovereign of the British Empire !




The Council of the Melbourne Social Science Congress having adopted
the suggestion of some of the members to authorize the printing of
the within Address for circulation in Great Britain, a copy is forwarded
to you, and more can be obtained from the Hon. Secretaries of the
Department, J. S. Greig, Esq., B. Cowderoy, Esq., L. L. Mount, Esq.,
or from the General Hon. Secretary, upon application.
