

[THIUD EX)ITXO3SrJ I
j iHcllKmrnc I
If ~ AND
I (^^tcforia
1. £ n/ ' ■ V I
I S# 18 80. i
I RY HORACE PERKINS. ’ ■* > * 4 ' ,nnv ßinHT. PRICE ss.
Inters, Melbourne.




milium iLbUSTBAVBD.
T I.
THE QUEEN CITY OF THE SOUTH.
®HE metropolis of Victoria is situated on the Yarra Yarra River, near Hobson’s
Bay, It is by far the most important and handsome city in the Southern
Hemisphere, and has, with its extensive suburbs, a population of about 300,000.
The estimated total value of rateable property in Melbourne is £945,464, The
civic revenue is £116,909.


Melbourne is a city which, although only of a few years’ growth, will take rank in a
measure with any in the world, whether for the width of its streets, the number and
grandeur of its public buildings (as shown in the illustrations of this little work), the
elegance of its shops and the costliness of the wares within, the beauty of the numerous
parks and gardens by which it is environed, or the thousand and one comforts and
conveniences afforded to its enterprising and industrious residents. Indeed, it has been
spoken of as the ninth city in the British world, for population, wealth, and magnificence.
The city proper is built on two hills and an intervening valley, the streets running at
right angles, each main street being 99 feet wide, and each minor street half that width.
These main and minor streets run alternately from east to west ; but there are no narrow
streets from north to south. Thus the city is cut up into handsome blocks, and upwards of
forty thousand pounds are annually expended by the City Council in its maintenance and
improvement. The principal streets are Collins, Bourke, Swanston, and Elizabeth-streets,
Bourke-street is the Melbourne Oxford-street, or Cheapside, by day, and Piccadilly by night.
Though not the most fashionable thoroughfare by day —which distinction must be accorded
to Collins-street —it is yet, at all times, the busiest street, and at night it reigns supreme,
without a rival. The pavements are daily thronged with pedestrians, elegant equipages halt
in numbers before the doors of favourite drapers and haberdashers, and the roadway is alive
with vehicles of every description. The spacious omnibus winds its way to Collingwood,


Simpson’s-road, Prahran, St. Kilda, South Yarra, Richmond, Sandridge, Emerald Hill, and
other places. The patent hansom, the colonial buggy, the licensed waggonette, the spicy
dog-cart, the spring van, and two-wheeled dray—all sorts of vehicles, in short—are flying
up and down in one continual stream. Humanity, too, is seen under phases as varied as
they are distinctive. The black coat and “ belltopper” contrast strangely with the jumper,
billycock hat, and roll of blankets that load the back of the “ swagsman.” Jack ashore, not
having joined the “band of hope,” jostles against the daintily-dressed Government official;
and the Chinese hawker, with bamboo and basket, jogs along under the pressure of heavily-
filled baskets of merchandise, which he maintains are “ welly good.” Vulgarity, in silks and
golden ornaments, hustles past gentility in alpaca ; and anonyma, in fur robes, shoulders with
wealthy respectability in feathers and flowers. Newspaper runners, policemen, volunteers,
country cousins, street arabs, bank-clerks, shopmen, and citizens in general make up, for
the most part, the rest of the pedestrian “personnel.’' Bourke-street is the street par
excellence of cheap restaurants : sirloins, picturesquely flanked by tomatoes ; mammoth
pumpkins displayed as baits to the hungry, who are occasionally invited to partake of the
luxury of soup, meat, and pudding for sixpence ; while some dainty comestibles are arrayed
so as to excite the renovated appetite of the valetudinarian, who has just emerged from the
palatial Turkish bath, en route for Hosie’s magnificent dining saloon at the Academy of
Music. At evening, Bourke-street literally swarms with people, who find attractions in the


well-lighted and splendidly-stocked shops, or seek amusement in the many theatres and
public halls that abound in the vicinity. Every taste is here suited. The strains of Italian
opera mingle with the din of the Waxworks band, at which establishment the “ Kelly Gang,”
“ Wieberg,” and “Captain Moonlite” have recently been added ; and it is but a step from
the Theatre Royal to the fetid room, with its twelve billiard tables, where larrikins and
loafers make cannons and winning hazards at the charge of sixpence a game. The cries of
the trotter vendor—“only a penny each”—mingle with the screech of the peripatetic
songstress, ‘ 1 When other Lips and other 'arts, ” and the blind sellers of matches, “only a
penny a box ! ”
Neither must mention be omitted of the three arcades, all of which are entered from
Bourke-street—viz., the “Royal,” the “Victoria,” and the “Eastern.” The former,
redolent of pastry and beetles, is immensely popular with country cousins, young Victoria,
and economical materfamilias who desire to satisfy the extravagant requirements of
“Tommy” by the frugal expenditure of the smallest amount of coin. On Saturday
evening Bourke-street and the arcades are crowded to excess with an ever-struggling mass
of humanity. The places of amusement, also—viz., the Theatre Royal, the Opera House,
the Academy of Music, St. George’s Hall, and the People’s Theatre—have usually over-
flowing houses. Folks of a more sober temperament seek amusement, recreation, or rest
in mechanics’ institutes, the Athenaeum, young men’s associations, concerts, the Waxworks,


or exhibitions where may be seen a learned pig, a monster whale, or a small creature of the
gorilla species, which is announced to “do everything like a human being, only it can’t
talk.” Pedestrians are also invited to try their height, weight, or strength, to enjoy a
galvanic shock, or to have their character exposed by a peripatetic phrenologist, who
guarantees its accuracy. Not until the theatres have “come out,” and the crowds dispersed,
does the city settle down to quietude, disturbed only by the clatter at the street coffee-
stalls, or the sonorous tramp of the vigilant policeman. On gala days and holidays there
are endless methods of outdoor enjoyment, in the pure, dry atmosphere, and under the
usually bright and cloudless sky. Cricket, football, bowling, rowing, and equestrian
exercises have each their votaries. The clear blue waters of Hobson’s Bay, the Saltwater
River, and the Yarra are at hand for fishing or aquatics ; and the beautiful Botanical or
Fitzroy Cardens, and numerous other parks and reserves, adorn the city and suburbs, and
invite the denizens thereof to pleasant walks and healthful recreations.
Tree-planting in the main thoroughfares is becoming popular, and in course of time will
doubtless be productive of highly valuable results, in a city where the heat is intense and
the dust so troublesome in summer.
The suburbs of Melbourne are extensive and largely populated, clustering around the
capital city like so many rosebuds on a common stalk, and comprise the following, within a
radius of six miles from the metropolis, viz. : —St. Kilda, South Yarra, Toorak, Richmond,


Collingwood, Fitzroy, Brunswick, Carlton, Hotham, Prahran, Emerald Hill, Sandridge,
Windsor, North, East, and West Melbourne; and the more distant ones of Balaclava, Caulfield,
Coburg, Essendon, Footscray, Flemington, Hawthorn, Kew, Northcote, and Moonee Ponds,
all being connected with Melbourne by rail or “’bus.” There is also a plentiful supply of
cars and waggonettes, which are well appointed, and run at cheap rates. Taken as a whole,
the city of Melbourne is a good place to live in, whether for business or pleasure. It is
still in the prime vigour of its youth, and for a city so young may fairly be called one of the
wonders of the world.


MMOTfill IITIBIiTHIAL IIHIBITIOI, 1880.
of the most important events in the history of Victoria —an event that must be
hDJI pregnant with results that should exercise a beneficial influence over the
(p=j(7\ fortunes of the colony for many years to come—is the project for holding
a world’s International Exhibition in the city of Melbourne, in this year of
grace 1880.
Parliament has liberally provided ample funds for erecting a magnificent and imposing
structure for the purpose, and the gigantic and praiseworthy undertaking now possesses the
co-operation and support of all classes of the community.
The building, of which the very latest view is given, produced under the authority of
the Commissioners, and therefore absolutely correct, stands adjacent to the north-east
boundary of the city, on a public reserve of 63 acres, known as the Carlton Gardens, over
the whole of which the Commissioners have control until the end of September, 1881. The
central 20 acres, on which the buildings stand, will then be permanently reserved for
exhibition purposes.


The main building is of a permanent nature, and has been erected by Mr. D. Mitchell,
contractor, in accordance with the prize design furnished by Messrs. Reed and Barnes,
architects, of this city. The amount for which contracts had been entered into up to Ist
January, 1880, was £320,500, and the probable total cost will reach £500,000. The
available space provided for the exhibits is 643,058 feet. The Sydney Exhibition covered
a space of 400,000 feet, and it may also be interesting to mention that the recent Paris
Exhibition provided four and a half million feet of space, and the total cost, after deducting
all receipts, was £1,460 000. The gardens surrounding the building have been beautifully
laid out, under the supervision of Mr. Sangster, at an outlay of £lO,OOO. Handsome fountains
are included in the general attractions, and a substantial and elegant iron pallisading on a
stone base, costing some £7,000, surrounds the whole.
It is estimated that the gross receipts derived from the Exhibition will amount to
£35,000, whilst the cost of management, together with the expenses during the period it is
open, will reach the sum of £51,000.
Commissioners have been officially appointed by the governments of Great Britain,
France, Germany, India, the United States, Belgium, China, and Japan ; His Royal Highness
the Prince of Wales being President of the Commission of the first-named.
The deep interest evinced in the undertaking by intending exhibitors throughout the
world gives promise that the show will be thoroughly international in its character, and


that there will be a great influx of visitors while the exhibition is open. The Victorian
Commissioners (of which body the Hon. W. J. Clarke, M.L.C., is President) express their
belief that the interests of the colony will be materially advanced by the educational effects
of the Exhibition upon the people of Victoria, and by the new markets, both import and
export, which will thereby be opened up.


¥JIE * t * OFFICER.
®HIS very costly and extensive pile of buildings, but recently completed, is situate
immediately behind the Treasury, in a reserve known as the Treasury Gardens—a
fspot which within the last few years has, by the aid of the landscape gardener, been
changed from a mere rubbish heap into a most delightful and ornamental garden. As
may be seen in the illustration, the building consists of a central block and two wings;
the former having five floors, and the latter four, containing in all about 150 rooms. These
are occupied in the central block by the Crown Lands department. Immediately over the
main entrance is the general board-room, an elegant apartment, where the fate of applicants
for leases of Crown lands, tenderers for public works, &c., is sealed. Corridors of vast
extent run east and west on the various floors to the offices of the several departments of the
Treasury, Public Works, Education, Law, Mines, Yan Yean Water Supply, and Agriculture.
Attached to the Crown Lands offices is a large photographic room, and a strong room for
storing original plans. There are also in the basement strong rooms for each department,
lithographic printing rooms, and contractors’ rooms. The contract price for gas fittings
alone was £1,200, and the total cost of the entire building, with fixtures, is put down at
£250,000. The prize design was furnished by Mr. Michael Egan, jun., architect.
Key to Buildings in rear.— l. St. Patrick’s Cathedral. 2. St. Peter’s (Anglican)
Church. 3. St. Peter’s Church Schools. 4. Dr. Cairns’s (Scotch) Church. 5. St. Patrick’s
College, 6. Scotch College.


<• JFJIE v MELBOURNE * TOWN * Pfllilr,>
SITUATED at the corner of Swanston and Collins-streets, is, as the illustration
depicts, a noble building of imposing dimensions, designed by Messrs. Eeed
and Barnes, in the “renaissance” style of architecture, after the model
£gr of the “Palais du Champ de Mars,” where France held the International
Exposition of 1878. The basement is constructed of massive bluestone, and
the superstructure of Tasmanian freestone. The height from pavement to summit
of the clock tower is 140 feet. The building has three entrances, the main
one in Swanston-street being reached by a double flight of steps leading direct into the
grand hall, a most noble and elegant apartment 175 by 75 feet, and 65 feet in height, having
galleries around it, and capable of accommodating 6,000 persons. The panels of the ceiling
are exquisitely ornamented in colour, and the walls are likewise delicately enriched ; while
the sombre but beautiful tints of the grand organ, one of the most magnificent and costly
instruments obtainable, which reposes in a recess at the northern end of the hall, completes
a picture which extorts astonishment and admiration from all beholders. The foundation-
stone was laid on the 29th November, 1867, by His Royal Highness the Duke of
Edinburgh, and the entire structure with its appendages cost the citizens £lOO,OOO.


* * PGjST * OFFICE.
jOVONE but old colonists, or, as they are usually designated, “ old chums,” can
6m ID have any recollection of the rickety old wooden structure, surrounded by
an equally dilapidated verandah, which in the early days did duty as
the Melbourne Post Office. Twenty years ago, the grand and massive
D : building illustrated was erected on the same site, at the corner of Bourke
and Elizabeth-streets, the centre of the busiest portion of the metropolis. It is at
once as handsome and convenient for the public as can be desired. Five hundred and
fifty-four officials, of whom 52 are females, are employed therein. There are 1,007 Post
Offices in Victoria open to the public. During last year 221 millions of letters, 3£ million
packets, and 11 million newspapers passed through the office. The gross postal expenditure
was £344,522, and the revenue £251,802, showing a deficit of upwards of £93,000. The rate
of postage for letters, delivered in any part of the colony, is 2d. per half-ounce; postal cards,
Id. A general penny postage has been frequently advocated ; but as it is calculated that
such would involve a further annual loss of £49,000, it has not yet been adopted.
Attached at the northern end of the building is the chief Money-Order Office, the
Savings Bank, and the head station of the Telegraph department.


The charge for Money Orders payable in Victoria is 6d. per £5. The amount so remitted
during the year reached £BOO,OOO.
The P. O. Savings Bank was established in 1865. There are now 46,268 depositors,
with balances to credit of £623,050. 4 per cent, interest is allowed.
The Telegraph department, during last year, despatched and received 641,581 messages
between Victorian stations alone. From the foregoing statistics, some idea of the industry
and importance of the city of Melbourne and the colony in general may be gathered.
Communication with Europe is maintained fortnightly by the Peninsular and Oriental
Company’s Mail Service. The average number of days occupied in transmission is 40 ; but
the distance from London to Melbourne is frequently accomplished in much less time.


-Me jppE * poa]SE]s *l* of * p/n^OTEjm^
«MPOSING and grand in the extreme, this edifice, now in progress, will, when completed,
rival in architectural magnificence almost any structure for similar purposes existing
in the old world. It is situated in Spring-street, at the eastern extremity of Bourke-
wW street, the great emporium and main business thoroughfare of the city. Standing on
y an elevated plateau, it commands the entire vista of the noble street from east to
west, affording a view from the summit of the flight of steps leading to the grand entrance,
which no visitors should neglect to avail themselves of.
The design is from the pencil of Mr. Peter Kerr, architect of the Department of Public
Works. It is in the Roman Doric style, the attic being surmounted with statuary, on the top
of grouped pilasters on f;he north and south wings, representing Fine Arts, Science, Labour,
and Commerce. The allegorical group in front of the stylobata of the dome is emblematical
of Legislation. The grand entrance is approached by a flight of forty-one steps, the lower
ones being 151 feet in length ; the retaining walls bearing couched lions 12 feet in length.
Under these are the strangers’ entrances to the galleries of the Legislative chambers, and on
the top landing is the noble portico, with its fluted columns, from the centre of which the
vestibule is entered. This communicates with the magnificent main hall and corridors


leading to members’ private apartments, and to the several Committee, Conference,
Ministerial, and Opposition rooms. The side-entrances from the main hall lead into the
grand Council and stately Assembly chambers ; and the eastern extremity into a most
comfortable and unique library, and extensive refreshment, billiard, and smoking rooms.
The main front is 310 feet long and 32 feet deep. The height, from the street to the top of
the lantern of the dome, is 215 feet. The material used in the erection of the entire structure
is white sandstone, from Mount Difficult, in the Grampian Ranges, near Stawell. A carriage
drive ascends by an easy gradient to the portico at the main entrance.


-Me HOUSE *<-
«HE residence of His Excellency the Governor—the Marquis of Norman by—stands in a
Government plantation of some sixty acres, and the grounds adjoin the Botanical
f Gardens, which, in fact, form part of the demesne. The mansion stands on a most
commanding site, and is a very conspicuous object to visitors as they approach the city
vid Hobson’s Bay. Seventeen apartments are contained in the building for the
private accommodation of His Excellency, for the transaction of public business, or for levies,
balls, banquets, and other State ceremonials. The State ball-room is 135 feet by 55 feet, and 45
feet in height to the centre of the coved ceiling, which is enriched with delicate and tasteful
ornamentation. The State dining-room is also a noble apartment. From the tower, which
is 140 feet high, a very magnificent view of the shipping in Hobson’s Bay and of the
surrounding country is obtainable. A picturesque drive, winding through a garden
exquisitely kept and teeming with nature’s blossoms, leads from the St. Kilda Road to the
mansion, the palatial gates being flanked on the one side by a handsome lodge.


•* 3FPE t ]\IEW * * JA^KE^.-S*
fADDY’S MARKET, one of the sights of old Melbourne, is now a reminiscence
of by-gone days ; the extensive area it once occupied, at the corner of Bourke and
I'Ctg. Stephen-streets, being now the site of the handsome edifice illustrated. It is a two-
story building, in brick and cement, one floor being on a level with Stephen-street, and
the other on a level with the lower portion of Bourke-street, at the Eastern Arcade.
The row of fifteen shops erected in Bourke-street is 332 feet in length, and is distinct
from the market, the frontage accommodating itself to the slope of the street. The Stephen-
street frontage is 315 feet long, and is occupied by thirteen shops. The suite of rooms at
the corner is opened as a Government Branch Telegraph Office. A daily market is now
established under the spacious roof, which is in three spans, and covers an area of 244 feet
by 305. This space is occupied by 53 stalls, besides which there is ample accommodation
for carts to enter and take up a position, the produce being thus offered for sale without the
necessity of unloading. Wednesday and Saturday are the principal market mornings,
when the business done, both wholesale and retail, is very extensive. The
internal decorations are plain, and coloured paints have only been used on the roof and
2


columns. In the scrollwork of the spandrils the arms of the Corporation have been
frequently repeated in dark and light green. Towers, from 50 to GO feet high, stand over the
principal entrances, as well as at the four corners. The market was built by Messrs. Nation
and Co., under the superintendence of Messrs. Reed and Barnes, architects, and cost
£BO,OOO. It was formally opened December 22, 1879.
-Me ¥PE v PUBLIC LIBI^Y.^
®HE Melbourne Public Library, with the National Art Gallery and Industrial and
Technological Museum attached, occupies a central position in the city. The main
front, which is one of the most classic elevations in Melbourne, is in Swanston-street;
and the site comprises an entire block, bounded by Latrobe, Russell, and Little Lons-
dale-streets. The library and reading rooms are on the first floor—the shelves con-
taining 106,000 volumes, of every class of literature. It is a magnificent apartment, richly
and beautifully decorated, its bold architectural features forming one of the most pleasing
sights of the city. The library is entirely free and open to all comers, who can take books from
the shelves without the intervention of an attendant, and the privilege is annually taken


advantage of by 270,000 persons. There is also a system of lending parcels of books to
country free libraries in operation, which is found to work well. In a building called ‘ ‘ the
rotunda,” at the rear of the edifice, there are files of colonial, intercolonial, and many
foreign journals for many years back—highly useful for reference. On the ground floor is a
Gallery of Statuary, containing models of some of the most celebrated work of ancient and
modern sculptors, which valuable collection has recently been enriched by a princely dona-
tion, by the Hon. W. J. Clarke, of four life-size statues in marble—the Queen and members
of the Royal Family, executed by the late Mr. Summers.
Adjoining, in a noble hall especially erected for the purpose, is a collection of paintings
in oil and water-colours, some of which are of great value. The Technological Museum
contains 17,982 objects, principally specimens of art, industry, and natural products. Class
lectures are given here, and attached is a School of Design and a School of Painting.
This noble institution, of which Sir Redmond Barry was the founder, was opened in
1856 (cost, £110,190), and the sum of upwards of £15,000 is annually expended in its main-
tenance. To quote a paragraph contained in the last report of the Commissioners, “It may
therefore be affirmed, without unseemly exultation, that this library, with its 100,000
volumes, now daily open for unrestricted use to a quarter of a million readers in the year,
may deservedly take rank amongst those which in other countries justly assert their claim
to high renown.”


-Me THE v HEW v CIYIE v hjm COU^T^N-
ERECTED from a prize design of Mr. A. L. Smith, this magnificent structure
occupies a site having a frontage of 313 feet to William-street, Lonsdale-
street, and Little Bourke-street respectively. The style of architecture is
Cfco? of modern Italian. The puisne judge’s chambers are placed on the upper
vjg floor on the principal front, allowing by a private corridor direct access
to the several benches and the library. The courts are arranged with separate
entrances to each, and separate accesses to all having business in connection with them.
The County and Insolvency Court, Equity Court, and Practice Court are placed on the four
angles of the building. Facing Little Bourke-street are the first and second Nisi Prius
Courts, 50 feet by 35 feet; and on the opposite side, facing Lonsdale-street, are the Banco and
a spare court of the same dimensions. The Insolvency, County, Supreme, and Equity
courts are each 59 feet by 50 feet. The barristers’ and attorneys’ rooms are situated on the
ground floor, within easy access of the various courts. Approaching from William-street is
a very neat Italian tower, in the front portion of which is a clock, and over this a large


dome, with its classic decorations and Corinthian columns, rising from the centre of the
building, gives the whole structure a grand appearance. The internal diameter of the dome
is fifty feet, and the whole space is taken up by a library and a circular gallery above. The
roof is vaulted, and the walls effectively decorated.
-Me TPE * t PGajSE
STANDS in Flinders-street, opposite the Melbourne wharf, at the head of the lower
Yarra Yarra River, whence come to anchor many of the intercolonial and coasting
u steamers and craft generally.
The ground floor is occupied by an important Electric Telegraph Station, the
offices of the Melbourne International Exhibition, also those of the Chief Harbour
Master, Engineer and Surveyor, and the Inspector of Weights and Measures.
On the first floor are the offices of the Collector of Customs and Export, the
Commissioner of Trade and Customs occupying the higher story.
It is one of the most substantially built and important buildings in the city.


V v cpapcp v OF V CPTPEDPPE.^
«fHE design depicted by the illustration lias been furnished by Mr. Butterfield,
\ architect, of London, The site chosen for its erection is at the corner of Flinders
fand Swanston-streets, adjacent to Prince’s Bridge. The general plan is in the form
of an irregular cross, the south transept scarcely projecting beyond the line of
aisles ; the north transept, in which the organ is to be placed, being much deeper.
In style, the building is designed in the earlier period of Gothic ; its extreme length is 24G
feet, and breadth 93 feet. There are three main entrances, and the seating accommodation
is estimated at 900 adults, exclusive of the transept and other parts of the building which
might be made available.
The Bishop of Melbourne has instituted a special Cathedral Fund, which is being
liberally subscribed to. The cost of the edifice is set down at £lOO,OOO,


-Nc 4* PIEI^.^
«HIS being the usual landing-place of all visitors from beyond the seas, and
likewise the point of departure, is always a place of special interest.
f Adjacent thereto is the Sandridge Railway Station, where trains run to and
from Melbourne at half-hour intervals. The Pier is. about a quarter of a
mile in length, and usually lined on either side with ships or steamers,
discharging or receiving cargo, which arduous work is performed with the greatest
ease, rails being laid along its entire length, and the hauling being mostly done
with the aid of steam power. During the week all is commercial bustle and activity ; truck
loads of wool, or other export commodity, are drawn up in rapid succession alongside the
fine clipper ships, which are to bear their valuable burdens to distant lands, the shrill
warnings of the restless locomotives successfully vieing with the modest whistles of the
many stationary engines, which keep up a continual clatter in their efforts to discharge the
inward freight. On Sundays the scene is one of comparative rest and peacefulness.
Excursion steamers, usually crowded, depart at an early hour for Queenscliff (at the Heads),
Sorrento, or Mordialloc—all charming resorts on the shores of Port Phillip Bay—returning
at dusk. In fine weather the Pier during the day is thronged with visitors from town, who
seek recreation and health in inspecting the noble specimens of marine architecture lying
alongside or out in the bay, and inhaling the balmy and ozonic breezes wafted from seaward.


•«PE v vOE MELBOURNE->
Acclimatization and Zoological Society’s Grounds, Royal Park.—Open daily, from 10
a.m. to 6 p.m. ; Sundays, from 1 p.m.
Alfred Graving Dock, Williamstown.
Arcades. —The “Royal,” the “Victoria,” and the “Eastern,” all in Bourke-street.
Botanic Gardens. —Open daily, from sunrise to sunset; Sundays, from 1 p.m.
Burke and Wills Monument, Collins-street East.
Botanical Reserve, South Yarra.—Contains New Government House,
Chinese Joss House, Emerald Hill.
Eitzroy Gardens. —Always open.
Flagstaff Gardens. —Always open.
Horticultural Gardens, Survey Paddock.—Open daily, from sunrise to sunset.
Melbourne Athenaeum (late Mechanics’ Institute), Collins-street East. —Members can
introduce strangers to privilege of reading-room for one month.
Melbourne Branch of the Royal Mint. —Orders to view can be obtained from the
Deputy-Master, at his office, in the Mint.
Melbourne Old Cemetery, near Flagstaff Gardens. —Contains graves of many of the early
colonists.


Melbourne New Cemetery.— Open daily, from sunrise to 6 p.m. ; Sundays, at 2 p.m.
National Museum, at the University.—Open daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
National Picture Gallery.— Open daily, from noon till 4 p.m.
Observatory. —Reserve, east of St. Kilda-road. Visiting day, Wednesday, from 2 to4p.m.
Parliament Houses, Spring-street.—Strangers are admitted to view the Chambers between
10 a.m. and 4 p.m., or when the House is not sitting.
Piers. — Railway and Town Piers at Sandridge ; also, St. Hilda Pier.
Public Library and Museum of Sculpture, Swanston-street North.—The Library is open
daily (Sundays excepted) from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. ; and the Fine Arts Museum from
noon to 4 p.m.
St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Eastern Hill.
The International Exhibition.
Technological Museum, Public Library Buildings, entrance from Latrobe-street East.
The Gift Dep6t, 51 Bourke-street.—Curiosities and Novelties. Open from 9 a.m. till
9 p.m. FREE.
Town Hall, Swanston-street.
Treasury Reserve Gardens.
University Gardens.— Open daily, from sunrise to sunset; Sundays, from 1 p.m.
And the Turret Ship “ Cerberus,” and the “ Nelson” Training Ship, off Williamstown.




lissillll*
PAH T 11.
■Me * 4 HI^JFO^Y.2^
» LITTLE more than a hundred years since, Captain James Cook, accompanied by Sir
Joseph Banks and the eminent Swedish botanist, Dr. Solander, left England in Her
o Majesty’s ship Endeavour on a voyage of discovery in the Southern seas. This era
cSV is adopted as a starting-point, inasmuch as it would be uninteresting and, moreover,
X unsatisfactory to inquire into the earlier discoveries of “ Terra Australis.” The
Portuguese, the Spaniards, and the French each in turn lay claim to the honour. Of the
three, the claims of the former appear to be based upon the best foundation, there being
extant, and now in the British Museum, a Portuguese map on which this continent is set


out, bearing date 1545. The matter, however, is wrapped in an impenetrable mystery,
which stands but little chance of ever being unravelled.
The first Europeans who sighted any of that portion of the land of Australia now
embraced within the limits of Victoria were Captain Cook and his companions, in the
month of April, 1770. It must be considered truly remarkable that up to so late a period
in the world’s history, the Australian continent remained almost unknown, totally
unexplored, and failed to attract the attention of even some of the more daring and enter-
prising spirits of earlier times, in order that its latent natural wealth, which might reasonably
be assumed to exist, might be laid under contribution not only for individual advantage,
but for the extension of general knowledge and the advancement of science. On the date
above mentioned, Captain Cook did not attempt to land, or even approach, but, passing
along the coast in search of favourable shelter, he entered a haven about six miles to the
south of Port Jackson, or Sydney Harbour, to which he was induced to give the name of
Botany Bay, on account of the diversity of the plants found upon its shores. Captain Cook
then surveyed the south-east coast, and its wild and rugged appearance reminded the great
navigator of the coast of South Wales in the old country. This circumstance led him to
give it the appellation of New South Wales. On 20th January, 1777, Captain Cook
planted the British standard on the shores of Botany Bay, and Captain Arthur Phillips,
8.N., founded the first settlement in Australia there in 1788.


From this parent colony of New South Wales, the province of Port Phillip, thence-
forward known as “ Victoria,” was formally separated in 1851.
Some ten years after the date of Captain Phillips’s settlement, two officers, George Bass
and Matthew Flinders, made an effort to explore the coast, and their labours resulted in the
discovery of Bass’s Straits and Westernport Bay. Two years later, Lieutenant James
Grant, bound from England to Sydney in a small armed brig, the Lady Nelson, sailed along
the coast of Victoria, sighting Capes Bridgewater and Nelson, Portland Bay, Cape Otway,
Point Nepean, at the entrance of Port Phillip Bay, where an inlet was noticed, and Cape
Liptrap. The shores of Port Phillip Bay, however, were first explored by Lieutenant
James Murray, who entered its heads and named the eminence now known as Arthur’s Seat,
ten weeks before Commander Flinders, in 1802. Later in the same year Charles Grimes,
surveyor, of New South Wales, visited the shores of Port Phillip, and finding a river
running into the Bay, called by the natives Yarra Yarra, sailed up it a little beyond the
place where Melbourne now stands. Grimes is therefore fairly entitled to the distinction of
being the “father of the colony.”
An unsuccessful attempt to colonize the territory of Port Phillip was made by an
expedition under the command of Lieut.-Col. David Collins in 1803. In 1824 the explorers,
Hume, Hamilton, and Hovell, travelled overland from Sydney to Port Phillip, discovering
the Goulburn River, and also, subsequently, Corio Bay. In 1833 the Messrs. Henty,


merchants, of Launceston, Tasmania, effected a permanent settlement at Portland Bay.
In the following year John Batman led an expedition from Tasmania to Port Phillip, and,
entering into an agreement with several of the principal native chiefs, secured to himself, his
heirs and assigns, 600,000 acres of land within certain defined limits. Another expedition,
which Jed to important results, was fitted out by a few adventurous inhabitants of
Launceston, Tasmania, in a small schooner named the Enterprise, under the direction of
John Pascoe Fawkner. They first landed at Western Port, but not liking the place they
entered Port Phillip Bay, and pursuing their course to the head, entered the Yarra Yarra
River, sailed up it, and on 28th August, 1835, made their vessel fast to a tree, opposite the
spot whereon the Custom-house, Melbourne, now stands. Here the river widened into a
natural basin, and further progress was prevented by some falls, occasioned by a ridge of
rock, which barred the navigation of the stream. By dint of cutting down some of the
rank growth of timber which fringed the water’s edge, and by running out a plank, the
landing of the live stock of this modest expedition was accomplished. It consisted of two
horses, two pigs, three kangaroo dogs, and a “harmless, necessary cat.” The pioneers
found that they had set foot in the midst of as beautiful a sylvan scene as the eye of an
artist could desire to rest upon. The ground heaved into softly rounded hills, and sank
into curved depressions, in the hollows of which the winter rains had worn some winding
watercourses, which emptied themselves into the river. Rich pasturages looked their


greenest at that season of the year ; and the timber, dispersed in clumps, and exhibiting
every variety of fantastic form and gnarled grotesqueness, lent a perpetually varying charm
to the lovely landscape. Here was an open glade upon which you might have almost
expected to see a head of dappled deer grazing with the confidence inspired by perfect
solitude ; and there, crossing a gentle eminence, stood a cluster of giant eucalypti. In the
far distance ranges of purple mountains, thickly wooded to their very crests, defined their
outlines sharply against the pale blue sky; and look in what direction they would, the
members of the expedition found something to delight the eye, one of those sights it must
have been that, to use a felicitous expression of Southey’s,
“ Sends quite a summer feeling through the heart.
So they pitched their tents, landed their stores, ploughed five acres of open land, and
sowed it with wheat; and sent the schooner back to Launceston with tidings of their
settlement, and orders for a flock of sheep to be sent as early as practicable, so as to utilize
the natural grasses of this pastoral Arcadia. Four and forty years ago this was the site of
Melbourne; and these were the virtual founders of the colony. Five hundred sheep and
fifty Hereford cows arrived in the following October, and before the end of the year the
name of the then Prime Minister of Great Britain had been bestowed upon the infant
settlement. On the Ist January, 1836, Mr. John Pascoe Fawkner published the first


newspaper, a manuscript production of four small folio pages, entitled the Melbourne
Advertiser ; and in the same year further important discoveries were made by Sir Thomas
Mitchell, Surveyor-General of New South Wales, who gave the country he had explored
the name of “Australia Felix.” The accounts he circulated of the richness and capabilities
of the soil caused great excitement, not only in Sydney and Tasmania, but also in the
mother country. Herds of cattle and sheep, driven overland from New South Wales,
speedily occupied the best part of the territory, and every available craft capable of
floating, was put into requisition to bring passengers and stock from Tasmania.
In March, 1837, Melbourne was formally laid out by Mr. Hoddle, the principal
thoroughfares being 99 feet wide, and the first land sale was held in the following June,
when half-acre allotments averaged about £35 each. Shortly afterwards shiploads of
emigrants began to arrive from the United Kingdom, and the first link was forged in the
chain of propitious circumstances that has established Victoria as the foremost colony of the
Australian group.


■Me GEO 6 WEIC/llr * PG^PFION
EXTENT AND CHARACTERISTICS.
lies between the 34th and 39th parallels of south latitude and the 141st and
|\y t 150th meridians of east longitude, is bounded on the north and north-east by New
South Wales, and on the south by the Southern Ocean and Bass’s Straits. Its
extreme length from east to west is about 420 geographical miles, and its average
width from north to south about 240 miles, the coast line extending about 600 miles.
Its area is 88,198 square miles, or 56,446,720 acres, being about a thirty-fourth part of that
of the entire continent, and is less by only 1,466 square miles than that of Great Britain.
Physically the colony is divided into two parts, north and south, by a range of mountains,
known as the main or dividing range, which runs from east to west nearly its whole length,
at an average distance of about sixty or seventy miles from the sea. The eastern part of
this range is known as the Australian Alps, and the western portion as the Pyrenees. This
forms the main watershed of the country, the rivers rising in it flowing generally north or
south, as the case may be—the former into the Murray, which runs along the northern
3


boundary, the latter into the sea. From the main range run numerous spurs, the loftiest
being the Bogong Range, in the eastern part, the summit of which reaches an altitude of
6,508 feet above the level of the sea, being the highest point of land in the colony.
With the exception of the Murray (which is the largest in Australia), the Yarra, the
Goulburn, and one or two of the south-eastern or Gippsland streams, the rivers are
unnavigable except by boats. There are numerous lakes in the colony, some salt, some
fresh. Of these Korangamite (salt) has an area of seventy-six square miles, and Lakes
Hindmarsh (fifty-six square miles), Oolac (ten square miles), and Burrumbeet (eight and a
half square miles), all fresh, are the largest. There are also large lakes in Gippsland, but
they are more in the nature of lagoons, being separated from the sea only by a narrow strip
of sand. Port Phillip is the largest inlet from the sea into Victoria, being a sheet of water
thirty miles long and thirty-five miles wide. It is entered by a rather narrow passage, and has
numerous shallows and sandbanks, the channels between which are well buoyed. Victoria
possesses many important and flourishing inland cities and towns, foremost of which is
Ballarat, with a population of 33,000 ; Sandhurst, 26,000 ; Geelong, 13,000 ; Benalla, 14,000 ;
Buninyong, 11,000 ; Kyneton, 9,000 ; and Castlemaine, Ararat, and Avoca, containing each
about 8,000 persons,


-Me * t jaETEO^OEGGY.^N-
BEING the most southerly portion of the continent of Australia, Victoria possesses the
mildest and most equable climate of any of the Australian colonies. It is warmer
* n suminer than Tasmania, and colder in winter than New South Wales, Queensland,
or South Australia, but does not suffer from the cold foggy winter weather of the
first, nor the intense summer heat and scorching winds of the other three. It is
true that there are occasional hot winds which blow from the north, and which, bringing
with them clouds of dust, parch up vegetation, shrivel the fruit on the trees, and create a
feeling of extreme lassitude in both human beings and animals. But much as these hot
winds are dreaded by new-comers, they are by no means so frequent, and certainly by no
means so severe, as is generally supposed. The average hot wind days for the colony
amount, according to Professor Neumayer, to about eight in the year, and these rarely last
longer than a day (three is the maximum duration), when in the evening a strong south
wind, with thunder, lightning, and rain, sets in, and rapidly clears the oppressive
atmosphere. The greater portion of the year consists of fine, clear, genial weather. The
hottest day on record during the last twenty years was the 14th January, 1872, when the


thermometer in the shade showed 111.2 deg. It rises above 100 deg. on an average three or
four times a year, and falls to or below freezing point two or three times a year, the extreme
cold being in 1865, when 30 deg. were registered.
The Victorian spring commences on the 23rd September, the weather throughout being
generally mild, pleasant, moderately warm, and having about the average rainfall. Summer
commences on the 22nd December, the longest day, and usually opens with changeable
weather, occasional high winds, and heavy rain. December is the wettest, and January the
hottest, summer month. Autumn begins on the 21st March, when, alternating with
refreshing showers, occurs the pleasantest time of year. Winter commences on the 21st
June, the shortest day, and brings with it stormy and boisterous, but not very wet, weather.
Speaking generally, the delightful climate assimilates to Southern Europe, and especially
that part of it bordering on the western shore of the Mediterranean Sea.


** GOYEIOTE]m->
SOCIAL CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE.
«HE form of government is a modification of the British Constitution, the Queen being
represented by the Governor (the Marquis of Normanby), who Is appointed by the
W Crown. The House of Lords is represented by the Legislative Council, which
consists of thirty members, each of whom must possess a property qualification ;
and the House of Commons is represented by the Legislative Assembly, comprising
eighty-six members, from whom no qualification of any kind is required. The business of
administration is conducted by nine Ministers, eight of whom are chosen from the majority
in the Assembly. Hitherto they have divided among themselves £14,000 per annum for their
services, and during the last eight years the members of both Houses have remunerated them-
selves from the public treasury at the rate of £3OO per head per annum. There is now a
general impression jn the country that payment of members does not produce corresponding


advantages ; and at the triennial election which took place in February, 1880, a determined
effort was made to abolish the system by returning members pledged to vote against its
continuance, the result being that opinions in the House are now about equally divided for
and against. The re-enactment of the measure is, therefore, very improbable, except in a
modified form.
The aspect of Victoria socially is one on which she may with reason pride herself.
Life and property are comparatively safe, and robbery with violence is of rare occurrence.
Victorians are pre-eminently a people of amusements. Holidays are frequent, and are
largely availed of by all classes. Every town of any pretensions has its racecourse, the
metropolitan one at Flemington being unequalled in any part of the world. The principal
event of the year is the “ Cup ” race, which is run at Flemington in the summer season.
On that great “Cup day” the “Grandstand” and “the Hill” are crowded with a vast
assemblage from this and other colonies, exhibiting such a spectacle of about 100,000 well-
dressed people as cannot be seen elsewhere—Goodwood, in England, and Chantilly and
Longchamps, in France, perhaps, excepted. The Melbourne Cup race of 1879 was won by
Darriwell, a Victorian-bred animal. The distance of two miles was accomplished in
3 min. 30| sec., a marvellous feat, which it is. believed has hitherto never been equalled in
any part of the world, and testifies to the fact that a magnificent breed of horses is being
developed in the country. Cricket-grounds exist in every town ; indeed, since the triumphal


tour of the first Australian Eleven throughout England and the United States, during
which, having met all comers, they won twenty-two out of the twenty-nine matches played
out, it is unnecessary to remark upon the popularity of the game. Football is the favourite
pastime in winter. There are also several regattas during the year. Other sports, too,
have their votaries, and there are but few young men who are not attached to one or more
clubs for the prosecution of games of some kind, or who do not belong to one of the
numerous volunteer corps which mass together once a year for an encampment in the
country, which lasts several days, and generally includes a review and sham-fight.
One of the proudest boasts of Victoria as a free country is that every man is perfectly at
liberty to enjoy his own religious opinions, and to follow the tenets and practices of his own
creed, so long as he does not break the law, outrage propriety, or interfere with his
neighbour. There is no State church, nor does any one religious denomination enjoy
privileges denied to the other. The clergy of all denominations throughout Victoria
number about 700, and the number of buildings used for public worship is 2,720 ; and the
number usually attending at the principal service on the Sabbath averages 300,000. The
number of Sunday-schools is about 1,500.
The state of education in Victoria may be said to have reached a very high standard,
and is virtually universal. The system, which was not passed through the Legislature
without strenuous opposition on the part of the clergy, is one of free, compulsory, and


secular education ; the religious element, or the slightest approach to teaching the tenets of
any creed or sect, being strictly forbidden in the public schools. At the same time
every reasonable facility is afforded to those who wish to communicate religious instruction
after school hours in the buildings used by the Government ; and, as every male adult is
entitled to exercise the franchise, the State feels bound to protect itself from the calamitous
consequences of having political power placed in the hands of the ignorant, by compelling
every child in the colony to be educated up to a given standard. The Department of
Education is presided, over by a responsible Minister of the Crown, styled the Minister of
Public Instruction, and Boards of Advice are appointed in each district. The cost of
the Department to the State is £500,000 per annum.
The Melbourne University, for the higher branches of education, established in
1853, ranks with similar institutions in any part of the world. All degrees granted are
recognized as academic distinctions and rewards of merit as fully as if they had been granted
by any University in the United Kingdom. It receives £11,250 per annum from the
Government, and has about 200 students attending lectures.
The other educational establishments of the colony comprise three Colleges, two Grammar
Schools, and 645 private schools.
In addition, the following intellectual agencies deserve enumeration The Public Library
(see the Illustration), with 106,000 vols. ; the Parliamentary Library, with 40,000;


the University, with 20,000 ; the Supreme Court, with 15,000, and its branches with 5,000,
The total number of volumes thus collected is 186,000 in the twenty-seven years since 1853,
when they were all first established. The Mechanics’ Institute possesses 30,000 volumes ;
and the Royal Society, the Law Society, the Medical Society, and the Literary Institute
have each their collection of books, besides fourteen flourishing suburban libraries, and 130
other libraries in Victoria, with about 200,000 volumes.
The National Gallery, containing valuable Works of Art, and an Industrial and
Technological Museum, are noble educational institutions ; and a National Museum is
attached to the Melbourne University.
Melbourne supports four daily and a dozen weekly papers, and ten monthly publications ;
while there are upwards of a hundred journals issued in the provincial cities and country
towns.
Building Societies, Savings Banks, Life and other Insurance Companies, and Provident
Institutions, are popular among the thrifty for laying up a store for a “rainy” day. Of
Banks of Issue there are eleven, with a note circulation of upwards of one and a quarter
millions, deposits of fifteen millions, and total assets about twenty-five millions.


**¥HE t *<•
Of Victoria are noble and large. Hospitals for the sick, asylums for the afflicted and bereaved,
shelters for the poor, and refuges for the penitent, are numerous and liberally supported,
partially by Government and partially by voluntary contributions. Of hospitals there are
thirty-two, besides a Lying-in Hospital, Blind Asylum, Deaf and Dumb Asylum, Eye and
Ear, and also Children’s Hospitals, five Benevolent Asylums, Immigrants’ Home, seven
Orphan Asylums, Industrial and Reformatory Schools, four Hospitals for the Insane, four
Female Refuges : total, seventy institutions, having afforded aid, in a year, to 35,000 persons
—a goodly show for charity, and one which speaks volumes for the generosity and philanthropy
of Victorians.


->$ popaii^ioN.^
although by far the smallest of the Australian colonies on the mainland,
I\Y 1 P ossesses a population of 925,000 souls, a number which is equal to about three-
fourths of all the others put together. Many of the present inhabitants .of
Victoria, as is well known, have found their way hither from all parts of the
world, and the relative proportion of different nationalities may be a subject of
interest, having naturally changed from time to time with the ever varying streams of
immigration. By the last official estimate by Mr. Hayter, Government Statist, issued in
1878, there were 26,010 births, 12,776 deaths, and 5,103 marriages, registered during the
year; 41,196 persons arrived, and 33,943 departed from the shores.
In 1871, the date of the last census, the Irish-born population stood in the proportion of
three to five of the English-born, while the Scotch-born were rather more than a third of
the latter. Foreigners numbered 37,315, of which 17,826 were Chinese, 9,264 Germans,
2,423 Americans, and 1,170 French. The number of Victorian-born was 329,597. There


has always been a disproportion in the number of the two sexes in Victoria, although it is,
of course, not so great now as it was in the earlier days of the colony. For example, in
1838 there were only 431 females to 3,080 males, while in 1878 there were 393,046 females
to 467,741 males. The greatest equality naturally exists among the Australian bom. In
1871 there were 178,385 females to 179,881 males. Among foreigners, the French showed
37 females to 100 males ; Germans, 35 females to 100 males ; and Chinese, only 1 female to
575 males. Statistics show that the nationalities are rapidly being fused, and that ere long
the distinctions of race, as they exist with regard to the present generation, will be to a great
extent disregarded, if not unknown. In 1876, the number of aborigines in Victoria was 1,067
632 males and 435 females—and in 1880 the survivors of both sexes were estimated at only
750. Like the aborigines of Tasmania, which have now become an extinct race, those of
Victoria are so rapidly disappearing that, at no very distant date, they will have an
existence in history only.


<- * * COMMENCE.**
ROADS, RAILWAYS.
a very small beginning, the trade of Victoria has, during a comparatively short
existence, grown into gigantic proportions. The annual total exports amount to
Q$=CP £16,362,304, and the imports to £15,157,687. The leading industries are mining,
(Tr? cattle and sheep raising, and general farming. The chief products and exports are
gold, wool (which is superior to that of any other country in the world), wines,
preserved meats, leather, and tallow. Trade is continued on an extensive scale with the
outer world, as" shown by the amount of imports, notwithstanding the efforts of the
temporarily dominant party in political power to discourage it in every possible way, by
imposing heavy customs duties, varying from 10 per cent, to 30 per cent., but few articles
being exempt. Strange to say, the almost obsolete policy of Protection finds favour among the
working classes, although its apparent results consist only in enhanced prices to the consumer,
and consequent reduction of purchasing power, and a general downward tendency in the


rate of wages, the natural result of keen competition and over-production in the manufac-
tories, many of which the system of “ Protection ” has called into existence.
The Port of Melbourne (Hobson’s Bay) is continually crowded with shipping of every
class and tonnage. There are also the smaller ports of Geelong, Portland, Port Fairy, Port
Albert, and Warmambool, and the Murray River Ports. Communication with all parts of
the world is easy and regular.
Every fortnight a mail steamer of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation
Company’s fleet arrives and departs, under contract with the Imperial and the Victorian
Governments. Via Sydney there is monthly steam communication with America ; and
the Queensland mail steamer proceeds from Melbourne, likewise, every month, and gives
direct access to China and the East. Independent lines of full-powered steamers are now
competing for the passengers and the goods traffic between England and Victoria, and have
reduced the passage down to from forty to fifty days.
The intercolonial steam communication is very complete, scarcely a day passing without
two or three fine vessels entering the port from Sydney, New Zealand, Tasmania, or South
Australia.
The electric telegraph and submarine cables connect all the colonies together, and the
direct cable which links Australia with Europe enables the newspapers in Victoria to publish
news of important events from England and the Continent, or from America, the day after


their occurrence. It also places business men in constant communication with their principals
and agents, and thus steadies and facilitates commerce.
Not many years ago the means of communication between one part of the colony and
another were of the most primitive description. The roads were for the most part little
more than bush tracks cut through the timber. These were traversed either by the
lumbering bullock drays of the period, when main strength was the only means of over-
coming the difficulties, or by the renowned 44 Cobb’s ” coaches, whose drivers, reckless of
danger and regardless of horseflesh, forced their way either on or off the road to any given
point. Now, however, the roads are mostly in admirable order, and there is every facility
for travel and locomotion. In the towns and cities, cabs and omnibuses are plentiful, and
run at cheap rates. Railway communication with the interior has lately been pushed
forward with giant strides. On the Ist January, 1880, 1,110 miles of railway were open
for traffic, viz. :—Melbourne to Echuca, 156|; Footscray to Williamstown, 6; Williams-
town Junction to Geelong Pier, 39J ; West Geelong to Ballarat, 53 J ; North-Eastern—
Melbourne to Wodonga, 187; Ballarat to Ararat, 57; Castlemaine to Dunolly, 47£ ;
Ballarat to Maryborough, Wangaratta to Beechworth, 23; Ararat to Stawell, 18|;
Maryborough to Avoca, 15 ; Sandhurst to Inglewood, 30 ;• Geelong to Colac, 52|; Oakleigh
to Sale (Gippsland), 118^; South Yarra to Oakleigh, 9|; Ararat to Hamilton, 66 i ;
Hamilton to Portland and the Pier, 54; Dunolly to St. Arnaud, 32f-; Stawell to Horsham,


53J ; Springs to Wahgunyah, 14 ; Geelong to Queenscliff, 20f ; Warrenheip to Gordons, 13
miles. In addition to these, the following are authorized, and will speedily be completed—
Goulburn Valley, miles; Carlsruhe to Daylesford, 22\ ; Toolamba to Tatura, 7;
total, 74^-.
On Ist January, 1880, the cost of the State railways (exclusive of the Hobson’s Bay
lines recently purchased by the Government for the sum of £1,320,820) stood at
£15,343,240, of which amount £13,503,693 is borrowed capital, and on this sum £732,218
is yearly paid in interest. The net revenue yields 4f per cent, on the borrowed capital.
The gross earnings of all lines (excluding Hobson’s Bay Eailway) during 1878, amounted to
£1,216,675, and the expenditure on working expenses to £625,699. During the year,
3,829,255 passengers and 3,829,256 tons of goods were carried.
As showing the magnitude of this State establishment, it may be mentioned that on
Ist January, 1880, there were 5,238 persons employed therein, and the payments in salaries
and contingencies amount to over £52,000 per month.
A very extensive and costly terminal station is now being constructed at Spencer-
street, and the Hobson’s Bay lines have recently been connected with the systems of the
interior.


* mv + TienioiiMranß.*-
jTf j)p to quite recently an idea prevailed, even among the better-informed in England and
Hu. .' on the continent of Europe, that the interior of Australia was a vast wilderness, an
arid, waterless desert of sand and stones, where nothing grew or could grow, and
where it was impossible for human or animal life to exist. All the land in the
colony does not, of course, possess soil of equal richness, or of similar quality;
and there are large areas of country unsuitable, either from position or from the nature of
the ground, for the cultivation of wheat or potatoes, or even for dairy purposes, but admirable
for other valuable industries common in Southern Europe, There are millions of acres of
land, the finest and fittest in the world, in every way suitable for the growth of those
valuable products, lying untenanted in the immediate neighbourhood, or within easy distance
of large centres of population. The Government offer every facility for the taking up of land
on easy terms, which enables the selector to ultimately become the possessor in fee simple.


The terms are—Free selection before survey; price, £1 per acre ; annual rent, one
shilling per acre, with the right of purchasing, at the end of six years, by paying the
amount required to make up the sum of one pound per acre. Limit of acres allowed, 320.
The selector must reside on the selection for three years, and cultivate one-tenth of the
area, enclose with a fence, and effect improvements to the value of £1 per acre ; or, by
paying double rental, the selector can hold land under the “non-residence clause,” which
enables him to reside anywhere. A foreigner can purchase and hold land thus, without
becoming naturalized. The average yield of wheat in Victoria is fourteen bushels to the
acre.


•s-JfIIOTG *** TPE 4* gOIiDFIEEDjS.-s-
HE rapid development of Australia, and Victoria in particular, has undoubtedly been
H) due largely to the alluring influence that always attends the discovery of gold. This
f ) important event occurred in 1851, and changed, as by the wave of a magician’s wand,
the entire aspect of life in the colony, A mad desire to suddenly obtain large
_ quantities of the precious metal, at all hazards, seized upon the entire community,
and men of every class left their occupations to join in the rush to the “ diggings. ”
Melbourne was nearly deserted. No richer harvests of gold have ever been gathered than
were unearthed in the old times at Ballarat, Bendigo, and Forest Creek, Castlemaine. The
two largest nuggets ever discovered were the “ Welcome Stranger,” at Dunolly, in 1869,
value £9,534, and the “ Welcome,” at Ballarat, value £9,325. In the Mining Surveyor’s
Report, up to Ist January, 1880, the estimated yield of gold for that quarter is set down
at 209,411 ozs., of which 129,678 ozs. were from quartz. There are 37,553 miners at work
in the colony, of whom 13,824 Europeans and 8,945 Chinese are engaged in alluvial mining,
and 14,619 Europeans and 165 Chinese in quartz mining. The approximate value of mining


plant in the colony is £1,908,827. The number of square miles of auriferous ground actually
worked upon is 1,182; and the number of distinct quartz reefs proved to be auriferous,
3,561. The deepest mining shaft in the colony is the Magdala, at Stawell, which has been
sunk 2,273 feet; and there are nineteen others down to depths varying from 1,018 to 1,940
feet, the latter being the Newington, at Stawell.
Eecent indications lead to the belief that payable gold-bearing quartz is to be found at
greater depths than those hitherto reached. Indeed, it is questioned whether there be any
limit to the vertical area of auriferous deposit. Gold has been the staple mineral export of
the colony for the last twenty-seven years ; the total value of the precious metal raised in
Victoria, from its discovery to the present time, is estimated at two hundred millions
sterling. The country also possesses considerable wealth in silver, tin, copper, antimony,
lead and iron ores. Extensive deposits of coal have recently been discovered, and many
valuable diamonds and other precious stones have been found.


•*£• EMPLOYMENT.-^
WAGES, BENT, PROVISIONS.
«HERE is a very healthy demand for labour in almost every trade in Victoria, and
skilled workmen can always find plenty of work at remunerative wages. The
q country is the home of the industrious, and it may be truthfully affirmed that any
steady person, with energy and application, may not only live in comfort, but,
I compared with the condition of many of those in overcrowded Europe, in affluence.
The prudent and thrifty may soon save enough to enable him to become his own landlord,
and start business on his own account. Persons without capital, or lacking skill in any
department of industry, and physically unable to undertake manual labour, fare badly in
Victoria. Clerks are at a discount, but any one with special trade knowledge can quickly
obtain employment. Good domestic servants are very scarce. In the building trades the
day’s work is of eight hours’ duration, and the ruling wages are as follows Stonemasons,
plasterers, bricklayers, slaters, and carpenters, 10s. per day ; painters and glaziers, 9s. ;


cabinetmakers receive from £2 10s. to £3 per week ; boilermakers anti platers 125., and
fitters 9s. to 12s. per day ; brass finishers and coppersmiths, 9s. to 12s. per day; plumbers
and gasfitters, £3 per week; bakers, £2 to £3 per week; butchers, from 355. to 40s. per do.;
coachbuilders, from £2 10s. to £3 10s. per do. ; coopers receive 10s. per day of 10 hours ;
farriers, £1 10s. to £2 10s. per week ; gardeners are not well paid —near town they earn from
30s. to 40s. per week, without rations, and in the country from 15s. to 305., with board and
lodging; saddlers earn from 355. to £2 15s. ; tanners, from £2 to £2 10s., and as high as
£3 10s. in some instances ; tinsmiths earn from £2 to £3 per week ; jewellers get from
£2 15s. to £3 per do. ; enamellers are scarce ; watchmakers are paid about the same rates;
tailors are wanted in the best shops at a log of Is. per hour. In second-class shops the men
earn from £2 10s. to £3 per week; bootmakers are not constantly employed, the trade being
subject to great fluctuations. In factories the men receive for children’s boots 6d. per pair,
boys’ lOd. per do. ; women’s Is., and men’s Is. 3d. Miners earn from 355. to £2 ss. per
week, according to the kind of work and locality. Navvies receive 6s. Cd. per day. Farm
labourers get at present 20s. per week, station hands 15s. to 20s. per do. Married couples
for farms get from £SO to £6O per annum ; for stations, from £6O to £7O per annum.
Housemaids receive from £3O to £36 per annum; women cooks, from £35 to £6O ; men do,
from 30s to £4 per week. Draper’s assistants are paid £2 10s. to £4 ; milliners, from 355.
to 705.; needlewomen, from 15s. to 20s. per week.


With regard to Victoria generally, it may be truthfully asserted that there are few, if
any, places in the world where food is so plentiful and the necessaries of life so abundant
and cheap. And yet the prices might be far lower, were it not for the heavy taxation
initiated by “The People’s Government.” The present cost of living may be estimated
from the following quotations, taken from the official report of the Government Statist. In
town : —Bread, 6d. to 7d. the 4 lb. loaf ; beef, from 2d. to 9d. per lb. ; mutton, Id. to sd.
per lb. ; lamb, 2s. to 3s. per quarter; and pork, 7d. to lOd. per lb. ; fowls, ss. to 7s. per
couple ; eggs, lOd. to 2s. 6d. per dozen ; butter, lOd. to Is. lOd. per lb. ; and milk, 4d. to
6d. per quart. The weekly rent of a dwelling in the towns suitable for a mechanic and his
family ranges from ss. to 10s. per week. Outside the city, lower rates prevail; and in the
country districts and to the bulk of the settlers rent forms no item in household expenditure.


MELBOURNE!
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY, AND CO.
Q MACKILLOP STREET.


*
_ l N
>or
uuopi
*
<ui,uuu ?!'(■>
1 V


X'Sr-XJaJ. I hiXJJ 'XUUi- : ...
% * \ V<, *
♦
u* I na
