

WATER SUPPLY
AND
SEWERAGE SCHEME








Melbourne Water Supply
AND
Sewerage Schemes.
Special Edition of the Building, Engineering & Mining Journal.
The Operations of the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED.




Preface.
The publication of a well-illustrated and exhaustive description of
the work accomplished up to date by, and now under the control and
administrative care of, the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of
Works will doubtless prove exceedingly welcome and well-timed.
The undertaking being of vast proportions and far reaching
importance, it is hardly to be wondered at that a considerable
amount of criticism has been levelled at the Board. It is an
experience common to the executive of every great public enterprise,
but without taking up a position either, as apologists-for or critics
of the Board, the publishers have used their best endeavours to
furnish a comprehensive account of the labours of its officers during
the fourteen years of the Board’s existence, and also in detailing: the
progress of the Water Works up to the date on which they were
handed over to it. That the work has been prosecuted with much
energy and ability, these pages will probably testify, and no expense
has been spared by the publishers in the reproduction of plans and
photographs, so as to enable even the non-professional reader to
intelligibly follow the details of the scheme. To engineers, archi-
tects, contractors and plumbers, these voluminous illustrations should
prove of special interest and value.
The publishers take this opportunity of thanking the officers of
the Board for their ready assistance in the compilation of this work.
To Mr. Wm. Thwaites, the Engineer-in-Chief, they are particularly
indebted for his admirable and extensive contribution, the preparation
of which has occupied much time and thought on his part, and those
who peruse it will doubtless be considerably surprised at the immen-
sity of work involved in the scheme and the many engineering difficul-
ties which from time to time had to be contended with. Mr. E. G.
Eitz Gibbon, the Chairman of the Board, whose services to the City
of Melbourne have extended over such a long period, has furnished a
very interesting historical sketch of the municipal life of the great
city in which he has taken such a prominent part. Mr. C. E. Oliver,
the Superintending Engineer of Sewerage, has contributed a very
acceptable article on The Testing of Materials,” and in addition to
this the publishers are indebted to Mr. Oliver for many of the best
photographs, some of the underground views being quite unique.
Mr. John Wilson, the Resident Inspector in charge of the water
works, has also been most courteous and obliging in offering all
information in his power, and in assistance as to the most interest-
ing localities to be photographed. That advertisers have been so
prompt to recognise the value of this publication as an attractive
and permanent work of reference is a matter for congratulation,
and the value of their advertisements has been much enhanced by
the illustrations which in most cases accompany their business noti-
fications. In addition to the matter descriptive of the Melbourne
Water Supply and Sewerage Schemes, are given some valuable tests of
materials. In conclusion the publishers are pleased to be able to
state that the success of their enterprise has already been assured
to a. most gratifying extent, the proof copies of the work creating
such a favourable impression that a substantial distribution of copies
was guaranteed before the actual publication of the book, enquiries
for it having reached them from all parts of Australia and New
Zealand.
326-8 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
July Ist. 1905.




Contents.
Index to River Yarra and Water Supply Articles.
Page.
Advance of Port Phillip 20
A Freshet (illustration) 9
A Necessary Reserve IO
Aqueduct Across Plenty River 37
Badger or Coranderrk River
Bear’s Castle 34
Biographies 26 to 33
Blackburn, Mr. James 34
Boundaries of the Watershed 8
Capacity of the Water Supply 9
Cascades
Channel Cleaner 25
Cleansing the Reservoir 3 7
Clear Water Channel 33
Conclusion (2 illustrations) "... 39
Dight’s Falls (illustrations) iy, x 8
Donnelly’s Creek Weir 38
Early Legislation xg
Early Pioneering
Early Squatters I 4
Embankment, The 34
Encouragement of Immigration
Ever Flowing Yarra 6
Expenditure on Immigration 20
First Building
First Sod Turned 34
Flood Scenes (illustrations) 8,9, n
Graceburn Aqueduct 38
Graceburn Weir 38
Growth of Settlement x 4
Hawthorn Bridge (illustration) 12
Historic 20
Hospice
In and About the Watershed (illustration) 11
Intake Channel 35
In the Scrub (illustration) 8
Iron Aqueduct Over Plenty River 36
Maroondah System 3-
Maroondah Weir 38
Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works’ Offices 22
Melbourne’s Ever-Flowing River r
Old Supplies ... 34
On the Hillside (illustration) 1 8
Other Reservoirs 37
Outlet to PijDe'-head Reservoir 36
Outlet Tower 36
Peeps Near Kew (illustration) 12
Pipehead Reservoir 37
Preston Reservoir 37
Rachael 20
Rainfall, Average 9
Resident Inspector 38
River Improvements Since the Great Flood (illustration) 9
Road to Port Melbourne i Q
Rough-Pitched Channelling 33
Sculpturing 20
Settlement of Port Phillip 10
Silver Creek Channel 36
Source of Supply 34
Source of the Yarra "10
State of Health in 1841 20
Statistics 38, 40, 41
Street Scene in the Great Flood (illustration) 8
The Yarra Yarra 8
Timber Shoot 33
Toorourong Reservoir 33
Lnauthorised Occupation of Land i e
Wallaby Creek Channel 33
Wallaby Creek Weir 33
Watt’s River and Yarra 38
Westgarth’s Description 13
Whence the Water Comes (2 illustrations) 38
William Buckley T 3
Yan Yean 34
Yan Yean Reservoir 34
Yan Yean to Mo rang 3<5
\ an Yean to the Metropolis 36
Index to Sewerage Articles.
Page.
The Sewering of Melbourne (Fitz Gibbon) 89
Sewerage System (Thwaites) 92
Sewerage System, Scope 92
Sewerage System, Dimensions of Sewers 92
Sewerage System, Area Provided for 92
Sewerage System, House Survey 92
Sewerage System, House Connections 92
Sewerage System, Sewer Reticulation 93
Sewerage System, Return of Tenement Costs 92
Sewerage System, Stoneware Pipes 93
Sewerage System, Main and Branch Sewers 94
Sewerage System, South Yarra System 94
Sewerage System, Hobson’s Bay Main, Section No. 5 94
Sewerage System, Hobson’s Bay Main, Section No. 4 94
Sewerage System, Hobson’s Bay Main, Section No. 3 94
Sewerage System, Hobson’s Bay Main, Section No. 2 95
Sewerage System, Hobson’s Bay Main, Section No. 1 95
Sewerage System, South Yarra Main 96
Sewerage System, South Yarra Main, Section No. 3 96
Sewerage System, South Yarra Main, Section No. 2 96
Sewerage System, South Yarra Main, Section No. 1 96
Sewerage System, Richmond Main 96
Sewerage System, Richmond Main, Section No. 3 96
Sewerage System, Richmond Main, Section No. 2 96
Sewerage System, Richmond Main, Section No. 1 97
Sewerage System, Melbourne Main 97
Sewerage System, Melbourne Main, Section No. 3 97
Sewerage System, Crossing River Gasworks 97
Sewerage System, Melbourne Main, Section No. 2 97
Sewerage System, Melbourne Main, Section No. 1 98
Sewerage System, North Yarra System 98
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 8 98
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 7 98
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 6 98
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 5 99
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 4 99
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 3 99
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 2 99
Sewerage System, North Yarra System, Section No. 1 99
Portland Cement 100
Pumping Station, Spottiswoode 10 0
Ultimate Engine Power 100
Initial Installation 100
Adopted Installation 100
Rising Mains 101
Outfall Sewer 101
Metropolitan Farm IIQI
Metropolitan Sewerage (Thwaites) IQ2A
Paper on No. 1 Section, North Yarra Main (H. V. Champion) 103
Paper on Hydraulic Shield Tunnelling (G. H. Dunlop) 106
Testing of Materials (E. C. Oliver) i IO
Testing of Materials, Portland Cement, Mortar m
Testing of Materials, Portland Cement, Concrete and Mortar ... 112
+
Appendix.
T . , . „ Page.
Lighting of Pumping Station H 7
Lubrication of Engine Cylinders H 7
W. H Brewer 773
J. A. Newton & Co 773
Illuminants 7 7 y
Sun Blinds 773
Emu Brand Portland Cement ... 773
Coimadai Hydraulic Ground Lime 773
The Use of Steel 773
H. V. Hampton’s Engineering Works 773
Wm. Machar & Sons 779
Kerosene for Oil Engines 719
John Danks and Son Proprietary- Limited 719
Commonwealth Coach Factory 779
Meplian Ferguson 779
The Australian Tesselated Tile Co 720
A. Nott 72q
Aust. Gas Retort and Fire Brick Company 120
J. M. Anderson & Sons 720


Stephens* Excelsior Foundry,
SOUTH MELBOURNE.
/Stephens e
iRON FOUNDER
W#7
•••
-1
' ■ ■ ‘
VIEW OF OFFICES OF EXCELSIOR FOUNDRY.
LOOK !
I am prepared to execute Orders for
susat- vcrandal) Castings.
""Hslt
QUALITY AND PRICE CORRECT.
- Architects, Builders, Contractors, &c.
FOR . . .
GILT EDGE CASTINGS and
CAST IRON COLUMNS
WRITE TO
W, Stephens,
EX6ELSIOR
Column, Frieze & Hardware Foundry,
SOUTH MELBOURNE.
f.j $ JNifr
D
V 4 ,
mm
VIEW OF ONE OF THE MOULDING FLOORS
IN THE EXCELSIOR FOUNDRY.


Index to Illustrations.
WATER SUPPLY.
PLATE.
The Castle x
The Embankment from Entrance Gates 2
The Embankment from Water’s Edge 3
The Embankment, with Full Reservoir 4
Windmill to Supply Resident Inspector’s Quarters 5
On a Wet Day, Mountains Enshrouded in Clouds 6
Reservoir, from Boat Shed 7
Reservoir, from Resident Inspector’s Quarters 8
Reservoir, from Bear’s Castle (folded sheet) 9
The Intake Tunnel and Old Channel 10
Drop or Artificial Waterfall on Old Channel 11
Junction of Clear Water Channel with Old Plenty River
Source (now permanently shut off) 12
Clear Water Channel, water leaving Toorourong Reservoir ... 12A
Toorourong Reservoir 13
Rough Pitched Channel in Jack’s Creek 14
Rough Pitched Channel in Jack’s Creek 15
Rough Pitched Channel in Jack’s Creek .> 16
Timber Fluming in Jack’s Creek, over Yellow Creek 17
Timber Shoot at Foot of Cascades 18
Timber Shoot at Foot of Cascades 19
Minnie Ha Ha Waterfall, Jack's Creek 20
The Cascades, from Wallaby Creek Channel, over the Moun-
tain Top, into Jack’s Creek 21
Wallaby Creek Channel, commencing at the Weir 22
Wallaby Creek Channel, with Channel Cleaner 23
Wallaby Creek Weir and Silver Creek Channel in Overflow ... 24
Wallaby Creek Weir from above, showing Silver Creek Intake
on left, and Wallaby Creek Outlet and Channel on right 25
The Board’s Hospice at Wallaby Creek 26
The Yan Yean Outlet Tower 4
The Yan Yean Valve House, etc., for regulating supply and
Aqueduct ... 28
Bluestone Basin Receiving Water from Yan Yean, and passing
it into Aqueduct 29
Aqueduct from Yan Yean to Pipehead Reservoir; Water
leaving the Circular Basin 30
Iron Aqueduct over Plenty River 31
“Le Page’s ” Aqueduct, raised in Concrete, and Embankment 32
Pipehead Reservoir 33
Preston Reservoir 34
Preston Reservoir 35
Preston Reservoir ; house enclosing Electric Alarum 36
Pipes Carried Over Yarra Yarra 36 a
The Straining Tank, where Maroondah System junctions
with Yan Yean System, above Preston _ ... 37
53-inch Main, W. 1., in Lattice Girder Bridge over Plenty River 38
View of the Bridge in Perspective 39
View of the Bridge in Perspective 4°
Maroondah Weir 4 1
Crossing the Maroondah 4 2
A Bush Track 43
Mathinna Falls 44
Donnelly’s Creek Weir 45
Junction of Donnelly’s Creek with Maroondah Aqueduct 46
Aqueduct and Water from No 5 Tunnel 47
Entrance to No. 6 Tunnel 4 8
Yarra Glen Aqueduct and Scour Valve 49
’Graceburn Weir 5°
Graceburn Weir 5 1
Graceburn Aqueduct 5 2
Graceburn Aqueduct 53
-4k
SEWERAGE.
PAO R.
E. G. Fitz Gibbon (Chairman) 2 5
Wm. Thwaites (Engineer-in-Chief) 2 7
C. E. Oliver (Superintending Engineer) 2 9
A. C. Smith, W. Wilson, W. S. Dawson, H. P. Nevins (As- 29
sistant Engineers) ;• •••
John Wilson (Resident Inspector Waterworks and Reservations) 30
R. Richardson (Treasurer) _ 3 2
George Wilson (Assistant Inspector, Preston Reservoir) 33
G. A. Gibbs (Secretary) 33
PLATE.
Pipe Yard, Spottiswoode 8
Map of Area Rateable 9
Detail Plan ••• 10
PLATE.
House Connections ... n
House Connections 12
House Connections 13
Special Types, Sections Circular Sewers 14
Diagrams, Sewer Calculations 15
Diagrams, Sewer Calculations 16
Diagrams, Sewer Calculations 17
Manholes and Ventilators, Pipe Sewer Branches 18
Ventilators 19
Flushing Chambers, Automatic Syphons 20
Flushing Manholes, Pipe Sewers 21
Detail Circular Manholes for Main Sewers 22
Cast Iron Manhole Covers, Closer 23
Manholes and Details, Pipe Sewers 24
Covers, Square Manholes, Ventilators, Inspection Shafts 25
Details of Ventilators 26
Hobson's Bay Main Manholes and Ventilators 27
Nine-Inch Reticulation Pipes, Port Melbourne 28
Shaft, Port Melbourne ... 29
Hobson's Bay Main, No. 3 Section ... 30
Under Port Melbourne Railway 31
Hobson’s Bay Main, No. 2 Section 32
Clarke Shield 33
Clarke Shield in Course of Transit 34
Shield in Use, No. 1 Section, Hobson’s Bay Main 35
Junction, C.I. Lining, and Brickwork 36
Spottiswoode Disaster, Air Lock, etc 37
Spottiswoode Disaster, Air Cock, etc 38
South Yarra Sewer, Iron Tube Crossing River 39
Penstocks to Oval Sew*ers, Details 40
Manholes with Penstocks 41
Plan and Details Hydraulic Lifting Cylinders 42
Iron Tube Crossing River Yarra 43
Tube under River Yarra, Repairs 44
North Yarra Main Sewer, in No. 6 Section 45
Hydraulic Shield 46
Dunlop Wooden Lining 47
Shield and Dunlop Wooden Lining 48
Dunlop’s Wooden Lining 49
Cast Iron Shell, North Yarra Main 50
Type of Shield, No. 5 North Yarra Main 51
Electric Lighting Installation, Spottiswoode ... 52
Wrought Iron Pipes and Bends 53
Six-Foot and Four-Foot Wrought Iron Pipes 54
Plan of Outfall Sewer 55
Main Outfall, Cross Sections 56
Main Outfall, Junction with Rising Mains 57
Main Outfall Aqueduct, Kororoit Creek 58
Main Outfall in Construction 59
Main Outfall, Werribee Aqueduct ... .. 60
Main Outfall, Werribee, as Completed 61
Main Outfall, Werribee, seen from up Stream 62
Main Outfall, Werribee; Turning First Sod 63
Main Outfall, Concrete in Construction 64
Open Outfall Completed in Concrete 65
Distributing Head Outfall Sewer 66
Distributing Head Sewerage Farm 67
Ploughing Engines 68
Ploughing Engines, with Kentish Plough 69
Oliver Plough 7°
Crosskill Roller 7*
Medium Cultivator 7 2
Plan Engine House, etc 73
Plan Pumping Station, etc 74
Roof over Engine House 75
Roof over Boiler House 7 6
Roof over Coal Bunkers 77
Details of Chimney, Spottiswoode 7 8
Pumping Station, Excavations 79
Pumping Station, Nine-Foot Sewer 80
Pumping Station, Foundations at Flood Level 81
Pumping Station, from S.E 82
Pumping Station, from N.E • 83
Pumping Engines (with Mr. Herbert, Designer) 84
Pumping Engines, Side View 85
Pumping Engines, Front View 86
Locality Plan (Mr. Champion's Paper) 87
Shield and Section (Mr. Champion’s Paper) 88
Sections Sewer (Mr. Champion’s Paper) 89
Sections Sewer (Mr. Champion’s Paper) .Y 9°
Sections Sewer (Mr. Champion’s Paper) 91
Shield (Mr. Dunlop's Paper) ••• 9 2
Wood Lining, Ram, Door, etc. (Mr. Dunlop’s Paper) 93




Melbourne’s Ever Flowing River.
Papei by W . 1 hwaites, Esq., Engineer-in-Chief to the Melbourne
Metropolitan Board of Works.
As it is now one hundred years since the British Government first
attempted to form a settlement in this portion of Southern Australia,
it would appear to be a fitting season to review the various incidents
leading up to, and affecting the rise and progress of Port Phillip,
and more especially the huge cities which have risen in sixty-eight years
on the banks of the ever-flowing river.
The discovery of Victoria arose out of the expedition fitted out
by the lords of the Admiralty for making observations in the Society
Islands on the transit of Venus. The Navy Board bought and fitted
out a cat-built barque of 368 tons burden for the expedition, which
was registered on the navy list as the “ Endeavour.” It was fitted
with six carriage guns of four pounds each, and eight swivel guns.
The ship's company consisted of 70 men, under the command of a
first lieutenant, who was to receive ss. a day. Lieutenant Cook was
appointed to the command. The interval of 135 years between that
time and the present has seen a vast transformation in the capacity
of the vessels leaving England for Australia. The difference between
the 368 tons of the “Endeavour” and the 10,000 tons of the “Mol-
davia, of the P. and O. service, is indicative of the vast transforma-
tion that has taken place in the commerce of the world, not only in
extent, but also in the method of propulsion of its ocean servants
from the white wings of the “ Endeavour ” to the throbbing, pulsating
18-knot engines of the “ Moldavia.”
Cook’s voyage commenced at Deptford on July 30th, 1768. Ply-
mouth was left in August, Madeira reached in September, and Rio
de Janeiro on November 13th. Leaving this port on December Bth,
the Society Islands were reached on April nth, 1769, or 254 days
after leaving Deptford.
The scientific work connected with the transit having been finished,
the “ Endeavour left Otaheiti on July 13th, 1769, commencing
what was for Australia the most momentous portion of the voyage.
Sailing southward, Cook fell in with the coast of New Zealand, which
part he called North Cape. After examining portion of the New
Zealand coast, Cook left Cape Farewell on March 31st, 1770, and
sailing westward discovered land on April 19th, 1770, 133 years ago.
This day, April 19th, 1770, was the most momentous day in the
civilised history of Victoria, as, on that morning at daybreak, Lieu-
tenant Zachary Hicks, the second in command of the “ Endeavour,’
who was on watch, saw eight leagues away “ ye land standing high.’
The entry in Lieutenant Cook’s official log is:—“Saw the land
making high, bearing from N.E. .by N. to W. by S.; distance off the
nearest shore, seven or eight leagues. Out all reefs and made sail.’
These words heralded Victoria’s connection with Great Britain. The
point was called Cape Hicks, and though there may be some doubt
about the exact point, it is probably Cape Everard, which is situated
about forty miles eastward of the mouth of the Snowy River, and
about forty-four miles westward of Cape Howe. Cook then pursued
his voyage northward along the eastern coast of Australia, naming
Cape Howe, Mount Dromedary, Cape Dromedary, Cape St. George,
Botany Bay, Port Jackson, Broken Bay, Port Stephens, Cape Hawke,
Smoky Cape, Point Danger, Moreton Bay, Sandy Cape, Bustard Bay,
Keppel Bay, Cape Capricorn, Cape Manyford, Cape Townsend, and
numerous other features up to Cape York. The voyage was then
continued through Torres Straits to the Dutch East India settlements.
The following is the entry in Cook’s log for August 22nd, 1770:
“ At 6, possession was taken of this country in his Majesty’s name,
and under his colours ; fired several volleys and cheered three times,
which was answered from the ship. This ceremony took place on
Possession Island, two miles off the western shore of Cape York
Peninsula. Thus did New Holland pass into the hands of the British
Empire.
James Marie Matre, on August 23rd, 1783, suggested to the
Government of the day that some compensation for the recent loss
of the American colonies might be obtained by colonising Australia,
as the country, spreading -through so -many dangers of latitude, em-
braced within itself the possibility of providing the products of many
lands, and that, with good management and a few settlers, in twenty
or thirty years a revolution in the whole system of European com-
merce might be produced, and England secure the monopoly of the
greater part, if not the whole, of the trade.
Two years afterwards Sir George Young suggested a plan for
colonisation, giving a rough outline of the many advantages which
should accrue from its adoption. The variety of climate rendering
it possible to raise the products of almost all of the known world.
“ With but a trifling expense and little industry, we may, in the
course of a few years, establish a commercial mart on one island,
comprehending all the articles of trade in itself, and every necessity
for shipping, not to mention the great probability of finding in such
an immense country metals of every kind. At a time when men are
alarmed at every idea of emigration, I wish not to add to their fears
by any attempt to depopulate the parent State. The settlers of New
South Wales are principally to be collected from the Friendly Islands
and China. All the people required from England are only a few
possessed of the useful arts and those comprised amongst the crews
of the ships in the service. The very expense Government is annually
put to for transporting and otherwise punishing the felons, together
with the facility of their return, are evils long and much lamented.
I here is an asylum open that will considerably reduce the first, and
forever prevent the latter.
This plan of Sir George Young’s, Admiral of the White, submitted
to Lord Sydney, the then Home Secretary, led to the first expedition
to New South Wales, under Governor Phillip, in 1787. The vessels
comprised in this first expedition were his Majesty’s ship “ Sirius,” and
the transports “Alexander,” “Charlotte,” “Scarborough,” “Friend-
ship,' “ Prince of Wales ” and “ Lady Penrhyr,” carrying 565 male
and 1 53 female convicts and ir children. To this fleet was also
attached the armed tender “ Supply.”
The fleet left England on May 20th, 1787, and reached Botany
Bay 243 days later, on January 18th, 1788, or 115 years ago. Governor
Phillip, writing to Lord Sydney in connection with Botany Bay,
stated:—“When I considered the bay being so very open, and the
probability of the swamps rendering the most eligible situation un-
healthy, I judged it advisable to examine Port Jackson. We got
into Port Jackson early in the afternoon, and had the satisfaction
of finding the finest harbour in the world, in which 1000 sail of the
line may ride in the most perfect security. The different coves were
examined with all possible expedition. I fixed on the one that had
the best spring of water, and in which the ships can anchor so close
to the shore that a very small quay may be made at which the largest
ships may unload. This cove, which I honoured with the name of
‘ Sydney,’ is about a quarter of a mile across the entrance, and half
a mile in length. On May 26th, 1788, all the transports had entered
Port Jackson, and were moored in Sydney Cove. A second fleet of
transports, comprising the “ Sunrise,” “ Neptune ” and “ Scarborough,”
arrived in June, 1790, with 1006 males and 89 females. Thus was
the populating of Australia by white persons commenced.
No further investigations were made along the southern coast until
Surgeon George Bass, leaving Port Jackson on Sunday, December
3rd, 1797, in a whaleboat, traversed the south-eastern coast line, dis-
covering the beautiful agricultural lands of the Shoalhaven district,
reaching Cape Howe on December 2nd, and Wilson’s Promontory on
January 2nd, 1798. After searching Wilson’s Promontory, Western
Port was entered on January Bth, where he remained until the 17th,
reaching Sydney again on the 25th.
The voyage of the young surgeon was reported to the Duke of
Portland by Governor Hunter on March Ist, 1798. Bass’s report on
the absence of harbours and rivers, difficulty of obtaining fresh
water, and absence of variety of animal and vegetable products, led
Governor Hunter to state: —“It will be sufficient to say that he
found in general a barren, unpromising country, with very few excep-
tions, and were it even better the absence of harbours would render
it less valuable.” The existence of the strait was clearly indicated
by the heavy, mountainous sea rolling in from the westward. On
this voyage Bass discovered seven escaped convicts on an island
near Western Port.
Lieutenant Matthew Flinders left Sydney on October 7th, 1798, in
the colonial sloop “ Norfolk,” reached Twofold Bay on the 9th,
passed Cape Howe on the 14th, and reached the Kent Group on the
17th, and entered the mouth of the Tamar on November 3rd, and
then traversing the northern and western coasts of Van Dieman’s
Land, entered Risdon Cove, Hobart, on Saturday, December 29th,
1798, and returned thence to Sydney, January nth, 1799, thus
proving that Van Dieman’s Land was an island.
The next step in advance in connection with the geography of Port
Phillip was made by Lieutenant Grant in the “ Lady Nelson,” a small
vessel built under the direction of Captain Schank for the purpose of
coasts and harbour surveying. This little vessel passed through Bass
Straits from the westward, reaching Sydney on December 16th, 1800.
On March Bth, 1801, Governor King instructed Lieutenant Grant
to make a detail survey of northern side of Bass Straits. Grant, in
his first voyage, named many of the coast features of Victoria—Cape
Banks, Mount Gambier, Mount Schank, Cape Northumberland, Cape
Bridgewater, Cape Nelson, Cape Solicitor (Sir William Grant), Port-
land Bay, Lady Juliana, Percy Islands, Cape Albany, Otway, Cape
Danger, Cape Patten, King’s Bay, Governor King’s Islands. The
name King’s Bay has disappeared; it applied to the bight outside
Port Phillip heads, and between Capes Otway and Schank. On his
second visit, Lieutenant Grant found that Western Point was a safe
and spacious harbour for any number of ships, and the soil to be
equal in goodness to that of Norfolk Island. Grant’s report led
Governor King to support Western Port as a proper place for a
settlement, the more especially as it was in the middle of the newlv-
discovered Bass Strait.


The “ Lady Nelson,” under Lieutenant Murray, was again commis-
sioned for survey work October 31st, 1801, and on this voyage Port
Phillip was discovered. Governor King, in his despatch of March
29th, 1802, informed the Duke of Portland that Lieutenant Murray
had discovered another very large and spacious harbour (Port Phillip)
within the straits. Commander Flinders, in the “ Investigator,"
examined the southern coast of Australia, from the Leeuwin, wheie
he arrived on December 6th, 1801, to Sydney, which he reached on
May 10th, 1802.
Referring to Port Phillip, blinders states that—“ In latitude 38
deg. 18 min. S., and longitude 144 deg. 48 min. E., I found an opening
of something less than two miles wide, which led me into No. 16, a
very spacious port, the termination of which was scarcely visible
from the hills, No. 16, Port Phillip, affording shelter, wood and
water; the port abounds with ducks and swans.’ In a letter to Sir
Jospeh Banks, Flinders informed him that “ Port Phillip is surrounded
by a fine country.” Governor King, May 21st, 1802, suggested the
propriety of a settlement being made at Port Phillip, a much more
eligible climate for growing wheat than Sydney. This was again
recommended on January Bth, and to Sir Joseph Banks on October
2nd. Governor King’s next step was to direct Charles Robbins to
embark on board his Majesty’s colonial vessel, “ Cumberland,” on
special service in the southern land. Mr. Charles Grimes, acting
surveyor-general, a surgeon, a gardener, and three marines of H.M.S.
“ Buffalo ”; in all seventeen persons, including the crew, embarked
on this expedition. Instructions were given to make “ a most minute
investigation of that most spacious harbour, the unsurveyed portions
of which vou will determine as well as possible, noticing the depth
of water and shoals throughout.” The “ Cumberland ” sailed from
Svdnev on Tuesday, November 22nd, 1802, and after examining
the Kent Group on Thursday, January 20th, Port Phillip Heads were
entered, and Friday anchor was dropped at Port King (Sorrento),
where, having landed, Mr. Robbins, Mr. Grimes, and James Fleming
walked across the peninsula, to what is now known as London
Bridge. The whole of the eastern shore of the bay was surveyed, and
on Wednesday, February 2nd, 1803, the party came to a large river—
“ The Elver-Flowing Yarra ”
James Fleming’s diary describes the first boating expedition of
civilised man up the Yarra:—“Went up it about a mile, when we
turned back and waited for the boat to take us aboard. The ground
is swampy on one side, and high on the other. Saw many swans,
pelicans and ducks. Thursday, 3rd, at six o’clock, the captain, Mr.
Grimes, and five seamen went in the boat up the great river. At
between two and three miles it divided into two; we took the ieft
hand stream at half-past eight o’clock.” This was the Saltwater
River, which was followed up until Solomon’s Ford was reached.
Friday, 4th. —“Started at six, and came to the branch we passed
before at the entrance; the land swampy; at few miles up we found
it excellent water, where we saw a little hill, and landed. Ine time
dinner was getting ready (the first civilised dinner in Melbourne),
Messrs. Robbins, Grimes and self went on the hill (Batman’s Hill, long
since levelled down to form the Spencer-street railway yard), when
we saw the lagoon, seen from the hill where we first landed. It is a
large swamp; between two rivers fine grass, fit to mow ; not a bush
on it.” Monday, 7th. —“After having breakfasted at Batman’s Hill,
the party went up the river to Gardiner’s Creek, where they dined,
and saw some of the natives, thence proceeded onward up the
river, and stopped the night somewhere in present Collingwood.”
Tuesday, Bth.—“ Pioceeded up the river, came to a fall, where we
could not get the boat over. A little above the fall is a small
rsland. We went inland a little way. We were not more than half
a mile from the river. Returned back and crossed a neck of land
300 paces over, whilst the boat went round.” This is the first
description of the narrow neck between the river near Johnston-street
bridge written 100 years ago. The following is Fleming’s note about
the “ Elver Eflowing River ” : —“ The most eligible place for a settle-
ment that I have seen is on the Freshwater River. In several places
there are small tracts of good land, but they are without wood and
water. I have every reason to think that there is not often so great
a scarcity of water as at present from the appearance of the herbage.
The country in general is excellent pasture, and thin of timber,
which is mostly low and crooked. In most places there is fine clay
for bricks, and abundance of stone. I am of opinion that the timber
is better, both in quality and size, further up the country, as I saw
'Om* that is called ash on the banks of the Freshwater River, and
the hills appeared to be clothed with wood. There is great plentv
of fish in Port King. The country generally is newly burnt.” The
Cumberland returned to Sydney on March 7th? 1803. Surveyor
Grimes prepared a very good chart of Port Phillip Bay from his
survey. As the result of this survey, Governor King informed Lord
Hobart that ‘ The officer of the ‘ Buffalo,’ the surveyor, the gar-
dener, etc., returned from their survey of King Island and Port Phillip
with no very promising account of either being found an eligible place
for a large agricultural settlement. It now remains how far it would
be advisable to make a settlement at Port Phillip. From its being
set at the western extremity of the entrance to the straits, it may be
advisable some years hence, and, indeed, absolutely necessary.” 'Ap-
parently Governor King's previous recommendations brought about
the first attempted settlement of Port Phillip, for we find that on
December 24th, 1812, Daniel Collins submitted to Under Secretary
Subivan a list of articles indispensably requisite in forming the new
settlement at Port Phillip Bay. Lord Hobart, on January 15th, 1803,
informed the Admiralty that the “ Calcutta ” was commissioned to
carry convicts under sentence of transportation to Port Phillip.
The “ Calcutta” entered Port Phillip Heads on October 9th, 1803
—xoo years ago. Lieutenant-Governor Collins established his head-
quarters at Sullivan s Bay (Sorrento). The “ Calcutta was under
the command of Capta.n Woodriff; she was accompanied by the
Ocean ” store ship. In reporting his arrival and subsequent investi-
gations to Governor King, Lieutenant-Governor Collins stated that
the difficulty of obtaining fresh water, and the unfavourable opinion
of the soil formed from its appearance were urged against its settle-
ment, and further, “ The bay itself, when viewed in a commercial
tight, is wholly unfit for a colonial establishment, being situated in
a deep and dangerous bight between Cape Albany, Otway and Point
Schank, to enter which must ever require a well-manned and well-
found ship, a leading wind, and a certain time of the tide.” In his
report to Lord Hobart the Lieutenant-Governor states: —“I regret
that I have not a better report to make to your lordship of the
probable success of an expedition equipped under your lordship's
auspices with a liberality that inspired everyone concerned in the
undertaking with the most sanguine hopes of success. You may rest
assured that what is possible shall be done by me to ensure it, if rt
is Governor King’s opinion that I am to remain here. I have sug-
gested to that gentleman, in a private letter which I wrote him, that
Port Dalrymple, on the northern side of Van Dieman’s Land, appears
to possess these requisites for a settlement in which this very exten-
sive harbour is so wholly deficient. Every day’s experience convinces
me that it cannot, nor ever will, be resorted to by specula t ive men.
The boat that I sent to Port Jackson was three days lying at the
mouth of the harbour before she could get out, owing to a swell
occasioned by the wind meeting the strong tide of ebb. A ship
would, undoubtedly, meet with less difficulty, but she must go out
at the top of the tide, and with a leading wind, which is not to be
met with every day. When all the disadvantages attendim this bay
are publicly known, it cannot be supposed that commerc, 1 people
will be very desirous of visiting Port Phillip.” On November 26th,
1803, Governor King wrote to Lieutenant-Governor Collins that, “ as
it appears, as well from Mr. Grimes’ and Mr. Robbins’ surveys as by
your report, that Port Phillip is totally unfit in every point of view
to remain at without subjecting the Crown to the certain expensive
prospects of the soil not being able to raise anything for the support
of the settlement, unless you should have made any further observa-
tions to encourage you to stop there. Perhaps the upper part of the
bay has escaped your notice, as that is the only part Mr. Grimes and
those that were with him speak the least favourably of. From this
circumstance, I shall presume that it would appear to you that remov-
ing from there will be the most advisable for the interests of his
Majesty’s service.” Governor King left the choice of removal to
either Port Dalrymple or the Derwent. Lieutenant-Governor Collins
took no more trouble to investigate the head of Port Phillip, but
decided to remove the settlement to the Dement. On January 27th,
1804, the whole number of prisoners embarked on the “ Ocean,” left
Port Phillip, and reached Frederick Henry Bay, Van Dieman’s Land,
February 12th, 1804. Thus the first expedition to settle Port Phillip
was a failure. The actual settlement was delayed thirty-two years,
but Victoria escaped being a convict settlement. Collins’s name is
retained in the name of Melbourne’s leading street, and must always
remind the Victorians of the good he did to this State by not pro-
perty investigating Melbourne’s ever-flowing river, thus preventing its
being turned into a human rubbish-heap, as three of the other colonies
were, by Great Britain.
A long period elapsed before any further attempt at settling Port
Phillip was made. Mr. Oxley, the Surveyor-General of New South
Wales,- after his visits to the western plain of New South Wales,
declared that: —“ We had demonstrated beyond a doubt that no river
could fall into the sea between Cape Otway and Spencer’s Gulf, at
least none deriving their waters from the eastern coast, and that the
country south of the parallel of 34 degrees, and west of 147 degrees
30 minutes, was uninhabitable, and useless for the purpose of civi-
lised life.” This statement simply meant that the whole of Victoria
and Riverina was an absolute desert. Notwithstanding this pessimistic
statement, two New South Wales settlers, Hume and Novell, deter-
mined to explore the southern territory. Leaving Mr. Hume’s station
on October 17th, 1824, the last settlement towards Port Phillip, they
passed through Yass on the 19th, and reached the Murrumbidgee,
which was then impassable through floods, and as the waters were
not subsiding, they crossed by forming the body of a cart into a punt.
On November 16th the party arrived suddenly on a large river
which was called the Hume, afterwards proved to be the head of the
Murray. Ihe river was difficult to cross, and after ascending the
river for about twenty miles, they succeeded in ferrying themselves
over by means of a temporary boat formed of wickerwork and tar-
paulins.


On November 24th they reached a river, which they called the
Ovens, after Major Ovens, the private secretary of Sir Thomas
Brisbane.
On December 3rd they discovered the Goulburn River, and on
the 9th reached the mountain ranges, which they attempted to cross,
but through the scrub and rocks presenting an almost impassable
barrier, and as they had hoped to see the ocean when they gained
the top, they caked it Mount Disappointment. This huge mass of
granite, covered with dense vegetation, which is even now difficult to
exploration, except with a tomahawk, forms one of the principal
sources of the Metropolitan water supply system. As the party
was not able to cross, they made a long detour, crossing the Dividing
Range near Kilmore, ultimately reaching Port Phillip Bay, near
Geelong. The discoveries of this journey completely disproved Sur-
veyor-General Oxley’s opinion, but the reports of Hume and Novell
were received in Sydney with very mixed feelings. One newspaper,
the “Australian,” published in January, 1820, extolled the country
to the skies; the editor quite expected to see weekly steam packets
plying between Western Port and Port Dalrymple. Hume and Novel]
differed as to whether the sea they had reached was Port Phillip or
Western Port, Hume deciding for Port Phillip, Novell for Western
Port. Hume’s decision was the correct one. On the other hand, the
“ Sydney Gazette,” of February 27th, 1828, declared that Hume and
Novell might have passed some fertile plains, but that they en-
countered the river spoken of, as well as the beautiffil tract of
country near Western Port, must be doubted, whilst the united
authorities of Captain Murray, Barallier and Tuckey go to establish
the contrary opinion, in which they are supported bv the Surveyor-
General, who most laboriously investigated Western Port as far back
as 1805. All idea of ever fixing a settlement at Western Port must
be abandoned for at least another century.
An expedition, under Captain Wetherall, of H.M.S. “ Fly,” set out
from Sydney to settle at Western Port, but was abandoned in March,
1828, guided by Novell, who persisted in his mistake that the sea
he had reached in his previous journey was Western Port.
A new era commenced in T 827, w r hen Messrs. Gellibrand and
Bateman, of Launceston, petitioned Governor-General Darling for a
grant of land at Western Port, proportionately to the property thev
intended to embark, stating, “ We propose to ship from this place
1500 to 2000 sheep, 30 head of superior cows, oxen, horses, etc.,” to
the value of or the whole to be under the personal
superintendence of Mr. Bateman. This request was refused.
The earliest settler known to history in Port Phillip was Mr.
William Dutton, who, after going to Portland Bay as a whaler, ulti-
mately settled there by erecting a house and forming a garden in
July, 1829.
The next settlers were the Messrs. Henty, who established the
first permanent settlement at Portland Bay, on November 19th, 1834,
about sixty-four years after Lieutenant Cook discovered Victoria, and
only seventy-one years ago. The attention of the settlers at Port
Dalrymple (Launceston) was now directed to Port Phillip, and in
the year 1835 a number of persons associated themselves together to
co-operate with Bateman in his colonisation scheme. Amongst these
were James Simpson, J. T. Gellibrand, Charles Swanston, George
Mercer, John Hilderwedge, T. Bannister, J. and W. Robertson, J.
Sinclair, J. T. Cellicott, A. Cotterill, W. G. Lams and M. Conelly.
These men played greater parts in the early settlement of Port
Phillip, many of them becoming wealthy landed proprietors in subse-
quent years. Serious opposition was given by the New r South Wales
Government to this Association, which was favoured by Lieutenant-
Governor Arthur, of Van Dieman’s Land. Even when the home
authorities endeavoured to favour the Van Dieman’s Land Associa-
tion, the Sydney rulers persisted in opposition. This was looked
upon at the time as a blow struck at Hobart. The Association ar-
ranged that Batman should cross over to Port Phillip to ascertain
the general characteristics and capabilities of Port Phillip as a
grazing and agricultural district.
On Friday, May 29th, the “ Rebecca, a vessel of 30 tons, wfith
John Batman on board, entered Port Phillip Heads. On Sunday,
June 7th, 1835, after exploring the western shores of the bav. the
party arrived at the junction of the rivers at the head of the bay.
On Monday, June Bth, the entry in Batmans journal is:—“ The wind
foul this morning for Indented Heads. We tried, but we could not
get up the river. The boat went up the larger river I have spoken
of, which comes from the east, and I am glad to state that about
six miles up found the river all good water and very deep. This will
be the place for the village. Batman made a very extensive inves-
tigation of the country round the southern and western sides of Port
Phillip and to the north and west of Melbourne. While traversing
the country to the north of Melbourne, he induced the native chiefs
to sign a deed, ceding to him large tracts of land around the present
sites of Melbourne and Geelong. This celebrated deed was signed
on the banks of the Merri Creek, near the present end of the Fitzrov
tram line, on June nth, 1838. Batman, after leaving a portion of
his partv at Indented Heads, returned to the Tamar on June irth,
1838, when his glowing account ot the country he had traversed ex-
cited intense interest amongst the Van Dieman’s Land settlers.
Another leading figure in the early settlement of the valley of the
ever-flowing river was John Pascoe Fawkner, who was born in London
in 1792, and accompanied his parents out to Port Phillip in 1803 m
the “ Calcutta.” His parents went over to Hobart with Lieutenant-
Governor Colhns, whence Fawkner removed to Launceston in 1819.
In April, 1835, Fawkner purchased the “ Enterprise,” a vessel of 55
tons, to assist him in his idea of founding a settlement in Port
Phillip. Ihe “ Enterprise” was first despatched to Western Port, to
thoroughly examine its possibilities, and if found unfavourable she was
to proceed to the Port Phillip, to the river known to exist at its head.
Fawkner’s party consisted of Messrs. J. P. Fawkner, W. Jackson,
George Evans, Robert Hay Moor, and John Lancy. James Gilbert,
a blacksmith, and his wife were taken over, together with two servants,
Charles Wise and Thomas Morgan. Fawkner did not cross through
sea sickness, but the party proceeded, after landing him at George-
town, examined Western Port, but finding no suitable place for a
settlement, entered Port Phillip, followed up the eastern channel, and
came to anchor in Nelson’s Bay on August 20th, TB3B. Mr. Fawkner
thus describes the founding of Melbourne in the “ Digger’s Advo-
cate ” of 1853: —“No time had been lost in procuring provisions, a
good whale boat and its fittings, and all such things as J. P. Fawkner
thought might be useful or required in a place which few vessels
visited. He particularly furnished common, coarse food and clothing,
together with blankets and tomahawks, knives and handkerchiefs
suitable for the aborigines, which were afterwards found very useful;
horses and ploughs, grain to sow, garden seeds and plants, and very
large and varied assortment of fruit trees, 2500 in number, were
shipped on board, and a stock of provisions to last some months;
part of the materials of a house and most of the comforts required
in civilised life.
“ On passing Shortland Bluff a whaleboat came off and asked the
news, where from, where to, and told our people that Mr. John
Batman, King of Port Phillip, had bought all the land, and desired
all trespassers to keep aloof.
“ On Thursday, the 20th, the “ Enterprise ” came to anchor in Port
Phillip Bay, just clear of the bar upon the channel to the Yarra
Yarra, and the new colonists, Messrs. R. H. Moor, George Evans, W.
Jackson, and Captain Lancy, putting some provender into the five-
oared whaleboat bought for the occasion on Friday, August 21st,
pushed off with two of the workmen to explore the inlet.”
With three cheers from the crew for success to the adventurers, they
pushed off, and after once or twice touching on the mud flats, they
found plenty of water, and pushed on joyfully and thoughtlessly past
the junction of the Yarra Yarra without much notice, and went up
the direct course, named by them the Saltwater River, because they
could not get up it far enough to find the stream fresh, owing to the
vast number of fallen trees lying in the water, which so obstructed
the navigation that, after much labour, they landed, and could not
discover the fresh water, the place that they landed at not allowing
them to see the course of the stream. They returned to the vessel
exhausted and fretful, being most of the day without water to drink,
they having on all former occasions found plenty of that element
on the shore.
The next day they took water as well as food, and pushed up the
Yarra Yarra, having noticed the opening thereto on their return from
the Saltwater stream, and after about an hour and a quarter’s pull
reached with joy the basin at Melbourne, and were delighted—-in fact,
half wild with exultation —at the beauty of the country. The velvet-
like grassy carpet, decked with flowers of most lovely hues, most
liberally spread over the land, the fresh water, the fine lowlands and
lovely knolls around the lagoons, on the flats and swamps, the flocks
innumerable of teal, ducks, geese and swans, and minor wild fowl
illed them with joy.
They all with one voice agreed that this was the place for the
settlement, and resolved to have the vessel brought up if possible,
he goods, stores, etc., landed, and a commencement of a town forth-
vith made.
They took a stand upon what was subsequently called Batman’s
rtul, and passed some hours there and thereabout enjoying the novei
and extraordinary view before them.
They were so pleased with the country that they made it night
before they returned to the vessel, which was lying opposite Williams-
own (that now is), near the bar entrance to the Yarra Yarra River.
Captain Hunter having been diligently employed these two days with
his crew, sounding his way up, it took some time to provide poles
and fix them on the various shoals in the stream now marked by
large buoys and strong beacons (but then markless), and, all this ac-
complished, the vessel w r as with much trouble got up to the so-called
junction, and the next day a fair wind drove the lucky “ Enterprise ”
up into the basin at Melbourne, the captain reporting three fathoms
all the way up, and in one part of the basin 7T fathoms of water.


No time was lost, though it was Sunday, in getting the vessel close
to the bank, at the very spot now occupied by the old shed of the
Customs Department, and some timber had to be cut from the over-
hanging trees to allow the vessel to lie alongside the bank. From a
plank the people landed, and the horses, having been nearly six
weeks aboard, were hoisted out and landed, very much to their satis-
faction, the fine young green grass and flowering herbage appearing
to gratify their palates, and their gambols evincing their delight at
being released from ship board, with its unsteady evils and close
confinement.
The fine fertile fields, the open, flowery grass knolls and downs,
and the indescribable charm which the country at first sight around
Melbourne displayed, riveted almost every visitor’s attention, until
man’s hand had despoiled nature of his pristine features.
Thus Mr. Fawkner described the landing of his party on land
which only 68 years afterwards is covered and surrounded b\ Mel-
bourne and the far-reaching cities of South Melbourne, St, Ivi a
Prahran, Richmond, Hawthorn, Colling wood, Fitzroy and North
Melbourne and their own suburbs, with their 500,000 inhabitants.
One of the most wonderful transformation scenes of modem history.
A few days after the landing Mr. Wedge, who belonged to Batman’s
party, having resigned his position of Assistant Surveyor-General of
Van Dieman’s Land to join the association, was astonished to find
Fawkner’s party landed and in possession of the ground.
Wedge reached Port Phillip on August 7th, 1838, and on tne 27th,
three days before Fawkner’s party landed, started from Nileshd
Heads for the head of Port Phillip to reach the Freshwater River,
but, his whaleboat proving leaky, he started to prosecute the journey
on foot. On August 30th he crossed the Werribee near the site of
the present Metropolitan Farm, and on September Ist reached the
junction of the rivers, arriving next day on the hills on which Mel-
bourne is now built.
What was his astonishment on looking down into the basin of the
river below him to see the “ Enterprise ” securely moored to the
shore, and Fawkner’s party camped on the land which Batman had
obtained by deed from the native chiefs.
Wedge, in the name of his association, warned the party off as
trespassers, much to their amusement, for they had come to stay,
and held the land against all-comers.
Wedge named the river the Yarra Yarra (Flowing, Flowing), and
then commenced this civilised history of this city’s ever-flowing
river.
The Yarra Yarra,
The 30th August, 1835, must be ever memorable in the history of
the Yarra and the magnificent cities which have grown up during the
last 69 years on its banks, for on that day the first white settlers
took up their permanent residence on the flanks of its western hill,
although 32 years before Surveyor Grimes and his party landed on
the site on their exploratory trip up the river, to what is now known
at Dight’s Falls, passing the sites of the great cities now known as
South Melbourne, Melbourne, Richmond and Collingwood.
“In the Scrub.”
Let us now consider what kind of assistance the “ Ever-Flowing ”
Yarra has afforded towards, and can still provide for, the nurture of
the centre of population, which, from such small beginnings in 1835,
has grown up upon its banks.
The early explorers always mistook the Saltwater for the main
river, as the course was more direct than that of the Yarra, which
appeared to be the smaller river of the two, and to join the Saltwater
merely as a branch from the east.
The watershed of the Yarra covers 1547 square miles, while that
of the Saltwater only contains 554; the united rivers entering
Hobson’s Bay thus drain 2101 square miles of country, or about one-
third the area of Yorkshire, and slightly larger than that of Lan-
cashire. The watershed is larger than that of the Clyde, Tweed or
Corrib, but smaller than the Tay or Mersey, about half the area of
the Trent or Severn, two-fifths of the Thames, and one-third that of
the Shannon.
Its area, however, only covers one-fortieth of the area of the State
of Victoria.
The Yarra rises near the north-western flank of Mount Baw Baw,
at a point about 58 miles in a direct line from its mouth, but about
122 miles, if the meanderings of the river course are followed. Its
On the Hillside.
largest tributary is the Saltwater; the valleys of the Woori \ allock,
the Plenty, Merri and Diamond Creeks cover over ioo square miles
each, while the Watts, Olinda, O’Shanassey, Moonee Ponds, and
Little Yarra vary between ioo and 50 square miles.
Out of the 2101 square miles of watershed, 1483 lie to the east
of Melbourne, and 618 to the west.
Every river towards the east is always fresh, except the Darebin
and Merri Creeks, while the rivers to the west of the Plenty —the
Darebin, the Merri, the Moonee Ponds and Saltwater, in dry summers
become very brackish.
This division of the waters into fresh and salt, coincides almost
identically with the alteration of geological surroundings, for to the
east of the Plenty the rock formation is chiefly clay and schist of the
Silurian period, with outcrops of older trappean rocks, while to the
west the older rocks are covered with sheets of modern volcanic
origin, extending from the twenty odd points of eruption north and
north-west of the metropolis.
Boundaries of the Watershed.
The northern boundary of the watershed is very clearly defined,
commencing at Bullengarook, about 34 miles north-west of Melbourne,
at a height of about 2000 feet, thence extending easterly back to the


THE GREAT FLOOD OF 1891.
RIVER IMPROVEMENTS SINCE THE GREAT FLOOD.


STREET SCENE IN THE GREAT FLOOD OF 1891.


spurs from Baw Baw. The highest points in the northern watershed
are Mount Macedon, 3220 feet; Mount Disappointment, 2637 feet;
Mount St. Leonard, 3304 feet; Mount Monda, 2974 feet; Mount
Strickland, 4000 feet; and Mount Baw Baw, 5269 feet.
Mount Juliet, 3651 ; and Donna Buang, 4080 feet; are situated on
spurs from the main watershed.
These Yarra mountains compare very favourably in height with the
classical mountains of Great Britain.
Baw Baw is higher than Ben Nevis, the highest mountain in Great
Britain. Mount Juliet, Mount Strickland, and Donna Buang, opposite
Warburton, are higher than Snowden, the highest mountain in Wales;
while Mount Macedon is higher than Scafell, the highest mountain in
England.
The lowest saddles in the northern divide are the North-Eastern
Railway crossing, at Wallen, 1150 feet; saddle near Forbes, 1200
feet; Steel’s Creek, 1215 feet; over which Professor Gregory con-
siders that the ancient river ran from the true divide north of the
present watershed line, through the Woori Yallock Creek, to the
Koo-wee-rup Swamp. The Bendigo railway line crosses the saddle
at a height of about 1920 feet.
The southern watershed runs, at a much lower altitude, towards
the south-west, falling to between 800 and 900 feet at the head of
the Woori Yallock Creek, rising in the Dandenongs to 1900 or 2000
feet, and then dropping to 370 feet on the saddle between the Olinda
and Dandenong Creeks.
The highest point between Lilydale and Melbourne is just north
of Croydon station, which reaches 640 feet, or 40 feet above the bv-
wash of Yan Yean Reservoir.
Near Mitcham railway station there is a point rising to 51 1 feet,
or 94 feet above the Maroondah Weir, and 89 feet below Yan Yean
by-wash.
From Mitcham the southern divide gradually drops until it reaches
the Bay, at St. Kilda.
"A Freshet.”
The width of the Yarra valley in a due northerly and southerly
direction, at Melbourne, is 32 miles; at Lilydale 19 miles, widening
to 28 miles at Launching Place, reducing to 19 miles at Big Pat’s
Creek, and 17 miles at Reefton, from which point the northern and
southern divides gradually approach and meet near Baw Baw.
The configuration of the valley is similar to a wedge, open to
the west, and with the northern side higher than the southern ; the
result of this is that the rain which, in the neighbourhood of Mel-
bourne, comes chiefly from the south-west, gradually increases in
average annual fall from west to east.
Rainfall Average.
Taking the recorded annual averages we find, west of Melbourne,
rainfalls of only 20 inches. Going northwards along the Saltwater
River valley, a gradual increase is found: Bacchus Marsh, 20.77;
Keilor, 21.00; Melton, 21.21; Sunbury, 23.11; Riddell’s Creek,
27.84; Romsey, 28.01; Lancefield, 28.79; and Gisborne, 30.67. The
maximum is attained at Upper Macedon, which yields 36.22.
Commencing again at Altona Bay, west of Williamstown, with
19.33, the averages increase thus: Prahran, 24.45; Brighton, 24.94;
Melbourne Observatory, 25.55 1 Toorak, 25.67; Essendon, 25.76;
Caulfield, 27.11; Camberwell, 27.61; Brighton—Picnic Point, 28.29;
Box Hill, 28.48; Kew, 28.65 ; Mordialloc, 30.68; Dandenong, 31.48;
Blackburn, 32.39; Surrey Hills, 32.79.
These figures show a decided average annual increase from west
to east.
To the northward of Melbourne, while the Yan Yean Reservoir
only gives 24.70, Toorourrong Reservoir, at the head of the Plenty
River, and close under Mount Disappointment, gives 30.72, which is
higher than the rainfall of either Romsey, Lancefield or Gisborne, but
less than Healesville, 34.42.
As the narrower portions of the valley are reached, the rainfall
rapidly increases, ranging thus: Warrandyte, 35.07; Corranderrk,
37.99; Maroondah Weir, 45.95; and at Toolangi, on the watershed
line, 55.82.
The main Yarra valley gives still heavier results: Gembrook,
47.16; Little Yarra, 50.98; Warburton, 52.51; and Beenak, 62.19.
The rainfall of the Yarra varies from 1.61 to 5.18 feet per annum.
A rainfall of 5.18 feet is a very high one, and only occurs in
England, in the mountains of Lancashire,, Westmoreland and Cumber-
land; and at the head of the Forth and Clyde, in Scotland; and in
the mountains of Wales.
The Thames valley itself varies from 15.90 to 31.20 inches, whereas
the Yarra valley varies from 19.33 to 62.19.
These comparatively heavy rainfalls in the eastern basin of the
Yarra watershed render it an excellent water catchment area, and
justifies the name of “ Ever Flowing.”
Capacity of the Water Supply.
From investigations carried out by the Metropolitan Board, there
would be no difficulty in supplying a metropolis of 2,000,000 in-
habitants on the same scale as at present, without apparently inter-
fering With the ordinary flow of the river.
The lowest year of rainfall recorded since 1840 was 1898, when
only 15.94 inches fell. Other low years below 20 inches have been:
15.94 in 1865, 17.04 in 1895, 18.27 in 1868, 19.28 in 1878, and 19.42
in 1888.
Even during the driest portions of the summer of 1898, the average
monthly gaugings at Warrandyte never fell below 4400 cubic feet
per minute.
Compared with other rivers of the State, leaving out
ol account the Gippsland rivers, the following results
have been obtained by the Victorian Water Supply
Department in dry summer months •
Cubic Feet
Glenelg, Wimmera and Avoca, cease running. Per Minute.
Loddon at Laanecoorie, and King at Wangaratta, yield xo
Broken River at Goorambat „ 90
Loddon at Bridgewater „ 100
Kiewa at Kiewa „ 200
Gomburn at Murchison „ 2,500
Carra at Warrandyte „ 4,400
Mitta Mitta at Tallangatta „ 5,40°
Murray River at Jinjellic „ 15,600
„ ~ Albury „ 20,000
„ „ Echuca „ 27,840
„ „ Mildura „ 28,300
The Varra gaugings give better results than any river of Victoria,
as far as minimum flow is concerned, except the Mitta Mitta and those
of Gippsland.
Compared with the Mitta Mitta, at Tallangatta, the Yarra, at
Warrandyte, the figures are as follow :
Mitta Mitta. Yarra.
Maximum total annual discharge, c. ft. 81,261,000,000 42,719,000,000
Minimum „ „ „ „ 32,517,000,000 16,908,000,000
Watershed areas, square miles 1,990 930
As the Yarra watershed is half that of the Mitta Mitta, the mini-
mum and maximum total discharges are very similar, but the minimum
daily discharge is more favourable to the Yarra than the Mitta Mitta.
Comparing the Goulbum, at Murchison, with the Yarra, at War-
randyte, the results are :
Goulburn. Yarra.
Watershed area, square miles 3,966 930
Maximum annual discharge, c. ft. 167,625,000,000 42,719,000,000
Minimum „ „ „ 50,963,000,000 16,908,000,000
Min. monthly discharge c. ft. per min. 6,510 8,100
Minimum daily „ „ 2,500 4,4°°
Average „ „ „ 180,000 54,000
Greatest „ „ „ 1,423,520 1,330,000
RATIOS.
Goulbum. Yarra.
Watersheds 100 23^
Maximum annual discharge 100 25^
Average daily discharge 100 30
Average annual discharge 100 32
Minimum annual discharge 100 33
Maximum daily discharge 100 93
Maximum monthly discharge ... 100 125
Minimum daily discharge 100 176


These ratios are all in favour of the Yarra watershed, as com-
pared with the Goulburn, and indicate how valuable the \arra is as a
source 1 of continuous water supply, and how suitable is its valley for
the cradle of a huge metropolis.
Source of the Yarra.
Professor Kernot has thus described the source of the Yarra to
me: —*
“ The Yarra does not rise in Mount Baw Baw itself, according
to my observations, and I have been there four or five times. A range
runs for a few miles west from Baw Baw, dividing the Thomson from
the Tangil. It there bifurcates, one part going north-east to the main
divide, and the other west, to the Dandenongs. In the bifurcation
the Yarra rises at an altitude of about 3500 feet, in two nearly equal
branches. These flow for about four miles, when they come to a great
drop, down which the northern branch descends fully 1000 feet in a
horizontal distance of between one and two miles, while the southern
does the same in a horizontal distance of about a quarter of a mile,
forming a notable piece of scenery. By my aneroid this great Yarra
Fall had its top about 3000 feet, and its foot about 2000 feet above
sea level.”
This great Yarra Fall is capable of producing very valuable power
in the future, and should be known as Kernot Falls.
The course of the Yarra is thence almost due west, as far as
Donovan’s Creek, where it is nearly 1000 feet above the sea, and has
a watershed of 81 square miles.
Up to this point the Yarra valley should be set apart as a National
Park, to be held in trust by the State for the purpose of providing
water for the metropolis whenever it may be required.
From Donovan’s Creek to Woori Yallock, it runs south-westerly,
the valley line being 800 feet high at McMahon s Creek, with a
watershed of 15 1 square miles, flowing past Warburton, where it is
only about 480 feet above the sea, with a gathering ground of 300
square miles. The valley here becomes very narrow, being hemmed
in between the lofty Donna Buang on the north, and the hills of old
Warburton on the south.
Soon after leaving Warburton the valley widens out on the south,
as between this point and Launching Place it is joined by the Little
Y arra.
At Launching Place the river drops to a level of 300 feet, and the
watershed increases to 400 miles.
Up to this point the river has a magnificent average annual rainfall
of over 50 inches.
After reaching Worri Yallock, the river runs west by north for
about eight miles, through the beautiful Yarra Flats, passing through
Killara and Dairy, being joined by the Corranderrk and Watts Rivers
from the east. At the junction with the latter river the valley has
fallen to 237 feet, with a watershed of 600 square miles.
This junction is lower than Surrey Hills, and all other stations on
the Lilydale line, as far as Lilydale itself, being only 32 feet higher
than Camberwell, and this at a point over 30 miles in a direct line
from the Melbourne General Post Office.
The river then turns abruptly to the westward, and travels south-
westerly from Yarra Glen to Collingwood. Soon after leaving the
Glen it enters the more or less narrow gorge extending through
Warrandyte to Templestowe, after which the basin widens out again
in the Heidelberg and Kew flats.
At Warrandyte the level has fallen to 134 feet, at Deep Creek
64 feet, ultimately dropping to 18 feet at the Dight’s Fall Weir,
Between this and Johnston-street Bridge, there is a fall of 14 to
15 feet, while below the bridge the river is subject to tidal in-
fluences.
The valley of the Watts, at the Maroondah Weir, is only 417 feet
above the sea, so that the hill near the Mitcham station is 94 feet
higher, as well as higher than the Yarra at Warburton, 27 miles away
as the crow flies.
I his characteristic of the watershed —namely, the comparatively
small gradient of the river channel—renders the use of the Yarra
waters, for water-power purposes, a comparatively expensive matter,
as the available falls are small, and although the river never ceases
running, the summer discharges are low. In fact, more water is used
on a hot summer’s day in the metropolis than passes daily down the
river in a dry summer, towards the sea, at Warrandyte.
Nevertheless, the canalisation of the river up to Warburton would
not be a difficult engineering work, and very considerable water power
can be obtained at Dight’s Falls, Fairfield, Wonga Park, and War-
randvte, on the lower river, and in several places above Warburton,
on the upper river, especially at the Kernot Falls.
A Necessary Reserve.
T The people of Melbourne should insist on the valley of the extreme
L pper \ arra, covering 8.1 square miles, as well as that of the
O Shanassey, embracing 59 square miles, or 140 square miles alto-
gether, being permanently reserved for water supply purposes of the
metropolitan area.
These areas should be permanently reserved from public occupa-
tion, and should be held in trust by the State for the future use of the
Melbourne people. In the meantime they should be used as forest
reserves or proclaimed National Parks, for the recreation of the
people of the State, under proper regulations.
That 140 square miles —or 240 square miles, including existing
reserves —out of 2000 square miles of the Yarra Valley, or the 87,900
square miles of the State, should be set apart for an area which holds
over 40 per cent, of the inhabitants of the colony, as well as of its
annual value, is by no means an unreasonable request to make.
Such are the general characteristics, as now known, of the river
upon which, that Sunday morning, 69 years ago, Fawkner’s party first
started a permanent settlement.
The ‘ Elver Flowing ” river is capable of rendering almost un-
limited service to the metropolis in providing for the comfort, health
and recreation of the magnificent city now located on its banks.
The Settlement of Port Phillip.
It is a matter of very great interest to trace out the circumstances
which finally led up to the settlement of Port Phillip.
To the Port Phillip Association belongs the credit of the initial
step in pioneering.
Mr. Sams, Sheriff of Launceston, thus describes the origin, in an
account forwarded to Mr. J. Bonwick, the author of the “ Settlement
of Port Phillip ” : —•
“ There had been an ascent of Ben Lomond, near Mr. Batman’s
house. On that occasion the promoter of this pleasant excursion
was taken suddenly ill on the side of the mount. The attack passed
off, and the two friends spent the evening at the camp fire.
“ It was then,” said Mr. Sams, “ that I first heard Port Phillip
spoken of as a desirable place for settlement, Batman telling me
when he was in Sydney he had heard from a schoolfellow, Hamilton
Hume, who, with Captain Hovell, had explored the neighbourhood of
Port Phillip, that the country there was of the finest description, and
that this information had dwelt in his mind, and made him ever
anxious to verify the truth or otherwise of this report. It then
occurred to me to suggest the formation of a company, in order that
the expense incidental to the exploration should be light when borne
bv a number. This idea was at once agreed upon.”
The Port Phillip Association was formed, of which J. T. Gellibrand
and John Batman were the leading spirits, and on May 29th, 1835,
the “ Rebecca,” 30 tons burden, entered the Heads with John Batman.
It was on this occasion that, after exploring the western shores of
the Bay, they forced their way up to the basin of the Yarra. where
Batman, being so struck with the surroundings, exclaimed : “ This
will be the place for the village.”
The historic deed between John Batman and the native chiefs
was signed on the banks of the Merri Creek, June nth, 1835. Batman
then returned to Tasmania. His glowing accounts drew the attention
of many adventurous spirits outside the Association, who became
anxious to explore this new country.
On June 27th the Association addressed Lord Glenelg, informing
him of the purchase of land from the natives, and stating:—“We,
therefore, with confidence appeal to your Lordship to advise the
Crown to grant us such rights as the Crown may be advised that it
possesses, to the tracts of land in question, upon such equitable
principles as your Lordship may conceive the justice of the casa
requires.”
This document was signed by C. Swanston, J. T. Gellibrand,
W. G. Sams, J. and W. Robertson, James Simpson, Thomas Bannister,
John Batman, Jno. Thos. Collicott, Jno. H. Wedge, Jno. Sinclair,
Anthony Cotterel, Henry Arthur, Michael Connolly and George
Mercer.
The appeal of the Association was supported by Colonel Arthur,
the Lieutenant-Governor of Tasmania.
On June 14th, Batman left Port Phillip for Tasmania, and on
June 25th forwarded a report to Lieutenant-Governor Arthur on the
results of his trip and the objects of the Association.
Batman left a portion of his party behind at Indented Heads, to
prepare for his return trip.
Colonel Arthur wrote to the Right Honourable T. Spring Rice,
Colonial Minister, on July 4th, informing him of the purchase of
600,000 acres from one of the native tribes by the Association, and
transmitting a copy of the deed of transfer, though he did not recom-
mend the recognition of the deed, but that a liberal grant of land
would be well bestowed on the members of the Association.


IN AND ABOUT THE WATER SHED.


PEEPS NEAR KEW


THE: GREAT FLOOD OF 1891.
THE GREAT FLOOD OF 1891.


THE HAWTHORN BRIDGE.


Early Pioneering.
In the meantime the attention of other adventurers had been at-
tracted to Australia Felix, for a Launceston paper stated, on May
21st, about eleven days after the “Rebecca left with Batman, that
the Enterprise, daily expected from Sydney, will be immediately
laid on for New Holland, to convey an exploring party of gentlemen
to the new country.
The “ Launceston Examiner ” informed its readers that the
‘Enterprise would sail on July 21st. Passengers: J. Eawkner,,
junr., J. H. Lancey, Geo. Plvans, W. Jackson, R. H. Marr, Chas. Wise,
E. Evans, W. Gilbert, Jas. Gilbert, Mary Gilbert, Thomas Morgan
and Charles Roberts.
Mr. J. H. Wedge, a surveyor, and member of the Association,
landed near Indented Heads, now called Point Batman, on the pen-
insula west of the passage into Port Phillip, on August 7th, 1835, and,
leaving that place on August 27th, started to travel overland to reach
the freshwater River, as his whaleboat was leaky. He crossed the
Werribee on August 30th, and on arriving at the river, on September
rst, found, to his astonishment, Fawkner’s party in possession of the
lands bought by Batman from the natives for the Association.
I he river was named by Surveyor Wedge, whose map, prepared
in 1835, gives the names of Arthur’s Seat and Station Peak, copied
from Flinders chart. The present names are slightly altered; the
Ballarina Hills are now known as Bellarine; Barrabull Hills as Barra-
booi, while the present \ ou \ angs are named Yowham Hills and
Anaki-yoo-wam.
I he names of the Moorabool, Barwon and Werribee are marked
Marabull, Burwan and Wearlily.
1 he Yarra, at this time, was only known for about a dozen miles
from Melbourne.
Wedge’s map showed the territory assumed to have been pur-
chased from the tribes of Duttigalla, or Port Phillip, which area was
bounded on the north by the Plenty Ranges, on the east by a line
running north-east from the Yarra settlement, and on the west by a
line running north-east from the Barwon, near Geelong, across the
Werribee Plains to the Salwater River sources. This huge tract of
country was parcelled out amongst the various members of the
Association.
Mr. Batman took block No. 9, which comprised all the area north
and west of the Yarra to the Saltwater, and extending northwards
about 15 miles. To Mr. Wedge was allotted the Williamstown
district and Werribee Plains.
Captain Swanston and Major Mercer took the volcanic country
north of Batman's block, while other areas were set apart for Mr.
Sams, the Sheriff of Launceston; Mr. Solomon, after whom Solomon’s
P'ord, on the Saltwater River, was named; Mr. Cotterel, whose name
remains associated with Mount Cotterel, near Melton; Mr. Collicott
and Mr. Gellibrand.
Station Peak was allotted to Mr. Simpson. Mr. Connolly took
the country north of Geelong ; while the south and, west of Geelong
was taken up by Mr. Robertson, who was afterwards so well known
in the Colac district; while Indented Heads, Portarlington, and
Bellarine district fell to Mr. Sinclair.
Although the Association were not allowed to retain their original
selections, nevertheless most of them took jjp squatting runs in the
areas with which they first associated themselves.
Surveyor Wedge thus describes his experience on meeting
Fawkner’s party on the site of Melbourne:
“ The last journey I made was for the express purpose of ascer-
taining where the principal rivers discharged themselves into Hobson’s
Bay, with the view of determining the most eligible site for a per-
manent settlement.
“ It was with no little surprise, on arriving at the place where
Melbourne now stands, that I observed in the basin, just below
where the Prince of Wales’ Bridge now spans the Yarra Yarra with
its noble arch, a vessel quietly and securely moored. The sight was
so unexpected, that at the moment I fancied that I had come upon
an unknown settlement, and it was with no little interest and anxiety
that I advanced to introduce myself to the party in charge of the
craft. It turned out to be a vessel, I believe the ‘ Enterprise,’ be-
longing to Mr. Fawkner, which he had sent over in charge of Mr.
Lancey, to form a settlement on the strength of Mr. Batman’s favour-
able report of the country.
“ She had crept into the port, and proceeded up the Yarra Yarra
unobserved by the party left at Indented Heads by Mr. Batman, or by
the tribe of natives who were also encamped with them.
“ The ‘ Enterprise,’ if that was her name, was certainly the first
vessel that had ever worked her way up to where the Queen’s Wflarf
has since been built.
“ It was on thjs occasion I gave the river the name of Yarra
Yarra, from the following circumstance: —On arriving in sight of the
river, the two natives who were with me, pointing to the river, called
it ‘ Yarra Yarra,’ which, at the time, I imagined to be its name; but
I afterwards learnt that the words were what they used to designate a
waterfall, as they afterwards gave the same designation to a small fall
on the River Werribee, as we crossed it on our way back to Indented
Heads. On return to my headquarters, I immediately broke up the
establishment and removed it to the north bank of the Yarra, and
encamped, if not at the very place, not far from where St. James’
Cathedral now stands.”
The First Building.
The men forming the party which Wedge found in possession of
the land which Batman had bought from the natives, were Lancey,
Marr, S. and W. Jackson and G. Evans.
The Sunday morning, August 30th, 1835, when the party landed,
was marked by the kangaroo dogs, which had been provided by
bawkner, running down a large kangaroo near the foot of Swanston-
street. On that day the banks above the falls were most odoriferous
with the scent of wattle blossom.
Ihe goods were landed on the Monday, and a, start made to
protect them by erecting the first structure in Melbourne.
Late on the evening of Wednesday, September 3rd, Wedge arrived
at the basin, and, according to Eawkner, after obtaining all the in-
formation he wanted from Captain Lancey, ordered them off in the
name of the Association.
A few days before August 26th, Governor Sir Richard Burke had
issued a proclamation in Sydney, declaring all deeds and arrange-
ments, such as Batman had made with the natives, void; and declar-
ing all persons found in occupation without licence or authority of the
Government of New South Wales, trespassers.
Lord Aberdeen, in a despatch to Sir Richard Burke, dated De-
cember 25th, 1834, had advised him to discourage any projects of
settlement, as it militated against the concentration of the colonists,
and any such isolated settlement would almost certainly become an
as\ lum tor runaway convicts, over whom the settlers would have no
power of control.
Quite unaware of this proclamation, Fawkner’s party were quietly
establishing themselves. Land was selected nearly opposite the pre-
sent I ish Market for a garden, and for growing a few acres of wheat.
On Tuesday the first plough was used in the Melbourne district, and
the first wheat sown on September Bth, 1835.
George Wise, of Norfolk Plains, lasmania, a general farm servant
of Mr. Fawkner's was the ploughman.
The “ Enterprise ” left for Tasmania on September sth, and the
Launceston paper advertised on September 9th:
for Port Phillip.— l he fast sailing schooner ‘Enterprise’ will
sad for the above port in ten days from date. Persons of moderate
capital wishing to emigrate to a fertile, open country, possessing a
most enviable climate and immense plains, will find this a most desir-
able opportunity. Full particulars will be given to those who may
engage to settle there, on application to John Eawkner, junior.”
On September 25th, the departure of the schooner “Enterprise”
was announced:—“Hunter, for Port Phillip, with a general cargo.
Passengers: Mr. and Mr. Eawkner, Mrs. Lancey and two children,
Mr. Watkins, John Wilkins, and. Thomas Morgan.”
Ihe “ Enterprise was the first general trader to the port, and
the pioneer craft in the introduction of stock into Australia Felix.
bawkners party selected 10 acres each for each member of the
original party. Having been measured off, lots were drawn, and on
Fawkner’s lot the ground was ploughed and sown with wheat, a
garden formed, and fruit trees planted.
Of the original party, John Lancey was a pilot; Robert Hay
Marr, a carpenter and builder; Samuel Jackson, architect and
builder; William Jackson, carpenter; and George Evans, a plasterer.
I homas Morgan, who came over with Eawkner on the second
voyage of the “Enterprise,” was a shoemaker; Charles Wise was a
ploughman; James Gilbert, horseshoer and general blacksmith.
Gilbert’s wife, Mary, was the pioneer woman of the settlement.
George Evans and his man built the first house in the place.
Marr did not remain long, but returned to Launceston, and after-
wards went to England.
The Jacksons soon left Melbourne and settled near Sunbury,
leaving their name in Jackson’s Creek.
Evans brought sheep over in the “ Chili,” and began squatting
between Jackson and his brother, though he found that John Aitken,
whose name remains in Aitken’s Gap, had got a flock over before him.
This early pioneer had left Launceston in the “ Endeavour,” on July
20th, 1835, with sheep, which were landed at Arthur’s Seat, and thence
taken up to the head of the Bay, where he was assisted across the
Yarra by Fawkner’s party, before Fawkner arrived.
The “ Norval ” was chartered by the Association, to carry stock
across to Port Phillip at a month. She was a barque of 300
tons register, and, with 500 sheep and 50 cattle, crossed in about 30
hours. The Master, Coltish, went up the river with Batman, and
landed a little below the Falls, where they camped all night, being
kept awake by some 200 blackfellows, corroboreeing.


The next day they hauled the ship close into the beach, on the
east side of the Bay 7 , and landed all the sheep and stock withor*
accident.
The “ Norval ” made six or seven trips across, always taking in
her stock at George Town. This vessel landed some sheep at In-
dented Heads, and others at Point Gellibrand or Williamstown. On
October 26th, 1835, she brought over B. Cotter, Oakden, D. kerguson
and several other persons.
Ihe shepherds w 7 ho drive some of the sheep became scared at
the blacks, and made off, leaving 500 young ew 7 es in their hands.
Captain Swanston, about the same time, was driven, by stress of
weather, into Western Port, where he landed 1048 ewes and 84 Saxon
rams. The men here again took fright of the natives, and all the
sheep were lost except 78.
Eawkner's party appeared to recognise Batman’s claim to the
land north of the Yarra, as Jackson and Evans removed to the Salt-
water River, and Evans stated that Eaw'kner accepted twenty pounds
from Batman's Association, and retired to the southern bank of the
river, w 7 here he cultivated a crop below Emerald Hill.
Jackson s account of the original landing varies from Fawknar s
own.
Jackson stated that “ The vessel made, and entered, the Heads in
safety, and worked her way up the Bay, and landed W illiam Jackson
and some others of the party on the beach, not very far from what is
now called the Red Bluff, near Brighton, the vessel continuing her
course up the Bay. This party made their w 7 ay through the bush, and
crossed the Yarra some distance below 7 the Falls. During this trip
they fell in with the natives, and ultimately camped upon the site
of the new 7 city of Melbourne, and there awaited the arrival of Cap-
tain Lancey, who brought the vessel up the Yarra to the basin at the
camping place.”
A considerable amount of ill-feeling arose between Fawkner and
Batman, the Association even going so far as to arrange to eject
Faw'kner by force, but wiser counsels prevailed.
Fawkner, on the occasion of the opening of the Exhibition of 1866,
stated: “ There were only thirty-three persons in Melbourne in
October, 1835: Fawkner, John Lancey and George Evans; one
man servant of Evans' and three of Faw'kner s; the master and crew
of the ‘ Enterprise,’ 10; Mrs. Fawkner, Mrs. Lancey, and Mary Gil-
bert ; or 13 males and three females of Fawkner s party. Batman's
party consisted of himself and his wife (after whom Mount Eliza was
called), four European sen-ants and six Sydney blacks; making a
total of 18 European males and four females; five children of Bat-
mans and Lancey’s; and six aboriginals.”
On January 23rd, 1836, Lord Glenelg, the Colonial Secretary,
informed Lieutenant-Governor Arthur that “ His Majesty could not
sanction the action of the Association, and further informed him that
his proposal of forming, under the auspices of your Government, a
settlement in the vicinity of Tort Phillip, and of placing it under the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court ol Yan Diemen s Land, requires,
and shall receive, every consideration. At present I shall only observe
that it seems to me open to very serious objection.”
On April 13th, 1836, Lord Glenelg informed Sir Richard Burke
that <! he approved of his proclamation, but pointing out that it may
yet admit of serious doubts whether the settlers at Port Phillip and
Twofold Bay have not, in reality, given birth to undertakings w 7 hich
deliberate reflection would have recommended rather than discour-
aged. Each of these places will probably, at a time more or less
distant, form the nucleus of a new and flourishing settlement, inter-
changing with the districts at present occupied in the vicinity of
Sydney, many articles of internal commerce, and contributing to
expedite the general occupation by the people of this kingdom, or
their descendants, of those vast territories in which our national
wealth and industry have already, in the last half-century, converted
an unproductive waste into two great and flourishing provinces.”
1 he result of these letters from the Home Government was that
fehe trespassers w 7 ere allowed to remain, not as mere squatters, but
under legalised tenure.
Early “ Squatters.”
Tasmania had been pouring into Australia Felix her most adven-
turous spirits, who were rapidly spreading themselves over the new
country 7 . Jackson and Evans had gone to Jackson’s Creek; Cow’e
to Cowie’s Creek; Aitken to Deep Creek; Joseph Sutherland to
near Geelong; Roadknight to Barrabool Hills; Brock to Williams-
town, then afterwards to Sunbury ; Howden to Dandenong ; Glass to
Boroondarra; Howie to the east of Mount Macedon ; Bolden and
Mills to Port Fairy; Captain Hepburn to the Loddon ; Yaldwyn to
Kyneton; Ebden to Carlsruhe; Mclntyre to Western Port; Gogg to
Prahran; Franks to the Werribee Plains; Messrs. Austin, Stead,
Steig.itz and Armytage to the west of Geelong; while Captain Lons-
dale ran sheep over Emerald Hill, and Fawkner at Pascoevale be-
yond the Moonee Ponds.
Mr. John Gardiner, alter whom Gardiner’s Creek was named was
the first overlander from Sydney, taking up a cattle station on' that
creek. He was soon followed by Mr. Ebden.
Of the members connected with the Association, Mr. Batman and
others held Indented Heads and parts between Geelong and Mel-
bourne; Mr. James Thomson, the lirst physician and catechist of the
Association, became a flock-master at Geelong. He sent over 50
cows in 1835. Mr. Connolly chose an area about 25 miles north of
“ The Settlement/’ Mr. Cotterel's sheep station was on the Saltwater
River. Messrs. Simpson and Wedge were satisfied with the pick of
the Werribee Tlains. Mr. Sams had his station on Jackson’s Creek;
while Messrs. Robertson were early established near Lake Colac.
The Great Lake Company forwarded sheep in the ‘‘ Henry,” under
the charge of Kenneth Clarke, which grazed first over the present
Melbourne Racecourse, and then w 7 ent to Bacchus Marsh and the
Tentland Hiils. Captain Bacchus followed them to the Marsh.
In 1836 the western arm of Tort Phillip Bay was explored by
Captain Whitney, in the brig “ Henry," and found to be navigable
up to the bar across the mouth of the present Geelong harbour. This
brig has left her name in Point Henry.
These were some of the leading pioneers whose names are well
known to all old colonists, and who deserve to be retained on the
scroll of fame recording the men to whom Victoria owes her first step
along the road to prosperity.
The Association, which afterwards became known as the Duttigalla
Association, determined to fight the question of its rights, and sent
Major Mercer to England, to carry on their appeal to the Home
Government.
The dispute was ultimately settled by the Sydney Executive allow-
ing the Association in compensation; but they were not
allowed to have any priority of purchase in lands thrown open. Most
of those left in the Association bought land west of Geelong, covering
9416 acres, and in the sale was allowed towards the purchase
money.
The other early settlers outside the Association appealed for con-
cessions.
Amongst these petitioners appear the names of John Aitken, John
Pranks, G. MackiLop, W. Mortimer, M. Steele, G. Armytage, J.
Smith, G. Sinclair Brodie, J. E. Strahran, A. Thomson, P. Harrison,
C. McLachlan and J. Allport. These men, with others, numbering
44, were represented by Mr. John Dobson. They had sent over
14,000 sheep, subsequently, however, to the Governor’s proclamation.
Another group of applicants for consideration were R. and J.
Sutherland, J. Lewis and W. T. Clarke.
Nearly all these early Victorians came from Van Diemen’s Land.
Growth of the Settlement
The litt.e settlement on the river was gradually growing, and on
June Ist, 1836, the first public meeting was held at Yarrow Yarrow,
Port Phillip.
Mr. James Simpson was appointed to arbitrate between individuals
disputing on small questions, excepting those relating to land. All
subscribing parties were to afford protection to the aborigines. A
reward of ss. per head was given for the destruction of wild dogs.
Governor Bourke was petitioned to appoint a resident magistrate
The inhabitants of the Rocks, in Svdnev, did not look very
favourably, however, on the trespassers of Port Phillip, and Mr.
George Stewart, a Goulburn magistrate, was sent over to report on
the characteristics of the settlement.
Mr. Stewart left Sydney on May 6th, in the revenue cutter “ Prince
George,’ and arrived on the 25th. being 19 days on the voyage.
His report on the settlement was forwarded on June 10th, 1836.
I his report has the following interesting references:
Ihe town ‘ Bearbrass is on the left hand of the Yarra Yarra,
about seven mi.es from its mouth, which at present consists of 13
buildings—viz., three weatherboarded, two slab, and eight turf huts.
Ihe whole amount of European population consists of 142 males
and 35 females.
ihe number of sheep grazing when I left was 26,500, the number
ot horses 57, and oi horned cattle 100. The estimated value of
the whole stock, together with farming implements, was computed at
,£BO,OOO.
■ Phere was last year under cultivation 60 acres.
Ihe Europeans occupy an extent of about 100 miles of country,
but no person is knowm to have penetrated more than 70 miles within
land, and the most distant station is not more than 35 miles from
the township.”
The report states “ that there were then eleven vessels, aggregat-
ing x 5 65 t°ns, engaged in bringing stock trom Van Diemen’s Land.
In conclusion, I beg to assure His Excellency that the residents
general 1\ expressed great satisfaction at the Government of New
South Wales having made inquiry into their state, and would, I am
persuaded, feel gratified if this Government would extend to them
its protection.”
Iht surroundings o! the infant township were thus described in
May, 1836:
The river has a bar on which there is not more than 9 feet
of water at high tide; but, the bar once passed, we found from three
to seven fathoms up to the township, and the river has this peculiarity,
that it is as deep at the very bank as in the middle of the stream for
three miles downwards, and is from 80 to 100 yards wide, with a basin
at the township capable of containing 109 small vessels, such as
would come over the bar.


'•fish are plentiful here, and of several sorts, both in fresh and
salt water. Ihe schnapper is the most abundant, weighing from two
to twenty-five pounds. Wild fowl and kangaroo abound, and, I must
add, the native dog is rather too plentiful.”
Westgarth’s Description.
Westgarth thus describes the surroundings:
Ihe kangaroo, skipping about in undisturbed happiness, would
emerge in troops upon the flats, from the denser woods on the
southern bank of the River Yarra. The branches of the old gum
trees were filled with black and white cockatoos, and innumerable
parakeets, with gaudy p.umage, sparkled in the bright sunshine,
whilst their incessant chattering imparted life to a scene otherwise
hushed in the rare presence of man, and the total absence, h.therto,
of his noisy but enlivening commerce.”
On the day of his landing, a visitor wrote thus in his diary of the
Yarra :
Lntil its junction with the Saltwater River, the banks were
densely covered with tea-tree, etc., which precludes all view of the
country on each side, excepting at one place on the left, where I per-
ceived an extensive clear, open space, probably a dried swamp.
“ Below the junction the banks are more openly wooded, so that
we were enabled to observe some fine spots of open forest country,
well grassed. Ihe \ arra is a most valuable river, fresh above the
Falls of the settlement. The banks are generally high on both sides,
and in some places very high; but in most places the water miofit
easily be made accessible to cattle.
“ On the immediate banks the land is generally of very fine
quality, undulating ridges. Ihe right bank seems of a richer soil
than the left; it is a teal or wffiinstone formation, while the left is
sandstone. It is rather over-thickly wooded, and with a great deal of
undergrowth, which gives a scrubby appearance, but it might be
cleared at no great expense, and would form very capital homesteads
and afford many beautiful sites for building residences. I am con-
vinced that it must rise with unprecedented rapidity, and that well-
chosen portions of land, early selected, will soon increase in value.”
Ihe place was known by a number of different names in those
early days. The township and the settlement carry their own explana-
tion.
Yarrow Yarrow was used in the manuscript description of the first
public meeting in Melbourne.
June 13th, 1835, the “Launceston Chronicle” expressed a hope
that the settlement would be called “ Batmania.”
Mr. Fawkner and others, including Ross’ Hobart Town Almanac,
designated the place “ Glenelg,” after Lord Glenelg, the Colonial
Secretary.
The native words Boomdup, to admire; Boordup, comfort;
Burdup, joy, are probably related to the original name of the locality.
Bearurp, or Barebarp, which was anglicised into Bearbrass, given by
Magistrate Stewart, in his report.
So that the native name of the settlement bestowed on it by Sur-
veyor Wedge, means “ Comfort,” “ Joy.”
Unauthorised Occupation of Land,
An Act was passed by the Sydney legislature, to inflict penalties
for the unauthorised occupation of public lands, and powers were
taken to issue licences for depasturing on vacant Crown lands for
one year only, renewable if approved of by the Colonial Secretary.
A further step in advance was made when Captain Lonsdale, of
the 4th King’s Own, was appointed Police Magistrate to the settle-
ment, and persons were informed that all lands will be subject to be
put up for competition at a public sale, and sold to the highest
bidder.
The Captain left on October Ist, in H.M.S. “ Rattlesnake,”
Captain Hobson. The police magistrate took with him Messrs.
Russell, Darke and D’Arcey, as surveyors, to lay out the new town-
ship; Mr. Howson, as constable; Mr. Webb, as officer in charge of
Customs ; and Lieutenant King, with thirty soldiers.
Captain Lonsdale’s permanent residence was situated behind the
gymnasium, near the present East Melbourne Cricket Ground.
Ihe first public dinner in the settlement was given to Captain
Hobson, on November 30th, 1836. The married ladies of “The
Settlement ” graced the table. The company assembled at 4 o’clock,
and dispersed at 6 o’clock. The viands consisted of a splendid leg of
mutton, a very fine shoulder of mutton, stewed mutton chops, real
Irish pork, pig’s cheek, and a variety of other delicacies. The des-
sert was in keeping with the dinner.
At first the Captain resided with Mr. Batman, but after a while a
sod hut was erected for him, just below Batman’s house, on the west
side of the present Market Square. Finally he took up his quarters
near the East Melbourne Cricket Ground.
The “ Sydney Gazette,” in December, 1836, reported that “ a
house has been erected for the commandant. Three public-house
licences have been gazetted; one is kept in a log hut by Mr. Fawkner,
the others are of turf. There is only one shoemaker in the settle-
ment ; no tailor, carpenter, or wheelwright, who are much wanted.
There are neither butcher nor baker, and the settlers luxuriate upon
salt beef and damper, which they wash down with copious libations
of rum and water, which are very plentiful there. The population
consists of 210 settlers, six only of whom are women, and 15 are
children. The stock there at present consists of 46,621 sheep, 121
cattle, and 14 horses.”
The “ Sydney Herald,” for December, 1836, predicts “ that the
river, now the abode of wild fowl, will be busy with human life; and
in that bay on which three ships are now gazed upon as an uncommon
and prosperous sight, numerous vessels will ride, loaded with the
riches of the world.”
This Sydney prophet of 1836 could scarcely, in his wildest dreams,
have imagined how fully his prediction would come true in only a
lew short years.
Articles of food were very dear at this time: Mutton, pd.; kan-
garoo, 4d.; milk, is.; butter, 35.; dinner, 2s. 6d.; bed, 2s. 6d.;
and washing, 6d. a piece.
Captain Lonsdale at first met with considerable trouble in dealing
with the inhabitants who had for some time been free from con-
trolling authority, and had been a law to themselves.
Captain Hobson, in March, 1837, brought Sir Richard Burke
round from Sydney in H.M.S. “ Rattlesnake,” on which occasion the
first official address was received by and responded to by the Gover-
nor-in-Chief.
The Governor travelled as far as Mount Macedon, with Buckley
as a guide.
William Buckley, or the “ Wild White Man,” was discovered by
some of Batman’s servants who had been left behind at Indented
Heads.
William Buckley.
While breaking up the ground for, cultivation, they were ap-
proached by some natives, with whom was a man taller than the
rest, with long shaggy beard, loosely-robed in a roughly sewn -rug;
his skin appeared lighter in colour, and indicated European origin.
He was an escaped convict from the attempted settlement at Sulli-
vans Bay in 1803. Four attempted to escape, but the sentry shot
one, two returned to the station, while Buckley for thirty-two years
had lived with the natives, to whose level in mind he had allowed
himself to drop.
1 he first Surveyor-General, Mr. Hoddle, accompanied Sir Richard
Burke, and was directed to inquire into the position of the survey,
but nothing satisfactory could be shown, while the unexpected ap-
pearance of the Governor created a panic amongst the assistant sur-
veyors, who had been more closely engaged in hunting kangaroos
than in surveying.
In 1837 Arrowsmith published a map with a river shown running
south into Hobson’s Bay, called the “ Ardnell,” now called the
“ Saltwater ’ ; a small unnamed creek coming from the east was the
Yarra.
Across the “ Exe" (Werribee) and “ Ardnell " are written the words
“ Extensive and beautiful downs called Iramo by the natives.”
On a map ordered to be printed on July 14th, 1837, appear the
Exe Stream, Ardnell Stream with Bland’s Plains, between these
rivers, while Indented Heads, Point Nepean, Arthur’s Seat and
Cape Shanck, old names, are adhered to. r
His Excellency’s despatch of June 13th, giving his views of the
place, states that ‘“a passage by water from Sydney may be effected
by steam vessels in about four days. TO l keep up a regular and fre-
quent intercourse between the districts of Port Phillip and Sydney
appears, for the present, impracticable, but a sure, though limited,
communication might be established by means of a Government
steam vessel. To diminish the necessity of more frequent intercourse,
I would suggest the appointment of a military officer as Lieutenant-
Governor or Commandant.”
The Governor directed the spot selected by Mr. Batman, on the
banks of the Yarra, to be laid out a,s a town, which he called “ Mel-
bourne, ’ after the first Prime Minister of Queen Victoria, who
ascended the British Throne the year Melbourne was laid out. The
sheep flocks were steadily increasing, as the Governor estimated the
population at 500, and the sheep at 100,000.
The township was laid down in squares of ten acres, each of
which was divided into 20 allotments of half-an-acre each. Every
buyer was bound to build on the allotment he secured, within two
years, a tenement worth at least
Two sales were held—one on June Ist, 1837, and the other
on November Ist, 1837.
An overlander who was in Melbourne at the time of the sales
stated that “ there are now here a population of 800 souls. The
town seems comparatively crowded with inhabitants, but without
habitations. They come so fast that it is impossible to provide them-
selves with houses, and they are living in tents and huts of all
manner of shapes. One hundred half-acre allotments were this day
disposed of by auction. You would scarcely credit the competition
there has been to secure the allotments, nor suppose that so many
persons could have congregated at a sale here. I am sure there
were 200 persons present, and the half-acre allotments fetched from
£l% to averaging each.”
The average price per half-acre at the first sale was and of
the second £42. The first sale of suburban land was held at


Sydney, February 13th, 1838, and the purchasers were almost wholly
corner of Nicholson and Victoria streets, was sold for £6 10s. per
acre. The blocks in Fitzroy and Collingwood averaged £7 an acre,
fetching from £4 an acre upwards. , Tl ,
In 1839 the block at the corner of Bridge and Bunt roads
brought £24 an acre, while other Richmond blocks sold for £l3.
Mr. Sparke gave 18s. an acre near Coburg, and Mr. Tawkner
gave 50s. an acre tor his Pascoevale farm.
The Government demanded payment in gold, which tew persons
had. Some of the blocks were forfeited.
The areas for which most money was received were F linders,
Elizabeth, Collins and Swanston, and Collins, William, Bourke and
Queen streets. The heaviest price was given by Batman tor the
half-acre at the corner of Flinders and Swanston streets —viz., £IOO.
In April, 1838, two townships had been laid out —Melbourne and
Williamstown, and the country had been laid out into three counties
—William, Melbourne and Bourke. During the Governor’s stay Cap-
tain Hobson completed a survey of the Port and Harbour of Geelong.
Early Legislation
An order was issued from Downing-street in May, 37, stating that
“ it was essential that separate accounts should be kept of the sale
of Crown lands in the district of Port Philip, and that the proceeds
of such sales should be applied to the improvement of the new
settlement, and especially in the introduction of free immigrants
which would supply the. demand for labour without the use of con-
victs. I am therefore anxious that you should take measures as
soon as possible for directing immigration to this settlement, as well
as to other parts of the colony, and that you should abstain to the
utmost practical extent from the assignment of convicts to the
settlement of Port Phillip district ” —a most fortunate instruction for
the future Victoria.
James Backhouse, the Quaker missionary, thus describes Mel-
bourne on November 13th, 1837: —“The Yarra Yarra is deep, but
it is difficult to navigate for boats on account of the sunken timber.
The town, though scarcely more than fifteen months old, consists of
about 100 houses, amongst which are stores, inns, a gaol, a barrack
and a school house. Some of the dwellings are tolerable structures
of brick. There is much bustle and traffic in the place, and a gang
of prisoners are employed in levelling the streets.
“ Business was at this time conducted on a very disagreeable and
unsound plan. Almost everything, including labour, was paid for by-
orders on Sydney or Van Diemen’s Land; the discount required by
the few persons who had cash was from 20 to 40 per cent. A
mechanic received half his wages in goods, charged at about 30
per cent, profit, and the rest in an order, which he paid his employer
10 per cent, to discount.”
The effect of the transfer of stock from Van Diemen’s Land to
Port Phillip was that sheep increased in value to 30s. and 40s. a
head, working bullocks £4O a pair, and milch cows £ls each.
These heavy prices induced the New South Wales settlers on the
Yass plains to move southwards rapidly across the Murrumbidgee
and Murray to Victoria.
Private villages and towns were soon rapidly laid out near Mel-
bourne and other centres, such as Brighton, Brunswick, Richmond
(near Melbourne), Ashby, Irishtown, Newtown (near Geelong), and
Belfast (on the west).
Alberton, Seymour and Violet Town soon made a commencement,
and a township at Warrnambool Bay was projected.
In January, 1838, the first Melbourne newspaper was started
the “ Melbourne Advertiser,” afterwards the “ Port Phillip Patriot ” ;
then followed the “Port Phillip Gazette” in October, 1838, and
the “Melbourne Herald” in 1839, which was published semi-weekly.
A fourth paper—the “ Argus ” —soon took up a permanent position”
In 1838 there were three churches, belonging to the Episcopalian,
Presbyterian and Independent denominations, and these were soon
supplemented by those belonging to the Roman Catholics and Wes-
levans.
On July 30th, 1839, Mr. Joseph Latrobe, the son of a Moravian
missionary, was gazetted to the office of Superintendent.
The “ Pyramus, ’ with Mr. Latrobe on board, arrived on October
2nd. The superintendent met the colonists at the New Auction
Rooms. He purchased a property at Jolimont, where he resided
while in Port Phillip.
Captain Lonsdale was appointed Sub-Treasurer, and Mr Tas
Simpson succeeded Captain Lonsdale on the bench.
Steady Progress.
„ jML i K; f l n » Se l. t - I V ent - k T/ tead T i, t forgin S ahead - The b »rque
. Tidlothian. which arrived from Leith, June 15th, 1830. was the
first merchantman that entered the Harbour of Port Phil ip direct
rom a British port. Towards the end of ,839 there were 30 vessel
from various parts of the British dominions lying at anchor in the
To meet advancing trade requirements, the Port Phillip Bank
was started in October, 1840. 1 mnk
In 1839 there were 358 houses —136 wood, and 222 brick, the
population had increased to 2000, and there were two printing presses.
During two years after the Melbourne sales, values increased
enormously. At a sale by auction in 1839- the time of happy faces
and general money-making —three of the original half-acres realised
the then enormous sum of ,£10,250. These areas were split up and
sold, and one piece of ground was bought at 35 guineas a foot. The
speculation in land was greater in proportion than in Melbourne
boom period of 50 years after. Everybody seemed to be prospering,
two Anglo-Australian banks opened branches in Melbourne, transac-
•tions enlarged and multiplied. The sale of town allotments com-
menced January Ist, 1837, and country and suburban lands in the
following year. Up to the end of 1841 the Government, chiefly by
public auction, had sold 205,748 acres of land, realising £394,533.
Every description of colonial property found a ready market. In
1839 good description of sheep were sold for £3 each, cattle for £l2
to ,£ls, and ordinary saddle horses up to £IOO, but only four years
afterwards the prices dropped to 3s. 6d., 255. and £l2 respectively.
But during 1839 prices of provisions were enormous. Flour rose to
and over £IOO a ton of 2000 lbs., and the common four-pound
loaf was 3s. 6d.
Ten shillings a day was paid for the common descriptions of em-
ployment. Cottages of four rooms, with very moderate pretensions
to appearance or accommodation, were let at an annual rent of ,£l5O
to £2OO.
During 1837, 55,208 sheep came from Van Diemen’s Land, and
lor four years —1837-1840 —the total number imported amounted to
102,500 head, with 1800 horses and a small number of cattle.
In 1839 Australia Felix turned the tables, and began to export
instead of import fat stock.
The value of exports in 1837 were £12,180, while in 1840 they
leached £154,650.
Governor Sir George Gipps, in one of his despatches, significantly
remarks that the neighbourhood of Melbourne was said to be strewn
with empty champagne bottles: This wine was largely consumed,
and for a long period a champagne lunch was quite indispensible to
an auction sale of importance. Two bullock drivers are said to have
called for a dozen of champagne, poured the bottles into a bucket,
and then drank it up in tin pannikins.
This old land boom had very similar symptoms, and caused very-
similar results to the one of latter years.
Encouragement of" Immigration.
With the view of promoting settlement in Her Majesty’s colonies,
the Land and Emigrant Commissioners issued special instructions
to Sir George Gipps, amongst which appear the following pro-
visions :
“ It has been determined that for all purposes connected with the
disposal of land in that portion of the territory of New South Wales
which lies to the south of the counties of Murray and St. Vincent,
and the Rivers Murrumbidgee and Murray, as far as the eastern
boundaries of South Australia, shall be separated from the rest of
New South Wales, and be distinguished by the title of the Southern
or Port Phillip District.
“ Within the Port Phillip district land will henceforth be sold at
the fixed rate of £1 per acre, in section of one-half a square mile,
or 320 acres each.
“ Anyone who shall pay in this country, or in the colony, the
price for eight square miles, or 5120 acres, will not be confined to
the districts already surveyed and opened for sale, but will have the
privilege of demanding a special survey of the land he desires.
Phis land, however, must be taken in one block, of which only
the outer boundaries will be surveyed.
1 Every purchaser will be entitled to name a number of persons
of the labouring class for a free passage to the colony in proportion
to the amount of purchase money paid in this country (Great Britain).
For every 7 £2O, one adult person of fourteen and upwards, or two
children between seven and fourteen, or three children under seven.”
These provisions had a very important effect on the early settle-
ment of Port Phillip.
The special surveys taken up embraced very valuable portions of
the colony, three ef them being close to Melbourne—viz., Unwin’s,
m Bulleen; Elgar, Boroondara; and Dendy’s, forming what is now
Brighton. Other areas were W. Rutledge’s, Kilmore, J. Orr, east of
the Albert ; and W. Rutledge, west of the Albert, near Corner Inlet;
Jamieson, at Lromana ; and Reeve, at Comer Inlet.
All these eight areas were applied for between March 17th and
May Ist, 1841.
These sales suddenly enormouslv increased the revenue and popula-
tion of the colony.
As the provision in connection with land sales required the ex-
pen 1 ure of the proceeds in the distirict, very sudden prosperity
..eeme to be the lot of the fortunate settlers of Port Phillip; and*
tion QT ’ * e ern ’£ ra^on provisions led to a rapid increase of popula-


DIGHT’S FALLS, RIVER YARRA.


DIGHT’S FALLS, RIVER YARRA.


A Road to Port Melbourne.
In 1841 a carriage road was formed from the Falls of the Yarra
to Sandridge by surplus labour, which had thus been suddenly in-
troduced into the colony through the Commissioner of Emigration
having ,£121,000 to spend on bringing inhabitants to Port Phillip.
During this year no less than 44 vessels were employed in introducing
8000 assisted emigrants. This increased the population from 10,000
to 18,000.
The streets of Melbourne in 1840 were rivers of mud. Collins-
street had been so cut up by bullock drays that is was absolutely
abandoned to traffic, as six, eight and ten bullocks had frequently
to be used to drag abandoned vehicles out from the bottom of the
road.
In winter time Melbourne was divided into two by Elizabeth-street,
which became a dangerous creek. Even in dry weather there was
generally a pond at the corner of Elizabeth and Collins streets.
In 1841, ,£IOOO was voted to form a wharf along the edge of
Flinders-street for nearly two miles. This was available two months
later for vessels of 200 tons or so. The first steamers were the
“ Aphrasia,” trading with Geelong; the “ Seahorse,” with Sydney;
and the “ Vesta ” and “ Governor Arthur,” between Melbourne and
Williamstown.
The same year saw the first market established—-viz., the Western
one. During the same year the merchants established the Commer-
cial Exchange, and at their instance the Flagstaff Plill signal station
was established by the Government to flag signal L> Williamstown.
These signals were eagerly watched by the earlier Melbourne resi-
dents, as they indicated the arrival of vessels from Europe with news
from the outside world.
In 1840, steam communication was opened with Sydney by the
“ Clonmel,” which was unfortunately wrecked near Corner Inlet, an
accident which led to the discovery of Port Albert. The “ Clonmel ”
was succeeded by the “ Seahorse,” but this vessel was also unfor-
tunately wrecked afterwards upon the rocks off George Town, at the
mouth of the Tamar.
During 1840-41 a period of wild speculation arose in Australia.
Several Anglo-Australian companies were established in Sydney.
Capital was occasionally transmitted from India, and loans at rares
of interest varying from 10 to per cent, per annum, and fre-
quently much higher, were effected both by public bodies and private
individuals. Many private loans were effected at 20 per cent, interest
on what appeared undoubted security. The rates charged by local
banks for discounting bills of three months’ currency was as high as
10 per cent, per annum, with 2 per cent, additional for bills of longer
date or overdrawn accounts.
The year 1841, however, ushered in a period of decline. Capital
still poured in, but it could not support prices at an extravagant
height. A great increase in mercantile failures took place, each
successive insolvency causing disaster all round. Property began to
be forced upon the market; those who remained in possession
generally borrowed or mortgaged to the utmost extent, either to facili-
tate commercial operations or complete improvements that had been
previously begun.
In 1841 the amount of money advanced in Sydney to the colonists
by the Anglo-Australian and Sydney banks was ,£2,583,203 ; in
it dropped to £1,583,137.
From 1842 to the end of 1844 there occurred at Sydney 282 cases
of sequestrations under the Act. In less than three years 1638
sequestrated estates had bad debts amounting to three and a-half mil-
lions. Most of the private carriages in Sydney were given up, and
were usually bought up for hackney carriages.
Time came to the aid of the colonists, debts were wiped off
in the Insolvency Court, pastoral interests rapidly increased, harvests
were plentiful, and when sheep and cattle of the colony had become
all but utterly valueless they were converted into tallow; and, further,
fortunately, the price of wool advanced.
In the beginning of 1844 the colony of New South Wales con-
tained 5,000,000 sheep, including 1,500,000 in Australia Felix,
1,000,000 cattle and 60,000 horses, so that the early boom troubles
were short and sharp.
The census of 1841 gave the population of Melbourne 4479;
County of Bourke 3241; Western Port, 1391; Geelong, 454; County
of Grant, 336; Portland, 597; Normanby, 1260—total, 11,758.
There were 769 houses in Melbourne, 432 in Newtown and Williams-
town, besides 67 huts; Western Port, no; Geelong, 81; Portland
Ba\, 100 —total, 1559. Newtown afterwards became known as Col-
lingwood and Fitzroy.
The first public meeting to advocate separation from New South
Wales was held in Melbourne on December 30th, 1840, in the store of
Mr. Isaac Hind, but it took years to bring about the results sought
for.
In October, 1841, Governor Sir George Gipps visited Melbourne,
arriving by the steamer “ Seahorse.” The Govenor landed at Wil-
liamstown, and after examining the buildings there came up the river
in the steamer, and was landed at the old Punt, where Prince’s
Bridge now stands, and then traversed the leading streets of the town.
The Governor also visited Geelong, travelling in the “Aphrasia”
steamer, which then traded between that town and Melbourne.
The State of Health in 1841.
About 1841 the health of Melbourne was exceptionally bad. In
a population of only 5000 or 6000 there were thirteen doctors all
fully employed, and each one in a summer month saw a patient buried
every week.
Drainage and water supply were non-existent. The water supply
was provided by carts filled at the Yarra and sold in the streets at
the rate of 4s. per 80 gallons, sometimes even rising to 6s. The
water was by no means pure, with the result that an epidemic of
typhiod raged in 1840-41-42.
Through the terrible mortality arising from the low condition
in which the emigrants of the “ Saltsette ” were landed, and the in-
sanitary state of Melbourne, which was rapidly filling the Queen-
street Cemetery, Governor Latrobe appointed the first Board of
Health.
This brought about the Incorporation of the Town of Melbourne
on August 12th, by Act, 6 Victoria, No. 7.
There were originally four wards —Bourke, Lonsdale, Latrobe and
Gipps Ward, which included the rapidly-growing suburbs of Newtown,
now forming part of Fitzroy and C'ollingwood.
On the 1 st day of December, 1842, Melbourne Corporation was
inaugurated.
The Mayor of the town was directed to set up durable boundary
marks of the various wards, and to perambulate the boundaries every
three years to prevent any alteration in their situation. Burgesses
must either occupy a house of £25 valuation or occupy a shop or
warehouse of that value, but not live more than seven miles from
the town boundary.
In 1840 Flinders-street was a bog of black sticky mud lying
between a row of houses and shops on one hand, and dense tea-tree
scrub lining the river bank on the other. In 1841 Bourke-street was
a series of rivulets, gullies, ponds and bogs, and it rejoiced in a
number of well-known stumps, particularised by the names of the per-
sons who had come to grief over them.
I he cleansing of the city and disposing of the refuse was not
attended to, being nobody’s business.
December Ist, 1842, the day of election of the first councillors,
was a great day of revelry.
In each of the four wards the rival candidates provided his own
table, at which the voters obtained a continuous supply of meat
and drink.
The most popular candidate was Henry Condell, one of the town
brewers.
I he day was kept as a holiday, and with bands of music and
plenty to supply the inner man, the people of Melbourne had a
day and night of jollification to mark their first council election.
Nearly all the 700 burgesses voted. The councillors returned
were :
Gipps Ward: Henry Condell, John Dixon and George Beaver.
Bourke Ward: John Thomas Smith, William Kerr and John
Patterson.
Latrobe Ward : Andrew Russell, George James and S. Campbell.
Lonsdale Ward: John Pascoe Fawkner, W. N. Mortimer and
John Orr.
The councillors elected Henry Condell, William Kerr, Andrew
Russell and W. N. Mortimer as their first aldermen, while H. Condell
was elected first Mayor.
I he following day the Mayor walked at the head of a procession
from the hired premises in Collins-street, where the first council was
held, to the Court house near the corner of King and Bourke streets,
and there took the oaths of office.
Then Melbourne entered upon her career of municipal self-govern-
ment, only seven years after the first inhabitants landed on that ever-
memorable August Sunday morning.
One of the first works of the Melbourne Town Council was to
throw a bridge of stout hardwood beams across the creek in Eliza-
beth-street, in line with Little Flinders-street. These old beams were
cut through when sewering Flinders-lane in line with the right-ofway
vest of Elizabeth-street.
1 he choice of the Town Hall site was only settled after some very
inharmonious meetings.
Mr. J. C. King was appointed the first Town Clerk.
One of the earliest matters dealt with was the necessity for a
bridge over the Yarra. The traffic was then provided for by a punt.
A bridge was first urged in 1840, but a battle of sites arose between
Swanston and Elizabeth streets. A meeting was held, which resulted
m 19 votes for Elizabeth-street and 18 for Swanston-street, but the
Sydney authorities decided for Swanston-street. As it was known
that the Sydney Government intended to build a handsome bridge
across the river, tenders were sailed for a temporary wooden structure,
120 feet in length, with a width of 17 feet roadway, and a four feet
footpath, which was erected and opened for traffic in 1845.
The Sydney authorities imported Mr. Thomas Lennox to super-
intend the new bridge, which was the first important one erected in
Australia.
The foundation of this graceful stone arch bridge was laid on
March 24th, 1846, by Superintendent Latrobe, assisted by the Aus-
tralia Felix Lodge of Freemasons. The procession was formed by


a band of trumpets in front, followed by the Freemasons in regalia,
succeeded by the Hon. the Superintendent and the local digm
taries. The bridge was named the Prince’s Bridge, after the pre-
sent King Edward VII., who was then Prince of M ales, and at that
time only four years old. Melbourne city is nine months younger
The same day was memorable, as the Freemasons also assisted
to lav the foundation stone of the Melbourne Hospital, whicn was
carriel out by Dr. Palmer, the then Mayor of Melbourne.
The Advance of Port Phillip.
The advance of Port Philip from 1836 to 1842 is shown by the
following statement in McCombie’s History of Victoria:
Y ea r Revenue. Expenditure. Land Sales.
£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d.
1836 2,164 16 8
1837 2,358 15 10 5,879 2 4f
1838 2,852 17 xo 16,030 2 5s 2 5, 2 |/ i 7 9
1839 i 4,7 0 3 5 10 24,034 10 45 30,986 11
11840 1 6 4L374 18 4 i 34,55 8 4 6 3
1841 81,673 10 4 74,324 19 4i 68,435 7 0
1842 84,56 6 9 3 9bi5 6 10 2)000 0 0
984 o 7 £2 54,965 o 6\ ,£393,9° 11 1
Expenditure on Immigration
Colonial Agents
Colonial Treasurer. in London.
1838 £ 2 9 4 o -£555 0 0
1839 n,474 ° 4 35° 0 0
1840 23,296 15 4 4,622 17 2
1841 121,979 4 9 3,986 8 1
1842 37,747 6 i| 145 2 3
,£194,527 1 6Jr ,£9,659 7 6
Total revenue all sources £616,895 11 8^
Total expenditure 45 9,4 11 5 °-:
Surplus £^ 57,484 6 74
This surplus New South Wales received from the revenue of the
Port Philip district.
These figures show a marvellous development in a few short years
in the infant settlement.
These statements of the facts surrounding the development of
Melbourne, from its first hut to its establishment as a town in 1842,
have been withdrawn from Bonwick’s “Settlement of Port
Westgarth’s “ Australia McCombie’s “History of Victoria,
and Sutherland’s “ Victoria and its Metropolis.”
These seven years served to wrest an uninhabited waste, except
for a few wandering tribes of blackfellows, from the hands of nature,
and lay the foundation of one of the most valuable provinces and
fairest jewels of the British Dominions on the banks of the com-
paratively small but exceptionally valuable, and more especially so in
Australia, “ Ever-Flowing River Yarra Yarra.’
Rachel.
A sleepy land, shut in by purple hills. A white road creeps down
the valley, crosses the river at the brawling ford, and winds on—
out into the world again. She was bom here, and yet it seemed no
one remembered that she was ever young. She was only Rachel,
with her gentle, careworn face, her busy hands and quiet ways.
Years before she had sat in a pew of the old chwch, and the grey-
haired pastor had preached the Resurrection and the Life. And
at the grave of her mother she had taken up her life burden. There
were many little ones in the humble household; she did what her
hands found to do, and kept the home together. She had her
dreams, but to her own heart yearnings had whispered—wait. But
the years went by, and somebody grew tired of waiting. “ He’ll
come back some day,” she said, but her eyes were misty, and the
turn in the road from which he had waved farewell was blurred
through her tears. The children grew up about her. So many little
mouths to feed, so many little garments to mend, so many little cares
to weigh her down. But “ sister ” never complained. When I knew her
first there were crow’s-feet about her eyes and sad lines around the
pitifully patient mouth. In her coming and going I grew to watch
for the frail, womanly little figure, with her patient, wistful face;
but there came a day when I missed her. “ Not sick,” she told them,
“only tired -so tired.” “Not sick,” repeated the children. Death
might smite other households—themselves, even —but it seemed as if
“ sister ” must be always there. But there came a day when the
windows of the little cottage were darkened, and a hush seemed
fallen upon the village. The weary heart was done with its throb-
bing and aching —the tired feet had strayed into a restful haven. As
they stood over the dead sister-mother they wondered that there
should be grev upon her temples, and it seemed in those deepened
lines in her meagre face that death had aged her a dozen years.
Finished. And the toil-worn hands, which had grasped only the
thorns of life, lay clasping a white rose. Finished—for “He giveth
His beloved sleep!”
-*>
Converting the Iron Duke into a Saint.
Messrs Winter and Thompson, a Belfast firm of sculptors, brought
an action against the Roman Catholic Bishop of Derry on -January
12th, in which they claimed £l3/14 for work done in altering statues
to be placed in the Derry Cathedral. The bishop tendered £5 in
settlement. The statues were bought in Dublin, and as they were too
large for the niches in which they were intended to be placed, they
were given to the sculptor for revision. Mr. Lockenden, sculptor,
whose time bill was 146 hours at Is. 6d. and 50 hours at Is., while
in the witness-box, was asked where he was in the habit of going for
his inspiration. He went, he said, into the fresh air under the canopy
of heaven, because the cathedral was very stuffy. He denied that he
went to a public-house for inspiration. He went for quite a different
purpose. A cathedral did not supply all the wants of a man for a
whole day. Counsel for the defence, however, declared that the search
for inspiration kept the sculptor days, and even weeks, from his work.
The sculptor said that the statues, which even disgusted the bishop,
were burlesques. St. Aloysius could have represented the Duke of
Wellington with a hump-back. “If you had to knock off St. Aloysius’
Wellington nose, you could not have replaced it very easily 1 ” asked
the Recorder. “No,’’replied the sculptor. “I had to take Sin.
from the shoulders, as in the original the saint’s neck was round his
chest, while his shoulders came up behind his ears. The bishop im-
pressed on me that St. Aloysius should look sad and melancholy, but
above all youthful. I succeeded, and the bishop praised the work.
The bishop then suggested that I should tackle one of the Evangelists.
St. Mark and St. Luke were not at all satisfactory, so I took the
latter first and licked him into decent shape—also to the satisfaction
of the bishop. I went over the remaining Evangelists and made them
all right, Then, when the statues were being fitted up, owing to
careless handling by the workmen, some of the saints’ fingers were
knocked off, as well as the wing of St. Columb’s dove. All of these I
had to restore ” The allegation of the bishop that the work only
occupied fourteen hours, said the sculptor, was absurd. He would be
proud to be able to turn the Duke of Wellington into St. Aloysius in
that time. The Recorder suggested that converting a duke into a
saint in a few hours was stiff work. “ You may say that,” said the
sculptor. “ Even at night, in bed, I was at work with a small board,
scaling the figures to try and get the shoulders to come down below
the ear, and get in a neck somewhere. Three of the statues I only
tone hed up, but as regards the three I altered from the head down to
below the bust, their hunchbacks were enough to make me suffer from
nervous excitement when I thought of tackling them. Of all the
statues, St. John was the most hopeless. He was represented as a
female, and could not be improved.” Mr. Lockenden was asked in
cross-examination who was over him at the works. He replied that
an artist claimed to be superior to any clerk of works. The Recorder
held that the tender of £5 was sufficient, as the firm in one of their
letters stated : “We are charging on time only.” He decided regret-
fully, because he knew of the difficulties of artists, who, in common
with novelists and literary men, had days on which they could not
work to their satisfaction.
Historic.
The historic site of Clausentum, situated on the river Itehen
Southampton, which formed the doorway to the Roman legions on
their invasion of Great Britian and remained their chief naval station
during their occupation of this country from a.d. 41 to a.d. 375, has been
purchased and taken possession of by the War Office for the purpose
of a military depot for the time-expired men and reservists. The want
of barracks has been-keenly felt. In 1902 as many as 243,873 troops
landed and embarked at this port, and in 1903, 77,902
troops also passed through the port. At times it has been
necessary to locate the men in the grain warehouses of the docks as
temporary barracks at great inconvenience to them. Now, however,
the Government propose erecting large and commodious barrac
accommodation on the identical site which for about 400 years was the
camp of the Roman Legions. The remains of the fortified camp aie
still visible, including the outside ditch and stone masonry, wit
looped walls. Tesselated pavement, pottery, implements, and coins in
large quantities have been found disseminated over the whole aiea
whenever the ground has been disturbed. Amoung the coins foun
are those of Claudius, Vespasian. Titus, Domitian, Nero, Trajan,
Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, Gordianus Africanus, (in silver), Gallienus,
Victorinus, Tebricus, Diocletianus, Constantine the Great (in laige
number), and Allectus. All are in a more or less excellent state o
preservation. V hen the foundations of the new barracks are ma e
many valuable remains will, it is hoped, be brought to light, and pie
served. From the initials “ S.C.” found on several coins, it is believed
that the Romans possessed a mint there.


WM. MAGHAR and SONS,
415 VICTORIA STREET, ABBOTSFORD..
SPECIALITIES.
Semi-c/ry Brick-
making
Machinery,
Plastic Wire cut
Brickmaking
Machinery,
Perforated and
Solid Grinding
Pans,
Steam Power &
Hand Brick
Presses.
CI
BP
m
■< $
i
i w.
r
hr.
mnifii
■■u i
•w. .
'
mxm
CL
. • S .' s
;• ■ -
1 HU MMWhI BH :
••
L:t- l a ,„
1
'
.
' r
♦
Vi*
SPECIALITIES.
Winding Gear,
day Mixers,
Tile Presses,
Elevators,
Pipe and Tile
Making
Machines,
Shafting,
Pulleys and
Gear.
Double Action
Force and Lift
Pumps.
-I-
-\
BRICK MAKING MACHINERY & MINING PLANTS.


MELBOURNE AND METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS’ OFFICES,
Sun Blinds Fitted by Messrs. Campbell, Johnson & Clark.


Telephone 1682 Central.
J. M. ANDERSON & Sons,
« —>
IRONWORKERS, ENGINEERS, COPPERSMITHS & GALVANIZERS.
( Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
CONTRACTORS TO Victorian Mines and Water Supply Department.
( City Council.
IHamifactiirers of Galvanized mild Steel Rivetted Pipes for
Hydraulic Sluicing. Water Supply.
Air Compressors.
Pumping and Irrigation.
Ventilating, &c.
(These pipes are made from black sheets and are galvanized after making, thus preventing rust and adding to their durability.)
Water Troughs, Hydraulic Nozzles, Iron Fluming, Bends , Junctions, Tees.
IRON SLUICE BOXES & RIPPLES.
j
'A
n
mm
■
%
gyi ’jgpjjr *. >7 -w?
A
W
m
m
~ '
<ad
*.
m
mm
% '
*.* 'W- -
:
w few-:
MM
1
1
A
Vti
m
&
at»*
V
1.. '.TH : V':
•' ' *
V** c - ' . **
■
TSS
*
MS
m
m
l
Y r
r
k.
1
HYDRAULIC ELEVATOR AT WORK.
Hydraulic Elevators as shown above, all sizes. Complete Plants supplied.
Engineers’ & Plumbers’ Copperwork. Range Boilers, Cylinders, Confectioners’ & Brewers’ Copperwork*
Vignerons’ Brandy Stills a Specialty.
SEWERAGE REQUISITES: Flushing Pipes, Offsets, Bends, Cowls, &c.
Estimates Given. Price Lists on application.
Factory, 334-336 LITTLE LONSDALE STREET ,
Office, 288-290 QUEEN STREET (Opposite
MELBOURNE.
Income Tax Office),


TELEPHONE 1749.
4
Sanitary Appliance Manufacturers
Contractors to Melbourne & Metropolitan Board of Works, the Admiralty, the Victorian
and all the throughout the World.
v 9 vU •
Berths.
Wash Basins.
Sinks
Closets
Cisterns.
Urinals.
Vent pipes.
Cowls, <%c.
• o^o-
- For
BERKEFELD FILTERS,
Most Rapid and
Germ Proof
in the World
IsPiBB
■
A
111
S v :
ms
tfW
'i
mm
m.
, P
1
'
i
iH
m
■
-
'
v
Brass fittipgs.
Xead pipes.
Cast Jrorj pipes.
Glass Enamelled
pipes.
Stoneware Pipes and
Brackets.
Black and Galvanized
Water Pipes and
Fittings.
AUSTRALIAN AGENCIES:
SYDNEY—W. P. Smith, 385 George Street.
PERTH—W. E. Goss <& Co., Hay Street.
ADELAIDE Fearn & Co., Pulteney Street.
Branches at: London, Manchester, Birmingham, Dublin, Glasgow, Edinburgh
Gape Town, Amsterdam, &c., &c.
Shanks & Co., 335 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.


MR. E. G. FITZ GIBBON, C.M.G.
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF WORKS.


Biographical of the Principal Officers of the Board.
The Chairman,
Mr. E. G. Fitz Gibbon, C.M.G.
Mr. Edmund Gerald Fitz Gibbon, third and only son surviving, and
with surviving male issue of the late Gibbon Carew Fitz Gibbon,
descendant of the White Knight, was born in Cork, in 1825, reared
in London, was for some time employed under the Committee of the
Privy Council on Education; emigrated to Australia in 1852, arriving
in Melbourne by the ship “ John Taylor,” in September of that year,
proceeded to the Mount Alexander goldfields, and 'remained there
until July following, when he had occasion to return to Melbourne;
there appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor, C. J. La Trobe, Esq.,
as Reader to the Legislative Council for the Session of 1853-4, he
arranged and made the first catalogue of the Parliamentary Library.
At the close of the Session, in April, 1854, Mr. Fitz Gibbon entered
the service of the Corporation of Melbourne as Clerk of Committees,
drafter of by-laws, etc. He conducted the business of opening the
streets of Fitzroy Ward, under the Fitzroy Ward Improvement Act.
On the resignation of the Town Clerk, Mr. William Kerr, in May,
1856, he was appointed,, by the Acting Governor, Major-General
Macarthur, Towm Clerk of Smith Ward, and on June 30th following,
■was elected by the City Council as Town Clerk of Melbourne, and
held that office until May 31st, 1891. As Town Clerk, he was
instrumental in preventing the Corporation from being deprived of
its revenue from market dues, and by a speech as Counsel at the Bar
of the Legislative Council, in 1861, procured the rejection of a Bill
which would have had that effect, and which had passed the Legislative
Assembly. Mr. Fitz Gibbon prepared and secured the passing of a
Bill in support of which he again spoke at the Bar of the Legislative
Council in 1863, which effected an important reform in relation to the
election ot Mayors of the City, and which conferred upon the City
Council powers to let its market lands upon building leases, to the
exercise of which power is owing the building of the Western Market,
the Eastern Market, and the .Northern Market, the rentals from
which add many thousands a year to the Corporation revenue. He
strenuously opposed the policy pursued by the then Surveyor-General,
Captain (now Sir Andrew) Clarke, of cutting off portions of the City
of Melbourne to constitute them separate municipalities, and when
the first of those separations, after his election—that of St. Kilda—
took place, in February, 1857, he appeared before the Governor, Sir
Henry Barkly, and Executive Council, composed of Messrs. Haines,
Stawell, bellows, Sladen,-Pasley, Childers, Clarke, Molesworth, and
Mitchell, and in opposition to the late Sir George Stephen, who
appeared for the ratepayers of St. Kilda, he succeeded in having
the new Municipality charged with payment of its proportion of in-
terest upon the “ Gabrielle Loan of and the decision then
arrived at regulated like charge upon each of the other places, which
were subsequently separated from the City. Finding; that the policy
of the Department of Crown Lands was to ignore the reservation of
the ample parks, which the wisdom and public-spirited foresight of
Mr. La I robe had designed for the Metropolis, and to cut up and
sell or otherwise alienate those lands, he persistently and vigorously
protested against, and opposed that policy, and succeeded in getting
clauses inserted in successive Land Acts, entitling the City Council
to put in proof of promises of such reservations, and to claim their
fulfilment, and acting thereon, he secured the publication of notices
of permanent reservation of park areas more extensive than those
now existing, and having subsequently found that the Lands Depart-
ment. took advantage of neglect, which it had committed in not
entering the permanent reservation in the Minute Book of the
Executive Council, and was making away with further portions of
the parks, he at length succeeded in obtaining Crown Grants, vesting
the parks as now existing in the Board of Land and Works, and the
City Council jointly, so that the one body should be a check upon
the other to prevent either political or municipal private interest from
effecting further spoilation. He vigourously opposed the at
tempts of private companies to obtain rights to electrically light
the City, so that that mode of lighting should be secured to the City
Council, and be a set-off against the claims of the Gas Companv.
He opposed the Tramway Company’s attempt to get permanent
possession of the streets, and secured the reversion of the tramways
upon expiry' of a lease for thirty years. He got like conditions im-
posed upon the Hydraulic Power Company. He gave close atten-
tion to the protection of public health, in improvement and cleanli-
ness of the . abattoirs, dairies, market places, and streets, and took
personal action for preventing the spread of small-pox whenever that
disease was introduced into the City. For improvement of the sani-
tary condition of the City he induced the abandonment of the old
plan of cesspits, whereby the subsoil was being saturated with
foulness and caused the adoption of the pan system, which served
as a better expedient, pending the construction of sewers, and by
persistently re-calling attention to the want of sewers, and to the
obligation which was undertaken by the Government in 1853, to
sewer the City from the proceeds of the sale of the lands of the
Colony, and without any charge to the ratepayers, and to construct
the water works, and hand them over to the citizens when the cost
of construction should be paid for by the water rates, he induced the
suburban Municipalities to join with the City Council in advocating an
amalgamation of their common interests in all Metropolitan matters,
by association in a Metropolitan Board of Works, or, finally, a
unification of their Municipal functions. And out of that advocacy
came the creation of the present Melbourne and Metropolitan Board
of Works, at the commencement of the year 1891. For the Chair-
manship of it, he was reluctantly induced to become a candidate,
and having been elected, he took office on June Ist of that year, the
duration of office being for four years. His first term, expired on
May 31st, 1895; his second term on the same month and dav in
1899, his third term in 1904, and on all occasions he has been re-
elected unanimously by the Board.
in all the matters above mentioned, he had the approbation,
counsel and support of the successive Mayors, and of the Aldermen
and Councillors of the City.
The estimation in which Mr. Fitz Gibbon w r as held as Town Clerk
was indicated by the City Council at the end of 1875 granting him
a year’s leave of absence with full pay, during which period he visited
the principal cities of the Mother Country, and on his return reported
as to recent sanitary improvements, and especially recommended the
purchase of the Gas Works, and in January, 1888, when, without
any application from him or previous intimation to him of its inten-
tion, the Council increased his salary from to per
annum, and, subsequently, to dissuade him from relinquishing the
office, intimation was given him that the Council would willingly pay
him the same salary as was offered by the Board of Works, namely,
a year. And outside the City Council the citizens in July,
1889, paid by a subscription amounting to upwards of the
cost of a full length portrait of him to place in the Town Hall, where
it now is, as also a replica for his own house, accompanied with a
portrait of Mrs. Fitz Gibbon, to whom they likewise presented a
diamond star.
Outside his duties as Town Clerk, Mr. Fitz Gibbon has occupied
himself with many matters of public benefit and importance. A
proposal of the Imperial Government in 1864 to re-commenee the
transportation of convicts to Western Australia was met with a pas-
sionately indignant protest from this colony. A new Anti-transporta-
tion League was formed, of which he was an energetic member. He
became honorary secretary to the movement, and wrote the addresses
and despatches which were sent to the Government and people of
England, and which led to abandonment of the proposal. He com-
municated with the Home authorities, with the maritime countries of
Europe, and with America in regard to night signals for ships in
distress, and received thanks from the Board of Trade, from His
Majesty the King of the Belgians, and others. He was called to the
Victorian Bar in iB6O, and in the same year unsuccessfully contested
the County of South Bourke, on Free Trade principles, for a seat
in the Legislative Assembly. He, by letters in the press and by
pamphlets, decried the operation of the system of government by
party, as it had developed in this and the neighbouring colonies, and
thereby exercised some influence in inducing greater stability in
political management. The last pamphlet written by him was in
contraversion of the theories promulgated by the late Mr. Henry
George in the work entitled “ Progress and Poverty,” and for a copy
of that pamphlet presented on Mr. Fitz Gibbon’s behalf to Her
Majesty, by His Royal Highness, the Duke of Edinburgh, the
author received a letter conveying Her Majesty’s thanks.
Mr. Fitz Gibbon married, in 1873, Sarah, eldest daughter of the
late Mr. Michael Dawson, an old and successful colonist, and by
her (who died August 28th, 1899) has had issue six sons, five of
whom are surviving. He was a lieutenant in the original local rifle
and artillery regiments. He represents the parish of Christ Church,
South Yarra, in the Church of England Assembly, is a Justice of the
Peace, and for service to the City of Melbourne, he was, at the
close of 1891, created by Her Majesty a Companion of the Order of
St. Michael and St. George.


Mr. WM. THWAITES, M.A., M.I.E., M.I.C.E.,
ENGINEER-IN-CHIEF.


The Engineer=in=Chief,
Mr. W. Thwaites, M.A., M.C.E., M I C E.
Mr. Wm. Thwaites, the Engineer-in-Chief of the Board, was born
in Melbourne on August 15th, 1855. His father is Mr. T. H.
Thwaites, long and favourably known in the cabinet-making trade
in Melbourne, and is now over eighty years of age and in good health.
Mr. George Thwaites, the grandfather of Mr. Thwaites, arrived
in the colony in 1842, from which time up to about 1889 the firm
of George Thwaites and Son had the honour of furnishing many of
the better-class houses in the colony, including the State rooms at
Government House —from the time of Sir Charles Hotham to the
present.
The career of Mr. Thwaites commenced with his education in the
Victorian Grammar School, Collins-street; he afterwards attended
the Model Schools, Spring-street, under the tuition of Messrs.
Henry Jones and Patrick Whyte. He obtained the silver medal of
the school in 1867, passed the Civil Service examination under the
old regulations in September, 1868, and the matriculation examination
at the Melbourne University in 1869. Leaving school to pursue his
studies at the University, he obtained the following honours: —1870
(February)—Proxime accessit; mathematical exhibition in Matricula-
tion. 1870 (October) —Mathematical exhibition, first year; first-class
honours, first year, engineering; Professor Kernot’s prize for surveying.
1871 (October) —Mathematical exhibition, second year; engineering
exhibition, second year; first-class honours, second year, engineering.
1872 (October) —Natural Science exhibition, second year; second-
class honours, second year, Arts. 1873 (February)—“ Argus ” En-
gineering Scholarship; second-class honours, third year, engineering.
1873 (April)—Certificate of Civil Engineer. 1874 (May) —Bachelor
of Arts. 1875 (February) —Natural Science Scholarship, third year,
Arts; first-class honours, third year, Arts. 1876 (May)—Master of
Arts.
Mr. Thwaites’ University career was pursued under the tuition of
Professors Kernot, McCoy, Wilson and Hearn, and during that
period ,£330 in scholarships and exhibitions fell to his lot, besides
three first classes, two seconds, and one third, together with Professor
Kernot’s prize for surveying.
On leaving the University Mr. Thwaites entered the Victorian
Railway Department and commenced his professional career, a brief
statement of which is appended:—April 29th, 1874 —He entered the
Victorian Railway Department as a pupil draughtsman in the central
office, and was thence transferred to the field on the survey of the
Portland and Hamilton railway, and thence on to the construction of
the Oakleigh to Bunyip and Ararat to Stawell lines, under the
guidance of Messrs. L. P. Moline Lunt and Peyton-Jones. Leaving
this department on September 27th, 1876, he entered the Railway
Department of South Australia on October 24th, 1876 —then
presided over by Mr. H. C. Mais, M. Inst. C.E.—and was there
employed as Assistant Surveyor on the Port Augusta and Government
Gums railway survey up to June 30th, 1877; and then on the con-
struction of the Port Wakefield and Kadina railway up to October
31st, 1878, serving under the late Mr. R. Stewart, and Mr.
McCormick, Engineer-in-Chief of Tasmania on the former work,
and under Mr. J. Blackburne, afterwards Engineer of De-
fences in Victoria, on the latter work. 1879. —Mr. Thwaites
then returned to Victoria, and was employed in 1879 in the
Public Works Department for the purposes of making the en-
gineering surveys for the Portland Harbour, Gippsland Lakes’
Entrance, and the Sale navigation, for the information of Sir
John Coode, in connection with his reports on those proposed
works. During this year he also surveyed Swan Island for Defence
purposes. 1880.—During 1880 he was employed on improvement
works on the Broken Creek, in the North-Eastern District. 1880-
1883. —He entered the Melbourne Water Supply branch of the
Public Works Department, surveyed and set out the Bruce’s Creek
diversion channel at Whittlesea for diverting the township drainage
from the inlet to the Yan Yean Reservoir. Then made the explora-
tion surveys in Mount Disappointment, which resulted in the addition
of the Wallaby and Silver Creek waters to the Yan Yean system,
probably saying Melbourne in 1881 from a water famine, which ap-
peared inevitable until, these creeks were found to be readily avail-
able.
I he next work was to design and set out the Toorourrong; Reser-
voir and Silver Creek channels for diverting the water supply from
the Plenty River, and rendering the water supply of the Yan Yean
catchment free from all possible pollution from its source to the Yan
Yean Reservoir.
The working drawings of the Wallaby Creek works, the Cascade
Diops, the Toorourrong Reservoir, and the clear water channel were
pr< pared b} him, and on transfer to the city he designed Essendon
Xo. i and Caulfield Reservoirs. All these works were carried out
under Mr. W. Davidson, M. Inst. C.E., the present Inspector-General
of Public Works.
1883. —In February, 1883, Mr. Thwaites was appointed Engineer
of Roads and Bridges and Reclamation Works, which position he
held until appointed Engineer of Melbourne Water Supply in 1890.
During this period he had charge of all roads then under direct
Government control, reported on all works subsidised bv the Public
Works Department, and carried out very extensive reclamation works
in Port and South Melbourne, Eootscray, North Melbourne and
Flemington.
The Port Melbourne Lagoon works were designed and carried out
by him, an undertaking which was very strongly criticised at the
time, but nevertheless has been entirely successful, both from an
engineering and a health point of view, for the death rate fropi 1885-
1891, previous to the construction of the lagoon works, was 20.12
per 1000, while for the years 1892-1898, subsequent to the completion,
the average death rate had dropped to 13.82, or 32 per cent.
The Dight’s Falls scheme, another strongly criticised work, has
been entirely successful, rendering the present'beautiful condition of
the Botanical Gardens possible, and the lake in Albert Park, a
pleasanter area for boating purposes than it was. The water had been
previously obtained from opposite Jolimont, where the water was ex-
tremely salt and also foul. The water at this point has become salter
and fouler than it was at the time when the scheme was designed,
whereas the present point of offtake will always be free from salt and
purer than any other point of the river near the metropolis.
Ihe Elwood Swamp works were also carried out at this period,
resulting in the obliteration of the old pestilential swamp at Elwood,
but as the works are not yet completed, the full benefit has not been
realised, and will not be, until finally dealt with. The reclamation
of Condah, Koo-wee-rup and Moe Swamps was also laid out and
commenced by him.
In January, 1886, Mr. Thwaites obtained the certificate of com-
petency as Municipal Surveyor under the Local Government Act.
1887 —In our description of the Maroondah or Watt’s River Scheme
of Water Supply, Mr. Thwaites is deserving of well-earned en-
comiums—Elected member of the Victorian Institute of Engineers.
December, 1887 —Elected Associate Member of the Institute of Civil
Engineers, London. February, 1887 —Appointed a member of the
Board of Examiners of Engineers of Water Supply under the Irriga-
tion Act, 1886. April, 1887 —Elected member of the Council of the
Institute of Surveyors. June, 1888—Appointed a member of the
Municipal Surveyors’ Board under the Local Government Act. 1888
and 1889 —Appointed by the Melbourne University as co-examiner
in engineering subjects. November 6, 1889 —Transferred to the
Class of Member of the Institute of Civil Engineers, London.
October 17 th, 1890 —Elected a member of the Council of the Mel-
bourne University. June 16th, 1891 —Elected Engineer-in-Chief of
the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works; commenced his
duties on July Ist, 1891, and is still so employed. 1893 —Elected
President of the Victorian Association of Engineers. 1897—Elected
a member of the Association of the Municipal and County Engineers
of Great Britain. November, 1897 —Elected a member of the Sani-
tary Institute of London. April, 1899 —Elected a member of the
Council of the Institution of Civil Engineers of London, to represent
Australasia on the Council for the year 1899-1900.
The work Mr. Thwaites is now engaged on is elsewhere described
in these pages, and, although only a percentage of the houses have
been connected, is making its effects felt for good already, not only
in the improvement of the health of the areas in which it is installed,
but also in those surrounding them.
The work that has fallen to Mr. Thwaites’ lot during the last fifteen
years has been very onerous, but being well endowed, physically and
mentally, he has been enabled to carry the works out up to the pre-
sent in a highly successful manner. He suffered a severe loss recently
in the death of his wife.


Superintending Engineer of Sewerage,
Mr. C. E. Oliver, 0.E., M.C.E,
Mr. C. E. Oliver is the son of Mr. Alexander Calder Oliver, one
df the first secretaries of the Roads and Bridges Department, Victoria,,
and step-son of Dr. Barrett, of North Melbourne. Mr. Oliver was
born at St. Kilda on July 4th, 1855, and was educated at the Church
of England Grammar School, under the late Dr. Bromby, obtaining
his degree of C.E. at the Melbourne University in 1876, and that
of M.C.E. in 1893. He obtained his certificate of Municipal Engineer
in 1886 and of Hydraulic Engineer in 1889; was elected A.M.I.C.E.
in 1888, and M. Inst. C.E. in 1897. From 1877-1878 he was em-
ployed in the Railway Department, and was with Messrs. C. and
E. Miller, the well-known railway contractors, during the years 1878-
1883. From 1883-1884 he worked under the Sydney City Engineer
in connection with the sewerage scheme, and during 1885-1886 he
was engaged in railway work in New South Wales and Western Aus-
tralia. Mr. Oliver then took up the duties of resident engineer in
connection with the Maroondah Water Works, second section, which
occupied him from 1887-1889. He was employed during 1890-1891
as Inspecting Engineer of the Victorian Water Supply Department.
From 1892 up to the present time Mr. Oliver has been with the
Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works as Superintending
Engineer of Sewerage, and has, in that position, rendered such im-
portant service that when a suggestion was made a few years ago,
on a motion of one of the commissioners, that there should be a
reduction in the staff, and that Mr. Oliver’s services should, in view
of the lessening of work, be dispensed with, his chief plainly and
emphatically stated that Mr. Oliver’s assistance was too valuable,
and that such a proceeding would be detrimental to the work in hand.
The suggestion was at once negatived. It may be stated that, taken
altogether, the contracts carried out under the superintendence of Mr.
Oliver have been completed for considerably less than the contract
price, and there is little doubt that his wide experience and profes-
sional ability have been the means of a large saving to the ratepayers.
The following figures will give some idea of the care exercised in the
prosecution of this work:—•
No. of Schedule Final
Work. Contract. Account. Payment.
Hobson’s Bay Main 5 291.674 286,270
South Yarra Main 3 101,631 97> i0 3
Richmond Main ... 3 57,806 555*62
Melbourne Main 3 595609 78,449
North Yarra Main 7 280,487 272,837
Branch Sewer 24 126,351 123,135
Reticulation 56 . 371,706 355’ 1 56
Pumping Station 3 50,400 48593 1
Outfall Sewer 13 £ 2 £ 2 4°>74%
£ 1,576,221 ,£L557579 1
the difference amounting to the sum of
Mr. Oliver has been on the Council of the Working Men’s College
for several years, and is an ex-President of the Victorian Insti-
tute of Engineers. In addition to his enginering work, Mr. Oliver
devotes a large part of his spare time to scientific research, having
made a special study of the Rontgen rays and wireless telegraphy.
Designing Engineer,
Mr. C. Kussmaul, A.M.I.E.
Mr. C. Kussmaul received his education in a German Technical
School, where he attended the engineering courses during four and a-
half years —1867-1872. He was afterwards engaged during 1872-
1880 in the Government Railway Department, South Germany, first
as engineering draughtsman in the office, then as assistant engineer
in charge of the construction of a section of railway line, in-
cluding a large viaduct 600 feet long, and xoo feet high. From
1880 to 1882 he was superintending engineer for the construction
and maintenance of a narrow-guage railway line (1 metre gauge), of
17 miles in length in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg (Belgium).
From 1882 to 1885 Mr. Kussmaul superintended the construction of
various engineering works, railways (Black Forest), including tunnels
and bridges of considerable magnitude. He was employed from
1886 to 1891 as draughtsman in the Victorian Railway Department;
engaged in the designing and computing of bridges, tunnels, viaducts
and making out estimates of cost, etc. From 1891 up to date Mr.
Kussmaul has been employed by the Metropolitan Board of Works
as designing engineer in charge of preparing all plans, details,
estimates of cost, quantities for all the works connected with the
Sewerage Scheme, specification and schedule for contracts. Mr.
Kussmaul is an Associate Member of the Institute of Engineers.
Assistant Engineers.
Mr A C. Smith, A.M.I.C.E
Mr. Albert Casson Smith began his professional career in Novem-
ber, 1879, when he entered into an apprenticeship under Mr. Charles
Gott, M. Inst. C.E., 20 years borough surveyor of Bradford, Yorks,
during which he assisted in the carrying out of the Spen Valley drain-
age works, and later on of the sewerage of Sheffield, to which, at the
expiration of his articles,, he became resident engineer under Mr.
Gott. In November, 1885, Mr. Smith came to Victoria. He was
appointed to the position of draughtsman in the City Surveyor’s
office, Melbourne, in March, 1886, which position he held until April,
1887, when he was appointed Assistant City Surveyor at South Mel-
bourne, and retained that position until February, 1893, when the
financial crisis prevented further improvement works being proceeded
with. Mr. A. C Smith was a student of the Institution of
Civil Engineers in 1882, an Authorised Municipal Surveyor (Vic.),
1887; Authorised Government Contract Surveyor (Vic.), 1889;
Licensed under the Transfer of Land Statute (Vic.), 1889; Associate
Member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, 1889; Engineer of
Water Supply (Vic.), 1890
A. C. Smith. W. Wilson. W. G. Dawson. H. P. Nevins.
Mr. W. G. Dawson, M.C.E., A.M.I.C E.
Mr. W. G. Dawson obtained his Certificate of Civil Engineer at
the Melbourne University in 1885, and his Degree of Master of Civil
Engineering in 1894. In the latter year he was elected an Associate
Member of the Institute of Civil Engineers (London) and obtained his
Certificate of Qualification as a Municipal Engineer (Victoria) in
1896. In 1898 he obtained a Certificate of Qualification as Engineer
of Water Supply (Victoria). He was appointed in November, 1891,
to the position of Assistant Engineer of Sewerage, Melbourne and
Metropolitan Board of Works.
Mr. W. Wi son.
Mr. W. Wilson has had charge of sections 1 to 6 of Outfall Sewer,
sections 2 to 4 of Hobson’s Bay Main Sewer, sections 1 and 2 South
Yarra Sewer, sections 1 and 3 Melbourne Main Sewer, several of the
sub-mains in Port Melbourne and South Melbourne, and all house
connection work in Port Melbourne, South Melbourne, St. Kilda and
City proper. His earlier career was intimately associated with the
extension and surveys of the Yan Yean Water Supply, at first in con-
junction with Mr. Thwaites, and afterwards on special surveys.
Mr. H. R. Nevins.
Mr. H. P. Nevins was articled to George Bellamy, Esq., M. Inst.
C.E., borough and inter engineer to the city of Plymouth, England,
during which time he gained considerable experience in both con-
struction and office work. From 1887 to 1891 he was in the
employ of the Victorian Government on waterworks construction.
From 1891 to the present time Mr. Nevins has been with the Board
of Works,


Mr. JOHN WILSON,
Resident Inspector, Yan Yean.


Resident Inspector Yan Yean.
Mr. John Wilson.
Ihe subject of this sketch is the son of the well-known Captain
Charles Peter W ilson, of the Black Ball Line of Sailing Packets
between New \ ork and Liverpool, and who, at the time of his death,
was commander of the “ Duke of Cambridge.”
Mr. \\ ilson has charge and general supervision of the Yan Yean
and Maroondah systems of water supply to Melbourne and the
metropolis, and of the works from Bell-street, Preston, to the top of
Black s Spur, in the Maroondah system; and from Bell-street, Pres-
ton, to the head works of Silver Creek, in the Yan Yean system.
He is also the custodian of the purity and regulation of supply, and
of the Board's Reservations within the above limits. His ’ head-
quarters are at Yan Yean Reservoir, where he has resided for the
last 30 \eais. His biography is largely a, history of the progress of
the Water Supply Y orks, and interesting on that account.
He was born in Liverpool, England, and educated in the famous
Blue Coat School, into which institution he gained admittance in 1848
through the influence of the late Hon. W. E. Gladstone and Dr. Gill!
Leaving school in 1853, he entered the service of Rennie and
Johnson, an engineering and shipbuilding firm, where he had 18
months in the drafting and mould rooms.
He arrived in Victoria in 1859, and in November of the same year
made his first acquaintance with the Melbourne Water Supply, in
the Yan Yean district, being engaged under the then Resident En-
gineer, the late Charles John I aylor, C.E., on the drainage works
through the Toorourong Swamp, north of Whittlesea, to the foot-
of the Plenty Ranges. At this time Bruce’s Creek and the western
branch of the Plenty River had no defined course above Y'hittlesea,
but in gravitating to Yan Yean, spread over a large area of ti-tree
swamp, and was much polluted by stock, etc. The- qualitv of the
watei Under these conditions was, and could not be otherwise than
defiled and objectionable. Flood waters of the most tuibid and
polluted character had to be admitted to the reservoir, trusting to
precipitation and improvement therein. At periods it was simply a
question of “ needs must when the devil drives,” or water of that
character is better than no water at all.
Mr. Wilson’s services seemed to be valuable to Mr. Tavlor in
marking out the lines cutting the drains. He was employed on
the drainage works for nine months, and afterwards contracted for,
and erected six bridges across the newly-cut watercourses, at dif-
ferent points, for the accommodation of stock, etc.
From this onward to 1872 he had no service in the Department,
but was engaged contracting, road construction and maintenance,
bridge building, general contracting, and farming ; but still remained
a resident of the Yan Yean district.
In 1872 he was engaged to build, and successfully launched into
the Yan Yean Reservoir, a punt of about 20 tons, known as “ The
Commissioner. This vessel was used and worked under sail on
the reservoir, in carrying bluestone spalls to different points, for
protecting the natural slopes of the Reservoir, which had become
very much washed away by the action of the water, causing dis-
colouration.
About this period Mr. C. J. Taylor resumed the duties of Super-
intending Engineer of Water Supply, and in the projection of the
scheme of works for increasing the means of carrving supply to
Melbourne, obtained Mr. Ydlson employment on the survey for an
aqueduct between Yan Yean and Morang, as at present existing.
The surveyor was Mr. Nethersole, C.E., a recent arrival from India.
After a second survey by Mr. Moselv, of the Marine Department,
Public Works Department, and a satisfactory completion bv Mr.
Davidson, a contract was let to Overend and Robb for the supply
and delivery of bluestone ashlar for the first section of the aqueduct
works, or from the Circular Basin, Yan Yean (as it is at present) to a
point 45 yards south of the Plenty; and subsequently a contract for
laying three miles of tramway (iron) was let. Mr. Wilson assisted
in the supervision of both contracts.
The excavation for the aqueduct and setting the masonry was
let, by contract, to Barry, of Brunswick, who relinquished it a few
months afterwards. At this period Mr. Thos. Cattanach was ap-
pointed, or transferred, from the Public Works Department to the
chief supervision. The contract was-sub-let to Overend and Robb,
April, 1874, and Mr. Cattanach, in consequence of old age and bad
health, being compelled to give up w 7 ork, Mr. Wilson was appointed
by Mr. Warded, Inspector-General of Public Works, on the recom-
mendation of Charles J. Taylor, Sup. Eng., to the general supervision
of the contract.
About three months afterwards the second section was let by con-
tract, and his services extended to both contracts. The second
section included the Pipehead Reservoir, and line of aqueduct from
Overend and Robb’s to the Pipehead Reservoir, and Mr. Wilson
supervised the line of operations from the Yan Yean to the Pipe-
head Reservoir—6f miles—and contracts were completed in Sep-
tember, 1875. Concurrently with the supervision of the contracts,
Mr. Wilson had the supervision of works not included in the con-
tract, and being executed by day labour. The number of hands
averaged over 100 until the end of the year 1875. These were
employed in levelling spoil, forming and soiling slopes, providing
material for, and the erection of stone and timber fences, accommo-
dation crossings over aqueduct, side and outlet drains, etc., etc.
( As the aqueduct works were drawing to completion, the office of
Resident Inspector, Yan Yean, became vacant, and Mr. Wilson was
appointed to the position in April, 1876, on the recommendation of
Charles J. Taylor (Sup. Engineer), Mr. Warded (Inspector-General
of 1 üblic Works), and the late Robt. Ramsay, who was then
Postmaster-General.
A time of intense anxiety and hard work, night and day, came
upon Mr. Wilson when the great flood of March, 1878, carried away
the bridge and aqueduct over the Plenty River (fully described
elsewhere in this book), and his exertions won for him the still
greater confidence of his superiors. The rainfall within the catch-
ment alone increased the Reservoir level by inches, or, say
540,000,000 gallons. The Byewash was widened during the flood of
1863, but it was still further improved and widened by Mr. Wilson
after the 1878 flood.
Soon after this he constructed the channel between Yan Yean
outlet and the Circular Bluestone Basin. Continuing in the office of
Resident inspector, he took part in the Wallaby Aqueduct Works,
and the work of building the cascades to connect the Wallaby Chan-
nel with the bed of Jack s Creek, was performed by day labour, under
his direction and supervision. On completion of the Wallaby works,
in 1883, (hose of the Clear Water Channel were taken in hand. A
contract was let to Mcßirnie and Anderson, and afterwards transferred,
by consent, to Falkingham and Son. At this juncture, much to the
relief of Mr. Davidson, who had failed in securing a suitable officer,
Mr. Wilson volunteered to supervise the contract, which was com-
pleted in December, 1884. Under date May 22nd, 1884, Mr.
Davidson wrote: “At present he acts as Chief Inspector of the Clear
Water Channel Works. Were he not available for this, and did he
not possess the requisite, knowledge and intelligence, it would be
necessary to keep an engineer constantly on the work.”
Before completion of the Clear Water Channel, in September,
1884, the Silver Creek Aqueduct Works were commenced, the con-
tractor being Mr. J. Barker. So that for a time Mr. Wilson had the
supervision of both contracts, and also the supervision of day labour
Oil the Ciear Water Channel. When the Silver Creek works were
completed, Mr. Wilson was awarded a bonus of on the
recommendation of Mr. Davidson, Mr. Steel, and Mr. Le Cren, for
satisfactorily performing these duties, in addition to those apper-
taining to his office of Resident Inspector, and also for the funds
saved in not having to employ a resident engineer for supervision of
the works.
After completion of the Silver Creek Works, Mr. Wilson, with
the consent and direction of Mr. Davidson, designed, laid out, and
constructed, by day labour, the rough pitched channel in the valley
of Jack’s Creek, above Toorourong Reservoir. Length, 131 chains.
And also the timber shoot below the cascades. He also, by direction
of the Superintending Engineer, Mr. Davidson, built “No. 2 Com-
missioner,” a punt of about 35 tons. In launching the vessel it
had a run of about 60 feet into the water. The launch was made
the occasion of a fete day, and was witnessed by a large con-
course of local residents and influential visitors, both ladies and
gentlemen, including Mr. and Mrs. Le Cren, Mr. and Mrs. Force,
Mr. and Mrs. Davidson, Mr. Fuller (Surveyor), Mr. J. Barker, and
many more. The launch was very successful, and afforded an object-
lesson to those who had never seen one.
The brushing and cleansing of the channels of the Silver Creek,
Wallaby Creek and Maroondah systems is a laborious undertaking,
and, in cold weather, trying to the health and energy of the men
employed on the work. Mir. Wilson planned and constructed a
channel cleanser, of which we give a photograph elsewhere. This is
shown in the plate just as taken out of the channel, and when in
place fits the masonry closely, and is forced along, sweeping sides
and bottom as it goes. Behind it the flowing waters collect, and have
a considerable propelling force, and the men standing upon it, in-
stead of, as before, in the water, are saved much exposure and dis-
comfort. Mr. Wilson received the thanks of the Board for this
labour-saving apparatus.
In 1891 Mr. Wilson was appointed to the general supervision of
the Maroondah system, and to hold the same position in regard
thereto as he then held at Yan Yean. At this period the works under
contract were completed, but left in such a condition as to be
almost unavailable as a means of carrying supply. The slightest
shower of rain falling on the clayey banks discoloured the water,
necessitating its being shut out at the nearest scour. Mr. Wilson
took in hand the flattening, soiling and grassing of the slopes; the
construction of scours; the arching of the deepest portions in
cutting, and sundry other works (throughout the line), which have
resulted in placing the entire length of works in as near a state of
perfection as possible, and has enabled the Board to avail itself of
the water to its full extent, and protected the flow from discolouration
during intervals of heavy rain and foul weather. Improvement has
also been effected in the gratings over the siphon basins, and in the
aqueduct, which renders the cleaning, etc., much easier, and saves
labour by increasing the length of the intervals between the time of
inspection. In all the work he has been ably assisted bv his col-
league, Inspector Richardson.


MR. R. RICHARDSON,
Treasurer.


Australia's Grandest jeu>ellerp establishment.
One of the Most Attractive and Beautiful Shops
that has ever been opened in Melbourne.
Situated at w/jat is krjown as
Stewart Dawson s
Collins and Sioanston Streets, Melbourne, Victoria.
- **
■
V-'
tV ■ ,
w ' \
>. ' ’.Y" : ’*v; 1 i fvp ; *
BMW ***^s
Ze&Kffi
■
k
■JmT
Si.
a
S-5*
IV ■
wm
3E
W
«SES
fee - i
r*~=*
.fc.
STST
#'V
Interior Y/ieW of Ste Wart Dawson’s Magnificent Premises,
With its wealth of Beautiful Fittings and its Innumerable and Exquisite
¥
WORKS OF ART
In Gold and Silver Jewellery, Diamond Goods,
SILVER and SILVER PLATED WARE, and
The WORLD’S FAMOUS WATCHES .
Visitors to Melbourne are invited to call and inspect what is known as one of the attractions of Melbourne. A visit will prove most enjoyable-
ILLUSTRATED BOOKLETS WILL BE SENT POST FREE FOR THE ASKING.
Stewart Dawson & Co.,
€nglish Watch Manufacturers, Diamond Merchants, Jewellers and Silversmiths,
Corner Collins & Swanston Sts., Melbourne, Victoria.
And at
London,
Sydney,
Brisbane.
Perth,
Auckland,
Wellington
Christchurch
Dunedin.


MINTARO FLAGSTONE & SLATE COMPANY.
The Mintaro Flagstone and Slate Coy.
Perhaps the most interesting of South Melbourne manufactories is
that of the Mintaro Flagstone and Slate Company, of Sturt-street.
We give herewith two views, one showing the Mintaro Quarries, 85
miles north from Adelaide, South Australia, and the other showing the
interior of the works, with a large stock of slate flagging, heartstones,
steps, landings, shelving, slabs for monumental work, billiard
View of Mintaro Slate Quarry
table tops, lavatories, urinals, baths, and the many works for which the
best qualities of slate are adaptable.
An overhead traveller goes the entire length of the yard, facilitating
the moving of the heavy slabs. The northern end of the yard is
occupied by the various machinery used, such as saws, moulding, plane
and polishing machines. All these are driven by a powerful gas
engine, made by Mr. E. Coulson. The quarry view shows the splendid
bed of slate which the company obtains its supplies from. Slabs can
View of Mintaro Slate Yard.
be taken out of this quarry varying in size from 60ft. x 40ft. to 90ft. x
30ft., and absolutely accurate in evenness and straightness of the
surface. In the yard can be found various slabs 14ft. 6in. x 7ft.
6in., which is as large as can be trucked over the South Aus-
tralian Railways, the low overhead bridges preventing the slabs
being stood on edge. The company carrying on its business at South
Melbourne controls all the business outside South Australia, and is
represented in Brisbane by the well-known house of Jas. Campbell and
Sons, in Sydney by that of Creak and Ford, and in Hobart by Mr. D.
W. Watson. They have also an agency in Launceston, Mr. J. Bunn.
An inspection of the stock shows the superexcellence in colour and
grain of this celebrated slate, and as compared with Victorian
output, it is vastly better, ranking in contracts with any known
slate or stone for flagging purposes, being free from inequalities and
equally hard throughout. The slate is very largely used for billiard
table tops on account of its great accuracy. It is clean, well laminated,
close grained, uniformly hard and of excellent colour, and not subject
to scaling and other defects common to some slates. This com-
pany— Messrs. Chas. D. Aston and Horace J. Jacobs being the pro-
prietors—supplies orders for all kinds of building work (except roofing),
and it is but fair to say that it is well supported by the profession
for the superior quality of its output. They are contractors to the
' elbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works for the supply of slates
for urinals and other sanitary purposes.


From the foregoing it will be seen how Mi. Wilson's duties and
responsibilities have increased and expanded the growth and in-
creased importance of the works. He has endeavoured to meet
every occasion, and fit himself for the full and proper performance
of new and additional work. He has done his duty at all times, to
the best of his ability, and to the entire satisfaction of his superiors,
and, having in view the responsibilities of his position, and the value
of exercising economy, we think he has more than earned the great
confidence which has been placed in him.
Mr. Davidson wrote of him as far back as May 22nd, 1884 : “ In
addition to the duties enumerated above, and pertaining more par
ticularly to the situation of Resident Inspector, Mr. Wilson is willing
at all times to aid in other directions. At present he acts as Chief
Inspector on the Clear Water Channel. Were he not available for
this, and did he not possess the requisite knowledge and intelligence,
it would be necessary to keep an engineer constantly on the work.”
And on June 4th, 1887 : “ The circumstances of the Clear Water
Channel contract necessitating the presence on the work daily of a
firm man with skilled knowledge, 1 asked Mr. Wilson to assist me
in the difficulty, and so well did he carry out the work in the face of
some grave difficulties, that I would not have consented to exchange
him for any other person. Wherever he has been we have secured
good work, and trouble with contractors has been reduced to a
minimum.”
Secretary,
Mr. George A. Gibbs.
Mr. George A. Gibbs is a native of Bendigo, and commenced his
career as a reporter on one of the local papers. In October, 1881,
the Minister of Railways appointed him clerk to the Locomotive
Superintendent, the late Mr. Solomon Mirls. At the end of 1882 a
Board, consisting of the Locomotive Superintendents of South Aus-
tralia, Queensland, and Tasmania, was appointed to report upon the
relative merits of the Woods and Westinghouse brakes, and to this
Board Mr. Gibbs acted as secretary, and received a special bonus for
his services. The chairman, Mr. W. Thow, the present chief mechani-
cal engineer of the New South Wales Railway, left a special minute
on record conveying the Board’s satisfaction as to the manner in
which Mr. Gibbs had discharged the responsible function of secretary,
He also performed important duties for the Engineer-in-Chief’s branch
in connection with involved and lengthy arbitration cases, and was
appointed secretary to the Signal Examination Board, which, as the
name implies, was called into existence for the purpose of testing
the employees of the department in regard to . their knowledge of
signals and block working. A special bonus was voted to him for
these duties. Wheix the unfortunate accident occurred between the
Prahran and Windsor stations in May, 1887, a Departmental Board
was immediately appointed to inquire into the cause, and Mr. Gibbs
was selected by the Railway Commissioners to act as secretary and
shorthand writer. He was elected first Vice-President of the Vic-
torian Railways General Library, and first secretary of the Victorian
Railways Musical Society. Upon relinquishing the latter office he was
presented with a gold badge of the society and an illuminated address.
Amongst other minor positions, he acted as secretary to the Officers’
Classification Board, and secretary and treasurer to the Craik Monu-
ment Committee.
Mr. Gibbs, in addition to the heavy routine work in attending the
Board’s committees, conducting correspondence and maintaining
general supervision, has, with the assistance of Mr. Harding, the clerk
of committees, done the principal work of arranging a most useful
compilation of the Acts of Parliament relating to the Board. He
has also prepared very useful analysis of the Board’s financial
business. In a former annual report of the Board the chairman
says :—“ Of the Secretary (Mr. Gibbs) I cannot speak too highly.
Amongst the constant good services rendered by him,, and his general
care for the interests of the Board, his successful exertions in bringing
the Stores Branch out of the chaotic condition in which it came over
to the Board from the Government, and into good and creditable
working order, entitle him to special praise and thanks.”
Assistant Inspector in charge at Preston Reservoir.
Mr. George Ernest Wilson.
Mr. George Ernest Wilson, the subject of the portrait, is Assistant
inspector in charge at Preston Reservoir, a responsible position, to
control the supply of water to the metropolis. Mr. Wilson had
many years of training, from boyhood, at the head works, under his
father, obtaining an intimate knowledge of all requirements, and
duly obtaining the position of Assistant Inspector. Mr. Wilson is
32 years of age, and is intelligent, quick in decision in an emer-
gency, and a capital all-round mechanic. In Mr. John Wilson’s
absence from Yan Yean, Mr. Wilson takes charge, and regulates the
rupplv to Melbourne from the Yan Yean and other sources. He has
charge of the line of works from Bell-street to Darebin Creek, the
regulation of valves, etc., all requiring both night and day labour.
He has also charge of the Junction Basin (Plate 37), where the
Maroondah system supply comes in, about a mile and a-half above
Preston Reservoir, to which it is then conducted by a main. Next to
his father, Mr. John Wilson, he has probably the most intimate local
knowledge of the works of any gentleman in the Board’s sendee.
Treasurer,
Mr. Robert Richardson.
Mr. R. Richardson joined the Victorian Government service in
1883, as clerk in the Yan Yean Water Supply Branch of the Public
Works. On its creation in July, 1891, he was transferred to the Mel-
bourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, and was associated in
the Accountants’ Branch with Mr. Force, the late Treasurer. Mr.
Richardson, during Mr. Force’s absence on leave, carried out the
duties of Treasurer, and on that gentleman’s retirement from the
service was, on April Ist, 1903, appointed Treasurer. Mr. Richardson
has under his direct control a staff consisting of 89 officers, 2 mes-
sengers, 29 collectors, and two warrant officers. During the year
ending June 30th, 1904, the sum of three millions and fifty thousand
pounds have passed through his hands—viz., receipts,
expenditure,


Water Supply.
THE YAN YEAN.
In the early fifties the watershed of the Yan Yean was used for
grazing purposes, and upon the rising ground immediately to the
North of the Reservoir, where now stands what is familiarly known
as “ Bear’s Castle,” a gentleman of that name depastured cattle and
sheep and cultivated the soil, employing Devonshire labourers who
had come out to him from the old country. He paid periodical visits
from the metropolis to his farm. It is said that the farm labourers
—having outstripped the demands upon their time, unlike the
labourers of to-day—sought more work to fill in their time, and im-
portuned “ The Maester,” who answered them, “ Oh, dang it—go and
build a castle !” When Mr. Bear next came up, to his surprise he
found the castle half built, and said, “ Oh, dang it- —finish it !” Some
say that it was designed as a protection from the blacks, who were
constantly wandering about this part of the country, and who then
frequently visited the city and its suburbs in tribes of 100 strong.
THE CASTLE.
The Castle, of which we give an illustration (Plate 1), is about
if miles from the dam of the reservoir, and lies due north, and' can
be seen from there. From the hill where it stands, the 1 - photographs
comprising the full view of the reservoir were taken. The Castle
was constructed of “ wattle and dab,” or “ wattle and daub,” and con-
sisted of walls made of well-kneaded clay or soil, interlaced with
wattle branches, many of the cottages around Melbourne being so
constructed in those days. As an evidence of the durability of the
material, the Castle has stood for more than fifty years, and the
walls, though exposed, through the decay of the roof, to all weathers,
both inside and out. are solid and secure even now. The rafters of
the roof, a double one —probably to obtain cool rooms —are still per-
fectly sound, and it seems a great pity that such an interesting relic
of the old times should remain without a covering, seeing that every
year which slips by renders it. in such a public reserve, of more and
more historical value. Tn the north-west corner of the building is
a winding staircase of very primitive construction, but still useable
bv light weights, whilst the doorway and windows are constructed by
forked trees inverted, and resemble Gothic archways. In another
corner is a. roomy fire-place, and the floor of the second story is quite
sound. Tn its early days, such were the surroundings of the Yan
Yean. The Woolshed, a. favourite resort, now covered with trees,
was named 1 after a building erected for that purpose by Mr. Bear.
Another point takes its name from Sellars, the black prze fighter,
who is said to have fought one of his brutal encounters with Joe
Kitchen here. Picnic Point, once a well-known picnic ground, is
now thickly overgrown with trees, and the reservoir is surrounded
with pines, jarrah, red gum, box, and eucalyptus. From these exten-
sive plantations, or from, the side of the brick aqueduct carrying the
water from Yan Yean to the Pipehead reservoir, Mr. Wilson has cut
trees, which he himself planted nearly thirty years ago, and in the
store yard has pine scantling, boards, joists and planks which have
cost only about 5/- per 100, instead of 14/6 per 100 ft. if bought in
the market. The timber is clean, sound and tough, and out of it
has been manufactured gates, frames, and other appliances required
upon the works, showing what a priceless industry awaits develop-
ment under suitable encouragement and supervision of the State.
OLD SUPPLIES.
Up to the early fifties water with which the residents of Melbourne
were supplied was pumped up from the Yarra.—“ the ever-flowing
river ” —to a circular iron tank erected on the Eastern Hill, and
many were the complaints about its impurities, for Richmond, Col
lingwood and settlements on the Merri Creek had increased rapidly.
MR. JAMES BLACKBURN
A name now ’remembered by but a~ few of The residents of Mel-
bourne that of Mr. James Blackburn, Surveyor to the City Council,
whose death occurred nearly fifty years ago—was at that time inti-
mately associated with the hopes of a new water supply. He dis-
covered in Ryders’ Lagoon the catchment of some 6000 acres on a
flat of about 800 acres, a most suitable place for a future water
supply reservoir, to be filled and fed from the Plenty River. His
suggestion being that it should tie dammed across to the high land
on either side, and this scheme was adopted in the face of many
criticisms and protests against the cost of imported iron pipes, in
which to convey the waters to Melbourne from the reservoir Under
the most capable direction of Mr. C. J. Taylor, C.E., this work was
then undertaken.
THE EMBANKMENT
The Embankment (see Plates 2,3, 4) is 49 chains, or | of a mile
in length, 30 ft. high, 25 ft. depth of water, with a solid puddle wall
in the centre. The inside batter is three to one, and outside two to
one. The width at top is 17 ft., at bottom 167 ft.; the inside
slope is lined wdth rough rubble bluestone, 18 in. deep, laid on
about 12 in. deep of quarry and masons’ spalls, presenting an im-
permeable face to the waves of the lake, even in the stormiest of
weathers. It is, however, worthy of note that the position of the
Embankment is a peculiarly happy one, for all the heavy weather
comes from lines nearly parallel with it, north and south, heavy winds
and consequent seas rarely coming from the eastward. There have
been many surveys with a-view to additional- storage, but in any case
new reservoirs can only be comparatively small, and require always
additional labour for supervision and attendance. When the Yan
Yean was constructed it wa.s calculated that it would hold between
two and three years’ supply for the population, and when the Preston
Reservoir was built it was estimated to hold three days’ supply.
Nowadays the Yan Yean would, supposing there were no intake and
no Maroondah Supplementary Supply, only last about 200 days,
whilst the Preston Reservoir carries only a third of the quantity con-
sumed in Melbourne on a summer’s day. Storage, therefore, in the
face of possible droughts, is the main factor to be dealt with in the
future. Of all the schemes considered, that of doubling the capacity
of Yan Yean seems the simplest and most feasable. There are al-
ways strong objections against building new work on to old. but ten
feet added to the Embankment at Yan Yean would double its capacity.
I here: are several methods of accomplishing this quite safely, but if
the most elaborate, most safe, and most expensive were adopted, and
a new and independent dam were built, complete in itself, and upon
the most approved lines, it would cost less than any other in propor-
tion to results. A good deal of the material in the old could be
economically used in a new Embankment, or the two could be made
one by filling in, and still greater strength could be secured.
FIRST SOD TURNED.
The Lieut.-Governor, C. J. Latrobe, turned the first sod on Decem-
ber 20th. 1853. and after four years of vigorous work and an im-
mensity of care in the consolidation of the Embankment, during the
following four years, and after delays for pipes which did not arrive
to time, the water was made available by an official opening in Mel-
bourne in 1857, just four years after the first sod was turned at Yan
Yean. A remarkable feature of those earlv days, and evidencing the
great pressure in the pipes, was the frequent bursting of mains in
the streets of the city, and consequent inconvenience until the water
could be turned off or emptied out of the pipes, there being a re-
lieving valve at Preston, and another half way between .Preston and
Yan Yean before the reservoir was built. From the centre of the
iron bridge erected over the Merri Creek to carry the main, could
also be seen for weeks a huge column of water rushing skywards
from the pipes, fully 80 to 100 ft., and swaving gracefully before
every breeze. To adjust the pressure Preston Reservoir was built.
T hree mains take their supply from Pipehead, and the pressure is
regulated at Preston Reservoir.
YAN YEAN RESERVOIR.
The Yan Yean Reservoir (Plates 2,3, 4,5, 6,7, 8,9) has a capacity
ot 6,400,000,000 gallons, of which 5>4 00 ' 000 " 000 gallons can be sent
into the city. It was a most costly work, as labour 1 was expensive,
labourers demanding .jQ 1 per day, and tradesmen in proportion.
I here are no settlements within the drainage area, about 1400 acres
alienated before Yan Yean was thought of, or about 1844. having
been resumed at great cost. All slopes, except the Embankment, are
natural. 1 o prevent the washing away of these, and the discolour-
ing of the water thereby, they have been lined, where neoessarv, with
bluestone spalls, between the 18 ft. and 25 ft. levels. The greatest
length is 2 miles, and average width miles, the water margin
being iol, miles. Ihe is 60 ft. wide. It was originally
44 ft., but was widened in 1863, at the time of the big flood.
SOURCE OF SUPPLY.
T he source of supply for some years, to 1883, was from the Plenty,
carried by an aqueduct, but the discolouration of the water from
heavy rains and its deterioration from drainage from farms, sheep,
pig and cattle yards, from geese and ducks, and from the township
of Whittlesea, soon rendered it necessary to make other provisions
and having to avail of flood waters for filling the reservoir.


THE INTAKE CHANNEL.
The intake (see Plate 10) is through a tunnel, a quarter of a mile
in length, passing under the hill to the west of the reservoir, on which
the residence of the Engineer-in-Charge is built, to which point it is
carried from the Toorourong Reservoir, a distance of 6| miles, by
an open channel, the carrying capacity of which is 120,000,000 gal-
lons per day. Along the course of this aqueduct there are many
drops, or waterfalls, of various depths up to 17 ft., as shown in Plate
n. The first if miles the water is carried by what was the old chan-
nel, from the Plenty River Weir, and Plate 12 shows (on the left
of the picture) where that was permanently shut off, and on the right
where the clear water channel from the Toorourong Reservoir comes
in at a considerably higher level —viz., 8 ft. There are many drops, or
waterfalls along the course of the old channel. (See Plate 11.)
THE CLEAR WATER CHANNEL.
Takes its name because it taps the Toorourong Reservoir where the
water is undefiled, and carries it with its purity maintained to the
junction of the old aqueduct (Plate 12a). The work from the
junction with the old Plenty River aqueduct was surveyed and
planned by Mr. Thwaites, M.A., M.C.E., M.1.C.E., and his staff,
under Mr. Davidson as Superintending Engineer, and Mr. Steel, In-
spector-General of Public Works, as Chief Engineer. A contract
for its construction was let to Messrs. Mcßirnie and Anderson, who
in a short time after its commencement transferred it to Falkingham
and Sons, who completed the work satisfactorily. The construction
and carrying out of the contract was under the immediate supervision
of Mr. Wilson, Resident Inspector of the Yam Yean. All drainage
on the C.W.C. line is intercepted by side drains, and carried to
favourable points and passed by pipe under the channel, so that
no surface drainage can discharge into the channel between Too-
iourong and Yan Yean.
TOOROURONG RESERVOIR
This reservoir (see Plate 13) was part of the original scheme for
augmenting the supply to Yan Yean. It was favourably reported
upon by Mr. Taylor, C.E., when he was Superintending Engineer,
but its construction was postponed because of its cost. It was, later
on, favourably recommended by the Yan Yean Water Supply Com-
mission, and constructed. The total cost was Its area is
36 acres. The Embankment is 15 chains in length, and the capacity
of the reservoir 60,000,000 gallons. The Bye-wash is 60 ft wide, and
in time of very heavy rain the water passing over it has been as
much as 3 feet deep, and going over at this rate for hours, whilst
the clear water channel has a’so been running full bore. All the
mountain streams comingle in the Toorourong reservoir, and are drawn
off by the clear water channel through treble sluice gates, by which
the supply is controlled. It takes in the waters of the eastern branch
of the Plenty River, with its tributaries the Beehive and Running
Creeks, and the waters of the Wallaby Creek and Silver Creek from
the northern watershed of the ranges, and those of Jack's Creek, into
which the Wallaby and Silver Creeks are conducted, as explained
further on. Except in wet weather, the yield of Jack’s Creek water-
shed is insignificant, at periods quite infinitesimal; but in times of
flood or of heavy rains it is enormous from the southern slopes. The
watershed! of the Toorourong is 10,500 acres.
Mr. Robert Cumming has charge of the Reservoir, regulates the
output by the Clear Water Channel, and keeps records of gaugings.
He patrols Jack’s Creek and the eastern branch of the Plenty, and
attends to the admission of visitors and vehicles with permits from
the Secretary. He is a good and reliable officer, most attentive and
willing in the discharge of his duties, and has been in the service
since 1881, and caretaker since 1886, at the Pipehead Reservoir.
ROUGH-PITCHED CHANNELLING.
Above Toorourong there is a rough-pitched channel (Plates 14, 15,
16) about 13 1 chains in length. It was surveyed, designed, and con-
structed by Mr. Wilson, the resident inspector of the Yan Yean, by
the direction of Mr. Davidson, by day labour, at a nominal cost
compared with the other works, and has proved to be equal to all
contingencies, even of heavy flood rains. It is constructed nearly
horizontal, and the fall is dealt with by numerous drops. Each
drop is of cement concrete, and forms a tie. A timber flume (Plate
17) carried the water across what is known as Yellow Creek. Mr.
Wilson’s early training in shipbuilding show out in the solidity and
neatness of the woodwork in this fluming. About thirteen chains above
the end ! of the pitched channel the Joey Creek joins the Jack Creek.
Then upwards to the foot of the cascade the water runs on the
natural bed of the creek to the end of the timber shoot, described
hereafter. The bed of the creek, from Smith’s Bridge upwards 86
chains, has scoured considerably, but is now on bed rock, and is a
succession of beautiful waterfalls and cascades, some views of which
are given here. (Plates 14, 15, 16.) At Smith’s Bridge the right and
left branches of Jack’s Creek join.
THE TIMBER SHOOT.
The timber shoot at the foot of the cascade (Plates 18 and 19)
was constructed by day labour, under the direction of Mr. J. Wilson.
1 he bed of the natural creek had been made the receptacle for de-
caying and rotten timber, which, after the completion of the granite
cascades, had been tumbled into the creek, with a view of arresting
scour. Wallaby and native bears drowned in the Wallaby Creek
C hannel, were washed down, and, becoming wedged in under the
logs, and there seemed to be no way of getting at it, and not-
withstanding the logs, the scour went on, the water working under-
neath them. I o such an extent did this scour proceed, that it threat-
ened to undermine the basin and imperil the cascades. To overcome
this danger, Mr. Wilson constructed the timber shoot (See Plates
] 8, 19), which is lined with rough bush slabs, and which completely
removed the danger of both pollution and demolition.
THE CASCADES.
I he cascades themselves, shown in Plate 21, have a total length
ot 691 feet on the slope, or 683 feet horizontal measurement, and
the fall is 120 feet, The pitchers are bedded on 4 in. cement con-
crete, and the average velocity of the water is 36 miles an hour,
creating a deafening roar, dhe object of the cascades was to check
the too rapid: flow of the water, and to carry it from the Wallaby
Channel to the normal bed of Jack's Creek.’ The total rise from
Smith’s to the head of the cascades is nearly 800 feet, or 964 feet
from Toorourong to the top of the cascades. The cascades, were
built by day labour, under direction of Mr. Wilson, resident in-
spector. Like the clear water channel and Wallaby Creek works,
they were surveyed and planned on the ground, in Prince’s Camp, by
Mr. W. Thwaites, M.A., M.C.E., M.1.C.E., and his staff, under Mr.
Davidson as superintending engineer, and Mr. W. K. Steel as chief
engineer. Mr. Thwaites had upon his staff Mr. Fuller (surveyor).
Mr. Siever (8.E.), and Mr. Swan (draftsman), sent up from the Mel-
bourne office. He had also Mr. Barker (“Jolly”), but only whilst
the clear water channel was in hand. Mr. Davidson paid periodical
visits of supervision as the survey, planing, and construction was
going on.
THE WALLABY CREEK CHANNEL.
1 he top of the cascades is 1700 feet above sea level, and the Wal-
laby Creek weir is placed on the creek at sufficient altitude to tumble
the water over the cascade into the southern watershed and Jack’s
Creek, with a fall of 3 feet to the mile in the channel, which is 5!
miles in length, with a capacity of 40,000,000 gallons (See Plates
22, 23). On the channel are five tanks, which serve as settling
ponds for getting rid of, by scouring out, all objectionable matter.
There are also, various screens to intercept leaves and other floating
matter. The tanks are constructed at the head of the gullies, where
the line of channel suddenly meets these deep depressions, and
leaves the solid ground, d hey go down to a solid foundation, and
are built up to meet the aqueduct, and thus a settling tank is fur-
nished, built upon a solid foundation, and tied with the aqueduct.
An alternative would have been to excavate and square the depres-
sion, and build up with lime and concrete to conform with the chan-
nel. In this case there would be no tank, and the job would prob-
ably be more costly. Each tank has a 12 inch scour.
THE CHANNEL CLEANER.
The channel cleaner (see Plate 23) is the name given to an appar
ratus designed and made l by Mr. Wilson to cleanse the channel. As
will be seen, it is shaped to fit the sectional area of the channel, and
is fitted with stiff bristle brooms around both ends and at bottom.
When put into the channel it acts like a dam, and the accumulation
of water pushes is steadily, at about two miles per hour, sweeping and
scrubbing the stonework as it goes, whilst two or three men with
hand brooms, working from its deck, assist the cleansing opera-
tions as they go. This obviates the necessity for the men to work
in the water in cold weather to the damage of health, and with ex-
penditure of three or four times the la,hour. Channel cleansers are
also worked along the Maroondah Channel, described further on.
The intercepting tanks and scours, above described, carry away the
washings of the channel. The ingenuity of the plan, and its saving
of cost, do Mr. Wilson much credit, and he received the commenda-
tion and thanks of the Board for it. The photograph (Plate 23)
shows that the brushes of the cleaner are worn down to renewing point,
when they would be much longer than those shown.
THE WALLABY CREEK WEIR.
is built of granite ashlar, in cement. We give two views (Plates 24,
25). One is from above and one from below the weir. That show-
ing the overflows displays the sluice gates on the left leading the
water supply into the Wallaby Creek channel, the overflow on the
right of the picture is from, the Silver Creek aqueduct, which passes
round the quarried face of the hill, and enters the weir in an exactly
opposite direction to the waters of Wallaby Creek, which pour in
at the head of the sheet of water shown in the engraving. The
centre overflow is, of course, from the combined waters of the Wal-
laby and Silver Creeks, the entrance of the latter being shown at
Plate 25. The weir has a solid rock foundation, and it and the


channel constituted a contract let to Messrs. Cornwall and Wright.
The work was supervised by Mr. W. Ihwaites, M.A., M.C.E.,
M.1.C.E., assisted bv Mr. fuller. Mr. Davidson visited the viorks
from, time to time whilst they were in progress, and Mr. Thwaites
carried on other important works in Melbourne at the same time.
THE SILVER CREEK CHANNEL.
The length of the channel from the Wallaby to the Silver Creek
weir is eight miles five chains. There are two tunnels —one of ißoof
feet and one of 406 feet in length. '1 he capacity of the channel
is 15,000,000 gallons per day. It was surveyed by Mr. W. Wilson,
a son of the resident inspector, and designed and planned in the
office at Melbourne under the direction of Mr. Davidson. It was
constructed under contract by Mr. John Barker, under the immediate
supervision of the resident inspector, and wa s completed in Dec em-
ber, 1886. The Silver Creek main weir is 125 feet in length, and 11
feet high. It was so placed as to give a fall of 3 feet to the mile 1 in
the channel; the foundation of the weir is on disintegrated granite,
overlaid with 12 in. to 18 in. of cement concrete. There is red gum
sheet piling, driven below the foundation on each side, to tie the
bottom ashlar masonry, set in cement. There are three subsidiary
channels, with small weirs beyond the main weir, to tap three small
creeks that naturally would otherwise fall into the main Silver Creek
below the main weir. These creeks are tapped at an altitude suffi-
cient to bring them in front of the main weir. The flow from the
Silver Creek svstem is the most constant of the whole scheme. Both
the Wallaby and Silver Creeks are tributaries of the King Parrot
Creek. The total length of the sub-channel on the Silver Creek is
if miles, and the total length of the Silver Creek works is 9 65-Both
miles. The distance between the Wallaby Creek weir and the Silver
Creek main weir being 8 miles 5 chains, or from the cascades to the
Wallaby Creek weir, thence to the Silver Creek weir, and thence
to the No. 3 small weir, 15 2 5-Both, say 15J miles, within the northern
or Goulburn watershed.
THE HOSPICE.
Quite near to the Wallaby Creek weir, in a southerly direction, are
eight acres of beautifully laid out and well cultivated grounds, round
which on two sides the channel winds. Plate 26 shows the Hospice
and the channel excavation in the foreground, crossed by a bridge
constructed of three hewn logs bolted together. The trees from
which these logs came were cut down the centre and laid flat side
up. The bridge is rigid and durable, and of the cheapest possible
construction, Mr. Wilson’s early training showing out in all the work
about this property. The Hospice consists of two roomy, well-built
cottages, that peeping through the trees to the right containing five
rooms and accommodation for fourteen persons.' and that on the 1 left
five rooms and caretaker’s quarters. 1 he latter contains a very
roomv dining hall. Mr. Olney is the channel keeper, and Miss
Olney the caretaker of the Board’s hospice. Both cottages are
furnished with beds and bedding for the accommodation of the
officers of the Board and of persons included in official visits. It
was all, no doubt, a necessary and wise expenditure. Both cot-
tage are supplied wfith water from an adjacent hill, and bathrooms,
kitchens, and W.C.’s are all sewered in an excellent manner. Mr.
Wilson built both these cottages out of the labour provided for the
usual work. The framework is of hardwood timber, cut on the
ground, and the walls between the posts are made of planks fitted
into grooves in the posts, so that nails were not v T anted. Every-
thing is most solid and substantial, and would be an object lesson
to the most experienced bushman. Inside, the walls and ceilings are
lined, painted., and stencilled very effectively. The roofs are of iron,
and the verandahs are spacious and the outlook pleasant.
FROM YAN YEAN TO THE METROPOLIS
Having now described the Yan Yean and doorourong Reservoirs,
and all the connecting links of the system, it will be interesting to
follow the water line to the metropolis from the Yan Yean.
THE OUTLET TOWER.
As shown at Plate i ', the outlet tower is built of bluestone ashlar.
Inside, cast iron caison in segments, in which valves (five) are fixed
—three inlets and two outlets. The first, or upper outlet, is on the
east side of the tower, between 16 feet 3 inches and 19 feet level.
Bottom inlet also on east side, with bottom 5 feet above bed of re-
servoir. The third is on the north side, about half way between
the top and bottom inlets. There are two outlets, 33 in., running
outside the tower, parallel to and on same level from the tower,
both under the base of the embankment. On No. 1 tower is a mush-
room valve, worked from outside the tower. In the event of water
being shut off from the tower for cleansing or other purposes, supply
to the amount of 7,000,000 gallons can be discharged by the mush-
room, for consumption.
On the bed of the reservoir, under the bottom inlet, is an 18 in.
scour, which discharges into a compensation channel, and thence
into the Plenty River. This scour passes through the base of the
tower east to west, and is immediately below No. i outlet pipe. If
ever required, it would be used to drain off the water below the
bottom outlet pipe, which is 5 feet above the bed of the reservoir.
It is used as an auxiliary to the Bye-wash in preventing the water
in the reservoir rising to 100 high a level, and also for drawing off
any sediment that might be deposited near the inlet to the tower.
YAN YEAN TO MORANG.
Passing out from the tower (Plate 27), the supply enters an aque-
duct, which soon shoots the water into a circular bluestone basin.
Plates 28, 29 show the water passing through this into the aqueduct
to Morang, which is 5 feet 3 inches wide on top. 4 feet 9 inches
on bottom, and 3 feet 9 inches deep, with a fall of feet to a mile,
and has a carrying capacity of 32,000,000 gallons per day. These
dimensions are continued for miles, when the sectional area in-
creases to 6 feet 9 inches on top, 6 feet 3 inches on bottom, and
3 feet 9 inches deep, with a fall of feet to the mile. The section
extends in bluestone ashlar three-quarters of a mile, and Plate 32
shows a good sketch of this. The balance of the length to the Pipe-
head Reservoir is built of brick, with a bluestone coping, but with the
same sectional area and fall as the bluestone section. The length in
brick is if miles to the Pipehead Reservoir.
IRON AQUEDUCT OVER THE PLENTY RIVER.
Between Yan Yean and South Morang the water from the channel
is carried across the Plenty River in an iron aqueduct, shown in
Plate 31. This aqueduct is built upon the site of the old stone
bridge of one-arched span which was carried away in the phenomenal
flood of 1878, leaving a great gap in the water channel, and cutting
off the cities’ supplies for three days and nights. In March, 1878,
the highest flood on record in the district occurred. Heavy rain
commenced on the 14th, and continued incessantly to the morning of
the 16th, and culminated in the above flood. Total, 5 inches rain-
fall. On the night of the 15th (midnight) a disaster occurred to the
aqueduct. The flood in the river had reached so high at the Plenty
Bridge as to overtop the works, carrying away about 180 feet length
of aqueduct, with the bridge and embankment which carried the
work. The flood, having overtopped the work, began the demolition
from the lower side. In a short time the embankment, or approach
to the bridge on the north side, carried away altogether. A breach
of 200 feet long was made in the works, which cut off supply to
Melbourne. Viewing it at nearly break of day on the 16th, Mr.V
Wilson saw that the restoration was too big a job to be dealt with
bv his staff, locally, and so, in the absence of a messenger, carried
the news of the disaster to Melbourne himself. Mr. Davidson and
he visited Anthony’s timber yard, and got supplies of Oregon timber
under way for the construction of a temporary flume. Mr. J. B.
Patterson (Minister). Mr. Steel (Inspector-General), and Mr. David-
son returned with Mr. Wilson to the scene. All possible despatch
was used, and by 3 p.m. of March 19th the timber flume was
erected, and the water turned on at Yan Yean, and reached Mel-
bourne during same night. For the skill and activity exercised in
this work Mr. Davidson was permanently appointed as superintend-
ing engineer. Mr. Wilson worked on continously to effect a junction
for four successive davs and nights, and no doubt his knowledge of
ship carpentry and bridge building came to his aid on the work. The
restoration of the supply by temporary fluming was thus executed
in a remarkably short space of time.
OUTLET TO PIPEHEAD RESERVOIR
The output from Yan Yean is by two 33 in. diameter c.i. mains.
No. 1 was original]v the main that carried the supply to Preston
If is now the head of the main 32 in. w.i., that carries the supply to
the Surrey Hills Reservoir* by Greensborough. through Heidelberg,
There is a 9 in. tapping running into Heidelberg.
-The original main (1870) became insufficient for the growing con-
sumption. It was thought to duplicate it. But iron rising up to
a ton made duplication prohibitory. Tn lieu, the aqueduct was
constructed, as now seen as Plates 28, 29. 30. 31, 32, which gavt
a-capacity equal to three 30 in. d. mains, or 32,000,000 gallons per
diem.
After completion of this aqueduct this main was lifted from \ an
Yean Basin to Pipehead Reservoir, distance miles, and relaid
from the Pipehead to Preston Reservoir, 6f miles. Thus the ser-
vice was placed in the position of having an aqueduct capable of
carrying 32,000.000 gallons per diem, and two mains equal to
20,000,000 gallons. Tn 1887 a third main—30-in. wrought iron—was
laid between Preston and Morang, making the capacity equal to the
aqueduct from Yan Yean to Morang.
The Surrey Hills main was laid in the trench vacated by this
main. It is miles long, and cost and was completed in
1891.
The Yan Yean and Morang aqueduct was let by contract in two
sections. First section, from Yan Yean to about 50 yards south of
the Plenty River (Overend and Robb in 1872 and 1873); and No. 2
section, from end of No. 1 to, and including, the Pipehead Reservoir
(Stewart and Harrison, 1874-5). Mr. Wilson supervised both con-
tracts, and on their completion was appointed to Yan Yean.


PIPEHEAD RESERVOIR.
The Pipehead Reservoir (see Plate 33), has a capacity of
3,000,000 gallons. It is the termination of the aqueduct, and the
commencement of the mains, of which there are now three from the
Pipehead—viz., the old main (27 in.), the duplicate (30 in.), and
30 in. wrought iron; united capacity, about 30,000,000 gallons per
diem.
So, at present, there are from Yan Yean the means of sending
to Melbourne (Surrey Hills main), 11,000,000 gallons; aqueduct,
32,000,000 gallons; total, 43,000,000 gallons per diem.
The Surrey Hills pipe main can be utilised for supply into Maroon-
dah aqueduct, and thence to Preston. In this manner it would act as
an auxiliary to the mains Pipehead Reservoir. When so
working the Surrey Hills main will supply 14,000,000 gallons per
diem. The Pipehead Reservoir is 14 feet in depth, and lined with
brick, with bluestone footings. We give at Plate 36 a view of one
of the mains carrying the water across the Yarra Yarra on an iron
aqueduct, work which was carried out by Messrs. Mephan Ferguson
and Co.
Mr. George Butcher is a good and trustworthy caretaker of the
Pipehead Reservoir. He joined the service in 1875, on Mr. David-
sons survey staff, surveying the two miles north from the crest of the
Dividing Range Reservation. He was employed on the survey of
Wallaby and Silver Creek, with Mr. W. Wilson, and on the Watts
survey with Mr. Wilson also. He was appointed in 1887 to the
Pipehead Reservoir, and his duties are both onerous and respon-
sible.
PRESTON RESERVOIR.
I he Preston Reservoir was built in 1864, on the main pipe line.
Its construction is partly in excavation and partly by embanking.
The stuff from the excavation was used in puddle, trench and forma-
tion of the embankments. The lining is of bluestone pitchers in
courses, bedded (and backed) on gravel and set in cement mortar.
Ihe bottom pitching is grouted with cement grout. The_ slopes are
12 to 1, the depth is 21 feet, and the capacity 16,000,000 gallons,
equal, when built, to three average days’ supply for Melbourne. The
Byewash is 22 feet wide, and the overflow commences when the water
rises to a depth of 18 feet 3 inches.
When completed it had two inlets—used also as outlets—from the
main from Yan Yean, one at the north end of the Reservoir, 20 inches,
used also as a scour, and a 33-in. near the south-west angle, which
was used also as a means of relieving the pressure on the main by
discharging the surplus water into the Reservoir. At this period the
one main was sufficient to carry the amount required for daily con-
sumption as far as Preston, from Yan Yean, but not beyond, to the
city, during the day. Storage in the Reservoir took place during the
night time. To meet the increasing consumption and to increase the
means of carrying the supply during the daytime, a 24-in. cast-iron
main was laid from Preston to C'ollingwood. This enabled the surplus
water stored in Preston during the night to be carried down into
consumption during the day, and in other respects act as an auxiliary
to the principal main supplying the city. This auxiliary was capable
of carrying 8,000,000 gallons in 24 hours.
In 1874 a cast-iron main, 18 inches in diameter, and equal to
carrying 4,000,000 gallons per day, was laid from the south-west out-
let of the Reservoir, through Coburg and Brunswick, to the city.
Simultaneously with this, work was proceedings for duplication of
the main from Pipehead Reservoir, and in 1875 the duplication was
completed to a point half-way between Preston and Merri Creek. In
1868 the population was 175,000, and in 1875 it had increased to
245,000.
To meet this increased population, a 24 in. cast-iron main was laid
from Preston to Merri Creek. Here it was reduced to 18 in. dia-
meter, and carried, in 1878, over the Yarra, at Kew, to supply the
suburbs of Kew and Hawthorn. This main was placed so as to take
its supply from the 3°-in. main—used also for scouring the Reservoir
--immediately north of the Reservoir. In this position it can take
its supply from Preston Reservoir as a low-pressure main, or be put
under pressure from Pipehead Reservoir, should the latter course
ever be found necessary. To the present it has always been worked
as a low-pressure main.
In addition to the mains enumerated, there is the 30-in. wrought-
iron from Pipehead, laid in 1887, with a branch into Preston; the
30-in. wrought-iron main from south-west end of Reservoir, laid in
1889, and running via Coburg and Brunswick; the 36-in. wrought-iron
main running down High Street, Preston, southward through North-
cote; in all, eight mains, varying from 24 in. to 30 in. diameter,
in conjunction (supplying and being supplied) with Preston
Reservoir in«furnishing Melbourne and the metropolis with water.
Irom the Junction Basin, which is the terminus of the Maroondah
Aqueduct, the water is carried by a 53-in. wrought-iron main about
1 h m iles in length, and discharged into Preston Reservoir. The Re-
servoir was the only outlet until 1900, when the High Street 36-in.
wrought-iron main, laid in 1894, was extended northwards (from the
south end of Reservoir), and connected with the 53 in., about 20
yards north of the Reservoir. Before this extension this main took
ali it could get from the 24-in. main laid in 1878 (as before men-
tioned) when the said main passed the south end of Reservoir.
Between the months of September and April, the 30-in. wrought-
iron and 30-in. cast-iron mains are supplied from Pipehead Reservoir,
and the pressure is regulated at Preston Reservoir. The amount
is about 32 to 42 lbs. respectively. The difference in altitude be-
tween the Pipehead and Preston is 167 feet. During about four
months in the year, with a further extension when the conditions of
weather make it permissible, the mains from Pipehead are worked
as low pressure. Under such conditions they take their head, and
are supplied from Preston Reservoir, nearly wholly with the Maroon-
dah water. During this period and under such conditions, intake
from Toorourong and the catchment is stored in Yan Yean of late
years, to the extent of filling to overflowing.
There is an electric float in the house on northern inside slope of
reservoir, shown in Plate 35. This gives the alarm to the caretaker
in his cottage by ringing a bell when the reservoir reaches the 17ft.
3in. level, or 12in. below by-wash. When this occurs, as it usually
does between 3 and 6 in the morning, he turns out and adopts means
to prevent excessive overflow. At the end of the timber shoot from
the by-wash—and the scour pipe—about 180 yards north of the re-
servoir, there is an 18in. diameter wrought-iron pipe which carries
overflow and cleansings from the reservoir into Darebin Creek.
Mr. George Wilson resides at and has charge of this reservoir and
the regulation of supply.
CLEANSING THE RESERVOIR.
Of late years this has been done annually in the month of August.
Last year the work was on hand two days, and cost Til 11s. 9d.
During operations supply is kept up by the high pressure main from
pipe-head, with the assistance of supply from Maroondah to the 36in.
High-street main. The quantity has to be increased or reduced at the
pipe-head, Y T an Yean outlet, and the Maroondah system at Darebin
Creek, to meet the hourly consumption, which is the largest between
the hours 8 a.m. and 12 noon.
Cleansing operations are facilitated by the use of canvas hose
worked from tappings on the 7in. main that supplies North Preston,
and which is kept under pressure up to 601bs. from the mains from
pipe-head.
OTHER RESERVOIRS.
In addition to Yan Yean, Toorourong and Pipehead Reservoirs,
already dealt with, those more immediately connected with the distri-
bution of the water in the metropolitan area are :
Capacity. Cost. Altitude.
Built. Gals. jQ Feet.
Preston 1864 16,000,000 11,000 327
Essendon 1881 1,000,000 1,000 210
Essendon, No. 2... 1883 6,000,000 6,500 210
Caulfield 1883 10,000,000 13,500 168
Kew 1886 3,000,000 5,000 282
Surrey Hills 1892 9,000,000 12,000 430
Surrey Hills cost equal to 2d. a cubic foot of capacity.
Caulfield cost equal to 2jd. a cubic foot of capacity.
THE MAROONDAH SYSTEM. "
The celebration of the opening of this system took place on Feb-
ruary 18th, 1891, on the site of the weir at Donnelly’s Creek, shown
in Plate 45.
THE AQUEDUCT.
The aqueduct crosses the Plenty River on the 1 trestle bridge (shown
in Plates 38, 39, 40), a 53 in. wrought iron pipe, 210 feet long,
being laid through it, with room for a duplicate service alongside
of it when that shall be required. The water is carried thence into
the Preston Reservoir.


WHENCE THE WATER COMES.
The water shed of the Maroondah system is far-reaching, and em-
braces many important works already executed. I H rom the Black
Spur road, which is in the watershed, an excellent idea can be
gathered of the great extent of the reserves. There a,re many aux-
iliary feeders to the Maroondah weir, and in the future, when neces-
sity calls for it, all the Upper Yarra watershed can be laid under
contribution, and have been exhaustively surveyed and planned bv
Mr. W. Thwaites, M.A., M.C.E., M.T.C.E., the most capable Engi-
neer-in-Chief.
Amongst these are*
THE BADGER OR CORANDERRK RIVER.
This river is on the south-eastern side of Mount Riddle. All
surveys have been completed for a future aqueduct to be laid down,
and the Board has purchased all property on this watershed which
was in private hands.
MAROONDAH WEIR.
This weir is built of concrete, topped with granite, and is of very
solid construction. (See Plate 41.) From this weir the water enters
a pipe, conveying it to' the commencement of an aqueduct, and
thence through syphons, channels, and tunnels and 1 pipes to Preston,
a distance of about forty-one miles. It conveys 15,000,000 to
20.000,000 gallons per day, and the supply can be regulated at
pleasure by the usual gates and bye-wash. About three miles from
the weir, on the Mathinna Creek, are two beautiful waterfalls, and
the scenery in all this district is surpassingly beautiful. See Plates
42, 43> 44-)
DONNELLY'S CREEK WEIR.
There is a small weir on this creek, gathering about 4,000,000
gallons per day as one of the auxiliaries of the Maroondah system.
(See Plate 45.) This branch was opened in 1893, and cost
The water is conveyed from the weir in a 24 in. pipe until it reaches
The water is conveyed from the weir in a quarter of a mile of 18-inch
earthenware pipes, until it reaches Maroondah.
GRACEBURN AQUEDUCT.
From the weir of the same name this aqueduct (Plates 52, 53),
winds in numberless sinuosities for three-quarters of a mile, until it
reaches a syphon ij miles in length, 18 in. in diameter, leading
across the Maroondah valley into the great aqueduct, its capacity
being 6,000,c00 gallons. From this aqueduct a branch pipe, 7 in.
in diameter, carries a copious and high pressure water supply into
the township of Healesville.
GRACEBURN WEIR.
Of this weir we give two views (Plates 50, 51). It is built of
stone and concrete, and receives the waters from all the valleys
at foot of Mounts Riddle and Juliet, and is a very valuable, though
not copious, adjunct, to the Maroondah or Watts River system.
The watershed areas around Healesville total fully 36,000 acres.
Mount Juliet being a leading feature, with an elevation of 3700
feet.
WATTS RIVER & YARRA.
The junction of the two rivers make a very handsome' sheet of
water, and after rain a rapid river also. If future requirements
should lead to the inclusion of the Upper Yarra. system, suggested
by the Chief Engineer, it is estimated that a population of nearly
2,000,000 can be amply supplied. Exhaustive data and surveys ha\e
been compiled and made, and the possibility of creating a great
reservoir in these mountains has also been considered.
THE RESIDENT INSPECTOR
The Yan Yean, and, indeed, all the water supply reservations and
works, are under the management of Mr. J. Wilson, who has resided
at the Yan Yean for thirty years. His residence is on the western
slope, and is a, roomy and comfortable villa, with a flower garden,
in which he and Mrs. Wilson evidently take great pride. From the
verandah of the house we give a view of the Reservoir and distant
hills (at Plate 8). In the vards attached to the house Mr. Wilson
has stored some thousands of feet of valuable pine, as before-men-
tioned, cut from trees grown by him on the land around the Reser-
voir, and has gates, frames, and various other articles made from
it, which show it to be very clean and serviceable timber. A resi-
dent near by purchased some of these trees, sent them, by rail to
Clifton Hill to be sawn up, had them returned to Yan Yean by rail,
and built a huge barn with the boards, a matter which v r e only men-
tion to enforce what w r e have said, that a vast future industry may
be prosperously fostered by Government.
STATISTICS (see pages 40 and 41).
Mr. Wilson has most interesting statistics of the v r ater supply,
spread over many years. He daily sends complete returns to Mel-
bourne, and a copy goes to the Government Astronomer, and we
publish a table compiled from these. Mr. Wilson has to be ap-
proached with a proper permit from the Board. About his resi-
dence (see Plate 8), the water’s edge is lined with firs and gums,
here and there broken by patches of heather; to the left and right
there is nothing but a haze, the view being shut in owing to the
indentations in the shore line of the Reservoir. Ahead are the


Christmas Hills of Yarra, Glen shimmering blue in the distance, and
in the far distance the peaks of Mounts Juliet, Monda, St. Leon-
ards, and Riddle, which close in the sky line, barely discernible
through the haze.
CONCLUSION.
Splendid as the system is, and the late Mr. Mansergh, the cele-
brated English expert, when here, classed it as amongst the best in
the world, it can easily and with comparatively small expense be
made to serve a population four times the present number. Many
men have had a share in the perfecting of the system,, but to Mr.
William Davidson, Chief Engineer of the Public Works Depart-
ment, belongs the chief credit, and the title of “ father of the sys-
tern. In some notes issued by the Chairman of the Metropolitan
Board, he pays a graceful tribute to Mr. Davidson in the following
terms: —•
b inally, when the demand for water in Melbourne shall have
exceeded 92,000,000 gallons per day, the head waters of the Yarra
can be tapped, an area of 115,000 acres being reserved for that
purpose, but not yet handed over to the Metropolitan Board. That
that area has not passed into private ownership, and thereby been
lost to the future water supply of the metropolis, is owing to> the
vigilance, zeal, and foresight of Mr. Wm. Davidson, who, whilst en-
gineer for the Water Supply Department, protested against the sur-
vey of it for settlement which was in progress, and induced its re-
servation. In this, and his general direction of the works, during
the period of little less than twenty years that they were under his
care, and in which they expanded from capacity to supply a popula-
tion of 200,000 with not more than 45 gallons per head daily, to a
system furnishing nearly 500.000 people with 100 gallons each on
hot days, Mr. Davidson has rendered lasting service to the present
and future inhabitants of the metropolis.”
And to these remarks we may safely add, that his genius and
mantle have fallen upon a. worthy representative in Mr. Wm.
Thwaites, who has been so intimately associated with the carrying
out of the works, and to whom the public may safely look for the
iuture guidance of this great State asset, next only in importance to
the railways.


The Months
of
1903.
Intake in gallons by
Output in gallons from
Consumption in gallons
Average
j monthly depth
Yan Yean
Reservoir
Tempera-
ture Max-
imum of
Atmos-
phere in
shade
Amount of Rainfall per Month in Inches
Aqueduct
Catchment
Yan Yean
Maroondah
Supply
Evaporation
Yan Yean
Wallaby
Creek
Toorour-
roy Reser-
voir
Watts
Weir
Maroondah
■
Graceburn
Donnelly’s Creek
J anuary
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
311,745,000
255,624,000
283,090,0u0
385,504,000
416,062,000
668,177,000
759,638,000
530,695,000
692,810,000
611,813,000
495,658,000
573,184,000
37,247,000
40,450,000
78,859,000
100,967,000
52,796,000
90,750,000
69,852,000
30,500,000
213,291,000
126,460,000
119,964,000
60,817,000
478,171,000
546,636,000
416,014,000
267,854,000
304,967,000
448,350,000
321,072,000
305,399,000
766,678,000
663,653,000
625,940,000
689,092,000
545,300,000
455,972,000
517,716,000
543,454,000
497,388,000
320,289,000
426,828,000
507,395,000
44,286,000
232,797,000
343,931,000
327,356,000
1,035,348,000
993,544,000
926,674,000
806,196,000
792,958,000
770,691,000
748,961,000
786,053,000
810,457,000
886,915,000
964,185,000
1,010,482,000
91,206,000
92,512,000
96,331,000
79,338,000
36,918,000
56,222,000
55,942,000
37,039,000
49,903,000
50,334,000
76,682,000
86,288,000
24ft. 4in.
23ft. 2±in.
22ft. 6fin.
22ft. 5-Jin.
22ft, llin.
23ft. 6|in.
24ft. 6in.
25ft. 4in.
25ft. 3 Jin.
25ft. 4in.
24ft. 10J
24ft. 8fin.
78°
80
77
64
58
53
54
59
59
69
73
73
1-35
1-
2-
3-
1-
2-
1-
0-66
3-
3-43
3-40
2-
2 39
2-32
414
5-
4-
6-
5-
2-08
6-
4-16
4-24
4-37
1-40
1-
3-
4-
2-
3-
2-82
104
4-
3-
4-
2-73
1-
3-
5-
6-
5-23
4-
5-
2-
4 92
4-25
3-
4-
868.000.000 371.380.000
83,700,000
56,000,000
68,200,000
75,000,000
111,600,000
360,000,000
' 208,600,000
133,300,000
90,000,000
90,000,000
114,000,000
117,800,000
655,000,000
811,000,000
1,006,000,000
2,634,000,000
5,621,000,000
5,144,000,000
2,026,000,000
1,912,000,000
2,419,000,000
1,950,000,000
1,698,000,000
223,720,000
248,000,000
294,000,000
372,000,000
870,000,000
775,000,000
434,000,000
339,000,000
372,000,000
345,000,000
403,000,000
YAN YEA
OF V
tit will
ing to
figures si
greatest
water yea
Yean for
years.
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
18.98
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
S DEPTHS
iATER.
ie interest-
read the
lowing the
depth of
rly la Yan
the past 28
ft. in.
24 5|
24 8|
20 93
25 7j
21 1
18 84
20 2
18 1
20 0
18 94
26 3
25 1
25 9
23 2
23 0
22 94
25 6
25 9
24 11
24 04
25 6J
22 l|
25 6
25 9
25 11
25 5
25 5
•* 25 G i
Totals
5,984,000,000
1,021,953,000
5,833,826,000
4,762,712,000
10,532,464,000
808,715,000
29'03
51-70
36-85
52-28
26,744,000,000
5,047,100,000
1,508,200,000
* Waste Darebin ©reek from Watts 506,490,000 sals.
77 O
Output by Aqueduct = 5,833,826,000 gals. Intake by Aqueduct = 5,984,000,000 gals.
„ „ Watts Aqueduct = 4,762,712,000 „ „ R’fall in Catchment = 1,021,953,000 „ = 7,005,953,000 gals.
Loss Reservoirs Preston and Pipehead 694,000 „ = 10,597,232,000 „
Output by Aqueduct 5,833,826,000 „
Amount, Consumption = 10,532,464,000 „ „ Loss over By-wash 363,417,000 „
„ Waste Scour Preston Res. 64,768,000 „ = 10,597,232,000 „ Evaporation 808,710,000 „ = 7,005,953,000 „
*Tn 1904 the waste was 735,800,000 gallons. tOn opposite page will be found a table showing the least depths
over the same period of time.
Resident Inspector’s Monthly Journal of Intake, Output, Consumption, Evaporation, Rainfall, River Discharges, &c., Yan Yean and
Maroondah Systems of Supply for year Jany. Ist to Dec. 31st, 1903.


The Months
of
1904.
Intake in gallons by
Output in gallons from
Consumption in gallons
Average
monthly depth
Yan Yean
Reservoir
Average
Monthly
Tempera-
ture At-
mosphere
Amount of Rainfall per Month in Inches
Discharges Feeders with Maroondah System
Notes
Depth of Y.Y. Reservoir, Jan. 1st,
1904 — 24ft 5|in
Depth of Y.Y. Reservoir, Jan. 1st,
1905— 23ft ljin
Average daily evaporation —1,197,000
ga 's., orl-13th of an inch, depth
of reservoir
Discharges—Maroondah, Graceburn
and Donnelly's Ck. Approximate
only, & the Maroondah includes
only that portion of watershed
area situate above the weir or
offtake
Had economy been necessaiy, the
Maroondah system could have
beep utilized to a much larger
extent, and Yan Yean conserved
to the extent of 2,000, 000, OOOgals.
This amount, with the quantity
run to waste at bywash & scours,
viz., 715,805,000 gals., would be
equal to half the quantity in Yan
Yean available for consumption.
Reservoir continued full to over-
flowing from July 16th to Novem-
ber 18th
Aqueduct
Catchment
Yan Yean
Maroondah
Supply
Evaporation
Yan Wallaby
J Creek
Toorour-
roy Reser-
voir
Watts
Weir
Maroondah
Graceburn
Donnelly’s Creek
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
628,249,000
550,624,000
399,728,000
465,913,000
494,118,000
748,710,000
1,014,173,000
746,694,000
579,621,000
726,148,000
635,526,000
458,445,000
142,962,000
269,570,000
20,125,000
21,175,000
55,660,000
91,723,000
99,565,000
295,171,000
32,845,000
88,820,000
7,830,000
690,377, f 000
764,272,000
775,395,000
521,888,000
693,897,000
443,560,000
434,276,000
597,020,000
448,670,000
731,037,000
701,655,000
802,590,000
331,060,000
156,870,000
201,783,000
395,754,000
158,505,000
319,377,000
312,925,000
201,857,000
207,575,000
125,893,000
329,003,000
434,038,000
1,014,157,000
919,471,000
972,833,000
913,150,000
852,251,000
755,399,000
756,192,000
798,318,000
734,365,000
857,349,000
1,023,809,000
1,230,571,000
78,652,000
47,027,000
47,119,000
53,775,000
67,894,000
15,696,000
1 1,426,000
9,937,000
31,660,000
52,898,000
157,331,000
126,293,000
24ft. 7in.
24ft. 81in.
23ft. 1 Tin.
23ft. 3±in.
22ft 10in.
23ft. OMn.
24ft. 5in.
25ft. 6in.
25ft. Sin.
25ft. 4in.
25ft. Oin
24ft. Oin.
770
71-
72
61
54
54 '5
54
58
67
72-
84
5-20
4-89
1-00
0-77
1-
2-
2-02
3-
0-90
2-87
1-01
0-16
9-46
6-
1-23
1-
4-
9-11
7-
6-68
2-
5-
2-52
0-27
5-34
5-74
1-17
1-
2-
4 -99
2-50
4 07
1-18
312
1-70
0-37
7-
9-21
1-16
1-41
3-58
8-
6-
7-
2 71
5-40
3-16
1-14
3,112,000,000
3,960,000,000
1,530,160,000
1,013,850,000
989,055,000
3,371,600,000
4,101,220,000
2,884,860,000
3,192,750,000
3,646,530,000
1,694,520,000
1,030,905,000
■
904,000,000
1,116,000.000
400,000,000
233,280,000
216,000,000
608,880,000
657,744,000
562,464,000
656,640,000
633,888,000
509,760,000
324,136,000
282,000,000
348,000,000
111,600,000
89,770,000
97,650,000
202,230,000
291,834,000
208,971,000
226,800,000
221,526,000
175,650,000
107,415,000
Totals ...
7,447,949,000
1,125,386,000
7,601,637,000
3,284,640,000
10,827,865,000
699,708,000
26-67 56-39
33-75
57-24
30,527,450,000
6,825,792,000
2,363,446,000
Average Daily Output Yan Yean, 20,834,000 gals.
” » » Maroondah, 9,000,000 „ Intake.
„ „ Consumption, 29,666,000 ,, By Aqueduct, 7,447,949,000 gals.
” „ Intake Y.Y. Res., 23,487,000 ,, By Rainfall in Catchment, 1,125,326,000 gals.
Used from Y.Y. Reservoir, 446,875,000 gals. 9,020,150,000 gals.
Total Output from Yan Yean Reservoir, by Channel, 7,604,637,000 gals. Shown by difference in levels : 24ft. 5fin„ 23ft. Hin.
» ” ” Walls System or Maroondah by Channel, 3,284,610,000 gals. 10,889,277,000 gals. How Disposed.
Output by Y.Y. Aqueduct, 7,604,637,000 gals.
Total Amount passed through Preston for Consumption, 10,827,865,000 gals. Evaporation 699,708,000 gals.
” WaStG at Pre8t0n iDcludedin 0ut P ut ’ butnotin Cons - col -> 61,412,000 gals. 10,889,277,000 gals. Waste by Scours and By-wash, 715,805,000 gals. 9,020,150,000 gals.
Full capacity Yan Yean Reservoir, 6,400,000,000 gals.
Quantity available for consumption, 5,400,000,000 gals. j WILSON
; ,
YAN YEAN DEPTHS
OF WATER,
It will be interest-
ing to read the
figures showing the
least depth of water
ni Yan Yean for the
past 30 years.
ft. in.
1877 ... 21 4
1878 ... 22 7
1879 ... 18 11
1880 ... 21 1
1881 ... 18 2
1882 ... 15 9
1883 ... 11 4
1884 ... 17 9
1885 ... 14 3
1886 ... 16 8
1887 ... 14 10
1888 ... 23 5
1889 ... 17 4
1890 ... 17 4
1891 ... 17 8
1892 ... 17 9
1893 ... 16 5
1894 ... 21 6
1895 ... 20 10
1896 ... 14 1
1897 ... 23 1
1898 ... 17 8
1899 ... 16 11
1900 ... 20 114
1901 ... 23 9
1902 ... 21 3
1903 ... 22 8
1904 ... 23 3
1905 ... 17 7
Extracts from Resident Inspector s Monthly Journal of Rainfall, Intake, Output, Consumption, Evaporation, Depth of Reservoir with the Discharges of
the Streams within the Maroondah System from Ist Jany. to 31st Dec., 1904.


PLATE 1.—Bear’s Castle.


PLATE 2. —The Embankment, from Entrance Gate.


PLATE 3. —The Embankment from Water’s Edge.


PLATE 4.—The Embankment and Outlet Tower with Full Reservoir.
PLATE 5.—Windmill to Supply Resident Inspector’s Quarters.


PLATE 6 .—On a Wet Day. Mountains Enshrouded in Mist.
PLATE 7. —Reservoir viewed from North of Tunnel Intake,


PLATE 9.—Yan Yean Reservoir from Bear’s Castle.


PLATE 8-Reservoir from the Resident Inspector’s Quarters.


PLATE 10. —Intake Tunnel Showing Masonry Face Wall and Tunnel Gates.


PLATE 11.—Showing Drop on Clear Water Channel.
PLATE 12.- Junction of Clear Water Channel with old Plenty Aqueduct, showing old flood gates and
sill raised from below bottom of old Plenty Aqueduct.


PLATE 12a. —Clear Water Channel. Water leaving Toorourong Reservoir.
PLATE 13 .—Toorourong Reservoir.


PLATE 14.—Rough Pitched Channel, Jack’s Creek.


PLATE 15.— Rough Pitched Channel, Jack’s Creek diversion from natural course
of the Creek.
PLATE 16.—Rough Pitched Channel, Jack’s Creek re-entering the Channel.


PLATE 17. —Timber Fluming over Yellow Creek connecting Rough Pitched Channel.


PLATE 18.-Timber Shoot, showing full length from bottom of Granite Cascades to natural bed of
Jack’s Creek.


PLATE 19. —Timber Shoot. Water leaving basin at foot of Granite Cascades into Timber Shoot.


PLATE 20. Minnie Ha Ha Waterfall, head of Jack’s Creek.


PLATE 21. —Granite Cascades connecting the Wallaby Aqueduct with natural bed of Jack’s Creek.
Fall of water, 120ft. Altitude above sea level, 1700ft.


PLATE 22.—Wallaby C reek. A Length of Channel.
PLATE 23. —Wallaby Creek Channel with Channel Cleaner.


PLATE 24.-Wallaby Creek Weir and Silver Creek Channel Overflowing.


PLATE 25.—Wallaby Creek Weir from above, showing Silver Creek Intake on left, and Wallaby Creek Outlet and Channel on right.


PLATE 26.—The Board’s Hospice at Wallaby Creek.
PLATE 27.—Outlet Tower at Van Yean. View looking North-East.


PLATE 28, — Outlet Tower at foot of Yan Yean Embankment. Head of Channel that discharges into
circular basin. Valve on Nos. 1 and 2 Outlets from Reservoir.
PLATE 29.- Yan Yean Outlet, water passing over Gauging Weir and discharging into the Aqueduct to Morang ani Pipehead Reservoir.


PLATE 30.-Watr leaving Circular Basin and passing down Aqueduct.
PLATE 31.—Iron Aqueduct over Plenty River and scene of disaster of March, 1878.


PLATE 32. —“ Le Page’s ” Aqueduct raised in Concrete, and Embankment, near Garden Lan[?]


PLATE 33. —Pipe Head Reservoir. Junction of Morang Aqueduct, showing Screens.


PLATE 34.-Preston Reservoir. View from N.E. end, showing By-wash and 53 inch outlet from Maroondah Junction Basin just visible
on surface of water near ladder.
PLATE 35.—Preston Reservoir. Showing mouth of By-wash and cover over Electric Alarm
Bell, which goes off when Reservoir reaches 17 feet ievel. The 53 inch and 30 inch Entrances are visible.


PLATE 36.—Preston Reservoir. House Enclosing Electric Alarm.
PLATE 36a.—Pipes Carried Over River Yarra.


PL A TE 37. -Junction Basin End of Maroondah Aqueduct, water passing through screens into 53in. wrought iron
main to Preston Reservoir.


PLATE 38. —53-in. Main, W.I., in La tt ic e Girder Bridge over Plenty River.


PLATE 39.—View of Bridge in Perspective.
PLATE 4O.-View of Bridge in Perspective.


PLATE 41.— Maroondah weir.


PLATE 42 .— Crossing the Maroondah.


‘lTlnber the patronage of
Ibis j£ycellenq> t
Str IReg. Talbot.
OLDSMOBILE
7 H.P. Regular Runabout.
> ■
i
OLDSMOBILE
7 H.P. Touring Roundabout.
HALL & WARDEN,
SOLE AGENTS EOR
J
Oldsmobile & Clement
MOTOR CARS.
REPAIRS TTO AMY MAKE OP CAR
X
yc
iW
7777
X
K
CLEMENT MOTOR CAR. Made from 7 to 45 H.P.
PRICES ON APPLICATION.
Manufacturers of BICYCLES, TRICYCLES,
OR ANYTHING OIN WHEELS!
WRITE EOR CATALOGUES .
HALL & WARDEN, 196 Swanston St


ALFRED NOTT.
Opposite Scots' Church «
Use the NEW “TORIC PERISCOPIC ”
LENS for COMFORT and ELEGANCE.
Tel. 2684.
145 Collins Street , Melbourne,
OCULISTS’ PRESCRIPTIONS FOR
SPECTACLES OUR SPECIALITY.
oP T l? M aj
ACCURATELY FITTING FRAMES.
O?
-i CiTAHACH'S GUARANTEED JEWELLERY.
2
g
\A-N\l
2
DIRECT from Factory to the Public.
No Imitation Stones. All First Quality Gems.
ENGAGEMENT RINGS a Speciality.
The most Complete Stock of Diamond & Pearl Jewellery, Watches,
Clocks, Sterling Silver, Brushware, and Up-to-date Novelties in Silver or Plated Ware.
ESTABLISHED 35 YEARS.
No. 142
isct. Gold Medal, £2.
Ne. 143
get. gold, 25s ; i-jct., 355, 50s.
No. 2177
Fine Diamond Ring,
£2O.
No. 2149
Fine Diamond Ring,
£lO.
No. 2176
Fine Diamond Ring,
£6.
No. 2179
Fine Diamonds and
Sapphire Ring,
£B. lOs.
No. 2r33
Fine Diamond Ring,
H. Hoop,
£6.
No. 1672
Fine Diamond and
Sapphire Ring,
£7 lOs.
wr
M
?
m
No. 1285.
Jsct. Gold and Pearl or Pearl and Turquoise Necklet,
£4 lOS.
Other Sizes at proportionate prices. All Rings set in iBct. gold.
No. 1238
Fine Brilliant Star,
£47.
These are only a Few Specimens of Our Enormous Stock.
Selections Forwarded to the Country upon satisfetory reference and approval.
Simply quote Numbers when Ordering.
Corner Little Collins Street & Royal Arcade.
r
No. 1275.—15 ct. Gold and Real Pearl Star, £3 10s.
A. (Ehallmqsworth,
DUDLEY IRON WORKS,
SWAN STREET, RICHMOND.
Engineers’ and General Smiths’ Work.
Tanks, Roofing, Girders, and Contractors’ Iron Work.
TSlala MINING REQUISITES SUPPLIED.


PLATE A3.—A Bush Track.


PLATE 44.-Mathinna Falls.


SCENERY NEAR THE WATERSHED.


THE WATTS RIVER.
ACROSS THE SWAMP.


FROM FOREST TO MILL.


IN THE HILLS.


PLATE 45. —Donnelly’s Creek Weir.


PLATE 46. —Junction of Donnelly’s Creek with Maroondah Aqueduct.


PLATE 47. —Aqueduct and Water from No. 5 Tunnel.


PLATE 48. —Entrance to No. 6 Tunnel.


PLATE 49 .—Yarra Glen Aqueduct and Scour Valve.


PLATE 50. —Graceburn Weir.


9
9
Proprietary
Limited.
Registered Office:
OLIVER’S LANE, MELBOURNE.
TELEPHONE No 2153-
Factory ;
Burnley Street North,
RICHMOND.
Manufacturers of
SEWER PIPES, Circular and Oviform, 4 inches to 6 feet in diameter.
BRANCHES & BENDS. INVERTS, all sizes.
STREET CMAININEES. GIRDERS. TANKS and VATS.
PLATES for Floors, Ceiling?, Culvert?, JVlaijholQs, &c.
SPECIALTY:
■jmß--
WE CAN
EEL ** • w* -
?* mw mmm mmmrnm m »« mv m tirwrwii
With
Ramped Ends
and
Kerbs
Complete.
Wmz
~ 5, ■- >4 - r «
.
■
-
:
**:•
v:
'• *
A ,
K-.T
Hi.'
:
1,
IPI
Mr
igp«s * life si
_ ’ ■ < v M j
~
Andl shall be
glad Ito have
your l .vafogl
ENQUIRIES,
DESIGNS & ESTIMATES for all classes of Reinforced Concrete Construction, in bridges, buildings, roofs, bridge decks, water^tanks,
grain storages, weirs, &c., &c.
CONTRACTORS to the Victorian Government; Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works; Melbourne,
Hawthorn, Richmond, Bendigo, &c., City Councils; fEssendon, Kew, &c„ Town Councils; Boroondara,
Coburg, Penshurst, Portland, Mansfield, &c., Shire Councils.


USE
A. net
“EMU” BRAND
IS
m
■
<0
i
“HIDEROW,”
K9^
A Specially-prepared!
Hydraulic Lime.
ESTABLISHED 1889.
Manufactured by the
Victorian Portland Cement Co
WORKS:
BURNLEY STREET NORTH, RICHMOND.
(D. MITCHELL.
CITY OFFICE :
OLIVERS LANE, MELBOURNE.
TELEPHONE 2153.
Contractors to the Victorian Government, Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
British Insulated & Helsby Cables Ltd,, Melbourne City Council, <&c., &c.
QUALITY UNSURPASSED.
Obtainable from all Iron, Timber & Builders’ Merchants, or from the Manufacturers.


PLATE 51. —Graceburn We ir.


PLATE 52.—Graceburn Aqueduct.


PLATE 53. —Graceburn Aqueduct.


Established 1884.
Davies, Shephard Si Coy.,
268 CITY ROAD,
SOUTH MELBOURNE,
Engineers, Brassfounders and Gear Cutters.
MANUFACTURERS OF
4f WATER METERS jfr
Electrical Fittings,
General Brasswork,
Fire Alarms, &c., &c.
Contractors to the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works,
Commonwealth Government, and other Corporations.
WE HAVE
A MERCURY COLUMN EOR TESTING GAUGES,
And can therefore guarantee accuracy in this department.
Our Machinery for Gear Cutting, Milling and Milling Cutter Making, are the best obtainable.
For Screw Making and Stamping our appliances are thoroughly up to date.
The utmost efforts are made to turn out first-class work in all branches.
REMEMBER THE ADDRESS-
Davies, Shephard & Coy.,
MELBOURNE.


The Sewering of Melbourne.
By Mr. E. G. Fitz Gibbon, C.M.G.
In 1842, seven years after the sound of axe and hammer first rang
through the forest which embosomed the Yarra, and the gum trees
gave place to John Pascoe Fawkner’s habitation which was the be-
ginning of Melbourne —the place had grown into a town, and was
incorporated by Act of the Governor and Council of New South
Wales, 6 Victoria, No. 7, —with Mayor, Aldermen, Councillors and
burgesses, who amongst many other things were empowered to cause
such and so many common sewers and drains of such materials,
dimensions and forms as they might think fit and necessarv to be con-
structed and made in, along, or across any of the streets, lanes, roads,
highways, passages, or other public places within the said town.
But the baby corporation was helpless as any newly-born child to
undertake the task.
The Town Council had not funds wherewith even to pay for the
advertisements necessary to give effect to its own creation.
Its powers of taxation over the sparsely peopled township were
strictly limited, and were of doubtful legality until validated two
years afterward by the Act, 8 Vic., No. 12.
Its borrowing powers were restricted to an insignificant sum, and
the Sydney Government, unlike the generous legislature of Victoria,
gave no subsidy to aid it in converting traffic-rutted, stump-obstructed
tracks, gullies and ravines into the streets and highways of a civilised
city.
Crippled in means and ill-spoken of for not doing what was beyond
its ability, the Corporation held steadily on, doing its best, and
cheered with the hope that separation from New South Wales would
bring to Melbourne, as to the remainder of the colony, a fair share
of the amount realised from the sale of Crown lands, and of the
revenue raised in the district of Port Phillip.
The Council proceeded with street improvements, and, unable to
deal with the question of Sewerage, whilst refused Government assist-
ance, and even adequate power of rating, it applied itself to the
planning and maturing of the kindred requirement of Water Supply.
At length, in 1851, the separation took place. The Crown lands
were granted to the colony on condition that one-half of the proceeds
of their sale should be spent upon immigration, and the other upon
such works of public improvement as Her Majesty, upon recommenda-
tion of the Legislative Council (the sole legislative body of that
period), endorsed by the Lieutenant-Governor, should approve.
Funds were thus made available for Sewering, and supplying
water to the city, and the City Council promptly applied for a grant
in aid of the latter work, for which its plans were ready.
But strong feeling against the Corporation of Melbourne was enter-
tained by especially one member of the new nominee Executive, and
was coupled with that disbelief in the capacity of trustworthiness
of municipal representatives, and preference for Boards of paid
Government appointees, which seems inherent in the official mind;
and the Government, instead of acceding to the City Council’s applica-
tion. appointed a Select Committee of the Legislative Council to
advise upon the subject of Sewerage and Water Supply for the
Metropolis. That Committee called for and obtained the Council’s
plans for Water Supply, which are those upon which the use of the
waters of the tributaries of the River Plenty and the construction of
the Yan Yean Reservoir have been based. But it recommended that,
in lieu of entrusting the construction of either Sewers or Waterworks
to the City Council, a Board should be created for both purposes,
nominated by the Government, paid, and with power to impose Water
and Sewerage Rates—and a Bill, giving effect to .these recommenda-
tions, was placed before the Legislative Council.
It was stoutly protested against by the Citv Council as taking from
the incorporated citizens the power previously given them to con-
struct the works, and giving to a Board, not composed of municipal
representatives, the power of imposing taxes upon the citizens.
In deprecation of these objections, the Attorney-General, who had
charge of the Bill, gave assurance, by direction of the Lieutenant-
Governor, that the Sewerage should be constructed without charge
to the citizens, that is, that the work should be paid for from that
moiety of the Land Fund which, with Her Majesty’s approval, was to
be applied to public works, that the cost of the Water Works was
to be repaid to the Government by rates, and that, when so paid for,
the works should pass to the Corporation, on terms and conditions
to be settled by Parliament, a provision which was necessary in view
of the intention to create other local corporations within the Metro-
politan area.
In fulfilment of the promise that the Sewerage should be con-
structed without cost to the ratepayers, the Legislative Council
agreed to an address to the Lieutenant-Governor praying that he
would ask Her Majesty’s approval for application of out
of the unappropriated moiety of the Land Fund to the Sewerage of
the Metropolis, and this was done accordingly.
Objection was further deprecated by the appointment of the
Mayor and the Town Clerk of Melbourne as members of the Board,
giving it, to that extent, a representative character in regard to the
citizens.
The Board commenced operations in 1853, and proceeded with
the Water Supply Works on the lines planned by the City Surveyor,
the late Mr. James Blackburn, senr. The Engineer of the Board who
constructed the Yan Yean Reservoir was Mr. Matthew Bullock
Jackson.
The turning of the first sod by His Excellency the Lieutenant-
Governor, Charles Joseph La Trobe, Esq., took place on December
20th, 1853, and the turning on of the water in the city, by His
Excellency the Governor, Sir Henry Barkly, on December 31st, 1857.
As to Sewerage, the Board devised a scheme, employed pro-
fessional skill in preparation of the working plans, and in accordance
with those plans got cast in England and imported here iron plates
for sewer covers at a cost of 7,967 Bs. id., and there ended the
Board's action with regard to Sewerage. Fortunately so, for their
scheme was short-sighted and bad. It was to direct the sewage into
a main drain along the line of Flinders Street, roofed with the iron
plates before-mentioned, and leading to a pump near the mouth of
the Saltwater River, from which the sewage was to be raised by a
large wheel and discharged into the Yarra.
But as to those plates, there hangs a tale. They lay at the foot
of Batman’s Hill for ten years, until, in 1865,, the City Council learned
that in connection with the new Post Office it was intended to drain
that building by a small brick sewer under the roadway of Elizabeth
Street to the Yarra. The Council suggested that for less than the
estimated cost of the brick sewer, the sewer plates, which were seg-
ments of an oval and suitably flanged, could be bolted into a pipe
of some seven feet by five feet, and bedded so as to recefye the storm
water which then at times flooded the street, stopped traffic, damaged
property, and endangered life, and could also be fnade to carry the
offensive drainage of the Melbourne Hospital, and so be used for their
legitimate purposes of sewerage. The Public Works Department re-
plied that the pipes were sold to the up-country Water Supply Branch,
and, deaf to the representation that they were the property of the
citizens, because purchased with money given by the Queen for the
Melbourne Sewerage, the pipes were sent up country, were placed as
a syphon at Back Creek, had the water turned into them, immediately
collapsed, and were publicly heard of no more. But the fact of their
having had existence is verified and perpetuated by an item of
,£22,314 16s. to the debit of Sewerage in the accounts of the depart-
ment, and improperly included in the debt for which the metropolitan
ratepayers are made liable; being the expenditure of .£37,967 Bs.
id., less the sum which was charged for the plates to the up-country
Water Supply Department.
In the meantime the colony had obtained a new Constitution,
with responsible government, which came into operation in 1855.
Ministries succeeded each other, the Mayor and Town Clerk of Mel-
bourne ceased to be members of the Sewerage and Water Supply
Commission, and the Government filled the vacancies with nominees
who had no representative character. The Water Supply presently
became remunerative, and the works of extension to render them more
so were continued, but the sewerage, which was only matter of ex-
penditure, was left in abeyance, notwithstanding protests on behalf of
the City Council. In iB6O, the Board of Commissioners of Sewerage
and Water Supply was merged in the newly-created Board of Land
and Works, and in 1865 the McCulloch Administration, in consolid-
ating the Public Works Statute, determined to take the Water Supply
income into the consolidated revenue, ignore the claim of the Metro-
polis to reversion of the Water Works, and take power to sell or lease


them to a company or individual. And whilst leaving the Board of
Land and Works under direction to construct the sewers, it gave clear
indication that there was no intention that it should do so; and this
was subsequently accentuated by the omission of the word “ Sewer-
age ” from the title, which the Act of Parliament gave to the “ De-
partment of Melbourne Sewerage and Water Supply.”
Against this the City Council protested, citing the promises of
the Lieutenant-Governor madp to the Legislature of the time by the
Attorney-General, and in consideration of which the Act was passed,
and citing the fact that in fulfilment of those promises Her Majesty’s
consent was asked for the expenditure of of money, which
was at her disposal and not otherwise at the disposal of the Govern-
ment, for the commencement of the sewerage. It was urged that it
was clear that such consent was both given and acted upon, from the
fact that at least ,£37,967 out of the amount had been expended, also
that the objection that all this was obliterated by the advent of re-
sponsible government, was of no value, for the Act which granted
that boon prescribed that no previously existing right or claim should
be abrogated by it, and that, therefore, the Government was bound to
hand over the Water Works so soon as the water rates should pay
for them, and was indebted to the Metropolis in the sum of
which Her Majesty had granted. The Council thereby induced the
insertion of words recognising the local municipal authority as that
to which the works when disposed of ought to pass.
And seeing that, because of the separate municipal districts into
which the Metropolis had been needlessly and unwisely divided, and
against which I had unsuccessfuly contended, the City Council of
Melbourne could not alone carry out Sewerage work throughout the
whole area, nor obtain the reversion of the Water Works, because of
the jealousy and ambition of the other muncipal local bodies, it, at
my instance, induced them to join with it in an application for the
creation of a Metropolitan Board of Works, on the lines of the body
bearing that title in London, and in expressing their willingness that
the Board so constituted should take over the Water Works, with
liability for debts thereon, and undertake the Sewerage.
But in vain. No Ministry seemed inclined to give up the revenue
from Water Supply, or to expend any part of it upon the Metropolitan
Sewerage. Although year after year, without cessation, the City
Council in petitions to the Legislature, deputations and letters to the
Government, reports, as Local Board of Health, and such other ways
as presented themselves, urged and argued for commencement of the
Sewerage.
In iB6O I wrote in its annual Health Report as follows :
“ Underground Sewerage is still the great, it may be almost said,
the sole sanitary requisite of the city. Time, and the completion of
other improvements, do but render the necessity for this more urgent;
but unfortunately the probabilities of its being proceeded with seem
to be in inverse ratio with the evidence of its indispensability. With-
out underground drainage, attempts to render the city really healthy
are simply futile; every cellar becomes a tank of noxious bilge water;
the stench consequent upon the emptying of these pollutes the night
air, wafts the poison to the lungs of sleepers, and may fairly be
charged with a great part of the sickness and mortality of the city.
“ But it is not merely the Sewerage of the centre of the City of
Melbourne that is required for the health of the citizens; the effec-
tual Sewerage of East Collingwood, Fitzroy, Smith Ward North, and
Richmond, by a tunnel conducting the drainage westward of the Salt-
water River, is equally needful, for at present the drainage of those
localities, for an area of upwards of six square miles, with the filth and
refuse arising from more than fifty miles of roads, streets and lanes,
and from the habitations of at least 40,000 people, as well as from
slaughtering places, candle works, breweries, and other manufactories,
and even, as the City Council is informed, from a manure depot of the
Municipality of Richmond, is discharged into the River Yarra above
Chapel Street bridge, and thus the river, .which should be preserved
as an ornament and a blessing to the city, in ,as pure a state as cir-
cumstances will admit, is, in disregard to all sanitary experience, con-
verted into a common sewer, which, with these pollutions, cannot fail
to become foul and pestilential. Even this is not all. Though the
Council would willingly avoid the appearance of intending to heighten
a nauseating picture, or of creating disgust, were it not convinced
that silence would be criminal, and that exposure is the most certain
method for obtaining a remedy, the river thus polluted, and with the
additional filth from fellmongeries and tanneries, is the only source of
water supply for all purposes for the district of South Yarra, for the
greater portion of the Municipality of Prahran, and may at any
moment, upon the occurrence of an accident to the Yan Yean works,
become the sole resource upon which the- entire city shall be depen-
dent for its supplies.”
In 1870 the City Council’s Medical Officer of Health, the late
Tharp Mountain Girdlestone, M.R.C.S., reported that “ The want of
proper means for the removal of sewage has given rise to a saturation
of the soil with ground water, which is detrimental to health. No
doubt a great deal of the mortality, more especially among young
children, is owing to the want of drainage. All medical practitioners
here must see numbers of infants who suffer from dysentery, mesenteric
enlargements and wasting terminating in death, arising from no other
cause than the fluid filth under the floors and in the foundations of
houses, that would be obviated by efficient drainage.” And in the
report of the Council as Local Board of Health for the year, I said:
“ The city is still without sewers, and the want of them is an evil
which is prolific of others, amongst them the pollusion of the River
Yarra.”
In 1881 a Committee of the Council, in a report upon the con-
dition of the river, said : “ In furnishing this report what is most dis-
couraging to your Committee is that- thereds -in it nothing new. They
have'again and again for years past subjected themselves to observa-
tion of the same sickening sights and smells, have exhausted epithets
of disgust in describing them, and every argument which could suggest
itself to induce a remedy.
“ Four years ago special notice was drawn to the pollution of the
Yarra by . the death of thousands of fish in the river. Attention is
now again forcibly recalled to it by the illness of His Excellency the
Governor, which your Committee, with the entire community, sin-
cerely regret, and which is attributed to it. Your Committee ear-
nestly trust that this will cause remedial action forthwith, or
otherwise the next warning may perchance come in the spread of
pestilence and death among the inhabitants. The circumstances are
plain. An area of upwards of two hundred square miles, with as
many lineal miles of roads and streets, upwards of fifty thousand
dwellings, manufactories, and buildings, and a population of nearly
a quarter of a million, for its storm water, house, chamber, and
kitchen slops, the refuse fluid from manufactories, stables, urinals,
and other constituents of street drainage, as well as the discharge
from sundry Government water-closets, has no other receptacle and
conduit than the River Yarra, which is thereby converted into an
open sewer, and so defiled that the pollution, less or more, of a num-
ber of noxious trades upon its banks is looked upon as of no
consequence.
“ The remedy is equally plain, and is suggested by the circum-
stances. A system of main drains, which shall intercept the drainage,
keep it out of the river, and conduct it to where it can be used
as a fertiliser and cleared of its impurities before being allowed to
discharge into other waters. The essays suggestive of such a system
sent in competition for the Right Worshipful the Mayor’s prize of
and still under comparison by the expert referees, will, your
Committee trust, furnish, in that selected, one which will prove
practically useful.
“ The power to plan and execute the work is vested by law in the
Board of Land and Works, and is not possessed by any other depart-
ment or corporation. Hitherto, unfortunately, the responsible minis-
ters of the Board have done no more than procure for riparian munici-
palities Parliamentary grants wherewith to make sewers into the
Yarra, which will all have ultimately to be unmade.
“ Your Committee are clearly of opinion that an elective body
should be created, with powers and means to supply this greatest and
most pressing of sanitary requirements. They recommend that this
be strongly urged upon the Executive Government, with a representa-
tion that the advantages to be looked for from it will infinitely out-
weigh its cost, as may be rationally inferred from the results which
have attended your Council’s action in putting an end to the nightsoil
pollution of the subsoil of the city, and of the street gutters and the
river which was caused by underground cesspools and the discharges
from water-closets, and in otherwise abating and preventing nuisances,
namely, that the death-rate of the city has decreased from 21.5 in
1000 in 1877, to 19.8 in 1878, 19.5 in 1879, and 18.2 in 1880;
which means that in 1878, 125 ; in 1879, 127 ; and in 1880, 192, or
in the three vears a total of 444 human lives have been saved and pro-
longed in the City of Melbourne by the carrying out of comparatively
small sanitary improvements under orders of your Council.’
And in 1888 the Health Officer in the annual report of the Local
Board of Health for the preceding year wrote : “ Since my last annual
report I have had the opportunity of visiting Adelaide and examining
its arrangements for drainage and the disposal of sewage. I have
also gone carefully into the mortality returns of that city for the last
few years and have convinced myself that an actual improvement in
its sanitary condition has resulted from the excellent system of
drainage recently adopted. I am, therefore, all the more strongly
convinced of the view held by most persons who have any know-
ledge of sanitary matters, and expressed on many occasions by myself,
that our greatest need in the way of public improvements is the adop-
tion of a complete system of underground drainage. It is unfor-
tunate that while enthusiasm can be worked up in favour of mere
temporary and makeshift expedients, there should be so little assured
progress made towards attaining what would be a permanent boon,
with great and far-reaching good effects.”
But anxiety to obtain the sanitary benefits of an efficient system
of sewerage was not restricted to the City Council of Melbourne. In
the proposal of that body for union in a Metropolitan Board of Works
to manage the Water Supply and carry out the Sewerage, the majority
of the cities, towns, boroughs, and shires of the Metropolitan district
cordially concurred.
And, at length, the necessity for avoiding further delays was pressed
upon the Government and the Legislature, by continual publication,
by the Central Board of Health, of the mortality from diseases,
chiefly typhoid fever, which seriously injured the reputation of the
Colony for healthfulness, to the extent of causing it to be shunned
and avoided by many travellers. The appointment of a Sanitary


Commission was a first step in advance, and that Commission's Re-
port gave additional reasons for the constitution of a Metropolitan
Board of Works; and for, in the meantime, obtaining from the
Mother Country the best engineering opinion available. James
Mansergh, Esq., Member of Council of the Institute of Civil En-
gineers, and one of the highest authorities upon sanitary engineering,
was retained, visited the Colony, and by personal inspection, and the
able assistance of the Surveyor-General, the Inspector-General of
Public Works, and the officers of the Public Works Department,
prepared and furnished several alternative schemes for the Metro-
politan Sewerage. The news of the death of this eminent gentleman
has only just been received by cable.
Meanwhile the “Metropolitan Board of Works Conference,” com-
posed of municipal delegates, which first met in 1870, had applied
itself to the financial and other aspects of the question, and found at
the period of its more recent sittings, that the expenditure upon the
Water Works, as first planned and constructed, had been overpaid
from rates, and that, if accounts were taken, it would be found that,
there remained only, on the part of the ratepayers, indebtedness for
the extensions, and that therefore the works should, in fairness, be
handed over, charged only with such additional expenditure, whereby
the inhabitants of the Metropolis would receive mere justice, and not
the favour shown to country districts, wherein there has been large
expenditure for Water Supply without any corresponding return.
The conference, furthermore, prepared a Bill for the creation of
a Metropolitan Board of Works, and placed it in the hands of the
Premier, the late Hon. Duncan Gillies, who was at the same time in-
formed by the Right Worshipful the Mayor of Melbourne of the
time, Alderman J. C. Stewart, as a better proposal, that a resolution
had been arrived at expressing willingness on the part of the muni-
cipalities to coalesce into one municipality for all purposes.
The Premier did not favourably entertain that alternative, but he
caused a Bill for creating the Board to be prepared and introduced
into Parliament.
Against several of its provisions the municipalities had and have
valid grounds of complaint, amongst them an attempt, which was
happilv defeated, to charge the Board with indebtedness for a sum, of
which had been paid already, and a clause which was
unfortunately carried exempting all Government property, railways,
etc., from rates for Water Supply or for Sewerage. The Bill passed
into law on December 20th, 1890, which may well be marked as a
red-letter day in the Metropolitan muncipal calendar, as the anniver-
sary of the turning of the first sod of the Yan Yean Reservoir, and
as marking the restoration to the ratepayers of municipal agency in
the conduct of their business, of which they were deprived for thirty-
seven years, to their bane and loss from inaction in the meantime.
The Board's first meeting was held on March 18th, and
the Act was brought fully into force by “ Gazette ” proclamation on
July Ist following, and on that day the Engineer-in-Chief, Mr. William
Thwaites, M.A., M. Inst. C.E., entered upon his duties.
The plans prepared by Mr. Mansergh were referred to him for
advice and consultation with the Board’s Sewerage Committee as to
their modification and adapting to actual requirements, and subse-
quent submission to the Board for approval and action, with the result
that the “ M ” scheme was chosen, reduced in cost upwards of a
million sterling by manifestly judicious modifications,, largely due to
the sound judgment and great practical experience of members of the
Board.
That so-modified scheme has been carried out by Mr. Thwaites
with the incidents and to the extent detailed by him. But to it has
been superadded onerous, minutely intricate and difficult duties not
usually assigned to the constructors of main sewerage —namely, the
sub-reticulation of lanes and passages and the furnishing and fitting
of'Sanitary appliances in houses and connecting them with the sewers.
The work commenced with the turning of the first sod of the
Outfall Sewer by His Excellency the Governor, the Right Honourable
the Earl of Hopetoun, on May 19th, 1892, and the penstock allow-
ing discharge of the sewage from the centre of Melbourne was raised
by His Excellency the Governor, the Right Honourable Lord Brassev,
■on Eebruary sth, 1898.
For all these matters relating to sewers, their incidental con-
tracts, the organisation and control of the host of requisite em-
ployees, the imposition and collection of rates and revenue, and
raising and guarding the expenditure of necessary funds, and, in
addition, dealing with all details of the Metropolitan Water Supply,
the burden and responsibility rest upon the members of the Mel-
bourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
They (irrespective of their Chairman, who is elected by them and
paid) are thirty-nine business men engaged in various professions and
callings, of good repute and standing, possessing the esteem and con-
fidence of the ratepayers, elected by them to the Municipal Councils,
and there chosen by their fellow-members as ablest representatives
on the Board, some of them also members of Parliament or of other
representative bodies —men whose time is money, and whose judg-
ment and experience are invaluable.
That time and those abilities they give gratuitously on the Board
to arduous, difficult, absorbing, and sometimes even dangerous duties,
with the object, happily in the greatest part accomplished, of supply-
ing the only thing needed to render this metropolis, whether as the
seat of the Federal Legislature or in any other aspect, one of the
cleanest, healthiest, pleasantest, and grandest cities of the world.


Sewerage System.
By Mr. William Thwaites, M.A., M. Inst. C.E., Etc.
Scope of Scheme. —The Sewerage system now being carried out by
the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, is designed to carry
off all water used in water closets, lavatories,, baths, and urinals, to-
gether with all chamber slops and water used in cooking,, washing
food, clothes, floors, etc., from sinks in kitchens and sculleries,, drain-
age from stables and cow houses, together with all liquid refuse which,
in the opinion of the Board, will not prejudicially affect the sewers,
machinery, or farm.
In exceptional cases where special difficulties arise the water from
paved yards is also taken into the sewers.
Dimensions of Sewers. —Rainfall from the streets is not taken
into the sewers, which are designed to provide for 30 cubic feet per
head per day from the future population, which it is calculated will
have to be provided for in each water-shed area.
The average winter water supply to Melbourne is equal to about 40
gallons per head, and the summer supply about 90 gallons, so that
the sewers are designed to run half full if the whole of the water
supply is sent in to Melbourne on a hot day were again picked up
without the loss of evaporation, and discharged into the Sewerage
Farm.
The basis of calculation has been for 1,000,000 people ultimately
settled on the areas now capable of being connected with the Pump-
ing Station.
Area Provided For. —The scheme embraces the following munici-
palities. (See Plate IX.) :
Cities.—Collingwood, Fitzroy, Footscray, Hawthorn, Melbourne,
Prahran, Richmond, South Melbourne, and St. Kilda.
Towns. —Brighton, Brunswick, Essendon, Northcote, North Mel-
bourne, Port Melbourne, and Williamstown.
Boroughs.—Flemington and Kensington, and Kew.
Shires.—Caulfield, Coburg, Boroondara, Malvern, Preston, and
part of Heidelberg.
These municipalities cover an area of about 103,000 acres. The
population about 500,000, living in about 105,000 houses.
House Survey.—ln order to design the details of the system, it
was necessary to have a detail survey effected as rapidly as possible
of the whole of the houses which could be drained.
The survey of the more densely populated areas was let in thirty
contracts, embracing 83,529 tenements, delineated on 1465 anti-
quarian sheets on a scale of 40 feet to the inch. Every detail
capable of being shown on this scale is surveyed and plotted. (See
Plate X.).
These plans showed all the storm water drains, the water pipes,
plugs and valves, and gas mains, as far as they can be identified.
The level of the lowest floor of every house was shown upon these
sheets, as well as that of the cellars.
The street levels are also given at every 100 feet.
All the physical features are shown, so that these plans make a
perfect record of the city as it existed.
All the designing of the sewerage reticulation is carried out on
lithographed copies of these plans.
District Plang to a scale of 160 feet to the inch are carefully com-
piled from these original plans for designing the general sewerage of
a district.
These plans are very useful for the Board’s purposes, and for
general municipal requirements.
Photolithos of these plans are prepared on a reduced scale of
400 feet to the inch for general record purposes.
The 40 feet to the inch plans not only provide the means of
designing the local sewers, but the plant for the individual houses
themselves are traced from them for the house connection work.
Permanent survey and level points were fixed all over the Metro-
politan area.
They are formed by a hollow tubular casting, capable of just
receiving the foot of a survey pole, being firmly fixed below the
street level in a block of Portland cement concrete, and protected
by a cast-iron cover. The cover has a lid, which can be removed,
and the survey pole placed in the hollow of the casting, giving a
survey point, or a levelling staff may be held upon the top of the
internal hollow casting, giving a fixed bench-mark.
All these points have been very accurately surveyed, both for
line and level, and provide a very useful skeleton framework upon
which either the present or future surveys of the Metropolis can be
based.
The Board surveyed the remaining houses by its own staff. The
framework survey was carried out by the Board’s Officers, the
limit of lineal error for the survey lines being three inches to the
male, with a maximum angular error of fifteen seconds.
House Connections. —The work of house connections is being car-
ried out under a very carefully prepared by-law, which was framed
by the Engineer-in-Chief, after considering those in existence in Ade-
laide, Sydney, England and America. The work carried out in accor-
dance with this by-law is proving very satisfactory, as very few
complaints have arisen therefrom. (See Plates XL, XII., and XIII.).
Under the Amending Act of 1897, after a property has been de-
clared to be a sewered property, the owner has several options :
(1) He may submit a plan of his house connections for approval,
and on approval being given agree to carry out the work
within one month, or such further extension of time as may
be granted to him by the Board.
(2) He may submit a plan which, if approved of, he may ask
for an estimate of the cost and expense of carrying it out.
This the Board is bound to supply, and the owner can then
either carry out the work himself, or ask the Board to carry
the work out, which it must do for the estimate, whether the
work costs less or more.
(3) On default of the owner, the Board can carry out the work,
and at the request of the owner, accept payment by forty
quarterly instalments, bearing interest on such portion as
from time to time remains unpaid at the rate of five pounds
per centum per annum.
The cost of connecting houses of equal valuation with exactly the
same fittings carried out by the same men, and under the same over-
seers, varies very considerably.
The following list gives a number of actual costs of houses, valued
at per annum, with three fittings, carried out in the same district
and by the same men —viz. :
No. £ s d No. £ s d No. £ s d
1. .. 11 4 0 9. ... 15 18 4 17. ... 18 0 1
2. ... 11 13 11 10. ... 16 7 4 18. ... 18 4 2£
3. ... 13 8 3 11. ... 16 12 9 19. .. 18 16 8
4. ... 13 14 2 12. ... 16 18 9 20. ... 19 6 9
5. ... 14 1 11 13, ... 17 011 21. ... 20 12 9£
6. ... 14 14 2 14. ... 17 15 6 22 ... 21 1 54
7. ... 14 15 9J 15. ... 17 17 5 23. ... 26 9 0
8. ... 15 0 9“ 16. ... 17 19 8£
This list shows how difficult it is to compare the cost of sewering
one house with another, even though the valuation be the same and
the number of fittings be identical.
The cost of each individual house depends entirely on its own
surroundings.
There are, of course, cases amongst these where the Board has lost
on individual cases, on others where it has gained.
The Board’s materials are obtained by public contract on the
open market. Contract prices, together with ten per cent, for test-
ing, storage, booking, etc., are charged.
The owners are only charged the actual cost of the labour em-
ployed on the works, with ten per cent, added.
The Board pays fair wages to all its labourers and tradesmen, and
does not attempt in any way to undersell private employers; never-
theless the Board is blamed in some directions for underestimating
the work, and in others for excess in its estimates.
The fact is that the estimates of the Board’s Officers are as nearly
as possible the fair value of the work. Of course there may be mis-
takes in some instances, but a reference to the columns of the “ Build-
ing, Engineering and Mining Journal,” will show almost any week
how great a variance in opinion private contractors have as to what
similar work is worth. Take a case in point:
Sewerage Connections. To “ Lundy,” Spring and Flinders Streets,
L. Edgecombe j£ ls7 3 o
W. L. Williams 187 o o
J. C. Tippett 189 o o
Lanyon and Bryant 210 o o
W. Downie 225 10 o
The preparation of plans, estimates and supervision of the house
connection work representing over 300 finished tenements per week
is a very formidable task. The only way it has been carried out has
been bv division of the various classes of work, one overseer having
20 or 30 houses almost continuously under his supervision.
The whole of these 1764 men have to be supervised by men of
different ranks, and gradually increasing responsibility, until the
higher district officers are reached.


A regiment of 2000 men would require a considerable number of
officers, from the colonel to the corporal, to control them, and ex-
actly the same officering has to be provided for in dealing with such
a complii ated branch as the house connection work now being carried
out by the Board, the chief criticism against which is that the work
is being too well done. The health of the dweller in a a year
cottage is just as well worth caring for as that of the owner of a
a \ear house, and the sanitary work in th& cottage should,
except for materials, be as well carried out, and as rigorously in-
spected as that of the mansion.
SEWERAGE RETICULATION.
The work of laying the sewerage reticulation of a city like Mel-
bourne is a matter of very heavy expense relative to the same
work in other cities.
To appreciate the difference between London and Melbourne, the
following relative water supply statistics are worthy of consideration :
London. Melbourne. Relative Proportion
Proportion. ~ , .
I opulation.
. 121 s - nhs. ... 122 sq. inis. ... Equal ... 12.50
Valuation ... ... ... ... ... 11 p.c .. 1 27
Water Supply, Winter t
(gallons) ... / J 9i.55i.000 ... 20,000,000 ... g£ 1.25
Water Supply, Summei )
(gallons) ... ] 2 3i.606,c00 ... 40,000,000 ... 17 2.12
Population 5.875.003 ... 464,590 ... 8 ~ ...Standard
blouses ... 795, 2 4 r ••• 105,000 ... 13 „ ... 1.62
Miles—Water Mams ... 5.254 - 1,348 ...25 323
f " in Metrop. 3.447 U- 1,090 ... 3I „ ... 3 75
Rate of Water ... i/- in the £ ... 6d. in the £ ... so ~
Mains constantly charged i,756|- ... i,cgo ... 62 "
1 hus taking the population served with water as a basis, water is
distributed over 12-2 times the area in Melbourne in proportion to
density of population.
The valuation is 37 per cent, higher in Melbourne than in London,
the winter water supply is 25 per cent, greater, and the summer water
supply 112 per cent, greater.
I he population occupies 62 per cent, more houses in proportion,
while there are 3J more miles of water mains per head for the whole
s} stem,, and 3§ as many miles of pipes for the reticulation of the
populated areas.
The annual value per square mile in London is £300,000, while in
Melbourne it is only £32,000.
1 he number of lineal miles of water pipes per square mile in
London is 15, while in Melbourne it is 9, so that everv mile of pipe
m London supplies worth of property, but in Melbourne only
£35 6 °-
From a sewerage expenditure point of view, it is therefore abso-
lutely necessary to reduce the capacity of the sewers to a minimum
without interfering with their sanitary efficiency, otherwise the cost
of sewering Melbourne would have been absolutely prohibitive.
I he difficulty has been met by excluding all rainfall from the
sewers except where considered absolutely necessary. Up to Feb-
ruary 22nd, 1900, out of 23,992 houses connected with the sewers,
only 140 paved yards had been drained into them.
When preparing his estimates for the Melbourne Sewerage System,
Mr. Mansergh, Vice-President of the Institution of Civil Engineers,
stated, with regard to the cost of sewerage reticulation.
“ I have, on account of not being in possession of a plan showing all
existing’ streets, been compelled to include in the estimate a lump sum
for sewering them, and such other streets as will require to be sewered
by 1898; the year when the work was estimated to be completed for
the existing population.
“ That sum is practically £500,000, and would be sufficient at
Melbourne prices to lay 15m.,, 12m., and 9m. pipes, in all such
streets as would be sewered by local authorities in England.
“ however, the numerous yards, passages, and public right-of-
ways be sewered at the public cost, I estimate that a sum equivalent
to the capitalised product of a rate of 1.13 pence in the £, on the
ratable value of 1898, and a diminishing rate as time goes on would
have to be added to the annual charge.”
These remarks mean that if the Board subsequently elected to
carry out all this extensive reticulation beyond what is the custom in
England, that an additional sum of £1,000,000 must be added to Mr.
Mansergh s estimate for sewerage reticulation, making the expen-
diture £1,649,721, instead of £649,721.
Judging from the results, the cost to the Board of this extended
reticulation will be about £1,950,000.
The Board is now carrying this reticulation much further than
was originally intended, so that what was estimated to cost £1,100,000
by the Board s Engineer-in-Chief, will cost probably £1,950,000.
The Board not only lays at least one branch to the boundary of a
Property, but in all right-of-ways, streets, alleys, and passages where
owners are not asserting exclusive rights of use.
1 his great extension of the Board’s expenditure was brought about
bv the Boards Amending Act, No. 149, which, in section 3, states
that street shall include “ any public or common highway, road, or
thoroughfare, and also any public bridge, and any road, lane, passage,
alley, or court, which the owners or occupiers of two or more houses,
or buildings adjoining thereto, or properties abutting thereon, have
the right to use, or do commonly use as a means of access to, or
drainage from such houses or buildings or properties.”
The Engineer-in-Chief originally increased Mr. Mansergh’s esti-
mate of ,£649,721 to £ji,ioo,ooo, to meet previous additions to the
extent or reticulation estimated to be carried out by the Board, but
the extra work entailed on the Board directly by the Act of August
24th, 1897, has necessitated an increase in this estimate to
£i,950,°°0.
STONEWARE PIPES.
As it was absolutely necessary to obtain a good quality of stone-
ware for the pipes to be used, a careful investigation of the pipes in
existence was made before calling contracts for the future supplies.
1 he chief faults with the pipes previously obtainable in the market
were that they were not vitrified, the sockets were too shallow, and not
large enough to allow a proper joint, and in many cases the pipes
were not true to shape.
After careful investigation it appeared to the Engineer-in-Chief
that as good pipes could be made in Melbourne as in any part of the
world, and that there would be no necessity to import them.
Ihe following are the principal points of the stoneware specifica-
tions : —•
(Ist.) Pipes to be well burnt, completely vitrified, and free from
splits, cracks, or other defects, and to be made to the exact form
and dimensions shown on the drawings.
(2nd.) Each pipe shall pass a wooden dummy § of an inch less than
the specified diameter of the pipe inside. The dummy is the full
length of the pipe, including a projection for the socket. A ring; of
an internal diameter \ of an inch larger is to pass over the outside
of the pipe from end to end, except the socket.
(3rd.) All pipes shall be subjected to a head of 30 feet of water,
without leaking or weeping, and be repeatedly struck bv a wooden
mallet while under pressure. (See Plate VIII.).
(4th.) The pipes shall bear a cross-breaking strain, when sup-
ported in a cradle on bearers 18 inches apart, of 1000 lbs. in the
centre.
The pipes have all been supplied well up to specification.
As far as this branch of work is concerned, the Board has proved
that sewerage pipes can be made as well, and as cheaply as in any
part of the world, besides having effected a permanent improvement
in the manufacture of all drain pipes.
All the various dimensions of stoneware pipes from 4 in. to 18 in.
are now typed, and will not be departed from unless for special pur-
poses.
The joints of all stoneware pipes are made with gasket driven into
the bottom of the socket, in a similar way to what is done with water
pipes, and the joints made good with cement mortar composed of 1 of
Portland cement to 2 of sand, worked in by the jointer’s hands.
Indiarubber gloves are provided to prevent the men’s hands being
injured by the cement.
The pick-up drains from houses drained individually, or combined
with others, are usually four inches in diameter; the sewers in right-
of- Ways are generally six inches, but in some few cases, nine inches
in diameter.
The major number of street sewers are nine inches in diameter.
The minimum gradient for a 4m. pipe is one in 40, for a 6in. pipe
one in 60, and for a 9m. pipe one in 180. (See Plate XXVIII.)
Pipes laid at these gradients will give the following results:
Velocity per minute Ve’ocity Discharge
Pipe. Fall. when half full per full per
or full. second. minute.
4 ••• lin 40 ... 278 ft. ... 4-i- ft. ... 24 c. ft.
6 .... lin 60 ... 279 ft. ... 4-t ft. ... 54 „
9 ... lin 180 ... 182 ft. ... 3" ft. ... 85 „
X T o sewer is designed to have a less velocity than three feet per
second, while in the four and six inch pipes, the maximum velocity
is feet a second; to give three feet per second in a four inch
pipe the pipe must be running iin. deep and a 6in. pipe 1-2 in. deep,
in the former case 6ft. a minute is passing along the pipe, and in the
latter 12 feet a minute.
The tables of Baldwin Lathan have been adopted in all calcula-
tions as to the discharge of sewers; though they may not be abso-
lutely correct, they give fair and relative results, provided that the
whole svstem be designed on the one basis. (See Plates XV. and
XVI.)
For house connection work, a better velocity is obtained in a 6in.
pipe, carrying 20ft. a minute, at a gradient of one in 60, than the
same quantity running full bore through a 4m. pipe, with a gradient
of one in 60. Hence the reason for adopting larger pipes where the
gradient is small.
The house drains are to be of salt-glazed stoneware, unless laid
less than 2ft. deep from the surface to the centre line of the pipe
in yards, or places liable to heavy traffic, it shall be of heavy cast-
iron, or wrought-iron, but when the traffic is not heavy, stoneware
pipes laid in concrete are allowed.
All pipe sewers, whether in the private work, or the Board’s work,
are laid in straight lines from, man-hole to man-hole with curved
junctions, worked smooth in Portland cement mortar at the inverts of
the man-holes.


Ventilator or inspection openings are provided wherever necessary,
in order that by dropping a lighted lamp down them, the lamp can
be seen from the adjacent man-holes, so as to enable a block to be
located.
The pipe sewers were laid in Port Melbourne, which was then
water-logged to within two feet of the surface, to a minimum depth
of sft.; in other municipalities a minimum of 8 to 10 feet has been
adopted, as the plane of the subsoil water was lower.
As far as possible all existing cellars and wells have been provided
for, except in exceptional instances, where the wells are too deep, or
the properties too poor to warrant an excessive expenditure in run-
ning the sewers at an extraordinary depth.
The pipes are bedded in the solid in good ground, in rock, in
sand, where the gradients are not steep, and in Portland cement
concrete where the}- are steep. In bad ground, the concrete is con-
structed on red gum planking, over which is laid one or two courses
of dried bricks if the ground be full of water. (See Plate XIV.)
In dangerous ground the pipes are entirely bedded in and covered
with concrete. Under storm-water channels, tramway lines, railway
lines, and large water pipes, the tunnels are filled with Portland
cement rubble concrete.
When the sewers are constructed in streets with wood blocking or
stone paving, the trenches have been entirely refilled with sand.
At frequent intervals the pipe sewers are provided with flushing
gates for cleansing purposes. (See Plate XXI.)
In case of an oversight any of these gates might be left down.
An overflow pipe is arranged behind the gate as a relief.
When pipe sewers join at different levels, special connections are
made, so as to reduce all splashing and agitation of the sewage to a
minimum, and thus prevent the liberation of gases of decomposition
when they would become a nuisance. (See Plate XXIV.).
All man-hole and vent covers are constructed of cast-steel lids,
with either cast-iron or cast-steel frames. Some of the original lids
were of cast-iron, but it was found that they were liable to fracture.
The whole of these covers are cast with openings, unless under
special cases. As far as possible, ventilation at the surface of the
street is encouraged, but from time to time it has been found neces-
sary to vent above the houses. (See Plates XVII., XVIII., XXII.,
XXIIT., XXV. and XXVI.)
For this purpose vent columns from 4m. to 15 in. diameter, and
from 30ft. to 80ft. high have been erected. (See Plate XIX.)
These vents are doing their work very well indeed, very few com-
plaints of bad smells having reached the Board’s officers.
As the main sewers had to be kept clean from the moment the
first drop of dirty water entered them,, it was necessary to design the
whole pick-up system, with the view of reducing all possible ground
of complaint to a minimum.
This was done by pushing all the main line of sewers ahead, so
as to be able to make connections with as many storm-water sewers
as possible. Connections were made wherever the municipal storm-
water drains crossed, and before the first house was connected as
many of these junctions as were available were opened. Scarcely
any change in the amount of sewerage pumped took place, for as
the houses were connected .so the water from the council drains
decreased, the dry weather flow being gradually charged from muni-
cipal drain to Board's sewer. In times of heavy rain the valves are
closed so that the sewers do not become charged with rain water.
As the various street sewers cannot be maintained clear by this
method, another had to be adopted.
Automatic flushing syphons are constructed at all the dead-ends
of the sewerage reticulation. These tanks hold 200, 400, 600, 800,
or 1000 gallons of water, the whole of which can be discharged in
from two to four minutes by the aid of an automatic syphon. (See
Plate XX.)
These syphons are of the ordinary Field type, of three sizes, 6in.,
9in., and ioin., for 9m., 12in., 15m., and iBin. sewers. In order to
make certain that a vacuum is obtained inside the syphon, an
ordinary cellar-pump connected with the water mains is provided.
This is worked by a float, which, when the tank is full, opens the
water supply valve and sets the exhauster in action. The vacuum is
perfected, and the contents of the tanks rapidlv discharged into the
sewers.
There are 229 of these automatic syphons at present in position.
When a district is first being connected, all the syphons are started
to go off every two hours, but as more houses become connected,
the syphons are set for longer intervals, arranged by the simple
process of slightly closing the supply tap.
These syphons have done their work magnificently.
No right-angled junctions are allowed in the reticulation sewers.
All connections are at an angle of 45deg., with the main pipes.
When necessary special curved bends of isdeg., 3odeg., 45deg.,
6odeg., or 9odeg., are provided to guide the flow, and prevent
deposition of silt.
The work of laying pipe sewers is now steadily progressing in the
outlying districts.
MAIN AND BRANCH SEWERS.
The sewerage system of the Metropolis is divided into two main
systems, viz.:—The South Yarra and the North Yarra.
The North Yarra system provides for Heidelberg, Preston, North-
Brighton, Caulfield, St. Kilda, Malvern, Prahran, Hawthorn, Kew,
Boroondara, Richmond, Collingwood, South Melbourne, Melbourne,
except Carlton and East Melbourne. (See Plate IX.)
The South Yarra system provides for Heidelberg, Preston, North-
cote, Coburg, Brunswick, Fitzroy, Carlton, North Melbourne, Essen-
don, Flemington and Kensington, and Footscrayv (See Plate IX.)
The town of Williamstown is provided for by an independent
branch, joining the South Yarra system before it enters the pumping
station.
SOUTH YARRA SYSTEM.
The Hobson’s Bay main sewer commences as a twelve-inch stone-
ware pipe near the Sandringham Coffee Palace, thence will follow
the Beach-road in Moorabbin to the junction with the South-road at
Brighton Beach station, thence it will follow Beach-road and St.
Kilda-street through Brighton to Glen Huntly-road, passing thence
along Glen Huntly-road to Mitford-street to the junction of Barkly
and Ackland streets, St. Kilda. From this point to the pumping
station this main sewer has been completed. The length of this
sewer still to complete is about miles. The completed sewer was
let in five sections.
HOBSONS BAY MAIN, No. 5.
This contract extends from a point 14,493 feet from the junction
of Danks and Graham streets, Port Melbourne, to a point 7531 feet
therefrom at Fraser-street, St. Kilda.
It was originally designed from Barkly-street, along Acland-street,
to Carlisle-street, as an oval sewer 3ft. x 4ft. 6in., with a fall of one
in 950 from Carlisle-street, along Acland-street, to Fitzroy-street, and
along Fitzroy-street to Park-road, 3ft. 6in. x sft. 3m., with a fall of
one in 1100, and thence along Park-road to its commencing point
at Fraser-street. It is 4ft. 3m. in diameter, with a fall of one in
1100.
The contract was let on June 2nd, 1897, to A. G. Shaw, for the
sum of 6s. 6d., and completed on June 7th, 1898, for
,£26,679 3s. Ild -
Part of the 4ft. 3m. diameter sewer was designed with bluestone
blocks, and part with cast-iron lining, forming a shell for a cement
concrete sewer inside.
No very great difficulties were experienced on this contract, though
a considerable length had to be carried out under compressed air
between Fitzroy-street and Fraser-street, n-ldbs. of air being required
in the air lock to keep the ground water back.
Bluestone blocks were used from 9031 to 7061, owing to the good
nature of the ground passed through, while from 10,544 to 9031
through the wet, drift sands encountered, cast-iron shell was used.
The ground from Carlisle-street to Fitzroy-street was good, chiefly
schist-rock, but from 13,251 to the end of the contract, wet country
was again met with, and bluestone blocks were used.
HOBSON’S BAY MAIN, No. 4.
This contract was let on September 30th, 1895, to A. G. Shaw, for
3s. Bd.
It extends from Fraser-street, St. Kilda,, to the junction with the
South Yarra main, at the corner of Foote and Graham streets, Port
Melbourne. It is carried out for 7175 feet as a tunnel 4ft. 3m. in
diameter, and 368 feet as an oval sewer 3ft. 9m. x sft. 6in,
Two thousand six hundred feet was driven with shields and cast-
iron shell, lined with concrete.
There was a very difficult portion of this section near Phillipson-
street, South Melbourne, when an old river course was crossed; while
traversing this length the shield dropped off the lining, and sank
several feet into drift sand. Compressed air was resorted to, and
the water driven back into the sand. A chamber was opened out in
the drift about 8 feet high, the shield lifted up, and put back on to
the end of the cast-iron lining Portland cement concrete placed
below the shield on the drift, and the shield then driven forward bit
by bit till it reached and entered the more solid sand on the op-
posite side of the old water course. A fuller description of this
accident appears elsewhere.
This sewer, though passing through sandy country, charged with
wafer to the surface, is in very good order and condition.
HOBSON’S BAY MAIN, No. 3.
This section was let to Mr. A. G. Shaw on November 13th, 1893,
for 4s. 6d., and was completed on December 10th, 1895, for
,£69,708 17s. id.
This contract commences at the junction of the South Yarra main
at the corner of Foote and Graham streets, South Melbourne, ex-
tending thence along Graham-street, Port Melbourne, as a sewer 8
feet in diameter to the junction of the Melbourne main at Ross-street,
when it increases to Bft. 6in. in diameter.
At the commencement, it included the junction with the 6ft. 9HI.
sewer from South Yarra, and the oval sewer 3ft. 9m. x sft. 6in.,
joining Hobson’s Bay No. 4 with the necessary junction chamber.
The length of the 8 foot section is 4450 feet, and of the Bft. 6in.
sewer, 422 feet.
Work was commenced near the eastern end of the contract, on


November 15th, 1895, the sinking being through light sandy silt carry-
ing a large quantity ol water. Great difficulty was experienced in
sinking all the shafts on this section on account of the running sand
and water. Ihe method adopted was a shaft of rectangular shape,
protected by driving long vertical runners behind very strong timber
sets. Ihe great trouble was to prevent the shafts getting out of shape,
owing to the unusual pressure, and the tendency of one portion of
the timbering to sink faster than the remainder. (See Plate XXIX.)
Driving in tunnel commenced on January 15th,, 1894; bottom
headings were first driven through from shaft to shaft, which had
the effect of considerably draining the ground.
1 hese headings were then opened up full size, commencing at a
point about midway between the two shafts, and working both ways
by using crown bars and very close slabbing. A length of about
10 feet was prepared for brick work, and was at once completed, as
a larger length could not be opened up on account of the nature
of the ground. Nearly all the timber was left in, as it was found
impossible to draw it. (See Plate XXIX.)
The whole of the tunnelling, with the exception of 14 chains, had
to be carried out by this method. This length extending under the
Port Melbourne railway line, was found too difficult to carry out in
this manner, and had to be driven by means of a shield with block
lining. At the first the shield was used without compressed air, but
it began to settle., and the water could not be kept under. An air
lock was then built, and the work continued under compressed air,
with an electric light installation for lighting up the workings. (See
Plate XXXI.)
I he first portion of the work was carried out with concrete block
lining, but subsequently bluestone block lining was adopted, as the
pressure required to be exerted by the hydraulic rams to drive the
shield forward became too great for the concrete blocks to withstand.
The ground was so bad along nearly the whole length of this con-
tract that numerous subsidences in the street took place, the ground
breaking through to the surface of the roadway.
Even after the work was finished, and the level of the plane of
subsoil water rose in the surrounding soil, considerable percolation
took place through the sewer lining. This was very considerably re-
duced by putting down bores, and forcing hydraulic mortar into the
sand surrounding the sewer.
The percolation through the sewer lining during the last few vears
has become less and less, and is now very small.
This section was the most difficult of all the Board’s contracts to
carry through, and reflects great credit on the indomitable pluck and
perseverance of the contractor to bring it to a successful issue.
HOBSON'S BAY MAIN, No. 2.
This contract was let on July 19th, 1893, to Mr. James Moore for
£n7,93 6 5 s - 3d.
The section extends from Graham-street, Port Melbourne, a dis-
tance of 10,192 feet to the end of No. 1 section, under the River
Yarra. The first 1296 feet is 8 feet 6 inches in diameter, the next
4902 feet, 8 feet 9 inches, and the last 2994 feet, 9 feet internal
diameter.
In view of the very difficult country through which this contract
had to be carried, alternative tenders were called for three different
types of work.
Lowest Tender.
First —Tunnelling, ordinary type 1 7,936 5 3
Second —Tunnelling, cast-iron shell £184,549 11 6
Third —Excavation in open cutting ,£187,456 10 o
The types of the various sections of sewer as let were similar,
constructed of brick and concrete on a square base, resting on dry
bricks for drainage and red gum planking.
A start was made to sink the first shaft on July 29th, 1893, the
excavation being through sand carrying a large quantity of water,
making the work very difficult and costly.
In this shaft the timber was fixed horizontally, but in the second
shaft the timber was driven vertically.
Neither of these methods proved very successful, and another
experiment was made by constructing timber cylinders with a cutting
edge, and sinking them by weighting, with bricks resting on the
horizontal rings, at the same time having men excavating inside.
This method was successful, and was afterwards adopted for the
whole of the shafts sunk on this contract. (See Plate XXXII.)
The sinking was at first through sand, but before the bottom was
reached strong black silt was met with, in some cases having a very
strong smell, and affecting the eyes of the workmen, causing extreme
pain, and blinding them for a time, some of the men even having to
be led home after work.
When an attempt was made to drive the first heading from the
shaft, it was found almost impossible to do so, the silt and water
coming through the timbering in spite of all efforts to keep it out.
After consultation between the engineers of the contractor and the
Board, it was decided to adopt driving with shields and concrete
block lining. The tenders had previously been called for shield
work with cast-iron lining, and concrete and brick lining; but the
lowest tender for this was ,£66,613 6s. 3d. above Mr. James Moore’s
tender for the type section, and was also his own offer, so that if
the contractor had been ordered to carry out cast-iron lining, his own
tender was the lowest, and governed the price.
The Engineer-in-Chief accepted the offer of the contractor to carry
out the work with shields and concrete blocks, with the result that
the contract was carried out for £104,262 19s. nd., an amount
-£ x 3>673 ss. 4d. less than the ordinary type sections, and £80,386
ns. yd. less than for shield and cast-iron shell. The Engineer-in-
Chief has been criticised for the prices he fixed in this matter, but
any person s hazarded opinion, and the actual prices tendered in a
contract are very different matters.
Ihe actual risk and danger with the shield work and cast-iron
shell, and shield work and concrete blocks are identical, and there
is no possible doubt that on this contract, the difference in actual
cost of the materials used is not £80,386 11s. 7 d., evidently showing
that compared with the tenders received at the time, the prices fixed
were fair and reasonable for block work as carried out, as compared
with the actual tenders for the cast-iron shell.
Ihe concrete blocks were made of concrete i2fin. deep, with a
rendering of thick of Portland cement mortar on the back.
After the blocks were set in the tunnel, and became permanently
set, the joints were raked out, and the whole of the interior face ren-
dered with Jin. of Portland cement mortar, thus making the total
depth of the block 15m. The concrete blocks were composed of 18
parts, bluestone screenings, 9 parts bluestone toppings, parts of
sand, and \\ parts of cement, and after being thoroughly mixed, was
rammed into moulds, the i|in. rendering put on as soon as possible,
and the whole kept well watered while setting.
The first shield was brought on to the contract on January 13th,
1894., and was lowered into the shaft on January 31st, 1895, and
moved forward on February 9th, block setting beginning on February
13th, 1895. (See Plate XXXIV.)
The length of one ring of blocks when set was iBin., but the arch
blocks were only half the length of the invert blocks, their weight
being only 1041135., as against 2iolbs. for the invert blocks.
In all, six shields were used on this contract; they were designed
by Mr. Lindsay Clark, M.C.E., and proved a great success. For the
greater portion of the contract men were able to work in front of
the shield doors and excavate the silt, keeping the shields pushed
forward as the material was taken out. One shield crossed what
was an old river bed, being sand, carrying a lot of water, as well as
roots and branches of trees. In this case great difficulty was ex-
perienced in preventing the shield from sinking bodily, the advance
being on some occasions only an inch or two in 24 hours. In one
shield foul air was met with; Davey safety lamps were used, and
the top half of the tunnel was brattised off. Even after the tunnel
was completed water and foul air forced its way through one of the
joints, and, if a light was brought near to the jet, it took fire. It
was not deemed advisable to block this air, in case it should break
out in another part of the tunnel, and provision was made to conduct
it to the surface by means of a pipe. (See Plate XXXIII.)
The meeting of all the shields on this contract was almost perfect,
both for line and level.
As the concrete blocks were built on the tail-end of the shield, as
it was driven forward, there would be a space left the thickness of
the metal of the shield; in the soft ground this immediately closed
up, but as the shield went forward in the harder ground, this did not
take place so readily, and cracks showed themselves in these parts
of the tunnel at more or less regular intervals. These cracks were
left untouched until the tunnel was rendered, by which time the blocks
were finally settled in their places; the cracks and joints were then
raked out, and made good with Portland cement mortar.
This contract was completed on December 31st, 1896, without any
serious accident, and reflects great credit on everyone connected with
both the contractor and his staff and the Board’s staff engaged
thereon.
The work on this contract has proved highly satisfactory.
HOBSON’S BAY MAIN, No. 1.
This section is about 27 chains 62 links long, and includes the
portion under the River Yarra. The contract was let on November
23rd, 1893, to A. T. Robb and Co., for ,£39,556 15s. 3d.
For the 13 chains 62 links under the River Yarra, the original
specification provided for the construction of a sewer of nine feet
internal diameter, within a cast-iron shell, the remaining 14 chains
being designed of the ordinary type, with a flat foundation of con-
crete on red gum planking.
This was the first contract on which a shield was intended to be
used; for the purpose one was obtained from England, lowered
into the shaft sunk on the western side of the river, and driven
forward to 6 chains 98 links without any trouble, but at this point
an inrush of water from the river into the air-lock chamber behind
the shield, resulted in the loss of six lives, including that of Mr. John
Buchanan, C.E., the contractor’s engineer. After this sad occurrence
this portion of the contract ceased, until started again by Mr. A. G.
Shaw, to whom the completion of the contract was let. This shield
was driven by rams provided with water from a hand pump. After
the air became bad in the face, compressed air was used, and kept
at a constant pressure of i2lbs. up to the time of the accident. (See
Plate XXXV.)


On the eastern side of the river, the method adopted from 13
chains to 17 chains 40 links, was to drive needles ahead of the
finished work. The rear end of the needles was supported by the
finished work, and the forward end by the ground into which the
tunnel was being driven, an arch chamber was thus formed in which
the sewer was constructed. This method proved very slow, and at
17 chains 40 links, through the country changing into a wet slurry,
filling one of the old water courses of the River Yarra, cast-iron lining
had to be adopted, as in the river portion of the contract. Another
shield had to be used, but in this case the compressed air for work-
ing the shield was brought from the surface. (See Plate XXXIII.)
The cast-iron shell was used from 17 chains 40 links to the end of
the contract near 27 chains. (See Plate XXXVI.) At this point a
shaft had been sunk, but when the invert of the sewer was reached
the bottom of the shaft blew up, having bottomed on an old channel
bed, totally wrecking the timber of the shaft. The tunnel had to be
driven through this wrecked shaft to join with the end of No. 2
section already completed.
As the broken ground was approached, the shield sank, and the
liquid slurrv forced its way into the drive. Compressed air had to be
brought into requisition, and the connection made in the best pos-
sible way under the circumstances.
The shield dipped gradually as it advanced into the broken ground
full of timber and slurry; every inch gained had to be retained and
lined as quickly as possible with concrete before again advancing,
until the better ground was reached on the opposite side of the shaft,
and a junction was made with No. 2 section. In passing through
this bad country, the shield dipped gradually until it had dropped
3ft. 6in. in a length of 28 feet. The shield used in section No. 2
also dropped 2ft. in a length of 18 feet in approaching this shaft.
For a distance of 50 feet this sewer had to be constructed in the
position taken by the shields.
At the deepest part of the dip the concrete has been made two
feet thick.
Before the sewage could entirely fill this dip it would have to run
sft. 6in. deep in the main sewer. With the heavy flushing power
available, there is no difficulty in maintaining the sewer in working
order.
After careful consideration of all the surroundings of the contract,
the Engineer-in-Chief deemed it advisable to excise the portion of the
contract under the river, and to recommend the Board to re-let this
portion of the contract.
The completion of this length was let to Mr. A. G. Shaw, on
January 23rd, 1896, for £>4,966. The river bed was filled with
clay over the old inburst, a new air-lock was constructed, and the
air kept at a pressure of 2 3lbs. instead of i2lbs. As an additional
precaution, a. diaphragm was constructed near the shield. The
shield was worked forward by compressed air brought from the sur-
face, instead of by the hand-pumps. The work proceeded strictly
without any further accident, and was completed on August 28th,
1896. (See Plate XXXV.)
The original contract for this section was .£39,556 19s. 3d., the
amount paid A. T. Robb and Co., was £32,953 2s. id., and to Mr.
A. G. Shaw £15,828 12s. 2d., or a total of £48,881 14s. 3d., being
£9324 15s. in excess of the original contract. A very considerable
portion of this excess was due to the fact that a large portion of the
land length of A. T. Robb and Co.’s contract had to be constructed
with a cast-iron shell, instead of the cheaper type section, and also
that a great amount of concrete was used in the river section, as well
as heavier cast-iron plates than previously adopted.
Since this section has been in work, it has been kept in good
working order without the slightest difficulty.
In light of the experience gained during this contract, there is no
doubt, except for the lamentable accident that took place, that the
portion of this contract on the land was as difficult as that under
the river.
Just before entering the pumping station provision is made for the
Williamstown Branch main.
SOUTH YARRA MAIN.
The South Yarra main starts from near the junction of the
Waverley and Boundary roads, Malvern, following thence to Waverley-
road to" Burke-road, thence along the Glen Iris railway line to
Heyington-place, along Lansell-road to a point opposite Struan-street,
thence across private property to Struan-street, along Struan-street,
Grange-road, and Bruce-street, to Williams's-road.
SOUTH YARRA MAIN, No. 3.
This contract was let on August 12th, 1896, to Messrs. Dinsmore,
Henderson and Adamson, for £11,517 10s., and was completed on
November Ist, 1897, for £13,354 18s. rod.
Commencing as an oval sewer 3ft. x 4ft. 6in., with a fall of one in
900, at a reduced level of 20.11 below low water mark, it extends
from 3590 feet from the commencement of the contract back to
2468 feet at Kensington-road, where, after receiving the Toorak
Branch, it increases to an oval sewer 3ft. 4m. x sft., with a fall of
one in 1000 for 2468 feet to its junction with the Richmond main,
and Prahran East branch.
After connecting these sewers in a chamber man-hole it passes as
a sewer sft. 3m. in diameter, with a fall of one in 1500 to the inter-
section of Domain-road and Darling-street, Prahran.
The work in this contract had to be considerably strengthened
when passing through the decomposed granite, forming the high
ground between Chapel-street and Williams-road. This ground
swelled very considerably on exposure to the atmosphere, requiring
very heavy timbering.
Great difficulty was experienced in driving through the black silt
in the drainage course between the railway line and Chapel-street,
which, though only about 100 feet wide, was a most arduous under-
taking.
This soft black silt was intersected with layers filled with leaves,
sticks and insects. The reduced level of the sewer invert, where it
crosses this valley, is 24.12 below low water mark.
SOUTH YARRA MAIN, No. 2.
This contract was let to Messrs. Baxter and Boyne on January
24th, 1895, for the sum of £36,665 ss. rod., and was completed on
February 3rd, 1896, for ,£34,313 18s. 3d.
This contract starts as a sewer 6ft. 3m. in diameter, and extends
from 14,370 ft., with a fall of 1 in 1500, to 7800 ft. from the junction
with Hobson’s Bay main.
The driving through the Domain-road Hill was at a maximum
depth of 153 feet, and was the hardest on the south side of the river,
rock drills having to be used on a portion of it.
The centre line of this sewer commences at the intersection of
Domain-road and Darling-street, South Yarra, following Domain-road
to the St. Kilda-road, crossing over into Albert-road, South Mel-
bourne, as far as Roy-street.
SOUTH YARRA MAIN, No. 1.
This contract was let to Mr. M. Starr on October 29th, 1894, for
£53,448 3s. 6d., and was completed on November 29th, 1896, for
,£49,434 18s. 6d. „ , ,
This section extends from the junction of Albert-road and Roy-
street, commencing for a short length as a 6ft. 3m. sewer, and then
extending to the total length of 7522 ft. as a 6ft. 9m. sewer until it
joins No. 3 section, Hobson's Bay.
A large proportion of the excavation on this contract was through
very soft reef, but for a length of about 1200 ft. two shields had to be
used, and bluestone blocks substituted for the ordinary type section,
extending from Eastern-road to near Clarendon-street, as the shield
passed through an old water-course, evidently underlying the older
basalt of South Melbourne.
RICHMOND MAIN, No. 3.
This main starts at the junction of Trennery Crescent and Reilly-
street as an ißin. stoneware pipe sewer, following Bath-street, Turner-
street, Rich-street and Johnstone-street to Nicholson-street, then it
becomes an oval sewer 2ft. 2m. x 3ft. 3m., following Nicholson-
street to Gipps-street, thence 2ft. 4m. x 3ft. 6in., along Gipps-street,
Victoria Crescent, Albert-street, Murray-street and Church-street,
thence 2ft. Bin. x 4ft., along Buckingham-street to Burnley-street,
from which point to the South Yarra main it is completed.
RICHMOND MAIN.
This contract was let on June 15th, 1898, to Messrs. H. McKenzie
and Sons for £22,290 ns. 5d., and completed on July 31st, 1899.
The final return as at present is ,£21,819 3s. Bd.
The contract starts at the junction of Buckingham-street and
Burnley-street as a sewer 3ft. x 4ft. 6in., with a fall of 1 in 750,
commencing at 11,671 ft., and extending to 10,460 ft. at Murphy-
street, where it receives the Hawthorn Branch, thence it extends
as an oval sewer 3ft. 4m. x sft., with a fall of 1 in 800, back to
10,090 ft., where it reoeives the Highett-street Branch. Thence it
extends, with a fall of 1 in 900, until it reaches Swan-street, at 7222 ft.,
where it receives the Swan-street Branch. It then increases to 3ft.
6in. x sft. 3in., with a fall of 1 in 1000, back to the terminal point
at 5997 ft.
Nearly the whole of this contract was excavated in extremely hard
basalt, carrying large quantities of water throughout the whole sec-
tion.
At Buckingham-street the invert of this contract is 1.33 below low
water mark, while at its terminal point it is 9.66 below L.W.M.
RICHMOND MAIN, No. 2.
This contract was let on September 22nd, 1897, to Mr. James
Moore for the sum of £>1,892 14s. 2d. It was completed on De-
cember Ist, 1898, for the sum of £>9,247 2s. 3d., as far as dealt
with at present.
This contract commences at 5997 feet, follows Burnley-street,
Berlin-street, Mary-street and Hamburg-street to Brighton-street, as an
oval sewer, 3ft. 6in. x sft. 3m., with a fall of 1 in 1000, back to
3275 feet; thence it follows Hamburg-street and Balmain-street, as an
oval sewer, 3ft. Bin. x sft. 6in., with a fall of 1 in 1100, back to 2049
feet, the terminal point.
The invert of this sewer at the intersection of Balmain and Green
streets is 14.53 below low water mark.
The whole of this contract was in extremely hard bluestone rock.


RICHMOND, No. 1.
The contract was let on March 24th, 1897, to Messrs. H. McKenzie
and Sons, for ,£13,622 ns. 6d., and was completed on May 20th,
1898, £14,096 2S. sd.
The sewer extends along Balmain-street, Green-street, Electra-
street, and Oddy’s Lane, on the north side of the River Yarra, as an
oval sewer, 4ft. x 6ft., with a fall of 1 in 1100; it then drops ver-
tically 8.14 feet, passing under the river as a circular sewer, 4ft. 3m.
in diameter, with a fall of 1 in 1100 to its junction with the South
Yarra main.
The length of this sewer is 2036 feet.
The man-hole originally designed on the south bank of the river
on this contract was omitted, as it was considered liable to endanger
the safetv of the railway bridge abutments.
The cast-iron lining was extended on each side of the river at the
contractors’ request, and the tube shortened from 115 feet to 66 feet,
which caused the contractor to’ have a greater length to' drive on both
sides of the river.
Three shields were used on this contract.
The wrought-iron tube was 66ft. long and sft. nin. internal dia-
meter, formed of Jin. wrought-iron plates. (See Plate XXXIX.)
The trench was excavated across the river, and the tube dropped
into position. It was then surrounded by Portland cement concrete,
lowered in position in a plastic and rammed by divers in
and around the tube.
The shields were driven forward from the land, and guided so as
to meet the ends of the wrought-iron tubes, clay being dumped over
the points of junction. The connections were both successfully made,
the air pumped out, and the wrought-iron tube lined with concrete.
A very serious loss of life occurred while driving the shield forward
towards the river bank on this contract, through a very heavy in-
burst of gases of decomposition. The work was being carried out
under compressed air. The contractors, finding the air at the face
was becoming 1 bad, stated that they were about to obtain another air
compressor before proceeding further. In consequence of this the
work was almost entirely suspended, and no danger was anticipated.
Nevertheless, some of the men, together with one: of the Boards over-
seers, entered the air lock during the Christmas holidays, with the
result that serious disaster occurred.
It was some time before the new air compressor was placed in
position and the bad air pumped out and replaced by good air, but
after this was done, with great care and attention the shield was
pushed on up to the end of the tube, which had already been sunk
In the river.
It required a pressure on the air lock of from 13Jib. to 151 b, to
carry on the work. The gases exuding from the silt alongside the
railway bank on the south side of the river were more concentrated
and deadly than in any of the other sections where they were met
with.
MELBOURNE MAIN.
The Melbourne main commences at the intersection of Swanston-
street and Flinders-street, where the Swanston-street and Jolimont
Branches join.
MELBOURNE MAIN, No. 3.
This contract was let on June 20th, 1894, to Messrs. Swanson Bros,
for £is> o( H 5 s - 6d. It originally followed Flinders-street and Flin-
ders-street extension to the gas works on the. north skfe of the river,
but through the dangerous condition of the front of the Fish Market,
it was decided to follow King-street, Flinders Lane, and Spencer-
street, so as to avoid the Fish Market frontage. This involved 1 an
excess expenditure of £5160, bringing the total up to £20,224 ss.
Bd. The contract was completed on October 26th, 1895, for ,£24,517
Bs. sd.
The original length of this contract was 5917 feet, of which 5173
feet was 2ft. 4m. x 3ft. 6in., and 742 feet 2ft. x 3ft.
The eastern end of this contract was in hard reef, but the western
end was in silt requiring very careful timbering.
As the water was extracted from this silt in, the open trench, it
settled, bringing down the roadway, which, in some places, had to
be made good for 2 feet deep below the original surface level. This
involved a very large extra, on the contract amount.
The sewer on the deviation had to be increased to 3ft. by 3ft. 4m.,
with a fall of 1 in 1368, which gives a velocity when one-third full
of 1.8 feet per second.
The fact that this is the only sewer in the metropolis which will
be working anything near its full calculated capacity for many years,
together with the great control obtained by the flushing gates, re-
duces the trouble of maintenance in this sewer to a minimum.
RIVER CROSSING, GAS WORKS.
The length forming the connection between Melbourne Main, No.
3, and Melbourne Main, No. 2, was carried out by the Board’s
officers.
The sewer coming from Flinders-street is 2ft. 4m. ,x 3ft. 6in., with
a fall of 1 in 700 at the point where it joins the man-hole, which
receives the Dudley-street Branch. The invert is 18.30 feet below
low water mark.
The connection between this man-hole and the deeper man-hole at
the northern end of the river tube was a most difficult piece of work
to carry out.
The northern man-hole is 40ft. 6in. deep, and the drop from the
invert of the Melbourne Main to the invert of the sewer under the
river is 15.20 feet.
Ihe tube under the river is a partial syphon, as it always will
retain about one foot of water in the invert at the north end.
1 his tube, which forms the mould in which the sewer has been
constructed:, was 320 ft. long, 5-o|ft. diameter, formed of Jin. plates.
(See Plate XLIII.)
One of the Harbour Trust dredges was altered to excavate a
trench across the river to a depth of 36 feet below low water mark,
this trench was from 12ft. to 13ft. below the bed of the river. This
was successfully accomplished, being excavated a foot deeper than
the outside of the tube. Banks of bluestone metal were placed at
intervals across the trench, and carefully trimmed by divers to* the
right level to form a proper bed for the tube.
The tube had been constructed in a trench on the south bank of
the river in a line with the trench in the river itself. The tube was
riveted up in one long length, with cast-iron blank plates at each end.
Wrought-iron columns, 24m. diameter, were riveted on to each end
of the tube, of such a length that when the tube was in its right posi-
tion the mouth of the tube would be above water. The Engineer-in-
Chief’s original intention was to have three or four pairs of barges,
connected by balks of timber in pairs, with derricks fixed between
the ends of the barges, which would have been placed about 12 feet
clear; then as the tube was hauled forward from the trench on the
south side of the river, and into which the water was allowed: to
enter after it had been riveted up and tested, the tube would have
been supported at distances of about 50ft. or 60ft. When in posi-
tion, after being hauled across the river, the water would have
been allowed to enter the columns at each end of the tubes, and have
been lowered from five separate points.
I his method was not carried out, because the river traffic might
have been blocked for one or two days. It was thought that heavy
tackle at each side of the river and filling the tube ; gradually would
cause the tube to lower evenly, but the tackle on, the south bank of
the river was weaker than the north, with the result that the southern
side sank faster. This soon put too heavy a strain on the tackle,
and it broke, with the result that the southern end of the tube fell
to the bottom of the river, the water rushed to the southern end,
and the northern end rising unsupported out of the river, the tube
broke in three nearly equal sections, and fell into the trench prepared
for it at the bottom of the river. On examination by divers it was
found that the fractures were through the riveting near the trans-
verse cover plates, and that the tubes were not very much out of
position.
Barges were obtained from the Harbour Trust, and the three
lengths of tube brought to proper line and level at the bottom of the
river. Thick indiarubber was passed round the tube ends overlapping
them, and was then bound together by wrought-iron straps, drawn
together with bolts, by the divers under water. As soon as this
was done Plastic concrete was placed in position round the tubes,
retaining walls being formed by Portland cement concrete placed in
bags on the edge of the concrete. As each layer was brought up,
the portion between the bags and tube being passed down by closed
skips to the divers, who rammed the concrete in position. Wrought-
iron saddles were placed over the outside of the tube, and weighted
with railway rails.
The concrete was brought up to the minimum depth allowed by
the Harbour Trust, and then the ends of the tubes, with the vertical
columns, were covered by solid concrete, filling the whole trench from
side to side, and brought up above low-water mark.
After this the water was pumped out of the vertical columns, until
the tube was half full. As it was found the leaks were imperceptible,
the tube was loaded in the bottom with broken bluestone for further
safety, and when loaded the water was pumped out and the concrete
lining carried out, the broken bluestone metal being removed as the
concrete replaced it. (See Plate XLIV.)
The operation was perfectly successful; this section being almost
perfectly tight from the first day it was completed.
The successful completion of this very difficult work reflects great
credit on the officers of the Harbour Trust and Board, who carried
it out. The greater portion of the difficult operations, carried out
under water, was splendidly dealt with by Diver Becket and his
assistants.
The experience gained in this work has enabled the men employed
to carry out two similar operations without a hitch.
MELBOURNE MAIN, SECTION No. 2.
This contract was let to Mr. M. Starr for 6s. id. on July
20th, 1896, and was completed on April 25th, 1897, for 17s.
4d.
The section extended from 6464 ft. on Section No. 1 to the end of
the tube under the river at 6726.
This contract was carried out exactly as specified without any
alteration.
An air lock was used, and the air pressure maintained at iBlh.
throughout.
A very accurate junction was made with the south end of the tube.
Good air pressure was kept up throughout, and was the secret of this
section being carried out so successfully.


The extra expenditure on this contract was chiefly from, extra work
carried out by the contractor in the river section.
MELBOURNE MAIN, SECTION No. 1.
This contract was let to Messrs. H. McKenzie and Sons for
£34,959 18s. Bd. on January 22nd, 1894, and was completed on De-
cember 12th, 1896, for £48,781 ss. 7d.
This undertaking was for the construction of an oval sewer 3ft.
4in. x sft., with a fall of 1 in 1100 from near Lorimer-street on, the
south side of the River Yarra, along Johnson-street and Ross-street
to the Hobson’s Bay Main. The total length of the contract was
6480 feet.
Work was commenced on February 13th, 1894, at lnglis-street by
attempting to sink a wrought-iron cylinder by building the brickwork
of the man-hole inside and causing the whole to settle as the interior
was excavated by adding more cylinders and brickwork. This proved
unsuccessful, the whole of the work going out of plumb when only-
down a few feet, and the side pressure caused the cylinder to lose
its shape.
After this trial, heavy cast-iron cylinders were used for shaft sink-
ing, with a few exceptions, where rectangular shafts were put down.
In sinking the cast-iron cylinders the men simply excavated inside,
and weighted the top with railway iron; they were got down without
difficulty, but were expensive.
The first start was made to tunnel from lnglis-street in good hard
reef for about 500 feet, but after this nothing but soft black silt was
met with.
The original contract was specified and designed in the ordinary
oval type section, but the fact that the black silt was not dry like
that in the faces of the shield in Hobson’s Bay Main, No. 2, which
with the greater depth of silt shown in the bores of Ross-street, would
have rendered this type feasible, necessitated a change to shields and
cast-iron shell with concrete lining or concrete block work.
On starting the cast-iron lining it was found, that the great pressure
of the almost fluid black silt often forced it out of shape and cracked
the plates, although they were ijin. thick, with 3m. flanges.
Very great difficulty was found in steering the shields in this
ground, partly because of the liquid nature of the silt through which
the tunnel was being driven, but also because of the shape of the
shields, the length being ij times the diameter.
The consequence was that the shell was very crooked both as to
line and level.
The heavy nature of the ground decided the Engineer-in-Chief to
reduce the diameter of the sewer to 3ft. 3m., so as to give a greater
thickness of material than was originally intended to meet the exces-
sive pressure of the surrounding ground.
In a length of sewer passing between brick buildings a larger shield
was used, and the compressed air adopted, and in this portion of the
sewer the results both for line and level were much more satisfactory.
There were seven shields used on this contract; one of these
shields was left standing for some time, when it slipped off the work
and subsided 4ft. at the nose, necessitating the sinking of another
shaft to raise it.
Over the greater portion of this contract the surface of the streets
settled 1 , and numerous houses along both sides of the street were
damaged—-in fact, more claims for damage were settled in this single
contract than on all the rest of the contracts of the Board put
together.
The shields on this section were driven forward very slowly and
with very great difficulty almost throughout the whole length of the
work.
After the experience gained in this very difficult country driven
through by the Board, a shield should not be used 1 less than about
Bft. or 9ft. in diameter, and be driven entirely under compressed air;
of course, in small sewers more earth is removed than is necessary,
but it is the only way in this class of country that an engineer can be
sure of maintaining true line and level, as he is bound within the limits
of his shield, and the smaller the shield the more difficult to steer.
In carrying out this contract there is a very considerable excess
expenditure, but this is all fully represented by extra material and
labour expended.
The attention of the contractors was continually drawn to the
difficulties likely to arise from the irregularities in the tunnel, but
they were unable to amend them; the Engineer-in-Chief had therefore
to deduct from the moneys due to the contractors the capitalised
value of the money necessary to provide for the exceptional mainten-
ance of this sewer, and from experience up to date the maintenance
will not be very heavy.
There are more than half the tenements connected with this sewer
that ever will be, and the maintenance men have been able to keep
the sewer in good order and condition by means of the penstocks only.
This sewer carries the sewage coming from the Flinders-street
Branch, and from the Dudley-street Branch these sewers deliver
together full.
Velocity per
Size (ft.) Fall. Discharge. second.
Flinders Street ... 2-4 x 3-6 1 in 700 1117 ft. 3 ft.
Dudley Street ... 1-6 1 in 500 280 c. „ 2 ft. 7 in.
Original Melbourne Main 3-4 x 5-0 1 in 1100 2168 „ 3 ft.
New Melbourne Main... 3-3 1 in 450 2200 „ 4ft. 4 in.
Now the total length of the Melbourne Main from the Hobson’s Bay
Main to the man-hole on the north side of the River Yarra is 7176
feet, so that the fall from the invert of Melbourne Main, No. 3, to the
Hobson’s Bay junction is 15.95. The actual level of the Melbourne
Main is 18.30 below low water, while that at the Hobson’s Bay Main
junction is 38.49, or a difference of level of 22.54, which is more
than is required.
So that by the extra head available on the north side of the river,
the 3ft. 3m. sewer will carry as much as the 3ft. 4m. x sft. sewer,
with the grade due to the fall between its two ends.
The result is the sewer could be strengthened without sacrificing
its efficiency, of which the Engineer-in-Chief has taken full advantage.
Because the Engineer-in-Chief can show that the sewer should do
all that is required of it theoretically, and the sewer has proved itself
able to' do' it practically, the ground of criticism is at once changed
to another position; then, although this unforseen emergency can be
dealt with in this way, why was not the smaller sewer designed
originally ?
In the first place, it is preferable that the sewer should be worked
without this head, which was fortunately available in this instance,
and in the second place to construct a 3ft. 4m. x sft. sewer requires
a sectional area of excavation of 6ft. pin. x sft. Bin., while a. 3ft. 3m.
barrel would have to be the same sectional area for economical ex-
cavation. The Board’s type sections of sewers from 3ft. 6in. diameter
to pipe sewers in tunnel, the minimum working height is 6ft. without
allowing for dry bricks or planking; any smaller excavation is not
an economical one to work in, and the fact is that below a certain
size in tunnelling no- saving is made by adopting small sizes, but from
a sanitary point of view it is not desirable to increase the sectional
area any more than is necessary for the sewerage, as excess area
means greater difficulty in ventilation.
NORTH YARRA SYSTEM.
The North Yarra system is collected by a sewer commencing in
Rosanna.-road, Heidelberg, following the Lower Heidelberg-road ap-
proximately to the Daribin Creek at Alphington, thence along the
Heid'elberg-road and Queen’s Parade to the intersection of Brunswick-
street and Alexandra Parade, connecting at that point with No. 8
section of the North Yarra Main now being constructed. (See Plate
IX.).
NORTH YARRA SECTION, No. 8.
This contract was let on November 17th. 1898, to Messrs. Horne
and Wadick for 17s. 6d., and is still in progress.
It commences in Queen’s Parade with a short length of oval sewer
3ft. 4in. x sft., with a fall of 1 in 900, the level of the invert being
1.51 below low water mark: at the intersection of Brunswick-street
it becomes a 3ft Bin. x sft. 6in. oval, with a fall of 1 in 1000, in-
creasing again at Station-street to a sewer 6ft. in diameter, with a fall
of 1 in 1300.
The contract commences at 34,320 feet from the pumping station,
extending back to 3r,no feet.
Between 34.320 and 32,600 this tunnel is in very hard dense blue-
stone, while from 32,000 to 3r,no the tunnel is in schist; between
these two points there is a length of 600 feet of very treacherous
ground, carrying a large quantity of water, being the 1 flanks of the old
valley which has been filled up by the old lava flow; the exact point
where this country is met with is at Canning-street at a depth of 95
feet. A chamber was excavated at a distance of 200 feet from the
Rathdown-street shaft, and the portions of a shield sent down the
shaft and riveted together underground. Considerable trouble arose
from the difficulty of heating the rivets in the drive, through the bad
air formed.; they were then heated on the surface, dropped down a
tube and sent to the face by mechanical means. The driving had to
be done under air pressure, the normal height of the subsoil water
in this ground being 60 to 70 feet above the invert level of the sewer.
In the hard bluestone rock drills worked by compressed air proved
highly satisfactory.
NORTH YARRA, No. 7.
This contract was let to Mr. J. Horne on September 22nd, 1897,
for ,£41,294 ns., and was completed on March Ist, 1899, for
,£36,768 10s. 3d.
It commences at 31,110 feet from the pumping: station in Prince’s-
street, Carlton, as a sewer 6ft. in diameter, with a fall of 1 in 1300,
and follows College Crescent, around the southern end of Melbourne
Cemetery, thence through Gatehouse-street, Parkville; Harker-street
and Haines-street, North Melbourne, to a point 24,028 from the
pumping station.
This is the deepest sewer on the North Yarra system, being at one
point 168 ft. 3in. deep.
This contract was all in good ground, and carried out without any
special difficulties.
NORTH YARRA SECTION, No. 6.
This contract was let to Mr. C. Wadey for the sum of £44,128 3s.
id. on January 6th, 1898.
It commences a,t 24,025 feet from the pumping station as a sewer
6ft. in diameter, with a fall of 1 in 1300 along Haines-street, and
through the North Melbourne reserves to Arden-street at 21,800.
At this point the invert of the 6ft. sewer is 13.67 feet below low
water mark, but there is a drop of 10 feet in the main to provide for
the-drainaga of the Moonae.Ponds valley.


Ihe sewer then follows along Arden-street, North Melbourne, and
Lloyd-street, Kensington, becoming a 6ft. 9m. sewer where the
Epsom-road Branch joins it; in Lloyd-street the fall is 1 in 1500; a
further increase to 7 ft. 6in. then takes place, with a fall of 1 in 1800
up to the Swamp-road, where the sewer becomes 7ft. 9m., with a fall
of 1 in 1900, and the contract ends 17,530 from the pumping station.
This section was designed in the ordinary type section with a
length of cast-iron shell and concrete lining for 656 feet under the
Moonee Ponds canal. (See Plate L.)
The country at each end was rather heavy to get through, but was
completed in accordance with the specification and drawings, but the
length between 21,785 feet and 18,500 feet was found not suitable for
the type work after the shafts were sunk, and necessitated shield
work with either cast-iron or some similar shell.
The contractor had a price for cast-iron shell for a definite length
of 650 feet; the Engineer-in-Chief gave him the option of either
proceeding with the extra length at his schedule price, which the con-
tractor had a right to have considered, or that the Engineer-in-Chief
would cut out this portion of the contract and call for fresh tenders
for it. The contractor refused to go on at his scheduled price, which
he contended'only applied to a definite length of 650 feet.
The contract was re-advertised, alternative tenders being called for
cast-iron shell and Dunlop’s patent wooden lining, which is simply the
adoption to a horizontal drive otf the wooden drumming so> success-
fully used under Mr. Lindsay Clark on Mr. Moore’s No. 2 section of
the Hobson’s Bay Main for vertical shafts. The wooden drumming
was formed' into circular segments bolted together on the tail end
of the shield to form a complete ring round the sewer and then
bolted to the ribs of the last ring, thus forming a wooden shell
instead of a cast-iron one. (See Plates XLVIL, XLVIII., XLIX.)
This wooden shell was then filled up with concrete lining (See
Plate XLIX.)
This portion of the contract was re-let to Mr. A. G. Shaw for
££5,278 12s. on January 6th. 1898, for a length of 3285 feet.
From time of starting no difficulties arose in carrying out this
system, and the work was successfully completed on November 6th,
1898, for ££4,037 ns. 6d.
The financial result to the Board of this contract stood thus:
Original tender of Mr. C. Wadey ££4,128 3 1
Final payment, Mr. C. Wadey, £20,391 3 7 ...
Final payment, Mr. A. G. Shaw. ,£24,037 11 6... £44,428 15 1
Excess over original contract ... £3OO 12 o
Thus an excess payment of £3OO 12s. above the original contract
was paid instead of ,£lO,OOO or £12,000, which Mr. Wadey’s ac-
ceptance of the extension of the cast-iron lining at his own schedule
would have involved.
The wooden lining proved highlv successful on this contract.
NORTH YARRA MAIN, SECTION No. 5.
This contract was let on August 13th, 1896, to Mr. M. Starr for
the sum of ,£57,354 9s. 3d;., and was completed on November Ist,
1897, for £57,598 9s.
It extends from 17,530 back to 12,268 as a 7ft. 9m. sewer, with a
fall of 1 in 1900.
The whole length was driven by shields with cast-iron shell and
concrete lining without any difficulty, through the experience gained
on previous contracts. (See Plate L.)
NORTH YARRA MAIN, SECTION No. 4.
This contract was let on July 13th, 1898. to Mr. M. Starr for
£11,928 10s. 9d.. and is now almost completed.
It extends from 12,268 to .11,800, under the Saltwater River, from
12,268 to 11,908 as a 7ft. 9in. sewer, and 11,908 to 11,800 as an Bft.
3in. sewer, with a fall of 1 in 2200.
The river portion of this contract was a very difficult one, but the
experience gained in previous river crossings by the men engaged has
enabled the work to be successfully completed without the least hitch.
A contract was let to Messrs. Hampson and Halliday for the supply
of four tubes 40ft. long each, and 9ft. 9m. external diameter, formed
of |in. wrought-iron plates, for the sum of £1399, and completed
for ,£1397 5 s -
A trench was excavated to 30ft. below low water mark across the
river ; as soon as this was completed one foot of concrete was placed
in the trench to give the tubes an even bearing. Each length was
brought into place and bolted up from the inside of the tubes by
divers, infernal angle irons having been arranged for the purpose.
Thick india-rubber was wrapped round the joints and brought
together by wrought-iron straps bolted up tight. The tubes then had
wrought-iron saddles placed over them, and old railway rails laid
from saddle to saddle on each side of the tube. The trench was then
filled with concrete to a height of two feet over the centre of the
tube.
The end of the wrought-iron tube was extended by cast-iron seg-
ments similar to the tunnel shell, being bolted together and’ brought up
to the ends of the excavated trench and covered with two* feet of
concrete. i /. ! i Wj
Six feet thick of puddled clay was spread over the tubes for 20
or 30 feet from the banks and the middle of the tube weighted with
5 feet of earth.
Thq western bank was excavated in solid rock and lined right out
into the river; a thick bulkhead was then built in the finished tunnel.
On the eastern bank the shield which had been used for driving
in No. 5 section had been bought by the Board for the use of No. 4
. section; this was brought into working order, an air-lock constructed,
and the shield then driven steadily on to the end of the shell already
placed in position under the river. Considerable difficulty was found
in maintaining the air pressure on the land side through a working
shaft previously sunk having collapsed and disturbed the ground, but
as the river was approached the air was held better. A very good
junction was made with the tube; the water was retained in the lower
half of the tubes by movable dams, and the concrete lining placed
all round the tubes in 16ft. lengths.
The joints of the tube were found to be absolutely tight, the only
leakage being at the land ends.
The concrete lining was speedily completed, and the rendering
put on before the air pressure was let down.
This work reflects very great credit to the contractor and men en-
gaged on it, together with the contractor’s and Board’s officers.
The invert of the sewer is Bft. 9m. below the original bed of the
river.
NORTH YARRA MAIN, No. 3.
This contract was let on November Bth, 1894, to Messrs. T. Cock-
ram and Co. for 10s., and completed on August 13th, 1895,,
for ,£33.117 r6s. 6d.
It extends from 11,800 to 8000 as an Bft. 3m. sewer, with a fall of
1 in 2200.
The work was completed in accordance with the drawings with-
out any special difficulty. The contract extends along Maribymong-
street, Wlngfield-street and Moreland-street, Footscray.
NORTH YARRA MAIN, No. 2.
This contract was let on December 6th, 1893, to Mr. C. Wadey, for
,£46,493 2S - 6d., and was completed on February 21st, 1895, for
,£40,855 rs. 1 id.
The sewer follows Moreland and Whitehall-streets, Footscray; from
8000 to 7826 it is an Bft. 3m. sewer, with a fall of 1 in 2200, and
from 7826 to 4000 it is Bft. 6in. internal diameter, with a fall of 1
in 2300.
It was not necessary to vary any of the first types on this section,
but portion of the contract was exceptionally heavy driving.
NORTH YARRA MAIN, No. 1.
This contract was let to Messrs. D. McCulloch and Co. on Septem-
ber 6th, 1893, for ,££4,915 6s. 7d., and was completed for ,£58,673
13s. 6d. on June 6th. 1896.
It comprised the construction of an Bft. 6in. sewer from 4000 to
the pumping station, with a fall of 1 in 2300.
The contract originally provided for a sewer being constructed
under the ordinary types for good and bad ground, and on a con-
tinuous grade throughout. From 4000 to 2101 feet and from 620 feet
to the pumping station the sewer is constructed as designed, but from
2101 feet to 620 feet, a distance of 1481 feet, it was found neces-
sary to lower the sewer by 37 feet in order to obtain a good foun-
dation.
The bores originally taken did not give as good a description of the
ground 1 passed through as was desirable; even at this depth it was
found necessary to use a shield.
From 2101 to 1739 bluestone blocks were used, but the ground
becoming very heavy and wet, a cast-iron shell was used from 1739-
1352, and stone blocks again adopted between 1352 and 1212, while
for the remaining length from 1212 to 620 the ordinary type section
was adhered to.
As the large tunnel designed for the future population of the
northern area could not be expected to maintain itself clean, a 4ft.
wrought-iron pipe has been built through the sewer, with vertical
ends in the shafts on either side of Stoney Creek. Through this tube
the whole of the sewerage is and will be carried for some years, until
the 4ft. tube becomes too small, when it will be necessary to drive
another tunnel under Stoney Creek and use them alternately with
tubes, but this will not be required for many years.
This 4ft. tube is about 1560 feet long; a velocity of four feet a
second would effectually cleanse this pipe, to obtain which the fall
must be 1 in 600, so that the actual head required to cleanse this
syphon would be 2.60 feet. The difference of the existing sewer irv
verts is 1.42, therefore a heading-up of 1.18 in the sewer on the
northern side is all that is required to cleanse the syphon.
When very little sewage was coming through, the penstock in
Yarraville was shut down for about twenty-four hours, and the whole
stored water shot through the syphon at a very accelerated velocity,
which has a scouring action on the syphon, giving all the flushing
power necessary to keep it clean.
At the northern entrance to the syphon a silt pit was formed which
caught all the heavier material, but up to the present very little cleans-
ing is required.
The original estimate for the Main and Branch sewers was
All the heavy work in this branch of the Board's undertaking is
completed.
SuDmains and branches have been steadily advanced in St. Kilda,
Prahran. Richmond, Melbourne, North Melbourne, Fitzroy and Col-
lingwood, so as to provide for these areas.


PORTLAND CEMENT.
In order to be certain of the cement used on the contracts the
Board has bought all the cement used on the whole of the works ac-
cording to a, standard specification.
The contractor has to include the cost of the cement required on
his contract, all of which is supplied to him by the Board at a price
fixed in the specification under which he is tendering.
For bulk work Victorian cement has proved highly satisfactory.
PUMPING STATION, SPOTTISWOODE.
In the scheme recommended for adoption by Mr. Mansergh there
were two pumping stations —one near the South Yam railway station,
and one at Stoney Creek, near the railway line.
The Stoney Creek Pumping Station was to have two separate wells
without being in intercommunication, the one well being 19 feet lower
than the other, as the invert of the/ Hobson's Bay Main Sewer was
at a lower level than that of Stoney Creek Main Sewer.
At each station three separate establishments were recommended,
each capable of containing one-third of the total poAver, and three
rising mains laid connected with each establishment.
The Stoney Creek Pumping Station was to have been designed for
twelve engines, of 150 h.p. each, for the Hobson's Bay Main, the head
on the engines including friction being 115.55 f ee L and twelve engines
of 100 h.p. for the Stoney Creek Main with a head of 96.55.
The South Yarra Pumping Station was designed for twelve engines
of 300 h.p., with a head of 96.39 feet.
At South Yarra an establishment containing four engines of 300
h.p. was to be erected at the outset, while at Stoney Creek two estab-
lishments, each containing four engines of 150 h.p. for the Hobson’s
Bay Main, and one establishment for the Stoney Creek Main contain-
ing four engines of 100 h.p., were to be erected at the commencement.
ULTIMATE ENGINE POWER.
System. Engines. Total.
Hobson’s Bay Main ... 12 Engines, 150 ... 1,800
Stoney Creek Main ... 12 „ 100 ... 1,200
South Yarra Main ... 12 ~ 100 ... 3,600
Total Engine Power ... ... ... 6,600
INITIAL INSTALLATION.
System Engines. Total.
Hobson’s Bay Main ... 6 Engines ... ... 900
Stoney Creek Main ... 4 ~ ... ••• 400
South Yarra Main ... 4 ~ ... ••• 1,200
Initial Horse Power ... ••• 2,500
ADOPTED INSTALLATION.
The scheme being carried out consists of two systems, the
North Yarra, and the South Yarra system, with two pumping estao-
lishments arranged to be worked separately or unitedly. The South
Yarra Main enters the southern building at a level of 45 feet below
loav water mark, while the North Yarra Main enters the northern
building at a level of 37 feet below low water.
The ultimate installation is designed for twenty engines of 300 h.p.
each, equal to a total of 6000 h.p.
In each of the buildings now erected the Avells are constructed
for six engines, or twelve in all. The installation required to deal
with the present population will be eight engines.
The engines in the southern house lift the sewage from 45 below low
water mark to 64.50 above, or a total of feet, while those in the
northern engine room lift 101| feet without friction head in either
case.
The engine power provided for in the Board’s system is practically
the samef as in Mr. Mansergh’s.
The seAvage enters the pumping station through a straining Avell,
one of which is established on each system.
These AA r ells are 22 feet internal diameter, and each contains two
straining cages, one of Avhich is always in position. These are lifted
by steam winches above the floor of the straining house, which is 12ft.
6in. above low water mark, and the material caught in them is trans-
ferred to a Johnson’s drier in the building over the wells, where it
is subjected to steam of 45lbs. pressure, and reduced to a practically
odourless material of very little manurial value, chiefly consisting of
light floculent fibre.
The seAvage passes from the strainers betAveen the wells in each
engine room in a 9ft. seAver. The sewers in the tAVO rooms are con-
nected together, but can be separated by a large penstock gate, so
that the engines can be used in the southern room for pumping the
sewage from the North Yarra system without any interference Avith
the ordinary working, Avhile the northern engine room can be used
for Avorking the southern system on an emergency by opening the
penstock. (See Plates LXXIII., LXXIV., LXXTX., LXXX.)
These Avells are disposed symmetrically on opposite sides of the
engine room ; they are at 30ft. centres transversely, and 34ft. longitu-
dinally Avith the engine rooms. At the floor of the engine room they
are elliptical in section 27ft. by 15ft., while below a platform 30ft.
below loav water mark they become ovoid the one end of the ellipse,
being replaced' by a circle 7ft. 6in. in radius, so that this portion is
21 ft. by 15ft. (See Plates LXXIII., LXXIX., LXXXL)
Each well is independent from the other wells and separately con-
nected with the central sewer. (See Plate LXXX.)
The engine rooms are each 113 ft. x 58ft. internally, the boiler rooms
are 92ft. 7m. x 50 ft. placed immediately behind the engine rooms,
with the coal bunkers at their rear, 92ft. 7m. x 26ft.
The engine rooms, boiler rooms and coal bunkers are spanned by
wrought-iron roof trusses with slate roofs, boarded underneath. (See
Plate LXXV., LXXVI., LXXVII.)
The clear height of the engine room and boiler rooms is 24ft. nfin.
while that of the coal bunkers, which has a floor sloping towards the
boiler furnaces, is 18ft. Bfin. at the back and 24ft. nfin. at. the front.
(See Plate LXXIII.)
The coal bunkers hold 750 tons of coal each, and have a railway
siding at the rear connected with the Williamstown railway line at the
Spottiswoode station. The coal is discharged from the trucks direct
into the coal bunkers through doors in the back walls.
The level of the railway siding is 30ft. above low water, or 17ft. 6in.
above the boiler room floor.
Beyond the large engine and boiler rooms and coal bunkers, there
are a number of rooms available for offices and retiring and dressing
rooms for the staff.
The machinery at first erected consisted of four triple expansion
direct acting, condensing Worthington type of pumping engines.
There are four single acting plungers 32m. diameter in each engine,
which are designed in pairs, one plunger being driven by a high and
intermediate cylinder, and the other by the low pressure cylinder of
each pair. (See Plates LXXXV., LXXXVI.)
The diameters of the cylinders are, low intermediate
high i6fin., 36m. stroke. The maximum number of strokes run per
minute is 16. (See Plate LXXIV.)
Each engine is able to raise 1000 cubic 1 feet per minute into head
of the outfall sewer, at an expenditure of not more than 112 lbs. of
Newcastle (N.S.W.) coal for every 95,000,000 lbs. of sewage raised
one foot high.
The coal to have a calorific power of 13,000 British Thermal units
as obtained by the Mahlor Calorimeter.
The four engines erected, are supplied with steam from six inter-
nally-fired 1 return tube boilers.
The most recent additions to the pumping power (two) were added
in 1900, and consisted of an Otis engine (Victorian). It was made in
South Melbourne in 1900, by the Austral Otis Engineering Com-
pany. Its power is enormous, and its work most satisfactory; it is
a vertical, triple expansion, direct acting crank, and fly-wheel t) pe,
cost ,£15,944. Diameters of cylinders: Low pressure, 55 inches;
intermediate, 36 inches; high, 20 inches; stroke, 3 feet. It raises
1000 cubic feet of sewage per minute into the head of the outfall
sewer. The Hathorn Davey Engine (English) is described as an in-
verted, vertical, triple expansion, Corliss, surface condensing, rotative,
three-crank type, sewage pumping engine. It was manufactured in
1900 by Messrs. Hathorn Davey and Company of Sun Foundry,
Leeds, England, and cost ,£11,475. Diameters of Cylinders: Low
pressure, 54 inches; intermediate, 36 inches; high, 20 inches;
stroke, 3 feet 6 inches. It raises 1000 cubic feet of sewage per
minute into the head of the outfall sewer.
The heated gases are returned over the top of the boilers and
thence passing through a Green’s economiser for heating t e ee
water on the way to the chimney.
The chimney is 166 ft. 6in. high, and about 180 feet above the grate
surface in the boilers. The chimney is Bft. internal diameter, at the
top being circular in section. (See Plate LXXVI 11.)
The top of the chimney is, 196 ft. 6in. above low water mark.
The present chimney is at the rear of the southern building, but
the flues are already constructed under the northern buildings tor a
similar chimney. , - 1q
A cross flue is in position between the northern and southern boil
rooms, so that at present the southern chimney provides for the north-
ern rooms. ....
The sewage is pumped by each engine into a receiving main in each
building. This main will be 48m. diameter at one end, gradually in-
creasing opposite each pair of engines to 63m.. 72m.. Bnn., and 8»m.
diameter. , •
The connection between the receiving main and the pumps is uy
means of 32m. pipes and branches. The centre of these mains is a
low wmter mark. _ _ . _ - nfk
There are three rising mains designed to come from the en b in
house. Originally it was intended to lay three 6ft. pipes, but, only one
6ft. and one 4ft. has been laid. .
The receiving mains are connected to a large centre receiver,
which the three rising mains start.
In order to allow of the receiver being cleansed, if necessary, by-
passes are provided in each engine house to deliver the sewage into
the rising mains, independently of the large receiver. .
There are at present two 88in. valves, and four 72m. valves drive
bv steam governing these delivery mains.
The whole of the building’s straining wells and underground cham-
bers are lit by the electric light.
Besides the four main engines, with their independent feed pump*
there are two independent electric engines, two steam, winches. tor 1
ing the straining cages, two engines driving the driers, six engi


lifting the valves, one wall engine driving the economisers, cleaning
gear, and one engine driving the steam tools.
The estimated cost of the pumping station in the original section
was £792,°°°, off which £320,000 was to be expended at the com-
mencement.
The Board s estimated expenditure for the present population was
£200,000 up to June 30th, 1899.
The following table gives the average cost in London of pumping
1,000,000 gallons of sewage one foot high, including cost of staff,
coal, repairs, lighting gas, water-rates, taxes and stores:
Lift 1893 1894 1895 1896
(ft.) d. d. d. d.
Abbey Mills 38 3.72 4.36 3.92 4.06
Western 2 if 6.60 6.75 6.06 5.98
Crossness 21J 6.15 7.27 6.94 6.35
Deptford 18 5.07 5.02 4.91 5.14
The Melbourne pumping has cost (2,833.971,156 gallons lifted
io9|ft.) £5877 14s. Bd.; 1,-000.000 gallons, 109JB:., £2 is. 6d.;
1,000,000 gallons. 1 foot, 4s. 6d. Considering the difference in the
cost of labour and coal between London and Melbourne, this result
is verv good.
In Sydney the cost of pumping water for the Sydney Water Supply
for 1897-98, was:
Gallons.
Crown-street 2,618,968,470 3.87 d.
Chatswood 60.561,990 8.0
Ryde 503,633,000 4.22 d.
Carlton 65.137,529 ii-49d.
North Richmond i7-88d.
The coal used at Spottiswoode for all purposes in 1899 was 3084
tons o cwt., 1 qr.
RISING MAINS.
In Mr. Mansergh’s scheme, three rising mains of 63m. diameter
were designed for the Stoney Creek station, and three mains 73 Jin.
diameter for the South Yarra station ; of these, two 63m., and one
72m. main were to be laid at once.
The Board's scheme was designed for three 72m. pipes, but of these
only one 7 gin. has been laid, and a 48m. in lieu of one of 72m.
pipe lines.
These mains are two and three-quarter miles long. The mains, after
leaving the pumping station, follow Hudson’s-road. crossing the Wil-
liamstown line at Spottiswoode railway station, then follow Harrison’s-
road and Bay View Avenue, extending thence in a direct line to the
head of the Outfall sewer, crossing the Williamstown and Braybrook
railway lines at about one and a-half miles from the pumping station.
(See Plate LIV.)
The invert of the pipe at the pumping station is 3ft. below low
water mark near the Spottiswood'e station; it rises to 39ft. above
low water; at Stoney Creek it drops to 6ft. above low water, thence
gradually rising to 6qjft. above low water mark at the head of the
Outfall sewer. (See Plate LIV.)
Both pipes are constructed of wrought-iron, Jin. thick. The 4ft.
pipes are in 30ft. lengths, with wrought-iron spigot and socket joints,
set up with gasket and lead in the usual way, while the 6ft. pipes are
in 15ft. lengths, every third joint being spigot and socket, and the
two intermediate ones flanged and bolted. (See Plate LIV.)
All the pipes were dipped while hot into an asphaltum mixture, simi-
lar tO' what is. used for the water supply pipes.
The pipes were laid and jointed in an open trench, which was exca-
vated in bluestone throughout, almost the whole distance. The filling
material was very bad, being chiefly bluestone spalls; very little earth
was available. This resulted in the pipes not having a good bed.
After laying where deep, the pipes at the upper end assumed an oval
section, but after thev took their bearing against the filling, no fur-
ther trouble has arisen. (See Plate LIV.)
Pumping was started in February, 1897. through the 48m. main,
and continued daily up to December, 1898.
It was then deemed advisable to test the 6ft. pipe, for which pur-
pose pumping was started through it, and continued without any diffi-
culty arising, from December 2nd, 1898, to October 14th, 1899. It
was then thought advisable., to empty the 6ft. for examination, and
pump through the 4ft.
After pumning through the 4ft. it was found, on being emptied, to
be practically clean, and in very good order.
On the 6ft. being emptied, it was found that the larsier body of
water passing through it at a-lower velocity, had not maintained itself
so clean as that in the 4ft.. and the thicker material which had passed,
both through strainers and pump valves, gradually settled in the bottom
of the pipe as the water was withdrawn, causing a heavy accumulation
in the hollow at Stonev Creek and at the pumping station. It was
found that this material yielded readily to flowing water, and the pipe
was gradually washed out, and the greasy material removed from the
sides of the pipe.
OUTFALL SEWER.
The Outfall sewer is about fifteen and three-quarter miles’ long,
with a fall of 2ft. to the mile. (See Plates LXIV., LXV.)
Whenever the sewer is close to the main road, or wherever the cover
over the arch would be more than sft., the sewer has been completed
its full ultimate size -viz., uft. diameter —in other places only the
lower half of the circle has been completed.
The whole length was divided up into thirteen sections, for which al-
ternate contracts were called, for concrete, with brick lining, and all
concrete,- with cement rendering, and the contracts were let to the
lowest tenderer in each case, with the following, result: —(See Plate
L 111.)
Section. Contractor. Tender. Final Payment.
1. J. F. Mixner £9,975 *£9*4B4
2. J. F. Mixner 13,432 12,821
Special Engineering Journal cC 7228 cmfwyp
3. J. F. Mixner 8,247 7,3 6 5
4. J. F. Mixner 15,487 14,759
5. J. Falkmgham 14,231 i 3
6. Goss and Wischer 18.297 20,548
7. A. G. Shaw 22.270 22,567
8. D. Spence 27,475 27.570
9. A. G. Shaw 16,969 19,655
10. A. G. Shaw 22,119 22,258
11. J. Falkingham"..-. 20,512 20,406
12. C. Wadey 30.432 32,115
13. McNeil and Upton 17.087 17.357
,£236,553 £240,748 1/0
These contracts have been completed now for about twelve years,
and very little maintenance money has been spent upon them. The
amount of extras on the original total contracts —viz., ,£236,553 —was
only £4195, or if per cent.
A trifling sum will be required to fill up cracks in some of the work
passing clayey ground, caused by the expansion and contraction of the
soil; but even this is not absolutely necessary, as the working of the
sewer is in no way affected by them.
Three main water courses are crossed by the Outfall sewer, viz.,
Kororoit Creek. Skeleton Creek, and Werribee River. The aqueducts
are all of the same type; each span is 42ft. The Kororoit Creek has
four spans, while the Skeleton Creek and Werribee River have each
five spans. (See Plates LVTIT.. LIX., LX., LXT, EXIT.)
These aqueducts are made their full capacity, and are so arranged
that a deck can be placed on the top of the sides of the channel, trans-
forming them into road bridges. In each case the necessary road ap-
proaches have been formed.
As the country through which the Outfall sewer was constructed was
virtually destitute of water, a 6in. water main was laid throughout
the whole length, starting at the junction of Francis-street and' Harri-
son’s-road, from the Williamstown Main, passing thence to the Gee-
long-road, along which it is, laid up to the Kororoit Creek, whence it
follows the Outfall sewer to the Metropolitan Farm. This main pro-
vided water for the contract work, and the men, while the Outfall
sewer was in progress, and now provides good water for the residents
on the farm. (See Plate LXIV.)
At the head of the Outfall sewer, where the three rising mains join
the Outfall sewer, a building has been erected for deoderising the
sewage on its way to the farm. (See Plate LVIT.)
The smell at this place, after the sewage left the rising main, was
very objectionable; but subsequently sulphur has been burnt at this
building, and the resulting sulphurous acid forced into the sewage
by means of a Root’s blower. The result in reducing the smell at
this point has been very satisfactory.
Another similar Installation was arranged at about five miles from
the farm. These two deodorant stations reduce all objections to
smell arising from the outfall to a minimum.
METROPOLITAN FARM.
(See Plates LXVI., LXVII.)
The Outfall sewer delivers the sewage on to the Metropolitan
Farm, in the Parish of Corcoroc, County of Grant, on the westerly-
side of the Werribee, which forms the eastern boundary of the farm,
while Port Philip Bav forms the southern boundary. (See Plate LV.)
The total area of the farm is 8847 acres, which was subdivided in
the following manner:
Acres.
Area available for irrigation 7227
Area available for grazing 915
Tree plantations 357
Private roads 230
Township sites 102
Board's reserve 16
Total acres 8847
The methods adopted for dealing with sewage in connection with
land are arranged under three heads: —■
(Ist) Chemical precipitation, and subsequent treatment by irriga-
tion on land.
(2nd) Purification by broad irrigation.
(3rd) Purification by intermittent downward filtration.
The first and third systems are only advisable when the value of
land is prohibitive. The best purification, the least expense in


maintenance, and the most profitable results are obtained by the
second system.
The ratio of population to area under the various systems is
approximately:
Persons per acre.
Precipitation and surface irrigation ... 185 to 508
Broad or surface irrigation 26 to 811
Filtration 125 to 1000
Mr. Mansergh suggested one acre for no persons at Werribee, and
one acre for 80 persons at Mordialloc.
The Metropolitan Farm gives an area suitable for the following
population at the respective ratios, viz.:
Ratio 1 in 80 acres 707.760 people.
Ratio 1 in 100 acres 884.700 people.
Ratio 1 in no acres 973.170 people.
The farm is consequently suitable for broad irrigation for less than
1,000,000 people, on which basis the general scheme is designed.
The original area suggested to be purchased by Mr. Mansergh was
onlv 5350 acres, and only provided for the existing population, on a
system of broad irrigation.
“ Under broad irrigation the sewage can be fully utilised; but as
increasing quantities of sewage are put on the land, it cannot be
expected to remain equally productive, although it will continue to
act efficiently as a filter, if worked intermittently.”
Now, considering the price at which the land was obtained, it
was very much easier to obtain more land than Was originally in-
tended. Intermittent filtration, as opposed to broad irrigation, is
merely a question of the price of the land. With land reasonable,
the extent of filtration, pure and simple, should be reduced to a
minimum.
Preparation of land for filtration costs three or four times that
for broad irrigation, and the agricultural returns are not so good ;
besides, there is a greater danger of sanitary object'ons arising from
stagnant sewage.
The balance of the land not required for irrigation at present is
bringing in the cost of purchase, and, therefore, adds in no wise
to the Board’s annual expenditure. Moreover, if an area only suit-
able for present requirements had been purchased, any future exten-
sion would have involved the purchase of property, the value of
which would be enhanced by its proximity to the sewerage farm,
and it was therefore very wise to buy all the land available for irri-
gation, although it will not be actually required for a few years.
This course was wisely adopted, and the Board now" holds land
capable of receiving the sewage of 900,000 people, on the principle
of broad irrigation. If the population increase beyond that num-
ber, it will be either necessary to prepare some of the blocks as fil-
tration areas, to be used for intermittent filtration with agriculture or
filtration, pure and simple, or to make arrangements with the occu-
piers of land along the Outfall Sewer to utilise the sewage.
The land at Werribee was prepared according to the recommenda-
tion of Mr. Mansergh, viz. :
“ That it should be broken up by steam cultivators to a depth of
18 inches or two feet, ayid properly drained.”
The estimated cost of this work for 5350 acres was, according to
Mr. Mansergh :
Distribution of Effluent Channels ,£168,416
Preparing and Draining 1 33575°
,£302,166
or at a rate of about ,£57 per acre.
The sewage from the Outfall sewer is carried throughout the pre-
pared blocks in a concrete-lined' channel, gradually rising above
the ground upon an embankment.
The channel is of 3ft. 9m. radius at the northern end of the farm,
gradually reducing to ift. 6in. radius at the seaward end. The sec-
tion is a quadrant of a circle with 1 to 1 slopes.
At every 10 chains, side channels take off the sewage in half
semi-circular cast-iron pipes, placed on graduated blocks, each side
carrier governing 20 acres of ground, of which 18 acres can be
cultivated.
These blocks have been broken up 18 to 20 in. deep with the
steam ploughing plant. They are then graded into level areas by
means of grading machines and scoops. (See Plates LXVIII.,
LXIX., LXX., LXXI, LXXII.).
The areas are under-drained by means of the mole plough, or by
agricultural pipes wherever necessary.
The effluent water is taken up by this under-drainage system, and
delivered into sub-channels at the lower ends of the prepared blocks.
These sub-channels deliver at every ten chains into the main chan-
nels, which are spaced 40 chains apart, east and west, the main
carriers alternating with them, also 40 chains apart.
Both main carriers and main drains run due north and south, and
deliver into the pick-up drain at the seaward face, which runs east
and west to one point, wherever the effluent water is discharged
from the farm into Port Philip Bay, opposite Portarlington.


Metropolitan Sewerage.
Outer Areas Scheme.
POLICY OF THE BOARD.
The special committee appointed by the Metropolitan Board of
Works to consider the financial problem instructed Mr. Thwaites,
the board’s engineer-in-chief, to prepare plans of that portion of the
metropolitan area still unsewered whicn could, with profit, or an
approach to profit, be connected with the system. Mr. Thwaites is
nearing the completion of this task, and it is expected that in about
a week the committee will be called together for the purpose of
finally deciding what measures should, in its opinion, be adopted for
meeting the annually-recurring deficit and providing funds to com-
plete the sewerage scheme. The public is now well aware that the
money available will only suffice to carry the board through the cur-
rent financial year.
The first house connection was made in 1879, si* years after the
works were commenced, and 71,206 houses had been connected up
to the end of June last year, the average cost of reticulation per
tenement being 6s. 4d. It is estimated that there are 112,788
tenements in the metropolitan area, and on December 31st last the
survey on which the designing of the sewage reticulation particularly
depends was in the following position :
Tenements surveyed and plotted 104,000
Tenements surveyed, but not plotted : 2,986
Tenements not surveyed ' 5,793
There were 550 tenements in Boroondara, 392 in Caulfield, 391 in
Essendon, 262 in Brunswick, and 238 in Malvern not surveyed —all
in areas which, although well supplied with water, were not likely
to be sewered for many years.
In a report which he prepared at the beginning of the year Mr.
Thwaites estimated that, at the present rate of progress, it would
take until June 30, 1908, to complete 107,000 tenements. There
would remain between 5000' and 6000 unsewered houses in the metro-
politan area. The engineer-in-chief was then of opinion that the por-
tions of Moorabbin and Heidelberg included in the board’s territory
were too distant to be profitably connected with the general system
at present, but the main sewers are designed to control Moorabbin
as far as Black Rock and Heidelberg above the level of the Yarra
flood waters. He thought it advisable that the township of Heidel-
berg should be sewered locally by means of septic tank and filtration
beds, with land purification, designed so that connection could be
made with the main sewers when they were extended into the dis-
trict. Mr. Thwaites has somewhat amended his views concerning the
Shire of Moorabbin. Settlement is going ahead rapidly in the neigh-
bourhood of Sandringham, and the time may not be very remote
when that locality will be connected with the .sewerage system.
The following table, prepared in January last, shows the number
of tenements in the various municipalities which were then un-
sewered :
Tenements in Balance
id. Area to Gazette
(Not Sewerable). (Sewerable).
Brunswick 250 5,400
Engineering Journal SIX 8497
Collingwood 4J53 1
Essendon 320 3,641
William,stown 261 2,916
Northcote 200 2,190
Brighton 215 1,990
Boroondara 456 1,605
Caulfield ... 496 1,264
Malvern 187 1,147
Kew 163 960
Fitzroy 947
Coburg 725 725
Footscray 162 589
Preston 316 560
St. Kilda ... ‘ 407
Richmond 397
Hawthorn 146 239
Melbourne 9 184
Flemington 130
Prahran 146
Nunawading 93 92
North Melbourne 17
South Melbourne 21
Port Melbourne 49
Heidelberg 690
Moorabbin 833
Totals 5>59 2 3°,°77
There are at present about 80,000 tenements either sewered or in
gazetted areas. Mr. Thwaites estimated that an additional 27,000
houses could be profitably sewered during the ensuing three years,
the progress of gazetting to be as follows:
No. of Valuation.
Date. Tenements. jQ
January 30, 1906 90,000 3,750,000
January 30, 1907 99,000 4,050,000
January 30, 1908 107,000 4,326,978
This would leave 5592 houses outside of the sewered area. The
special committee of the board arrived at the conclusion that it would
be wisest to allow five years, instead of three years, for the comple-
tion of the scheme, and the engineer-in-chief is preparing detailed
drawings on that basis. The committee will then be able to ascertain
definitely what its capital requirements will be for the next five years,
and rating proposals will be framed accordingly and submitted to the
full board for approval.
Determinations have been tentatively arrived at by the committee
that Parliament shall be asked to allow the board to levy a rate of
3d. in the jQi on unsewered properties in the inner area and a
“ general sewerage rate not exceeding is. 2d. in the jQi ■ also to
increase the water rate from 6d. in the jQi to not more than Bd. in
the 1. It is proposed to abolish the rate of id. in the jQi in the
outer area. The idea is that the water and sewerage rates shall be
struck each year in accordance with requiiements. There will be no
variation in the rate of 3d. in the jQi on unsewered properties in
the inner area, but a “ general ” rate of is. id. in the £1 for
sewerage and a rate of 7d. in the jQi for water may suffice. The
maximums of is. 2d. and Bd. respectively are not to be exceeded.
Under the existing act, properties may not be rated for sewerage
unless they are in a gazetted area. The proposal is that localities
not likely to be sewered shall be relieved from taxation, but that
those which have an early prospect of enjoying the benefits of the
system shall pay an increased rate of 3d. in the £l. Those locali-
ties which have been paying a rate of id. in the £1 for a long series
of years may protest against being deprived of anything but a remote
chance of being included in the system; but it is contended that
they have benefited by the improved sanitation of the metropolis,
and, moreover, they have been supplied with water at the very modest
rate of 6d. in the jQi. In only one instance has the sewerage yet
been extended into the outer area. At Boroondara the mains have
been carried a short distance into the “ penny ” district, south of the
shire hall. In later years there will, of course, be nothing to prevent
localities where the settlement has become sufficiently dense being
sewered.


TELEPHONE 2231.
The Steel Company of Australia,
SYDNEY ROAD (
OPPOSITE
POST OFFICE
), BRUNSWICK, VICTORIA,
4
"-*r
V
K -
~y
m
M
-J
v>
0-1 \
Y
M
ry\
srs
y
\
-
;
.
smm
A CORNER OF THE FOUNDRY.
The Largest Steel Founders in the Commonwealth
CASTINGS made in any grade of Steel up to 5 lons in weight.
Crucible Steel Supplied to Analysis if required.
We keep an Analyst on the premises; we also keep our own Pattern Makers,
Prices for same being as Low as Possible.
If Drawings are submitted we will complete the Castings and Machine
them, at MODERATE RATES, ready to go into position.
OUR PRICES ARE THE LOWEST IN THE COMMONWEALTH.
The Steel Company of A ustra/ia.
MARTYN, Proprietor.


Section No. I, North Yarra Main Sewer.
Paper by Henry Vine Champion, Assoc. M. Inst. C.E., read before the Victorian Institute of Engineers.
See Plates LXXXVII., LXXXVIIL, LXXXIX., XC. and XCI.
The sewage of Melbourne and its suburbs is conveyed by the
Hobson’s Bay, the Williamstown and the Stoney Creek or North
Yarra Main Sewers to the Spottiswoode pumping station, situated
at the corner of Craig-street and Fleet-street (Fig. 1, Plate 6). The
site of the pumping station is approached by good macadamised
roads; it has a water frontage to the Yarra, and js furnished with a
railway siding from the main Williamstown radway. The ground
was already partly excavated on the site of the wells, and sloped
upwards to the west, so that the approaches to the buildings on
that side were easily made above! the level of the boiler room
floors. This allowed the coal bunkers to be constructed with slop-
ing floors, and facilitated the delivery and subsequent handling of
coal. Over nine acres are available, giving ample room for storage
and other purposes. The line of the North Yarra Main Sewer is
located as shown in Fig. 1, and Section No. 1 extended from a point
near the pumping station for a distance of 4000' feet northwards to
River-street. The sewer passes under Stoney Creek by an inverted
syphon at an inlet invert level of 72.35 feet below low water, on a
gradient of 1 in 2300 (Fig. 2). In addition to the bore-holes sunk
for the Board by the Melbourne Harbour Trust, a thorough test
of the creek bed was made by driving a row of piles on each side
of the line of sewer, and for a length of 950 feet it was considered
that no suitable ground for the sewer could be found. Along this
length piles 12 inches in diameter required little or no driving.
When driven 38 feet a fall of 8 or 9 feet with a i6cwt. monkey drove
every pile more than 9 inches, while some descended between 12
inches and 20 inches per blow. Under the line of channel, par-
tially dredged for small craft by the Melbourne Harbour Trust, a
very bad foundation was discovered. A trial tunnel was driven a
short distance on the upper level, and it was found that the silt
when reached ran in with great freedom, and filled the tunnel. This
silt was of a fluid nature, having no angle of repose. In no part
of the ground which was bored through did the boring augers at a
less depth than 38 feet bring up a solid core of any kind, the whole
of the material, except a little wet sand in places, being a semi-fluid
slurry- Good progress was made with the work on each side of the
creek, the type section varying somewhat, according to the nature
of the ground, but being generally of the character shown in Fig. 5,
Plate 6. Arrangements were made to construct the syphon of brick
in cement and cement concrete, according to the type section from
the south end of the creek, the excavation being supported by tim-
bering; and from the north end by Milestone blocks (Fig. 3), a
wrought-iron shield being used to facilitate construction. After
completing about 580 feet of the tunnel from the south end. the
contractors were ordered to stop the construction at this point, as
the brickwork showed signs of failure under the heavy pressure
caused by the swelling of the clay. The stonework was steadily
pushed forward from the north shaft until a point was reached about
350 feet from it, when a stratum of sand, carrying a large body of
water, was tapped. The shield had met with various mishaps during
the progress of the work, owing to striking against boulders in its
course; it was now strengthened, and several ineffectual attempts
were made to continue the contract. The sand when fully exposed
extended to about 15 inches above the bottom of the shield, and
the inburst of water increased to probably 15,000 gallons per hour.
The contractors had at first great difficulty in preventing the sand
from washing out, and in securing the clay face above; and finally
had to abandon the work and close the sliding doors of the shield,
as the water was gaining on the two pumps in the shaft, which were
capable of dealing with 11,000 gallons per hour. During the few
hours in which a larger pump was being fitted in the shaft the whole
length of tunnel was filled to springing level; but after that the flow
of water seemed to gradually decrease until it remained constant at
about 8000 gallons per hour. Further boring operations were then
undertaken to more clearlv define the nature and extent of the sand
drift, and a bulkhead was built across the sewer, about 20 feet back
from the shield, a Bourdon gauge being fixed to test the pressure of
water behind the bulkhead. These efforts to keep back the w'ater
were not wholly successful, as it found its way along the outside of
the stonework and forced a passage through the joints. Caulking
with oakum was then resorted to; but, although the leakage was
much reduced, it was not entirely prevented. A pressure of 2 slbs.
per square inch was recorded by the gauge, while the escape of water
through the joints between the bulkhead and the shaft was estimated
at about 3000 gallons per hour. It was considered that if there
had been no escape, the pressure would have closely approached the
full amount due to the head of water from the surface— viz., 33lbs.
per square inch above atmospheric pressure.
After these experiments had been made, and the fresh bore-holes
had peen completed, the contractors plotted a detailed longitudinal
section of the ground in which the sand drift was clearly defined, as
shown in Fig. 2. It was considered impossible to proceed further
with the tunnel under the existing mode of construction, and the
author was called in to advise upon the works necessary for the suc-
cessful completion of the contract, to negotiate with the Board’s
officers for a satisfactory settlement, and to direct the further pro-
gress of the undertaking. A complete examination of the contract
having been made, a preliminary report was submitted to the con-
tractor upon “ the state of the work and the practicability of further
operations.” This report described the condition of affairs, and
gave a brief “ resume ” of the operations which had, so far, been
conducted from the shaft on the north side of the syphon. The
flow 7 ' of water there was estimated at 8000 gallons per hour, and was
easily kept under by the steam duplex double acting Worthington
pump in use. The extent of the sand-drift, as defined by later bore-
holes of the Board of Works, was 380 feet along the line of sewer,
at level varying between invert level and about 2ft. 6in. above it.
The total length of tunnel to be driven was 540 feet. The sand was
overlaid by a good, solid drift clay, deposited from denudation of
schist rock, and showed a good, dry face, which had, however, fallen
to a slope from the front edge of the hood to the bottom of the top
doors. The thinnest covering of clay over the arch was about
7 feet, overlaid by 7ft. 6in. of rotten rock and 48 feet of silt of
varying degrees of stiffness. The invert of the syphon at the north
shaft was about 73 feet below water. Flood level was shown by the
Board of Works 8 feet above low water. Allowing for the thickness
of the invert, a total head of 82ft. 2m. might be developed. As,
however, a flood of this character would not occur without timely
warning, and during its operation work might be discontinued, it
was considered sufficient to allow for a very high tide, giving a total
head of 79 feet, or a pressure of 34-29 lbs. per square inch. The
highest tide recorded above Melbourne Harbour Trust datum was
4ft. 6in., on April 29th, 1878. The men showed great disinclination
to work in compressed air, and the contractors were very averse to
use it. The terrible accident of Good Friday, 1895, in the Yarra
tunnel, had also a bad moral effect upon all engaged in sub-aqueous
operations. Taking into consideration the experiments made in this
case, and the experience gained in other parts of the world, it was
considered probable that a pressure between 20 lbs. and 2 slbs. per
square inch would be sufficient to carrv on operations, but there was
a possibility that the pressure due to the full hydrostatic head might
be encountered, provision must be made to meet it up to a pressure
not exceeding 35 lbs. per square inch. Sir Benjamin Baker, Past
President Tnst. C.E., after visiting the works of the Hudson River
and St. Clair tunnels, estimated that the Blackwall tunnel under the
Thames Was practicable as long as the pressure did not exceed 35lbs.
per square inch. The following table shows particulars of works
carried out under somewhat similar circumstances :
Maxi-
mum Pressure Maxi-
Internal Depth due to mum Thickness of
Locality. Dimensions of Invert Hydro- Working Iron Nature of Ground,
of Tunnel. Below static Pres- Lining.
Water Head. sure.
Surface.
Lbs. per Lbs. per
Square Square
Ft. In. Ft. In. Inch. Inch.
xt 1 . fl 7 101 f Good stiff
} { 16 T lo } 84J {quit^csand.
2. Thames, | „ Qn ( 2in. & Ballast, running sand
Blackwall. 1 ' ) ljin. clay & shells, etc.
[ 16 0 63 27.3 18 ranges Boulderclay
Glasgow I (i Jin .
f Hard gneiss, de-
I composed felspar
I soft chlorites,
4 ' East wv [ 10 2 122.6 53 52 IJin. black, mud with
River, N.Y. j 4 ] pyrites modules,
I in nearly vertical
I veins from river
f bottom
In view of the above, and the opinion of Sir Benjamin Baker, the
contractors were advised that it was quite practicable to use com-
pressed air if necessary.


Cast-iron Lining. —Owing to the difficulty in making the stonework
water-tight in the ground already traversed, and the still greater diffi-
culty, if not impossibility, of doing so through the sand-drift, the
contractors were advised to substitute cast-iron lining, thick, with
cement concrete and brick interior. The great pressure of the clay
upon exposure in the south section of the tunnel had already materially
affected the brickwork, and, taking this into account, as well as the depth
at which the tunnel was laid, the thickness of i| inch was decided
upon. The deformation of the ij inch cast-iron lining in the Yarra
tunnel, which amounted in some places to a difference of some inches
between the horizontal and vertical diameters, and the fact that un-
planed flanges were used in the class of work by the Board, were
additional reasons affecting the thickness adopted. The Board of
Works approved of the proposed alteration, and negotiations were
ultimately concluded. It was decided that the lining, Figs. 3, should
extend for 380 feet, the full length of the sand drift, the remaining
160 feet having to be finished in stonework. Each complete ring of
cast-iron plates was ift. 6in. in width over flanges, and consisted of
seven plates each 4ft. 6 6-701. long and a key-piece ift. sm. long.
The width of plates was decided on as giving more security in carry-
ing on the work than the greater widths formerly adopted in the
Yarra tunnel, as being more easily erected, and as fitting in with the
20-inch stroke of the shield rams, so that a complete ring could be
erected with one movement of the shield. The thickness of flanges
was 11 inch, the depth 3! inches, and the diameter of the wrought-
iron screw bolts ij inch, and their spacing 8 inches from centre to
centre. The bolt holes were cast slightly larger than the bolts to
secure facility of erection. The shanks were round iron, and no diffi-
culty was experienced in screwing up. In the Yarra tunnel, after-
wards carried to a successful completion by Mr. A. G. Shaw, square
holes in the linings and-square shanks were used with iin. bolts, but
in the author’s opinion there is no necessity for this modification.
The iron plates were cast by Messrs. Monteath and Sons, of South
Melbourne, the bolts being made by Mr. Mephan Ferguson, of Mel-
bourne. Precautions, having been taken by means of horizontal bores
in the face to test the ground immediately in front for a length of
50 feet, the contractors decided to endeavour to push on without in-
stalling a compressed air plant. The first ring of iron to be placed
next the stonework was cast with a specially- deep flange on that
side, and strengthened by ribs across the plate at frequent intervals,
Fig. 3. The deep flange was secured to the stonework by six i\ inch
Lewis bolts. The bottom plates yvere placed by an iron derrick
secured to> the diaphragm of the shield and furnished yvith a single
block and endless chain. The top plates yvere inserted by hand from
temporary staging, the only difficulty occurring with the two top side
plates and the key piece. These tyvo side plates yvere loosely bolted
to those immediately beloyv, the top ends being held up by the men.
The key piece, yveighing about 2001 b., yvas then inserted by hand.
The top ends of the side plates being pushed up as far as possible,
the key piece: was slid betyveen them and temporarily secured to the
side pieces by tyvo drifts slipped in smartly at opposite corners. Bolts
were then inserted through the other holes and screwed up, the drifts
being then removed and bolts substituted A segment-erector was de-
signed for the purpose of relieving the men in the erection of the
plates, but it yvas difficult to avoid taking up a great deal of space
in thp tunnel, and the contractors yvere so satisfied yvith the progress
made yvithout it that they decided not to use it. The height of the
trucks yvas about 3ft. 3m., and the erector gave only about tyvo
inches above this, so that earth could not be piled on the trucks,
and time would be lost in trucking excavated material to the shaft.
The first shift took place in the presence of the contractors and their
engineers, and, contrary to* expectations, no great increase occurred
in the quantity of yvater. Everything yvorking satisfactorily, and the
ground ahead being yvell exploited, it yvas decided to 1 push on as
rapidly as possible. The joints in the ironwork yvere made yvith
tarred felt, and arrangements were made as the yvork progressed to
have bottom plates made yvith qin. cast-iron pipes in them projecting
upwards about 14 inches. These pipes yvere left in the bottom about
every half-chain, and the yvater from the sand yvas alloyved to floyv
freely through them into the tunnel. This practice yvas decided on
when it was ascertained that the sand did not come away yvith the
yvater to any appreciable extent. The effect was to keep down the
water in the face as the yvork progressed, and facilitate excavation
and construction. The pipes yvere not closed until after the interior
lining was completed, and by thus relieving the pressure the brick-
work and cement concrete was enabled to become thoroughly set.
As the work yvas proceeding on a down gradient it was. necessary to
intercept the yvater coming from these pipes and prevent it from
flooding the face. Temporary dams yvere therefore erected from
time to time between the last pipe and the face. The water from
the face was pumped over these to the shaft by a Worthington pump
at the bottom of the shaft with a long horizontal suction-pipe. The
main body of yvater in the north shaft was pumned to the surface by
the large steam pump before-mentioned. The yvater in the shaft
included part of that discharging from the upner tunnel, yvhenever
it was syphoned over a small dam at the junction to the pump at
the bottom of the shaft. This yvas usually unnecessary, as there
yvere tyvo small Worthington pumps at the end of the upper tunnel,
which ordinarily yvere enough to lift the water to the surface. Some-
times, however, they had to l be stopped lor repairs, and if a flood
occurred there was too much water for the pumps to deal with, and
the syphon came into operation, ft was certainly not economical to
double the height which it was necessary to lift the water, but the
arrangement was not often used, and might be regarded in the light
of a stand by.
Rate of Progress.—The rate of progress through the sand con-
tinued satisfactory, five rings per day being frequently erected. The
horizontal test boring was performed weekly, and the ground between
the vertical bores in this way thoroughly tested. These precautions
gave great confidence to all concerned, and although the water was
exceedingly troublesome at times, no mishap occurred excepting an
injury to one of the workmen’s hands in erecting the plates. This,
however, was due to carelessness or to a misunderstanding.
Shield.—-The shield, Fig. 6, Plate i, was constructed by Mr.
Mephan Ferguson, of Melbourne. On approaching the bad ground
it had been specially strengthened and refitted by the contractors.
Previously, owing to a deformation of one of the plates, which re-
mained undiscovered for some time, it was found impossible to keep
the shield moving in the proper direction. Eventually the increasing
error became serious, and a careful examination showed that exten-
sive repairs were necessary. The shield had been previously fitted
with a projecting hood, but it does not appear that “ per se ”it was
the cause of the error, as no difficulty was found after the repairs
had been effected in keeping the shield moving in the required direc-
tion. The hood projected 2 feet beyond the cutting edge, and was
made of fin. wrought-iron plate, supported by brackets stiffened with
angle irons extending back to the diaphragm. A wrought-iron pfate,
extending forward from the diaphragm to the end of the hood, was
placed horizontally in the centre of the shield, supported by angle-
bars at its junction with the shield and by a stiffened plate in the
centre sloping outwards from the bottom of the shield to the outside
of the plate. This support practically divided the lower half of the
shield into- two chambers, where a vertical wrought-iron plate also
divided the top half into two working chambers. The horizontal
plate was also stiffened and supported near its outside edge by aT-
bar. The diaphragm, as originally constructed, had only one door
space, 6ft. bjT 4ft., but this was eventually cut into four doorways.
The doors were composed of wrought-iron plate, sliding in grooves
faced with gun-metal. The lower doors slid up in front of the upper
ones, two doors being above and two below the horizontal plate.
T'he doors were fitted with projecting studs, which were engaged by
flat swinging hooks when they were open, the hooks being so shaped
that when properly fastened they firmly engaged the studs and kept
the doors up, but a smart tap sufficed to swing them clear of the
studs, when the doors dropped at once with some force to the closed
position. This arrangement worked well. The top doors were first
opened and the ground excavated by one man in each chamber to
the extremity of the cutting edge, and as far beyond as was necessary
for a complete shift. The men were then withdrawn and the doors
shut down. The lower part was then similarly excavated. The pres-
sure was then put on to the jacks and the shield forced forward, fn
excavating the lower portion, where the sand continually rose higher
as the tunnel progressed, it was frequently necessary to use bags
of silt or clay to control the flow of water.
Hydraulic Jacks. —The movement of the shield was effected by
eight hydraulic jacks, spaced as shown in Fig. 6. The power was
supplied from a force-pump on the surface worked by the Robey
semi-portable engine hereafter described. From the puma the power
was conveyed to the jacks by wrought-iron tubes secured to the
tunnel at frequent intervals by iron clips, to prevent the pipe spring-
ing under pressure. As the work progressed further lengths of tub
ing were added to maintain the connection, an extension pipe being
always used at the junction with the shield. The ram cylinders were
of cast-iron, 9 inches in external diameter and ij inch thick, the
solid ends being cast in one piece with the cylinder, and varying in
thickness between ij inch and i-J inch. The length of the cylinders
over all wa,s 2ft. 6jin., and the travel of rams about 20 inches. The
rams were 6 inches in diameter, and were dished on the inner ends
and provided with the ordinary cup-shaped leather collars. When
used against the stonework, the outer ends of the rams were fitted
with cast-iron crossheads secured with one set bolt to each ram. In
the case of cast-iron lining it was required to distribute the pressure
of the ram over a considerable length of the very narrow annular
surface formed by the cross section of the lining, and for this pur-
pose cast-steel shoes were substituted. They were 3ft. nin. long,
and were curved to the same radius as the cast-iron lining, the inner
sides being bevelled off so as to prevent the shoe from bearing on the
unsupported flanges. When the tunnel was constructed in masonry
the travel of the shield—viz., 20 inches at each stroke of the rams —
was not enough to permit of the long stones being inserted, and it
was therefore necessary to 1 use blocking pieces, which were readily
placed on the ends of the rams, Figs. 7. The stonework was also
protected by wooden baulks cut to the shape of the tunnel, and used
tc take the pressure from the crossheads. The drawback motion of
the rams was effected by two small pistons, each having an effective
area of 0.8 square inch, the rods being attached to the crossheads
or shoes. The packing of the drawback pistons and piston rods was
of the ordinary- screw-down pattern, and was not altogether satisfac-


tory for the high pressure used, which frequently amounted to
tons per square inch. The construction of the supply-valve, Fig. 8,
was such that water was admitted to the drawback cylinders at the
same time that the ram was being forced out, but the drawback rods
only came into operation to return the rams when the pressure in the
ram cylinder was released.
Cement Grouting.—The exterior of the stonework and of the cast-
iron was covered with cement grout, forced in by the Greathead
method with compressed air. at pressures varying up to a maximum
of qolbs. per square inch. This compressed air was supplied by an
ordinary locomotive Westinghouse brake pump.
Electric Light.— The tunnel workings were lit by electricity, which
at one time was supplied by the Glass Bottle Works Company, whose
factory is situated near the shaft on the south side of Stoney Creek.
When the work was confined to the north end, however, the con-
tractors furmshed their own generators, a ioo-volt dynamo being
driven by a small Tangye engine.
Engines and Boilers, etc. On the north side 1 of the creek a semi-
portable Robey engine was used with a multitubular boiler. The
engine had two 6in. cylinders with a stroke of 12 inches. There was
also a steel Cornish multitubular boiler to furnish steam for the
pumps, steam winches, etc. This boiler worked to a pressure of
9°lbs- per square inch, and was fitted with a Blake feed-pump. The
winding, was performed by a steam winch with two sm. cylinders.
The main pump in the north shaft was a double-acting duplex Worth-
ington steam-pump placed about 16 feet above the bottom of the
pump. The stroke was 10 inches, the cylinders being 8 inches and
10 inches in diameter.
South Shaft.—At the south shaft, from which no work except
pumping was done during the term of the author’s-service, there was
a steel, externally-fired, multitubular boiler, sft. 6in. in diameter and
12 feet long. This supplied steam to a large Tangye pump of about
the same dimensions as the Worthington pump.
Ventilation.—During the progress of the work from the north shaft
the atmosphere frequently became oppressive below, and it was found
necessary to renforce it by introducing air from the surface, by a
fan driven by the small Tangye engine. The air was conveyed to the
face by light galvanised-iron pipes, 7m. in diameter, joined with tarred
canvas. The sand drift having been safely passed through, the con-
tractors resumed the bluestone block construction in good ground.
Rigidity in Cast-Iron Lining.—'Measurements were made of the
vertical, and horizontal diameters of the cast-iron lining at various
places in the tunnel, starting from the north end of the ironwork,
with the following results:
Number of rings Horizontal Vertical
of iron inserted. Diameter. Diame f er. Difference.
Ft. Ins. Ft. Ins. Inches.
2 10 5 10 3& If
10 10 5f 10 38 U
75 10 5| 10 31 If
115 10 5f 10 4“ 14
155 10 4f 10 44 f
197 10 4f 10 41 f
236 10 5 10 3f 18
Where the horizontal diameter is less than that shown in the Figs,
the difference is due to> a slight excess in the thickness of iron and
the smallness of the horizontal joints, which in some cases are less
than 4 inch. 1 he iron was coated with a mixture of hot Stockholm
tar and Archangel pitch, according to the Board of Works’ specifi-
cations, before the plates left the foundry.
Bluestone Blocks.—The basaltic stone blocks used were adopted
by the contractors, with the approval of the Board, in lieu of cement-
concrete blocks, at a slightly higher rate, on account of the greater
crushing strength of the stone, and because difficulties had occurred
with the crushing of the cement-concrete under the action of the
rams in other contracts of the Board of Works. The blocks were of
two sizes, ift. 2in. by 2ft. gin. The depth was 134 inches, the
joints being radial, and thirty stones made up a complete ring of
tunnel, the vertical joints being broken, Fig. 3. The stones were
rough-axed, and, when placed in position, formed a very substantial
work. In wet ground, however, it was extremely difficult to
make them water-tight. The lower blocks up to the springing of the
arch, were inserted by means of a derrick, and the arch by means of
a moveable centre, travelling on the rails of the truckway, and long
enough to take the 2ft. 4m. stones. The centre was raised or lowered
by turning nuts fitted to screws in the feet near the rail-levels, the
nuts being made with holes, into which capstan bars could be fitted.
Interior Lining of Iron Tunnel.—After a junction of the two tun-
nel-faces had been effected, the ironwork was filled into the internal
diameter of the sewer, Bft. 6in. The invert was first inserted,
inches of cement-concrete, and on the top inches of brickwork,
the 4in. pipes in the bottom being kept open except in the section
in which the work was being laid. The invert work was started at
the lower end of the iron, and proceeded in a northerly direction on
the up-gradient. Two small Worthington pumps. (6000 gallons per
hour each) were erected at the end of the lining and supplied with
steam from above. The last 4m. pipe .was plugged, and a section
of the iron lining dammed at each end, the water being pumped out.
Ihe water escaping from the 4m. pipes above this section was
pumped over the section by one of the pumps. In the section
pumped out the ironwork was then cleaned, and the concrete and
brickwork laid to true level by using screeds. After this section was
completed the next one was treated' similarly, the pipe in the first
section being re-opened and the water allowed to flow down the new
invert. The process was repeated throughout, until the whole of the
invert had been laid, and all the pipes re-opened. The sides were
then constructed by hanging profiles from 6in. by 2in. bearers sus-
pended by iron plates fastened to each end of the beam and secured
to the bolts of the cast-iron lining. The profiles were supported on
the invert at the bottom, and 3m. square lagging was secured to the
profiles, the concrete and brickwork being built up and the lagging
raised with them. The arch was built up with centres and
in the usual way, platforms being made for men to stand on as the
arch rose. The keying-up was performed by crown-lagging in the
ordinary way, and the centres were struck by knocking out wedges.
North Shaft.—The shaft at the north end was built with blue-
stone b-oeks left over from the tunnel. Where the tunnel joins the
shaft, however, the latter is built wholly of cement-concrete for con-
venience of making the junctions. The whole work was completed
to the satisfaction of the Board’s officers on June 28th, 1896, and, so
far as the author is aware, is the first successful example of sule
aqueous tunnelling in Australia.
Ihe alignment and levels of the tunnel were carried out under
the direction of Mr. Charles Lyell, 8.C.E., resident engineer to the
contractors, and his operations were characterised bv extreme sim-
plicity and an absence of those refinements in the smaller acces-
sories which have been deemed a necessity in some tunnelling ope-
rations. An ordinary sm. Troughton-Sims transit theodolite was
used throughout, except when the work was nearing completion,
when a 7m. instrument was obtained from the Board of Works and
the alignment checked therewith. The latter instrument was mounted
so that it could be moved bodily in azimuth on a sliding plate with-
out interfering with the legs, and, therefore, without appreciably
disturbing the level. This is an excellent arrangement for tunnelling
work, and saves much time. The centre-line of the tunnel was
ranged over the two end shafts, and screws were fixed to the timbers
with their slots in the direction of the alignment. Owing to the
timbering of the shafts interfering with the transference of the
centre-lines to the bottom, it was necessary to offset from the two
surface points about 4 inches, and from the new line plumb-lines
were dropped down the shaft into buckets of oil at the bottom. The
observer then set up the instrument about 60 feet ahead of the
shaft, and prolonged the line by plunging the telescope. The
telescope was then lifted out of its bearings and turned over on to
its horizontal axis, and the operation repeated. The mean of the
two observations was accepted as correct. Although, as has been
previously stated, in carrying on the work the tunnel was allowed to
get off the line, it was ultimately brought back, and 1 the two faces
met with precision, the error in alignment being less than 1 inch and
in level about f inch. On the completion of the syphon, the Board
of Works constructed an interior pipe of wrought-iron, 4 feet in
diameter, through it. The total cost of the completed works was
,£58,673. Tn conclusion, the cordial co-operation of the contractors,
Messrs. McCulloch and Duncan, and their cheerfulness and deter-
mination during a difficult operation, deserves to be recorded. The
author also desires to acknowledge the help received from all con-
cerned in the work, and especially that extended to him throughout
by his assistant, Mr. Charles Scott Rudall, 8.C.E., and by the con-
tractors’ engineer, Mr. Charles Lyell, B.C.E.


Hydraulic Shield Tunnelling in Melbourne.
Paper by George Henry Dunlop, Civil Engineer. Read before the Victorian Institute of Engineers.
(See Plates XCII. and XCIII.)
The writer has chosen Hydraulic Shield Tunnelling as the subject
for this paper because it is the most important of the methods of
tunnelling of which he has experimental knowledge; because the
subject has not yet been written upon in relation to Victorian Works,
and because it is a process by which extended and varied work has
been done here, and by which most important and valuable services
have been rendered. The Shield tunnelling carried out in Melbourne
is notable on account of the number of sewers of small diameter built
in this way, for the novel methods adopted for lining the tunnels,
and for the variety and extent of the soft ground to be passed
through.
The description and particulars given are taken mainly from Mel-
bourne Sewerage Works and from the writer’s own experience. The
source of the information is given in all other cases.
The importance and success, indeed, almost, it might be said, the
necessity, of this system for carrying out the tunnelling for the Mel-
bourne sewers, is manifest to everyone having knowledge of what
has been done. The extent of Melbourne Shield Work is indicated
by the following list, and it is safe to say that were the whole of the
sewerage works to- be carried out with present knowledge, this list
would be much longer: —-
Length of
- Dia of Sewer Length Length work
Contract, f..' Lining, Int. Ext'. of rings in done in
ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. in feet compressed
-j air in feet
Hobson’s Bay cast-iron 9 o 11 o 1 6 & ? g goo* 500
Main Sewer cast-iron 90110 29 633 very short Ith.
Sec 1.
Hobson’s Bay concrete blocks 8 6 11 o 1300 ~|
Main Sewer 8 9 11 3 1 6| 4900 }> nil.
Sec. 2. 9 9 n 6 3000 J
Hobson’s Bay concrete blocks 8 o 10 6 1 960 700
Main Sewer
Sec. 3.
Hobson’s Bay cast-iron 4 3 5 9 13 2070 1430
Main Sewer bluestone 4 3 5 i°J 1 6| 1290 nil.
Sec. 4.
Hobson’s Bay bluestone 4 3 5 10J 1 6£ 1327 nil.
Main Sewer cast-iron 4 3 5 9 19 1611 1436
Sec. 5. bluestone 4 3 5 10J
&5 8| 1 1200 probably nil.
South Yarra
Main Sec. 1. bluestone 69 90 1 6£ 1760 nil.
Richmond Main
Sec. 1. cast-iron 4 3 60 16 704 494
Melb. Main cast-iron 33 5 9 16 1440 450
Sec. 1. cast-iron 3 3 4 io£ 1 to 2 vrng. 3440 nil.
concrete blocks 3 3 5 9 1 6J 860 nil.
Melb. Main
Sec. ia. cast-iron 3 32 ? 247 247
North Yarra
Main Sec, 1. bluestone 8 6 24 496 |
cast-iron 8 6 16 387 j nil.
North Yarra
Main Sec. 4. cast-iron 7 9 9 9 20 5 2 80 nil.
North Yarra
Main Sec. 5. cast-iron
North Yarra
Main Sec. 6a+ wood 7 6 . 10 6 20 1270 nil.
69 99 20 1990
Total length ... ... ... 37,145
* Section under Yarra. About 560 ft, subaqueous. + Alternative tenders
called for wood and c.i. lining Tunnelling nearly completed.
The first introduction of the Shield in Victoria was for the purpose
of constructing the Hobson’s Bay Main Sewer with cast-iron lining,
under the Yarra at Spottiswoode, but the first shield tunnelling was
done with concrete block lining at Port Melbourne. Though diffi-
culties were met with, little experience was needed to 1 meet them,
and the use of the shield may be said to have been immediately suc-
cessful, for the troubles of the earlier works were certainly owing
to undue delay in adopting the use of air compressed to pressures
approximating to> those of the water in the soil to be tunnelled
through. Naturally with present experience more use would have
been made of it in earlier works. For in every case the use of the
Shield and a proper air pressure have practically removed the diffi-
culties due to water and running ground.
THE SHIELD.
The shield consists generally of an iron cylinder about four to five
times the length of the lining rings to be used with it. There is a
diaphragm, or bulkhead, fixed in it at some distance from about one
foot to half the length of the shield from the forward end, having
one or more openings in it fitted sometimes wfith drop or sliding
doors. Tn front of the bulkhead there may be horizontal and vertical
longitudinal partitions, forming compartments into' which the soil
is forced when the shield is shoved forward. Behind the bulkhead
around the shield are fitted hydraulic jacks, the piston heads abut-
ting on the end of the already constructed tunnel. By these
the shield is forced forward after the rings have been built within the
rear end of the shield.
Five types of shield are shown in outline in the following figures
1 to . 5-
Fig. i shows the type of shield used here in small sewers. It
was built of diameters from 4ft. nin. to 6 feet. It had one open-
ing in the bulkhead from 2ft. 6in. to 3ft. 6in. square, fitted with guides
for drop planks. Some designs were of the Greathead type, using
a combination of cast and wrought-iron; others were built entirely
of wrought-iron or steel of Jin. and fin. in thickness.
The Clark design of shield is shown in Fig. 2. Seven shields
from 10ft. 9m. to lift. 6in. in diameter were built. It was designed
to tunnel through bad ground without compressed air, and it worked
successfully, especially in silt.
A type of shield suitable for bad ground, but having the bulk-
head nearer to' the front is shown in Fig. 3. It is suitable for good
ground also.
Fig 4 shows a shield of medium size having the bulkhead towards
the middle of the length. It presents less, resistance at the face
when being pushed into the ground, and provides more room for
the workmen or for earth than No. 2.
The Mersey type of shield is shown in Fig. 5.
The shield with the bulkhead about one foot from the cutting edge,
especially the Greathead Shield, has been called in Great Britain
the Assisted Shield,* as it has been largely used there with a system
of advance timbering. In this practice the ground is excavated and
timbered for a short distance in front of the shield, the forward end
of the timbering' resting on props, the rear end resting on the front
end of the shield. The shield with compartments in front has been
called the Independent Shield.* It has usually had the 1 bulkhead fur-
ther from the cutting edge, and sometimes at the middle of the length
of the shield, with partitions in front of the diaphragm. The .object
of the partitions is to divide up the “face 1 ’ in order to facilitate ex-
cavation. and the compartments, provide room for the earth forced
in during the advance of the shield for a ring length, so that it is
not necessary to excavate in front of the cutting edge. The nomen-
clature, Assisted and Independent Shield, was not entirely accurate
for Melbourne procedure. Here the Ass’sted Shield was frequently-
used independently of advance timbering, and the Independent Shield
with it.
to the small shields of about 6ft. diameter there is neither space
nor necessity for compartments, and they are not used. And in order
to allow as much room as possible for the men within the shield, and
to keep the length as short as possible, the bulkhead is necesarily
put within about one foot of the cutting edge (Fig. 1).
The operation and suitable construction of the shield may be de-
scribed for hard ground, wet silt and sand.
In hard or firm ground, the bulkhead will be placed near the cutting
edge and the ground will be excavated for about an average distance
equal to a ring length ahead of the shield, the ground being taken
chieflv from the centre of the face. When the shield is. shoved: for-
ward. the cutting edge will break down a large amount of the ground
ready for shovelling. A large door in the bulkhead is advisable.
In work here in silt there has been no apparent advantage in
having the bulkhead far from the cutting edge, but in the larger
shields partitions in front are advisable, especially in soft silt, in order
to control the “ face.” The shield will be shoved into the ground
and the spoil shovelled as it squeezes up to or through the doors.
The silt has been pressed, sausage-like, two feet through the doors
of a shield with the bulkhead 4 feet from the front. Soft ground,
such as sandy clay with water, will squeeze similarly though not so
freely as soft silt.
The most difficult material to deal with is fine running sand, especi-
ally if there be hard material in the bottom through which the shield
cannot be forced. It is impossible to force the shield through sand
as through silt without undue pressure. The face must be excavated
back. Unless the pressure of the water is so great that compressed
air is necessary or at least distinctly advisable, it is not difficult to
excavate out as far as the front of the shield. There should then be
sufficient room in the compartments to hold the spoil for the shove
for a ring length. When working in this way, the ring length should
be short, not more than 18 inches. In the Graham-street shield tun-
nelling at Port Melbourne, the shield, Fig. 2, was Bft. long, 10ft. pin.
*Leitch Trans. Inst. C.E. CXXV. 377.


diameter, with the bulkhead in the middle of the length. 'There were
four compartments and plates tapering from the full diameter to the
edge, to about 6ft. diameter at the bulkhead, where there were four
openings, each about 2ft. square fitted with drop doors. Drop planks
fitting m channels beside the doors would be about as effectual as the
doors, and would permit a shield, and required more compression
than could be obtained except with larger and more convenient open-
ing. This type of shield was most effective in compressing the silt,
but the sand would not com]iress. The conical form of the front
compartments presented too much resistance to the silt. And al-
though the chambers 4 feet deep might be full of sand, at times the
water would rush through carrying slurry. Finally it became neces-
sary to employ air pressure to enable the chambers to be properly
cleared. The distance of the bulkhead from the front of the shield
was then found to be a source of considerable inconvenience when
excavating. The rings were ißin. long, and when shoving in the run-
ning sandy ground, and especially before compressed air was used,
extreme difficulty and great delay were continually experienced in
pushing the shield through the last few inches. Frequently the cham-
bers were cleared twice for each ring length, and sometimes it was
necessary to clear them to allow the shield to move the last one or
two inches. For a considerable distance here, there was a layer of
about 2ft. of cemented gravel in the bottom, with silt and sand above.
The horizontal front partition -was kept pressed into the face, and.
notwithstanding the running ground in the top of the excavation, the
men were able to go safely under the partition so as to pick down
the gravel in front of the cutting edge.
For use in cases where variable ground will be met with, every
shield large enough to allow subdivision of the front into compart-
ments, should t»e arranged so that partitions and doors can be bolted
in and removed at any time. Thus the Greathead type of shield used
for the Yarra tunnel at Spottiswoode was subdivided in front into
four .compartments in this manner, by the second contractor, and the
partitions were removed when the tunnel had been carried forward
some distance into firm clay. There was considerable inconvenience
in working with them; and they possibly were at no time entirely
necessary. They doubtless gave a feeling of security to the work-
men.
The position as to the type of shield may be summed up in this
way: The short front type of shield is most suitable in good ground.
Bad' ground should be made good by the use of compressed air. But
if the material is very soft, or sandy, or if sufficient air pressure can-
not he obtained, front partitions will assist in holding up the face.
But the front should be arranged to give as much working-room as
possible for the men. The horizontal partition in variable ground
is specially valuable.. Finally, in bad ground, where-air pressure
cannot be used, partitions should be used in the larger shields. In
this case the principal matter for consideration is the position of
the bulkhead. The writer favours putting it about a ring length from
the cutting edge in shields of medium size, such as 10ft. diameter,
and leaving the whole front clear of rams for the spoil forced in when
shoving into the ground (Fig. 3). In very large shields the Hudson
River type would be adopted (Fig. 4). The matter largely depends
on the siz-e of the shield, and consequent possible size of the com-
partments. Tf the compartments must be made so small as to . pre-
vent a man from working with reasonable ease, the bulkhead will be
placed forward so that the man can excavate standing behind it.
If the compartments are large enough for a man to work freely in
them, the bulkhead may be placed well back, say, 4ft. from the cut-
ting edge, so as to leave full room for the man to work in the com-
partment, and for this purpose at least sft. of height is necessary,
and 6ft. would be better. The larger s : ze of shields, such as that at
the Hudson's River tunnel, permit this. There has not been appar-
ently any case in Melbourne where the front large compartments
would have been necessary or advantageous if full air pressure had
been used.
A projecting circumferential hood and partitions were bolted in
front of a shield under the Stoney Creek. The effect of thus prolong-
ing the upper cutting edge by the hood was to allow the face to be
battered so that it would stand better, and to cut off any inrush
from the top by keeping this hood cutting edge always thrust into
the solid ground.
The Mersev tunnel shield (Fig. 5) has a curved bulkhead, 2ft. to
3ft. from the cutting edge, with small openings for access to the
face. These small openings caused the work of excavation to be
slow. Afterwards an enlarged opening was made in the curved bulk-
head. and a second bulkhead rising to mid-height was fitted behind
it. as shown by the dotted lines, with a movable trap-door closing
the top opening across to the front diaphram. This second bulk-
head was put in to check sudden rushes of sand and water. Here
the horizintal: partition in, front, together with a ready means of clos-
ing the top openings, effected the same purpose. The Mersey Shield
was roft. 3m. in diameter. If this were considered too l small to
have four front compartments, the horizontal partition could be
placed 6in. to qin. below the middle, and the upper vertical partition
alone used with it.
Tn the construction of the outer shell there are two practices.
Either it consists of two plates of equal thickness breaking joint, or
of one plate with cover plate joint. The second is undoubtedly the
better construction. The first would require the most accurate abut-
ting of the plates at the joint. The writer has examined a shield built
of two plates, and found in several places one plate broken and the
other not. This showed, as might be expected, that they did not act
in unison.
Projecting teeth for breaking down the ground in front of the cut-
ting edge have been proposed but not used here. ■ They have been
used in England successfully.
Two special types of shield, neither of which has been used in
Melbourne, may be briefly referred to. These may be called “ non-
circular ” and “ roof ” shields.
The use of the non-circular shields has been discussed both in
England and Victoria. It will not be difficult or unduly expensive to
secure strength and stiffness —at least, in small shields necessary for
oval sewers. The difficulty will be to prevent rolling. In discussion
at the Institution of Civil Engineers it has been contended that with
a non-circular shield there will not be the same facility for rolling
as there will be resistance both from the ground and the lining.
Their successful use, even, in good ground, would be very uncertain,
and only slight advantages would be gained.
The, roof shield consists of an overhead arch pushed forward by
hydraulic jacks. The shield rests at the sides on longitudinal timbers
or beams upon which it rolls or slides. It has been successfully used
in America and France.** The use for this class of shield must be
limited.
FITTINGS AND POWER.
No considerable improvement has been made, or appears neces-
sary. in the arrangement of rams and fittings of the Greathead Shield,
described and illustrated in connection with various tunnels.
Each ram should be fitted so that it can be thrust or withdrawn
independently of the others, and, as in the Greathead Shield, so that
the whole can be simultaneously withdrawn, when the stroke is com-
pleted, by the reversal of one valve. In the Greathead Shield—and
especially in the advance timbering system of working —manual
power is used to operate the hydraulic pumps fixed in the shield.
This system was found unequal to the requirements of Victorian
work, and the writer has not had experience with it. Here, with
some inconsiderable exceptions, the water for the hydraulic jacks, at
pressures up to two tons per square inch, has been conveyed 1 from
pumps at the surface through iin. and piping to the shield.
A telescope fitting with a stroke of about Bft. is attached at the
shield. Manual power might be used where very little power would
be required, or where the small amount of work to be done made it
desirable to reduce the cost of plant. But it seems fair to say gener-
ally, that the power pumps are preferable in all cases. Manual
pumps take up too much room in very' small shields, and they entail
hard labour on the workmen in the larger ones, and delay in all cases.
While the shield is being shoved forward, most of the men can be
otherwise engaged, as in preparing for building the ring and getting
the lining materials forward.
EXCAVATION.
Three processes are adopted in regard to the excavation—-advance
timbering, or the assisted shield method; clearing away a space in
front of the shield without timbering —at least, without any complete
system of timbering; and the independent shield system, in which
the shield is forced into the earth which is excavated within the
shield.
The only case in which advance timbering has been adopted here
as a regular system was at the Yarra tunnel at Spottiswoode, during
the earlier half of the work. There the shield, hand-pumps, and sys-
tem of working was substantially that used in the Glasgow tunnels,!
except that no heading was carried i : n advance, each 2ft. pin. ring-
length being taken out ahead of the cutting edge successfully. With
full air pressure equal approximately to the hydrostatic pressure,
this plan was practicable, but slow and costly. It was afterwards
amply demonstrated that with rßin. ring-lengths, and proper air pres-
sure, this complete system of timbering was not required. In the
system in practice at the Glasgow tunnel it is difficult to see the use
of a shield, and particularly the strong cutting edge. Here the ad-
vance timbering system has not been found necessary.
At the Yarra tunnel, in the second contract, the next system of ex-
cavation was practised. In front of the bulkhead they were bolted
in one vertical and one horizontal position, projecting about 2 feet.
All the ground above the horizontal position, converted by the full
air pressure to good standing, firm, sandy clay, was excavated away,
especially in the interior, sufficiently to allow the shield to be pushed
an ißin. ring-length. Timbering was not necessary, but light tem-
porary timbering sufficient to steady the face could have been used,
consisting of boards across the face with light temporary props against
the bulkhead. These props could be removed, or would be broken
as the shield was pushed forward. (This was done when necessary at
Graham-street, Port Melbourne.) Below the horizontal partition the
ground was coarse and fine sand. Above the level, where the air
and water pressure balanced, this stood well; below that level light
*Trans. Ins. C.E. CXXIII., 107.
**“ Engineering News,” January 9th and 16th, 1892; July 9th,
1896; June 24th, 1897.
t Engineering LXIT., 574. Trans. Tnst. C.E. CXXV., p. 383.


timbering was adopted to hold back the wet running sand around and
in front for the bottom two or three feet to enable the sand and the
rock boulders to be removed. The shorter ring-lengths greatly facili-
tated progress, though the longer rings would probably have been
quite safe, especially if the 2ft. 9m. advance were made in two stages.
Afterwards, in firm clay, when all partitions had been removed, the
ground was excavated far enough ahead of the cutting edge, but to a
smaller diameter, to allow the shield to be pushed forward for 2ft.
9in. ring. In this way from one-third to one-half of the clay would
be broken down for the shovellers.
The plan of forcing the shield forward and allowing the soft
material, especially silt, to squeeze through the door, was adopted in
several contracts. It may be said generally that it is a suitable
method only in silt.
Direction.
To ensure accuracy of line and level is difficult, especially in bad
ground. It should be most easy in the advance timbering method of
excavation, and, possibly, this is partly the cause and justification for
that system.
Simple but frequently repeated observations (depending, of course,
on the rate of progress) are necessary to determine the position of
the shield and its parallelism with the centre line. Accurate grade —
at least, on sewer work—is much more important and more difficult
of attainment. No rules can be given; it is simply a matter of care
and observation. In soft ground the shield must usually be kept
with a considerable rising grade to allow for the continuous settle-
ment that takes place. A large number of powerful rams materially
assist in keeping and in rectifying the course of the shield. There
should be a ram for every three to four feet of circumference of
shield, with 6in. to 7m. cylinders. The top ram mav well be omitted,
as less power is required there, and more head-room will be left,
especially, in very small shields, for working and erecting the kev
piece.
Two special matters only need be dealt with. The shield has a
tendency to roll. This is due to some peculiarity of the construction
and sometimes it may be due to the ground, Ro.ling may be pre-
vented and sometimes rectified by incompletely excavating the upper
portion of the face on the opposite side.
Rolling is stated by Greatheadf to be due simply to the combined
thrust of the hydraulic presses being not parallel to the axis of the
shield, and he has suggested that some of the jacks be fitted so that
their direction of thrust may be adjusted. Such an arrangement
would certainly be necessary if it were attempted to use a non-circular
shield.
In hard ground, it is difficult to turn the ordinary shield, for it cuts
out exactly its own space; and the material being incompressible, it
cannot be deflected in its course. In one case here it was necessary
to pick away the ground to an approximately oval shape larger than
the shield to allow it to turn either in a horizontal or vertical direc-
tion and to impose special resistance by strong struts from the face
to the bulkhead on the side towards which the shield was to be turned.
Adjustable steel cutters are provided for this purpose on the Great-
head Shield, but the method described, though troublesome, was used
here.
The Lining.
1 he lining used with the shield should be strong, impervious to
water, easy of erection, and require as little underground work as
possible while working the shield. The construction should be such
that the joints will not wash out with water, and the ring will not
readily yield to unequal pressures. The various systems used in Vic-
toria will now y be described.
Concrete Blocks.
1 he first lining used in Melbourne shield work consisted of con-
crete blocks set in cement. The following dimensions were adopted
tor an Bin. sewer at Port Melbourne. The rings were iß|in. long,
containing seventeen blocks rßin. long and twenty-two blocks of half
that length, equivalent, when set to eleven of the former. The lining
was 15m. thick, having i|fn. of outer rendering, and i2fin. of con-
crete in the block, and a final fin. rendering when in position.
The blocks were made in tapering moulds, with the sewer face of
each block underneath, and the i|in. rendering was applied while the
concrete was quite fresh.
The concrete block system of lining was fully tried, and it must be
admitted that it only partially realised the anticipation generally held
when it was first introduced. Its advantages were such as to make it
eminently suitable to our circumstances and worthy of trial. It was
cheap, and if it could be effectively constructed it would be most re-
liable and durable. But it had two radical inherent constructional
defects. As the shield was pushed forward, the joints, partially set,
were broken by the pressure used in shoving the shield/and by the
alteration of form of the ring of blocks in passing out of the shield
into the larger area of excavated ground. No means to sufficiently
overcome these defects have yet been brought forward. If they
could be overcome the merits of the svstem would be great, and its
extended success assured.
1 he remaining difficulties were remediable. The water washed out
the fresh joints, the block sometimes crushed under the heavy pres-
sures of the hydraulic jacks, and as the work uas practically com-
pleted as the shield advanced, any departures from the proper level
or direction could not be corrected without reducing the size of the
sewer. In most cases the use of sufficient air pressure would prevent
the joints washing out until set. The crushing of the blocks could
be prevented by a better distribution of the pressures, by increasing
the end areas of the blocks, and by increasing the strength of the
concrete if necessary. The head of the ram pressed against the
middle of a “pressing beam’’ resting against the ends of blocks.
The short toothings were brought up by 4!in. “ toothing blocks.” The
arrangement could be improved. Even with 12m. x 6in. pressing beams
there would necessarily be unequal pressures on the blocks. And
it was difficult to get the toothing blocks to accurately fit and give an
equal bearing for the pressing beam. Should they be too small, the
long toothing blocks might be crushed, while the short toothing blocks
might be unloaded. By diminishing the number of the blocks in the
ring, or increasing the number of hydraulic rams, there could be ar-
ranged a ram for every three blocks, and upon these the pressure
could be more equally distributed. The shield could be pushed for-
ward without exceeding a thrust of 36 tons by any one ram, and this
thrust could be distributed so that not more than 18 tons could be
imposed on any one block. This'pressure in working conditions of
blocks of suitable size would not be excessive for the 1 few repetitions to
which they would be subjected. Bluestone blocks were used in con-
junction with the concrete in order to prevent crushing.
The difficulties of securing correct alignment and level were mainly
due to the bad ground, and could be proportionally removed by the
use of compressed air.
Bluestone Blocks.
Bluestone blocks were suggested instead of concrete for the sewer
under Stoney Creek in order to get greater strength to resist the
thrust of the jacks. Their use presented no other gain, and could
not obviate the inherent defects of the system. Under the particular
circumstances regulating the respective prices of stone and concrete
blocks in late years, the bluestone would cost about one-half more
than the concrete blocks delivered at the shaft, and as the strength
would be very much greater, the bluestone is relatively cheaper. But
under past normal conditions in the stone trade, the bluestone rocks
would have cost from two to three times as much as concrete blocks,
and as a minimum stable thickness would be necessary, the strength
of the bluestone would be too dearly purchased.
One special case of successful work may be given. For part of
the length of a 4ft. 3m. sewer to be constructed of brickwork there
was about 301 feet of wet sand, with 3 feet to 4 feet of excellent clay
above the crown of the tunnel. In timbering this ground about 18
feet at least of the clay above the tunnel would necessarilv be broken
down and the remainder could not be held up as tightly as it would
be over the shield. The water would come through, disintegrate the
clay, and “ runs " of sand would follow. It was decided to abandon
the ordinary timber method in favour of shield tunnelling. Bluestone
block lining was selected. There were eighteen stones 18 inches
long and 9 inches thick in each ring set in 2 to. 1 cement mortar
with /\\ in. toothing. All the blocks were of the full length but the
nine lower blocks were larger, occupying 9-16th of the full circle.
After the sewer had progressed some distance the following method
of carrying out the work was adopted:—lnstead of building the ring
within the tail of the shield, only three or five of the invert stones of
a ring were built there, and the remainder of the ring, really the com-
pletion of the preceding ring, was built immediately behind the shield,
the clay standing up unsupported for the length and time necessary to
allow of this being done. In building in this way the space due to
the thickness of the shield and any other vacuities were filled with
sand packing. Thus, one of the already mentioned inherent defects
of the block system could be overcome. No spreading deformation
of the sewer took place, and excellent work was effected. Of course
the circumstances were unusual, but the method selected was certainly
a good one to meet them. In one or two places wet ground was
met with, and the building of the ring was done within the shield.
The defects of the system at once asserted themselves.
Cast-Iron Lining.
In the ordinary system of cast-iron lining the length of ring has
varied from 12 inches to 33 inches. The most suitable length will
be from. 18 inches to 24 inches. Long plates are not economical
with the same design of flanges, and lengthening of the ring simply
reduces the proportion of metal in the circumferential flanges, where
metal can be most suitably disposed to give strength to the lining.
The depth of the flange in inches is usually about 2 inches plus
one-third of the diameter of tunnel in feet; and the thickness of metal
about 1 inch for 6 feet diameter of tunnel and one-fortieth of an inch
for each extra foot of diameter. The circumferential length of the
plate should be as great as is practicable for manufacture and erec-
tion, but the key piece should be short, only 9m. to ißin. long. It
is well to avoid a. longitudinal joint in the bottom in wet ground, as
it is difficult, if there is much water present, to fit it well, and after-
wards to clean round it before concreting. Cast-iron plates have
usually been made of the same thickness throughout. It would be
better to increase the thickness of metal at the flange angles, as in
tTrans. Inst. C.E. CXXIII. 107.


the St. Clair tunnel lining,* or to use brackets from the flanges to
the plate, as in the Glasgow subway lining, t
The circumferential joints can be flat, with strips of tarred felt,
or better of soft wood, one-quarter of an inch thick. Tarred felt was
extensively used here. It is an excellent packing, except that it is
too thin with unplaned joints. These strips should fit closely, espe-
cially at the ends, to prevent leakage. A small space should be left
at the face to be caulked if required to stop leakage, and it generally
will be required. The longitudinal joints are more important. If, as
is usually done, these joints are made continuous along the tunnel,
the stiffness of the ring is dependent upon the rigidity of the longi-
tudinal joint. The best joint then will be a machined joint fittng
coated metal to metal, and tightly held together by strong bolts well
screwed up at about 6in. pitch, and with brackets between each pair
of bolts. These brackets will help to transmit any unequal pressure
or any tensile stress from the flange to the plate and prevent breaking
at the angle. If the joint be not machined it will be: made as first
described for circumferential joints. This was the practice in Mel-
bourne, and it is a good one, especially if soft wood packing is used.
Different designs of joints are shown in Figs. 6,7, 8, and 9.
In Fig. 6 a longitudinal'machined'joint, fitted metal to metal, is
shown, with a space for caulking with cement, or for a rust joint.
This is the best form.
Fig. 7 shows a good type of joint for general use and for both
flanges. A fin. soft wood packing is placed between the flanges.
This packing will tend to swell and so correct any slight inequalities
in the fitting of the cast-iron. It'will be better, but not entirely neces-
sary, to have the flanges, especially the longitudinal ones, machined.
There should be a space of about rin. deep left for caulking, so that
the lining may be made water-tight. This joint is stated to have been
made entirely water-tight in wet ground in London, using iron cement
for caulking.
Fig. 8 and 9 show types used more particularly for circumferential
joints. The joint shown in Fig. 9 has, however, been largely used
between the longitudinal flanges with soft wood packing, into which
hard-wood wedges are afterward driven in order to make it tight.
In the East River Gas tunnel, in New York, the practice of having
the longitudinal joint continuous was departed from, in order to ob-
tain a more rigid lining ring. The matter is discussed and some tests
given showing the comparative stiffness of the two systems. An rßft.
ring at the Hudson River tunnel flattened 3 inches when erected on
the ground. This result accords with local experience. At the gas
tunnel two rings of iro ft. 2 in. diameter, were bolted together, break-
ing joint, one ring being revolved two holes; when erected no flatten-
ing could be detected. With a measured strain of r6,0001b. applied
along the vertical diameter, it shortened fin. and the flanges of the
plates cracked. The advantages claimed for the system of breaking
joints are rigidity, the prevention of a tendency for the plates to warp
so that true joints cannot be made, and the retention of a more truly
circular form of ring.
T he rigidity and the truly circular shape of the ring are of great
importance, and the breaking of the joints should be a superior plan
in both respects, for in this way each plate becomes a cover plate over
the joints of the adjoining rings. If the rings are tightly and strongly
bolted together the lining must evidently be more rigid than when it
depends for stiffness entirely upon the longitudinal joints. The shield
and the iron lining are made circular and with from rin. to 2in. of
difference in diameter. In building the ring with the lower half of
the iron lining in contact with the shield, the ring has an initial depar-
ture from the circular shape, and defective bearing at the longitudinal
joints. If now it were attempted to attach another ring, with con-
siderable breaking of the joints, the rings would not fit accuratelv
and, unless the bolt holes were considerably larger than the bolts, theV
might not fit at all. Therefore it becomes necessary to build the
ring more accurately to the circular shape. The importance of the
bolting of the circumferential flanges is greater when the joints are
not continuous, and as the bolts do not fit the holes closely, their
efficiency depends upon the tightness of the screwing up.
There should be no special difficulty in arranging the rings to break
joint.
Where, as in Melbourne', the longitudinal joints are continuous
along the tunnel, the purpose of the bolts in the circumferential joints
is mainly to draw and hold the plates together in order t© ensure a
close joint in all cases. Tf the rings "be closed together by the
hydraulic ram pressure, as can readily be done, the bolts only require
sufficient strength to retain the plates in close contact. It is impos-
sible to estimate what forces there may be tending to separate the
rings, but it does not seem likely that they would increase more
rapidly than the diameter of the tunnel. If then a constant pitch
be adopted, it follows that the diameter of the bolt need not increase
with the diameter of the lining. There does not seem any necessity
or more than yin. to rin. bolts for any size of tunnel, and a man
using an ordinary spanner will not overstrain a fin. bolt. Unless then
a greater length of spanner is insisted upon, there is no advantage in
any case m increasing the size of the bolt, for its strength will not be
utilised. The pitch should be from 6 inches to 12 inches, and
bably 9 inches would be about right. For the longitudinal joints the
case is different, for the rigidity of the joint depends upon the depth
and fitting of the flange joint, and the tightness of the bolting. This
relates to the total strength of the bolting. The strength of each bolt
may be whatever the spanner used will utilise. The size may be fin.
for 6 feet diameter and gin. more per 4 feet of increase with 6in. to
Bin. pitch according to the class of the ground and strength of flange.
In a sft. 9 in. sewer lining in Melbourne the C.I. rings were 15
inches long with rin. metal and flanges projecting inches. They
were bolted together with fin. bolts at 6in. pitch. This lining col-
lapsed in two cases under exceptional circumstances, mainly through
the ground getting away underneath, and thus causing an undue strain
in the lining. In this case the iron and bolts both failed, but the
C.I. much more extensively than the bolts. It was clear that fewer
bolts would have sufficed to utilise the strength of the cast-iron plates.
There were no brackets.
In designing and constructing sewers, especially in pumping
schemes, it will be of importance to consider the extra cost to which
it is advisable to gO‘ in order to exclude leakage. The expenses due
to leakage will be extra cost of pumping, reduction of effective area
of sewer, and general charges.
Suppose one mile of sewer Bft. in diameter costs and ad-
mits 3000 cubic feet of water per hour. Estimating the cost of pump-
ing 1,000,000 cubic feet per day 1 foot high at a year, and tak-
ing the lift as r2o feet, the annual cost of pumping this leakage will be
£260, and at 4 per cent, interest this will represent a capital sum of
£6500, or about 10 per cent, on the cost of the sewer.
Again, assuming a velocity of 3 feet per second, the discharge of
the sewer will be about 540,000 cubic feet per hour, of which 3000
cubic feet will be leakage, being in this case i-i Both of the whole. And
this will apply to every succeeding mile of the sewer to the point of
discharge. If this length be 12 miles there is a sum equivalent to 7
per cent, of the cost of the sewer rendered non-effective.
There will be further charges for distribution and treatment.
In the case stated then it would probably be better to spend
£75,000 on a watertight sewer, if it were possible to get it,
than to spend ,£60,000 on the one which leaks. (Of course this
calculation is rough, and is made simply to show the importance of the
matter.) Now cast-iron and wood are the only linings used here,
which could certainly be made water-tight. The cost of a cast-iron
sewer in a shield’ tunnel is one-half more than that of a brick sewer
in an ordinary timbered tunnel, and the wood lined sewer about the
same as the brick sewer. The extra cost to exclude leakage would
not be considerable for iron or wood lined tunnels.
In the Melbourne sewers a thick concrete lining wa.s put in. In
some European and American tunnels for traffic it is omitted, or only
a thin lining is used to give a smooth surface over the flanges. The
life of the cast-iron appears to be considered as equal to that of the
brickwork or concrete. In the Melbourne sewers this would not be
so, and the cast-iron lining could not alone have been relied upon.
The writer’s opinion is that where the tunnel can be thoroughly
grouted -and examined at any time the iron lining may be relied on,
but it should be left exposed for examination as much as possible.
In other cases, such as sewers, it should be lined, and the lining
should be sufficiently strong to be complete in itself.
With cast-iron lining the concrete or other internal lining should
not be put in under compressed air, at least until the iron lining has
been made as watertight as possible, and tested by reducing the air
pressure. Otherwise leaks in the lining, which might be caulked, will
be covered up.
Erectors are used for putting the plates in place in large tunnels.
In the St. Clair tunnel the erector was attached to the shield and
moved forward with it. It was worked by hand power. In the Hud-
son River tunnel the erector was worked by hydraulic power, and
mounted on a traveller moving on rails at about mid-height of the
tunnel.
Two erectors were built in Melbourne. Each consisted of a truck,
upon which was fixed the erector, consisting of an arm raised and
extended by toothed gearing. The trucks were mounted on rails of
wide gauge, under which there was room for the earth trucks to pass.
The erector was cumbrous, and on the one occasion that the writer
saw it working, it appeared to be slow and clumsy. The second
erector was not used to any extent. These designs were not suitable,
and they appeared to have discouraged the use of erecting machinery.
The plates were erected generally by the men without such assistance.
The writer sketched the following arrangement for an rrin. shield
for erecting heavy plates, but it was never designed :—A square shaft
would project from the bulkhead, and upon this would slide a collar
around which the crane or erector arm would be fixed on a bearing.
The collar could be clamped to the shaft and the crane to the collar.
The shaft would be fixed to the bulkhead at about 4ft. 6in. from the
top. For the bottom plates can be thrown into place from the truck.
The plates will come in about 2 feet above invert, and the crane
would be pivoted mid-way between this level and the top of the
tunnel • and it would cause less inconvenience to the shovellers here.
The crane would consist of two arms, one having an adjustable coun-
*Engineering L 576. fEngineering EXIT 574 .


terwejght and the opposite one having a gearing for extending and
withdrawing the arm, with a suitable arrangement at the end for pick-
ing up the plates. The plate could be lifted by the man depressing the
counterweighted end of the erector, or, perhaps, by gearing. When the
plate was brought opposite to its proper position, the arm would be
fixed on the shaft, and the plate thrust into its place. When the
ring was fixed the crane would be pushed back along the shaft to the
bulkhead, where it would be less an obstruction while excavating.
Of course, hydraulic power could be used. When the weight or plate
exceeds 6 cwt. and the diameter of the lining exceeds 10 or 11 feet,
the erector would be advisable.
Wood Lining.
A patented system with wooden lining has been designed, and used
with the shield at work at North Yarra Main section, No. 6a, at North
Melbourne. As this system is comparatively unknown, a model and
a design for a small sewer are shown. (Figs. 10 and n.) This
design was prepared by the writer for the construction (for exhibition)
of two full size rings shown in the photograph (Fig. 12). The suit-
ability and safety of the system have now been determined by its
successful use over a length of more than half a mile of tunnel of
1 oft. in diameter.
The relative cost of 6ft. pin. sewer, given later, indicates the objec-
tion to cast-iron clearly. It is too costly. But in Melbourne work in
bad ground it has these great advantages over such systems of lining
as concrete and bluestone blocks —that the joints are not such as will
be affected by water, the lining can be caulded more readily, and,
above all, whatever deformations may take place in the outer lining,
the final internal concrete lining can be placed in position in a con-
tinuous mass, and without being exposed to subsequent disturbance.
Half the cost of the completed work is about the actual price paid
in Melbourne for the iron lining delivered at the shaft. The similar
actual cost of the wood lining would be about one-fifth of the total
completed cost of work. The cost of a finished concrete sewer with
wood lining would be about 70 per cent, of the cost with cast-iron
lining.
As shown in the drawing and model, the wood lining is built in
rings composed of sections. Each section consists of two rib seg-
ments spaced the ring length apart, and covered on the outer side
with boarding. Between the rib segments are placed thrust blocks,
Avhich will form continuous lines of struts to resist the pressure of the
rams of the shield. Each succeeding ring is built so that the joints of
its sections “ break " with those of the preceding ring. Thus the lin-
ing has, at ring-length intervals, ribs really composed of two layers
of wood secured together by bolts and breaking-joints, so that "the
whole will act as one piece. Of course, this result can only be secured
by spiking the ribs together, or by drawing them together with strong
bolts well screwed up. Probably the former would be the more efl£
cient, and the latter the more convenient method. What has been
written before about breaking joint in cast-iron lining applies here.
Some of the more evident peculiarities of this system may be
criticised. There will be an unusually large number of joints, but
the swelling of the wood will tend to prevent leakage through them.
But if it were necessary to use boarding such that the joints cannot
close up, the whole of the outer surface of the section may be covered
with water-proofing material, as thin sheet metal, even, overlapping
across the joints with the sheeting of adjoining sections. The con-
nection between the separate pieces of each section cannot be made
sufficiently strong to render it nearly as rigid as a cast-iron plate. But
the use- of- the thrust blocks will relieve-the sections from the pressure
of the rams, which is the principal cause requiring such rigidity.
Ihe more bulky timber will require a, larger shield and excavation.
Phis, however, will be compensated for by the lighter weight of sec-
tions in erection. It may be said that all the outer boarding is use-
less except for the purpose of transmitting the loading of the earth
to the rib segments, and that in cast-iron lining the whole metal is
available to resist the compressive loading of the ground. The pri-
mary purpose of the outer boarding is to transfer the earth loading
to the ribs, which resist the compression. But if the boarding be
closely fitted the swelling of the boards will cause them to act to a
considerable extent as an arch, and, in-any case, the subdivision of
duties enables the designer to concentrate the material for resisting
compression in stout and efficient sections. This cannot well be done
with the cast-iron plates. In an alternative design of this system iron
is used for the ribs. For the laggings to resist cross breaking timber
is, price considered, the strongest material.
It is of importance that each leading ring of rib pieces be accurately
retained in shape until the next ring has been securely attached to it.
When the shield is shoved forward the earth on top of the lining
will usually close down and press upon it before, or heavier than it
will at sides. To prevent deformation in the large excavated area
behind the shield it has been proposed to use a strong square “ sett ”
of timber temporarily. This sett will be removed when the ground
has closed around the lining.
Testing of Materials.
By Mr. C. E. Oliver. M. Inst., C.E., Etc.
Although most classes of materials used in building and construc-
tion works of various kinds have been repeatedly subjected to ela-
borate and exhaustive tests, and tables of tensile and compressive
strength have been published in great number, it was soon realised
that in view of the magnitude of the contemplated operations of the
Board, it was a matter of practical necessity to institute a systematic
series of tests on the various samples of materials locally obtainable,
in order that firm data might be secured with regard to the suitability
of the actual materials from which the Board would have to select
its supplies for the work in hand under existing conditions.
This was one of the first works undertaken by the Engineer of
Sewerage. The tests were concerned principally with the following-
materials : Cement (colonial and imported), stone, bricks, sand, stone-
ware pipes, and metals, principally wrought-iron, cast-iron, steel, and
gun-metal.
A long series of tensile crushings and other tests were made, the
results of which are tabulated below.
The cement testing plant obtained consisted of a Faiga machine,
which had done all the cement briquette testing on the Watts River
aqueduct, an Adie machine, and a 120 ton crushing machine.
The Faiga has been used mostly, but as this is a lever machine,
in which the strain is put on by means of a, spring balance, the Adie
machine was obtained, in order to test it at intervals, and standardise
the work. It was principally in order to arrive at results on masses
°f actual concrete and brickwork that the 120 ton testing machine
was built. This at first was worked by manual pumps, but later on
an accumulator was connected to it, which, by using Yan Yean or
Hydraulic Power Co.’s water, gave the means of increasing the pres-
sures in the ram itself tenfold, and so as to render it possible to get
a pressure of 7000 lbs. per square inch.
It may be interesting to- note that this machine was so designed as
to enable an old hydraulic ram from the Tay Bridge works to be used
as a means of supplying the power. On this machine the readings
are taken on gauges, which have been calibrated in the University
testing machine, designed for the purpose. With this machine com-
pression tests were made on cement and concrete blocks, and also on
bricks and brick blocks, all these blocks being 9111. cubes. With regard
to brick blocks, it was found within certain limits, that whilst most
of the machine-made bricks around Melbourne would stand 18 to 20
tons on end, and from 60 to 80 tons on the flat, it was almost im-
material which bricks were used in the cubes; but that in them the
mortar was the factor which governed their strength. Thus brick
blocks built with neat cement mortar gave over 120 tons on the pin.
x 9m. x 9m. cubes, and blocks made up with 1 to x mortar, 97 tons,
with 2 to 1 mortar, 80 tons, with 3 to 1 mortar, 65 tons, while pin. x
9m. x 9m. cubes of neat cement had a strength beyond the capacity
of the machine. The voussiors for building the tunnels gave on the
Hat 00 to 70 tons. From the results of the work on cement, an in-
teresting table has been compiled, giving the breaking strain of vari-
ous brands of cement up to years, their analyses, etc., which results
are also plotted in a diagramatic form. Before any stoneware pipes
were obtained, all the potteries were invited to send in samples of
pipes to be tested. On the results of these tests, which were all
carried out destructively, the pipe specification in use by the Board
was founded. Some of the pipes submitted have stood a test of 250
lbs. per square inch without breaking, and experiments could not be
carried further with the apparatus, the rubber facing used to connect
the pipes into place failing at this pressure, although it is not neces-
sary or practicable to subject all pipes supplied to- the extreme pres-
sures which were adopted in the first place, to discover the nature of
the articles. They are all before being received into stock passed
through a water test of 14 lbs. per square inch, in a special testing
machine, under a free head of water. This is not done with a view
of testing their strength, as a majority of pipes will stand up to 150
lbs. ; but with the object of searching them for flaws, leaks, pinholes,
and cracks. Tn addition to these tests in house connections, after
all pipes are laid and jointed, and before being covered up, are tested


Sand
Bluestone Toppings
Cement
Sand
Screenings
1
Age
in
Days
Tons per
square
foot
Average
Tons
Cement
1
Toppings
|
[ Screenings
Age
in
Days
Tons per
square
inch
Average
Tons
1
1
1
29
102
1
1
1
37
134
1
1
1
29
103
1021
1
1
1
37
139
1361
1
1
2
24
79
1
1
2
42
150
1
1
2
54
65
72
1
1
2
42
128
139
1
1
3
54
78
1
1
3
34
82
1
1
3
54
81
79 J
1
1
3
34
104
93
1
1
4
54
71
1
1
4
34
98
1
1
4
54
58
6ii
1
1
4
34
104
101
1
2
1
50
116
1
2
1
50
101
J
2
1
50
9 i
1031
1
2
1
50
) 09
105
1
2
2
50
86
1
2
2
36
107
1
2
2
50
81
85
1
2
2
36
104
1051
]
2
3
50
77
1
2
3
50
85
1
2
3
50
78
771
1
2
3
50
101
93
1
2
4
50
83
1
2
4
-48
110
1
O
4
50
81
82
1
2
4
48
104
107
1
2
5
50
80
1
2
5
48
89
1
2
5
50
66
73
1
o
5
48
99
94
1
3
1
45
47
1
3
1
48
108
1
3
1
45
38
421
1
3
1
48
118
113
1
3
2
45
47
1
3
2
48
83
1
3
2
45
48
471
1
3
2
48
101
92
1
3
3
45
41
1
3
3
36
54
1
3
3
45
38
391
1
3
3
36
57
551
1
3
4
45
36
1
3
4
48
56
1
3
4
45
37
36£
1
3
4
48
63
591
1
3
5
45
39
1
3
5
48
78
1
3
5
45
65
52
1
3
5
48
77
77i
1
3
6
45
44
1
3
6
48
37
1
3
6
45
46
45
1
3
6
48
37
37
1
4
4
42
34
1
4
4
36
38
1
4
4
42
16
40
1
4
4
36
37
371
1
5
5
40
28
1
5
5
36
~ 49
1
5
5
40
23
251
1
5
5
36
j;. 57
1
6
6
40
31
1
5
5
36
37
1
6
6
40
29
30
1
5
5
36
40
45f
1
7
7
40
18
1
6
6
36
27
1
7
7
40
23
201
1
6
6
36
26
26 h
in situ with a head of water, thus testing both pipes and jointing as
a whole.
Pans and traps tor water-closets are tested with a standard three-
gallon flush, and all cisterns are likewise tested with a standard pan,
the tests conforming as near as possible with the actual conditions of
use. A long series of tests was made with regard to traps and such
fittings on venting and syphonage. This was done in a four-story
building specially built for the purpose. In this building the junctions
of the pipes were made with glass tubes, in order that the effects of
various flushes, etc., might be under actual observation. The testing
of various vent cowls was also carried out at the same place. The
automatic flushing cisterns for flushing the dead ends of sewers were
tested on a full sized tank ,and it has been found possible, with a 9
in. flushing cistern, to discharge 1200 gallons per minute into a sewer.
A number of tests, principally tensile and cross breaking, have also
been made with the 120 ton machine on bars and beams of iron, cast
and wrought, steel, and various samples of gun-metal. These have
been in general, to assure the metal supply being up to the standard
required, and do not call for any special remark.
I he principle adopted in all this work, and it is one that has been
endeavoured to be followed out faithfully, is to leave nothing to
chance that could be tested. The personal equation has been elimi-
nated as far as possible, and instruments have been used in which the
inevitable errors have been reduced to a minimum.
PORTLAND CEMENT MORTAR
Composed of Bluestone Toppings, Screenings, and Sand in Various Preparations,
Comparing Sand and Bluestone Toppings.


Cement
Bluestone
Toppings
i
Bluestone
Screenings
i
1 Bluestone
Age
in
; Days
Tons per
square
foot
Average
Strength
Cement
1
Bluestone
Toppings
Bluestone
. w creenings
i
Bluestone
Age
in
Days
Tons per
square
inch
Average
Strength
1
42
183
1
1
2
3
50
85
1
32
178
1801
1
2
3
50
101
93
1
1
37
146
1
2
3
1
37
79
1
1
37
171
1581
1
2
3
i
37
106
921
1
2
37
142
1
1 L
3
2
37
110
1
2
37
140
141
1
2
3
o
37
102
106
]
3
37
118
1
2
4
48
110
1
3
37
86
102
1
2
4
48
104
107
1
1
42
146
1
2
4
1
36
77
1
1
42
138
1
2
4
l
36
67
72
1
1
31
200
1
2
5
48
89
J
1
31
190
1681
1
2
5
48
99
94
1
1
1
32
172
1
3
41
66
1
1
1
32
167
1
3
41
70
68
]
1
1
35
120
1
3
1
49
100
1
1
1
35
122
1451
1
3
1
49
87
1
1
2
34
107
1
3
1
29
83
1
1
o
34
115
1
3
1
29
86
89
1
1
2
32
174
1
3
2
39
100
1
l
9
32
188
146
1
3
2
39
79
1
1
3
32
166
1
3
2
28
73
1
1
3
32
170
1
3
2
28
112
92£
1
1
3
34
93
143
1
3
3
39
125
1
1
1
37
134
1
3
3
39
117
121
1
1
1
37
139
1361
1
3
1
39
110
1
1
1
1
34
111
1
3
4
39
99
104|
1
1
1
1
34
106
1081
1
3
1
48
108
1
]
1
2
34
104
1
3
1
48
118
113
1
1
1
2
34
104
104
1
3
1
1
39
171
1
1
1
3
34
64
1
3
1
1
39
170
1701
1
1
1
3
34
54
59
1
3
1
2
38
83
1
1
2
42
150
1
3
1
2
38
96
891
1
l
2
42
128
139
1
3
1
3
38
91
1
1
3
34
82
1
3
1
3
38
87
89
1
1
3
34
104
93
1
3
2
48
83
1
1
4
34
98
1
3
2
48
101
92
1
1
4
34
104
101
)
3
2
1
35
116
1
2
42
102
1
3
2
1
35
108
112
1
2
42
102
1
3
2
2
35
113
1
2
1
31
90
90
1
3
2
2
35
108
1101
L
2
2
29
136
1
3
2
3
35
55
1
2
2
29
136
136
1
3
2
3
35
80
671
1
2
3
29
1 W
1
3
3
35
54
1
2
3
29
112
1131
1
3
3
36
57
55^
i
2
1
50
101
1
3
3
1
35
79
1
2
1
50
109
105
1
3
3
1
35
82
801
1
• >
1
1
38
174
1
3
3
2
35
98
1
o
1
1
38
170
172
1
3
3
2
35
100
99
1
2
1
2
38
134
1
3
4
48
56
1
2
1
2
38
162
148
1
3
4
48
63
59|
1
2
2
36
107
1
3
4
1
35
116
1
2
2
36
104
1051
1
3
4
1
35
88
102
1
2
2
1
37
68
1
3
4
2
33
34
34
1
2
2
1
37
78
73
1
3
5
48
78
1
2
2
2
32
86
1
3
5
48
77
771
1
2
2
2
32
91
88i_|
1
3
6
48
37
1
2
2
3
30
78
1
3
6
48
37
37
1
2
2
3
30
107
1
4
41
59
1
2
2
3
36
109
1
4
41
65
62
1
2
2
3
36
102
99
1
4
1
28
58
1
5
42
40
1
4
1
28
61
591
1
5
42
40
40
1
4
2
28
78
1
5
1
27
45
1
4
2
28
80
79
1
5
1
27
45
45
1
4
3
28
71
1
5
2
27
51
]
4
3
28
78
7H
1
5
2
27
48
491
i
4
4
28
71
1
5
1
36
78
1
4
4
28
75
73
1
5
1
36
80
79
1
4
1
38
80
1
5
2
36
48
1
4
1
38
71
751,
1
5
2
36
54
51
1
4
1
1
38
136
1
5
3
36
47
1
4
1
1
38
120
128
1
5
3
36
48
47 £
1
4
1
o
38
85
1
5
4
36
52
1
4
1
2
38
61
73
1
5
4
36
45
48£
1
4
1
3
38
71
1
5
5
36
49
1
4
1
3
38
106
m
1
5
5
36
57
1
4
1
4
36
107
1
5
5
36
37
1
4
1
4
36
115
1
5
5
36
40
45f
1
4
1
4
36
93
1
5
6
36
36
1
4
1
4
36
105
105
1
5
6
36
38
37
1
4
2
47
92
1
6
39
34
1
4
2
47
65
781
1
6
,
39
36
35
1
4
3
47
46
1
6
6
36
27
1
4
3
47
58
52
1
6
6
36
26
261
1
4
4
36
38
1
7
39
18
1
't
4
36
37
371
1
7
39
16
17
1
4
5
47
62
1
8
39
18
1
4
5
47
60
61
[
8
39
18
18
1
4
6
47
45
1
9
38
18
1
4
6
47
48
461
1
9
38
18
18
|
1
10
38
24
-
-
—
1
10
38
25
2 4*
PORTLAND CEMENT, CONCRETES, AND MORTARS.—Relative Proportions and Strengths


C.JM onteath & Sons,
SANITARY ENGINEERS AND IMFOUNDEDS,
Market & Cecil Sts., South Melbourne.
-6H
Patentees of “ THE CHIEF ” Flushing Cistern,
MANUFACTURERS OF
Flushing- Cisterns, Pipes & Connections, Traps, &c.
C.I. BATHS, COLUMNS, MARBLE FITTINGS, &c.
A
«
NOI
LESS'
NOTi
\
Pet
p
R
'///.
g?
m
This Cistern
Is Certain in Action.
It Flushes with the pull down, whether held or let go.
It is Simple in Construction, and not liable to get out of order.
It gives an Efficient Flush, leaving the pan perfectly clean.
The Flushing Pipe is wrought iron, and straight, requiring no
offset.
And can be Connected with Lead or Sheet Iron Flush Pipes.
4* 4* 4*
OUR SPECIALITY :
Sanitary Fittings, Pipes, and Special Castings,
GLASS LINED.
i«r- OAST IRON WATER PIPES, all sizes from 3 in. upwards.
GLASS LINED Pipe and other Castings.
TELEPHONE No. 498.


Plate VIII.— Pipe Yard at Spottiswoode Station, showing Store Shed and Nine-inch Stoneware Pipes. At right of Plate is Tank for Tester, giving supply of pressure water for Testing Machine, with a constant
head of thirty feet at bottom of Tank for Testing Pipes. This Tank Stand was constructed of Three-inch Cast Iron Pipes, three of which are utilised: one to supply water through fall taps in
Tank, one to supply pressure from Tank to Testing Machine, and a third for overflow water.


{Telephone 677.
JOHNS &WAYGfIOD Limited
Hydraulic & General Engineers,
BRHSSFOUNDERS, &c.
MANUFACTURERS
Hydraulic Machinery,
Passenger & Goods Elevators,
Hoists, Travelling Cranes,
Fodder, Wool Baling and
Dumping Presses.
Stamper Batteries.
Compound Girders. Rivetted Girders. Columns and Stanchions.
Roofs, Bridges, Fire Escape Stairs, Collapsible Gates, &c.
The Turpin Patent Sledge Scoop, Containing Water.
♦
SOLE AGENTS FOR
Archd. Smith & Stevens’ Electric Elevators.
CARNEGIE STEEL Co’ s Structural Material,
Beams, Channels, Angles, Tees, Plates, &c.
NOTE ADDRESS—
Sturt Street, (Princes Bridge), SOUTH MELBOURNE.


The iUorkiiivj [))en*s College*
The Technical College & School of Mines for the Metropolitan District.
-1
The Working Men's College, Main Building.
Day (Bourses:
LOWER TECHNICAL SCHOOL.
English, Mathematics, Science, Drawing, Geometric Development,
Shopwork, &c., &c.
Preparation for the Higher Technical Day Courses ; also a
thorough training for Boys before entering on Industrial Pursuits
of Town or Country.
FEE, £3 ss. per Term.
HIGHER TECHNICAL SCHOOL.
Full Day Courses from £4 per Term.
Prepare Students Higher Positions in Industrial Life ; Foreman,
Managers, Experts.
1. Mechanical Engineering
2. Electrical Engineering
3. Marine Engineering
4. Sanitary Engineering
5. Mining Engineering
00 03
6. Municipal Engineering
7. Building and Contracting
. M etallurgy
. Applied Chemistry
10. Sheep and Wool
Evening Courses and Classes
Courses of Study for Experts’ Certificates.
A. Carpenter and Joiner
B. Fitter and Machinist
Ba. Marine Engineer
C. Cabinet Maker and Carriage Builder
D. Plumber and Gasfitter
E. Decorator
F. Modeller and Terra Cotta Worker
G. Lithographic Artists, &c.
H. Photographers
I. Electrician
J. Assay er
K. Metallurgist
Ja Geologist
M. Municipal Engineer
-N. Commercial
Complete Courses for Architects and Builders.
Architectural Perspective, Architecture, Building, Construction, Plane and Solid Geometry.
SCHOOL OF PHOTOGRAPHY » —Retouching, Collotype, Photo-litho., latest processes, three color work, A r c.
Single Subjects may be taken on almost every subject—Commercial, Mathematics, Engineering, Mining, Metallurgy,
Architecture, Chemistry, Photography, Art and Applied Art, Household Economy, Trade Classes.
FEES from ss. Reductions to Juniors.
PRELIMINARY COURSES for TRADE CLASSES. Fee, Bs. per Term. Two Evenings a Week.
The Working Men’s College,
LATROBE STREET, MELBOURNE.




MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS.
CITY OF PRAHRAN
DETAIL PLAN NO 954
Scale 40 Fee t- Ilnch


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS
DRAWINGS OF TYPE
HOUSE CONNECTIONS
Plate XI.


urn HIIHRNF anti METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS
DRAWINGS of TYPE
house connections
Plate XII.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD ofWORKS
DRAWINGS OF TYPE
HOUSE CONNECTIONS
Plate XIII.


Plate XIV.


MELBOURNE AND METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS.
DIAGRAMS FOR CALCULATION OF OVAL SEWERS (NEW FORM).
A. When Running Full.
B. When Running Two-Thirds Full.
Plate XVI.


MELBOURNE AND METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS.
DIAGRAMS FOR SEWER CALCULATIONS.
CIRCULAR SEWER FROM 3 IN -TO 36'»- DIAMETER.
CIRCULAR SEWER FROM 2” TO 14 n - DIAMETER
Plate XV.


Telephone 22, Footscray.
C. EBELINO,
Engineer, Boiler Maker & General Blacksmith,
78 & 80 Stephen St., Yarraville,
Coach, Lorry, and Waggon Builder.
Builders’
and
Contractors’
Ironwork
a
Speciality.
m
©
v®
L
m
f /
iiiiill
■Maia
Estimates
Given
in every
Branch
of the
Trade.
Contractor to the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works
for manufacture of
Penstocks, Cast Iron Pipes, Manhole Covers and
Frames„ Wrought Iron Ladders, Dirt Boxes, &c., &c.
Street Watering Waggons, Road and Asphalt Rollers, Water Troughs aud Fluming,
Fancy Iron Work, Lamp Brackets.


Australian General Electric Co.,
—Electrical Engineers and Contractors,^
SOLE REPRESENTATIVES FOR
GENERAL ELECTRIC Co., U.S.A.
“Eiiison" anfl “liitilan”
Incandescent Lamps.
ARC LAMPS
M
Tramway,
Power,
Mining,
And
Lighting
Apparatus.
Hold annual incandescent lamp contracts with Melbourne, Launceston, Sydney & N.S.W. Government Railways.
LARGE STOCK OF ELECTRICAL APPARATUS ON HAND.
Address—Equitable Building, MELBOURNE & SYDNEY,
TELEPHONE 40 BRUNSWICK.
rXZXKey*
ALFEED ROBSHAW,
VICTORIAN COKE WORKS, 150 BARKLY ST., BRUNSWICK.
Contractors to the Victorian
Railways for Foundry Coke
and Suppliers to the Con-
tractors for Castings to the
Metropolitan Board of
Works.
v
mmJ
mmw
fT
All Communications by Post or
Otherwise
PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO
Prices Lowest,
Current Rates.
Maker of Prepared Coke for Foundry and Smelting Purposes Generally.
Takes this opportunity to thank many customers for their regular support, and also to remind others that they can obtain from me a
First-Class Coke in good condition, and a regular supply direct from the Coke Ovens.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
C. When Running One-Third Full.
Plate XVI.


Colonial ©il Company
IMPORTERS OF
Petroleum Products
Finest American Lamp Oils.
White Rose and Snowflake.
Royal Daylight
KEROSENE,
FOR USE IN OIL ENGINES.
MOTOR SPIRIT,
STOVE NAPHTHA,
BENZINE,
GASOLENE,
TURPENTINE.
SOLE IMPORTERS ;
Colonial Oil Company.
HEAD OFFICE FOR AUSTRALASIA:
Equitable Building, Collins Street, MELBOURNE.
Pratt’s
Write for Price-List of OIL HEATERS and OIL COOKING STOVES.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS
.HOBSON'S BAY MAIN - fiF.MFRAI DRAWING OF MANHOLES ADD VEKTiIATORS - -
DRAWING N'
Plate XVII.


MELBOURNE m METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS.
f.FNFBAI nRAWINr.nrTypFMANHDIES ft VENTIUTrnRSrnB PIPFSewFABRANCHCS- y l2"l5'&l&"DIAf
DRAWING r
Plate XVIII.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS.
GENERAL DRAWING for VENTILATORS
Plate XIX.


Theodolites & Levels.
Staves, Poles, Tripods and
GENERAL SURVEYING ACCESSORIES.
SEWARD & DAVIS,
Opticians,
457 Bourke St. (Near Queen St.,)
And at 325 Little Collins St.,
MELBOURNE.
Large stock of Secondhand Instruments. Instruments Overhauled and Repaired, Bought Sold and Exchanged.
EYESIGHT TESTED. SPECTACLES FITTED. PRISMATIC BINOCULAR FIELD GLASSES.
Wm. Train & Q&.
Manufacturers & Importers
Marble and Wood Mantlepieces of the Newest Designs.
grates, Ziles, Shoves, Sir?J(s, <sc.
Marble, Slate, and Stonework of All Descriptions.
Marble and Slate Sanitary Work a Specialityo
Office, Works, and Showrooms:
Sturt St., Princes Bridge, Melbourne.
TELEPHONE 1087. /
Lanyon & Bryant,
Sanitary » Engineers,
Coppersmiths & Electricians,
BLOCK PLACE, OFF LITTLE COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
HAVE carried out, under the supervision of < the Metropolitan Board of Works, sewerage work in connection with some of the
principal houses in the city, such as the Melbourne Club, Australian Club, Ceorge and George Limited, the Block in Collins
and Elizabeth Streets, Lady Janet Clarke’s Town House, “Cliveden,” and other important buildings in the city.
Estimates Given for Sanitary, General Plumbing and Coppersmith’s Work.
First-class Workmen Employed, and all work Guaranteed.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate XX.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD 8f WORKS.
general drawing of flushing manholes on pipe sewers -
Plate XXI.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS
GENERAL DRAWING OF DETAILS TO CIRCULAR MANHOLES FOR MAIN SEWERS
Plate XXII.


MELBOURNE ami METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS
ffiASJ JKfff mmr CfIVFR rn ny;Fn,
Plate XXIII.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS.
GENERAL DRAWING OF MAHHOLES WITH DETAILS Tfl PIPE SEWERS
Plate XXIV.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD or WORKS,
PIPE SEWERS
G MRALJ)iMWING OF COVEkS TO SQUARE MANHOLES VENTILATORS & INSPECTION SHAFTS
Plate XXV.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
SENERAL DETAILS FOR VENTILATORS
Plate XXVI.


Plate XXVIII. —Nine inch reticulation pipes at Pori Melbourne, showing how the trenches in this sandy soil had to-be timbered. Four inch
junctions left for house connections are also shown.


Plate XXIX.- Shaft at corner Pickells and Graham Streets, Port Melbourne, showing method of square timbering adopted and runners for cages.


Plate XXX. —Hobson’s Bay Main Sewer, Section No. 3, showing centreing for brickwork and timbering of excavation.


Plate XXXI. — Under Port Melbourne Railway, Hobson’s Bay Main sewer, Section NO.3 This view was taken in compressed air, and
shows shield doors in background with men placing extra hydraulic power in position. This view also shows the method
of constructing with concrete blocks and iron centreing on which to build the upper portion of the sewer.


Plate XXXII,-Section No. 2, Hobson’s Bay Main Sewer. View looking down a shaft showing the method of Timbering adopted, The dry brick lining is well shown. The square timbering at bottom is the space
left through which to lower shields. This view is an interesting specimen of the photographers art, and was taken by Mr. Calaer by E. Oliver.


Plate XXXIII. —Clarke Shield, six used Section 2, Hobson’s Bay Main Sewer, shows Back or Building Portion, the Eight Six-inch Rams, their Copper Pipe Connections and Valves, and Telescopic Pipe
Connections with Hydraulic Pipes. The doors are shut.


Vacuum Oil Company
' - • *■ ' ; f ' £ f
Proprietary Limited.
Sole Marketers for Vacuum Oil Co.
MANUFACTURERS OF
HIGH GRADE PETROLEUM LUBRICANTS
Refineries : Olean and Rochester, New York, U.S.A.
CYLINDER OILS a Speciality.
As Supplied for Lubrication of Valves and Cylinders of
Metropolitan Board of Works Pumping Plant, Spottiswoode.
Melbourne: 31 Queen Street.
SYDNEY: 289 Pitt Street. ( FREMANTLE: 37 Packenham Street.
BRISBANE : 150=152 Charlotte Street. i WELLINGTBN : 3 Willis Street.
PORT ADELAIDE: St. Vincent Street. 5 W W W
Charters Towers, Gympie, Broken Hill, Auckland, Dunedin, Christchurch, Invercargill, Hobart, Launceston,
Kalgoorlie and Coolgardie.
CABLE ADDRESS: “ VACUUM,” MELBOURNE.
E. W. LYCETT, Managing Director.
Vacuum Oil Company Proprietary Limited.


MEPHAN FERGUSON,
Engineer, Boilermaker, Blacksmith, &c„
CITY OFFICE: 475 Collins Street, Melbourne.
m
Head Office & Works: FOOTSORAY, VICTORIA.
Also at Perth, Western Australia: Wanganui, N Z : &at 141 Fen:hurch'Street, London, EC
W
LOCK BAR PIPE.
Patent Carbonic Anhydride
Refrigerating and Ice-Making Machinery.
Manufacturer of Ferguson’s Patent Locking Bar or Rivetless Pipes, Patent Spiral Riveted Steel
Pipes, Wrought and Cast Iron Pipes, Wrought Iron Fluming and Tanks, Castings, Forgings,
Rabbit Exterminators, Patent Nelyambo Scoops, Bolts, Nuts, Washers, Screws, Dog Spikes, and
every description of Cast or Wrought Iron Work.
It:,®
A—"'ll
SSI


Plate XXXI V,— Clarke Shield for driving in uncertain ground in course of transit to scene of operations. This gives a slight idea of the weight of a shield.


Plate XXXV. —Shield in use in No. I Section Hobson’s Bay Main Sewer, being driven forward by Manual Power Pumps. Cast-iron lining in position. This view shows how
shields usually turn on centre. &


H. METCHER,
Importer of Paperhangings, Lead, Oils, Colors, Glass, Varnishes
AND
PICTURE MOULDINGS.
PICTURES FRAMED AT LOWEST RATES. WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
COOLS FORWARDED TO ANY PART OF THE STATES.
Note Address : 167 & 169 CHAPEL ST., PRAHRAN (3 doors from High St.) Telephone 156 Windsor.
E. JEHLIGKA,
sf-gg-M 1/Z>
Cabinetmaker & Joiner. = Shop & Office Fitter.
Contractor to the Melbourne & Metropolitan Board of Works, &c.
4 Highbury Grove, East Prahran.
PULLAN and CO-,
Engineers, Iron & Brassfounders,
QUEEN’S PARADE, NORTH FITZROY.
MANUFACTURERS OF ENGINES, BOILERS, PUMPS, HOISTS,
AND GENERAL MACHINERY.
REPAIRS OF ALL KINDS EXECUTED. TELEPHONE No. 859.
, . c
Telephone No. 11, Footscray Exchange.
HOLDEN and LEWIS,
GENERAL IRON & BRASS FOUNDERS,
Albion Foundry:
Stephen St., Yarraville, Melbourne.
Contractors to the Victorian Government and Melbourne and Metropolitan
Board of Works.
CHILIAN MILLS and STONE CRUSHER CASTINGS
A SPECIALITY „
Estimates Given for Contractors’ and Builders’ Castings.


AUSTRALIAN
Gas Retort & Fire Brick
MANUFACTURING COMPANY,
SOUTH YARRA.
AWARDED FIRST ORDER OF MERIT, Melbourne Centennial Exhibition, 1888.
We have supplied the following
Factories and Works requiring the
BEST CLASS
of this material, viz :
Tramway Company.
Metropolitan Gas Co.
Iron and Steel Works.
Foundries.
Rolling Mills.
Glass Works.
Sugar Works.
Pirities Works.
Broken Hill Smelters.
Mt. Lyell Smelters.
m
m
■- I
,S. , « 1 IiUPUrt ■* 5 l’
sift.'
t<?Wr- rCc v t
:
■
: :W
I."
is
If
m
AUSTRALIAN
CAS RETORT
a, fire brick
MANUFACTORY t
m
I 8 0
’
■MCI
u
m
mm 1
BAKERS’
LUMPS
in all shapes
and sizes.
A
GAS RETORTS.
OVEN TILES.
BOILER LUMPS.
STOVE BRICKS.
GRATE BACKS.
DAMPERS.
MUFFLES.
THE WORKS


Plate XXXVI .—Junction of cast iron lining and brickwork. No. I Section, Hobson’s Bay Main Sewer.


Plate XXXVI I.—Spottiswoode Disaster. Air lock under River Yarra, showing the men who formed the rescue party, after the disaster.
This view shows back of lock in finished tunnel. This air lock consisted of two brick walls, four feet six inches thick,
with cast-iron rectangular tubes, with doors attached built twelve feet apart, and the space between filled up with
to form a chamber six feet by six feet


Plate XXXVI II. — Spottiswoode Disaster. Air lock used by the contractor after the accident, and placed behind the original air lock. This
consisted of an old boiler five feet in diameter, with doors at each end. The front end of boiler was heavily flanged
and built into a four foot six inch wall of brickwork.


Plate XXXIX. South Yarra Sewer; showing iron tube across the River Yarra in which to build the sewer. Timber deck shown on further bank
of the river. This is where the accident by foul air occurred.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS
GENERAL PLAN & DETAILS OF PENSTOCKS TO OVAL SEWERS.
Penstock for S’.4* x 5. O' Oval Sewer
Pilate XL.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate Xl_l.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS.
Plate XLil.


T
t • §
to 29 BEDFORD STREET, Near haymarket,
NORTH MELBOURNE.
x
X
I.PITT&C9
a
f 'D
i'i XJf ( X'U si U r D r J ( Jsi^
nvr)r^>j>.iX;<ouc)ffj;i^JFlP£:j^V7iL»ia
m m
Jiw
! k : III! >
#
M
Sfe-
X
K
Fire and Burglar Proof Safes
And Strong Room Doors.
Makers to the Victorian Government and
the Principal Banks of Melbourne.
n
Our Safes are Acknowledged to be Equa l
to the Best English Makes.
T. PITT & Co., 23 to 29 Bedford Street,
Near Haymarket,


WATER METERS
HIGH PRESSURE WORK
COINTRACTORS TO s— OUR SPECIALTIES.
Melb. & Metro. Brd. Works Melb., Water & Sewerage Board Sydney.
SANITARY WARE
T
mmm
/ 1 / J ' / i j
I' r i
JOHN DANKS & SON Prop. Ltd., BOURKE ST., MELBOURNE
Look for our other Ad.
324=330 PITT ST., SYDNEY
It will Interest You.
Australian Metal So. Ltd.,
MELBOURNE,
SURRLY
Electric Power and Lighting Equipments
Brown. Boveri & Co. Ltd.
Steam Turbines. * * Electric Pumping Plants.
MINING & POWER MACHINERY.
Permanent and Portable Tramways == = Rails, Trucks, Locomotives.
The Whitecross Wire Ropes. Mining & Tool Steel. Wrought Iron Tubes.
FOR PARTICULARS A PRICES APPLY
Australian Metal So. Ltd.,
113 WILLIAM STREET, MELBOURNE.


Plate XL III. —Iron tube crossing River Yarra near the Gasworks, showing the tube placed in position for lowering, just before the break
took place.


Plate XLIV. —Tube under River Yarra placed imposition after breakage; showing where the fracture was made good and invert of
concrete in place.


Plate XLV.-No. 6 Section, North Yarra Main Sewer, showing timbering in excavation in rock and brick lining in background.


Plate LX VI. —Illustrating paper on Hydraulic Shield Tunnelling, No. i Section, North Yarra Main Sewer.


Plate XL VI I .—Another view of Dunlop’s wooden lining as used in Section No. 6, North Yarra Main Sewer.


Plate XLVI II. —Shield in No. 6 Section, North Yarra Main Sewer, showing Dunlop’s wooden lining, This view shows the ribs well,
with bins between, which are used for distributing the pressure when forcing the shield ahead. These are subsequently
removed before lining.


Plate XLIX. —Another view of Dunlop’s wooden lining, showing concrete lining in position; North Yarra Main Sewer.


Plate L.— Section No. 5, North Yarra Main Sewer. View of cast iron shell before concrete lining was placed in position.


Plate LI. —Type of Shield used for driving in Section No. 5, North Yarra Main Sewer.


Siemens-Willans’ Direct Coupled Electric Generating Sets, 80 K.W. each. Installed at Yarraville for Electric Lighting and Power.
Siemens’ 50 B.H.P. Electric Motor, driving extensive Mill Plant.
Plate LII.
Switchboard for Electric Lighting and Power Plant.


Siemens Bros. & Go. Ltd.,
Electrical Engineers and Contractors.
SIEMENS Continuous, Alternating, and Rotary Current Plants for
Transmission of Power, Mine Working, Hauling, Winding,
Pumping, Ventilating, Rock Drilling, Lighting, &c.
TELPHER SYSTEM OF OVERHEAD CARRIAGE.
MANUFACTURERS OF CABLES AND WIRES
For Telegraph, Telephone and Electric Light Work, Wet and Dry Batteries, Instruments, Arc and
Incandescent Lamps, &c., &c., &c.
India-Rubber, Gutta-Percha, Paper Insulated, Lead Cased and other Cables and Wires for Telegraphs, Telephones and Electric Light and
Power, Materials for Land Telegraph and Telephone Lines, Iron Telegraph Poles, Insulators, Instruments, Batteries,
Electric Mine Exploders, Submarine Mines, Torpedo Apparatus, Dynamos, Alternators, Motors, Lamps,
Carbons, Electro-Depositing Apparatus, Railway Signalling and Block Apparatus,
and Telegraph and Electrical Apparatus of Every Description.
Contractors for
Power by Electricity,
Submarine Cables, Land Telegraphs, Electric Light and Power on Land
and on Board Ship, Electric Tramways and Railways, the Transmission of
Central Stations, &c., &c.
Contractors to
The Admiralty.
The War Office.
The Post Office.
The Office of Works.
The Crown Agents for the Colonies,
- &c. , - &.C.
Head Offices:
I i 2 QUEEN ANNE'S GATE, WESTMINSTER, S.W.
LONDON
1 YORK MANSION, YORK ST., WESTMINSTER, S.W.
Branch Offices:
NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE— 39 COLLINGWOOD BUILDINGS, COLLINGWOOD STREET.
GLASGOW— IQS HOPE STREET.
SYDNEY, N.S. W. — 16 O’CONNELL STREET.
MELBOURNE - - - - 29 WILLIAM STREET.
Works :
WOOLWICH AND STAFFORD, ENGLAND.


Tel, 2802,
A. G. WAY,
Blacksmith, Sheet Iron Worker & Coppersmith.
MANUFACTURER OF
Washing Coppers and Frames, ) Garden and Fire Hose, Reels and Racks,
Portable iron Fireplaces, ( One-Fire Cooking Stoves for town or country,
Garden Seats, Barrows, | All kinds of Builders’ & Contractors’ Ironwork,
And Every Description of Iron and Copper Work to Order.
217 FRANKLIN STREET, MELBOURNE.
The BEST is the CHEAPEST.
Why not have the BEST ?
IN the case of Elevators, the
Electric System is Best,
both from the standpoint of
and efficiency, though rather
dearer in first cost.
Most modern ideas are dearer than
the antiquated systems they replace.
Write for Particulars
Re comparative costs of working
Elevators by Electricity as \
against Hydraulic,
S
*
WE SUPPLY
And ERECT
In any part of Australia—
Dynamos,
Power Motors,
Storage Batteries,
Telephones,
Fire Alarms,
Electric Hoists and
Elevators,
&c., &c.
Every description of Electrical Sundries
and Appliances in stock.
Estimates Free. Correspondence Invited.
We guarantee the maintenance of our
Electric Elevators to be 70 per cent,
cheaper than Hydraulic.
Compare the working cost of the
Electric Motor as against the Gas
Engine.
ELECTRIC ELEVATOR, SHOWING POSITION IN BASEMENT.
EDMISTON and O’NEILL,
Electrical Engineers & Contractors,
464 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
G.P.O. Box 317.
Telephone 3682.
If you want to BUY SAWS, or if you require any information in
regard to the working of them,
WRITE US!
We have been Importing and Manufacturing Saws for nearly FORTY YEARS.
A Good Supply of
HENRY DISSTON & SON’S SAWMILLING SPECIALITIES always on hand.
With our Up-to-date Machinery we can make Old Saws into New Ones on the Shortest Notice.
Planer and Paper Cutting Knives. - - - Moulding Cutters of Every Description .
LET US> HEAR FROM VOU!
W. H. BLAKELEY & CO., Importers of Saw Mill Supplies,
lIS LONSDALE STREET, MELBOURNE.


Plate LIII, Wrought Iron Pipes and Bends in Contractor’s yard for the rising main.


Plate LIV. —Rising Main, six feet and four feet wrought iron pipes being laid in the trench.


-Plan of outfat.i, Sewfr ft. Sewage i Arm- —
Plate LV.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
MAIN OUTFALL SEWER. GENERAL DRAWING OF TYPE CROSS SECTION.
Plate LVI.-


MELBOURNEamd METROPOLITAN BOARDofWORKS.
main outfall sewer-junction with rising mains
DETAILS OF BUILOiHG
Plate LVII.


MELBOURNE and METROPOLITAN BOARD of WORKS,
MAIN OUTFALL SEWER, AQUEDUCT OVER THE KOROROIT CREEK
Plate LVIII.


VICTORY GAS&OIL ENGINE WORKS.
Established 1871.
H. ». HAMPTON. 500 Elizabeth St.. Helium.
mi
The Most
Modern Engine
on the Market
FOR
Efficiency
and Simplicity.
It Cannot be Excelled.
It is specially
adapted for Driv-
ing Pumps, Chaff-
cutters, Thrashers,
Sheep Shearing
Machines, Electric
Lighting, &c.,&c.
iiiliiffd
frfir-?
PORTABLE TYPE,
As Supplied to West Australian Government-
STATIONARY TYPE.
VICTORY GAS ENGINE.
MANUFACTURER
OR
Moulding, Shaping,
Turning Lathes, Thickness,
Tenoning, Mortise,
Saw Benches,
Twin Saw & Break Down
Frame,
Saw Spindles, Pumps.
>v
Siß
Jam Making
Machinery.
Tin Testers,
Steam and Treadle Presses,
Crimping Machines of all kinds,
Lemon and Orange Cutters,
Pulping Machines,
Jam Boiling Pans (Revolving and
Stationary).
- - Portable Engines Made into Traction. -
Patent.
Patent.
M. V. HAMPTON
Wishes to draw the attention of users of Portable Engines to the following •---
The above engraving illustrates a Portable drawing a Thrasher, the Portable being altered so as to render it capable of so doing.
Only one horse is required in the Portable Shafts to steer it, and my improved attachments can be fixed to any Portable Engine now in
use. A Chaff Cutter can also be drawn behind the Thrasher.
RABBIT EXTERMINATORS.
Sole Maker of Boadle’s Patent.
Cheapest, Simplest, and Most Effective Machine in Existence.
The Only Machine using Tar by Patent Rights.
Price, £8 lOs.
the: “ DAISY” GREEN BONE CUTTER.
PATENT.
>AIS\
PATENT.
This useful little machine will thoroughly cut up into small particles
Green Bone, so that the product may be fed to Poultry. Given
in such form, bone is a valuable, nutritious food, and is greedily
eaten by poultry.


'Phone 322
Box G.P.o. 278.
J. A. NEWTON & CO.
"N ~ *
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS AND CONTRACTORS,
• •380=382 Bourke Street, Melbourne...
• :
REPRESENTING
1110 MAS MARKER Ltd., Wolverhampton.
ALLE\ <k MacLE LLAN, Glasgow.
BERG MANN & CO., Berlin.
SIMPLEX STEEL CONDUIT CO. Ltd.
PHILLIPS <k CO., Eindhoven.
PORTING & MATHIESEN.
The BAST lAN METER CO. Ltd.
lIA R TMA NN & BRA UN, Frankfurt.
PRITCHETTS &ZGOLD Ltd., London.
FRED G. LEX KINS, Hamburg .Jj
Contractors for Complete Electrical Installation of all
descriptions Power Lighting, Transmission, Pumping, See.
Repairs to Electrical Machinery of all descriptions
undertaken. We have the most up-to-date Electrically driven
workshop in Victoria.
3
5c
cs
o
c.
%
z>.
Head Office & Works: LONDON.
1. T. Henley’s
TELEGRAPH. . .
WORKS Co. Ltd.
J. A. NEWTON, M.1.E.E., Manager.
380-382 Bourke St.,
MELBOURNE.
Manufacturers of all descriptions of
Electric Light Cables and
Wires,
Telephone and Telegraph and
Submarine Cables.
Large Stocks on Hand. = Telephone No. 322.


Plate LIX.— The Koroit Creek Aqueduct, during erection, showing piers in course of construction and wrought iron pipes to connect therewith.


Plate LX .—The Werribee River Aqueduct during its construction, showing the completed piers with centreing for spans in position.


Plate LXL.-Werribee Aqueduct as completed, showing interior of the sewer.


Plate LXI I.—The Werribee River Aqueduct, comprising five spans of 42 feet each, as seen from up stream.


Plate LXIII .-The Turning of the First Sod on the banks of the Werribee River, on 19th May, 1892, by His Excellency, Lord Hopetoun.


Plate LXIV .-Main Outfall Sewer, showing concrete work in course of construction.


Plate LXV.- View of an Open Outfall Sewer completed in concrete at the Werribee Sewage Farm.


Plate LX VI .—Eastern Branch Outfall Sewer from the distribution head, where the sewer divides East and West at Northern boundary of Sewage Farm.


Plate LXVII.-Werribee Sewage Farm; Distribution Head, showing the Eastern and Western Outfall Sewers, with one of the main carriers in the centre.


Plate LX VI II. —Werribee Sewage Farm. Ploughing Engines, 20 H.P., with Five Furrow Kentish Plow.


Plate LXI.- Werribee Sewage Farm. Ploughing engines with five furrow Kentish plough "which turns over a strip seven feet wide and fifteen inches deep every time it crossesTthe land.!" On>ft of plate
is shown one of the drains which lead into the main drain every ten chains apart.


Plate LXX .—Werribee Sewage Farm ; the Oliver Plough, said to be the largest plough ever turned out by Messrs. John Fowler & Co., of Leeds. It will turn up a furrow two feet wide and two feet six inches deep.


Plate LXXI.— Werribee Sewage Farm. Crosskill Roller used in breaking up heavy clods after land is turned by steam ploughs.


Plate LXXI I. —Werribee Sewage Farm; Medium Cultivator, made by Messrs. John Fowler & Co., of Leeds. This implement breaks up ground and subsoils fifteen feet wide at one operation after the ground
has been worked with ploughs and Crosskill roller.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
PLAN OF ENGINE HOUSE, BOILER HOUSE AND COAL BUNKER.
Plate LXXIII.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
PUMPING STATION SPOTTISWOODE
General Drawings of Pumping Station, Junctions. &c.
.Scalc4o'.Q'' to l. T
Plate LXX IV.—


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works
Plate LXXV.


Melbourne fifnd Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate LXXVI.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
details of roof over coal bunkers.
Plate LXXVII.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate LXXVIII


Plate LXX IX.-Spottiswoode Pumping Station. This view shows method of timbering adopted to hold up ground during excavation and the building of the wells for the pumping engines.


Plate LXXX. —Spottiswoode Pumping Station; brick nine foot sewer running through, with three foot six inch inlets to pumping wells.


Plate LX X XI.—The Spottiswoode Pumping Station during construction, giving a general view at floor level.


Plate LXXXII. —Spottiswoode Pumping Station from North East.


Plate LXXX III.—Spottiswoode Pumping Station from South East.


Plate LXXX IV. —Spottiswoode Pumping Engines. Interior view of engine house. Mr. Herbert, the designer of the engines, standing on the low pressure cylinder.)


MORRIS & MEEKS,
Hardware and Iron and Steel MerchantSi
SOLE AGENTS FOR
Nobel’s 15 Hamburg Explosives. D.H. &G. Haggies Steel Wire Ropes. Shearer’s Wrought Steel Plough Shares.
Forgan’s Cast Chilled Plough Shares.
LITTLE COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
H. Diirre,
First Order of Merit, C.l E. Melbourne, 1888
389 Little Collins St., Melbourne,
MAKE It OF
Brass and Rubber STAMPS.
GENERAL ENGRAVER.
Companies Seals, Crests, Steel Punches, &c.,
CUT TO ORDER.
£ERLOa Up
STEMPtV;
TELEPHONE bos.
S. a. DICKSON,
PATTERN MAKER,
538 Elizabeth Street, North, Melbourne.
Clifton Hill Cash Saw and Moulding Mills Timber Yard.
w. jTbrewer,
Timber, Lime, and Cement Merchant,
HAS ALWAYS LARGE STOCKS OF
Oregon, Baltic T& G, Deals, Kauri, White Pine, Hardwood, Red Gum, Palings Walnut Oak Ash 88 ’ Joinery ’of
Cement, Builders’ Ironmongery, Galvanized Iron, Paints, Oils, Paperhangings, Strawberry Crates and Boxes, Packin 0 Ca e . J
every description made to order. Estimates given for all kinds of work. Direct Importer.
Saw Mills and Joinery Works: GRANT STREET, CJLIFTON HILL.


W. H. BREWER,
• t •
SOLE MANUFACTURER OF THE CELEBRATED
“Silex” Asbestos Nonconducting Composition for Covering Boilers, Cylinders, Steam Pipes, &c.
“Silex” Asbestos Non=Conducting Fire=proof Blocks for Locomotive and other Boilers.
“Silex” Asbestos Liquid Paints. Manufactured in Australia Specially to Suit the Australian Climate.
The most durable and economic paint for inside and outside work on Dwelling Houses, Warehouses, &c. Made fTeRI colors
Mixed ready for use. One gallon will cover 40 sqr. yards, two coats, or one-third more surface than white lead paints.
“Silex” Quick=drying Enamels for Agricultural Machinery and all Iron or Steel Work.
“Silexene” Anti Corrosive Enamel Black for the Protection of Iron and Steel .Work
on steamships Decks, tunnels, Hunkers, Bilges, &c. Also for Railways, Bridges, Refrigerating and Mining Plants Cyanide
Vats, Boiler Fronts, Steam, Water, and Sewer Pipes, Water Tanks and all Sanitary Fittings. ' J
Not affected by Heat or Cold. Rust-proof and damp proof.
(t
Silex” Brilliant Enamels. For Painting New or Renovating Old Furniture of even
Wicker Chairs, Tables, Bracket-, Cages, Bedsteads, Asc. Made in all shades.
“SILEX” Ship Paints. Funnel Paints. Mast Paints. Top Sides Paints. Boot Top Paints
Anti-Corrosive and Anti-Fouling Paints for Ships’ Bottoms.
“SILEX,” THE GREAT WEED DESTROYER.
Eradicates Weeds and all noxious or useless vegetation. Non-injurious to the soil. Will destroy Blackberry, Briar, Bathurst Burr
istle, St. Johns Wort Prickley Pear, etc., &c. Invaluable for keeping garden paths, carriage drives, street channels, &c’
fiee from grass or weeds. The preparation is simply sprayed on the foliage of the weeds, which disappear in a few davs’
eaving the suiface of the paths and drives undisturbed and solid. Cheaper and more effective than hand weeding.
MANyjFACTLJ RE p |N
Pamphlets and all particulars from the Sole Manufacturer,
W. H. BREWER
, “Silex” Works, Maffra St., Near Queen’s Bridge.
SOUTH MELBOURNE.
Waring Bros..
Carriage & Buggy Builders,
490, 492, 494 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE
Manufacturers of all classes of Popular Vehicles at Popular Prices.
Sole makers of the Duplex Speeding Buggy, the lightest, easiest, and cheapest four-wheeler in the State.
A splendid Mountain Buggy. Price, £2O.
All our vehicles are built from the Finest Materials, and are “ Built to Wear." Sulkies from £lO lOs
□
fjn
irTh~ ~ i
_ WARING BROS-’ KING KARRIER, the most Roomy Two Wheeler on the Roads.
lekory Wheels, either Sarven or Plain as desired; Long Distance Axles, Spring Cushion, Sliding Seat (wide enough to carry three),
Double Step. Wide enough in axle to fit track, Plated Mountings, Draft from Axle.
PRICE - - £l5 io O. Lancewood Shafts, io/- extra.
Manufactured only by WARING BROS., 490 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.


Plate LXXXV.— Spottiswoode Pumping Siation. Slde View of No 4 Engine in Northern Engine Room. The Managing Engineer, Mr.
T. R. Smith, on the steps. The High, Intermediate and Low Pressure Cylinders, with Corliss Valves, Beams and
Compensating Gear, are well shown.


Plate LXXXVI .-Spottiswoode Pumping Station. Front view of No. 4 engine, showing high and intermed te pressure cs In lers.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate LXXXVIII.— Illustrating paper by Mr. H. V. Champion.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate LXXXIX. —Illustrating paper by Mr. H V. Champion.


SANITARY
FITTINGS
A SPECIALITY
WE WOULD BE PLEASED TO SHOW
YOU SAMPLES IN WORKING ORDER
FROM THE CELEBRATED ENGLISH
POTTERIES.
Ask to see our New shaped
Art Ironwork Lavatories ;
they can be decorated to
suit the room. They need
no woodwork.
TOOLS
For Engineers
and Plumbers.
SPECIAL ATTENTION IS GIVEN TO THE
TOOL
DEPARTMENT.
Lathes, Chucks, Stocks & Dies, Snips,
Pliers, Drills, Files, Blow Lamps j
Wrenches, Mallets, Vices, Etc., Etc.
A VARIETY OF MAKERS TO CHOOSE FROM.
JOHN DANKS & SON Prop. Ltd..
391 BOURKE ST., MELBOURNE.
324=330 PITT ST., SYDNEY
OUR OTHER ADVT. IS SURE TO INTEREST YOU
Under the Patronage of the Victorian, N.S.W. and West ftustralian Governments and the Imperial Institute Sommittee, London
F. PFLLINGER,
iiiiiii
|U—ui
m
fruu-i'LV.nilllll
SI
W\
?| 1 I'aw
W
riSwmin
I
m
XSti
T.
n
These Stoves can be had with a side copper boiler (tinned inside) to hold 7 gallons
of water, with extended cast front and top, and to burn either wood or coal.
The Oldest Established Kitchen Range
Manufactory in Australasia.
Pullinger's Ranges have gained the highest Award
of Merit against all Australia at the Exhibitions of
iBBo'Bi and 1888-89.
All Work Guaranteed. Ranges set and
repaired by competent men.
F. PULLINGER,
142 Flinders St.,
Melbourne,
3 doors from Russell Street.
Telephone No. 1822.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate XC. —lllustrating paper by Mr. H. V. Champion.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate XC I. —lllustrating paper by Mr. H. V. Champion.


Reeve & Marshall
4* 4* 4*
Rrassfounders & Finishers.
Contractors to the Metropolitan Board of Works.
35 HAIG STREET, SOUTH MELBOURNE.
Engineers 9 and Plumbers’ Brasswork of Every Description.
J. HftLLING and S©N,
LICENSED SANITARY PLUMBERS & GASFITTERS,
Tin, Iron, Zinc & Copper Workers,
316 Russell Street, Melbourne, Opposite Public Library.
AND AT 1 MIRAMS STREET, ASCOT VALE.
HOT WATER APPARATUS, STEAM and WATER PIPES FIXED.
Every Description of Work Done on the Shortest Notice. Certificated by the Metropolitan Board of Works.
MELBOURNE GRINDING and BLACKING MILLS,
TELEPHONE 1617.
49 Dudley Street, West Melbourne.
PROUD
Manufacturers of Charcoal Blacking, Coal Dust, Plumbago, Brickdust,
Core Gunj and Core Wa^h.
ALU KIINDS OP CRUSHING DONE.
J. G. HIiAGK)
41
IM
f H.M. Government, Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works,
Contractor to j Melbourne Harbor Trust, and the City Corporation of Melbourne.
E.P. Ware, Mantlepieces, Baths, &c. Cutlery, Guns, Travelling Bags, Lawn Mowers, Shovels, Picks and Spades, Tinware, &c., &c.
“BLACK’S” INCANDESCENT GAS LAMP,
Used extensively in all the colonies, is the Very Latest, Most Brilliant and Effective Lamp for Street, Shop or Hall Lighting.
nnCMT CflD f Charles Buick & Sons, Alloa, Scotland— Sanitary Ware.
ALLN I rUn | The st. Helens Cable Co. Ltd., Warrington, England—Electric Cables, &c.
Cromwell Buildings, Bourke St., Melbourne,


Plate XC II.— Illustrating paper on Hydraulic Shield Tunnelling, NO. I Section, North Yarra Main Sewer.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
Plate XC III. — Illustrating paper by Mr. Dunlop.


Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works.
PLAN OF THE PRECIPITATION TANKS
PRECIPITATION TANKS OF MANCHESTER SEWAGE DISPOSAL WORKS,
Plate XCIV.—Illustrating paper by Mr. Jas. H. Fuertes, M. Am. Soc., C.E.


Appendix.
Lighting of Pumping Station, Spottiswoode.
(See Plate LII.)
The Pumping Station is lighted by an electrical plant supplied by
Messrs. Siemens Brothers and Co. Ltd., of 29 William-street, and is
illustrated by the accompanying photograph.
The plants consist of two sets of Siemens-Ransomes dynamos and
engines direct, coupled on same bed plate. One set with switchboard
is erected in each engine room.
The engines were manufactured by Messrs. Ransomes, Sims and
Jefferies Ltd., at Ipswich, England, and are compound high-speed,
Avith in. and 11 in. cylinders, and 7 in. stroke.
The dynamos were manufactured by Messrs. Siemens Brothers and
Co. Ltd., at Woolwich, and are of their H.B. type, each having
an output of 145 amperes no volts, at a speed of 350 revolutions
per minute. The station is lighted with 8 arc lamps, and about 300
incandescent lamps of 16 c.p. each.
The switchboards are of black enamelled slate, handsomely
mounted in polished cedar frames, and each switchboard has mounted
on it the necessary instruments, fuses, switches, and controlling gear,
so that either dynamo may be used to light the Avhole station.
The arc lamps are of Siemens band type, 9 amperes, 18 hours in-
stalled, 2 in. series, each pair being controlled by separate switches
on main switchboards.
The AAdiole of the wires and cables are of Siemens Brothers make,
consisting of highly conductivelv tinned copper conductors, insulated
with pure and vulcanised india-rubber taped, the whole vulcanised
together, and, where underground or in damp places, are also cased
with lead.
To light the straining AA'ells concentric cables of Siemens type,
C.R., are run underground in lead casing.
The lighting plant has now been running for over six years, and
during the whole of that time has given the greatest possible satist ac-
tion to the Board’s engineers.
Messrs. Siemens Brothers have carried out a very large number of
electric lighting and power installations in Melbourne. The plants
A\ 7 hich they have installed at Messrs. Cuming, Smith’s, and Moran and
Cato’s Avorks being interesting examples of modern continuous cur-
rent and three-phase plants respectively.
The Lubrication of Engine Cylinders.
The cutting and grooving of the surface of the cylinder of an engine
cannot alwavs be prevented by the use of oil. Nor is this cutting
and grooving alA\avs due to the fact that no oil has been used or that
an insufficient quantity of it has been applied. Cylinders have been
knoAvn to run for years Avithout having had any oil applied to their
surfaces, and yet they have not shown the least trace of cutting on
their surfaces. The surfaces of the cylinders of several engines. Avhich
had been run for a number of years Avithout haA 7 ing had any lubricant
Avhate\ r er applied to them, Avere found upon examination to be
smoothly Avorn and as free from all traces of scores and scratches as
the most exacting engineer could desire. It is of course true 1 that
the wear of the metal, as well as the friction betAveen the piston rings
and the walls of the cylinder are much greater in cases where no oil
is used than is the case with a cylinder that has been freely lubricated.
EA 7 eryone knows that the greater the amount of friction the more must
be the power to o\ T ercome this addition in friction, and so, by de-
creasing the amount of friction by the judicious application of oil,
enough power can be saved to many times pay for the cost of the
oil used. So that if for 1 no other reason, we see that judicious lubri-
cation has the advantage of economy on its side. We sometimes find
that the piston rings of the engine have been set out tightly in order
that they may thus prevent the leakage of stean\ Noav, while at
first glance this might not appear to be the cause of grooving, it is
neA T ertheless often found that this has been the very cause of the cut-
ting of the cylinder’s surface.
It is generally the case that these cuttings and groovings occur
just after the engine has been set up. 1 his fact is little to be Avon-
dered at Avhen Ave take into account the manner of setting up an
engine. It is very seldom that the sand, Avhich is used for the moulds
and core, is entirely removed from the castings, and this very sand, by
being alloAA 7 ed to remain on the cylinder’s surface, is ground into it
by the piston rings. There is also a hard scale Avhich comes from
the pipes. The scale, which forms on the inside of the pipes during
the process of Avelding, is broken off from them by their rapid con-
traction and 1 expansion. Then, again, dirt, grit and other foreign sub-
stances are collected and stuck to the surfaces of the pipes by the oil
that is used to lubricate the ends of these pipes Avhen the threads are
cut on them. Another cause of this cutting is the circumstance that
there are oftentimes blow holes in the casting which furnish resting
places for the dirt, etc., which, owing to their concealment in these
holes, escape detection and so get into the engine, there to cause
much trouble. Now, when these accumulations are not thoroughly
cleaned out of the pipes, values and other fittings, and it is seldom
the case that they are, the current of steam running through the pipes
carries them into the engine in precisely the same manner as steam
carries entrained water with it, and it is sure to be but a very short
time before some of them will get by the throttle valve, and, getting
caught between the valve and its seat or in the piston rings, will cause
great havoc by cutting up the surface of the cylinders.
* The wearing of an engine’s cylinder’s is often due to the fact that
the oil which is being applied to it does not reach its destination
owing either to some fault in the construction or to some peculiarity
in the running of the engine. We have had many instances where
both of these have been the trouble.. The following is. one of the
most recent ones brought to our attention : — 1 he steam pipe that aa as
connected with the engine had a trap for the purpose of drawing oft
the water that collected in the pipe just before, the steam entered
the steam chest. Now the oil, instead of vaporising and being en-
trained with the steam into the cylinder, a portion of it is collected
with the particles of water that had formed on the sides of the steam
pipes from the condensation of the steam, and with it passed out
through this trap into the drip pipe, so that the cylinder got very little
of the oil which was being fed to it.
Another example of this failure of the oil to reach the cylinder is
the case of the compound engine which was run at full speed and
with a light load for a number of weeks, during which time its
low-pressure cylinder was worn down quite perceptibly. It so hap-
pened that a profuse quantity of the best cylinder oil that could be
obtained had been used on this engine's cylinder during the whole of
the time it was running, and on this account the engineer could not
see why the low-pressure cylinder should wear away so much in such
a short space of time. The cause was finally found to be that the
condensing or pressure pipe of the lubricator was connected with the
main steam pipe and discharged its oil into the receiver between the
two cylinders. Owing to the fact that the engine was running under
a light load, the steam in the high pressure had been expanded down
to the atmospheric line, and so there was not enough heat or velocity
to the steam to atomise the oil and carry it to the surface of the
cylinder, it merely dropping off the end of the discharge pipe into
the receiver, and thus not reaching the surface of the cylinder at
Engineers have often found upon examining their cylinders that
there %vas a thick, gummy residue in them. The cause of this has
verv often been attributed to the oil that they were using, but this is
a wrong conclusion. All that the oil had to do with this residue is to
aet like & cement and glue its parts together into one solid mass. Some
years ago an eminent chemist made several very careful. and com-
plete analyses of some of this residue in order that he might deter-
mine its character and the cause of its formation. He found that
the grade or quality of the cylinder oil had nothing to do with this
deposit beyond cementing it together. He discovered that the solid
matter was carried along from the boilers with the steam and de-
posited, by means of condensation, in the valve chests and. cylinders,
where it adhered to the cylinder unguent and made a thick, sticky
residue. He also found that this residue contained but a very small
amount of oil, it being, in the greater part, composed of magnesia,
silica, lime, rust and other foreign substances, which had come from
the boiler and steam pipes. The fact that when an engineer has used
a high grade of oil he has found this residue in his cylinder, and that
when he used a cheaper grade he did not find it, is absolutely no
proof whatever that the quality of the oil has anything to do with it.
It merely shows that the adhesive power of the high grade oil was so
stron" that it collected this residue and cemented it together, when, as
in the case of the cheaper oil, it (the adhesive power) w as not strong
enough to collect it. and so it-passed out with the exhaust steam.
It will be seen from this article that while the use of good oil does
r>ot always prevent the cutting and scouring of the surface of cylinders,
it will increase the efficiency of the engine and be economical both by
savin o- the extra Avear on the surface of the cylindei and by sa\ing
enough power which would otherwise go to overcome the extra fric-
tion to more than pay for its cost. The most practical and. effective
wav for stopping all cutting of the surface of cylinders is to see
that the engine’s parts and connections are thoroughly freed from all
dirt, grit and other foreign substances before they are set up.
“ Boston Journal of Commerce.” _ . r ,
The Vacuum Oil Companv’s 600 W. Cylinder Oil is manufactured


to meet conditions appertaining to the lubrication of all description
of engines. Is used by a larger number of steam users throughout
the world than any other cylinder lubricant, and may always be relied
upon to give the highest results under proper usage. Absolute satis-
faction guaranteed. E. W. Lycett, manager for Australasia. (See
advertisement.)
W. H. Brewer.
The “ Silex ” preparations, sold by W. H. Brewer, are all manu-
factured locally at his “ Silex ” Works, near Queen’s Bridge, South
Melbourne. These preparations include the celebrated “ Silex ”
asbestos non-conducting composition for covering boilers, cylinders,
steam pipes, etc., which is well known as the best heat-saving and
most durable covering in the market. “ Silex ” asbestos non-con-
ducting fire-proof blocks, for locomotive and other boilers. Mr.
Brewer has in hand at present a large contract for the supply of
these blocks to the Victorian Railways for covering the boilers of
the new D.D. engines. Next to the boiler covering factory, in a
separate building, is the paint-making department. Here are manu-
factured paints for all purposes, ship paints, house paints, enamels,
dryers, etc. The paints are all made from the purest materials only,
and can be recommended as a really first-class article. The “ Silex ”
liquid paints, for house work, outside or inside, are mixed ready fot
use, and are specially prepared to suit the Australian climate, and
it is claimed that they are the most durable and economic paints for
this purpose. One gallon will cover 40 square yards, two coats, or
one-third more surface than white lead paints. In another part of
the establishment is manufactured the great “ Silex ” weed destroyer,
a preparation which is proving of inestimable benefit to farmers,
graziers, etc., in completely eradicating all kinds of noxious or useless
vegetation. Pamphlets and all particulars regarding the above on
application to the sole manufacturer, W. H. Brewer, “ Silex ” Works,
Maffra-street, near Queen’s Bridge, South Melbourne.
J. A. Newton & Co.
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS AND CONTRACTORS.
This business was established by Mr. Joseph Allison Newton in
the year 1890. Mr. Newton is a native of London, where he was
educated, afterwards being articled and brought up to the electrical
engineering profession. He is a member of the Institute of Electrical
Engineers of. London, and has carried out many large contracts for
electrical engineering work in Australia.
In addition to establishing his own business he was entrusted with
the inauguration and management of the Australian business of W.
T. Henley’s Telegraph Works Co. Ltd., who are one of the largest
manufacturers in the world of electric light cables and wires, tele-
graph and telephone cables. Under Mr. Newton’s management
Henley’s business has grown to be the largest of its class in Aus-
tralasia. They have carried out very large contracts all over Aus-
tralia, and are at present engaged in the manufacture and laying of
the whole of the underground cables required for the electric lighting
of Sydney. They have also supplied a large quantity of 3-core
6000 volt underground cable for the Sydney Tramway authorities,
and also some miles of multiple telephone cable for the Federal
Postal authorities. Henley’s, as a business concern, is one of the
most prosperous in the world, having paid, for years, dividends
ranging between 15 and 20 per cent.
Illuminants.
The chief requisite of good lighting is uniform illumination. It is
a well known fact that if the illumination be uniform the eye can work
comfortably with a much less intense light than where the illumination
is not uniform,. In the latter case, the eye adjusts itself to the bright-
est illuminated spots, and the less illuminated areas appear very much
darker than they would without the contrast of the bright spots.
In this respect, electric lighting is much superior to any other
method, and the Incandescent Lamp in particular lends itself, if
properly distributed, to a uniform illumination.
The latest design of Incandescent Lamp that is attracting great
attention in Melbourne is the “ Meridian ” Lamp, which is manufac-
tured by the General Electric Co., Schenectady, U.S.A., and is furnished
by their representatives, the Australian General Electric Co., in this
city. The filament of this lamp is scientifically designed so that the
illumination is practically uniform over both the walls and floor space
of a moderate-sized room in which it is placed. The lamp is artis-
tic in design, and economical in power, a 25 c.p. Meridian Lamp giv-
ing more and better illumination than an ordinary 24 c.p. Incandes-
cent Lamp, and consuming only 60 per cent, of the energy. For the
lighting of homes, offices, theatres, and churches, the use of the
Meridian Lamp produces artistic and most pleasing results.
Sun Blinds.
As the summer advances, so we appreciate or require, as the case
may be, some protection from the sun’s rays. The Window Blind
Factory of Campbell, Johnson and Clark has been fitted with the
latest machinery, which enables them to turn out work on the shortest
notice. They have lately made and fitted up ioo spring roller inside
blinds at the Ladies’ High School, Gipps-street, which have given
great satisfaction. We may here say that all the partners are prac-
tical men, of good experience, and those who are wanting blinds of
any description should communicate at once with Campbell. Johnson
and Clark, whose advertisement, appears elsewhere in this issue, in
which a view of the Metropolitan Board’s Offices, Spencer-street, is
given, showing 70 outside blinds lately put up by this firm, in con-
nection with which they have received a very satisfactory letter from
the worthy chief of the Board.
Emu Brand Portland Cement.
T he manufacture of “ Emu ” brand Portland cement was com-
menced at Burnley-street, Richmond, by Mr. David Mitchell, in 1889.
After its. initiation the usual vicissitudes common to pioneer industries
were experienced, but the manufacture is now firmly established, and
Portland cement making has become one of the staple industries of
this colony. In 1891 the present manager, Mr. John Gibson, took
charge of the works, and under his administration very extensive
additions to the plant and improvements in the manufacture have
been effected. The article produced by this firm has now reached a
high standard of excellence, special attention being paid to fine
grinding, which is a leading feature of this brand of cement.
Em,u brand Portland cement has been very extensively used by the
Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works in the construction of
their sewers ; by the Victorian Government. Railways, and Public
Works’ Departments; by the Melbourne, Hawthorn, Richmond and
many other city councils, in the construction of practically all the
head works carried out under the Water Supply Department during
the past five or six years, in the construction of the Mo-nier bridge
over the River Yarra at the Botanical Gardens, and in the erection
of many important buildings in Melbourne and other cities, such as
the Bendigo Cathedral ; Shamrock Hotel, Bendigo; Messrs. Ball and
Welch’s new warehouse, Flinders-street; Yarra Family Hotel, Flin-
ders-street; Messrs. John Connel and Sons, and the Massey-Harris
Co.’s warehouses, Bourke-street; Central Fire Station, East Mel-
bourne; and very many others too numerous to mention.
It is worthy of notice that all the raw materials used in the manu-
facture! are obtained in the colony, principally from the firm’s exten-
sive limestone quarries at Lily dale and Lara.
Coimadai Hydraulic Ground Lime.
Coimadai hydraulic lime was first used about forty years ago on the
Castlerruaine railway line in the erection of the bridges and culverts.
For years the works were carried on in a very primitive way, and
ultimately abandoned on account of the trouble in slacking the lime
after being burnt, it being a hydraulic limestone. Messrs. Alkemade
Bros, secured the property twenty years ago, and to overcome the
difficulty in slacking the lime they erected extensive modem kilns and
grinding plant, and prepared the lime for the market as a. ground
hydraulic lime, theirs being the first grinding plant on any lime works
in Victoria. After ten years of very hard persevering work, the lime
is now firmly established on the market, and universally admitted as
being the only lime to approach cement for setting.
The leading architects and engineers specify it for work both above
and below the surface, in concrete and mortar, for stone and brick-
work irrigation channels and concrete dwellings. It gives the greatest
satisfaction on account of its hard and tenacious setting qualities in
any situation, wet or dry.
The Use of Steel.
Under the above heading a very interesting book is to be obtained
for the asking from the Eagle and Globe Steel Company Ltd. The
late Mr. Henry Seebohm, F.Z.S., F.R.G.S., founder of the firm, in
1865, besides his interest in steel, was an eminent naturalist. His
valuable collection of birds was left to the British nation, comprising
1440 skins, etc., which are now in the British Museum. His books
comprise a History of British Birds, and several other works and
monographs on allied branches of ornithology. His books on his
travels in Siberia, Europe and Asia are of great interest. Those
people who are interested in steel should apply to the firm for a
copy of Mr. Seebohm’s lecture to the Cutlers’ Company of London.
H. V. Hampton’s Engineering Works.
Mr. H. V. Hampton, engineer, of 496 to 500 Elizabeth-street, Mel-
bourne, is the principal manufacturer of all the machinery required
in the jam manufacturing industry, such as pulping machines, melon-
peeling machines, marmalade machines, peach-cutting and stoning
machines, crimping machines, power and hand-presses, and dies of all
sizes to suit the requirements of all those connected with producing
the different sized tins for putting up all classes of goods which are
usually packed in tinware. Mr. Hampton also does a very great
portion of the work required in the saw-milling industry, and is the


sole manufacturer of the Victory gas and oil engines, and also of the
famous little machine known as the Daisy green bone cutter so neces-
sary for those interested in poultry-rearing, for without one a poultry
yard is not complete. We may state that the establishment referred
to does an extensive business in repairs to all classes of machinery,
engines, etc., etc.
Wm. Machar & Sons, Engineers, 415 Victoria Street,
Abbotsford.
Mr. Wm. Machar, the principal of the above important business,
was born on May 31st, 1853, at Montrose, Scotland, and, on the com-
pletion of his scholastic career served his apprenticeship to the en-
gineering trade, with Messrs, kairbourne, Kennedy, and Naylor, ol
Leeds, remaining with them for eight years. In he came to
Victoria, and, after travelling throughout the various States gaining
experience, established his present business in 1881. The firm makes
a speciality of manufacturing brick-making machinery, and their
plants are to be found in all important brick-making centres. It is
claimed for these machines that they are capable of turning out a
greater quantity of bricks of a better quality than any other machine,
either imported or manufactured in these States. The firm has also
built a great number of mining plants, such as batteries, winding-
fengines, etc., which are well and favourably known throughout Aus-
tralasia! A number of new milling machines have lately been added
to the alreadv extensive plant, and the firm is now in a position to
furnish mining, brickmaking, irrigating and other plants of any size
and description required.
“Royal Daylight” Kerosene (for use in Oil Engines).
In view of the large number of oil engines used in Australia and
New Zealand, the Colonial Oil Company decided to import a re-
fined American kerosene similar to that used in the United Kingdom
by the leading manufacturers for testing their oil engines before leav-
in°" the works. The oil in question is a refined American kerosene of
125 degrees fire test, branded “Royal Daylight, and is packed two
tins to the case, each tin containing 4 i-6th Imperial gallons. The
sales of this oil are steadily increasing in Australia, and those, who
possess oil engines cannot do better than to give Royal Daylight
a trial if they have not already done so. One of the leading manu-
facturers of oil engines in England writes as follows:
“ We have much pleasure in confirming that we always use ‘ Royal
Davlight’ for the purpose of testing our oil engines. We have got
similar results from ‘White Rose I ,’ but as the price of this brand is
higher, we naturally prefer to use ‘ Royal Daylight, and, seeing that
hundreds of engines leave our works in the course of a year, we do
not think that vour Australian friends could adopt any better brand
of oil for use in the engines of our make." This in itself is suffi-
cient evidence of the splendid qualities of “ Royal Daylight kero-
sene for running oil engines. The Colonial Oil Company will be
very pleased to send full particulars, together with price, on applica-
tion.
John Danks & Son Propy. Ltd,
This firm is one of the oldest of Victorian concerns, and
a record such as this would scarcely be complete without some re-
ference to them. The late Mr. John Danks, with his two brothers—
Samuel and Thomas—first started business in Patterson-place off
Montague-street, in 1859, where they traded as Danks Bros., brass
founders, engineers and wrought-iron fitting makers and importers.
After some two years the younger brother retired, and the. two
brothers, John and Samuel, continued in business. The business
soon increased, and it was found necessary to take premises at 82
Bourke-street, and from thence, as trade increased, moves were made
to 3,4 and 42 Bourke-street, at which place business was carried on
until Mr. Banks purchased a block of four properties in Bourke-
street, and built the premises which the firm at present occupy,
was very earlv in the historv of the business that the younger
brother, Thomas Danks, decided to sever his connection with the
firm and, after 14 years of partnership, the other brother, Samuel,
decided to do likewise, retiring with an ample competency. ;
The premises in Bourke-street were soon found too restricted tor
the requirements of the business, and land was purchased at Moray-
street, South Melbourne, where the present factory was built Land
was also purchased at Bank-street, South Melbourne, for the purposes
of an ironfoundry and bulk stores, and subsequently t e anr ac joi
ing the Moray-street works was purchased, so that these works no
cover an area of about two acres. . , ,
Business was soon started at Sydney, and the premises firs a '
in Liverpool-street proving too small, moves were.ma.de to 363, an ,
finally to 324 Pitt-street, where the present spacious premises were
erected It was also deemed advisable to start a manufactory in
that city, and land was bought at Blackfriars, in the city °f Sydney,
beintf a whole block completely surrounded by streets. This has
proved a very satisfactory venture, and there to-day, as in Melbourne
the manufacture of sheet lead, lead pipe and all classes of brass
foundry and copper-smithing work are carried on.
Sometime after his Brother Samuel’s retirement, Mr. Banks took
into a profit-sharing arrangement, his son, Mr. Aaron Danks, and
several of his leading employees, and, later on, when his son was
taken into partnership, an arrangement was made by which these
leading employees were allowed to acquire an interest in the business,
and to facilitate this, the concern was converted into a limited, and
finally into a proprietary company. These gentlemen, Mr. J. H.
Guy, Mr. R. Ferguson, Mr. W. Booth, and Mr. W. A. F. Waitt, are
still connected with the business. Mr. Guy and Mr. Booth having
management of the Sydney business, while, with Mr. Aaron Danks,
the other gentlemen take the leading positions at Melbourne. Many
of the employees have been over 30 years in the service of the firm.
Mr. Samuel Danks, on his retirement from the Melbourne concern,
started a business at Brandon-street, Wellington, New Zealand, which
with his son, he carried on until his death, when his son took charge,
and has since conducted a satisfactory and increasing business. Mr.
Samuel Danks was highly respected in Wellington, where, for many
years, he was a city councillor, and he took a leading interest in all
the charitable institutions of the city.
Mr. Thomas Danks some time after he resigned his partnership, in
the Melbourne firm, also started business in New Zealand, choosing
for his home the city of Christchurch, where he started works and
business premises in Lichfield-street, stocking and manufacturing
similar lines to those manufactured by the Melbourne and Sydney
firm. • • i
The late Mr. John Danks was honoured in serving in the municipal
council of South Melbourne for several years as a councillor, and
as Mayor for two years in succession. In 1876 he was elected presi-
dent of the Manufacturers’ Association, and he was a commissioner
and representative to the Paris Exhibition of 1878. Besides the busi-
ness carried on at Melbourne and Sydney, Messrs. John Danks and
Son Prop. Ltd., have their buying office at 32 Union-street, Wednes-
bury, Staffordshire, England. _ . .
Mr. Aaron Danks, J.P., the present managing director is a native ot
South Melbourne, and has always shown the greatest interest in all
matters affecting the interests of the city.
Commonwealth Coach Factory.
An order for 18 waggons
of somewhat novel con-
struction was lately exe-
cuted by Mr. F. Naef for
the local branch of a
Canadian firm of imple-
ment manufacturers. The
waggons were built after
the design of an imported
vehicle, a feature in which
was the construction of
the body, the rear part
being made so that the
sides could be made to
close together, thus hold-
ing firmly in position the
sample machine they were
designed to carry. In
every respect the locally-
built waggons showed bet-
ter workmanship than the
imported one. They were
mounted on platform car-
riage, and each was provided with a canvas hood. Those in want of
a vehicle of any kind would do well to consult Mr. Naef before going
elsewhere.
Engineering Works.
Mr. Mephan Ferguson, the founder of the firm of that name, whose
extensive works cover a ten-acre block corner of Gordon and Fer-
guson streets, Footscray, started originally in 1875 at North Mel-
bourne, but, owing to the rapid increase of business, he moved to
larger premises in Leicester-street Carlton \ he also constructed pre-
mises in West Melbourne and again on the Footscray-road, eventually
erecting the present establishment. In addition to general engineer-
ing work, comprising the construction of railway and road bridges,
etc the manufacture of bolts and nuts has been brought to perfec-
tion. In the making of spiral riveted water-pipes a large amount ot
money was spent before the idea was brought to perfection. The
advantage in this pipe is the combination of strength and. lightness,
while the spiral form renders the pipe perfectly rigid.. Sluice, valves
and stop valves are also supplied by the firm (in all sizes), while flap
valves and other simple and effective valves, are also manufactured.
Since last year great strides have been made with the lock-bar pipes
which were used so successfully for the. Coolgardie
Mr. Ferguson is the largest contractor for iron work, to the Melbourne
and Metropolitan Board of Works, having supplied and built the


iron aqueduct over the Plenty River, wrought iron tubes over Merri
Creek, and River Yarra and many other of the Board’s heaviest
undertakings. Not satisfied with colonial contracts, Mr. Ferguson
tendered for the supply of pipes for the Mond Gas Co., aU Tipton,
South Staffoidshire, England, securing same against firms of Great
Britain. The firms, foreseeing the great advantage in using these
pipes, amalgamated, and secured the English rights, and approached
Mr. Ferguson with a view to forming a company to work the busi-
ness. The negotiations came to a satisfactory conclusion, and, on
May 20th, 1904, the company was registered at Glasgow under the
style of the Mephan Ferguson Lock Bar Pipe Co. In the English
contract pipes from 18 to 33 inches were used, and absorbed some-
thing like 3000 tons of steel plates in their construction. In every
sense, both the Melbourne, Coolgardie and English contracts have
proved highly satisfactory to all parties, and nothing but praise is
heard on all sides.
The Australian Tesselated Tile Co.
The first question travellers to Lilydale ask on arrival at Mitcham
—a station about 15 miles from Melbourne—is, “ What is that large
stack of chimneys and buildings over there ?” When the answer comes
—“ The factory of the Australian Tesse lated Tile Company Propy.
Ltd.,” wonder ceases, for so well and widely known has this company
become that it is at once recognised such an extensive plant would
be none too great to cope with their vast output.
Those who have at heart the welfare of their country’s industries
will find much of interest in the story of the company’s progress. In
the middle eighties Mr. E. E. Walker, the present managing director,
was much impressed by the rich and practically inexhaustible clay
deposits at Mitcham, and, with the unerring insight bom of experi-
ence, realised its possibilities of utilising them in tile manufacture!.
With Mr. Walker to conceive was to act, and, securing the able al-
liance of Mr. Albert Wiseman, and the late Mr. Walter Wiseman,
decided to establish the works we have now under review. Seldom
have pioneers been so happily circumstanced in their personnel as
were these three gentlemen named, who worked together, in the face
of difficulties before which less sterling spirits would have succumbed,
with ever before them the hope of ultimate success, and their present
output will show their efforts have been successful in establishing
an industry of which the Commonwealth may justly be proud.
The clay deposits acquired by the company cover an area of 40
acres in extent, three acres of which are taken up by the buildings,
workrooms, ovens, and warehouses. A great number of experienced
hands are constantly employed in the industry, and an object-lesson
of absorbing interest is afforded those watching the various processes
of conversion from the raw to the finished product. First the clay is
mixed, then conveyed by an elevator to the crushing machines, and,
at last, after being further pulverised, is subjected to a series of
purifying and sifting influences, and is ready, as soon as dry, for the
moulder’s hands.
Specimens of every kind of tile are turned out here, paving tiles
being a specialty, and builders and architects recognise them invalu-
able for the purposes they are intended, covering as they do qualities
suitable for all factory purposes up to the finely finished article for
palatial and cathedral decorations.
Rich encaustic pavements, and a wide range in colours in tessel-
ated flooring tiles are some of their products that have won wide
commendation, but no less fine are their white and coloured wall and
hearth tiles, and their enrichments for dado and interior wall decora-
tions. The company also execute faience work in various designs,
combining with this class of manufacture that of terra-cotta, garden
edgings and such humbler grades.
Let us hope a renewal of industrial activity throughout the Com-
monwealth as a whole may be brought about so that all such indus-
tries may find a full and remunerative outlet for all their splendid
productions.
A. Nott, Optician.
Mr. Nott is anxious that special attention should be given to the
Tone Periscopic Lenses, which he is now grinding at 145-7 Collins-
street. This form of lens enables the optician to execute in a more
satisfactory periscopic form the ordinary compound and spherical
lenses, the advantage of which is a flatter and consequently larger
field, and at the same time reducing the spherical aberration. It
also renders a coqueile form, which in many cases is very valuable,
as it allows the lenses to set closer to the face, and leaves plenty of
space for the eyelashes. The cost is a trifle more expensive than
e ordinary form of lens, but the advantages to be derived from their
use will more than offset the increase in price. This description will
enable readers at a glance to appreciate its advantage.
Australian!Gas Retort and Fire Brick Manufacturing Co.
This company is in possession of an extensive deposit of very
superior fire clay, and manufacture gas retorts, fire bricks, oven tiles
and many other articles at their works. The severe tests to which
these manufactures have been subjected prove them to be equal to any
imported articles, whilst the facilities for carriage and general con-
venience of the works enable the proprietors to maintain very mode-
rate prices with a minimum of liability to breakages. The company
has a very excellent display of their goods in illustrated designs, but
any not on hand can be made to order on the shortest notice. ' The
company was awarded the first order of merit at the Melbourne
Centennial Exhibition 1888, and have supplied the Tramway Co.,
the Metropolitan Gas Co, foundries, rolling mills and smelting
works, and all those firms which require the very best quality of fire
bricks. Users of the goods they manufacture can rely upon punctual
execution of their orders.
J. M. Anderson and Sons.
The above firm are introducing a new class of galvanized mild steel
rivetted pipe for various uses. The special feature about these pipes is
that they are first made up from special black steel sheets and after-
wards thoroughly galvanized. This process renders them practically
rust proof, which in itself makes the pipe very durable. But the
great point aimed at by Messrs. J. M. Anderson & Sons is to get
strength and durability combined, at the same time reducing the
weight of the pipe so as to make them handy for shifting about. In
this they have succeeded so much so that they are enabled to manu-
facture pipes of galvanized mild steel of light gauges and of various
lengths up to 24ft., which are guaranteed to stand a working pressure
up to 3001bs per sq. in. For water supply, such as hydraulic sluicing,
irrigation, &c., these pipes will be found of great value, as, on account of
of their weight, they are so much easier to handle and fix and cost of car-
riage so much less. This pipe is also being used for air compressor work
in place of wrought iron with every satisfaction. This firm also makes
a speciality of hydraulic elevators for mining purposes. On reference
to the firm’s advertisement in this book will be seen a sketch of an
elevator at work lifting alluvial dirt and wash to a height of 20ft.
These elevators can be supplied to any capacity and height according
to the water available. A number of these machines have been erected
in various parts of the State, and for economic working there is no
machine to equal them. The above firm are also manufacturers of all
classes of copperwork, vignerons’ stills, and all classes of sheet iron
work, and will be pleased to supply any information that may be
required in reference to their various manufactures.
Wm, Stephens’ ‘Excelsior’lron Foundry. Established 1887,
Visitors to Melbourne will do well to spare a little time in paying a
visit to these compact works, situated at the corner of Sturt and Grant
streets, South Melbourne (close to Messrs. Johns and Waygood’s).
When once there the visitor will be shown numerous varieties of orna-
mental ironwork, for which this firm is specially known both for the
excellent quality of its work and the reasonable cost of the various
items produced. The artistic designs are first sketched by architects,
artists, &c., then the carvers spend some considerable time in produc-
ing a workable design in wood, from which brass patterns are then
made, which, when thoroughly chased and cleaned up in the finishing
shop, are put into the moulder’s hands, who forms a mould by placing
between two iron boxes in which sand, <fec., is pressed, which forms
around the brass pattern ; this pattern in turn is carefully removed,
leaving an impression which is filled with the molten iron, and when
cool, is lifted and cleaned up with files and wire brushes, which leaves
them the perfect castings for which this firm is noted. The iron used,
it is perhaps interesting to note, is either pig or scrap, or both mixed,
and is taken up on to a platform some twelve or fourteen feet high in
truck by water power. It is then placed in the cupola or furnace,
and is subjected to intense heat, caused by a powerful blast from a fan
driven by electricity. Here it is re-melted, and drawn off into ladles
convenient for carrying round the foundry by the employees, or
lifted by overhead crane for heavy work, each iri turn being emptied
into its proper place, and so casting the many shaped designs, which
are such a material improvement to the appearance and value of the
villa or cottage. A thoroughly good line, too, is their 12 foot rotunda
or summer house, octagon in shape and containing 8 c. i. columns, 16
brackets, and necessary frieze (about 32ft.), together with 32ft. bal-
cony panels, 9 finials, &c., the whole cast-iron required being placed
f.o.b. for the sum of 17 guineas. It is just such a line as would make
a splendid addition to a private residence, or, if a little heavier
column and friezework were substituted, would make an ideal place
for band stands, &c., for corporation, clubs and other public bodies to
erect on their grounds. Other lines, such as garden rollers, seats,
restaurant tables, gate posts, post caps, cast iron pickets for fence
work, and hundreds of smaller lines are made.


Manufacturers to the Gonjnjoijwealttj.
BLINDS. SUN BUNDS, blinds.
CampbelUohnsoniClarK
MANUFACTURERS OF
Venetian Blinds, Shutters, Verandah Blinds,
and Every Description of Window Blinds
By the latest machinery driven lay steam power.
Improved
Check
Action
Fitted to
Old and New
Blinds.
MM
-
Wmm
fi
e
set
m
-
s-f
I
H
-
V -V
*•<*
/■.
Old
Blinds
Repainted
and
Repaired.
OUTSIDE SUN BLINDS OUR SPECIALITY,
Worked from inside, without opening windows. Keeps rooms as cool as an Ice House.
The Firm of Messrs. Campbell, Johnson & Clark have just completed another large Contract of 70 Outside Blinds for the Metropolitan
Board of Works’ New Offices, Spencer Street.
Copy of Letter received from Metropolitan Board of Works —
" I have much pleasure in stating that the contract has been carried out in a thoroughly satisfactory workmanlike ma^ne_r.
The Blinds have been so arranged that an effective method of easy adjustment from inside each window is provided, and their
fixing has been much appreciated by the staff during the recent hot weather.
CAMPBELL, JOHNSON & CLARK,
139, 141,143 Lonsdale Street < Wesley Church. Melbourne,


Hampson & Halliday,
FOOTSeRHY
3 IRON WORKS.
MORELAND STREET, FOOTSCRAY.
3--V.
f
W « wm
t m
>
- .
A*\
'*W3SB» <W
AO-JI
K
Section W.I. Tube, 140 ft. long x 12ft. diameter, weight 60 tons, for connecting North Yarra Main Sewer under Saltwater River.
IRON ftND BRftSS OftSTINGS ftT LOWEST RftTES.
Manufacturers of O.H. Travellers and Travelling Jennies. <?jt Sluice Valves, Fuming, W.I. Pipes, and all
descriptions of Contractors’ Ironwork.
:
P&
&
m
m
m-t
: .
i
IS
m
m
mim
V
..gpr*
-V* 1
-
—-BBSffl-b
VIEW OF WORKS, FOOTSCRAY.


Hampson & Halliday, ”1,
MORELAND STREET, FOOTSCRAY
a
w
101'
a
1
5S«:» s ' v
Manufacturers of Engines, Boilers, Pumps, Hydraulic Presses, eranes==*Steam,
Locomotive, Derrick, and Quarry.
**
HAMPSON*HAU «•*
0 t N *t f IWV
CAM CFANE MAHiR
•»
m
*3
:
'
’** -
Set
VIEW OF WORKS, FOOTSCRAY;


This Space is Taken by
The Australian Explosive and Chemical Co.,
P
fi
<•
•Bfe.
Ot>
G
630
'-ELI2A
£>
£TH
STB
El\s o/?
COMMONWEALTH CO
••
Mat*
ACH
FACTORY
rTr. , h*
A r-^,O
«»s»aMMBB
«SWSI
B
a*
.
t;..
*
i kino.
m
m
m
v:
t£* Z/t.Q
r
,
NAEF’S COMMONWEALTH COACH FACTORY,
630 ELIZABETH STREET.








