

f 1 Bsoagl 'S
MELVILLE STREET
WESLEYAN CHURCH.
A GLANCE AT ITS HISTORY FROM 1823.
G. T. TAYLOR, Secretary to the Trust.
Abstract of a paper read before the
Wesleyan Literary Association, Melville-
street, Tuesday, September 8, 1891.
After introducing his subject, Mr. Taylor
said : —The Rev. Benjamin Carvosso, on his
way from England to Sydney, was the first
Wesleyan minister who set foot in Hobart.
This was in May, 1820. Before the found-
ing of the little church by Sergeant Waddy
and his comrades of the 58th Regiment, Mr.
Carvosso preached in the open air, for the
Wesleyans had not a place to call their own,
from the words “ Awake thou that sleepest.”
The Rev. Mr. Horton arrived on September
21, 1821, and secured for the Wesleyans
their present city block. Sergeant Waddy
and the little band of followers had an open
field, and there cast the first seeds of Tas-
manian Wesleyan Methodism, which sprang
Up and yielded fruit now everywhere visible.
The first place of worship was in Argyle-
s'reet, about where the Bird-in-Hand hotel
now stands ; and it was there in July, 1823,
at a meeting held for the purpose, the fol-
lowing persons engaged to become trustees
of the property of the Wesleyan Methodist
connection in this town, viz., Messrs. Jesse
Pulleyn, Esh Lovell, William Kneale,
William Shoobridge, Isaac Chapman, John
Hiddlestone, Robert Household, John Dunn,
Robert Mather, David Lord, and John
Dean. After electing secretary, etc., and
making arrangements for the trustees, two
at a time, to take it in turn, to systemati-
cally collect funds for the erection of a new
chapel, it was decided to apply to the
Missionary Committee in London for assist-
ance to the amount of £l,OOO, part as a
grant and part as a loan,any amount granted
as a loan to be repaid by annual instalments
of not less than £lOO. The application,
stating the position of affairs, was sent by
the brig Allies, Captain Kirton, which
sailed on January 20, 1824. On May 17,
1825, 16 months afterwards (a great con-
trast to the postal system of now-a-days),
the secretary was enabled to lay before the
trustees the reply from the London Mission-
ary Society, stating that the resident
missionary was empowered to draw upon
their treasurer for £7OO, of which £5OO was
to be a loan and £2OO a grant. In the mean-
time the trustees had sent to the Lieutenant-
Governor, Colonel William Sorell, a petition
for assistance in “ An undertaking whose
only aim is to promote the bestinterests of the
subjects of your Government, and to dissem-
inate those sacred doctrines, which operate
in personal piety and practical virtue, and a
cheerful subordination to the oonstitu-
tiion, authorities, etc.” This was signed by
the trustees, and recommended by Revs.
Mansfield and Orton, A. W. Humphries,
Esq., J.P., T. G, Gregson, Esq., J.P., and
James Gordon, Esq., J.P. To this a favour-
able reply was received, and it was eventu-
ally decided that a new chapel should be
built 63ft. x 40ft. That building is now
known as the Mechanics Hall.
On May 14,1824, Colonel George Arthur was
appointed Lieutenant-Governor, when it
was decided that the substance of the
memorial presented to his predecessor should
be made to him, with the additional re-
quest that *‘ His Honor be solicited to put
on the roof and lay the floor, providing the
material for the same.” This request was
most graciously acceded to, excepting that
His Excellency intimated that, though it
was not in his power to furnish carpenters,
he would cheerfully supply the requisite
timber, and would issue orders for the
delivery of the same, and afford every
assistance in his power. Indeed, during his
term of office he proved himself a good friend
to our Church. During the erection several
defects were discovered, which necessitated
a great deal of the wall being pulled down,
and the secretary was deputed to request
His Honor to furnish materials and brick-
layers for taking down the walls and re-
building the same. This was readily
granted, and two bricklayers, six labourers,
and 100 bushels of lime were placed at the
disposal of the trustees.
An allotment of land was held by our
Church in Canipbell-street near the Peni-
tentiary ; this was afterwards surrendered to
the Government in exchange for another
grant in the country,which in turn was sold.
In the year 1825, the Rev. Benjamin
Carvosso’s name appears as chairman in
succession to the Rev. Ralph Mansfield, who
had occupied that position since the establish-
ment of the trust. By this time the trustees
had run into debt to the amount of £637
7s. Old., of which sum £294 Bs. 3Jd. was
owing to the committee in London, and the
balance to lenders in Hobart Town.
The chapel was now so far advanced as to an
warrant the trustees taking into considéra- G<
tion the lighting, and a sub-committee was to
appointed to decide upon the quality and as
quantity of the candlesticks. stf
On Sunday, February 12,1826, the open- wi
ing services were conducted and sermons Cl
preached by the Rev. Benjamin Carvosso. he
The collections amounted to £21135. foi
The following is an extract from a letter wi
forwarded by the trustees to the Missionary pr;
Committee at home. After referring to do
various matters,they proceed to say “We aft
are happy to inform you the chapel is now 1
completed, and is both neat and substantial. trt
For its neatness, indeed, it is very generally tio
admired. We are grateful to our beneficent in
God for such an important addition to our 26
comfort in thisdistant region,andtrust it will let
prove a permanent blessing, not only to Fr
ourselves, but also to our children, to our
neighbours, and to many who are yet un-
born.” In 1829 resolutions thanking Mr.
Turnley for his gift of a scarlet pulpit
cushion, and to Mr, Lord, for the monetary
help he had at all times given the trustees,
were unanimously passed.
Prosperity was now attending our cause,
for in April, 1830, it was reported at the
trustee meeting that several applications for
sittings could not be complied with for want
of room, and it was subsequently resolved
that a gallery be put up in the west end of
the chapel for theaccommodation of the school
children, at a cost of £145. (After a lapse
of 55 years this was removed to enlarge and
improve the Mechanics Hall.)
I do not know whether our friends, when
looking at the clock in the present church,
have ever noticed that it tears the following
inscription ;—“ For the use of the Wesleyan
Chapel, Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land.
Presented by B. Carvosso, A.D., 18.30.”
For 61 years it has thus indicated the
passing hours, the time for services,marriages,
funerals, etc.
In 1831 the name of the Rev. Nathaniel
Turner, which is still so familiar to many
residents of Hobart, was chairman of the
trustees ; in the following year Mr. T. J.
Crouch was elected a trustee, a position he
uninterruptedly occupied until his death last
year, covering the long period of 58 years.
At the first meeting at which he was
present, it was resolved that steps be taken
to enlarge the chapel, and it was decided to
erect a two-story building at the rear (half
the present upper schoolroom, etc.) Appli-
cation was made to the Government and the
Missonary Committee for further assistance,
and in October Mr. Smales’ tender for £654
was accepted. Early the following year an
application was made to the Government for
a loan of £BOO. This was subsequently
granted.
In 1833 the father of one of the present
trustees, Dr. T. C. Brownell, was elected a
trustee. It was this year also that Mr.
Richard Clark left a legacy of £lOO to the
Sabbath school in Melville-street, the
principal to be held by the trustees, they to
pay an annual interest to the Sabbath
school committee. This amount is still held
by the trust, for which they pay the school
committee 6 per cent, per annum, 1836 saw
the mission house enlarged at a cost of £lBO.
June 6, 1836.—The following minute, which,
though no doubt a matter of serious con-
sideration then, one cannot now read without
a smile, appears upon the minute book :
“ Resolved that in future sperm candles be
used instead of tallow.” An order was
then forwarded to Sydney for 501 b. sperm
candles. In 1836 the chapel was granted to
the Tasmanian Temperance Society for the
purpose of holding a temperance meeting.
It was in this year that the trustees, being
compelled to again refuse sittings, owing to
the limited accommodation available, the
preliminary steps were taken to build a new
chapel. It was resolved “That a new
church, 55ft. x 75ft. in the clear, should be
built,” and Mr. Henry Chapman was re-
quested to furnish an estimate for the same.
Mr. Chapman did not lose much time, for
a week afterwards he submitted a rough
plan of the present church at an estimated
cost of £4,150. Having decided to build
upon this estimate as a basis, the next ques-
tion was the site, and although the trustees
appear to have been unanimous in regard to
the necessity of building, yet the locality
on which it was to be built seemed to be a
veritable bone of contention. That they
held strong opinion on the matter may be
seen from the fact that the site was chosen
and rechosen no less than four times,
before a final decision was arrived at. On
December 14, 1836, Murray-street side of the
old chapel was decided upon. A week after
this was rescinded, and by the casting vote
of the chairman, Rev. J. Orton, it was
resolved to build on the Elizabeth-street
side. One month after this, that was re-
versed, and Murray-street again decided
upon as being the best. Against this resolu-
tion the Rev. J. Orton wrote a long protest,
which, though interesting, is too long to
insert here. One month afterwards, Janu-
ary 24, 1837, it was finally resolved that
it be built on the Elizabeth-street side,
where the church now stands. Steps were
immediately taken to push forward the
work, and arrangements made with the
Commercial Bank to overdraw the account,
if necessary, to the extent of £2,000. Similar
arrangements were made with the Derwent
Bank, so the trustees felt themselves' in a
position to proceed.
I have omitted to state that in this year
an application was made to the Lieutenant-
Governor to grant as a gift the £BOO to
to which I referred as having been obtained
as a loan la reply the Lieut.-Governor
stated that he could not make such a grant
without the consent of the Governor-in-
Chief, but that in view of the high respect
he had for the Wesleyan body he would
forward their application to head quarters
with his warmest recommendation that the
prayer of the petition be granted. This was
done, and a very cordial vote of thanks was
afterwards forwarded to the Lieut-Governor.
In accordance with the wish of the
trustees. Sir John Franklin laid the founda-
tion stone of the present Wesleyan Church
in Melville-street, at 4 p.m., on December
26, 1837. The Rev. Joseph Orton gave a
lengthy address, after which Sir John
Franklin addressed the assembly, and de.
livered an extempore prayer. The Sabbath
school mustered in force and sang several
hymns, «hich had been specially prepared
for the occasion. The Hohart Courier of
May 6, 1838, contains an account of the
proceedings, occupying nearly two columns,
which I shall be happy to show any one
interested in the subject if they will call at
The Mercury Office. The usual coins, docu-
ments, etc., were placed in a cavity in the
stone, together with a document relating to
the affairs of the church. Arrangements
were made for a systematic canvass of the
city, and it was decided to again appeal to
the Government of the day for further assist-
ance. About this time a Mr. Williams sold
the property adjoining the church, where
the new Temperance Hall now stands, to the
trustees for £3OO, the idea in buying seeming
to be to utilise it for a parsonage, but, not
being found suitable, it was let for Bs. per
week. A letter was forwarded to the
Missionary Committee in London, asking
for a loan of £2,000. September, 1840, saw
the building so far advanced that the
trustees decided that the opening service
should, if possible, take place during the
stay in port of the Triton. In respect
to the lighting, it was resolved to enter into
arrangement with Mr. Osborne to find the
lamps required, the oil, etc., and keep all
in good order for 50s. per week. The open-
ing services were held on Sunday, October
18, 1840. The Governor and Captain Foster,
and a large party were present. On that
day Rtv. Mr. Waterhouse preached in the
morning, Rev. Mr. Hurst in the afternoon,
and the Rev. Mr. Cargill in the evening.
On Monday the services were conducted by
some natives from Fiji and Tonga, Rev. Mr.
Cargill acting as the interpreter. On the
Tuesday Rev. Mr. Simpson, of Launceston,
officiated. These notices were duly adver-
tised in the Trumpeter, Advertiser, and
Courier. Madame Carandini took part in
the anthem, “ These walls we to thy honour
raise.” Application was made about this
time for permission to sell that portion of
the church property lying between the
church and Murray-street. In January,
1842, the following reply was received
“ Manchester, August 12, 1841. Dear
Brethren, —You have the permission of the
Conference to sell the corner part of trust
property, Melville-street,Hobart Town. Sgd.
on behalf and by order of the Conference,
James Dixon, President, John Hannah,
Secretary.” Acting on the permission thus
given, it was decided to sell the corner allot-
ment at £4 10s. per foot, the other frontage
at £3 10s. This was done, which in the
present day we have very much cause to
regret for several reasons. It was now
deemed that better music should be pro-
vided in the church, and some discussion en-
sued as to the propriety of purchasing a sera-
phim,and Rev. Mr.Simpsonand the secretary
were requested to refer to the model deed,
and see if such could be consistently done.
They reported that there was nothing to
prevent such a purchase being made, and
one was had on trial for a few weeks, after
which it was dispensed with. Regular
worshippers in our church may have noticed
that on each side of the porch, there is
placed a cedar box. These were placed there
42 years ago to receive donations towards the
liquidation of the debt upon the church. I
believe the amount thus received for that
purpose was £ll Bs. lid.
The year 1844 found financial difficulties
pressing heavily upon the trustees,and it was
deemed necessary to take steps to raise the
sum of £3,050 by mortgaging the church
property.
Another appeal was made to the commit tee
in England, but this time without success.
The expenditure each year was exceeding the
income, and it was determined to make a
strenuous and special effort to reduce the
heavy liabilities of the trust, and after various
efforts to raise the necessary funds, arrange-
ments were made with the Commercial Back
to advance £3,000 at 9 per cent., the balance,
£BOO, being made a personal responsibility
by the trustees. At this junction the Rev.
W. B. Boyce was coming out to Sydney in
the capacity of General Superintendent of
Australian Missions, and he was entrusted
with a sum ef money to be granted to the
trustees on the following conditions ; That
a grant of £750 would be made if the
trustees and friends would raise £l,OOO.
Mr. Boyce generously promised to give £5O
and raise £5O among his friends as part of
the £l,OOO required. On May 5, 1846, a
meeting of trustees, seatholders, etc., was
held and arrangements made to canvass the
town for the amount required. This was
promised in the course of a few days—and
it was also decided to hold a bazaar, which
was duly held on September 30 and October 1,
1846, in a marquee in front of the chapel,
and realised £375. This, with the sub-
scription and grant from Mr. Boyce, made
£2,030. After paying interest due and ex-
penses of bazaar, £1,961 remained towards
the reduction of the debt, leaving a balance
due of £1,700, which was borrowed at 6
per cent. Amongst the list of subscribers
appear—Rev. Boyce and friends, £lOO ;
R. Brown, £2O ; Rev. W. Butters, £10; C.
Clark, £2O ; T. Crouch, £lO ; H. Dickenson,
£6O; J. Dunn, sen., £5O; J. Dunn jun.,
£10; A. Fraser, £4O; J. Hiddlestone, £5O;
H. Hopkins, £lO ; H. S. Hurst, £3O ; Capt.
McDonald, £10; Rev. J. A. Manton, £2O;
H. Marsh, £lO ; J. Rothwell, £25 ; Isaac
Sherwin, £lO ; Capt. Spotswood, £lO ;
S. Stevens, £lO ; Rev. N. Turner, £lO ;
J.T. Waterhouse, £5O; R. Waterhouse, £25;
J. Watson, £5O ; W. Wilkinson, £5O ; J.
Beresford, £lO ; Mrs. Burgess, £lO ; C.
Williams, £lO. Not much of importance is
recorded till December 20, 1847, when a
meeting was held to consider the propriety
of making a special effort to clear off the
remainder of the debt, some £1,300. Upon
the matter being made known to Rev. W.
B. Boyce he guaranteed a grant of £5OO,
provided £BOO was raised by the trustees.
Subscription lists and cards for weekly sub-
scriptions were issued, and on October 2,
1849, the debt and interest were paid off and
the property rendered free. In the effort
thus made nearly the same names as
I have previously mentioned appear.
Following this, in 1850 funds were raised
to enlarge the schoolroom and build a care-
taker’s residence. In 1851 the question of
abolishing the use of the Church prayers
was discussed and the retention of them
carried by the casting vote of the chairman,
Rev.H. Gawd. It is a coincidence that when
the use of them was discontinued in 1875 the
motion to do so was only carried by one
vote.
In 1855 the state of the roof of the church
necessitated a thorough repair, and it was
slated at a cost of £307. Two years after
saw the last of the lamps, and the intro-
duction of gas. In 1859 Messrs. Burgess
and Barrett presented to the church that
work of art which has excited the admira-
tion of so many visitors to our church ; I
allude to the painting under the singing
gallery, within the communion rails. The
minutes about this time, and for a con-
siderable time after, are taken up with
records of the negotiations which took
place between the trustees and the authori-
ties of the Mechanics Hall, and also with
the Sabbath School Committee, which re-
sulted in the alterations being made to
render the hall suitable for Sabbath school
purposes.
The year 1874 saw an effort made to
reduce the debt which by this time was a
burden upon the trust. The Rev. F. E.
Stephenson and Mr. James Smith (both now
gone to their rest) canvassed for subscrip-
tions ; a bazaar was also held, the total
amount raised being £279 6s. sd. In 1874
a new trust deed (the present one) was
drawn up, and fresh trustees elected.
During the years 1876 and 1877, the
church was cleaned and renovated, and a
new ceiling placed in it. The services dur-
ing the time the alterations were being
made were held at the Town Hall. It was
about this time that the question of procuring
an organ for the Church was mooted,and took
a tangible form. A letter was addressed to
the trustees, signed by several of the mem-
bers and worshippers in our church. The
trustees affirmed the desirability of au organ
being placed in the church. A lot of
correspondence took place, and a number
of meetings held, and eventually the
present fine instrument was procured from
Melbourne at a cost of about £620. The
back of the choir had to be altered to re-
ceive it, and considerable expense was in-
curred in that direction. To meet this, a
bazaar was held, and the proceeds divided
equally between the trustees aad the Organ
Fund Committee. The sum of £165 14s. lOd.
being received by each.
The events since then are so recent that
nearly all our friends sre conversant with
them. I cannot close this paper without
briefly drawing attention to the present
position of our Church in Tasmania, com-
pared with what it was 63 years ago. Then,
half a dozen soldiers meeting in an obscure
room. Now with our churches, preaching
places and schools, scattered through the
land. 2 hen our members and their religious
views, scarcely known. Now many of the
leading positions, in religious, political, and
commercial life, occupied and worthily filled
by its members. Then as a Church un-
recognised. Now with 144 churches and
preaching places, 30 ministers, 104 local
preachers, 95 class leaders, 82 Sabbath
Schools, 669 teachers, 5,551 scholars, 2
colleges, and some 15,500 attendants on
public worship—a power for good in the
land—our pulpits giving forth no uncertain
sound upon the religious, social, and moral
questions of the day. Our financial position
good. Our educational establishment oc-
cupying a foremost position with the
leading schools, and carrying off the
highest honours obtainable ; and remember-
ing also how many have gone forth
from this Church, and are labouring suc-
cessfully in other colonies, winning souls,
ought we not with thankful hearts go
forth with renewed energy, determined to
make our Church still more powerful for
good. To effect this we must bury generalities
and use our individual efforts, and with
heart and mind bent to the task, teach
through the lessons we have learned, that
we recognise our responsibilities, and act up
to them, and though ofttimes our actions
may and will be misunderstood, yet let us
work and wait,
For the whole world’s jarring discords
Shall be tuned aright ere long,
Into true, harmonious blending
With the angel’s peaceful song ;
So in the mighty chorus,
To be chanted before His throne,
May our voices be found all tuneful.
No part unlearned, unknown.
Tasmanian Mail, September 19 and 26, 1891-
Printed at “ The Mercury ” Office, Hobart.
