

King Geokge (Tubou)
The First of Tonga, Friendly Islands [Tui Kanoknhohi).




MEMOIRS
OF THE
Rev. Dr. Shirley Waldemar Baker
D.M., LL.D.
Missionary and Prime Minister
BEATRICE SHIRLEY BAKER
COULLS SOMERVILLE WILKIE. Ltd.
Printers and Bookbinders
Dunedin, Christchurch Wellington.
[COPYRIGHT!


FOREWORD.
THE materials for these memoirs have been long laid by
awaiting the anangement by far abler hands than mine.
To prevent a still greater delay, I have undertaken the
work, not venturing to hope that I will supply those who
knew my father, the Rev. Dr. Shirley Waldemar Baker, with a
narrative which they will deem worthy of its subject, but anxious
that a true account of his life and work should be laid before
the public, because of the misstatements that have been published
about him. As far as I can, I have given an entirely literal tran-
scription from the documents and papers in my possession, lest
any deviation from the expression of the original should render
the authentic meaning doubtful and destroy the information and
facts which are required to be brought before the public, while
a free wording would not have been sufficient and would have
failed in satisfying the reader. As my motives for publishing
this work are merely to perform a duty which I think due to my
father’s memory, and to contradict the slanderous lies that have
been published about him personally and his work, as a reply to
such is the simple design of the following pages. What has been
his reward for every hour of day and night, given to hard work,
for constant striving, incessant labour against every difficulty?
Calumny and disdain has he been repaid with. To have main-
tained Tonga her liberty against such odds was triumph enough
for him. These are the memoirs of a man who tried to make a
native nation. A little nation, truly, and far off in the South
Seas, consisting of five groups of islands with about 23,000
people. The lesson of independence and self-government was
taught them along with the customs of progressive Europe, and
when you consider that this was mainly the work of one man,
the transmutation of a cluster of Polynesian Islands into a
nation, with a commerce, a regular social organisation, and a
peaceful relation with the outside world, it is scarcely less than
a miracle, and it has been accomplished in less than a generation
under the wise guidance of the Rev. Dr. Shirley Waldemar
Baker. This group of Islands has given one of the most remark-
able and interesting chapters to the history of civilisation. Plis
firmness has not only protected the Islands from being plundc l , ed,
but has steadied their progress and inspired the people with self-
reliance through the difficulties involved in barbarism conform-
ing itself to civilised institutions. The influence which he
acquired over the King and Chiefs was always used to promote
the best interests of the Islands.


MEMOIRS
OF THE
REV. DR. SHIRLEY WALDEMAR BAKER, D.M.,
Missionary and Prime Minister
HE late Rev. Dr. Shirley Waldemar Baker, D.M., LL.D.,
/TV was born in London, February 14, 1836. His father
) was the late Rev. George Baker, Church of England
clergyman. His mother was Jane Gray Baker,
daughter of the late Rev. Samuel Woolmer, Wesleyan minister,
Gloucestershire. She died in his infancy, and it was her dying
wish that he should become a missionary. He was confirmed
in the Church of England and educated for the ministry, but
had a great desire to become a lawyer, and pending his decision
he went out to Australia to visit his uncle Parker, who was
Crown Protector to the aboriginals. As there was no Church of
England in the district he attended the Wesleyan Church, and
in 1856 he wrote to his father in England, telling him of his
wish to join the Wesleyan Church as a missionary. The fol-
lowing is a paragraph from a letter from his father who, in con-
junction with his ministerial duties, was the head master of the
Oxford Home Grammar School, London, St. David’s:—“ Your
present purpose of spirit to continue your studies for the ministry
is most gratifying to me, and your intended course for the future
has my hearty approval. Continue your study of Latin and
Greek; you then will be prepared to embrace opportunities of
advancement when occurring.”
In 1859 he married Miss Elizabeth Powell, of Yorkshire,
England, who accompanied him to commence his life’s work in
Tonga.
January 7.—1 was examined for the Wesleyan ministry.
April 27. —Received orders from the President to go imme-
diately to Sydney,
July 13.—1 was ordained to the work of the Ministry.
July 18. —Sailed from Sydney with Mrs. Baker as passengers
per “Jennie Dove” for Tonga.
August 14.—Arrived in Tonga.
* * * *


Dr. Baker readily acquired the language, preaching his first
sermon in Tongan a month after his arrival. He was considered
one of the best Tongan scholars and speakers. His voice was
rich and clear, and, together with a lively sense of humour, was
able to expound with a wealth of picturesque detail.
On his arrival in Tonga he found that, while the Mission had
been most successful in spiritual matters, yet, in consequence
of the peculiar difficulties in the case, nothing had been done
to raise the Tongans up as a nation. He very soon manifested
the deepest interest in the political, social, and physical—beside
the spiritual —well-being of the Tongans.
King George the First was not slow in recognising the value
of Dr. Baker’s advice, and in acting upon it. Fie became the
King’s favourite, to the annoyance of some of his brother mis-
sionaries; so from the very beginning of his mission work he
was the object of envy. .Shortly after his arrival King George
expressed to him a longing, which he had felt for many years, of
setting the people free and securing to them their property, thus
giving them some inducement to work and accumulate goods;
for, on his arrival in Tonga, it may be said there was only one
free man, and that was the King. The King appointed every
chief; they were subservient to him, to be deposed or set aside
at pleasure. The men and women were serfs of their chief —
their time, property, and everything they possessed were at the
disposal and will of the chiefs. No man or woman possessed
anything except in secrecy, because it was known that the
chiefs would claim it. Though he possessed all the land,
the lives and property of his people being in his hands, and
though he had the power of a despot and autocrat, yet the King
was poor in the extreme. The little trade that was done was
carried on by barter. The King had no salary; neither was there
any revenue. It is true there was a kind of local Court, presided
over by native judges, administering laws which had originated
from the missionaries. The mode of paying the judges and
officers was most objectionable. It consisted of apportioning the
prisoners who had been condemned by the Court to the judge or
officers according to his status or chieftainship; hence it was
sufficient for a person to be charged with a crime, as it was for a
judge’s interest to convict him, and seldom did the innocent escape.
Such was the state of things during the first two years of Dr.
Baker’s residence in Tonga. The King had repeatedly asked him
to draw out a charter of their liberty and a plan of government
by which a revenue could be obtained. Feeling confident that
the mental calibre of the Tongans was such that, if left alone ,
they could make themselves a nation, and taking as a motive


that annexation was not a necessity to missionary effort, he
determined to make it his life work to make the Tongans a
nation independent and self-supporting.
June 4. —The Tongan charter of their liberty which Dr.
Baker had drawn out was granted by King George the First.
The scheme embraced the setting free of the people, the destruc-
tion of the power of the chiefs in regard to serfdom, the appor-
tioning of an amount of land to each male adult who was
considered a taxpayer sufficient for the wants of his family, the
provision of a revenue sufficient for the payment of the King’s
salary and that of the judges and officers; the prisoners no longer
to be appointed to the King and chiefs, but to be used to promote
government work; registration of births, deaths, and marriages
to be kept; the feudal laws to be repealed, and the laws relating to
morality, which had been introduced by the missionaries, to be
retained.
After considerable excitement and indignation on the part
of the chiefs, this charter w r as passed by the largest meeting of
chiefs that Tonga had ever seen; representatives not only coming
from the distant islands, but also from Fiji, Samoa, and Uvea.
“ When we reached the temporary platform, we saw a mighty
congregation that had come to show their allegiance and respect
to King George, and to unite in the great parliament which he
had called. Some four to five thousand natives sitting together
in solemn silence, under the spreading branches of the banyan
(ovava) tree in whose cool shades sits in solemn majesty King
George of Tonga. Yes; majestic in appearance as well as in
power. What power, but that of Gospel Grace, could have
changed that man’s heart? Many are the victims that have fallen
beneath the herculean blow of his war-club. A few years hence,
his was the glory to imbrue his hands in the blood of fellow-men;
but see him now waving the olive branch of peace. After a hymn
that echoed through the mighty throng I preached to them from
the Book of Acts, ii, 2-4.”
The King’s Speech. “ Palace, June 4, 1863: —To-day, the
first anniversary, the first year of the freedom of Tonga, is passed.
It is true we are a small government, a small nation, but I am
thankful there are no slaves in the government. Thanks to the
great God that lam alive to-day to see it a success. If I never
accomplish anything else, I am grateful I have been able to give
to the Tongan people their freedom from slavery. This freedom
I give you all, will become the law of the government for ever


and ever, and it will not be possible for anyone to make slaves of
you all again. And cursed be those who try to bind you up again
in the bonds of slavery.”
The next political meeting of importance was held in 1864,
when Dr. Baker was asked to give them their flag, and to draw
out a system of municipal regulations, and also laws for the
keeping and making of the roads. It was at this time that the
King asked him to become his Premier, and he informed him
that he could be of more use and service to Tonga as a missionary,
and refused to do so. It was not until 16 years afterwards that
he accepted the position.
The system of holding their meetings, which they had copied
from the plan adopted by the Church, was that of holding local
meetings of chiefs in each group, and biennially a general meeting
of the representatives of the whole group. This was certainly
not without its objections. Any petty chief, who could raise a
following of a few score of men, had a right to sit in the local
meeting of the great chiefs. It was most humiliating to the high
chiefs, and gave to the petty chief too much importance, and it
was derogatory to the dignity of the King to sit in council with
them. The King asked Dr. Baker to draw out a constitution for
him, which would not only alter the same but give a better plan
of both legislative and judicial government.
Koe Otua mo Toga Ko Hoku Tofia
(The God and Tonga are my
inheritance).
The word “Tubou” is used for either
King or Queen in speaking of them or
to them.
GEORGE TUBOU.
Before the freedom from serfdom, King George held a
meeting with his chiefs. Some of them wished to ask England
to annex Tonga, some to ask America. The King, in answer to
them:—“Tonga is my inheritance; the Bible tells us not to put
our trust in horses and chariots, but to trust in Jehovah. So I


say to you, my people, God and Tonga are our inheritance.” Dr.
Baker, in fulfilling a wish of the King to have a government seal,
had the words as a motto: “ The God and Tonga are my inheri-
tance.”
On the same seal are three swords and three stars repre-
senting Tonga, Haapai, and Vavau —The Friendly Islands —the
flag on either side being the flag that was asked for in 1864: Red,
with a red cross on white on the corner, the dove being the mes-
sage of the Gospel, and the King’s crown. In the same year the
Royal Ensign, and on it the seal, was represented.
“When King George gave Tonga the constitution covenanting
that he and his heirs would govern constitutionally, it was a
grand sight to see the old King leaning upon his staff addressing
his people, quoting the words of Samuel to the Israelites of old:
‘ Behold, here I am; witness against me before the Lord . . .
whose ox have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have
I oppressed ? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind
mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.’ ”
In the year 1875 Dr. Baker drew out a constitution of Tonga.
He was always in favour of the nationalization of the land, and
he accomplished the same in Tonga. In the new system of legis-
lation there was one House in which both hereditary chiefs and
representatives who were elected by ballot upon educational
qualifications sat together, an equal number of each. The appoint-
ment of a Ministry responsible only to the King; the appointment
of a supreme district and police courts, together with their various
officers, and their system of police, prison discipline; road laws,
etc.; also the defining of the prerogatives of the King; the suc-
cession to the throne, and the power of the Privy Council —all
these regulations have for years been found to work most success-
fully. Subsequently the system of education, compulsory and
free, with the Protestant Bible for the Protestants and the Douay
Bible for the Catholics, was also passed. A few years afterwards,
during Dr. Baker’s premiership, customs duties were levied and
a tariff formed, whereby the revenue was greatly increased.
Objections have been made to some of the laws of morality, but
it is well to remember that for more than 50 years these laws
have been handed down as laws from the missionaries, and from
the very nature of the people they may be suitable to natives,
although repugnant to Europeans.
German Treaty with Tonga,
Made on November 1, 1876. Ratified on October 20, 1877.


Dr. Baker’s next appointment was to Haapai, which consists
of numerous islands. Travelling by canoe —the large canoes,
called “ Hamatefua,” are the double ones; the small canoes,
“ Tafaaga,” fishing canoe —to islands containing few landing
places, and these through dangerous openings in the reefs. The
principal work in which he was engaged, apart from his regular
ministerial duties, was attending the sick, and these were brought
from all the different sections of the circuit for him to attend.
He was the only medical man in the islands for some years, and
attended to most of the missionaries and their wives. He had a
lot to contend with in connection with his attending the sick, as
some of the missionaries did not approve of his work, and ham-
pered him all they could. At a district meeting reference was
made to his having vaccinated the natives, and he writes in his
journal: —
“We finished our district meeting this afternoon. At its
conclusion a very unhappy conversation took place, one
of the missionaries spoke the most bitter things, also
the chairman. He who judges all knows the motives
by which I was actuated in vaccinating the poor
Tongans.”
Afterwards he received a letter from the King and chiefs
thanking him for the great work he had done in vaccinating more
than 3,000 people during the year. The following year Dr. Baker
had to apply for leave of absence on account of Mrs. Baker’s
health, which, being granted, he left for Australia. He remained
in the Colonies till the early part of 1869, lecturing and doing-
mission work. He walked the hospitals for more than a year to
acquire information.
On April 24, Dr. Baker left Sydney on his second appoint-
ment to Tonga, having been elected Chairman of the Friendly
Islands. Before he was made chairman, he informed the General
Secretary of Missions, Sydney, that he had the choice of accept-
ing a district in Melbourne, but would leave it to the Secretary
to decide.
Attended the Annual Conference in Sydneyand was re-
turned chairman.
Attended the Annual Conference and presented the request
of the King that Tonga be no longer a Mission, but the Wesleyan
Church of Tonga. The salaries of the missionaries were raised
to one hundred and eighty pounds. While away at the Con-
ference it was persistently stated that the King would make Dr.
Baker Premier if he did not return as chairman.


To the Secretary Tongan Government.—l beg to receive
the receipt of yours March 25, 1874, written by His Majesty’s
command, containing - a series of resolutions, and sent to me to
bring before our next district meeting and the next Conference
held in Sydney. Resolutions: That the time has come when Tonga
is able to support the entire expenses of the Mission in Tonga,
and earnestly desires that the Committee and Conference will be
willing and allow the Church in Tonga to become an Independent
Church to be supported by the people of Tonga as their Church,
separate and independent of others.
Consul Layard’s despatch, and the Rev. Dr. S. W. Baker’s
reply: “The European residents affirm that Mr. Baker uses his
power not for the good of the natives, but entirely for his own
aggrandisement and emolument. They accuse him of being a
trader in disguise, and in league with the firm of Messrs. Godeff-
roy and Sons of Hamburg, in whose favour he obtains, or makes
concessions of every kind, and with whose stores he directs the
stream of copra poured into the Mission treasury, receiving a
percentage on the same himself.”
“That I use my influence not for the good of the natives, but
for my own aggrandisement.—ln refutation of which I would
point to the position of Tonga to-day. Ido not say it boastingly,
but in self-defence. I had the honour of drawing out the Deed
of Liberty, and of giving them their flag, and of giving them
most of their laws, and in getting them to make good roads.”
“Being a trader in disguise.—Nobody can say I ever bought
a bag of copra. As regards the contract with Messrs. Godeffroy
and Sons. It is true their firm allows the Mission the extra per-
centage, as they have no risks to run. But I have not received
a farthing of it.”
“ Consul Layard continues to say that one of Mr. Baker’s
sources of private emolument arises from the dispensing of
medicine and attending the sick, and I am told that he is possessed
of some medical skill. I was under the impression that medical
men receiving salaries from missionary funds administered to
the bodies of their converts without looking for emolument.”
“It is a gross misstatement, my giving medicine as one of
my sources of private emolument. My bills for medicine, as the
Mission Committee well knows, have often amounted to more
than a fourth of my salary. As to attending the sick—and pos-
sessed of some medical skill—it is true I used to spend some of
my vacation with my uncle, Dr. Woolmer, of London, who had
the honour of being medical attendant to the Queen’s household


at Buckingham Palace. I presume he was able to give me in-
structions, especially as he wanted me to become a physician. Had
it not been for my father’s determined wish for me to enter the
Church of England ministry, for which I was trained and edu-
cated, I should very likely have become one. lam happy to say
I can point to-day to scores of persons —European and native —
whose lives I have saved, who have never given me a sixpence,
and many in the Mission families.”
Consul Layard again observes—“lt may be supposed that
this gentleman, from his antecedents, is not especially qualified
for making the part of a legislator, and yet he manufactures new
Consitutions and Laws, which are accepted.”
“I was not aware it was the part of the instructions of
Consuls to investigate the antecedents of the missionaries. Before
entering the ministry I was studying the profession of my choice,
that of the law, and under one who afterwards proved himself
to be amongst the first of the profession; hence I have perhaps
as good an idea as some others.”
Consul Layard again says —“Maafu, the Tongan Chief, who
has so long resided in Fiji, and undoubtedly would have made
himself master of the whole group—Tonga —had not the English
and American Consuls thwarted him. He is known not to be
friendly to missionary domination. The latter has therefore
persuaded the King to declare David Uga his successor. I must
allude to the autocratic power possessed by Mr. Baker, the
enormous revenue raised for the purpose of their mission, and
the means by which it is raised. Mr. Baker informed me the
two aims of his life were to enrol Tonga in the family of Nations,
and to make the mission self-supporting.”
“Until King George gave the Constitution of 1875 it could
never be said that there was any legal heir, from the fact that
the King was elected by the King-making Chiefs, and often, very
often, the junior taking precedence of the senior. Maafu was
the son of the brother of King George’s grandfather, the founder
of the present dynasty, Mumui the Great. He had upwards of
twenty sons and daughters, of whom the following are the princi-
pal:—Tukuaho, chosen before his eldest brother and made King,
because his mother was of higher rank and was also King George’s
godfather, Tuboumalohi was afterwards King; Mumui Sataleki,
everyone expected, would succeed Maafu’s father, but waved his
right in favour of King George. Tubou i Faletuibabai, Maafu’s
father, did not come to the throne till after the death of King
George’s father, Tuboutoa. Consul Layard fails to say what is
the autocratic position occupied by myself. The amount raised


is forwarded to the Missionary Committee in Sydney. Mission-
ary collections are held once a year. As regards the mode of
giving, the General Secretarj'- of the Missionary Committee has
attended such meetings and seen it for himself. As regards my
own remarks, I see no sin in such an ambition, but rather the
contrary, to try and prove to the world the power of the Gospel.
Consul Layard has thought fit in his wisdom to report me to the
Colonial Office, and they again to the committee in England, and
then to the Board of Missions in New South Wales.”
“Downing Street, August, 1876. Sir, I have laid before
the Earl of Carnarvon your letter of the 11th, stating that steps
have been taken for an investigation into the proceedings of the
Rev. S. W. Baker of Tonga. Although His Lordship is of
opinion that nothing but good can result from such an inquiry
I am desired to transmit to you the following extract, from a
despatch lately received at the Admiralty, which he is glad to
observe convey an altogether different impression of the conduct
of the Tongan missionaries.
I am, your obedient servant,
P. C. MEADE.
Extract from a despatch from Commodore Hoskins. —
“May 19, 1876. From the information given me by the
missionaries, and from the communication I was able to hold
with the King by aid of one of their interpreters, I gather that
the affairs of the Group over which he reigns are going on peace •
fully and prosperously, without at present any disturbing element.
“The King is a very fine old man of about 76 years of age,
and has very great influence and prestige with his people. Fie
appears to preserve an independent authority, and though coun-
selled and influenced by the Wesleyan.-missionaries, to be by no
means entirely in their hands. Alterations are being gradually
made in the laws and customs of the islands, and as far as I could
judge those that have recently been promulgated are just and
sensible. A Constitution was decreed and published in the
Tongan language, but has not been printed in English. A copy
will, however, be sent me shortly, which I purpose forwarding
for the information of their Lordships. The principal points in
it, I am informed, are the transfer from the King—hereto by
Tongan law the sole owner of the soil through the group—to the
principal chiefs, of the rights to the lands occupied by their peo-
ple, on condition that they enforce the published Tongan laws,
and secondly, the making the Kingship hereditary in the present
King’s family, the old practice having been for it to be given
alternately to members of the older (the King’s) branch and, the


younger one —a similar custom to that which has existed both in
Fiji and Samoa. The King is assisted by the missionaries, whose
influence seems to me to be exerted for good ends, though it is
occasionally resented by the other white residents, when it leads,
as in case of the liquor law, to a curtailment of the profits they
make out of the weakness of the natives. But it is King George’s
own character—firm and vigorous to a degree—which has ren-
dered so good a commencement possible—qualities which it is
much to be hoped will be inherited by his successor.
“King’s Palace, Nukualofa, November 13, 1876. To the
General Secretary of Missions. Mr. Baker has reported to me
the British Consuls letter, therefore I wish to say a little about
it. Ido not know the least thing in which Mr. Baker has usurped
my power. It is true I have often asked Mr. Baker what is his
opinion or advice with reference to certain arrangements I make,
but never has Mr. Baker ever overruled me in my government.
There have been many things which I have asked Mr. Baker
about, but when I have taken his advice, I do not know that I
have repented in doing so. I do not know how it is that Mr.
Baker is thus punished ever since he came to Tonga. I do not
know of any missionary who has such love for Tonga, and his
help to me in various ways, in settling anything difficult. In his
medicine many chiefs and people are alive to-day through him,
Therefore I beg of you to let Mr. Baker remain a missionary to
Tonga whilst I am alive, because I will be right or wrong with
Mr. Baker. George Tubou,
Writing to the General Secretary. —Allow me to say if the
committee and yourself consider I have gone too far in helping
the King or advising him, then please tell me how far I can go,
and I will readily comply with your demands. You are aware I
could become Premier to-morrow, as far as position goes. Tell
me what to do and I will abide by it, and if my connection with
the King as his friend is to be altered, let them also tell him
honestly why and wherefore. Since I have been in the mission,
I find, in looking over my private accounts, I have spent some
hundreds of pounds in medicines. I have now adopted the fol-
lowing plan: All money received either from Europeans or
Natives to be put into a money-box to be opened by our district
missionaries.
Attended Conference, returned as Chairman. Letter to Sir A.
Gordon; “In reference to Consul Bayard’s despatch.—May I
thank Your Excellency for your kind remarks made in reference
to the same, to the Secretary for the Colonies. And it certainly


would have afforded me great pleasure to have given verbal ex-
planation to the same in addition to what has been sent to the
Home authorities. You may rely upon my giving H.B.M.’s Con-
sul all the assistance I can as becomes a British subject: I have
written to the committee asking permission to leave the mission
work altogether at the end of three years. Our new Consul, Mr.
Maudslay, is making himself very busy meddling with Church
affairs and inquiring into everything. His interpreters sent for
local preachers and members to inquire about the proceedings of
our missionary meetings. The Consul’s interpreters are stating I
am to be removed immediately.
Extract from a letter of the General Secretary of Missions,
Sydney: “ Sir A. Gordon, on his way to England, wrote me wish-
ing for an interview. I wrote if he pleased I would take with me
the President of our Conference. Accordingly we had a long
interview with him. His Excellency introduced the subject of the
Friendly Islands. He dwelt upon your great political influence, an
influence active and clearly felt; of this he insisted that there could
be no doubt. We told him that we held a missionary might give
advice, if he were asked by the King or chiefs. If a missionary
transgressed he would be liable to be recalled, tie seemed to have a
suspicion that you exerted your influence for the German Govern-
ment. He told us his efforts to negotiate a Treaty with Tonga,
which closed our first interview. When he saw us again he read
a letter he had written to the Consul in Tonga, in which he ex-
pressed his views about you, and his assurance we had no sym-
pathy with the matters he complained of. The enclosure is a
copy of Mr. Maudslay’s letter, in which he charges you on the
subject of the Natives borrowing money off traders to enable
them to give at the missionary meetings,”
The General Secretary of Missions again writes me: —“I
have received a letter from the Mission House, London, stating —
Sir A. Gordon informs me that, being about to leave for the
South Pacific, he felt it necessary to decide upon the course he
should take in regard to Tongan affairs, that he had come to the
conclusion to take the General Secretaries at the Mission Plouse
into his confidence. Pic therefore had placed in their hands for
perusal all the documents upon the subject—letters he had re-
ceived from Tonga —official and unofficial —some despatches to
the Secretary of State, and some affidavits. Having received the
letters from the Mission Plouse, London, I called together the
disciplinary committee, and laid before them the letters I had
received. The meeting adjourned to the next day, passed certain
resolutions for the Board of Management, which met the follow-
ing day.


“Resolutions —The Board has felt it necessary to recall you.
It has also deemed it necessary In your interests and those of our
mission to determine that these charges should be examined
thoroughly in Tonga. I herewith give an extract of the
charges:—
First: That of being a secret agent of a German Firm,
Messrs. Godeffroy and Sons.
“Second: That you conduct a large part of the business
transactions of the Tongan Government in Sydney, and you have
considerable influence in the management of the local finances.
. “Third: That you interfere in political matters. In the ap-
pointment of a Secretary. That it was almost entirely owing to
your management and influence that a Treaty was concluded with
Germany.
“Fourth: That you put under censure officers of our Church
for countenancing or assisting at the inquiry conducted by the
British Consul.
“Fifth: That you made advances of money to some of
Godeffroy’s agents on the day of the Mission collection.
“Sixth: That distress warrants were issued against Natives
who had incurred liabilities on the day of the missionary meetings.
That the letter to the Consul was both misleading and untrue.”
The Rev. S. W. Baker to the Deputation: “Before any
further steps are taken re Consul Maudslay’s charges against me,
I ask officially, why am I recalled —for I believe I have been
unjustly and _illegally recalled. I respectfully request that my
case be tried by a minor district meeting.”
Deputation.—“We understand you ask the reason of your
recall. The Board of Missions having power under rule three
under the head of Agents, in the interval of the sittings of the
Conference and with the concurrence of the President, to recall
any missionary, has exercised that power in recalling you. We
are not instructed to assign any reason for the action of the
Board.”
Deputation: “To King George. —We have received the letter
which your Majesty caused to be written to us that your Majesty
has heard that Mr. Baker has been commanded by the authorities
in Sydney to be removed without a trial, as required by the Church
Deed of Tonga, which has been registered in the Government
records of Tonga. Your .Majesty further states you signed the
leases because the said Deed had become the law and the rule of
the management of the Wesleyan Church of Tonga. If Mr.
Baker is removed without the trial provided for in the said Deed,


the leases shall become at once null and void. We would observe
that the Model Deed of Tonga does not interfere with the rights
of Conference to appoint and remove its ministers in Tonga. Mr.
Baker has been recalled by the Board of Missions in virtue of the
power it has always possessed.”
Reply: From the King:—“We all know positively you held
your meeting in Sydney because of the British Consul’s letters
that the Governor of Fiji took to the Committee in London, and
if the meeting had not been held in Sydney Mr. Baker would not
have to go, and this is what is plain to Tong-a; Mr. Baker goes,
not because he has done wrong, but because of his love to Tonga.”
Present: Deputation, Rev. S. W. Baker and A. Maudslay,
Vice-Consul. The deputation state they have been instructed by
the Board of Missionary Management to inquire into certain
charges against the Rev. S. W. Baker in Tonga. The charges
have been formed from what Sir A. Gordon calls official and un-
official communications from Mr. Maudslay, which were sent by
him to the Mission House Committee in London. With the
exception of charge one, the charges are taken from extracts
supplied by Sir A. Gordon. The Secretary of Missions advised
Sir A, Gordon of his action in the matter, and of the course which
the Board had resolved in taking.
Sir A. Gordon in reply: “Your letter has given me much
satisfaction, and further-in the circumstances of the case I
cannot hesitate to desire Mr. Maudslay to give you every assist-
ance.”
Secretary of Missions to Mr. Maudslay: “I have taken out
the charges as well as I can from the extracts supplied to me. We
shall have to look to you for the evidence, by which you propose
to establish the charges against Mr. Baker.”
The Deputation read the charges, and the word “secret” was
expunged from the first charge. It appears the Deputation, in
framing the charges, put the word “secret” in, but was not in
the extract.
Rev. S. W. Baker: “Before entering in my defence with
regard to the charges, I will refer to Mr. Maudslay’s remark
“I consider myself responsible for official letters only. Some of
these charges I have never affirmed. I distinctly protest against
my unofficial correspondence being used.”
“First Charge: What does it imply? That I have been un-
faithful to my Church, dishonest to the Committee, and used my
position for personal aggrandisement. An agent —without any
pay and risk a position like mine—well, may Mr. Maudslay try
to shirk his own statement. I challenge anyone to prove that I
have acted as the agent of Messrs. Godeffroy and Sons.”


“Second Charge: Mr. Maudslay has not brought any evi-
dence to prove the statements. I need not bring further evidence
than the statement of the Premier, David Uga—‘Mr, Baker does
not conduct the business of the Government of Tonga, nor has
he complete control over the business transactions of the Tongan
Government in Sydney, nor considerable influence in the manage-
ment of the local finances.’ ”
“Third Charge: His Majesty King George in his statement
says —with reference to a Secretary—‘Mr. Baker did not speak
about it, or express his opinion, nor influence me; it was my own
wish. Mr. Baker had nothing to do in obtaining by the Kingdom
of Germany, the lease of the coaling station in Vavau; before Mr.
Baker knew about the matter, the Premier and I had decided
about it, therefore he did not persuade us to have anything to
do with it.’ I have never given my opinion, and I have never
pressed my views either on the King or the chiefs. That con-
siderable advantage has been granted to Germany, there is none,
and the Treaty made with Germany, Tonga would only be too
glad to make with any great Power. That I advised Plis Majesty
to make a Treaty with Germany, did I do wrong? am I hence to
be denounced a traitor? The Committee of Discipline in 1877,
with the President in the Chair, said—‘We are of opinion that
there is no reason why missionaries in Tonga should not give
advice in private to the King when he asks for it, if they feel
themselves competent to give it, or why they should not interpret
for His Majesty, or for any member of his Government, when
they are invited to do so, and deem it right to comply,’ ”
“Fourth Charge: It is strange in a quarterly meeting Mr.
Maudslay should only bring one witness, and what was his evi-
dence ? he was neither suspended or degraded, but simply had no
appointment for a time.”
“Fifth Charge; Had there been no hurricane we should
never have heard a British Consul making a charge like this,
and but for the hurricane, there would have been no difficulty in
paying the debts. Then again, I. would wish the deputation to
remember that all these things, into which the Consul is inquiring
and concerning which the investigation is being made, happened
in the year 1875-1876—affairs that have been inquired into by
the Conference, Mr. Mauclslay comes and inquires into them,
when the system is at an end, and put an end to by myself.
“Sixth Charge: The evidence advanced by Mr. Maudslay
has failed to prove, and also failed to show, that through my
aiding and abetting there was great distress in the land. To
receive promises is part of our church system. The General


Secretary was cognisant of it ; it was not to say that I alone had
done it. The system of advancing- money to the Natives, to be
returned at the collection, was not originated by me, and it was
not only done in Tonga, but at other places.
“That the paragraph three in my letter to the British Consul
was both misleading and untrue: I maintain that the whole of
the evidence produced goes to prove that my statement was not
untrue. When I was called upon to answer at the District Meet-
ing, he would never have allowed such a chance to escape, knowing
only too well that he need prove nothing more than I had stated
what was misleading and untrue to accomplish what he so
ardently worked for —my removal—as appears in his letter in
which he says: T trust that in this and my two previous despatches,
I have given sufficient grounds to justify the wish I have ex-
pressed that Mr. Baker may be speedily removed from the Islands.’
‘‘What, then, is my position of to-day in consequence of the
action taken by a young man who has not been in the land three
months; interfering- in matters altogether beyond his jurisdiction,
meddling with Church affairs, the usages and customs which have
been adoped for years ? I have not been guilty of falsehood, or
unfaithful to my trust. I feel, in being removed in this way,
after almost twenty years service in the Islands, yet I am con-
fidently leaving with a clear conscience.
“ Mr. Maudslay states to the Deputation, ‘ Mr. Baker’s pro-
ceedings are causing serious impediments in my way. I hold a
commission appointing me one of H.B.M.’s plenipotentiaries in
the Western Pacific, and at the present time I have instructions
to negotiate a Treaty with King George of Tonga. lam awaiting
the arrival of Sir A. Gordon, with whom I am associated in the
full powers to carry out my instructions I should now be employed
in preparing the way for the Treaty it is proposed to make.’ ”
The Rev. Dr. Shirley W. Baker and family left for Auckland
in the early part of November. Sir A. Gordon arrived in Tonga
in the same month. The Treaty between Great Britain and Tonga
was made at Nukualofa, November 29, 1879, and ratified July 3,
1882.
The first visit of Sir A. Gordon in connection with this
Treaty was made during the absence of the Rev. Dr. Shirley W.
Baker at the Conference., Sir A. Gordon ’ wished to make a
Treaty, but the King wished for time for consideration. Some
one informed Sir A. Gordon had Dr. Baker been there the Treaty
would have been made. The outcome of this visit was the recall
of Dr. Baker.


A missionary’s letter from Fiji: “There is no getting out of
the fact that the Board had no intention of recalling Mr. Baker
until the receipt of the London Secretary’s letter also. Why
could not Mr. Baker be heard on the spot as King George wanted?
The action of the Board appears to be a condemnation of the
District Meeting of 1876 and the Conference of 1879, both of.
which bodies had the case before them and pronounced upon it.
In what way had Mr, Baker endangered the interests of the
mission since the Conference and the date of his recall by the
Board? and how was it that neither the Board nor Mr. Baker’s
brethren in Tonga, nor our Tongan Churches discovered that
mission interests were endangered until Sir A. Gordon set the
London Secretary to work. King George does not seem to think
that mission interests were being injured. He protested against
Mr. Baker being removed —When Sir A. Gordon with a large
retinue went up to Tonga to annex, so it was said —Mr. Maudslay,
referring to the feeling aroused in consequence of the action
against Mr. Baker, said to him, ‘You will not get even a treaty
signed.' If the ordinary Treaty only was wanted, why take up
the local steamer, as well as the Emerald warship, with the
Receiver-General, Interpreters, Clerks, twenty-five armed Con-
stabulary, and Secretaries, Maafu also had been sent with
despatches.”
“The Crown Prince, Premier of Tonga, accompanied me to
Auckland for the purpose of obtaining medical aid. Returned
from the N.S. Wales Conference. After my speech, it was de-
termined I might rest for a year, live in Auckland, and go where
I liked.
“Charges —There is nothing in them directly against Mr.
Baker’s moral and religious character. That, in reference to Mr.
Baker’s administration of our mission affairs, he has greatly
erred, advancing money to the Natives on the day of the mission-
ary meeting. In reference to his interferences in the politics of
Tonga, Mr. Baker has gone beyond the bounds permitted to our
missionaries. In reference to Mr. Baker’s conduct as a British
subject, he has conducted himself so as possibly to bring about
embarrassment between the Missionary Society and the British
Government. There is no doubt in the minds of the committee
that the British Government, through the Governor of Fiji, meant
annexation. How otherwise could I possibly bring about em-
barrassment between the Mission and the Government by my
opposing annexation? Sir A. Gordon is very anxious about the
succession to the throne of Tonga. If he could get Maafu ap-
pointed he would sign over Tonga. Two Chiefs have come from


Tonga to accompany myself, and the remains of the late Premier
of Tonga, His Majesty wrote asking the annual Conference in
Sydney to grant his request for Tonga to be an independent
Church, for the Church to be the same as in Sydney. In answer,
the Conference states, that the General Conference, which meets
every three years, is the only legislative body which can deal with
this matter, and therefore this Conference has not the power to
do what the King requests in his letter, but must refer to the
next General Conference.”
Extract, Rev. T. Buddie to the President of the N.S. Wales
Conference: —
“As regards the request of King George and his people, to
be constituted a Methodist District, I think it would have been
well had this been done before. I consider that this should be
the object aimed at in all our missions. The sooner they can be
made self-supporting and be organised into regular Circuit Dis-
tricts the better. On the subject King George appears most
decided, and only waits the decision of the General Conference
to determine his future course. The charges preferred against
Dr. Baker are frivolous, in no way affecting his moral, religious,
or ministerial character. He gives advice in political matters;
who of us old missionaries have not been compelled to do so. Mr.
Baker’s opposition to annexation of Tonga in my opinion was
right. With all deference, I think the deputation to Tonga in
Sir A. Gordon’s representations was a mistake.”
Extract, Fiji Argus, July, 1880
“The “Nautilus,” H.I.G.M’s gunboat, on June 30 arrived in
Tonga from Auckland with the remains of the Crown Prince,
Premier of Tonga, on board, also the Rev. Dr. S. W. Baker and
Tuuhetoka, a Tongan Chief. The King granted Captain Clenden
an audience, and Plis Majesty expressed the great obligations he
was under to Captain Clenden and through him to the German
Government for the great honour which had thus been conferred
upon him and his family. During Dr. Baker’s visit to Tonga the
King asked him to become Premier of Tonga.. In doing so, Dr.
Baker was actuated by a desire to assist the King, believing that
he could render good service both to the chiefs and people. He
refused to accept any higher salary than the stipend he would
have received as a missionary.
“When I returned to Auckland I found a letter from the
President of the N.S. Wales Conference saying: ‘From a com-
munication which is to hand, I learn that the King of Tonga has


appointed you to the position of Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Controller of Finances, that you have accepted the office. I have
now to request that you will appear before the Conference of
Discipline in Sydney to answer thereto.’ I requested to be ex-
cused from attending the Conference of Discipline, for the
following reasons: That I am a Wesleyan minister under the
Conference, and not a missionary under the Board of Missions.
I do not receive an allowance from the Committee or occupy any
position under their jurisdiction. I had intended sending an
explanation of my conduct and views on my return from the
Islands, but I found your letter waiting me. I have agreed to
help King George of Tonga, and become Premier of Tonga, but
that the same is contrary to the laws and usages of the Church I
am hardly prepared to admit. I have the permission of two ex-
Presidents to say that the Committee have assumed to themselves
power, in my case, which they do not consider the committee to
possess. I may also remark I have seen Sir A. Gordon, the High
Commissioner and obtained the promise of Plis Excellency’s as-
sistance in advancing the welfare of Tonga.”
Extract: Sir A. Gordon’s Memoirs, November 25, 1880. “1
said there was no charge of disloyalty against Mr. Baker. That
there was nothing disloyal in a British subject considering that
the interests of an independent Estate would be better served by
more intimate alliance with Powers other than Great Britian,
rather than with Great Britain itself, or in expressing that opinion
to the ruler of that State. Plis conduct, assuming to have been
correctly reported to me, would have been unfriendly and un-
becoming, but could not be styled disloyal. I would frankly avow
that, considering his great influence, I would rather work with
him than against him.”
“To the President of the N.S. Wales Conference. After
careful consideration, I beg to accept the suggestion made by the
ex-President, that I voluntarily retire from the Wesleyan ministry
to help King George of Tonga, and I truly do so on the under-
standing that it is thus recorded in our Minutes. Telegram,
General Conference, saying—Tonga had been made an Indepen-
dent Circuit. King George wishes for the Rev. J. B. Watkin to
be made Superintendent of the Tongan District.”
Extract. —To the President from Prince Wellington Gu: —
“I am requested by His Majesty King George to inform you that
at a meeting held by His Majesty and his chiefs, it was resolved
that the Rev. Dr. S. W. Baker, Premier, should represent His
Majesty and his Government, chiefs, and people in negotiating
matters with the President and the Conference in Sydney.”


In reference to Wesleyan Methodist Church affairs in Tonga,
the Conference has appointed a committee to deal with Tongan
affairs.
His Majesty has commanded me to ask you to kindly present
to the Committee his request to the General Conference that it may
he pleased to attach the Tongan Wesleyan Church to the New
Zealand Conference, and that the request be presented to the N.S.
Wales and Queensland Conference. His Majesty still urges that
the Rev, J. E. Moulton might be removed, for his continued
political antagonism to His Majesty and his Government. On
the receipt of the answer to the King’s letter it was determined
to send the “ Sandfly ” at once to New Zealand with the telegram
to the General Conference at Christchurch.
Haapai, the central group of the Friendly Islands, which
has always taken the lead in political and ecclesiastical matters,
has again come to the fore, by being the first to initiate the move-
ment for the establishment of the Free Church of Tonga, It is
a matter of regret that the General Conference, held in Christ-
church did not accept the compromise proposed by the King. The
number of people who seceded from the Wesleyan Church, 18,500.
Deputation, appointed by the Conference, arrived April 20.
The following propositions were made by the deputation:-
Tonga should no longer be attached to the N.S. Wales Confer-
ence, but be attached to the Victorian and Tasmanian Conference.
That the Rev. J. E. Moulton be asked to leave the Islands. That
the Rev. J. B. Watkin be requested to withdraw his resignation
and ask for an appointment in the Victorian and Australian
Conference. The first and second propositions were agreed upon,
but the proposition on which the whole affair was wrecked, was
that of the third. In all probability the opportunity for recon-
ciliation has now been lost for ever.
England and Germany have signed a convention granting
the neutrality of Tong'a.
The Treaty between the United States of America and Tonga
was made October 2, 1886, and ratified August 1, 1888,
Letter from the Hon. J. B. Thurston, High Commissioner,
asking me to meet him in reference to the monetary question of
Tonga, and the steam communications. Sir Julius Vogel has
suggested that the New Zealand Government send a Commissioner
to Fiji re the Tongan Tariff, and for me to accompany him.
William Tugi has been included in the succession by His
Majesty King George in the place of the late Chief Henry Maafu.


January 13.—As the Rev. Dr. Shirley W. Baker was in the
habit of going to the Government office and working late into
the evening, advantage was taken of this by some criminals who
had been set free to make their dastardly attempt. Dr. Baker
was driving that evening. His daughter, who was accompanying
her brother, sat behind her father with him. The horse was
travelling rather fast, when it shied at a native standing on the
road. His son called out “that man has a gun.” Dr. Baker
immediately drew up, and his son jumped out, commanded the
man to put the gun down, stepping towards him as he spoke, and
seeing his father aimed at, tried to screen him, and his daughter
seeing the man taking aim at her father, threw her arms around
her father’s neck, completely covered him. The man fired and
shot Dr. Baker’s son in the arm carrying away the flesh, and
smashing the bone into pieces. His daughter was wounded in
the thigh, but Dr. Baker was not hurt. , The horse bolted, throw-
ing his daughter on her head, seriously injuring her spine. Dr.
Baker, as soon as he could get the terrified horse under control,
called up the police, and brought the doctor to attend his daughter
and son. The former became a confirmed invalid, and the latter
maimed for life.
Sir Charles Mitchell, High Commissioner, arrived in Tonga
in connection with the attempted assassination.
Extract: Sir Charles Mitchell. —Had the Wesleyan Confer-
ence which considered the appeal of 1874 acted in the spirit of
the General Conference of 1881, I have little doubt that all these
troubles would have been prevented. But it was then too late.
The King had the idea of absolute separation firmly fixed in his
mind; of the general dislike felt by the King and chiefs and the
majority of the people for the rule exercised over their Church
by the New South Wales Conference, there was a great deal of
evidence. I think that this dislike has been growing for years.
The King’s manner to me was courteous and his replies straight-
forward and unhesitating. I may here remark that I saw no
indication, either on this occasion or on that of any of the many
subsequent interviews I had with the King, of his mental
incapacity, or of his being under Mr. Baker’s control. On the
contrary, his mind appeared to me to be clear , his manner decisive,
and his whole bearing that of a man of strong will and indepen-
dent character.
Sir C. Mitchell also proved the newspaper accounts that
were used to excite public opinion elsewhere with reference
to the so-called persecutions, were absolutely and offensively


King Gkorgk. (Tuhoc)
The First, of Tonga, Friendly Islands (Tui Kanokubolu).
Tlia staff In the King’s hand is 3 feet 10 Indies long, which lie held when
giving Ills people their freedom from serfdom, and in granting the Constitution
of Tonga. The two first joints of the little finger of the King’s right hand
were sacrificed to the gods—according to their heathenish ceremonial rites.


exaggerated, and the banishment of the Wesleyan Tongans to
hiji, calling themselves exiles, was really their own voluntary
withdrawal to Fiji.
1 uibelehake, a Tuitongan, who had ideas of usurping the
throne, _ was in league with an anti-government party, the afore-
said criminals being members. They drew out a petition asking
England to annex, Tonga, stating the King was in his dotage,
and no longer able to govern, and also to remove Dr. Baker.
“It is true that many generations ago the Tuitongans were
the lords of the soil, yet through the royal blood becoming con-
taminated by the illicit connexion of one of their Tuitongans with
his female slaves, when the sons of these women came into power,
their assumption of authority led to national anarchy and repeated
assassinations, ultimately the right of the Tuitongan to the exer-
cise of supreme government was annulled by their own abnega-
tion.”
While it may not have been a Wesleyan conspiracy, yet the
assassins were harboured in the Wesleyan College grounds on
the night of the attempted assassination, and the chairman of the
Wesleyan Mission, the Rev. J. E. Moulton, translated the petition,
and in answer to his doing so at their district meeting said Sir A.
Gordon had informed him that individuals were at liberty, any-
where, if they were not agreeable to the residence of an English-
man in their land, to petition Her Majesty the Queen to remove
her subjects for fear of complications.
Rev. L. Fison: —The real question is whether King George
and his chiefs look upon themselves to be punishing their subjects
for offering unwarranted opposition. . . . That King George
is a mere tool in the hands of Mr. Baker. —The King is about
the last man in the world to be a tool in any man’s hands. From
the very beginning of his career he has uniformly shown himself
to be most able, strong-willed, arbitrary, stern, and implacable to
all who persisted in setting themselves against his will, but grac-
ious to those who submitted. Mr. Baker’s success is owing to
the fact that he has been keen enough to perceive what it was
possible to do with the King, but that he could prevent him from
carrying out his stern policy, I do not for a moment believe.
Communications from the Rev, L. Fison: —Fie suggests that
if the Rev. George Brown, in his official character as General
Secretary, were appointed ecclesiastical head, not to reside, but
to visit, could not the King accept that. In answer: I stated
“No. I am certain that the King and the Free Church would not
agree to anything that might look like reflection upon Mr. Wat-
kin;” and in a letter from the President of the Conference—l


wish to refer, especially to a suggestion of Mr. Fison’s to which
you say “No,” In answer —Since I wrote to Mr. Fison I have
had letters from Mr. Watkin and from several of the Native
Ministers ,of the Free Church. Mr. Watkin most pointedly ob-
jects to the proposed plan, and the Native Ministers'state they
will not agree to any other plan than contained in the King’s
letter.
Extract. —At the fifth General Conference of the Australian
Wesleyan Methodist Church held in Melbourne, May last, a
letter was received from the Premier of Tonga by the order of
His Majesty King George, requesting" the Conference.—That the
Free Church be acknowledged as an independent Annual Con-
ference, in connection with the General Conference of the
Wesleyan Methodist Church, on the same lines as the New Zea-
land and other Conferences bear to the General Conference.
Whereas the said General Conference appointed the Rev. George
Brown as their special Commissioner to Tonga, who preceded to
Tonga in August to present his credentials as special Commis-
sioner. Suggestion—The Friendly Island District of the New
South Wales and Queensland Conference be transferred from
the jurisdiction of that Conference and be united with the Free
Church of Tonga, and the United Churches hereby constituted
an Annual Conference, affiliated with, and governed by the
General Conference of the Wesleyan Methodist Church of Aus-
tralasia.
When the new Mission of New Britain and Ireland was
started, Native ministers, teachers, and their families were sent
from Tonga to help. When the Rev. G. Brown headed the
murderous attack at the New Mission, in retaliation for thch-
eating some of the mission people, it was greatly talked about
amongst the natives at Tonga. According to their way of think-
ing it was not the work of a missionary.
When the Conference of the Free Church was held, I was
requested to give them what information I could relative to the
action of the Conference. I was certainly surprised by the dis-
approbation expressed by several of the native ministers and
representatives of the appointment of Mr. Brown as Commis-
sioner. .
To the President of the General Conference: —I have re-
ceived a letter from the High Commissioner, Sir J. B. Thurston,
informing me that the letters (private and confidential) to Mr.
Brown and yourself have been reported to him, and demanded
an apology, which I made. The letter which Mr. Brown sent to
the King about me is libellous. liis charging me with all the evil
that has ever arisen in Tonga will afford me an excellent oppor-
tunity of putting in the witness box many persons.


Wesleyan General Conference of Australasia. The Rev. G.
Brown tabled reports of his visit to Tonga as Special Commis-
sioner.
Recommendation:—That this General Conference resolves
to earnestly request, through the High Commissioner, the good
offices of Her Majesty’s Government. The draft of a lengthy
letter to Sir J. Thurston upon the subject was read by the Rev.
G. Brown. It was decided to forward a letter to Sir J. Thurston.
Rev. G. Brown; “I only desire to speak upon the question of the
advisability of soliciting the good offices of the High Commis-
sioner. I would first say this—reference has been made to the
King’s feeling's, and they were in danger of misunderstanding the
real position of affairs in Tonga as regarded the King, their
action, and the people there. Would the Conference understand
me when I say that Mr, Baker was the King of Tonga (hear,
hear). He was also the Upper and Lower House of Parliament
(hear, hear). . .
When Mr, Brown interviewed the King after Dr. Baker had
been deported, in November of the same year, His Majesty would
not have anything to do with him in reference to a reunion of
the Churches.
Extract —Rev. Dr. Shirley W. Baker’s statement: The
Warship “Rapid” arrived in Tonga with Sir J. B. Thurston, High
Commissioner. An interview was appointed with the King. The
High Commissioner suggested to the King that the latter should
appoint some chiefs to meet him in order that he might bring
before them several matters which he had been commanded by
Her Majesty, the Queen of England, to bring under the notice of
the King. The King replied, that it was best for them to put in
writing anything they had to state. The High Commissioner
asked me to go on board H.M.S. “Rapid.” I accordingly went on
board, and was ushered into his presence. Instead of rising to
shake hands, he waved me to a seat and said: “With regard to
the King’s nonsense about writing, I suggest that a committee
should be appointed, and that I should meet the Committee.” I
replied —“I am surprised that you should make such a mistake.
I consider it an affront to the King.” The High Commissioner
then asked me if I were going to traverse his action. I replied
I would not oppose or support him, with regard to a committee.
Moreover, if such a committee were appointed, I would not at-
tend it. He then spoke about a Blue Book containing a letter of
the Minister of Police. I explained what was meant, and he
said he was satisfied. The Pligh Commissioner sent for some
chiefs, especially those who were opposed to the King and my-


self, to form a committee. Two of these chiefs, after the Act
of Deportation, signed an oath, that they requested me to be re-
moved.
“High Commissioner’s Office, Western Pacific, H.M.S.
‘Rapid,’ Nukualofa, Tonga, sth July, 1890.
“Sir, —I am directed by the High Commissioner to inform
you that, after a careful consideration of the existing state of
affairs in Tonga, and of the disorders which His Excellency is
satisfied are to be apprehended in the immediate future from your
continuous residence here, he has decided to prohibit your re-
maining in the Tongan Islands.
“2. As being a person dangerous to the peace and good order
of the Western Pacific, the High Commissioner will prohibit your
remaining here after Thursday, the 17th instant, subsequently to
which date you will, in the event of your disobeying that order,
render yourself liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding-
two years, and also to arrest and removal.
“3. His Excellency considers it his duty to inform you that,
according to some evidence in his possession given by persons
who know the feelings entertained of you by a large number of
their fellow-countrymen, your life appears to be endangered.
There are natives, so His Excellency is informed, who would
shoot you without hesitation did they not fear the consequences
to Tonga from the fact of your being a British subject; but who,
so exasperated are they, will kill you in any case, together, with
some of the chiefs who have carried out your behests, if you
remain in the country.
“4. The High Commissioner is aware, from personal ob-
servations, that you are attended at night by an armed guard,
even while moving about the precincts of the King’s house —the
partial possession of which, to the indignation of the Tongan
Chiefs, you have recently taken —and His Excellency is also
aware that, from trustworthy sources of information, for a long
time past you are never at night without such guard.
“5. I am, therefore, to acquaint you that in giving you this
information, His Excellency is also prepared, should you request
it, to ask the commanding officer of H.M.S. ‘Rapid’ to afford you
protection on board his ship at any time between this date and
that of the order of Prohibition as hereinbefore indicated.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) WILFORD COLLET, Secretary.


Her Britannic Majesty’s High Commissioner, Western
Pacific, Order of Prohibition by the High Commissioner.
“Whereas it has been shown by evidence on oath, to my
satisfaction, that Shirley Waldemar Baker, of Nukualofa, Tonga,
is dangerous to the peace and good order of the Western Pacific.
Now, therefore, I do hereby prohibit the said Shirley Waldemar
Baker from being on the Western Pacific Islands within the fol-
lowing limits, that is to say—the Islands comprised within one
hundred and seventy-third, and one hundred and seventy-seventh
degrees of West longitude, and the fifteenth and twenty-third
degrees of South latitude, and the waters within three miles of
said Islands, during two years from the seventeenth day of July,
one thousand eight hundred and ninety.
“Given at Nukualofa, Tonga, under my hand and Official
Seal, this seventeenth day of July 1890.
(Seal) “(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.”
The present action of the High Commissioner is certainly
contrary to the agreement made at Berlin between England and
Germany, when the declaration concerning the boundaries of the
English and German dominions in the Western Pacific was made.
The Article VI. reads thus —“This declaration shall not apply
to the Navigation Islands, nor to the Friendly Islands.” The
conduct of the High Commissioner towards me before the making
of the Treaty of the United States of America with Tonga- —
previous to that occasion the High Commissioner was on the
most friendly terms with me, and we were frequently corre-
sponding together, in a most intimate way, but after —a letter
which I received from him dated Pago-Pago, 6, 1886: —“The
U.S.S. ‘Mohican’ came here to-day, and I have learned may go
to Tonga with the Special Commissioner, Mr. George Bates, upon
some business with your Government. I hope to see you next
month, but in the meantime, let me counsel, not at this moment
to consider any fresh relations in any quarter. It seems to me
you should avoid as far as possible all entanglements.”
• A change of feeling was quite manifested against me, and
our friendly correspondence ceased. Before I received this
letter, I had received a letter from him saying—“l hear, from
something coming to my ears, that Mr. Basil Thomson, who has
been away on three months leave of absence,, has been busying
himself alittle in affairs which do not concern him. I am, how-
ever, recalling him for this reason” This is the last letter I ever
had in a friendly way. The object of the High Commissioner is
evident—the reason of the opposition to myself is because I have
fought, and intend to fight, for the independence of Tonga. Had


I been willing to be passive in his hands, things would have been
different, and I believe honour and reward would not have been
wanting. The chiefs who signed for my removal were sent by
the High Commissioner to inform His Majesty King George of
my deportation, that the High Commissioner had done so with
the wishes of England, Germany, and America. That I had
written the most insulting letters to England and Germany; that
I had issued a Blue Book libelling British officials, and that he
was sure that His Majesty knew nothing of the same; that I
had put His Majesty’s name to certain documents of the greatest
importance; that I had not accounted for the revenue and ex-
penditure.
“The High Commissioner is aware from personal observa-
tions.” —While Sir J. Thurston was observing Dr. Baker, he was
in turn being observed, and the guards he speaks of were two
prisoners who were working in the Government. When the
attempted assassination took place the King demanded that the
daughter and son should be taken to the Palace. His Majesty
would not let them go to their own home, which has now become
the site on which H.B.M.’s Consulate and Agency stands. When
Prince Laifoni was at College in Auckland he lived in Dr. Baker’s
home, also King George the second as Prince, both as invited
guests. But when Dr. Baker and his family were at the Palace,
they were there only officially with the expressed wish of the
King. ... The High Commissioner offers to give Dr. Baker
protection on board the warship “Rapid”—which was kindly
refused, and the night that Dr. Baker was deported a guard from
the warship “Rapid” was sent on shore to surround and guard
the Palace, to prevent Dr. Baker visiting the King. Not a soli-
tary native ever molested him, although a few days afterwards,
many of the prisoners were released from jail.
“Is informed there are natives who would shoot you without
hesitation.” —The chief, who, with Sir J. Thurston, interviewed
the King, requesting that he should be the King’s successor, was
that chief who before the deportation said Dr. Baker was to go
and he be made King. ■
“Being a person dangerous to the peace.” —It does seem
strange that it was just found out after thirty years residence in
Tonga, and Dr. Baker’s life should be of much importance to
the High Commissioner; instead of deporting Dr. Baker, why
not have deported those who were planning the dethroning of
the King.


Extract: Letter written by Prince Wellington Gu to Dr,
Baker, December 29,1881, re the mock Parliament at Mua Tonga.
The Minister of Police, Tuuhetoka, has been investigating the
petition they are getting up about removing you. When the
King heard about it, he was terribly enraged, and .said without
any hesitation that it is to try and dethrone me, not for the
Premier’s banishment, and looks like the work of a white man.
-t -t -t *
Abstract.' —The action of the High Commissioner of the
Western Pacific in issuing an Order banishing the Rev. Dr. S.
W. Baker from Tonga is an extreme measure, and will require
very strong reasons to justify it. Dr. Baker was not a recent
arrival at Tonga, and his connection with the Government was
well defined, and had existed for a great many years. The arbi-
trary powers under which Sir J. Thurston appears to have acted,
were manifestly conferred for the purpose of dealing with a
sudden emergency, and unless His Excellency has received in-
structions from the Home Govcrnnrmt he will have to adduce
much more substantial evidence than the declaration of a few
partisan chiefs to justify his high-handed proceedings. It is
admitted even in accounts of the affair which are bitterly an-
tagonistic to Dr. Baker, that the King was strongly opposed to
the measure adopted by the Pligh Commissioner. The action of
Sir J. Thurston has therefore involved a deliberate defiance of
the authority of the recognised ruler and established government
of Tonga. Dr. Baker has at least the satisfaction, when leaving
the Islands, of knowing that they remain intact for the sole
benefit and support of the Tongan Islands. He has neither
yielded to the temptation to lay hands upon them for himself nor
has he allowed any foreigner to do so. Plow many men —early
missionaries—or traders, who have enjoyed the same opportun-
ities can say the same.
The mere fact that a few of Dr. Baker’s political opponents
had declared his life to be in danger, was certainly a puerile
reason for forcible removal. Sometime back, when parleyings
were taking place, it was only the determined attitude of Dr.
Baker that prevented Tonga from being a Crown Colony of
Great Britain. That if Dr, Baker had thrown his influence into
the scale in favour of surrender of national independence Tonga
would have been annexed, and Dr. Baker would have been the
first Governor. He was however, firm, and his ruin w?is decided
upon.
* * * *
On the third day after Dr. Baker was deported Sir J.
Thurston, accompanied by the Vice-Consul, Captain of the war-
ship “Rapid,” and Tukuaho, had an interview with the King.


Sir J. Thurston requesting the King to allow Tukuaho to succeed
the King,instead of Taufaahau. The request was put three times
in succession, but His Majesty would not grant the request. Tui-
belehake, Tugi, and Tukuaho, all expected that the King would
be deposed as he was supposed to be in his dotage—each one
thinking that the High Commissioner would put him on the
throne. But Sir J. Thurston found that Commodore Hoskins
and Sir Charles Mitchell’s judgment of the character of King
George was correct.
* * >l=
After Dr. Baker arrived in Auckland he made all arrange-
ments required for his family, and was in Washington in the
following February. Fie had an interview with some of the
Senators, and several with Secretary Blaine. The question that
was discussed: Was it with the request and wish of King George
of Tonga that Dr. Baker was deported?
In the next, year, Sir J. Thurston returned to Tonga to
attend the opening of Parliament, the first after Dr. Baker was
deported. Mr. Basil Thomson was sent from Fiji to help the
Government. It is remarkable that after the High Commissioner
recalling him for busying himself a little in affairs which did
not concern him, he should become Assistant-Premier for one
year. A copy of the speech from the throne was placed before
the King for perusal, and, after doing so, there were two state-
ments which the King had expunged. His Majesty then said
very determinedly—“lt is a falsehood, I never requested, nor had
I anything to do with it. It was the wish of England to deport
Dr. Baker, and the wish of the High Commissioner to do so; nor
did I ask for Mr. Basil Thomson to help me. It was the Fligh
Commissioner’s work and doing.” When the speech from the
throne was read at the opening of Parliament next day, both
the statements that the King had expunged were found missing.
When the High Commissioner was leaving for Fiji next day, he
wrote to the King suggesting that a white man should be sent to
help; also to inquire of His Majesty who would be his successor.
Flis Majesty replied; “Taufaahau according to the Constitu-
tion.” His Majesty, in addressing his people —“They have taken
away the white man who has helped me for so many years. They
recalled him. They tried to assassinate him —and now they have
deported him. If I cannot have Dr. Baker as my Adviser, I will
not have anybody else.” And His Majesty kept his word.
King George the First of the Friendly Islands, founder of
the Kingdom of Tonga, passed away on February 18, 1893, in
his 93rd year, and 48th of his reign. Taufaahau, his great-


grandson, then became King George the Second. Dr. Baker,
while residing* in Auckland, did many things to help the young*
King aiH the native Premier; especially in revising the laws, and
for the Government Schools —Arithmetic, Geography, and His-
tory, etc., which he had translated and had printed when Premier.
Pie then put through the Press for the Free Church an English
and Tongan vocabulary, consisting of words collected by the Rev.
S. Rabone, himself, and his daughter, including a portion of
West’s Grammar, with an enlargement-same time editing and
translating the Free Church Newspaper.
In 1886 the Right Rev. S. T. Nevill, Bishop of Dunedin,
visited Tonga, and had a long interview with Dr. Baker. In
writing to him—“ Our conversation with you remains much on
my mind, because observations made in Samoa lead me to con-
clude that it will be desirable for the Anglican Church to establish
a mission there, and as Fiji also is likely to receive some attention,
I should like to recommend that Tonga be the headquarters of
our work in these Groups. I feel sure that if you could see your
way clear to render unification of the Church that an irresistible
position could be taken up,”
Dr. Baker bought a place in Haapai, where he started the
Anglican mission, Bishop Nevill providing him with a license.
Some three hundred joined in Haapai, and five hundred in Tonga.
Missionary collections were raised, making them self-supporting.
Some then joined at Vavau. Fie revised and translated the
Anglican services, consisting of the morning and evening prayers,
Collects, Litany, Catechism, Confirmation, etc. Fie drew out a
Constitution and established day and Sunday Schools. In Tonga
the school numbered about one hundred, and the same in Haapai.
Fie translated and edited a newspaper in connection with the
mission, in which were printed the thirty-nine Articles of Faith.
After preparing some of the people for Confirmation he wrote
informing Bishop Willis of Honolulu, requesting him to visit
Tonga and hold a confirmation service. About that time Hono-
lulu was taken over by America. Bishop Willis communicated
with the British Consul in Tonga, and it ended in Bishop Willis
taking over the work that Dr. Baker had commenced. In con-
junction with Church affairs, Dr. Baker assumed the work that
he had done in the early part of his mission life—nursing and
attending to the sick —and was thought much of. He cured and
comforted many in their different peculiar native complaints,
such as elephantiasis, leprosy, skin diseases, and fevers. He was
successful in the use of the electric and sun baths, which were


very beneficial. His daughter very ably helped him in administer-
ing to the sick, and in dispensing medicines which he had found
suitable and useful.
Mr. Basil Thomson arrived in Tonga as plenipotentiary re
the Treaty between Great Britain and Tonga —made at Nukua-
lofa, May 18, 1900; ratified February 16, 1901.
The last thing that Dr. Baker did for Tonga was to trans-
late this Treaty from English into Tongan at the request of King
George the second. After a meeting of the King and the chiefs,
a deputation waited on Dr. Baker asking him to become Premier
of Tonga, and that they had come at the command of the King.
In replying to them he said: “When he was Premier he was
Premier to the King of Tonga—an independent kingdom —but
under this Treaty it would be impossible. Tugi, one of the chiefs
who signed for his removal, pleaded with him to become Premier,
and in taking his hand asked for forgiveness for what he had
done, as he had followed his son’s wishes (Tukuaho). This
Ttikuaho was out riding, fell, and was taken up dead. Tugi
passed away soon after his interview with Dr. Baker. Tuibele-
hake tried to undermine his son, King George the Second, but he
and Ms son have both passed away, and his granddaughter.
Queen Charlotte, reigns in her own right, her Consort being the
grandson of Tugi.


PART IT
-*•* •*- -A-vA. -A. moL* Jl- a
The written history of Tonga begins on January 21, 1643,
when Tasman came to an anchor at the west end of Tongatabu.
They were not visited again till Captain Cook anchored off
Nukualofa in Tongatabu on June 9, 1777, and named them the
Friendly Islands. Two natives from Tahiti, named Kabe and
Tafeta, who had been converted by the London Society mission-
aries, called in at Tonga, on their way to Fiji; were taken by a
Tongan, Ilaiasi Lagi, to the King, Tubou Aleamotua, who be-
came converted, with some chiefs and about two hundred and
fifty people, amongst them Pita Vi. These converts built a large
native Church in Tonga. The Rev. J. Thomas arrived in Tonga
on June 28, 1826. One of the first things Mr. Thomas did was
to baptize Pita Vi.
Taufaahau, the name of King George the First, as he was
known when he w r as King of Plaapai, hearing- of the work of
the Tahitians, crossed over to Tonga and asked the Rev. J.
Thomas to get him a white missionary to take over to Haapai.
Mr. Thomas told him he could not give him one, but that he
could take Pita Vi. When they arrived at Haapai, they visited
the priestess who had charge of the temple, where the heathen
gods were enshrined. Taufaahau clubbed her on the head, then
strung up the gods by their necks to the rafters, opening up the
temple and grounds for desecration by animals; so they continued
their work in Haapai, then crossed over to Vavau converting
Finau, the King of the Vavau group; and by degrees some of the
people. When Finau died, Taufaahau was made King of Vavau.
Pie was then not only King of the Plaapai Group, but also of
the Vavau Group. Taufaahau was left the throne at Tonga by
Josaia Tubou; and was made King George the First; Tui Kano-
kubolu, on December 4, 1845, thereby becoming King George the
First of the Friendly Islands, the first King who had ever been
King of all the three groups,—Tonga, Plaapai, and Vavau.*
Extract: When the first chapel was built and opened at
Plaapai, a pulpit was of course indispensable. Little did the
officiating missionary think how greatly he was entrenching upon
Sovereign rights when he ascended the place prepared. Taufaa-
hau (King George) saw the elevation of the missionary with
* In heathen mythology these three groups were supposed to have hoen iahed out ol tte
sea by the god Maui—Tongatabu (Snored South), Haapai (tlpkited), Vavau (Sheltered Haoa).


dismay. It would never do for a foreigner, even though he was
a missionary, to violate thus publicly the rules of Tongan pro-
priety, and so to meet the difficulty, the King ordered his
carpenters to prepare him a pulpit of still loftier elevation, to be
placed opposite that of the missionary, in which he might sit,
and hear the Word of God without any disparagement of his
dignity in the presence of his people. Great, therefore, was the
missionary’s astonishment, when on the following Sunday, he
was confronted by the pulpit of the King.
King George the First preached his first sermon on May 22,
1835. King George’s son, Vuna, died on January 2, 1862. The
natives of the whole of Tonga, even natives of the Fiji and Samoa
Islands, presented themselves before the King, to show their
sympathy in his great sorrow, and according to their customs,
held their funeral ceremonies. A young missionary took upon
himself to interview the King and inform His Majesty that it
was not in keeping with His Majesty, who was a preacher of
the Gospel, to hold these ceremonies. When the missionary had
returned home, a chief was sent by the King with the message
that for the future neither he, the King nor any government
official would preach again, that His Majesty would leave that
for the missionaries and their native assistants.
From 1862 a thread is woven right through to the day that
Sir J. Thurston deported Dr. Baker. Commencing when the
freedom from serfdom was given to the people of Tonga, touch-
ing the vaccinating-of the people at ITaapai, on to the Constitution
of Tonga, and then on to the German Treaty; in Consul Layard’s
despatch, Consul Maudslay’s official and unofficial charges —all
on the same subjects of Church and State; then by Sir A. Gordon,
who sets the Secretary of the Mission House, London, to work;
the Treaty with England in 1879, causing the recall of Dr. Baker ;
afterwards the Treaty with the United States of America in
1888; then by Sir J. Thurston, who uses force, supported by two
of Her Majesty’s vessels of war, and the position of a High
Commissioner having the power to deport Dr. Baker—Admiral
Tyron on the subject said; “There are two sides to every question.”
In this of Tonga—and the unwholesome mixture of politics and
religion —Tonga was not allowed to have any say. High Com-
missioners, Consuls, Mission Board and Conferences expected
that King George should do as they required of him. In the
different Treaties, the very marked attention of High Commis-
sioners and Consuls. In the freedom of the Church —the extra-
ordinary embarrassment of the Wesleyan Conference. The in-
ternal movement of would-be usurpers to the throne, which gave


(
■kT®
- Mijnir^
MTOMPfr
J*Sp
jg
g|||B|jggnjjM
:w
M
w
jfl.. : *flHI
MiMM
1 fljPMP' *■
1' p • yf/ ]gr<-. *
iT- 7 - 1 ''
, .Sal
1 «h
j£
rli-
“ ■- T5kJI ■•* -
■ ■
B8BB mBT
MB Wk - -ilwBBl
isjjmjm jI
0
Ml
MIL
K|Brl
mfll
'-,- aR-’-tvr 1 -- -
a ""^
■3£SmliS§sl§£ :* 3H.
i, 4 - - ■
#4lii
T -f
’ ' -'''■ ' r '-*'jy
MMMMMM88MMMI
■.
.
Rev. J. R. Watkin
Dr. S. W. Baker
Prince Wellington
Gu
President of the Free Church
Premier of
of
of Tonga.
Tonga.
Tonga.


such opportunity to those seeking self-aggrandisement. The
self-banishment of supposed exiles making a good cause for
asking assistance of both High Commissioners and vessels of
war, and when these exiles were brought back some would rather
have stayed behind. The stand the Wesleyan body took in the
matter was actuated with a blind dislike to Dr. Baker and a very
firm belief that the Kin g was a tool in his hands. Notwithstand-
ing what Commodore Hoskins and Sir C. Mitchell had reported,
that the King was an independent character, yet the Wesleyan
body to the end persisted, and as was shown by a missionary
who said in his speech at the Conference, when they requested
Sir J. Thurston to intervene, that Dr. Baker was the King of
Tonga ; that Dr. Baker was both the Higher and Lower House of
Parliament. Much to Sir J. Thurston’s and this missionary’s
chagrin, they both proved during the same year that Sir C.
Mitchell’s reading of King George’s character was fully con-
firmed.
Dr. Baker was Premier for Tonga from 1880-1890. During
that time he put through many laws that were suggested by the
Ring, and had brought before Sir Frederick Whitaker of
Auckland, and Sir Wigram Allen of Sydney, laws that the King
thought suitable for the people, and laws which they are using
now. When Dr. Baker was deported, and Mr. Basil Thomson
was sent over from Fiji, he twisted up some of these laws; how-
ever, when he retired, they became untwisted. Dr. Baker’s in-
fluence was used to bring the Union Steam Ship service to Tonga,
although sadly to the liking of the European traders, so they
petitioned for his removal, on that score and for the Duty Act.
In establishing the Postal service, the printing of Tongan stamps,
and regulating the Customs, he had to fight against great diffi-
culties and opposition, as this had all been free, the mails being
taken to the Consulate. The singularity of introducing- the Police
Force brought him also in contact with many unique experiences.
During his" term of office the Government College and Day
Schools were instituted —a very great anxiety to the Wesleyan
Mission, and a great subject of communication. The policy of
the Mission Board in Sydney was not a progressive one; if the
Government did this or that, it was supposed to be in opposition
to the Mission. When Dr. Baker landed in Tonga, a young
missionary, he was presented to the King, who took a liking to
him, which lasted the whole of King George’s life. The King was
a warrior, and liked a good fighter. The more they tried to take
Dr, Baker away from him, the more determined he was to stand
for him. It was a friendship that was beyond the Board of
Missions to understand, so they put everything down to Dr.


Baker, seeing nothing good, but bad in red letters before their
eyes. When the freedom from serfdom was given to the people,
it was natural that the High Chiefs should feel it. It was ac-
cordingly made use of by his small friends. Two of the chiefs
thought that if they could get him removed, and the King banished
to Haapai, they would do away with the Constitution, laws,
etc., but they forgot what King George said in his speech, the
first anniversary of the freedom from slavery—“lt will not be
possible for anyone to make’slaves of you all again, and cursed
be those who try to bind you up again in the bonds of slavery.”
The King and his Premier had to bear with all the disloyal
and untrue statements by the opponents at the Secession of the
of the Free Church from the Wesleyan Society. The most
hysterical and false reports were circulated in Australian Metho-
dist Churches, with''reference to the so-called persecutions in
Tonga. Public meetings were held in order to arouse sympathy.
In a private and confidential letter to the Rev. George Brown,
about these false and wicked reports, Dr. Baker wrote “I should
have certainly thought you, who had escaped a felon’s cell at
Suva because I was made your scapegoat —for it is well known
the understanding between the officials of the British Govern-
ment and Messrs. Chapman and Hunt, that if I were not sacri-
ficed and recalled you would not escape, but if I were recalled
you would be let go free, on the charge of having murdered the
innocent women and children of New Ireland in your murderous
raid upon them —would have been true to an absent friend.” Mr.
Brown sends this communication to Sir J. Thurston, the High
Commissioner, on the plea that it was sent to his official address.
Mr. Chapman and Mr. Hunt were the General Secretary and
the President of the New South Wales Conference, and refers
to the. meeting held by them with Sir A. Gordon when they re-
called Dr. Baker on the charges “Official and Unofficial.” Mr.
Brown did not think it discourteous in passing letters marked
“private and confidential” into the hands of a High Commis-
sioner, and for him to accept such letters, and then to be satisfied
with an apology, and have it printed; for never would such an
excellent opportunity have been passed for legal proceedings to
be instituted, but a meeting had been held privately in a lawyer’s
office in Auckland about the question of petitioning Sir J. Thurs-
ton to remove Dr, Baker, and the subject was brought up re his
recall by the Mission Board. In the interview between Sir J.
Thurston and Dr. Baker on board the warship “Rapid” an ex-
planation about the printing of some statements in the Govern-
ment Blue Book re the attempted assassination was accepted.
Referring to this same Blue Book, Dr. Baker is informed through
the Secretary: “You are, in His Excellency’s belief, the prime


author and publisher, has come to His Excellency’s knowledge.”
Sir J. Thurston believed too much of what was reported to him.
Again—“ You are aware that the subject has been brought
to the notice of the King of Tonga, who, His Excellency is con-
vinced, has no knowledge of the nature of the proceedings.” Sir
J. Thurston was wrongly convinced, there was nothing* that King
George did not know of, or was not told of —a fatal mistake on
Sir J. Thurston’s part. He was so thoroughly convinced that
Dr. Baker could do and say just as he liked, so when he deported
him, it was under the delusion that he would be able, with the
knowledge and his conviction, to walk over the King; but his
knowledge of King* George was not up to his imaginations, and
his convictions fell short. Sir J. Thurston actually stated in his
interview with the King* that the books had not been audited and
the statements of revenue had not been printed. Yet it had all
been placed before the King, and the certificates presented.
Letter in the New Zealand Times: “I will venture to say
there is no State of a similar size in the world which can show
such a record of orderly progress as Tonga is under the rule of
King George and his Premier, Dr. Baker, a man whose name and
work in the Western Pacific will live long after the. memory of
his traducers shall be buried in oblivion. I can unhesitatingly
affirm that, taken as a whole, the laws of Tonga will compare
favourably with the legal code of any modern civilised State;
order has been preserved, poverty is unknown, rights are univers-
ally respected, serious crime does not exist, and works of general
public utility have been constructed, without incurring any debt.
The land of Tonga has been preserved inviolable for the people
of Tonga. And it is principally by Dr. Baker’s unalterable
determination that the lands of Tonga should not be alienated to
foreigners, that he has evoked so much hostility amongst the
land-grabbers. Dr. Baker’s rule was strictly no more a personal
rule than that of the Premier of New Zealand. Tonga is
governed by a King, Privy Council, and Parliament, and though
Dr. Baker, from his long experience and commanding personality,
was no doubt a verjr potent influence in Tongan councils, he was
by no means all-powerful, and he had to govern in accordance
with the provision of a legal system.”
In the remark “commanding personality,” it was that which
brought forth Sir A. Gordon’s remark to Dr. Baker in Welling-
ton at their meeting—“to meet you, Mr. Baker, is quite different
to hearing about you.”


Re the Secession of the Free Church, King George and the
Rev. J. B. Watkin were at Vavau, when word was brought over
to Tonga, that they were both very ill with typhoid fever. Dr.
Baker immediately crossed over and attended to them. Leaving
to go back to Tonga, was becalmed outside Haapai, the vessel
drifting into Lifuka. On arriving there, he sent for Paula Yi, son
of Pita Vi, to hold the Sunday services of the native officials that
had come with him as Premier. This Paula Yi had been sus-
pended by the Chairman, Rev. J. E. Moulton, of the Wesleyan
Mission. Mr. Moulton stationed at Haapai a young native
minister, and as there were several native ministers his senior,
in the circuit, they took umbrage. On his taking charge, he
introduced the Church Canticles —the choir objected. When
Paula Vi held the service on the first Sunday in January, 1885,
he had as a congregation the choir, the native ministers, those
who sympathised with them, and the officials. The congregation
numbered about five hundred in the morning. The afternoon
service about one thousand. Next day a deputation waited on
the Premier asking him to become their minister, as they wished
to start the Free Church of Tonga, to be separated from the
Wesleyan Church in Sydney. The Premier informed them that
as he was Adviser to the King, he could not comply with their
wishes; but would report the matter to the King at Vavau. They
signed a petition, which was taken to His Maj esty, who in answer
said: “I will with the Queen and my family be with you in es-
tablishing the Free Church of Tonga.” The King caused a
proclamation to be sent through the Islands—that he had sanc-
tioned the starting of the Free Church —with the, exception of
those in charge of the Wesleyan Mission and their friends joined.
Pita Vi and Ilaiasi Lagi had been told by Mr. Moulton that their
supernumerary allowances would not be paid. Nothing annoyed
the King more than the withdrawal of these allowances. When
they joined the Free Church the first money raised went to pay
them their allowances. The King requested the Rev. J. B. Wat-
kin to become their minister. Mr. Watkin then resigned from
the Wesleyan Methodist Mission. The constitution of the Free
Church of Tonga was drawn out and signed by King George the
First on January, 1885. The constitution and laws of the Free
Church of Tonga were passed and adopted by the first Confer-
ence during the same year, and the Rev. J. B. Watkin made
President. The Conference was held in the King’s private chapel,
which was built of kauri. The throne, altar, chairs, and the
seats were all carved and prepared in Auckland under the
supervision of Dr. Baker when Premier. The following April
a deputation from the Conference arrived, but nothing was done,
as the deputation wished Mr. Watkin,to withdraw his resignation


and return to Sydney. The convictions of the New South Wales
Conference were highly related to those of Sir J. Thurston—
they seemed to work hand in hand, and in their superior know-
ledge judged that this was all the work of Dr. Baker, as in Sir
C. Mitchell’s report, “the thing had been growing for years,” but
they were too blind to see. Each attempt at reconciliation was so
domineering’ on the part of the New South Wales Conference,
always accompanied with the suggestion of Mr. Watkin’s re-
moval, that time went on to the day when the General Conference
was inspired to request the services of a High Commissioner,
which instead of opening up the way for reconciliation, only
served to strengthen the position of the Free Church. It was
really wonderful the supposed power that Dr. Baker wielded,
both in State and Church —a supposed power they thought could
be assumed by any one coming after him.
The Rev. George Brown, signing - himself Special Commis-
sioner, writing to Dr. Baker in June, 1889, at Tonga: “The total
abandonment of our Church in Tonga, to which I for one will
never agree.” Mr. Brown as a missionary may have thought
that, but as a politician was near-sighted, to have thrown the
whole thing at the King’s feet would have won the whole Church
back under the General Conference. Mr. Brown goes on to say:
“I am willing to afford you every possible opportunity of vindicat-
ing your character before the world.” Are these the words of
a peacemaker? Mr. Brown, in his half-broken Tongan, said
things which were misconstrued, believing all sorts of fabrica-
tions which were told him by his followers. What had Dr. Baker
to vindicate before the world? Whose world was that?—Mr.
Brown’s and the Sydney Conference ? —a band of men who were
so weak with embarrassment that they could not stand true
because they were confronted by a politician. Mr. Brown was
so supported by Sir J. Thurston that he did not do anything to-
wards reconciliation and as events have shown, an opportunity
was to be given to try to take without “total abandonment,” and
“vindication of character before the world.” When the oppor-
tunity came the supposed power that Dr. Baker wielded had been
deported with him, as neither the presence of a High Commis-
sioner and two vessels of war could force the King to be untrue
to Dr. Baker. ‘His Majesty emphatically denies that it was his
wish to have Dr. Baker deported, or to have his place taken by
another. Mr. Brown, as special Commissioner, did not seem
quite normal In his report on Church affairs in Tonga, in
which he states, with reference to the answer of the King to the
irritating letter that he wrote the King abusing Dr. Baker: “I


am yery sure it is not the King’s letter. lof course made all in-
qmnes possible, and venture to state that the whole letter is
English written above the signature of King George.”
Again, Mr, Brown says—“ Apparently a great probability of
our being- able to weaken his (Dr. Baker) very undesirable in-
fluence oveiHhe King,” That Br. Brown failed in his endeavours
as Special Commissioner is not to be marvelled at.
In of Council regulating the power and duties of
the High Commissioner, relations with the semi-civilized group
of Islands -such as the Friendly Islands —when speaking to the
Europeans in Tonga, after the act of deporting Dr. Baker, Sir
J, Thurston states: “We do not consider Tonga to be a civilized
nation.”
Treaty made between Great Britain and Tonga, at Nukua-
lofa, May 18, 1900. Clause 4 —“ Whereas His Majesty the
German Emperor has by Article 2 of the convention between
Great Britain and Germany signed at London in November last,
the 14th, renounced in favour of Great Britain all the rights of
Germany over the Tongan Islands.” It was exactly ten years
after Dr. Baker was deported, that Germany gave up all rights
over Tonga, and America her rights during* the Great War.
When Dr. Baker was on his way to America he had an inter-
view with the American Consul at Samoa, who stated America
knew nothing - about what Sir J. Thurston had done. When the
parley mgs about the Islands, and Honolulu was taken by America,
and Germany renounced her rights in Tonga, was not as Sir
J, Thurston thought to be six weeks after Dr. Baker was de-
ported, hut ten years. He was so anxious to get Tukttaho on
the throne, and Dr. Baker out of Tonga, and the Wesleyan
people requesting his interference with Church affairs who were
advised by their President not to act too hurriedly, gave * him
what he thought was a glorious opportunity for paving the way
when Tonga would be given over to England in the division of
the Islands, What did Sir J. Thurston accomplish in his treat-
ment of Dr. Baker? —but showed the way to the Tongans how
to treat a white man, was treated himself with contempt a few
months after by the two chiefs who signed, confirming- the re-
marks in the “Evening Star” (the Auckland Newspaper). “The
charge has an air of being trumped up.” Whether Tonga is to
be considered a civilized nation or not, the work that King George
did still stands, both in Church and State. His Government, his
constitution, his laws, the freedom of his slaves, —before the
constitution not a grain of sand, not a speck of soil, a slave
belonged to anybody but King George. Yet he gave to his chiefs
their portion, to the Wesleyan Methodist Church since the com-


ing of Mr. Thomas the free use of all their Mission grounds. He
gave to the Tongan Government their sites, and to the Free
Church their lands to build their churches and houses. Also
giving to the people their free allotments in their villages to live
in, and portions of land in the country for gardens. In order to
do this he asked the help and sympathy of a missionary who
arrayed against himself —High Commissioners, Consuls, Presi-
dents, missionaries, and European traders; then he was taken
forcibly away, or, as Louis Stevenson said, “Kidnapped because
it was not considered a civilized nation.” The Order-in-Council
gave a High Commissioner power, if he thought fit, on oath, to
do so. The succession to the throne of Tonga was a very great
anxiety to Consul Layard and Sir A. Gordon. They were in
favour of Maafu —Sir J. Thurston was very persistent in the
matter. In one interview he asked the King three times for
Tukttaho to be his successor.
When the guards of the warship “Rapid” were still surround-
ing the King’s Palace in charge of officers, and the native guards
were stationed at the four gates of the stone wall to prevent Dr.
Baker seeing the King, and His Majesty going to his Premier,
Sir J. Thurston sat on the verandah of the Palace giving orders
to the chiefs without the invitation of the King. Yet Dr. Baker
was banished from sitting on the same verandah, as he had been
adopted by His Majesty in their Tongan custom. He had a
right to do so, and when the King named him Finau Malaealoa,
he gave him as a deed of gift a piece of land for his home called
Malaealoa, on which the Consular flag is now flying. King
George’s son Uga, who died in Auckland, had two sons and two
daughters—Wellington, Laifoni, Fusipala, and Salote —who all
died. Taufaahau, the son of Fusipala, became King George the
Second. Pie had a daughter by his first marriage who is now
Queen Charlotte of Tonga, and her son is called Taufaahau. By
his second marriage he had a daughter named Fusipala, Why
Sir J. Thurston wished to pass Uga’s family by and put Tugi’s
on the throne —the plan was for Tukuaho to be King, and sign
in favour of the High Commissioner taking over Tonga to be
ruled from Fiji. Yet when he was Premier he was made to re-
sign, as he allowed the measles into Tonga, carrying away hun-
dreds of the people, covering many more times the number of the
supposed exiles which were brought back. When Dr. Baker was
deported the whole of Tonga —with the exception of the said
chiefs and their friends and the Wesleyan party‘were in sym-
pathy with him; asked for the sake of the independence of Tonga
and the King, to resist the action of the Pligh Commissioner. He


counselled them to submit that he and His Majesty had arranged
upon the course of action to pursue. The day before the steamer
that Dr. Baker had to go by was expected, some chiefs called
to say good-bye. informed him that a government proclamation
had been sent throughout Tongatabu demanding that all the men
and women were to assemble on the square in front of the Govern-
ment Offices beside the King’s Palace, facing the wharf, in order
for the High Commissioner to address them, and to state why
the Premier had been deported. —This meeting was to be held
at 3 o’clock, two hours before sailing time of the steamer. They
wished Dr. Baker to go on board before the meeting. He did
as they requested, quietly walking past the King’s Palace and the
Government Offices, which had all been erected under his super-
vision, down the wharf that he had organized in memory of the
King’s son Vuna, on to the steamer belonging to the Steam Ship
Company, that he had suffered so much in arranging to take up
the Tongan service. His son and daughter followed, accompanied
by the chief women and girls of the King’s family. At 3 o’clock
His Excellency took his seat before the assembly of natives, His
Majesty sitting on the verandah of his Palace surrounded by the
guards of the warship “Rapid.” As the steamer left the wharf,
this was the picture to be seen. It is supposed the desired effect
was lost, or why not have held the meeting the day after.
The British Consul at Fiji, when Dr. Baker was on a visit
there, invited him to lunch, and, on arriving at the Consulate he
found Mr. J. B. Thurston (Sir J. B. Thurston) conducting the
cuisine department.
“As to the reported debt said to have been left by me, I
maintain it is a most exaggerated and unjust statement. With
regard to the indebtedness reported to he due to foreigners I
know nothing of such amounts. Among other reasons given to
the King, by the chiefs, I have not accounted for Government
money, that balance sheets had not been printed, yet strange the
accounts of the yearly audit duly signed by the auditors, and the
printed balance sheets were sent regularly to the High Com-
missioner. With respect to the so-called exiles, no one can prove
that I ever opposed their return. I opposed the return of the
deportees, those who had been connected with the attempted
assassination, and who have not been returned. It was Mr.
Moulton and the British Consul who first mooted the matter of
their leaving Tonga, and asked permission for them to go to Fiji,
which they had previously threatened to do, and as the King felt,
they had left their rightful sovereign, thinking that they would
be free from the laws and taxes. His Majesty said let them
first ask permission, then come. What way is there more religious
freedom than when I was Premier, when I was there every man


was at liberty to worship as he liked. The chiefs say the High
Commissioner was afraid that I had put the King’s name to
certain documents of the greatest importance, and if such were
the case Tonga would be lost. The present administration has
never found anything to which I attached the King’s name. Such
an insinuation is a gross libel—neither has the Fiji Government
anything purporting to be written by the King’s authority, which
he knew nothing of or had not sanctioned for doing so.”
The expression Sir J, B. Thurston used in writing to Dr.
Baker: “I hear from something coming to my ears,” has been the
foundation of all the trouble in Tonga. Sir A. Gordon heard
from something coming to his ears through the Rev. J. E.
Moulton; Sir J. Thurston heard from something - coming to his
ears through Mr, Basil Thomson and the Rev. George Brown.
The New South Wales Conference heard from something coming
to their ears when Dr. Baker was made Premier. Instead of
waiting till he informed them, they demanded him to present
himself before them, which he decidedly refused to do.
Dr. Punshon writes in reply to the New South Wales Con-
ference: —“Mr. Baker is not under the jurisdiction of the Mis-
sionary Society, but an agent of the Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist Society.” Something came to Sir J. Thurston’s ears
when he heard that Sir J. Vogel was in communication with Dr.
Baker re Tongan tariff, and invited him to Fiji to have a private
interview with reference to the Union Steam Ship service, and
a said Treaty of Reciprocity with New Zealand; and something
must have come to the ears of the Foreign Office for the follow-
ing letter to be written at the direction of the Earl of Granville,
in referring to the Treaty of 1879 between Great Britain and
Tonga: “It has been represented to the Earl of Granville that
the Rev. S. W. Baker has been appointed to certain political
offices by the King of Tonga, and that he had been, and is still
exercising the influence he possesses with a view to preventing
the ratification of a Treaty recently concluded between H.M.’s
Government and the King of Tonga.” Memoirs —Sir A. Gordon.
He (Mr. Baker) had not, he said, opposed the ratification of the
En glish Treaty, as he could easily show, for it was and had for
sometime past, been engrossed here for the King’s signature.
Extract, from Sir J. Thurston’s despatch to Sir A, Gordon:
“I deem it my duty to inform your Excellency that His Majesty
assented to the proposed alterations without hesitation, and that
the Rev. S. W, Baker, who, your Excellency is aware, has been


appointed Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs, gave an
active and cordial assistance on expediting the important busi-
ness that brought me' here.”
When this Treaty was made, Sir A. Gordon presented
himself before the King of Tonga in full Court robes, with two
little half-clad Fijian boys as train-bearers. When His Ex-
cellency withdrew, the King remarked to those around him —
“Does annexation mean that the children of ray people are to be
train-bearers ? ”
The Earl of Granville continues— <f Mr. Baker is also
earnestly devoted to the promotion of German interests in the
Islands.”
When Dr. Baker arrived in Tonga in 1860 the Mission was
accepting coco-nut oil for their missionary meetings. In Samoa
the firm of Godeffroy and Sons, in which Consul Layard
and Consul Maudslay had such an interest, was established.
They then took up stations in Tonga. The firm had large
ships trading throughout the groups, and an agency in
Sydney, copra being their principal export. The small brig*, the
“John Wesley,” could not always carry everything for the Fiji,
Samoa, and Tongan Mission. There was trouble with money
matters —Chilian and American dollars. A Government bank
was established at Tonga. Dr. Baker was Chairman of the
Board of Trustees. No need to say this was speedily under Sir
A. Gordon’s notice, who requested to see the books. It was
brought before the notice of the General Secretary of Missions,
who demanded Dr. Baker’s withdrawal. In a letter from the
Genera] Secretary of Missions to Dr. Baker in 1876 —“I find I
have lost an order of yours to he sent per “John Wesley.” Please
send duplicate. I also have the impression there was an order
for the district meeting, by some unaccountable reason it is gone.”
Dr. Baker got for his family the best he could, whether from
the German firm or through their agency in Sydney—who did
not lose their orders “by some unaccountable reason”; but not
only Dr. Baker, but the King, his chiefs, and the- people, utterly
regardless of what nationality the firm was. This same General
Secretary of Missions wished to deduct the travelling expenses
by sea of Dr. Baker and family when he was recalled by the
Mission Board.
The Hon. Richard Seddon, late Premier of New Zealand,
visiting Tonga said: “If King George the First and Dr. Baker
had not been so interfered with, the affairs of both Church and
State would have worked out in proper order, and that Tonga was


never better governed.” In 1901, Mr. Sedclon asked for an
interview with Dr. Baker, when he was in New Zealand re the
cpestion of the position of New Zealand with the adjacent
Islands of the Western Pacific. Mr. Seddon seeking information
from him upon the subject because of his experiences of both
Church and State.
It was with Mr. Seddon’s knowledge that Dr. Baker started
the Anglican services in Tonga; also that Bishop Nevill had
given him the license to do so.
Extract; In a letter from Bishop Nevill. —“Since seeing you,
I have received letters from Australia and Fiji relative to the
formation of a Bishopric to include Fiji, Friendlies, and Samoa
groups. I know the Archbishop of Canterbury is desirous of the
establishment of this, and think help will.be forthcoming.”
- Flow does Tonga stand to-day? Why have civilized Christ-
ians caused such misery and bitter animosity to King George of
Tonga, who with his Premier, the Rev. Dr. S. W. Baker, won
against High Commissioners, Consuls, Presidents, and Confer-
ences. Everything in Tonga was established when King George
the First died, as he had desired to make it. When Dr. Baker
passed away, they had only succeeded in procuring a Protectorate,
even unto to-day. The feeling of animosity was carried on under
the administration of Sir J. Thurston and Basil Thomson —it was
so instilled by them into the minds of the Tongan Government
and Church that they were not to do anything for . Dr, Baker or
his family, that under Tukuaho’s Premiership, the pensions that
were granted by King George the First and his Government to
the daughter and son of Dr. Baker were annulled, and that be-
cause he had been deported by the Fligh Commissioner, purport-
ing to be the wish of England, Germany, and America that the
pensions of both Government and Church were not to be paid.
Dr. Baker, in petitioning the British Government through the
High Commissioner, received the answer that it was not Eng-
land’s doing that he was deported.
After —being recalled in 1879 when a petition signed by more
than three thousand native ministers and people was presented
asking him to come back to Tonga.
After —the attempted assassination in 1887 when his
daughter and son were injured for life, and their pensions taken
from them..
After being deported in 1890, five months before his term
of office would have expired, when he would have resided in
Auckland, doing what he could for them. Dr. Baker was re-


quested in 1900 by the King and chiefs to become their Premier
for the third time. Circumstances, and his enemies, brought him
back to Tonga in time to translate at the request of the King,
the Treaty of 1900 with Great Britain, thereby rebutting Sir J.
Thurston’s accusations. It was extremely apparent the way the
Wesleyan body showed their dislike to Dr. Baker because he
was the son of a Church of England clergyman. They even went
so far as to infer that he was of German nationality because his
second Christian name was “ Waldemar ” —the name “ Walde-
mar ” being in the Shirley-Woolmer family for many centuries.
There have been many, so many untruths printed and circulated
about him. It really became quite an extensive propaganda.
Dr. Baker was very happy in his home in Haapai, holding
the Anglican service, for which his father had trained him, up
to the Sunday before he was taken ill. He and his daughter had
been out driving on the Friday afternoon. On the Saturday he
was not feeling well, and continued so until Monday afternoon;
sitting in his chair he quietly passed away in the presence of his
daughters, on Monday, 16th November, 1903.
The following afternoon he was taken down to God’s acre,
carried on the shoulders of kind Europeans and Tongans.
In passing the Government flagstaff, the flag that he had
braved and dared to help King George give his nation, was flying-
half-mast in his honour.
The Government Offices, for which he had made the laws
and seal, were closed as he passed by to lie laid at rest with Her
who had worked and toiled in the loneliness of early mission life;
who had felt with him the troubles and difficulties of carrying-
out the wishes of his mother, against his own inclinations; but he
was rewarded by the true knowledge that no opportunity was let
slip by to help King George according to the ability that training
and birth had given him, —although arousing such bitter hatred
and misunderstanding by those who ought to have helped him
both in State and Church.
The name of SHIRLEY WALDEMAR BAKER stands
recorded in the history of the Western Pacific.
HIS ENEMIES MADE HIS NAME.


COULLS SOMERVILLE WILKIE. Ltd.
Printers and Bookbinders
DUNEDIN. CHRISTCHURCH, WELLINGTON


Coulls Somerville Wilkie Ltd.
J.A..Ferguson Esq.,
University Chambers,
167 Phillip Street,
Sydney, N.S.W.
Dear Sir,
We have before us yours of the 17th. April containing
enquiry for a copy of "Memoirs of the Rev. Dr. Shirley W.
Baker" printed in 1927.
The work was produced by us through the Government
Public Trust Office, arid the whole of the issue, comprising
100 copies, was sent direct to -
Miss A.E. Baker,
Takapale,.
Lifuka,
liaapai,
Tongan Is lands.
By communicating wits Miss Baker perhaps you might be
able to secure a copy.
With regard to your further request for particulars.of
any other publications falling within your field of interest,
we have pleasure in enclosing herewith 3 leaflets dealing
with various works printed by us.
If you are interested in any of these volumes we should
be glad to hear from you.
If you have friends likely to be interested in the leaflets
we are forwarding to you, we would be glad to send copies of
same on receipt of name and address.
lours faithfully,
COULLS SOMERVILLE WILKIE-LTD.,
eew/et.
