

MEMORIES
OF
THE PAST






MEMORIES OF THE PAST:
BY
A LADY IN AUSTRALIA.
MELBOURNE:
W. H. WILLIAMS, 68 ELIZABETH STREET.
1873.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Chapter I. —On Board i
„ 11. In Tasmania ... 5
„ lll. — ; New South Wales - , - - 11
„ IV. — Journey to Port Fairy - 19
„ V. —At Yambuck - - - -71
„ VI. New England 88
„ VII. —Home again - - - - 105




PREFACE.
M|qs DO not aim in the following pages at instructing or
astonishing. The history and statistics of Australia
have been treated by abler hands than mine, and
information on these subjects is within the reach of all. I
am content to confine myself to chat and gossip, in the hope
of causing a leisure hour to pass pleasantly, and perhaps
recalling sunny memories of happy days to kind old friends.
Right good and hospitable friends they were. Perhaps I
now remember only the happiness of the four years I spent
in Tasmania, and overlook the vexation which, there and
then, has everywhere, and at all times must have, mingled
with the joys in the journey through life. Still, on reading
over my Tasmanian journal in my New Zealand solitude,
my heart warms to those dear old times, and I cannot help
thinking that, though not so rich and grand as the colonists
of this day, we were quite as happy. It seems to me also
that there were more oddities in those days. At least, on
comparing my journal of later years with that in which I
propose to find a subject for my gossip, I find the latter
much the livelier of the two; the fault very likely is mine,
but on the whole I am inclined to give the palm to the
earlier years.
***** ****
My husband had the honour of belonging to the “ fight-
ing half-hundredand soon after our marriage the regiment


got the “route” for Van Dieman’s land. Military people will
understand what a stir this little word creates, and how
many things are to be seen to and thought of when pre-
paring for a long voyage. Chatham, where we were
quartered, was in a continual state of ferment, owing to so
many arrivals and departures; and one met perpetually young
officers looking dejected on many accounts. Some on their
tailors’, some on their Israelitish accommodators’, and others
at the idea of leaving the very charming friends with whom
they had danced, flirted, pic-nic’d so happily perhaps for
weeks or months previously. Amongst those who were
most persevering in seeing the gentlemen about to leave was
a Jew, who was a perfect pest to all. He would cry out
“ Ole do” at the very windows, and insist on it that people
possessed such articles. At last, one of our officers, a
strange character, determined on what he called “ outjewing
the Jew,” and ordered his servant to polish a farthing very
nicely, and put it into an old regimental coat pocket, and
when the merchant for discarded apparel called had him
shown to Captain E ’s room. The coat was shown, and
the owner said, “Now what will you give me for this coat,
without any more ado ?”
“It ish ole, ferry ole, it ish; ” here he stopped, for on ex-
amining the pockets he felt what he thought a sovereign.
He looked to see if anybody watched him, took a quick
glance at the coin, dropped it into the coat again, arid said,
“ Veil, it ish ole, and not worth more den seven shillings
and sixpence.”
“There, you can go, my man,” said Captain E ,
“ unless you choose to give me a guinea for it; no harm
done, and now just decide at once.”


After trying all ways to make a better bargain, or, at
least, to get a good view of the coin, the Jew’s cupidity got
the better of his judgment, and he paid the money and left
the room ; but, scarcely had the officer gone to a neigh-
bour’s quarters to laugh over the trick, when back came
Moses in a fury. He threw the coat on the floor, said he
must have back his money, that he had been duped, and, in
fact, was quite stormy. Captain E asked him why he
had so soon altered his mind, when out came the truth,
that he thought there was a sovereign in the pocket.
“Oh ! you rogue; so you thought to rob me of a pound,
did you? Now, unless you leave this immediately, I shall
send for the guard to turn you out of the barracks ; and you
shall never be allowed in again.” This had the effect, and
off went the unlucky merchant of rags.
*********
We embarked at Gravesend, and were to take in prisoners
at Portsmouth. On the day of embarkation a great many
women came to the ship to see their husbands, brothers, or
lovers, as the case might be. Amongst these was a young
girl of fifteen, who had married a soldier without leave, and,
therefore, was to remain behind. She seemed very sad, and
just as the order to “clear the decks of visitors” was given,
she threw herself into the river. An officer, named Fothergill,
immediately plunged into the water and rescued her; and, not
satisfied with that noble action, he paid her passage out to
Tasmania, the captain of the vessel, I think, assisting. I
suppose it would be fruitless in me to tell the remaining
part of the poor creature’s career, as a warning to silly girls
who are so easily attracted by a red coat, yet I may as well
add that her husband was a drunkard, abused her terribly,


and, when she came to my service in Launceston, one
night ran after her to cut her throat, and, in trying to avoid
him, she fell, and cut her knee so badly as to oblige ampu-
tation of the limb.
After several years passed in New South Wales, I visited
Tasmania twice. I found many of my old friends had paid
the debt of nature. One house in particular at Perth, not
far from Launceston, I missed; that of Major and Mrs.
McL , who were always ready to welcome any visitor
.very hospitably, and for whose family I entertain the
greatest friendship. Then, again, at Symonds Plains
I had passed many happy days, and had been kindly
entertained, together with thirteen others, at a charming
party given by Mr. J. Youl, when we passed more than a
week in the bush en route to and from the highest mountain
in the island, i.e., Ben Lomond.
Where are the fourteen now? Alas! out of seven gentlemen
only two are alive. The gayest, handsomest of the number,
Sir R. Dry, has so lately left this world for a better, and so
many just and true things have been said in his praise, that
I can only add that a better, kinder-hearted man never
lived. Mr. J. Youl has now been living in England many
years, but he has not forgotten his old home, and has done
it most valuable service by introducing into its waters the
king ;'of fish, salmon : and may all his undertakings be
equally crowned with success.
The Authoress.


MEMORIES OF THE PAST.
BY A LADY IN AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
ON BOARD.
“ Adieu, adieu ! my native shore
Fades o’er the waters blue ;
The night-winds sigh, the breakers roar,
And shrieks the wild sea-mew.
Yon sun that sets upon the sea
We follow in his flight;
Farewell awhile to him and thee.
My native land —good night!”—Bvron.
»5|N the year of which I am about to write, a long voyage
yj) was not as common an event as in these days of
steam communication and universal travel. Not-
withstanding our “tight little island” being surrounded by
ocean, many of its inhabitants much preferred seeing that
wonderful element at a distance to being “ tempest-tossed ”
on its surface. Some feeling of the kind pervaded my
system when I embarked for my first voyage in the ship
Augusta yessie, commanded by an excellent master, to
accompany my husband to Van Dieman’s Land, now called
Tasmania. He formed part of a guard of the “ fighting half-
hundred,” to convey prisoners to that settlement. We took
in three hundred and ten male convicts at Portsmouth, and
weighed anchor on the 29th September; but I, for one, felt
little wish to taste the Michaelmas goose that the steward
had put so temptingly on the table just at starting.
People say all voyages are similar, but I cannot agree in
this very popular fallacy. So much depends on the comfort
of the ship, on the captain, on the surgeon, on the steward,
and lastly, but decidedly not by any means the least in im-
portance, on the cook ! If he be not au fait in his depart-
ment, then we may truly look out for “ squalls,” for most
men would sooner die from jaundice than see dishes come
to the table of which they cannot eat plentifully and with


gusto. Indeed, after taking especial notice of these matters,
I am of opinion that the reason why so many persons
benefit by a sea voyage is that they cannot gormandise as
they do on shore, owing to the generality of “ cuisiniers ”
on board being nothing more nor less than the disparaged
race termed “ sea-cooks !” and, having nothing to grumble at
in our “staff,” we journeyed on in the most amiable way.
We had some rough weather off the Cape of Good Hope,
of course, and since then I have believed in “ mountains of
seas.” It appeared perfectly wonderful that the enormous
waves which sometimes followed us did not swamp us com-
pletely : and I never could feel the smallest envy of the
little stormy petrel, sitting, seemingly, so quietly on these
huge billows ; in fact, would prefer sitting, cherub-like, on a
a cloud ; but everyone to his own taste.
I think we must have been fortunate in having a good
draft of prisoners, as they never seemed to give much
trouble, and on fine moonlight nights to hear them singing
no one would ever have supposed they had been sent from
their country for its good, or that any but themselves had
paid for their passages. Some of the unfortunate fellows
sang nicely, and some good choruses were formed, in which
many excellent voices were heard. There was one espe-
cially favourite song they used to sing frequently, and in it
they invited some “ dear girls,” whom they had left behind
them, to come to the new country they themselves were
going to ; and promised, when they arrived, that they would
dance with them “by the light of the moon !” a promise
not very likely to be kept.
We had some strange characters in our ship; for example,
a sergeant in our brave old regiment, a bachelor and woman-
hater. He certainly did annoy the soldiers’ wives sometimes
in a quiet way. He had the dispensing of rum to the soldiers
and women, and he insisted on all coming on deck to re-
ceive it; whereas, if he had been an admirer of the fair sex,
he might have contrived to spare their feelings by allowing
the said drink to be given out of sight, and thus let us of
the saloon ignore the delicate creatures indulging in such
luxuries ! But no ! this obdurate sergeant would come to
the capstan, and, holding himself erect, would call out
“ Grog ! ” To this call all would respond ; but when on


deck the ladies would look round to see who could witness
their swallowing the above-named draught; and if we from
the cuddy were there, some would pretend they could not
possibly take it: they would bring their mugs and tin panni-
kins, and would say, “ Sergeant Yea, sir, do you think it will
do me good, as I feel very sick, sir?”
The sergeant would answer, looking over their heads into
the billows beyond, “ Really, ma’am, I don’t know; if you
don’t want it, say so whereupon the woman would put the
mug to her lips, and, making a grimace, put it down again,
thinking, no doubt, that she might take it below to her cabin,
or rather berth ; but the obdurate sergeant would seize the
tin, and empty the contents overboard. So very soon the
women took their grog manfully, the prisoners their lime-
juice with sour faces, and all went on charmingly.
Amongst the soldiers’ wives was one named Livingstone.
She was a tall, dark woman, and rather of the better class ;
but, unfortunately, she used to give herself a few airs, and
was, consequently, not a favourite in the regiment. One
day being exceedingly fine, the third mate thought he would
go below to the hold where the provisions were kept, and
open some flour casks, etc. He took away the ladder by
which the passengers descended to their berths, and placed
a large open cask of flour just below the hatchway. Mrs.
Livingstone, after a slight altercation on deck with some
of the other women, said in a tragedy-queen-like way, “ I
shall leave you; you’re not fit company for me.” Where-
upon she turned round to go down the ladder without look-
ing to see whether it was there or not, and, turning a sum-
mersault in the air, landed on her head in the flour cask !
The mate shouted, and numbers of persons ran to the gang-
way, and then such laughter followed as it would be diffi-
cult to describe : some of the soldiers called out:—
“ Poor Mistress Livingstone ! Arrah ! but we’re sorry for
you, ma’am ! ” Others again screamed out, “ Where are ye,
ma’am? Show us your head ! ” “She’s the active young
woman, God bless her ! ” “ Sure she’s performin’; I allays
said she came from the theatricals!” And various other
quaint remarks were made. In the meantime the mate,
knowing what a passionate woman she was, and justly fear-
ing her rage, put out the light that he had with him, and


then extricated the poor woman as well as he could from
the cask; which he had no sooner done than he ran off to
some distant part of the hold.
When Mrs. Livingstone appeared, perfectly unhurt, with
her black hair powdered, and her face thoroughly white
from flour and anger, the screams of laughter must have
been maddening to her ! Her husband, although very sorry
for her, could not contain his mirth, and whilst assisting in
placing the ladder brought for her to mount, had to hide his
face every now and then behind some person near; and
after having the courage to go down and assist her, he was
rewarded by a hearty slap on the face. I heard some one
say to her, “ Deal gently wid the boy,” and then that sport
was over; but she was never herself again ; her spirit
was damped.
We had a slight alarm of fire one night which created
plenty of screaming and fainting; and lost some spars in a
heavy gale off the Cape.
I had a narrow escape, too, of being shot one day. It
happened as follows: The gentlemen had gone on the
poop after dinner, and were practising firing with pistols.
Being the only lady on board I was rather spoiled by some
of my compag?wm de voyage, and, as they were pleased to
say no amusement was complete without my presence, they
used to get me to join the firing parties also. On the day of
which I speak I had firmly declined going on deck, as the
heat was intense ; accordingly, I sat myself with my work
just under an open sky-light, whilst our man-servant was oc-
cupied with something in my husband’s cabin, and had the
door open, which was close to where I sat. The doctor
came down to the cuddy, and, saying that I positively must
go on deck, led me off. We had scarcely reached the deck
when the report of a pistol was heard near us, and a voice
called out “ Good God ! I’ve shot her ! ” I ran to the
ladder, and, looking up on the poop, said, “No; here I am! ”
and I was quite “ hailed ”by the whole party. We returned
to the cuddy and found the doctor busy examining the spot
where I had been sitting ; the pistol bullet had gone through
my chair and lodged in the sill of our door. It was a won-
derful escape, and I felt thankful for it then ; but I have
sometimes since then thought that a fatal accident at that


time would have saved me from many a pang in after
years. It is, in fact, a great boon our not being in the least
aware of what may occur to us in after years ; as I am con-
vinced many of us would be too cowardly to face our dan-
gers and difficulties. Whilst on the subject of pistol-shoot-
ing I may here narrate that the sergeant above alluded to
met with a sad accident during the voyage. He always
fired off a very old pistol at sunset, and I can imagine I
see him standing by the capstan, looking towards the west-
ward, waiting the setting of the glorious orb of day, and as
this disappeared beneath the waves bang would go the
pistol. One evening the horrible weapon burst in the poor
man’s hand, and disabled him for life ; he was tried by
court-martial when we reached Tasmania, as the “powers
that be ” have an idea that sometimes soldiers, losing their
military ardour (of which, perhaps, they never possessed
very much after the shilling’s-worth of spirits that the gay
recruiting sergeant helped them to had subsided), and anxious
to retire into private life of another kind, do actually maim
themselves, when, of course, they become unfit for the
army. Chacnn a son gdut, but for my part I would far pre-
fer being “in arms ” all my life to being a disunited
member of any other profession.
CHAPTER II.
IN TASMANIA.
voyage ended on the hundred and fourteenth
day, and we sailed up the beautiful river Derwent to
(Sae/'" Hobart Town on a warm summers day. It appeared
strange at first to have such hot weather in January, but
one soon is accustomed to the antipodean change. Ido
not think in the whole world a more exquisite or picturesque
site can be found than Hobart Town. The river forms a
lovely harbour, and its banks are thickly wooded to the
very brink. Then the majestic Mount Wellington has such
an imposing appearance in the back-ground. I have heard
naval officers say they never saw a more perfect scene, so
I am anything but singular in my admiration.


We had not anchored when a man-of-war’s boat came
alongside, in which were several gentlemen anxious to learn
the English news. Some of us returned on shore with them,
and I was quite charmed when I reached the land to see
the hedges of scarlet geranium, and quantities of other
flowers. I cannot say that I expected to see all the people
“ darkies but I was rather astonished on seeing so many
elegantly-dressed woman walking about; and still more
delighted in the evening when we accepted an invitation
from the pleasing wife of the Attorney-general to a fancy-ball.
Our host was one of the most gentlemanly, clever men I have
ever had the pleasure of meeting, notwithstanding his one
day telling me that Providence had intended him for an
upholsterer, because he had so much taste in furniture ! He
is now Chief Justice of New South Wales.
We went from our lodgings to the house of the Solicitor-
General, who was an old friend of our surgeon, and as the hour
was late and there were no lights in the room into which I
wasushered, I nearly committed manslaughter unconsciously,
for I was going to sit down on a sofa, when a voice begged
of me to “ take care of an unfortunate fellow,” and this was
a gentleman just recovering from rheumatic fever.
We found the ground in front of our entertainer’s house
studded with tents, and at the entrance of these were several In-
dians, servants to some gentlemen from Madras. They looked
to me like a portion of the bal costund; but whilst I was
looking at these men and their neat dresses, a dainty-look-
ing page came tripping through the tent-door to where I
was, and taking my hand led me to the cloaking room.
We next were shown into the reception room, where I was
introduced to my host and hostess. I will pass over a de-
scription of the ball, which was a thoroughly enjoyable one,
and merely say that, although I had come direct from Kent,
which was then justly celebrated for pretty women, I could
not avoid being struck by the good looks of several of the
ladies that evening. Alas ! in two cases the beauty I speak
of brought dishonour to the homes of their possessors.
There was one very remarkable dress ; it was that of a New
Zealand chief, and so well was the gentleman disguised that
when he made it known to me that he wished to dance with
me I hesitated, and not until an old friend of mine said I


might venture would I entrust myself to his arms and his
tomahawk ! He was a most amusing character this “ chief,”
and told me much about the new country to which he was
returning the following evening. He amused me con-
siderably during the evening, trying to induce a remarkably
cadaverous-looking man to accompany him to New Zealand,
but vainly. At last the person so requested said, “ I’m sure
you must have some especial reason for trying to get me
down there ; now, what is it ? ”
“ Well, my dear fellow, it is simply this : the natives of
New Zealand are remarkable for their cannibal habits ; now,
you are so thin, and I’m convinced tough also, that if they
would only eat you, they would take such a hatred to the
flesh of white men they would never think of tasting another!”
When, many years after this ball took place, I again met
the New Zealand chief in his own character, as a settler
near where I then lived, he was a very singular being. He
had got some sheep from a gentleman on terms ; and this
person was informed that Major B had been selling his
sheep : so he thought it wise to go and visit the Major and
look at his flock at the same time. He was received with
a hearty welcome, and when in the evening be mentioned
his wish to see his sheep, the Major said, “ You need give
yourself no trouble about that; they shall all be brought past
the door to-morrow morning.” In the morning, just as
breakfast was ready, the Major came in and requested his
guest to step to the door, and there came a flock of sheep
with their shepherd :
“ How many sheep have you there, my man ? ” said the
gentleman.
“ One thousand, sir,” returned the man.
“ Move on,” said the Major.
A flock of sheep again came past, and the same question
was put, the same answer given. A third time the sheep
passed, and as they were going past, and the gentleman had
got the same answer to his third question of how many were
there in that flock, he said :
“ The sheep look uncommonly well, B , and I am
quite satisfied with their number and the condition they are
in ; but I must tell you that I heard you had sold more
than half of them ! ”


“ Do you hear that, my dear?” cried out the Major to
his wife ; but she did not hear him, as she was sitting at her
piano, playing a very old and significant tune, “ Little Bo-
peep has lost his sheep ! ” In fact, the report for once was
a veritable one ; the Major had parted with many of the
flock ; and the way in which he managed to palm off the
remaining 1000 was by causing three different men to take
the same flock past three times. “And his lord commended
the unjust steward.”
Talking of sheep reminds me that I have strayed from
my narrative; therefore, revetions a nos moutonsm. Tasmania,
where I remained four years and more, nearly the happiest
in my life. It is impossible to speak highly enough of the
hospitality, friendship, and affection that I met with there.
Never can I forget my Tasmanian friends.
But though I loved Tasmania I thought some of the
events that occurred not over pleasing. For example, after
our detachment had been a few days in Hobart Town, it
was ordered to the other side of the island, to relieve some
of the 2 ist Regiment at Launceston. My husband and
another officer marched with the men across the island, and
it was arranged between the two gentlemen to take it by
turns to pay the hotel expenses. One night they halted at
a place called Campbell Town, and retired to a double-
bedded room. Just before getting into bed, my husband
said to his companion de voyage, “ Where do you generally
put your money at night?” —“Under my pillow.” The
idea was acted upon, unfortunately. During the night my
spouse was awakened by somebody falling upon him. He
immediately seized the person by the wrist, and found it to
be a very large female servant, whom he had seen during
the evening in the house. She decamped quickly, and,
being very drowsy at the time, the whole affair passed from
his mind. But when the company proceeded on their
march, and stopped to breakfast a few miles further en route,
it was my husband’s turn to pay the bill, and when he put
his hand in his pocket he suddenly remembered the scene of
the past night, and that he had left his purse under his pillow.
He got a horse and returned as quickly as possible to the
hotel, and dashed upstairs to the room he had occupied,
where, on opening the door without the smallest ceremony,


he found a pretty young bride standing opposite the looking-
glass, “ arranging her beautiful hair !”
Apologies were made and accepted ; butthebed had been
made, and the purse, of course, was gone. The landlord
said the woman-servant referred to above was the person
who had made the beds, and nobody else had been in the
room until the lady came. Accordingly the servant was
handed over to a constable’s custody, and eventually sen-
tenced to two years’ imprisonment in the female factory,
and at the end of her term, I suppose, made use of our
money.
We had a friend in Tasmania, a young, single man then,
who had his mother and three sisters with him, and, having
lately built a new domicile, he gave his friends a house-
warming. But this was to his male acquaintances, and, as
he was a great favourite with the opposite sex, we got up a
sort of small pout on the occasion, and declared he should
give an entertainment that ladies could also join in ; and so
he kindly and good-naturedly gave a charming pic-nic party,
which lasted for a week. He has since made himself
rather a public character, having, after numberless attempts
by numberless persons, at length succeeded in introducing
the salmon ova into Tasmania and Victoria ; and I only
hope he may be always as successful in whatever he may
undertake.
But to return to our pic-nic. We started fourteen in
number, and as merry as any people could be, determined
to put up with gipsying of all sorts; and although on our
travels we did not steal poultry a la Boheme, we did nearly
as bad, for the hens’ nests were robbed. We encamped
every night under tents, and the ladies had a nominal
watchman to lie before their tent entrance. But we had to
dismiss two for snoring woefully; and lam convinced they
used to pilfer our mulled claret, which may, perhaps, account
for the heavy breathing.
We ascended the highest land in Tasmania, the majestic
Ben Lomond, and a good deal of scrambling and falling it
occasioned. Some parts of the ascent could only be
managed on foot; some better tracks were followed on
horseback, and some of our party at the commencement
were comfortably settled in a bullock-dray.


This last arrangement was one day brought to a hasty
close by the pole-pin coming out; when the bullocks walked
on as they were ordered by their driver, who was on foot,
and the unlucky individuals were sent in all directions, but
invariably with their feet in the air. One gentleman, a
heavy man, fell on a tin-dish, and bent it into an extraor-
dinary shape.
We had dancing by firelight of an evening, and quantities
of singing and joking; and on our bidding “Good-night”
to our male friends, they would all protest they were very
sorry, indeed quite miserable, in losing our charming
society, and in a few minutes we would hear their voices
in chorus, laughing immoderately. But when were men ever
to be trusted ? One can never depend on any man unless
one has him by the whisker or beard, and then he is wonder-
fully tractable !
There was a German doctor living in Launceston who
had a rather nice wife, and so thought another countryman
of the doctor’s. This friend used to accost everybody
nearly with “ Vat’s de news ?” He had been out of town
for some days at one time, and as a party of us were taking
a ride one afternoon we met him returning home. One of
our officers said, “Should ‘Von’” (the foreign gentleman’s
sobriquet) “ ask about news, tell him his friend the doctor
has cut his throat.” On we rode, but pulled up to exchange
civilities.
“ Vat’s de news, boys?” said Von.
“ Not much of consequence,” said my husband, with a
grave face ; “ only Dr. Dassell has cut his throat!”
“ Mein Gott! Dr. Dassell cut his treat! And his poor
wife ?”
But he did not remain to say another word, and, putting
spurs to his horse, away he went.
When we returned from our ride we were told there had
been a tremendous fuss at the doctor’s house. Von had
gone there on the wings of friendship immediately on his
arrival, and, rushing into the house, had said to the wife,
“ My dear lady, I am so sorry to hear dat your husband has
cut his treat.”
“ Cut his throat, oh ! I must faint!” and down she fell
on the floor. Von, who was politeness itself when a pretty


woman was in the case, went on his knees by the bereaved
fair one, and was urging her in vain to be comforted, when
the door of the room was opened, and in came the indig-
nant spouse. Of course, for some time the two friends
raved at each other in their own language, and it took much
patience on poor Von’s side to make the jealous husband
believe the truth.
When my husband was asked why he said what he had,
he only answered that he thought Dr. Dassell should have
done so.
CHAPTER III.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
jS>!MS[N 1841 our detachment was ordered to join the head-
quarters of the regiment, then stationed in New
Jife South Wales. We sailed from the north side of the
island of Tasmania, George Town, in a crazy brig, mis-
named the Bee, for, unlike any bee I ever heard of, she
refused to “ improve each shining hour,’' and was woefully
slow. As we came nearly abreast of Circular Head, some
of the officers and I were sitting on deck watching a pretty
little vessel ahead of us, called the Yarra Yarra, on board
of which were several emigrant families going to Port
Phillip, then almost a new colony. Of a sudden the ship
we were in gave a desperate lurch ; a great shouting ensued,
and I made my way to the side of the vessel to secure a
favourite greyhound that was tied up there. When I re-
gained my seat and looked round for the Yarra Yarra she
had disappeared. Nothing more has, I believe, ever been
heard of her or her crew and passengers. I remember
hearing, five years after, that one poor woman who had ex-
pected all her family over by the Yarra Yarra had gone com-
pletely out of her mind, and was to be seen every day,
whatever the weather might be, walking up and down on
the Williamstown beach, looking out for her family’s arrival.
This incident should have taught me contentment, for had
it not been that the vessel we abused so much was very old,
and that in consequence neither ropes nor sails would stand
such a frightful squall, we, too, in all probability, should also


have sunk. But ropes cracked, sails were rent, and then
the Bee , giving herself a shake, as a Newfoundland dog
would after a heavy wetting, righted herself where others
foundered.
Our next arrival was in Sydney. The magnificent harbour
there has been so often and well described that I can say
no more about it; but the scenery about there is very ugly.
My husband had not been long there when he was attacked
by rheumatic fever, which completely invalided him for
thirteen weeks. What the doctors were unable to effect,
namely, his recovery, was accomplished in a somewhat singu-
lar manner ; and, perhaps, this will be the first explanation
of a riddle in the recollection of many inhabitants. In the
domain, a public drive, or rather a park, which was not
very far off from the old barracks, was an immense stack of
wood, collected for the use of the Governor’s household.
Some young men who had, as they said, never been asked
to dine at Government-house, and eat any of the “ baked
tarts,” resolved that this wood should be of no use to any-
body else, so they one day placed some tar balls amongst it
and fired it at night. They kindly came and told me in
the morning not to be alarmed, but I had forgotten to tell
my husband, and was lying down on a couch in his sick
room for a few minutes’ rest at a little before midnight, when
the bugles sounded the “ assembly,” and the soldiers hurried
on to the parade ground. Then the fire-engines were
dragged out of their sheds, and away went the whole regi-
ment, excepting those on duty. I had ran into the front
verandah of our house, commanding a view of the parade
ground inside the high walls of the barracks, and the
hospital outside; and the fire being in the rear of the latter
building, 1 could see many of the patients looking through
their windows at the fire. As the officer who lived in the
rooms opposite to me was coming through the passage, he
whispered, “ Remember what you were told this morning,
and don’t be frightened !” so I went back to my husband’s
room to tell him, when, to my astonishment, I found him in
his dressing-gown, sitting by the fire. This fright quite
cured him, and from that night he was able to move about.
He soon got leave of absence for change of air, and we
went by sea to the northward of Sydney, to an exceedingly


pretty part of the colony, a penal settlement for gentlemen
prisoners, called Port Macquarie. We also visited a kind
Tasmanian friend, who had a station in the interior, and my
husband took such a fancy to the bush life that, when his
leave had expired and we returned to Sydney, he sold out
of the army and became a squatter in Port Macquarie.
Those were the days in which we were content with a hut
formed from a gum-tree, shutters in lieu of windows, and
many other primitive things that would quite horrify a
squatter of the present day. Still I must say we proffered
and accepted unbounded hospitality. We vied not with
one another in grandeur or expenses that we could not
afford, and were not a whit less happy than the present race.
Au eontraire , there was the greatest gaiety for ever prevailing,
and if we did not possess an acre of bought land, why we
could not mortgage it, and have to pay the ruinous interest
which is now paid on borrowed money.
Our pretty hut and very nice garden seemed to rise as if
by magic almost. It seemed so queer to me when the
overseer, an immense man, named Webster, looked at a
huge gum-tree and said, running his eye up the barrel of
the tree, “Yes, you’ll do;” and in a short time down came
the tree, and the slabs were run out the next day of which
our hut was made. It consisted of six rooms and a wide
verandah, and there was a detached kitchen, with a room
for the servant. The roofs had bark on them instead of
slates or tiles, and so they were easily covered in.
We lived in a pretty valley on the banks of a creek, which
at times swelled to a river, and was most enjoyable in the
summer for bathing. At the back of our hut were some
high hills, and on one side a regular jungle of thick vines,
cedar and other trees. I liked the life very well, as there
was plenty of horse exercise, and hunting of kangaroos, for
we had some very good dogs which we had brought from
Tasmania, besides my peculiar favourite, Ada. We had
constantly some very agreeable visitors, and were enter-
tained by the blacks, who were generally a well-meaning,
inoffensive race. Occasionally they would misbehave, but
all amongst themselves. I recollect a young lad coming to
me one day and saying that a lubra (woman) had got a bad
head. When I went to the camp I found the lubra with a


frightful wound on her head. Indeed, it was nearly split on
the top from a blow of a waddy, a very disagreeable weapon
in a clever hand for such practices. She had also a spear
wound just under her left shoulder-blade; and the weapon
had nearly made its way through her body, and protruded
under her right breast. I was really shocked, it being the
first wound of the sort that I had ever seen. On asking
who had wounded the poor creature in this way, I was told
that a young man named Barney, an especial favourite of
mine, had first of all struck her the violent blow on her
head, and then, as he was leaving the camp, he turned round
and threw his spear at her.
She was his wife, and he had taken some trouble in
stealing her from a man of another tribe. A child she had
lately had was not Barney’s, but he liked it, and hence the
quarrel; she had taken it by its heels and dashed its brains
out against a tree.
I certainly felt very small interest in my patient after
hearing this tale; yet I did what I could for her, and in
three days she walked to a station nearly five miles off,
with her head bound up, and the wound in her body all but
well. It is wonderful how soon any sore would then heal
with any of these people, I suppose from their eating
so little meat, and drinking nothing stronger than tea,
of which they got but a small supply. This was the case
in rßqt ; alas ! now times have altered, and rum has done
its work amongst the poor blacks.
Speaking of rum' reminds me of the great difficulty we
had in getting either spirits or ale up to the station. All
our supplies came from the settlement, a distance of 53
miles, to within 7 miles of Yesabba, by water; we then had
to send a dray with a bullock-team to fetch them. - And
some accident invariably happened to the drinkables.
Either the dray had gone over some immense log, or into
some desperate rut, and the bottles in the cask of ale or
porter had broken with the concussion, or the hoops had
loosened, and the spirit leaked out. I discovered one time
more necks of the broken bottles than there were bodies,
so I had the drayman up and told him to be more particular
in future. A friend of mine sent to England for a crate of
crockery, consisting of articles that it was impossible to get


in the colony, and yet of much value in the dairy and kitchen
departments. She heard of its reaching Sydney, then Port
Macquarie, and as she lived only 27 miles from the settle-
ment, a dray was despatched for the long-looked-for
crockery. I happened to have ridden down the day of its
arrival at the “ Plains,” its destination; and when we saw
the dray coming we walked down to meet it.
“ Well, you’ve got my crate, blacksmith ? ” said the lady
to the driver.
“Oh, yes! but he’s had an upset tho’!” returned the
man, a sulky-looking individual.
As we went towards the house, Mrs. F said she
hoped nothing was broken in the crate, as the contents
would be invaluable to her. No time was lost in unloading
the dray, and Mrs. F ’s brother, an eccentric, clever
man, though quite a rough diamond, commenced unpacking
the crockery. I heard him make a kind of groan, then
“Whew!” Mrs. F—— went up to inspect the pieces of
delf, and pieces they were certainly. Out of the whole lot
not more than a dozen articles were whole.
, “Call the driver,” said the lady, and he was immediately
summoned.
“Blacksmith,” said she very quietly, “just look what
you have done ; broken all my crockery, nearly.”
“Well, surely it does not matter much,” he returned,
“for a greater set of rubbish I never see !” and with this the
man, his mistress, and her brother burst into a laugh.
I envied the two their temper, and the third his impudence.
One evening our dray arrived with stores, and the boat-
man and his little child came with it, and I gave the latter
some bread and jam and sent her into the kitchen to eat it;
a little later in the evening the child came into the garden
to me, and, amongst other prattle, told me that our brandy
was very good this time, “ Father said.”
I asked her how he knew, and she told me that he poured
boiling water on the top of the keg, and then the water sank
and the spirit rose. The poor little girl said all this so in-
nocently I could not help feeling sorry for a child being in
the way of such villainy ; but I took very good care not to
name it to her father, or he would have nearly killed Her, I
believe.


The native women climb trees of the greatest height in
Port Macquarie, in a pretty way, and seemingly so easy.
They cut a long vine out of the scrub, and throw it round
the tree, and as they ascend they chop with a tomahawk a
place for one foot to rest in at a time ; and continue to do
this, and balance themselves by the vine, until they reach
the place they wish. In the tribe living near Yesabba there
was a very graceful girl, named Cocky. One day she was up
a very high tree close to our hut, when an animal called the
“ flying fox ” settled on a limb near her. She immediately
shouted to her husband to shoot it; and he came for a gun
and shot the animal, whilst his lubra stood perfectly undis-
mayed, with a mere twig between her and the bullet. She
never seemed to doubt his aim ; and he in his turn was a
perfect William Tell.
Our farm servants were prisoners, but we had only two
black sheep out of ten, and one of these was a “ special,” or
gentleman prisoner. I have always found the prisoners
well-disposed, and very rarely dishonest; and any little in-
dulgence was appreciated by them. As to my female ser-
vants I must say that in Australia I have found the prisoners
undoubtedly the best. They used to have a year, and
were, to my mind, neater-looking than the generality of
emigrant women who go to service. These ask you with
the greatest assurance from to a year; when you
take them you find they require teaching their work ; and
just as you think you have got them to understand your
method, you may rest assured that Joan has found her
Darby, and is going to what she calls “ settle herself.”
We had scarcely set our station in order when flour rose
to a most unprecedented price, a ton, and even higher.
Of course, we had no money to spare (who has ? No
squatter, I’m sure !), and, therefore, our consideration was
what could we get to mix with it so as to make it last
longer than it otherwise would. Maize meal was very good,
but we fancied it made our noses look sharper than before,
so we agreed to try rice, and we congratulated ourselves on
its being cheap. A friend rode up from the settlement one
day, and our first question was, “What news?”
“ Oh ! not much that will interest you, I thinkadding,
with a sort of sickening smile, for he, too, was in rather


straightened circumstances, and, I believe in my heart, had
also made his calculations on the advantages to be derived
from eating rice ; “ rice has risen in value, and is quite dear
now.”
He could not have made a more homethrust. I should
have felt heartbroken, only I had not time to think of it,
as I had no female servant at the time, and had to cook the
dinner.
Our farm servants had comfortable huts, and small gardens
attached. All of them had plenty of melons, cucumbers,
and pumpkins from their own cultivation, and very soon we
were able to give them as many peaches as they.liked in the
season. It was wonderful how quickly everything grew in
that lovely climate. The only trouble in gardening was to
keep down the weeds, as vegetation - ' is” so rapid; and you
have nothing to do but put cuttings of any kind into the
ground to make sure of their growing.
We had some strange men amohgst our servants j , one, a
Scotch lad, I had occasion to speak to about his swearing
so much, more I believe from habit than vice, for he was a
good, willing boy. To enforce my words I sale \Jr Sootchy,
why do you swear so awfully? It is very ypu never
hear me swear.”
“No, I never did, and I’se often wondered at it !” re-
turned he, with a gaping face.
An old Irishman I had for a short time was also quite a
character. He had lived for years with our next neighbour,
and I think had left him on account of being too fond of
his “ glass.” He was most honest and trustworthy, and
quite a “master’s man.”
On the Saturday he had to weigh out the week’s rations
to the men, and his delight was to give them as close a
weight as he possibly could, and all the time he would speak
so friendly to them ; but when they had gone, and he was
clearing up the store, he would mutter aloud in something
like the following terms :
“ Jist as tho’ I was going to give yees yer full weight of
tay and sugar!” “The Lord forgive me for doing the
likes ! ” “ What did yer father ever give mine that I should
do it?” “ Sure ye’ve got enough, too much may be ; bad
luck to ye, for a set of spalpeens !” and such like speeches,
c


I never knew any person who had such a knack of coaxing
fowls to lay as old Ryan had ; he would collect eggs in an
incredible short time. One day a cock was making one in
a chorus of rejoicing after some eggs were lain, and old
Ryan ran out of the kitchen with a cloth in his hand, and
whisking this about, said, “ Whist there, wid yer noise ! It’s
not yees that have laid an egg, anyhow !” at the same time
catching the cock in the cloth, and walking off with him to
a distance from the hut.
The servant woman whom I brought from Tasmania had
been transported for life for forging a cheque on her uncle.
She was very young and pretty. Our man-servant had
“ bought ” out of the regiment at the same time we left,
for the purpose of going with us to Port Macquarie. We
had been there about three years when Supple, the man,
came and asked leave to marry Mary; and my husband
thought, as she was so much the younger of the two, it was
a pity for her to throw herself away, so he spoke to her.
“Mary,” said he, “what makes you think of marrying
Supple, a man old enough to be your father—and such an
ugly man, and you such a pretty girl ?”
“ Well, sir, John Supple is not a pretty man ; but his
manners ! oh ! sir, his manners ' ” said Mary.
We could say nothing to this, and manners carried the
day.
My husband had heard so much of Port Phillip that he
thought we might improve our condition by repairing
thither, but, before quite making up his mind to leave Port
Macquarie, he went alone to see the country. I remained
nearly three months by myself, and when he returned we made
up our mind to start immediately for Port Fairy, a country
260 miles (or near that) from Melbourne, the capital of Port
Phillip. The “ immediately ” was put off for some time,
and I was rather glad, as I had become fond of our pretty
little valley, and felt uncertain as to how I should like my
future dwelling.


CHAPTER IV.
JOURNEY TO PORT FAIRY.
March, 1844, the long-threatened journey began,
Sf I® and quite in light marching order, as we had been
obliged to give nearly all we possessed to pay a dis-
honoured bill to which my husband had kindly put his name
for a friend, so that our prospects were dark in leaving
Yesabba. How often had I made up my mind to say
adieu to this place, and yet when the time arrived that I was
indeed saying “ Good-bye ” I went round and round the old
hut as if I had never seen it before, prying into every
corner, looking at all the gum trees as though they were at
least laurels, scanning the ranges of hills so familiar to my
sight, listening to the pretty creek rippling beneath the
garden, and, in fact, in my heart, bidding a farewell to my
dear old station. Any person with a spark of feeling must
become attached to a place where they have been living for
some time, even though it be in the “ wilds of Australia,”
as they are sure to have passed some few happy hours in the
society of those they love or esteem ; and pleasant associa-
tions generally intrude themselves in our minds before the
melancholy. Intrude, did I say ? No, it is no intru-
sion ; it is so ordained by our wise Creator that the bitter
part of our weary pilgrimage may not press too heavily on
our hearts and tinge them with sorrow.
A little foal that I had reared as a pet seemed on the
morning of our departure to play about me more than usual,
as if knowing that his nurse was about to leave him. I
thought he would have forgotten me in a short time,
as in most instances “ such is life ; ” but he died soon after
we left Yesabba, and I say from a broken heart '
Before quitting Port Macquarie I must not forget to men-
tion what beautiful birds there are there : such varieties of
pigeons, and one kind, the green pigeon, is the most exquisite
bird I almost ever saw. There are also some other very rare
birds to be found in that region ; the “ regent bird,” and


the “ rifleman.” A man came to our station and remained
some time there collecting birds to send to England; his
name is now well known in all the colonies as a snake-
charmer. Underwood (for it was he) used to amuse me
much in making up birds in a very clever way. If he
spoiled a skin in shooting the bird, he would take out all
the bad feathers and put in others of totally different birds,
and would thereby concoct the most wonderful specimens.
He professed to cure the bite of a snake, and in many in-
stances has cured their bites ; but he has fallen a victim to
a snake bite at last himself. When he told me he would
let any snake bite him, and would cure himself, I felt doubt-
ful ; so I sent a black boy to track and watch him one day,
and see if he extracted the fangs from the reptile. The boy
followed close at his heels, and came home with him ; and
in the bosom of his shirt he had a large carpet snake which
he took out before us all, made it draw the blood from his
thumb by pressing his jaws together on the thumb, and
after that he only tied a piece of string very tightly round
the upper part, so as to prevent the circulation of the blood.
He remained talking to us for fully half-an-hour, and then
left us to go and put some ointment or lotion to the part
affected, and was not a bit the worse for the bite. The
black boy told us that, after walking some time in the bush,
Underwood stood still and looked at a snake that was near;
the reptile advanced, and so did the man ; and as the snake
reared its head to make a spring at him, Underwood walked
up and tickled the snake under its jaws I It then crept up
his arm, and got inside his shirt, from whence he took it in
our presence.
There are several kinds of snakes to the northward of
Sydney, but none more deadly than the nasty death-adder,
by many called “ deaf-adder,” and 1 think either name is a
true one ; it both stings and bites, and is so like the color
of the ground and dry leaves that a person is liable to tread
on one without being aware of it. It is perfectly deaf, and
refuses to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he ever so
wisely.
One evening my husband had returned from a journey on
a favorite horse of mine, and I had been patting the animal
as the man was leading him to the stable, when suddenly I


saw something under the horse, and I said as quietly as I
could to the man, “ Stop there a minute,” and I crept under
the horse, putting a foot on the tail of an adder, while I
held down its head with a stick I had in my hand ; “ Now
you may lead him on again, Scotchy,” said I; only mind
me, please.” As soon as the man saw what I had done he let
go the horse, and running back to me with a spade, stuck it
through the viper, saying—“ Well, Missis, ssurlye—ly ! ”
Our first day’s stage was only seventeen miles, where we
remained the night with some friends. I rode one horse and
led another; my husband did the same ; and a black boy
named “ Tommy” rode his namesake and led a mare which
had a foal. Tommy, the horse, was a noted “ buck-jumper,”
had been the cause of one man’s death, and the overthrow
of many others. This “’buck-jumping” is peculiar to Aus-
tralia, and I think proceeds in most cases from the hurried
way in which the horses are broken in and mounted in these
colonies, and the manner in which they are abused ? If
ever members of the Humane Society were required to keep
a vigilant look-out anywhere, it is here. We know the old
adage of “ set a beggar on horseback.” It looks very curious
and causes anxiety to see a person on a buck-jumping
horse. The animal gets his head down almost between his
fore-legs, then puts his back up like an angry cat, and in
this attitude gives a succession of high jumps, all his four legs
off the ground at the same time. Nine times out of ten he
throws his rider. Sometimes, if the rider be a good horse-
man, and the horse very determined, he will continue his
tricks until he puts his rider and his saddle over his head,
and deposits them on the ground. I have known our old
horse, after he had pitched his rider, buck until he broke
his girths, and then commence feeding quite quietly.
The day after our journey commenced w r e were jogging
on slowly, when a cattle dog which we had with us was at-
tacked by three native dogs, or “■ dingoes ; ” they are ex-
ceedingly like foxes, indeed so much so that on my return
to England I took a skin of one of them to a “ meet ” in
Devonshire, and it was hard to make anybody there be-
lieve that it was not a fox’s; and the old huntsman remained
fixed in his opinion to the last, for, as he said—“ If I don’t
know un, who should ? ”


Our other three dogs, Ada and her two sons, immediately
ran to their friend's rescue, and a general melee ensued.
I tied my led-horse up to a tree, and galopped off to see
the fun ; and my husband let his horse go ; and as the black
boy had to catch it, why he could not join in the sport,
much to his despair.
Two of the dingoes were severely handled, in fact left for
dead; the third was more hardy, and after being terribly
mauled, as we called our dogs off to pursue our journey,
followed them and attacked them again. I think it must
have been a female and that her puppies were somewhere
near at hand, as she defended the “ pass ” so valiantly.
It was getting dark and we were rather far from the road,
the dogs all crippled by their antagonists; so we made our
way as well as we could under the circumstances. We soon
recovered our horses, and rode on pretty fast to the “Black-
man’s Point ferry.” My husband and the black went on to
the settlement, five miles further, whilst I crossed the water
in a boat in another direction, to see some valued friends
for the last time in this world. The river where I crossed
is about two miles wide I think, and I was rowed over by a
little Hottentot, a prisoner, and a dreadful looking creature,
what there was of him. He had no legs, and no tongue,
and yet he was a vicious little man, I’ve heard. I often
wondered what he could have done to become transported.
The stars had risen, and the night promised to be beau-
tiful when my guide left me at Gooloowa; and as I walked
up to the house I thought the sound of the oars in the water
very pretty. I found my friends at home, sitting with their
work and books, and looking especially happy, as that
dear family always did, they were so English, so amiable,
so good. When I told them of the little Hottentot escorting
me over to their shore, they exclaimed—
“Oh ! were you not frightened of him ? ” I believe I
said something about being able to upset him into the water
if he had misbehaved.
It was pleasant while sipping their excellent coffee to
hear all the latest news, for at times I had been months
without hearing any in my retreat; and I, in my turn, not a
little amused them with mv bush anecdotes.


The following morning I was early astir, as I was to go into
town soon after breakfast. My husband came out to that
meal, and when that was over we left Gooloowa for ever,
and after crossing the river by the aid of our late host’s two
pretty daughters, we mounted our horses, which were
awaiting us, and, waving our hands to our fair boat;«£«, rode
away.
We remained with a Tasmanian friend and her family
for one day in the town ; they were very old colonists, but
originally from Skye, and the mother of the family has seen
many vicissitudes out here, as all must do in a new country ;
and her adventures would be, if related, more extraordinary
than many a romance. On the day after we came into
town we left Port Macquarie in a steamer, en route to
Sydney, from whence we were to proceed overland to our
future home. It would not be easy to find a prettier country,
whatever else it may be. In some places the scenery is
most picturesque, and often when riding alone through the
bush have I sang those beautiful lines of Moore’s and felt
them in truth :
“ We think how great had been our bliss, if Heav’n had but
assign'd us
To live and die in scenes like this, with some we've left behind us.”
The horses w r ere shipped, and several friends walked with
us to the steamer to see us away. Just as we were leaving
I noticed two young ladies, who had not been very long ac-
quainted, saying, or rather weeping, adieu on each other’s
shoulder ; it appeared quite heartrending. One of these
was going to Sydney. When I had taken a last look at the
land I went below to see to my berth being snug, as I must
own to the weakness of being sea-sick ; what was my sur-
prise on seeing the lately weeping and disconsolate young
lady lying on her back in her berth, singing a song, as
though she had never known a grief.
“ What ! singing ? ” said I, in astonishment.
“Oh, yes,” replied she ; “if I don’t sing I shall be sea-
sick.”
It was the first time I had ever heard of this preventive,
so I made a note of it.
When I left the deck I had intended getting into my
berth at once, and thus try to prevent the dreadful feeling


that generally takes possession of a poor “ land-lubber ; ”
but on finding that my greyhound could not be allowed
below also, I preferred having my mattress and blankets on
deck, as the night was lovely, and the wool bales on board
made an excellent bed ; and Ada took her usual place close
to my side.
We had gone about three miles from Port Macquarie
when it was found that the provender for our horses had
been quite forgotten ; and, notwithstanding our urgent re-
quest to return for it, and it had been entirely the mate’s
fault leaving it on shore, still we could not do so. Fortu-
nately there was plenty of maize on board for sale, so our
horses had some of that, and some porter. Shortly after
our request had been refused there was a commotion on
deck, and an order to “ about ship.” On looking over the
side of the vessel I saw dimly a little something in the
water, which proved to be the captain’s dog, swimming
with all its might and main.
“ Look at that,” said my spouse ; “ they take all that
trouble for such a little brute, and yet would not return for
my horses’ food; how I hate it.”
With this quiet conclusion, he went below to ruminate on
his troubles.
In two days we reached Sydney, after touching at New-
castle, and proceeded to an hotel ; our horses went to a
livery stable, and very soon after our arrival I was making
a hearty breakfast. I hold it to be a perfect luxury after a
voyage in a small obnoxious vessel to find oneself in a com-
fortable hotel, and finally, after a bath, enjoying one’s break-
fast without the trouble of ordering it. Of necessity we
cannot in this world be all of the same opinion, but give me
the delight of being free from mutton and beef wrinkles,
which only disfigure the face and sour the temper, and allow
me to send to a restaurant for my meals.
A few persons who knew that I was going to Sydney came
to see me, and as we only intended staying the one day
there I went out to look about me with an intimate young
friend, but I did not remain out very long, as she had to
leave. On my return there were several dog-fanciers came
to see my greyhound, taking her proportions, and admiring
her very much, most naturally ; one of these persons ad


mired a son of her’s, and wished to have him if I would
part with him, but I refused.
The black boy, knowing how greatly we prized our dogs,
and wishing to go to the Paramatta races, which were to
take place on the following day, went off in the evening and
took the envied dog with him, making sure that we would
not leave Sydney without him. However, we could not
wait another day in town, so I went for Mr. Hill, who
had admired my dog so greatly, told him the circumstance,
and said if he could get the dog he might keep him for a
time until I could send for him. I heard soon after that he
had gone to Paramatta, got the dog, and made him a regu-
lar pet; and he turned out a very valuable one to him, as
he used to sell numbers of his progeny for tiger-hunting in
India. At least, so he said.
In consequence of the black boy leaving us, we had to
hire a man to take with us ; and such a genuine little coward
as he was ! He did tolerably well, however, and was very
civil and obliging. Having purchased a gig, a small tar-
paulin, some blankets, biscuits, tea, sugar, and an immense
sausage, as provisions for the outward and inward man, we
commenced on the 17th March, St. Patrick’s day, our land
journey. Some persons made sure that I should leave my
bones on the Murrumbidgee River, about the half way of
our trip, and everybody said I was very foolish to tempt
Providence in undertaking such a hazardous and arduous one.
“ En avant ” then was our motto, and we started in a gig,
driving two horses out-rigger, and leading my favourite
horse from behind the vehicle. He was an imported Cape
horse, and very fond of company, so that every horse we
met Plantagenet drew back to notice them, and with such
force that my hands quite smarted from the friction of the
tether rope. Mr. B remarked that my hands would
“ soon strike fire.” “ No,” I answered; “it will only make
them a little tinder ” (tender). Our servant, Murphy, rode
the buck-jumper, but we never told him of it, or I think
nothing would ever have persuaded him to mount him.
We passed a town called Liverpool, why I am sure I cannot
think ; but they have the strangest way of naming towns in
the Antipodes. Forinstance, in Tasmania, Brighton, Bagdad,
Richmond, Jericho and Hamilton, are close to each other.


We saw several nice estates, and the grounds prettily laid
out in some. We went four miles beyond the town to an
inn kept by Mr. Jenkins Cole ; it was very neat, the sitting-
room really furnished with two most comfortable couches ;
over the mantelpiece was the portrait of the dowager Mrs.
Cole —such a buxom old lady, with a huge lace cap, and
dressed in her best attire. Opposite to her was her “ greater
half,” the quintessence of a rubicund-visaged boniface ; and
to complete the familygroup there was the likeness of a youth-
ful aspirant to the honors of the Cole family. Being fond
of genealogy, I began tracing the pedigree of this group,
but could get no further than “ King Cole.”
On the 18th we left the hotel soon after breakfast, and
mounted the “ Razor-back.” I had heard such a frightful
account of this mountain that I felt quite nervous as to how
our horses would acquit themselves. However, we walked,
and the good nags took their load up well. It was nothing
very formidable ; I had travelled much more precipitous roads
in Port Macquarie ; it merely took away the breath for a
time ; but in days of yore, before the road was cut away, it
must have been a terrible place. We jogged on about
thirty miles altogether that day, and remained in a good
paddock all night, through the civility of a woman whom I
saw carrying water. I asked her if we might go in, and
was answered in the affirmative. This being our first night’s
encampment, I must give a few details.
We had two large blankets joined for a tent; these were
easily pitched with two forked sticks and a long pole across
the top, and then they were pegged all round close to the
ground. A small tarpaulin was next laid inside on the
ground, and with the gig bag and cushions, and a feather
pillow, and one large blanket each, we managed to pass the
night. Murphy, I fancy, made himself at home in the
kitchen of the house, for I saw him no more that night.
When we left our encampment on the 19th, the woman,
who had been very obliging, did not wish for any remunera-
tion. We had plenty of our own provisions, and fared
sumptuously for travellers. We had our loaded pistols
wrapped in the blankets, and rolled in the apron of the gig,
but so that we could put our hands on them in a second if
required. The tent and provisions were in the boot. The


mare carried a large pair of saddle-bags, and my horse
another pair over my saddle.
About seven miles further on we came to Picton, It was
a small village, containing a good publichouse and two
stores. We stopped at one of these to buy some tin panni-
kins and quart pots, and the mistress brought me a cup of
tea, and wrapped me up carefully, as though it were cold
weather. Just as we were leaving, too, she gave me a very
fine water-melon. We passed Campden, a village belonging
to Mr. MacArthur, whose estate is close by. I here saw a
whirlwind for the first time ; the people seemed to be accus-
tomed to such things, for there was much shutting of doors
and windows. My companion said it was quite West
Indian, the dust rising very high in the air for some time in
the form of a pyramid. The church at Campden was being
built, and promised to be a pretty building. After this we
passed no more fine country for one day, and the “ Bargo
Brush,” which we travelled to-day, is the most miserable
twenty miles of country that I ever travelled in my life.
It is very sandy, and full of stumps of trees, which have
been felled to within about a foot of the ground, and so
small and close are these that it is nearly impossible to
avoid them, and, to crown all, a dense scrub of the very
ugliest trees that were ever planted in this universe. How
my sides ached with the shaking and bumping; and how
glad I was to mount my horse for a change.
In the middle of the “ Brush ” we came to a clean inn,
kept by a man named Brown, and answering so exactly the
description of “ John Brown ” in a song which I had often
been amused with in New England that there seemed little
doubt as to whether he were the person described ! Such
a j ovial face, with a pair of sparkling black eyes ; and his
figure betokening the Bonhomme to whom the song is
addressed !
Our horses and dogs were well fed here, and we then
drove on to the “ Lock-up,” or place were the prisoners
sent from the different country towns and villages to Syd-
ney were lodged en route. We were asking the constable
who kept it where we could put our horses for the night
when he espied a 50th button on my husband’s tobacco
pipe, and he turned round and said quickly—


“ If it were not for the moustaches and whiskers I should
say you were Mr. A. B , sir ? ”
“ And so you recollect me, Egan ? ” said Mr. B .
“Well, sir, I was thinking if you were not your brother,
you must be yourself; but how bad you look !”
This last compliment was anything but pleasing to the
person to whom it was addressed, who said it was owing to
fatigue, whiskers, and all sorts of things. I expected to
hear “ matrimony” mentioned in the list.
We resolved on resting the horses a day, as Egan was so
civil; he sent us milk, potatoes, and everything he could
think of; regretted his wife being from home, but said she
would be back in the morning. Accordingly on the follow-
ing morning Mrs. Egan returned, and sent us to our tent a
fowl nicely cooked : really this couple were indeed hospit-
able. Our horses were in an excellent paddock, and our
dogs well cared for ; and this with me is a most essential
thing, as I believe in “ Love me, love my dog.”
We remained only the day at Egan’s, and in the evening,
just as I was going up to see Mrs. Egan’s cottage, a very fine
young man in the mounted police uniform came to the tent.
We were glad to see him ; he had been a corporal in our regi-
ment : he and four brothers were non-commissioned officers
in the 50th ; his name was Feeny. The sons provided for
their old mother, who did what she could to assist in their
housekeeping. A few days before I left Chatham for Tas-
mania I had walked down in the afternoon to see the
parade, and was standing on the terrace which overlooks
the square, when a soldier walked deliberately out of the
ranks and shot Sergeant Feeny, the eldest of the family :
the bullet passed through his lungs and out of his back,
and struck the wall of the barrack-master’s house, which is
at the further end of the barracks from which the shot
was fired. The poor sergeant fell back into the arms
of a man close to him, and very soon expired. This mur-
der caused a great sensation at the time ; the civil authori-
ties claimed the prisoner, and he w r as hanged on the
Brompton Lines, all the military quartered in Chatham
being present at his execution. The murderer had no par-
ticular spite against Feeny, but, being drunk, he detemined
on shooting the first person who should tell him of it on
parade.


Egan was telling us that a short time ago a strong police
force brought down several notorious characters to remain a
night at this station.
They were the merriest set he had ever had there, singing,
talking, laughing and shouting in quite a frantic manner.
He did not like to stop them in their mirth, although it was
getting late, but at last he thought he would, and before
doing so he walked outside the house to see what sort of a
night it was, and to speak to his watchdog, which would not
be pacified, when, on turning the corner of the building, he
espied one of the prisoners with his head, and nearly his
shoulders, out of a hole which he had burrowed, and in
another minute he would have been off, with perhaps the
whole gang after him. He fired a pistol, and the police
came to his assistance, and soon secured the merry and
clever rogues for the night.
They had sung boisterously to prevent their working
through the wall of the house being disturbed, and thus
making.their exit.
On the 21st we said good-day to our kind entertainers of
the Bargo Brush, and proceeded to cross the “ Mittagong
Range; ” it was rather tedious, and so our horses thought.
We were told that if we went to a place called “ Bong-bong ”
(it might be bonbon ), we should find a beautiful paddock,
kept by another of our old regiment. When we reached
there about three o’clock no constable was there,so I rodeup
to a house and asked which was the police paddock. An
old man told me to take down the rails opposite to his house,
and there I should find it. However, I requested the man
to take them down for me, and I then found myself in a
beautifully grassed piece of land, with a fine river flowing
through it. We fixed our tent very soon, had dinner,
and whilst the other travellers took a sleep I walked
down to the water to bathe. I must here mention that
I took a good swim every morning and evening, if only
in a waterhole sometimes. The weather was becoming
colder, and we had already had two sharp frosts since we
left Sydney.
The night in question was very quiet and lovely when
we went to sleep, but in the middle of the night I dreamed
that I was trying to push a tree from me, when one of the


limbs struck my forehead, and it awoke me, at least the tent
pole that had fallen on my head did. But I merely just
put up my hand without opening my eyes, until I heard
Murphy call out, “ Lord save us ; the tint is down !” As
to that individual, he looked like the spirit of the storm,
wandering about with his blue blankets wrapped tightly
round him, for fear they might be swept away by the wind.
We arose and made the place as snug as the wind would
allow us, for it now nearly blew a hurricane. Morning soon
broke and we decamped. I heard the Van Dieman’s Land
magpie for the first time this morning since our campaigning
began ; it makes one rise good-tempered hearing its merry
little notes ; and the “ laughing-jackass,” too, putting in a
few hearty peals of laughter, also enlivens one ; this though
I must say, that, however foolish it may seem, I have some-
times been quite angry with some of the latter birds, as
they always appear to me to come and laugh when a person
is in any kind of dilemma.
An officer in the 50th used to imitate them very well,
and one day a young lady said to him—
“ Oh, Mr. , do you know I never hear a laughing-
jackass without thinking of you.”
This was all the more personal as he was given to giggling.
I rode Plantagenet all this day’s stage, and stopped oc-
casionally to pick some of the sweetbriar which grew very
luxuriantly there. We passed a very fine orchard during
the morning, and I’m afraid had there been any small boys
ready to pick some of the forbidden fruit, I should have
been easily bribed to silence by a slight remuneration in
that line. The proprietor of that orchard was a person to
whom his neighbours (?) gave the credit of taking too much
care of their cattle, and yet, such was their ingratitude,
they did not thank him for it.
Soon after passing this fruitful soil we came to a lovely
spot. It appeared so neat, so quietly happy. There was a
pretty cottage at the commencement of the village, not
quite finished ; the garden surrounding it was laid out
nicely, the verandah was covered by creepers, and on it
stood a black servant in a snow-white dress and turban. It
was evidently before breakfast with the inmates of the
dwelling, and as we came nearer we saw two gentlemen


walking in the garden. In a small paddock near the house
was a laughing party of young people; one child was
riding a pony led by a little boy ; she had no bonnet on,
and the fresh morning’s air had given her such a healthy
colour in her cheeks ; whilst the rest of the group followed,
running and skipping in all the bouyancy of childhood. What
a halcyon time that is.
I was told a short time ago that the good people of Eng-
land think that Australia is not a good climate for children ;
that, in fact, they are as difficult to rear as young “ niggers”
in the West Indies. This is a great mistake. Nursemaids
in crinolines, and children in and out of perambulators,
swarm in this land of promise. I cannot say that I am a
lover of children generally, but I can always feel for and with
themand enterinto theirsports and pastimes; and am notpre-
cisely of the same opinion as the gentleman who hated
babies. But then, again, I never had the same reason. I
dare say our horses will not mind resting while I narrate the
following anecdote. It was told by a gentleman who was
reproved bysome mere tendre for not loving babies —
“ I will tell you,” said he, “ how I came to dislike babies :
Some years ago I was travelling from Calais to Dover, and
on the deck of the steamer I saw a very pretty young
woman with, apparently, twin babies in her arms. I was,
and am, particularly fond of pretty women, and I then
had no positive dislike to babies; so, for the sake of
the nurse, I offered to take care of one of her little charges
for a time, more especially as I fancied the poor mother had
a very anxious look and manner.
“ I put the baby on my knee, carefully wrapped up (as in-
fants are generally to suffocation), and it was so good, so
perfectly inoffensive, that I chatted away with the mother,
forgetting that I held the infant. We reached Dover; the
young mother asked me if I would mind taking care of the
child until she had passed her luggage at the custom-house,
and that she would then relieve me of my charge. I said I
should be happy to be of any service to her, and away she
went with her other darling. We had arranged to travel to
London in the same train, and the lady was so amusing and
charming that I would have taken care of the tw r o little ones
if she had hinted such a wish.


“ She went; time sped also, but no sign of the fond parent
returning; so, rolling the ‘ baby ’up in its swaddling
clothes as well as I could to prevent its being eyed by the
public, I also went to pass my luggage at the custom-house.
“ I did so, and then took my ticket for London and got
into a carriage in a train about to start; when, thinking
that the mother of the child would be sure to come soon,
and that the young incumbrance would be as well on the
opposite seat as on my knees, and feeling heartily tired of
my position as nurse, I placed the babe on the cushion care-
fully, and leaned back in my seat.
“ The train was about to start, when the door opened and
in came an immensely stout man, who immediately sat down
on the infant! My horror cannot be depicted ! I’ll defy
any living being to tell my feelings in a pen-and-ink sketch.
‘ Sst-sst,’ goes the whistle ! off goes the train ! But amid
the din of all I shouted to the stout elderly party to remove
from the babe —
“‘Sir, you are smothering an innocent babe! You are
committing murder —infanticide ! ’
“ ‘ Much obliged, my dear sir,’ answered the old gentle-
man, whom I found to be stone deaf; ‘ much obliged to
you, but I’m an old traveller and can rough it here.’
“He evidently thought I had offered to change seats with
him, as he was sitting with his back to the engine.
“ ‘You shocking old villain,’ thought Ito myself; ‘ rough
it, indeed ! What on earth will the mother do to me ?’
“ I had heard of lionesses protecting their young, and that
they were mere trifles when compared to an infuriated woman
when her offspring was injured. I saw it was of no use at-
tempting to make the man hear me ; he had made an air-
cushion of the child, and was soon snoring above the inno-
cent fledgling. Two stages more, and the old miscreant got
out of the carriage, bowing as he left; and I then took
courage to look at the crushed infant. I uncovered it; it
moved not, it yelled not, it screeched not ! It had a sweet
little placid face, shrouded in lace cap and hood ; large blue
eyes and fair curling hair, but at a glance I saw life was
extinct.
“ You, madam, may imagine my feelings, but I cannot
describe them. Here was I, left in charge of a lovely child,


and witnessed its murder. Yes, unintentional certainly, but
still actual murder. What compensation was to be made
for such a frightful calamity? None. Every time the train
stopped I expected to see its mother, and then, oh ! then,
I might look out for myself.
“ I had two carpet-bags, so I crammed as much as I could
from the two into one, and then placed the dead body in
the emptier one.
“ At length the train stopped at London, and I saw the
young mother at the carriage door.
“ ‘Oh ! are you there, sir ? Why, I have been in such dis-
tress ; I could not find your carriage on leaving Dover.
I’ll get in there a minute ; I hope you have had no trouble
with baby. Where is she ?’
“ ‘Madam,’ I commenced, gradually retreating to beyond
her arm’s length ■ ‘ madam, hear me.’
“‘Sir, my child ! I will, I must, I insist on having my
beautiful child !’
“ I seized my carpet-bag—
“ ‘Here, my dear madam, are the remains of your mur-
dered infant; sat upon by a ruthless elderly party by mis-
take ; but beautiful still in death.’
“ She was soothed. She sobbed only a little; and,
putting her living child on the seat beside her, commenced
examining the dead one.
“ ‘Poor lamb !’ said she ; ‘ are her brains uninjured, think
you ? ’
“ I was commencing a speech on the subject, when I saw
her pretty eyes turn on me in a mischievous glance; and,
seizing me by the hand, she said —
“ ‘Well, you do deserve to have a nurse’s situation, you
very best of smugglers !’
“ Whereupon she opened the back of the child’s head,
and out poured—not water, not blood, but splendid Brussels
lace, which I had unconsciously passed through the custom-
house.
“ ‘ Don’t be angry,’ whispered the pretty coaxer, as we
were getting out of the train. ‘ You’ll allow that for me at
least le jeu vaut bien la chanddlel
“ Madam, ever since then I have hated babies.”


We were at Sutton Forest when we allowed the horses
the above-mentioned rest. The children, directly they saw
us, were quiet, and stood still to gaze in amazement at us, for
travellers in those days were scarce in such regions. We
dismounted soon after we had passed the pretty cottage at
the churchyard, to see my sister-in-law’s grave ; her husband,
also in the 50th, had been stationed near there when she
died.
The next place of any importance in our trip was a station
belonging to Mr. Oakes. It was sweetly situated, but the
grass close to the house was very scanty, owing to sheep
being fed there. We were rather late, but made our way to
another constable’s hut, and encamped there, the horses
being hobbled and turned loose for the first time. We pur-
chased some mutton from the constable, and he obliged us
with cooking utensils, and very soon a savour arose which
men and dogs seemed to hail.
On the 22nd we had some small difficulty in finding the
horses, as Murphy went exactly in the wrong direction to
look for them, but my husband soon found them a short
distance off, by some water, and we proceeded on our route
to Goulburn, a well built though small town. We were
within four miles of it when we came on a fine piece of
road, which was quite a treat after so many ups and downs.
We met a lady and gentleman on horseback at the com-
mencement of the road, and a servant carrying their luggage,
also on horseback. We had intended remaining close to a
river near a police-station, but Murphy missed us, and went
on to Goulburn before we could overtake him. We reached
the town about four o’clock, and went to a comfortable
hotel there, kept by a person named Brodie. Mrs. Brodie
was exceedingly pretty, and it cheered us to see her pleasant
face, and the well-furnished rooms of the hotel. We had
dinner, and afterwards walked out to see the town and post
some letters which I had written at the camp each day.
Two squatters were at the hotel; they had come down
the country from some distance, and were going to Sydney.
They invited the landlord and a doctor to pass the evening
with them, and these four choice spirits began at an early
hour “ keeping it up,” as they called it; and they kept me
up also, for I could not sleep in hearing of their incessant


tongues. Here let me mention, far farenthhe , what a
popular fallacy it is to think that women talk so much more
than men. Only get the opportunity of being near to a
fosse of gentlemen, and hear how their tongues go ! and
how splendidly they retail gossip. Then again, we poor
females have not the license to talk so much; for are there
not actually paid male speakers ? Nobody ever heard of a
woman being paid to speak ; on the contrary, I believe in my
heart that many would be gladly paid to keep their tongues
quiet. So we are obliged to content ourselves in a quiet
way, and do as much in private as we can, without payment,
coute qui coute.
The Esculapius in question at Goulburn had served his
apprenticeship, I fancy, to some country actor. He evinced
great talen.t in that line, and quoted Shakespeare with con-
siderable volubility and accuracy. His friends of the even-
ing were delighted with his poetie effusions, and one of them,
a Scotchman, had evidently heard him previously, for he
said—
“ Oh ! do say that piece I recollect you’re always saying ;
its ‘ Coome baack, coome baack, my dochter !
Which invitation I remembered to have seen given in a
song by a Highland chieftain to his daughter.
The leech complied, but in the middle of it some person
commenced a song entitled “ Vive la compagnie,” quite for-
getting himself, the young lady, and the distressed and re-
pentant parent; but this new ditty so pleased the landlord
that he continued singing it during the whole evening, and
it was of course his interest to do so.
I never heard a more distracting or distracted set than
those men, and I was well pleased when I heard them inti-
mate their intention of parting. Some one said he “ would
not go home till morning,” but 1 hoped in my heart that
he would change his mind, and start then. As they were
getting their candles to retire, I heard the doctor say, in
dolorous tones, “ I am never merry when I hear sweet
music.” I thought to myself, “ Then, my poor friend, you
are a sad fellow to-night in more ways than one.”
On the 23rd we had a most unpleasant drive, and were
rather troubled to find either grass or water for our horses.
Mr. B rode off the track we were on to a short dis


tance to look for a spot for our encampment. He cooeyed
(native halloa) to me, and I drove on to meet him, to a
very retired spot; well suited, as we thought, for our stay
that night. The tent was pitched, and we dined ; my hus-
band had lain down and fallen asleep ; Murphy, suiting him-
self to the adage, “ like master, like man,” had also em-
braced Morpheus, when I thought I would walk up a steep
range that was close by, and see if the horses could stray
from us to the main road. I had satisfied myself on this
point, and was returning down the slope to the camp, when
I heard voices in angry dispute, and one of them calling for
help. I listened intently, and, turning round, I could
discern on the top of the hill three persons, two men and a
woman; the men were struggling, and I heard one say—
“ If you only spare my life, you shall get the few shillings
I have with me.”
The woman then said, “ Oh ! don’t kill the old fellow.”
I ran to the camp, and told my people that they must
come with me and protect the old man. I got my own pistol,
and was starting with my dogs, when a shot was fired, on
the hill as I thought, and I felt sure we could do no good
then. My husband said “number one” was to be con-
sidered, and that the place looked very like one to which
bushrangers would resort, and that he should not leave the
spot where he was to help any one, but put out the fire and
lie perdu. Murphy was evidently already in that state.
His teeth chattered, his knees almost knocked together with
fear at hearing the report of the gun. Unlike most of his
countrymen, who are brave, and who love a little skirmish,
he was utterly prostrated. I told him to get the pistols out
of the holsters affixed to the saddle on which he rode, and
see if they were in good order. He went for them, and
said, “ Why, ma’am, if you’ll believe me, I would not fire a
pistol for dear life.” I only remarked that I did believe him.
I had read of an Irishman, who, seeing a mob collected
and fighting going on, took a thick stick and rushed in
amongst it, saying, “ God direct me to the right side,” and
laying about him on all sides. I don’t think Murphy would
ever have been guilty of such an outrage.
Our fire was put out, so we were cold and without tea;
and, saying “ We must keep a sharp look-out to-night,” my


companion rolled himself in his large blanket and fell
asleep. I believe Murphy never closed his eyes through the
night.
It could not have been more than three o’clock on the
following morning when I walked out of the tent in my
dressing-gown, and with bare feet, to go and look for the
horses and help to bring them in with Murphy. They were
close at hand, and we had started before daybreak. We had to
go round the high range of hills before alluded to previous to
getting on the main road. Three miles on we met a dray;
the men with it had encamped there the night before, and
had heard and seen what I did, and they thought it best to
fire a shot, which was the one we heard, and which I hoped
had had the effect of alarming the robber from his prey.
There was a celebrated man at large then named Holloway,
who frequented that part of the country, and it was thought
likely that he was one of those whom I had heard disputing.
We drove by a most picturesque spot that day. It was
after passing some miserably ugly country, and we came to
a river of a sudden, in the turn of the road. All around
looked green and smiling; and, to add to the scene,
there was at the time a dray encamped close to the water,
and two women were performing their toilette on the bank
of the river. The coach which passes from Goulburn to
Yass was coming down the road on the opposite side to us;
it contained a bushranger named Massy, who had been
taken by the police, and shot through both legs, poor
creature.
We travelled until we came to a sheep station, and, as we
found excellent feed and water for our horses, we rested the
following day, it being the Sabbath. Sunday is very little
kept in the bush, and yet that day always appears quieter
than the remainder of the week. God reigns peculiarly on
His own day, it seems; and; whatever may be said to the
contrary, in a thinking mind the wilderness inspires religious
feelings. We look at this tree, or that flower; we hear the
birds carolling their sweet notes ; we see and hear the
Almighty in all! How powerfully that beautiful poem was
recalled by me during my pilgrimage in the bush—
“ Father of all, in every age, in every clime adored,
By saint, by savage, and by sage—Jehovah, Jove, our Lord."


Who can be an Atheist in the bush, even without church
to go to, clergyman to guide, Bible to read ? Look into
nature, and it must be admitted that a Supreme Being reigns
over and orders all. I once met with a clever man who
I was told was an Atheist ; I asked him if it were true. He
said—
“ Yes, I had been brought up very carefully and reli-
giously, but was always sceptical on certain points ; I came
out to the colony, and was one sultry day driving bullocks,
which were very contrary: I got off my horse and threw my-
self on the ground, blaspheming most awfully ! From that
time I have not believed in a God, as, if there had been
one , he would assuredly have struck me dead 1 ” A curious
conclusion to arrive at, and, oh ! how sadly mistaken is our
wise Creator’s mercy.
The hut by which we passed our Sunday was inhabited
by an old Irish couple and one other man ; the old woman
was very loquacious, and made herself quite amusing. She
was delighted at my reading to her.
On the Monday we started for Yass ; it was a wretched
road, nothing but jolts. We met some police, and a good
many blacks. The former asked us if we had seen any sus-
picious-looking “ tramps ” on our way, and I told my
tale. The sergeant seemed to listen attentively, and then,
after hearing all, turned to one of his men and said, “ That’s
his beat; ” and, thanking me for the information, made off.
I will here say that we heard that Holloway had been taken
that very day in a hut close to where we encamped, and,
having showed resistance, was shot through the shoulder
during his capture.
Yass seemed very inferior to Goulburn in buildings, but
there was a good Roman Catholic Chapel in the principal
street, and the priest’s house was very pretty. Opposite to
this was the Protestant clergyman’s house, also very neat;
but we could not see the church from where we passed.
We bought a few things that we wanted and then proceeded
to “ Barber’s Creek,” about three miles out of town. This
day’s stage was a long one, considering how bad the roads
were, but the horses were well taken care of, and looked
uncommonly well.


The station at which we halted belonged to a Mr. Barber,
and his house was half a mile from where we encamped ; so
Murphy went up to one of the huts to cook some meat, and
on his return at night met with a warm reception from one of
our dogs, “ Ranger,” who set him up in kangaroo style, and
kept him against a tree until I went to procure his libera-
tion. The dogs travelled well • their feet were at first a
little sored, but I used to wash them, or dip them rather, in
strong pickle every day after we encamped, and at last they
would hold up one foot after another to have it doctored.
The foal, too, became very fond of the dogs and the camp,
and would play with the former as they were on the march,
and at night would lie close to the fires, as if quite at home.
Our next day’s road took us through BonioJ and we got to
the “ Bookham Arms ”to luncheon. As we were travelling
in the way we did for economy, I did not wish ever to go
near an inn, but my husband went to this one to ask the
road and have a glass of ale. The landlord, an old soldier
, of the 4th King’s Own, said —
“ Won’t you and your lady step in and take some lunch ?
It is on the table.”
Mr. B came out and told me this, adding—
“ As he pressed us so much we may as well go ; it won’t
delay us long.”
In we went, ate a hearty luncheon (as I knew we should
have to pay well for it), and then I amused myself at a piano
for a few minutes.
“ You may as well ask what there is to pay, although I
don’t suppose they will take anything as they asked us in,”
said Mr. B on his return from seeing the horses have a
drink.
“ Yes, and took you in too,” I answered, “ as I have just
paid Mrs. Green five shillings.”
That place was called Bogolong ; it was far from pretty
country, and there had been bush fires lately, which gave it
a dismal appearance. We travelled on another mile, and,
finding a good paddock, truth obliges me to state that we
took down a panel of the fencing, and entered uninvited.
The innkeeper had told us that we should find no water for
ten miles, thinking, no doubt, that we should remain at his
house when we heard that, but we found it sooner, and
encamped.


We always awoke just before daylight, and the fire was
then put together, as we never but the once allowed it to go
out. Then on went the quart-pots for tea. Whilst the
water was boiling I used to run down to the river or
creek, or whatever water it was, and go in if possible; some-
times it was bitterly cold, but very refreshing; then I
dressed and returned to the camp, but always with bare feet,
as the grass was so wet from the heavy dews, or frosts, that
it would have made my boots damp for the whole day ; then
we rolled up our blankets and packed the gig, and then “ all
hands ”to breakfast. After this meal Murphy, pipe in
mouth and hands in his pockets, went to bring up the horses,
which never strayed away but the first night, and, whilst he
and his master harnessed the gig horses, I saddled my own
pet.
On the morning after we had taken “ French leave ” to
enter the paddock, we sent up to the house, which it ad-
joined, to asked if we might remain there the day, as we had
some clothes for a laundress if we could find one. Murphy
soon returned, accompanied by a woman who had brought
me some milk and butter.
She was told to ask us to the manager’s house (the owner
did not live there), but we declined with thanks, and she
took our clothes and brought them back at night. Mr.
B walked up to see the superintendent in the evening,
and met some Port Macquarie people there.
We started early from our good encampment on the fol-
lowing morning and found a dreadful road before us. We
were a long time en route; we passed a small, miserable-
looking hut, kept by a young Irish woman—a very good-
looking woman—with large melancholy grey eyes, such
as one often sees in Ireland, and nowhere else. The hut
exhibited a sign, and we were very cold, so we had some
hot wine and water. The woman told us that she had to
pay two pounds a week to Mr. Green for the place, so after
that I did not much wonder at her pitiful-looking face.
There had been races there the previous week, the land-
lady told us. Where will people have them next, I wonder?
I forgot to mention an amusing incident which occurred
to me at an inn situated about ten miles from Berrima, near
Sutton Forest, and which hailed to the sign of the “ Black


Horse.” We got out when we came to this establishment
on purpose to feed the horses and dogs. Whilst my com-
panion was at the stable I walked into the verandah, ex-
pecting, of course, to be asked into the house. I saw a
young girl of about thirteen years old sitting at work near
a door; she, however, paid me no attention. At last I made
bold to ask which room I could enter. I shall never forget
that girl’s face ! it was the Grossest that I ever saw ! it was
almost fiendish. She came and opened a door and said,
“ There.”
I had sat a few minutes, when she returned, and, opening
my door, said, in the same rude manner—
“ Don’t you let the dogs in ! ”
“They are not in, Miss Vinegar-face,” retorted I ; for
I felt very vexed, and showed it by shutting the door in my
visitor’s face. Before leaving, I told her, whilst thanking
her for her civility, that my dog, showing Ada, had been ac-
customed to a drawing-room, therefore she need not have
feared her hurting her room at the “ Black Horse.” I also
said, if she were not more courteous to strangers, I feared
her husband would not get much custom. She answered
very quaintly ; “ Oh ! none comes as aren’t obliged ; ” which
I thought very likely.
That little cross-faced girl had married a man of forty,
and perhaps was sorry for it when too late. When my hus-
band returned from the stable, he saw the girl’s cross face ;
and asked me if I had done anything to her to make her
look so. I told him, and he christened her “ Miss Cruet.”
After the horses had fed we drove on, and on, until I
thought it was with us as with the celebrated cork leg ;
but at last we halted and made ourselves snug for the night.
On the following morning we started very early, not know-
ing where we should find a camping ground, and came to a
dray that had been all night by the road side, and the
driver was just thinking of a breakfast which was displayed
on tin plates, and looking quite tempting. He had taken a
fine large piece of corn beef out of an iron pot; and a
damper (unleavened bread, baked in wood ashes) was being
dusted after baking. I suppose I gave a longing look at
the damper, for the man said : “ Will you try my damper,
ma’am?” Notwithstanding my husband’s look to the con


trary, I was out quickly, and, saying I should be very glad to
try the damper, sat down on the pole of the dray and eat
ravenously, as though I had tasted nothing before that
morning. The man asked us how far we were going, and
told us of a good place for encampment at twenty miles on,
and said he was going there too, if he could reach so far.
When we left the dray my husband noticed what a bad
expression the man’s face had, “ quite a Jack Sheppard’s
face,” as he termed it ; but I felt so good-tempered with all
mankind after my second breakfast that I could not concur
in his opinion. We had a tiresome journey, but got to the
place pointed out for our stay at an early hour, and found it
exceedingly good. We had had our tea, and our fire was
blazing up prettily in the dark night, when we heard the crack
of a whip, and shortly after the dray came up. The bullocks
were hobbled for the night, and the driver came to ask for
a bit of fire stick to light his fire. He asked if he might
come to our fire after supper, and hear the Sydney news.
He came, and, seating himself opposite to me, said he won-
dered how I could venture on such a journey, and when he
saw me looking to the caps of the pistols expressed surprise
that I was not afraid to touch firearms. My husband told
him that he would rather I fired at his hat than his head !
whereupon the man gave a long sigh, and said—
“Ah ! never think of that, ma’am ; ” and paid me a neat
compliment on being too good to be hanged ! He then
told us his name was Tom Sheppard; we could not avoid
smiling at this ; and, as Murphy came up to replenish our
fire, the man said if we liked he would tell us what he had
been to Berrima for, as it was a strange tale. I told Mur-
phy that he could remain to hear the “ yarn,” as they call
these little anecdotes, and, being all still, Sheppard com-
menced :
“ I went to Berrima on a case of murder,” said he (Mur-
phy gave a look behind him, to see if there were any cbance
of his being served in the like manner). “ I have lived
several years on a farm with as good a master as ever man
had ; but he married a young woman, and she and I never
were friends, somehow. Some months ago the missis had a
■young cousin come to see her, and the master being kind
asked him to stay with them.


“ I allays had my suspicions of those two young folk, but I
said nothing. What was it to me what they did as long as
my master didn’t mind them ? One day, though, I had
brought in some wood to an outhouse, and was stacking it,
when I heard the two in doors talking together, and on
putting my ear to the crack of the chimney I could see
that my suspicions were correct, and that there was too
much relationship between ’em. I had noticed that when-
ever the master went out of the house the cousin went in.
“We had a fine crop of wheat this season, and master
said he should think of getting a good market for it and not
hurry in selling it, which I thought quite right. A day
after this missis said to me —
“ ‘ Tom, you’ll be driving me to Berrima in a day or two,
for the master is going to take his wheat to market.’
“ I made no answer, but I thought the master must have
changed his mind pretty quick; and when I saw him I
asked him what day he was going, as I had some little to do to
the dray.
“ ‘ Oh ! these young women like to think of their bit of
finery, Tom,’ he said good-humouredly ; ‘but I’m not going
for some months yet.’
“ The following week I went up one morning to see the
master, and there were the two standing near the door,
talking. I said what I had come for, and the missis said —
“ ‘ Why, Tom, your master is gone to Berrima, and we
are to follow him in three days.’
“ I stared, because whenever he went away he allays told
me what he wanted done whilst he was away. I had a dog
with me, and he had gone into the parlour whilst we
were talking, and he began sniffin’ and howlin’ in a horrid
way. ‘ Take that brute away, Tom ; what is it he wants ? ’
says the missis. But this was easier said nor done. The
cousin tried to make him go, and I thought he would have
torn him down. I went in and called him off, and put him
on a chain ; and I just told another man who lived with me
in my hut all about the master. At night I walked up
when all was still, and heard them talking, but could not make
out what it was they said : I could get no chance of look-
ing inside the house, as the two never left it at the same
time. Well, we started for Berrima, and the night before


getting in I was very tired, as the roads had been bad all
day, so I turned my bullocks out and threw myself down
by the fire to sleep. The dog as you see yonder (of course
I could not see in the dark) was tied up close to the dray,
and I must have been asleep and awakened by his growl.
I did not move for a minute, for I thought I was still
dreamin’; the two had come close to me, and she said,
says she —
‘ Novv is your time; just knock him on the head, for no-
body has a down on us but him.’
“ With this I turned round, gave a grunt, and then, sittin’
up, I saw her.
“ ‘ What’s the matter ?’ says I.
“ ‘ I thought your fire was gettin’ low, Tom, and I came
to put it together for you.’
“ ‘ She was more audacious than the young fellow, a good
bit; but I’ve heard tell, ma’am, that when a woman is bad,
she is bad ! ’
He seemed to have made a good hit in his own mind
here, and quite chuckled. I agreed with him that our sex
were much more depraved than his when once they had
fallen.
“ ‘ Well,’ he resumed, ‘ you may be sure I didn’t go to
sleep again that night. I walked about and put the fire to
rights, and in an hour more I went to collect the bullocks.
We got into Berrima, and the missis told me to go to the
same place as we allays did, and that I was to be sure to
have my dinner and a glass, whilst they had theirs. How
she and her cousin watched me as I got the bullocks some
hay in the yard ; and she told me to be sure and let her
know before I left the house, as she wanted me to go some-
where for her.
“ But I had no sooner gone in doors, and heard them go
to their dinner, than I slipped out of a back way and went
to the police office and gave my statement and suspicions.
A policeman was sent up to the inn, and as they were
coming out of their parlour door he took ’em both into
custody. They were confined separately, and as she
screamed and shouted at night with fright, a constable went
.in to see what was the matter, and she then made a full
confession of her guilt. Poor lost creature ! She had, by


her own word, made her lover cut my good master’s throat,
whilst she held a basin to catch any blood that might flow
from the wound. She said she had never slept since that
night, and never should again. The body they had cut in
pieces and buried under the hearthstone in their parlour,
and that was what made the dog so furious, as he must have
smelt the blood. The sessions were close at hand, and I
remained for ’em; the two were convicted, and he was
hanged ; whilst God has taken her from man’s punishment,
and given His own, for she is a hopeless lunatic, and gone to
Tarban Creek, the mad-house near Sydney.
“ My master’s brother has given me one hundred pounds,
and left me to manage the farm, so we are going home now,
Moscow and me.” This was his dog.
We thanked Sheppard for his narrative, a most melan-
choly one, certainly. I cannot say that the words are exactly
his, for I have lost the original statement. Murphy was
blanched with the recital, and as the two men moved off
for the night he kept looking over first one shoulder,
then the other, to see that nobody was following him.
We were astir before Sheppard in the morning, and I
went to his fire to call our valiant servant, who had been too
frightened (like the ugly man) to sleep alone on the night
previous. Our breakfast over, we started, and in twelve
miles came to a miserable-looking hovel, displaying a sign
in token of the proprietor’s being desirous of taking in
strangers / We debated some time as to whether we would
call there, as Sheppard had told us that is was the only
place for thirty miles where we could feed our horses, or
perhaps find water ; at last we went up and asked if we
could stay there. We were told that the “ mistress ” was
changing houses, but that they would do their best to ac-
commodate us. I remarked that it was a most thievish-
looking place, and seemed to be the resort of any but res-
pectable-looking people ; however, the sun was getting low,
and we could not well travel the rest of the thirty miles.
The mistress of the inn was a Mrs. Kain, a pretty Irish
widow; she had been a “lone woman” for three years.
We had an excellent tea, and our table was well spread.
As to beds, I cannot say much for them, for we slept on two*
sofas on either side of the fire-place. The following morn


ing we left early and watered our horses at Mrs. Kain’s new
establishment, two miles from the old one, and not much of
an improvement on it; both places being quite in the
“Castle Rackrent” style. Where we staid the last night,
men were threshing wheat in the open air, and they had to
keep on beating a small boy to make him go and drive the
pigs from the grain. He would then run to his mother, and
she would use her parental authority to try and persuade;
this the young urchin stoutly refused several times to do,
saying—
“ What harm can the poor bastes do ? ”
His mother would call him her “good son,” and her “dar-
lint,” until he became very refractory, when she would
insinuate something about calling “ Paddy to give him a
bating,” which having already tasted “ unknownst” to his
mother, he would run off, this son of Kain, or Cain!—
literally a young vagabond.
We made the Murrumbidgee country about one o’clock;
the river is very fine, and I saw on its banks what I nad not
seen since leaving the Madeay river, Port Maquarie, namely,
the “Swamp oak.” The grass here was like hayin appearance,
and seemed to have equal nutriment, as horses and cattle
look so well. We were told that the country looked so
parched up owing to the hot winds which had prevailed
lately. It is strange that these winds have not the same
effect to the northward of Sydney.
At three o’clock we reached Andrew’s inn. He had been
messman and sergeant in the 50th regiment, and was now a
rich man, with his flocks and herds, and keeping the hotel at
the crossing of the river Murrumbidgee. He was from home
when we arrived, and his wife did not know us ; but just as
we had had our dinner, the maitre d’ hotel arrived. He was
very glad to see my husband, came in and had a long
chat with him over old times, and seemed quite the soldier
revived.
Our horses were sent to his farm, two miles off, with the
exception of Plantagenet, who was stabled at the inn. We
remained three days at the Murrumbidgee, and on the fourth
made another start. Mr. B took the gig across the
night before we left, as the river was rising rapidly, and as
we could not afford to pay a pound for crossing it in the


punt; so in the morning I rode my own horse across, and
had to swim some distance. Murphy was following,
leading the mare, but when he saw my horse swimming he
protested against going. My husband, who was behind him,
swore and raved at him to no purpose ; so, after letting my
horse shake himself, I went in again and crossed to where
Murphy was standing and took the mare from him. It
was as well that I did so; on my landing at the bank I
jumped off my horse in time to see Murphy going down for
“ soundings ! ” I’m afraid, had he been drowned, I must,
although sorry, have had one tiny laugh at his ridi-
culous appearance when last seen before going down.
What a different exit to that of Sabrina ! Les extremes se
touchent. Tom, the buck-jumper, always went down to try
for footing, but when he found this was not to be had in a
reasonable depth he would come up again and swim
splendidly. This habit was even more dangerous than
disagreeable, and we were not aware of it until now, or we
would have led or driven him across the water.
Murphy looked perfectly drowned, but holding on like
grim death ; and when he reached the shore he took an im-
mense breath, and would not then have dismounted if Tom
had not given him a warning shake. “ What’s he up to
now ? ” said he, throwing himself off and getting out of the
horse’s reach.
The whole village had collected to see us cross, as they
knew we would have to swim ; and Andrews had said in a
military tone when I went into the water —
“ Now, you’ll see what a soldier’s wife will do ! ”
The people cheered me on my first crossing, but on the
third there was a mixture of hisses and cries of “ Shame !
you coward ! ” and cheers for me, which I returned on land-
ing by waving my hat. One, a blacksmith, who came down to
meet me, said to my husband —
“ You should be proud, sir, of that young ooman ; she’s
saved you a pound ! ”
Plantagenet was the best horse I ever saw in water;
as he went into deep water he would blow like a porpoise,
and go on the same way until he got his feet on ground
again. I used to throw the reins loosely on his neck, and
never attempt to guide him; my feet I tucked up on his


neck in not a very elegant manner ; but I never got my
habit even damp, although swimming, as he swam so high
out of water. I remember, one bush trip, crossing the
M‘Leay River eleven times in the day, and some of the
gentlemen and police of the party got their legs quite wet,
whilst I, on my small Cape horse, escaped perfectly dry.
We reached our place for encamping by moonlight, and
had got our tent up by the time Murphy arrived; the
wetting in the morning had damped his spirits also.
We met the mailcart here. It is wonderful how the driver
manages to go along as he does, over and through such
terrific places. I was told by a lady who sent her servant
woman by this conveyance from Benalla to Melbourne,
that, being a short woman and fearful of moving her position,
her legs never once touched the bottom of the cart, but
kept dangling about the whole time. She must have had a
pleasant drive.
Soon after we met the mail we overtook two other “males,”
with one horse and two dogs. Everybody in this colony
has a dog ; even if they have little enough for themselves,
they must have a dog. As these men were lying on their backs
smoking their pipes, we drove on without speaking, and
Mr. B remarked to me, “ 111-looking fellow's those.
By-the-bye, A , whenever you see any suspicious-looking
man coming towards us, keep your hand ready to get out
the pistols.” We had scarcely made our fire when up came
Murphy, accompanied by the tw r o identical “ ill-looking
fellows.”
They made their fire near to his. Mr. B gave Mur-
phy a long lecture for admitting any more into our company,
and ended by saying he really believed them to be bush-
rangers, who would see all we had in our possession, and
then rob us.
I told him, as there is said to be “ honour amongst
thieves,” we had better offer them some tea, in case they had
none. They w r ere provided with it, and our politeness w'ent
for nothing but thanks. The next day our two travellers
kept with Murphy, and joined us at our encampment at
three o’clock. A tremendous fire came sweeping down the
valley in which we had encamped, but, fortunately, on the
opposite side of the road to us, so we were only incon-
venienced by the smoke.


A gentleman who was coming from Sydney with horses
had encamped one night, and he and all his party were
sound asleep, when of a sudden they became aware of
more warmth than their thin blankets could afford. Some of
them jumped up, and found the camp surrounded by a huge
fire, and they had only time to awaken their comrades and
escape with the clothes they had on. Blankets, rugs, every-
thing, were all burned.
We crossed the Murray River at a horseshoe ford. It
was very high, but so was the puntage, and accordingly I
mounted my horse, and a man from the bank kindly threw
a stone to show me the crossing. Mr. B—— and Murphy
followed, and we got over well. I rode on to try and find
a place for encamping, and succeeded after some time, but
it was not a good spot; we had a long way to go for water,
and a swampy place to go through before we reached it.
The banks were high on one side, and marshy on the other,
but the bed was beautifully clear and gravelly. The two men
came up late, and one of them, a fine young man, named
George, was in great distress, as his dog would not cross
the river with him ; he thought better of it before the night
was far spent through. The other man was rather a wag ;
his name was Jack, his horse’s name Jack, and his dog Jack.
Sunday morning, contrary to our usual custom, we were
obliged to move on two miles, as the old encampment was
bitterly cold. We found another, and made ourselves com-
fortable on a nice flat, close to the banks of the river. We
had not been there very long when a herd of 1,500 head of
cattle, driven by four men, went past. The drovers took a
great fancy to our collie dog, Rogue, who helped them on
with their cattle, and we walked down to assist in crossing
them at the river. The men then tried to coax the dog to
go with them, at which we felt vexed, after our having
assisted them, so we called him back with us directly.
On the Monday morning we allowed the men to start
earlier than ourselves, thinking to overtake them. About a
mile on the road we came to Mr. Huan’s ; two roads pass
through this station, the one much more beaten than the
other, so of course we took the plainer one of the two.
On we went without overtaking our party, but tracking some
horses corresponding with theirs. After going some thirteen
E


miles we gave the horses some water, in doing which we
bogged one of them, a heavy, good-tempered beast, and he
lay in the mud as if it had been a comfortable litter of
straw. We extricated him from the shafts of the gig with
some trouble, without breaking a single strap or buckle, and
then we drove on again, never doubting we were on the
main road, as it was so excellent. At last we got to another
station, and seemingly a fine one. We drove past the barn,
where several men, and apparently their master, were busy.
We were driving on, when an old man ran after us and
asked where we were going.
“To Melbourne.”
“ You can only get seven miles further on this road, and
that is to Mr. M‘Kenzie’s.”
N ow, we had no wish to go there; so when we found we
had been travelling all day on the wrong road, we tried to
find out how far we had to return to where we might make
a cut across to the right one. This we did, and then pro-
ceeded on our way, determining to ask our route for the
future.
The next man we met we asked how far it was to the
nearest station.
Unluckily for us, the man accosted was inclined for a
yabber; so he took off a knapsack that he had on his back,
got out his knife and pipe, and then answered—
“ Why, sir, I’ll tell you ; but could you give me a smoke ? ”
This request being granted, he continued —
“ You will, about six miles from this, come to Muster
Osburn’s, then ten miles further on is Muster Tyson’s, after
that, sixteen miles further, is Muster Johnson’s.”
“ Stop. You say Mr. Osburn’s is seven miles, and Mr.
Johnson’s twenty-nine?”
“ No, no,” said the poor fellow, quite confused, and be-
ginning to add up the several units again ; in the middle of
which we drove on, after thanking the man for his informa-
tion, and not one iota the wiser for it.
Everybody we met for the future we, or rather my hus-
band, questioned in the same way, and then he would turn
to me and say —
“ Did you ever hear such people? They no two of them
agree in the distances ; in fact, I believe they don’t know
the road.”


About three o’clock we came to Mr. Osbum’s ; it was a
tiresome road to go. A fine young man came out, and
asked us to alight and take some dinner. He led the way
in, saying, “We were just going to dine.” I thought
perhaps his wife was there, but instead of a wife was a
dirty, bare-footed hut-keeper, sitting down to dinner with
him. There was a small iron pot standing by the fire, with
tea in it. He gave us some beer, and said—
“ You must eat, or you’ll never get through your journey.”
He seemed glad when his messmate, Tom, vanished from
our presence, as he appeared quite ashamed of him. Mr.
Osburn was a gentlemanly man; what a pity to see him
associating with a person so much beneath him. I don’t
think ladies would become so intimate with their prisoner
servants if left without other society. I know I should not.
When I speak of prisoners I mean those in general. Of
course, there are exceptions to every rule (Tom may have
been one of these), and I always bear in mind that beautiful
verse in scripture that says— ■
“Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever
thou art, that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another,
thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the
same things.”
From my soul I pity those who have, from their most
tender age, seen nothing but depravity, and, consequently,
have fallen victims to it.
Or again, those who, seeing their families starving, have
stolen to save them; and that some have done this we can-
not doubt. I can safely affirm that the noise of the chains
on the prisoners’ legs, clanging as they walked, smites me
now as much as it did in 1835, when I first heard it. I
recollect it was in Hobart Town, and I had never thought
of men being chained like animals. I was really shocked
at the noise and the sight; my companion, an officer who
had known me before my marriage, said—
“ You are a good-hearted soul, but you will soon get
accustomed to them, and not mind them.”
He was mistaken.
After leaving Mr. Osburn’s, we proceeded to a nice flat,
with plenty of water, and encamped there. This was the
first time that we had been alone, but we managed very


well, and did not even hobble our horses. There was
heavy frost that night; however, we got plenty of wood and
kept up a good fire.
I brought the horses in the following morning by moon-
light, and the water was severely cold for my dip. A gen-
tleman in New England told me that if I bathed in the
Western waters it would make me so happy ! I have now
tried them, but have not found a Lethe amongst them.
Our next stage, to Mr. Tyson’s, we soon got over. That
gentleman came out immediately, and insisted on our going
in to breakfast, and wished us to remain all day. Whilst we
were in doors the horses were taken out of harness and got
plenty of hay. It was so kind and hospitable I thought;
and so unlike a person whom we had passed the previous
day, who, when he saw us, ran into his house, changed a
loose coat for a dress one, and, coming out to his gate, ac-
companied by three small children, stood with his hands
under his coat tails and—gaped.
When we left Mr. Tyson’s, after an hour’s rest, we went
on to Mr. Johnson’s, which is on the Ovens river. We en-
camped close to the house, having asked permission, as the
blacks are not always trustworthy.
Some of them paid us a visit. They are very ugly, not
at all like the Murray river tribes, who are fine-looking
men. They speak quite a different language too, but
they understand the Port Macquarie tongue. Mr. B
began singing one of their songs, to amuse them as he
thought, when up they jumped and shook some spears, and
jabbered like monkies. I looked my surprise, when one,
more polished than the rest, said—
“No talkee like that! That mean all black fellow here
go debil-debil.”
Of course, we explained that we did not know what it
meant, and the excuse was taken. Mr. B went up to
the house in the evening to speak to the manager, whom he
found sitting with five stockmen in his own room. He was
very young, and named Pincent ; I hope his taste for good
society may come with years. He very civilly offered to
allow one of his men to go with us in the morning and show
us the road, as the track to it was very indistinct.
Mr. Pincent passed us with his five stockmen in the mom


ing, and bowed m passant. This station is on the Ovens
river, and a pretty stream it is here. We heard the little
“ Bell bird ” for the first time since we left Port Macquarie;
it quite awakened my mind to former times, and made me
recall my old station and much connected with it. Imme-
diately after breakfast our guide came to show us the way
we were to travel. He was a middle-aged man, and rode
a nice cob, which he told us was his own.
We jogged on after him until we came to a tremendous
hill, the first that we had seen of the same size on the Port
Phillip side of “ Razor back,” and something like a range
which we mounted in going on to the table land of New
England. We all walked up, and had to rest several times
en route. I was a little way behind when I remarked our
guide continually turning to stare at me. At last be waited
until I came up to him, and then asked me from what part
of England I came. I answered, “ Devonshire.” “ Because,”
said he, “ you remind me very much of a Miss Sarah
Lawrence, who lived in Exeter.” I told him my name
never had been Sarah Lawrence.
Whenever we stopped I saw the poor man with his eyes
fixed on me, much to my amusement. We had surmounted
the difficult “ gap,” as it is called, and were getting on well
with our journey, when snap went one of the springs on my
side of the gig. Our cicerone was by my side in a second,
helping me out; and very fortunately we had some good
strips of green hide with us, with which my husband and
the guide braced it up.
We passed another very nice but outlandishly situated
station. There appeared to have been a perfect hurricane
in these parts of late : all the trees were either torn up by
the roots, or else shivered by lightning ; large gaps in the
ground showed what ravages the elements had made.
Having no further use for the guide’s services, I told him
that we would not trouble him any more, and said how
sorry I was that I had not more than five shillings to give
him.
“ Oh, keep it, ma’am ; never mind it ; I shall meet you
again some day, sir, I daresay; and as to you, ma’am,”
turning to me, “ I shall always remember you, if it was
seven years hence. Why, is neither here nor there.”


I positively blushed; but, not having much time to devote
to that, I said my thanks, and walked on. I could see the
man looking at me as I got into the gig. Poor fellow ! My
likeness to the fair “ Sally ” had awakened old feelings,
and I had opened the severest of wounds, that of the affec-
tions.
We travelled on to the King river, where we came to a
frightful crossing ; the bank on one side was almost perpen-
dicular, and there was too little room pour rkukr pour mieux
sauter. The horses plunged, and we had to jump out in the
mud and water ! What a regular guy I did look ! and so
wet and dirty as I was !
A man who happened to be near, on horseback, kindly
left his business and came to our aid; he took one of the
horses’ head ; and I quickly scrambled on to my horse and
unfastened his head from the gig, and by going ahead of the
other two they followed in better humour; but it was a very
trying place for all parties.
Our road lay through a farm yard, and as we were uncer-
tain as to turnings to the right or to the left, we asked a man
who was there which way we should go? He said he would
ask “ the mistress.” Now, by the look of the place, I fancied
some pretty woman lived there, and was glad of the chance
of seeing her. Out she came, and I never beheld a funnier-
looking object in my travels ! I thought of the ditty com-
mencing, “ There was a little woman.” She was short and
stout, but trim looking, with very short clothes, black stockings
and thick shoes. Her hair was en papillotte, surmounted by
a snowy cap; she wore a pair of green spectacles, and when
she stood with her hands on her hips she looked so droll
that I could have laughed. She directed us to the “ Fifteen
mile creek,” and, having thanked her, we went on. We
passed through a pretty country, but without the sign of
water, and came at four o’clock to the “ Glengary Arms.”
We found that our men had not passed this, so we were all
right so far.
The following day we got to the “ Broken river,” and in-
tended staying there a day for the men to join us. Our poor
dog Ranger was nearly dying for want of water ; we took
him into the gig, but he would not stay quietly there, so we
put him down again on the road. I could not have thought


it possible for any animal to alter so rapidly as he did in
appearance ; he became quite a skeleton in a few hours.
We were obliged to tie him up when we got to the river, or
he would have killed himself drinking, as so many do out
here.
On our road we met two drays; in one of them was a
young woman, who, directly she saw us, jumped down, and
running up to the gig said, “ Have you a letter, please sir, for
Norah Byron ? ” My husband told her laughingly that he
was not the mail-man, and she “ begged his pardon.” Some
persons think that their letters are always on the top (like
everything in a midshipman’s chest!) of a mail-bag. I had
a letter once from England, written by a highly-educated
woman, and on the cover were these words : —“ If the ship
in which this letter goes should meet any homeward-
bound vessel, would some one enquire for Mrs. B and
give her this letter ? ” These things appear strange to us
“travelled monkies.” We found a party already encamped
at the river; they had a hut built of rushes in two compart-
ments-; there was a woman in the hut, and she kindly
brought me a cup of tea, which was very acceptable. We
halted not far from the hut, and made ourselves comfortable,
as we were to remain the day following, it being Sunday.
The men came up in the afternoon ; they had kept the
main road, and luckily did not think of coming after us.
This part of the country is very ugly, and the river here ap-
pears only a chain of water-holes. We heard some drays pass
late in the evening, but they did not encamp near us.
On Monday morning we left our camp very early; we were
passing the drays, which we had heard the previous night,
when my husband said he was sure that an acquaintance of
ours, who had formerly brought up the news of the price of rice
having risen, was in one of them. I thought it impossible, as
his wife and her mother had written such flourishing descrip-
tions of their tandem-driving, and their splendid riding
horses, and then to find them in a dray!
Such was the case, though; and how foolish this bom-
bast makes a person in the eyes of another. I descried,
on looking closer, Mrs. E s, with a pannikin of tea in her
hand, sitting on a little wooden box. Immediately the
lady saw us driving up, she ran towards the dray, and how


she managed to jump in so quickly was a mystery to me, but
she was wonderfully expeditious ! I told her afterwards that
she must have practised it. Mr. E s was very glad to
see us, and asked and heard all the Port Macquarie news,
and we told him of his mother-in-law’s arrival in Melbourne,
which he had not heard. He admired the condition of our
horses, and thought we had stabled them all the way down the
road, and said that our turn-out “was perfect.” I had a good
mind to add, “ and your wife’s turn-in was ditto” ; she did
not make her appearance, being ashamed of her poverty,
silly woman !
We travelled on, leaving the “ Black Springs” and the
“ Murderous
Goulburn river, when the rain came down in such torrents
that the horses could not face it! We tried to fix our tent,
but it left us in a “ fix ” instead, as we could not manage to
peg it; so we drove on, regularly tacking as on board ship,
so as to coax the poor horses through it. We went eight
miles further to a gentleman’s station, and although the rain
gave us a small respite, still, sitting wrapped up in a wet
blanket was anything but comfortable, and I don’t believe
any water doctor ever would have recommended it.
We reached the station at last, and asked if we could stay
there the night. A nice-looking lad said we could, and
told us to walk in. We had finished tea when Mr. C. H
came in from an out-station. We apologised for taking him
by storm (as we had been;, but he said we were most wel-
come. A female servant laid the table, and said Mrs. H
was sorry that she could not pay me proper attention, as
she was not cleaned, and was without a servant ! I thought
this strange, as it was no lady’s apology, and besides which
we were told positively that both the Messrs. H were
unmarried. Presently my doubts were set at rest by a
person coming into the room rubbing her hands on her
dress, and walking as no lady ever walks. She was marked
by the small-pox, had light hair curled all round her head,
was short, ill-made, and had small grey eyes with a very bad
expression.
She begged me to excuse her not staying with me, as she
was very busy, having no servant, which excuse I inwardly
welcomed, and told her not to inconvenience herself on my


account, as I had found books, and knew how much there
always was to do on any station. After this we both bowed
to each other, and she left the room.
We thanked Mr. H most kindly in the morning for
his attention to our wants, and then we started for a valued
friend’s house, eight miles further on. Her husband had
sent a trooper from his station to meet us, hoping we might
have encamped, and not gone to the station, knowing of the
lady in question being there.' '.lt waS’very kind, but, as I
told him and his dear 'these contagious,
only epidemics, and 1 ’was not hurt with
“the person.” i r ’£* »
What a contrast was yief'q in my friend from the last lady
I had seen ! How beautiful soft
brown eyes, so tender, and Both she and her
husband are now dead, but the "world will seldom find their
equals in kindness and genuine warmth of heart. We re-
mained a happy week with these good people. How w r e
recalled all our enjoyments in Tasmania, talked overall our
friends there, and really made use of our tongues.
The evening before w y e started for Melbourne, a gentleman
named P (but 1 will not mention his name) came
to my friends ; I had seen him six years before in Tas-
mania. He was a commissioner of Crown lands, and a
most gentlemanly, agreeable person. He very kindly told
us to stay at his station the next night; and, being twenty-
four miles off, it was a good stage. It proved a miserable
road, rough and stony, and we very nearly missed our
way, only for a shepherd meeting us and putting us right.
When w r e got to Mr. P—-—’s station, a young man came
to the door to meet us, and said we must pardon his not
assisting us in dismounting, as he was quite a cripple from
rheumatism ; and I did not much wonder at it alter I had
been in the house a short time. Whilst I was in the bed-
room changing ray dress, a servant came in and commenced
making the bed. She had a pair of sheets which looked
wet to me, and I said to her, “ I’m afraid those clothes are
scarcely dry enough.”
“ Well,” said she, continuing to put them on the bed,
“ they are, maybe, moist , but they will soon dry after you’ve
been in bed a time.”


Oh ! ye rheumatic powers ! I would sooner have been
tickled to death by blankets than have lingered out a life of
damp-sheet misery. So I took the articles off the bed as
soon as the woman left the room, and was not surprised at
the poor young man in the next room being such an invalid.
The servants at Mr. P ’s had been told to expect a
Captain and Mrs. Bunbury, and they had prepared such a
nice repast! We came in for the good things ; and after
dinner the superintendent told us that he had not expected
us until the next day. I wondered how he could expect us
at all! But he then said, “ Are you not Mrs. Bunbury ?”
and I had to deny the fact; whereupon he rang the bell,
and said that the lady and gentleman that had been
expected would probably come on the morrow; and then
followed a rush amongst the poultry, and sundry consequent
deaths.
We reached Pentridge from Mr. P ’s, and determined
on leaving our horses at a person’s whom we knew a little
of before. He had made an independence by working
hard since he came to Australia, and was thinking of soon
going back to “ ould Ireland.” It was singular to see how
this immense, uncouth-looking man attended to a pretty
young wife, who was at that time very delicate ; how kindly
he anticipated her wants, and how gentle he was with her and
their child. He was telling us that he met with quite an
adventure a few nights before we got to Pentridge. He had
a very vicious horse for driving, which he always had to
muzzle, as a precaution against his biting. Mr. M used to
take loads of lucerne and Cape barley into Melbourne with
this horse, and very often returned quite late at night.
Some persons who knew that he had one day gone into
town, and that he was sure to return with some money about
him, resolved to “ stick him up,” as it is colonially called,
and, in more polite phraseology, demand “ his money or
his life.” It happened, strange to say, that Mr. M on
leaving town had taken off his horse’s muzzle, and was
jogging along quietly in his cart when three men ran up to
the cart, and one of them was about to take the horse’s
head, when the latter saved him the task, and took his
instead! The poor wretch yelled with pain, and a second
man, going to assist his comrade, was put on the ground by


the horse's fore-leg. Mr. M took possession of the
third man, and tied him in the cart, and then went to extri-
cate the man from the horse’s mouth, which involved con-
siderable danger to his own hands. The man was seriously-
hurt, so he was packed by his friend in the cart, and Mr.
M tied the man’s hands who was under the horse’s
feet, and then made him walk by his side to a publichouse
near there. He left the three at the inn to do what they
could, after telling the landlord how they had served him,
and the result.
Some years previous to the time I am writing of, this
same Mr. M was dining at the mess of some regiment
quartered near to where he lived in Ireland. After dinner
the conversation turned on different great actions that had
been fought. Mr. M was all attention. At last he
said, very quaintly, “ I was out shooting to-day, and was
attacked by four poachers. I shot one man, knocked down
another, and killed a third with the stock of my gun ; and
was’nt that a great action ? ”
After leaving Murphy with the horses at Mr. M ’s, we
went into Melbourne. The town covered a large space
of ground even then, but the progress in it since is won-
derful. We soon got lodgings at a person’s house whom we
had known in Tasmania, and I was glad to see them again;
I mean the landladies , there being four sisters, I think.
I shall pass over Melbourne and my stay there for five
days.
On the ist of May we had our horses brought into town,
intending to start on that day, but the good people persuaded
us that May-day was a most unfortunate day to commence a
journey on ; so we remained until the next, giving ourselves
a sweep’s holiday.
My friend Mr. S , from the Goulbum, came into Mel-
bourne while we were there, and he took me to the church-
yard to see his child’s grave. There seemed to be a great
many graves for so new a place, and yet we never heard
that the climate was anything but healthy. I like to visit a
churchyard; it gives me, if I may so express myself, a
pleasing melancholy feeling, to think that the graves I
look on contain the dust of some who have been the idols
of friends; and what are they now ? And again, in graves


lie the remains of some who have never known a friend but
their God. All of us —high, low, rich or poor—are alike in
His eyes, and in the churchyard. Our Creator sees no dis-
tinction between us, excepting that, perhaps, like Lazarus,
the poor may, more often than the rich, be carried to our
Father’s bosom. I recollect seeing a very touching inscrip-
tion on the tombstone of a young officer in Chester
Cathedral. He was a favourite in his regiment, and had
returned from leave of absence just before the dinner hour;
he had consequently not had the opportunity of seeing
some alterations that had been made in the barracks, or
castle, rather. There was, before he left Chester, a balcony
on to which a French window opened from the mess-room;
and whilst he was away the balcony had been pulled down,
and under the window was a moat and cheveau de frise work
close to it. I was told that directly after dinner he opened
the window, and, as had been his wont, slept out! No
need to tell any further than that his death ensued. On his
monument are these beautiful lines—
Thus death, grand monitor, oft’ comes to prove
’Tis dust we doat on when ’tis man we love.
As we were driving through the town we met Mrs.
E s and her mother. They apologised for not calling
on me, but said they could not find out where we lived. I
thought I would pay off my score on the younger lady for
jumping into the dray without even bowing to me, so I said
it was of no consequence; that I should have called on
them, only I knew it would be of no use asking where
they lived, as their names would not be known. I ended by
saying—“ Persons of ton are quite disregarded in a place
like this.” After this kind little speech, we moved on to
the “ Land of the West.”
We went to Mr. M for the horses that we left on
going into Melbourne. We started from Pentridge for
Keilor at three o’clock, went across the bush to it, and
arrived at five o’clock. Mr. and Mrs. W lived here,
close to a publichouse, and as it was getting dark Mr.
B went up to a stockyard, where some men were busy,
to ask which was the inn. Mr. W was there, and
asked us to go to his house, and sent a man to show us the
way and to take our horses.


I ventured to say that I would rather not go to a private
house, but it was of no use ; how could we offend the
person who had asked us so kindly ? We had left Murphy
in Melbourne, and brought George with us ; and as he
and the other man were taking out the horses, I saw a
female form come to the door, and heard a shrill voice
exclaim —
“Joe.” Joe only grunted. “Joe; I say, whose horses
are those ? ”
“ They belong to a lady and gentleman that the master
has asked to stay here to-night.”
“ Oh! indeed, then, I can accommodate no travellers here,
so they can just go on.”
My husband, who was standing close by, stepped forward
and said—
“ It is I, Mr. B ; I hope you are quite well, Mrs.
W .”
“ I don’t know you at all,” said she ; “ I never saw you
before; and you cannot stop here to-night.”
“ We will not inconvenience you ; but I think that, after
all the obligations that you are under to my brother, you
might have treated us with more politeness; I shall remem-
ber you, madam, as a most civil and hospitable person.
George,” turning to our man, “ harness the horses again.”
He was uttering a few benedictions, when I said—
“ Remember, B , she is a woman, and very tipsy;
consequently does not know what she is saying.”
I had scarcely said this, when, coming up, she seized me
by the hand, and exclaimed—
“ Oh ! dear Mrs. B , don’t mind what I have said, but
pray remain to-night; do, I beg of you : I’m very ill and
don’t know what I say. Mary,” calling to the servant-woman,
who had stood listening and gaping during the above dia-
logue, “ Mary, get the best room ready, and tea, for they
must be hungry.”
“ Mrs. W ,” I replied, feeling exceedingly angry,
“ I shall not stay here to-night, for I was never so much in-
sulted in my life. I can attribute your unladylike behaviour
to nothing but the real cause !”
“Joe,” said the distressed woman, “run down to your
master, and tell him I want him ; he’ll make you come back
again, so I don’t care.”


As she finished the last sentence we drove off, and went
to the inn; and I suppose her poor husband knew pretty
well the state of the case, as he never made either his ap-
pearance or his apology. As we were at tea, Mr. B
asked the waiting-woman if it was usual for Mrs. W
to be drunk.
“ Why, sir,” said she, in a confiding tone of voice, “we
don’t make a practice of telling everybody; but since you
asks me, I tell you that she is often in liquor.”
A fine young staghound followed us from Mr. W 's
gate, and we could persuade her to return there neither by
coaxing nor threatening.
We were accompanied the following morning by the
hound, which was a nice animal, but rather poor in condition.
We christened her “ Shelah." The country we passed
through that day reminded me of Kent, such beautiful un-
dulating hills, and so sunny-looking altogether. We had
anticipated meeting a friend at Bacchus Marsh, but did not
do so ; and we were also to be sure and go to a gentleman’s
house there, as he would be glad to inform us of our
road, and would be hospitable in every way. On starting
in the morning my husband said it would be of no use
taking anything with us for luncheon, as we were sure to
have some at Captain B ’s; but I voted for not trusting
to houses on the road, but taking our own provisions, so we
fortunately took a little with us.
As we drove up to the house we saw a young lady, and
Mr. B got out of the gig, and, walking up to her, de-
livered a parcel for her father, and asked if he were at home.
“ No, he had gone out walking ; but would we go in ? ”
In we went. The young lady said she was sorry she
could not ask us to have anything to eat, as her papa had
taken the keys out with him. Unfortunately for her story,
she had forgotten to have the crumbs swept off the table,
although the servant did run as hard as she could with the
tray when she saw us, and thus left traces of there being
something in the eating line not locked up with papa’s keys /
I began to wish that we had brought more provisions with us,
as we should encamp, and I did not know where to buy any
eatables. With these pleasing reflections I voted for leaving
the house we were in as soon as possible. We were to


have remained until our servant came up, but, as events
turned out, I would wait for nobody, so we left.
We had to drive several miles before we came to water,
and when we found that, and let the horses loose, we
could find no wood. The country was bare of timber,
it was past sunset, and, as everybody who has been in
this colony knows, there is little if any twilight. We could
not obtain any pole for our tent, so we had to do without
one. What matter ! The stars came out brightly, and
although the air was a little sharp, still it was dry ; so after
collecting two or three old hurdles for a fire, we sat looking at
the smoke as it rose, and I said, “ Nice fire that will be soon
for a ‘sticker-up.’”
“ Have you got anything to cook?” remarked my husband
briskly; “ for I must say I’m devilish hungry.”
“No,” I answered; “and, if I had meat bones, I have no
cayenne and sauces, so you must not think of such dia-
bolical indulgences.”
We found in our searches for timber an old watch-box,
that some shepherd had used as a bedstead in days
gone by. Mr. B pounced on this in a delightful
state of mind. “ What a famous bed! and there is plenty
of room for both of us in it,” exclaimed he. I knew by
experience that it would be folly in me to try and convince
him that the said watch-box would be anything but com-
fortable, so I made up my mind to bring the fact home to
him in another and more touching manner.
We took it to the fireside, and he turned it over to get rid
of any dust that might be inside; then he put in his blanket,
and said mine would do to cover us with.
“Will it?” thought I; “not if I know it Now, you
get in first, and then I’ll come in.”
In he got, and I then slipped in, and as if by accident
turned sharply on my side, and sent him nearly through the
outer side of his bedstead.
“Oh ! ” he roared; “ I say, what are you at ? Cannot
you lie down, and not nearly crush a man ? ”
I dared not laugh out loud, so I coughed my feelings.
“ Well, you see, there is not quite as much room as you
thought, so I am going out again.”
But before I left, I gave him another shock, and left him
screaming out, “ Oh! my hip."


Now, I am very fond of anything lively in a general way,
but that watch-box I felt sure would be too lively in a par-
ticular one; for we all know how those little “ insects ”
torment any person who may take up their abode in any
old hut or dwelling of any kind ; so I preferred not putting
myself in their power; and I then rolled myself in my
blanket by the fire. I had not been long there when
George came up, and I took his horses, whilst he walked
up to the huts which we could see near to us, and which
belonged to a station; I told him to go and purchase some
mutton if he could. He came back very soon, and brought
with him such a nice leg of lamb, for my especial eating , as
the manager had told him. It appears he had bought the
mutton from the storekeeper, when this gentleman was
walking about smoking his pipe, and seeing a stranger
carrying away meat, asked him who he was ? George told
him, and he said he would be glad if we would go up to
the house for the night, as it must be very cold and comfort-
less for a lady to be out in the bush. Our man thanked
him, but said he knew that I would not go, as I had en-
camped for the night. The superintendent then volunteered
to go down with George and see if he could induce me to
leave the camp; but George said his master was asleep, and
that finished the business. As he could not come himself,
he sent me the lamb 1
I could not help contrasting his kindness with the beha-
viour of two of my own sex whom I had happened to meet
within the last two days.
In the morning, as we were starting, the young man rode
down to where we were, although very early. I thanked
him for his thoughtfulness. He made for answer—
“ I assure you, ma’am, had I seen you last night, I would
never have allowed you to pass a night in the open bush,
and I can only regret not having your company.”
Before leaving our camp, I must return to the over-night.
George had rolled himself away somewhere or other near the
watch-box for shelter, and gone to sleep. I was looking at
the beautiful heavens, so bright with stars, and was thinking
of dear England, and how astonished my friends there
would be to hear of my adventures, when I was aroused by
a terrific groan, and the following exclamation—


“Oh ! my back is broken ! I never shall get out of this
d d watch-box ! I shall never straighten my back
again as long as I live, never ! And these little vagabond
fleas, too ! Heaven help me, I’m nearly killed !” He then
called out, “ A , where are you ? Get up, girl, get up !
You will die after sleeping on that damp ground.”
“ I expect that will be the case,” said I, laughing.
In the morning we passed a second sheep-station, and,
notwithstanding its being very early, we met the overseer
returning on horseback from an out-station. I was amused
at the cunning way in which this good man was treated by
the shepherds. He had evidently seen the sheep turned
out of their hurdles, as he thought, for the day; but we
were wiser, for as the man on horseback wended his way
over a hill on his way home, the shepherds quickly put all
the sheep back into the folds, and, I suppose, betook them-
selves also to theirs. Now, I daresay that overseer would
wonder how it was that his sheep did not look well. He
would naturally say, “ I know they are out very early, as I
go myself and see to them.” As a general rule, it is of no
use putting one’s trust in either princes or shepherds !
Our next encampment was after passing an old friend’s
house, where we remained a day; it was at the river Lee.
Our friend, who had gone so far with us, assisted in collect-
ing wood for our fire, as it is very scarce there ; and, after
having tea with us, returned to a gentleman’s house hard by.
We got to the plains that I had heard so much of. I was
told that I should see twenty miles ahead on them, but I
think the distance appeared nearer fifty. Oh ! how tired I
was of seeing the same thing for so long. We met a man,
and asked him which was our road. He told us which
direction to take, and we arrived at a house of no accom-
modation, called “ the Frenchman’s,” but not before we had
met a second man, who told us we had been going the
wrong way. Mr. B was for going back to our first in-
formant, and trying to give him a beating; but I said it was
only losing time, so he took my advice, and we duly found
ourselves at the" above-named house.
We met a man, woman, and child in a horse-cart. They
were stopping to take some refreshment, and asked us to
have a glass of wine, which we declined with thanks. They
were going to Melbourne, to sail for England.


I rode nearly all the road that day, for there were so
many boulders on our track that I was horribly shaken
going over them in the gig. We reached a very nice station,
and encamped that night by a good creek; and on the fol-
lowing morning got to an inn called “ Hardy’s.” The land-
lord directed us to follow a certain route, and to keep a
mount called Mount Elephant in sight until we came to it.
On we went. Such a day as we had ! no water to be
seen anywhere, and over very rough ground. We travelled
on until sunset, when we came to the mount, and to two
old huts. I protested I would not enter them, to be eaten
alive ; so whilst my husband and George knocked out a
slab from one of them to make up our tent, I rode round
to see if I could find any water. I saw at a little distance
what I thought a pretty little sheet of water, and, cantering
into it, let my bridle fall on my horse’s neck, so that he
might have a good draught of it. The horse snorted, and
would not drink, so I called him more nice than wise, and
rode to the camp. George went down to the place where I
directed him, and took vessels with him for water. He
came back without any, though, and we found we had both
been taken in by a mirage. I never saw one before, and this
was dear experience, as we should be at the least twenty-
eight hours without water. I pitied the horses more than
ourselves ; indeed, I did not feel thirsty, fortunately. When
the man came back, saying there was no water, his master,
throwing himself in a convenient position for resting, said,
“ I shall perish without it,” and then went to sleep. I was
told there was a crater on the top of Mount Elephant, and
I thought how an Irish person might have wished to see the
Elephant, the cratur I
As for me, I was quite vexed at making such a blunder
about the water, and when I went to sleep I dreamed of
water, and waking up said, “Oh! what delicious water!”
“ Where ?” But it was only a dream, and I had to confess
it. My dream was not so drolly illustrated as that of a
friend of mine, but I must give it in his own words—
“ A vision crept on my dreamy brain :
I clasped my loved one’s form again,
And fondly called her a brighter gem
Than ever graced a diadem I


Vowed we ne’er again should part,
Pressed her closer to my heart,
Kissed her till she frowned, and then—
Kissed her till she smiled again.
Women, be they e’er so haughty,
Never think a kiss is naughty ;
True, they frown, but then the eye
Echoes to the pleading sigh ;
And lovers find the only way
Is but to kiss the smile away ;
And thus did I—when o’er my ear
A horrid voice came croaking,
‘ For God’s sake, man, let go my hair—
Oh lord ! oh lord ! I’m choking ! ’
I then found out that in my dream
I’d seized around the neck fast
Young R—tc—r, who had just come in
To wake me up for breakfast! ”
We were very early astir in the morning, and went to an
inn some miles on to breakfast. The water was very brackish,
but that is not much tasted in tea or coffee. My dog wanted
feeding, so I began praising a really pretty child in his father’s
hearing, and when I asked what my dogs could get he re-
turned the compliment, admiring them all, and feeding them
well. After leaving the inn we found the country very
pretty and park-like; large, flats, with slightly undulating
grounds, and small lakes or lagoons here and there. We
saw four emus, and quantities of “ native bustards also a
few “ native companions,” very graceful birds, and two
dingoes. Our dogs were in their element, and I could not
resist following them on horseback, to the death of one of
the latter animals.
We remained three days at an old Tasmanian friend’s
house, and whilst there took sundry walks to the neighbour-
ing mounts and valleys.
Our next stoppage was at a bachelor’s station, and such a
comfortable cottage he had. His nurse had come out with
him to take care of him,' as she. told me, and truly she did
this. No mother could be fonder or more attentive than
that nurse was to her “ young master.” Mr. S kindly
offered to lend us horses to go and pay a visit to some old
friends of ours, who lived three miles from him, and wished
us to stay the next day with him, but we were so near to our
own home that I felt anxious to make its acquaintance, and


therefore thanked him for the hospitality he had already
shown us, and left his station the following morning.
The road was very bad, and we had had a great deal of
shaking by that time, yet I was not tired, nor were the
horses or dogs. To show that the latter were in good con-
dition, they had a pretty run after a kangaroo, a “ flying doe,”
whilst we were staying to have luncheon under a beautiful
tree called “ blackwood.” The timber in these trees is
very fine, and makes handsome furniture. The doe did not
go far before Ada caught her, and she was soon despatched.
It is a singular fact that persons most fond of domestic
animals are those who are the fondest of hunting the wild
ones ; and yet if any creature could disarm a hunter in his
murderous career, it would be a kangaroo I believe; this
animal never attacks; and it has sweet, mild eyes, with
which it looks very imploringly. They abound in the
Port Fairy district, in which we then were ; some of them
are immense, and I have been in at the death of one which
measured ten feet three inches from the tip of the ear to
that of the tail.
We had a weary drive the day on which we left Mr.
S ’s; the rain had threatened for several days previously,
and this day it came down in earnest. However, it did not
last long, so we did not get wet.
We reached a hut in the evening, and asked if we might
encamp near it. The person to whom it belonged was what
is termed a “ cockatoo,” or small farmer; I don’t know
whether this alias is given because they encroach on land as
the bird of that name does. I have never thought of asking
the derivation of the term.
Mr. M , to whom the place belonged, said we were
welcome to stay in his hut; but it looked so dirty that I
preferred going to the barn to sleep. We had a lot of
clean straw, and we slept on that, with our dogs at our feet
as usual. There were no doors to the barn ; it was only a
large shed, I dare say sixty feet long ; and when I say that
at the other end of the barn our servant joined four more
belonging to the farm, it will show that we entertained no
fears of robbery or molestation of any kind. The company
at the further end of the shed were paying too much atten-
tion to their sleep to spare time for thinking of us. Ye powers!


how they did snore. There was no mistaking it as a young
lady once did. She had declared that she would never
marry a man who snored, if she could discover it before-
hand. The lady became engaged to a very agreeable
person, and he and she were on a visit to some friends in
the country. The greater part of the household had retired
to rest one night, and amongst the number the affianced
gentleman. The betrothed lady had remained chatting with
a young friend, and, as they went to their rooms, they had
to pass the chamber where slumbered the “ loved one.”
“Oh ! listen to your intended snoring ! ” said the friend to
her engaged companion. After stopping at the gentleman’s
door for a minute; the young lady answered —
“Do you call that snoring ? / call it only breathing
hard.”
I remained awake some time the night we passed in the
shed, thinking of my position then, and what it had been in
days gone by ; but it did not prevent my sleeping well when
I once commenced doing so.
The next morning I was looking for the horses before
any of the men were awake. We jogged on again imme-
diately after breakfast. The country about Port Fairy is
pretty in patches, beautifully grassed, and the trees in
clumps in park-like form. I do not say all the country is
like this, but the road by which we passed was. It is
difficult to say what a country actually is like from only
seeing a small portion of it, as we may either happen to
see the best or the worst feature of it in the route which we
pursue, and since I heard a Frenchman’s opinion of Eng-
lishwomen given I am very cautious in pronouncing any
decisively. It appears that, during the Peninsular war, this
Frenchman was imprisoned at Plymouth, and he thought he
might as well write an account of the English. Amongst
other compliments which he paid us was a flattering statement
which he made relative to the ladies of England, wherein he
declared that they all dressed in very short linsey-woolsey
petticoats, and swore frightfully. On investigation it proved
that ce pauvre monsieur had been imprisoned close to the
fish-market, and the English ladies were the fish-wives.
We quickly travelled the ten miles between Mr. M ’s
and Belfast; when we reached the bank opposite to the


township we found the river high, and not knowing the
proper ford, and seeing nobody to direct us, we went in and
had to swim our horses across. This was anything but pleasant
in a vehicle, as we had to put our feet on the top of the splash-
board, and the water wet everything in the boot of the gig.
This was hard, too, on our poor animals the last day of
their overland journey, but it could not be helped.
We drove to a kind old Tasmanian friend’s store and he
took us up to his house, and introduced us to his pretty young
wife, who also received us most hospitably. Before leaving
Belfast I took a glass of wine with gusto, for the day was
cold and rainy, and I had nothing to fear in the way of spon-
taneous combustion, and in mentioning this it reminds me
of an anecdote relative to the same subject.
An acquaintance of mine at Port Fairy had passed some
days in Melbourne, and in those times the days were any-
thing but slow, nor were the gentlemen either. Mr. G
(my friend) made up his mind to return to his station, some
distance from the metropolis, and started one day after
luncheon, intending to go as far as a settler’s near Geelong,
or somewhere thereabout. Previous to leaving town he and
others had been speaking of a case of spontaneous com-
bustion, and remarking how very rarely a case occurred in a
man, although some cases were mentioned as having taken
place. As Mr. G proceeded on his journey he took
the pipe that he had been smoking out of his mouth and
placed it in his waistcoat pocket. He was exceedingly
musical, and he commenced humming some air; but of a
sudden his song was changed to a dirge, for before his
mouth arose a thin vapour, which on a minute inspection he
felt sure was smoke. He knew he had “exceeded” in town,
but still had anticipated no bad results; but now he felt he
was a doomed man. As he urged his horse on to a water-
hole, which was at a short distance, he said to himself, “Ah !
yes, spontaneous combustion, that’s it! ” On coming to the
water he jumped off his horse, and threw himself flat on his
face in the shallow part. He continued doing this until,
raising himself a little out of the water, and watching his
breathing attentively, he could discern no smoke. Just then
a man was riding past the spot, when Mr. G , looking at
him, said, “Am I out, my man ? ” “ No, sir; you are in, I


fancy !” answered the man, facetiously. With the man’s
assistance he got on terra firma, and had an investigation of
his clothes, when he found that in lieu of the fire being in-
ternal, it was only his waistcoat that had been burned a little
by his lighted pipe.
A gentleman named Atkinson kindly put us on our road,
and rode three miles with us. We passed a station seven
miles from Yambuck, our new abode, and when there the
rain came down in torrents. This appeared to me like a
bad omen. The country we traversed was exceedingly
thickly timbered, and very ugly. I never had seen so much
dead timber in my travels : it was in piles. The honey-
suckle trees, always ugly, even when young and green, here
came close to the ground, thereby shutting out any peep at
a landscape had there been any worthy of being seen. And
this was my introduction to the boasted Port Fairy district.
But it was a wonderful country for what it was wanted,
namely, to fatten stock of all kinds.
CHAPTER V.
AT YAMBUCK.
length we reached Yambuck, and here ended my
journey overland, in exactly two months from the
va i3i day we quitted Yesabba; and as we drove up to our
tiny hut at our new home, I could not avoid wishing we had
been returning to our old one. A young man made his ap-
pearance at the door of the domicile in his shirt sleeves, and
they none of the cleanest. This was our superintendent.
Out of a second hut ran five or six men and three small
children. As we approached the dogs barked, men ran here,
there, and everywhere, and the children screamed, and hid
themselves behind a dray.
We dismounted, and walked into our small abode, com-
prising two rooms. It was thatched with the long native
grass, and the inside was plastered and white-washed. A
small deal table was in the middle of the sitting-room,
covered with a dirty rug, pannikins, and crumbs of damper.


A fire was in the fire-place, but as much smoke came into
the room as went up the chimney, and this, added to the
total look of discomfort, made me feel inclined to cry.
We were very hungry, and, as there was nothing for us to
eat, a man went to the opposite sheep-station and procured
some mutton. When the meat came, and some chops were
brought in, Mr. B , who was particular in what he ate,
looked at them, and then asked the servant how they were
cooked. The man answered—
“ In the bottom of an iron pot.”
This was Dutch to me then, but I’ve seen the operation
since.
A rug was put up to the doorway, as there was no door
between the two rooms, and I took possession of the inner
room. I then found out where the gridiron of the estab-
lishment was ; it composed my bed ! How I did ache after
lying on that split-wooden-gridiron. I could not rest the
first night at all ; nor, indeed, until I made some alterations
in it. The inner room had large cracks between the slabs
of which the hut was composed, and these made it very
airy. A pair of blankets was nailed round it, but they did
not much prevent the draught. Opposite to my berth was
a cask of corned beef, a chest of tea, and a bag of salt.
A little window place, having no glass in it, had a bag
nailed up to keep out the rain or sun. On the mantelpiece
in the sitting-room were sundry dirty clay pipes, knives, ink,
and so on. The floors were earthern, and, from not having
been swept and watered regularly, were in small heaps, and
fleas abounded.
There was a vegetable garden in front of the hut, and
cabbages did grow, certainly. Our superintendent was not
a great florist, and the flowers consisted of stocks only ; in
fact, nothing is discussed but stock, from fat cattle to garden
flowers. I hear of nothing but stock ! First it is about the
great weight of some bullocks; then as to what wool
fetched at home, and strongly recommending sheep-farming ;
and when I turn to see the garden, alas ! stock again is pre-
sented to my mind.
About two miles from Yambuck the sea dashes against
rather an unsafe shore, so that we could distinctly hear its
roar. I liked that, as I think turbulence in nature very


grand, and I often used, after being settled, to go down and
look at the waves which caused the roaring. Just before
coming to the beach there was a salt-water lake, and there
were quantities of good fish in it; and on it black swans
and wild ducks. We also had the wood-duck, which builds
in a tree, and numbers of snipe, quail, and pigeons. Strange
to say, the river that ran at the foot of our garden was
beautiful fresh water, and about 500 yards from the hut
there was a hill of sand, and on the side towards the sea
the water was quite salt. We had another river, the
Eumeralla, at the back of our run. The fish in the fresh
water river were most plentiful and like smelt. I used to
send a black boy down with a crooked pin fastened to some
twine, and he used to collect his bait, i.e., worms, and catch
a large dish of fish in a few minutes. The wild-ducks
used to be very plentiful there also, and I had a shot now
and then at them with success; that was when I could sneak
on them and shoot them from behind the trees.
In the afternoon of the day after our arrival, our horses
came up to the river to water, and I went to pat them and say
“ How do you do ”to them. They evidently thought they
were to be harnessed as usual, but when they found this not
to be the case one of them commenced kicking up his
heels with joy, and, galloping off, was soon followed by the
others.
We began building a new and larger hut immediately,
and it was a very pleasant one when finished, as many a
traveller can aver. It consisted of six rooms and a large
verandah, and we made the old hut into a kitchen. We
had then to build a store, as we were obliged to get flour,
tea, sugar, and all other necessaries, in large quantities in
the bush, as there are no shops to send to.
A gentleman was staying at Yambuck when we arrived,
for whom I formed, on acquaintance, a sincere friendship.
He was the son of a Major S . If ever a kind heart
dwelt in man, he had it. He was left in England at school,
under the care of guardians, when his father, mother, and
younger brother came to New South Wales. After being
eight years at home, and hearing nothing from his parents,
he determined on going to Sydney to see them, and before
starting received a Government appointment from England.


On his voyage he dreamed that he saw some letters in the
post-office in Sydney, and one was addressed to his father,
opposite to whose name was placed the word “ dead,” in
large letters.
On his arrival in Sydney the first person whom he visited
confirmed his dream; his father was dead. He was
naturally much shocked, but immediately set out to see his
remaining parent. When he got to her house she disowned
him. Unnatural woman ! What her reason was continued
always a mystery to him ; but he fancied, as she was an ex-
ceedingly vain, frivolous woman, that his age might have
something to do with her not owning him as her child.
She told him that he was Major S ’s son by some
foreigner, but not hers. It was supposed that his father
had left him some property, but the supposition is all he
ever knew of it. Poor fellow ! he was of a most affectionate
disposition, and has often told me that, if even then she
would only own him as her child, he would give her all he
either possessed then or was likely to possess. This so
preyed on his mind that at night, in his sleep, he would
repeat aloud what he had said to her on their meeting in
Sydney —
“ Cruel mother, to disown your son ! You’ll break my
heart! I am your son !” He would remain silent fora
time, and afterwards, in a subdued tone, would say, “ My
poor father ! would you were alive.”
His friends recommended him to write to England for the
certificate of his baptism, and to go to law to recover any pro-
perty that might be his by right; but he was unwilling to bring
shame to his father’s name by citing his worthless mother to
appear before the public. Some time after we arrived at
Yambuck Mr. C. S remained with us, and a few
years later he studied for the church, and became a mission-
ary to some of the South Sea Islands, where he died.
I have often talked over my travels in Australia, and my
friends have said, “ You should publish them.” But now
that I am doing so I feel that my small journal is so poor
and uninteresting that few will give themselves the trouble
of buying or reading it.
My time in the bush passed sometimes very merrily, some-
times very sadly. Being of a happy temperament, I made


friends, and every now and then some queer incident would
occur to amuse me. I was very fond of riding and hunting,
had some beautiful dogs, and plenty of kangaroos and
dingoes to hunt.
A clerical friend of mine, who is now living in Portland,
Victoria, and for whom I entertained the sincerest friend-
ship, came to stay a day with us, and I was mischievous
enough to plan a hunt for him. He said, in answer to my
invitation to go fora ride, that he would be most happy, but
that he never hunted, I must remember. Accordingly, we
went; and when we got some distance from home I saw the
dogs keeping a steady look-out, and presently they went
after a forester kangaroo, or what we call “an old man.” I
cantered on, and heard my friend close behind me, but not
a word did I say. The dogs, some of them, followed a
second kangaroo, but Ada, my greyhound, kept to the old
gentleman, and, seeing that he was too strong for her, and
fearing lest she might be injured, I jumped off my horse
and caught the animal by the tail to stop him from getting
away. I put my arms round a sapling tree to prevent his
moving, but he was too much for me, and away we went
together, he taking me such hops as even Kent never saw.
My friend could not move for laughing, and I don’t know
how the affair would have ended had not my shouts of
“ Hold him ” brought the other dogs back to my assistance,
and the forester’s death.
Another time I remember we had to drive some cattle to
a river about twenty miles from Yambuck, on their way to
Portland, as they had been purchased by a butcher there.
My clerical friend was going to the same place, and rode
behind the cattle with Mr. B and the stockman. My
place was in front of the bullocks, and as we got to a large
swamp they broke in all directions. I found myself at one
side of them, and tried to keep them together, but they were
bent on going to their old haunts on some hummocks, so I
followed and tried to head them. I had done this, for my
horse was really a good one and could go the pace when he
and I chose, and we had steadied the cattle a little, when
the stockman rode up from behind me, thinking I should
not be able to come up with the runaways.
“ Why, what possesses the cattle, Will; I never knew any
so tiresome before ?” said I to the man.


“Ah ! they knows they has a parson behind ’em, and
that always do make ’em wild, ma’am,” returned he.
I was told an admirable story in England of a clergyman
who was very fond of following the hounds, but always did
this to the letter, as he never could afford a horse which would
keep up to them. The Bishop of O spoke to him about
it, and said how sorry he was to hear of his attending balls
and joining hunts. “You would think it strange to hear of
my doing such things,” said his lordship. “My lord, if I
mistake not,” humbly suggested the young minister, “ I saw
your name at the last ball at Buckingham Palace.” “ True,
but the sovereign’s invitation is an order, you know, and
nobody ever saw me in the same room as the dancing,”
returned the bishop. “ And I’ll defy anyone, my lord, to
say they ever saw me in the same field as the hounds,” said
the clergyman ; to which, I believe, those around bore testi-
mony and smiled.
We had been at Yambuck about three weeks ; and it
being then the commencement of winter, the small hut, with
four regular inmates, was anything but comfortable ; and as
I could have no female servant, I had to act in that capacity
myself. I can fancy in my mind’s eye that I see poor Mr.
S assisting me in my work by cleaning the knives
and a pair of brass candlesticks. We were very merry over
our work. The other gentlemen went out after the stock,
when possible, but one day all were at home, owing to the
downpour of rain, and one or other would go constantly to
the door, give a look out, and then remark, “ What a fine
day for young ducks ! ” About two o’clock, to our astonish-
ment, up drove a lady and gentleman in what is popularly
called a “ spring cart,” but this in which they were seemed
anything but that. Their horse, a very jaded one, appeared
to relish the stop more than some of us did. The lady was
wrapped up in a large plaid shawl, over that a silk cloak,
lined with fur, and, to cover all, a policeman’s cloak. Of
course, they were invited into our mansion, and I took the
lady into my room to take off her bonnet. She said she felt
much ashamed to trespass on my kindness, that if it cleared
up they would try and go on to Belfast, sixteen miles further,
and a great deal more, which I listened to without answering.
At last I said—


“ You’ll have to sleep on my gridiron ; but I promise not
to heat it.”
She appeared amazed, and told me after that she thought
I was quizzing her.
We returned to the sitting-room, and passed a merry even-
ing, and it would have been even merrier had we known that
we were then entertaining a couple married that morning.
Such a honeymoon !
The superintendent nearly found out the fact by saying to
the bridegroom—
“ Why, Mr. A , you have not been long making up
your mind to marrying; I heard of your intention to get
spliced, but thought the day named was not until to-morrow.”
Mrs. A said quickly, “You see we took Portland by
surprise, and were married sooner, and are now going to pay
some visits.”
She told me the secret when we were alone, and I did not
divulge it for some days after they left. They were weather-
bound for three days with us, and Mrs. A was dis-
tressed when she awoke each morning to see me lying on
the floor between a mattress and a feather bed, quite in the
German style, only the upper covering was not composed of
eider down, and it nearly suffocated me ; added to which,
Ada, seeing me on the floor, thought it was camping in in-
stead of out, and insisted on lying by my side, and on the
bed.
The most laughable thing was to hear the people in the
outer room groaning in their sleep with the hardness of their
beds, for I had had the floor made very level and clean,
and all these unfortunates had between them was a large
tarpaulin, which would not soften their position much. I
used to call these outcries “ the groans of the wounded.”
One night, before going to sleep, I heard some one of
them say, “Oh ! but it is hard ! If Mrs. B would only
let me scratch out a place for my hip to rest in I should be
grateful.” I answered, “ Then indeed she won’t!”
At the end of three days our young couple went on their
way, I should think, rejoicing, to Belfast, and gave us a call
on their return home, and very warm thanks they gave me
for what they termed my hospitality.
The superintendent was an excellent-hearted young man,


but a foreigner, and he made some queer mistakes in his
words sometimes; for example, he one morning asked a
gentleman to whom he had kindly lent his small looking-
glass to shave by, if he did not find it extort his face very
much. And introducing a gentleman to another said, “ This
is Mr. Munro, Mr. ; he is son of Squire Munro, Pro-
fessor of Atitimony,” instead of “ anatomy.”
Mr. S , on his second visit, brought a character,
in the shape of a stockman, with him. He was an immense
entertainment to me. Sometimes, when his master went
out on the run with the other people of the station, Jack
would remain at home, and used to make himself useful to
me in chopping wood, and other little matters. He was
sadly troubled with asthma, and one day, after a fearful fit of
coughing, I heard him say, “ Well, if God will only forgive
me this once, I promise never to go out stock-keeping no
more.” Jack was very fond of eating a very large white
grub that is to be found in some of the Australian trees. I
have heard a gentleman say that when roasted it eats like a
filbert. Jack preferred them in their savage, undressed
state. One day he found an immense one, and brought it
to me, saying it would do my chest good, as I could get no
snails. It was no use my trying to convince him that I did
not wish for either of these delicacies. As I would not have
the grub, he put it into his own mouth, head foremost, and
as he bit the poor thing it caught hold of his tongue in its
death grasp. Jack let go his hold pretty soon, and yelled,
but the grub held on until its demise. This was an illustra-
tion of the biter being bitten, at which I laughed heartily.
The gentleman in whose employ both Mr. S
and Jack were was a very speculative person, and at an
early period of the colony had taken overland to Adelaide
a large number of cattle. One day, whilst there, he was
dining at Government House, and being very absorbed in
thinking how his speculation would turn out, he could give
no attention to anything else. On being asked by Mrs.
what he would take, he replied—
“ Sixteen pounds a head, and all calves given in.”
The “ times ” were said to be very bad when we went to
Yambuck, but they are much worse now, methinks ! How-
ever, notwithstanding the hardness of the times, the working


class got what would in any other country be called good
wages. I remember one day, whilst in my garden, hearing
the stockman call out to some newly-arrived person,
“Halloo! when did you come?” “In the last shower,”
answered his friend. “ I thought so,” was the rejoinder,
“for you do look so green !” The traveller then went on
to say that he was looking fr >r a place, and had refused
twenty-five pounds a year, i . remarked, “Do you know
what I said to one gentleman w..j asked me to take twenty
pounds a year ? I told him 1 would if he would let me
shepherd near a high road. He asked me why I wished to
be on a high road. Because, said I, I could then sell some
sheep to make up my wages.” Such were the “ old hands !”
The “ new ” won't take less than a pound a week in the
country, but the “ march of intellect ” has something to do
with this ; as it is impossible in these days of universal
education that a man or woman can afford to keep up
either his or her correspondence with friends without an in-
crease of salary to pay for pens, ink, paper, and stamps !
And if they do not write to their acquaintance, what is the
benefit of their instruction in reading and writing?
The stockmen in the colony’s infancy were most of them
bachelors, and they, after mature consideration, determined
if possible to change their state. Tl?ey therefore subscribed
one pound each for Ae'purpose p£.fringing out a ship-load
of young women. Accotjßnp£\\the money was sent to Eng-
land, the young femal£S'-**)}<rdted, and word arrived in
Melbourne as to the time at which these fair ones might be
expected to reach Fort Phillip. Great was the excitement
as the time approached ; nearly all the stockkeepers were
requesting “ liberty” to go to Melbourne, never dreaming
that it might be the last time in their lives that they would
have it if their visions of bliss in the matrimonial line were
carried out. I was told that on the ship’s anchoring in the
Bay she was surrounded by boats laden with passengers, and
that the scramble to be first on deck was intensely ludicrous,
for it was “first come first served,” and i’ll not mention on
paper who was told to take the “ hindmost.”
Up went the aspiring youths, and they were warmly
welcomed by the Eves collected en masse to receive them.
Some of the Adams could not speak in time, as they were


out of breath by hastening on deck; and others had allowed
their spirits (or somebody else’s) to overpower them, so
these just sprang as fast as they could to the sides of the
fair girls whom they were smitten with at “ sight.” 1 expect
many wished afterwards that they had not been “honoured”
for “ thirty days ” at least.
Some of the men came away disengaged, our stockman
one of the number. But only one woman remained so, and
this not from want of offers, but she said, “ No, thank ye ;
if I can get so many offers here on board ship, what will I
not have on shore ? and I came to better myself, I did.”
So they all agree that she was a plain girl, in more ways
than one.
There is an old law, I believe, which admits of a man
selling his wife, if he chose, by public auction. But I once
knew of a case on the next station to Yesabba where the
husband parted with his sposa amata to an overseer for five
pounds and a pair of blankets. I need scarcely add that
the time of year was winter, and the fair one embonpoint,
and hence the value set on the warmth of her nature. I
had often seen the poor woman and pitied her. I dare say
she did the same for me, and, in the words of Henri Quatre,
“il me semble que tons deux out (avaient) raison" She was
married to a sawyer who was then engaged in felling cedar
trees, and they lived in a dense scrub in a very good tent.
When flour was ninety pounds a ton they had it, and I
have several times declined her kind offer of tasting her
beautifully white damper, when I had nothing but corn
meal or rice to munch away at. She told me that she was
the daughter of a retired officer of the army, and ran away
from school in Dublin with a person who promised to marry
her; he never did so, and soon tired of her and left her,
or perhaps she left him ; who knows ? She sank lower and
lower until she married, out in New South Wales, and be-
came sold. But I must, however, add that all parties were
quite friendly after the exchange, and the old love used to
go every Sunday and smoke his pipe in his friends’ hut, and
be very merry in their company. What an illustration of
philosophy ! As an agreeable medical friend said to me once,
“ Philosophy ! It’s very well to talk of it, but give me
the man who can practice it under such circumstances as


the following : —We had sat down to our hunt breakfast,
some sixteen of us, and I had been thinking over all the
good stories I could tell to my companions. Some of these
anecdotes were racy in the extreme, and I was very anxious
to relate them. The Rev. Mr. B was at the breakfast,
and such a talker I never met; he talked incessantly,and I did
not mind it at first, as I could satisfy my appetite and listen
to his stories; but as time flew by and still he talked and
gave me no chance of being heard, I must say my philosophy
was vanishing, when, lo! he sneezed; I took up the running ,
and never gave him another chance.”
The natives were very troublesome when we first went to
Yambuck, and some time after, and used to kill both shep-
herds and sheep on the next station to ours ; with us they
did not commit any depredations for some while, but at
last commenced killing the cattle ; this was too unpleasant
to be allowed. The superintendent had left the place, and
ray husband was away for some weeks, when the stockman
found several cattle with pieces of spears sticking in them.
One morning very early I accompanied the stockman and a
black boy in pursuit of the delinquents, and we came up
with them about an hour after sunrise. We heard a noise at
a short distance which I thought sounded like the striking
of a tomahawk against a tree; however, both my com-
panions said it was a bird. All at once the black said,
“ Blackfellow close up, you see,” pointing to a place where
I looked in vain for the slightest trace of anything but grass,
leaves, and bark. On we went in silence, and the boy
every now and then threw up his head as a bloodhound
would to sniff the air, and then would fix his attention on
the ground. It was wonderful how he would observe the
smallest twig or piece of grass broken, or pressed down.
We came to a swamp, but there was very little water in it.
“We stop here,” said the black; “you see, blackfellow
dere,” pointing to the swamp. We saw no more of our sable
guide then, as he went off at racing speed, and the stock-
man and 1 moved on and soon came up with twenty-three
natives, all but one as wild as kangaroos. They took to
their heels in good style, and we dashed after them, but one
more heavily laden than the rest missed his footing in a
rough place, and fell floundering on his back in the wet.
G


He could not rise, as he had a heavy load between his
shoulders in a native basket, which impeded him as much
as a knapsack would have done, so I had plenty of time to
give him a good frightening by riding at him, and making
signs that I would ride over him. The stockman got off his
horse, and took the commissariat into his own hands; it
proved, fortunately for the man, that there was only kangaroo
and opossum in his larder, so we made him walk on before us
to introduce us to his fellows. As we approached, one man
came out from the group and made a signal for us to stop
where we were; I told the stockman not to go any nearer,
but I walked my horse on behind the man whom we had
found on his back. The black who was to act as spokesman
was the only one of the party who had on a stitch of clothing,
and his dress was certainly limited in quantity ; it was com-
posed of a straw hat, and a striped woollen guernsey frock.
The others were painted with white and dark yellow,
and wore small skins round their hips and waist. How
they all chattered, and looked like demons. “ Name you ?”
said Ito the full dressed youth. “ Charlie,” was the answer.
“ Merrie Jig Charlie, what for you all kill and spear him
cattle ?” After this an interpretation followed, and then
Charlie answered, “ Blackfellow no kill him cattle.” “ You
hear me, Charlie; supposing blackfellows kill any more
cattle, plenty me shoot them.” The interpreter gave his
friends to understand this, whereupon another violent
yabbering went on, and a movement towards the spears
which had been put on the ground in bundles, at Charlie’s
instigation. He saw a large pistol which I always wore in my
belt, and he said, “ What for piccaninny bang ?” “ Along a
shoot him blackfellow, if he kill him cattle 1 ” “Oh ”
whistled Charlie, in true whaler style, and then said, “ Me
tink wild dog kill him cattle, no blackfellow.” “ Wild dog
no got him spears, Charlie.” This seemed to puzzle him
rather. At last I told him that they must leave that place, as
the cattle were too frightened of them. They disputed the
point, and told me to go. I stood my ground, and we
agreed that both parties should give a little. “ Giggo,” said
Charlie to me, which means “ go.” “ Giggo you, too,”
answered I, and we all receded, and I was some distance
from them, laughingly saying “ Good bye,” when the stock


man called out, “ Look out, ma’am, for God’s sake ! ” I did
not know which way to move, as I saw a spear coming
towards me, so I waited for a second, and then put my head
on the saddle pummel, and “ whiz” it flew past me.
I immediately put my horse to a gallop and rode straight
at the wretch who had thrown it, but when I got up to him
all his party had collected around him, and were giving him
such a lecture that I left it to them to punish him. It was
a very narrow escape with my life, and it made me feel very
revengeful at the treachery of the black. The stockman and
I reached home about twelve o’clock, but the black boy had
been there for hours. •
In the evening of the day on which we encountered the
blacks some of ray neighbours had been out looking for them,
and must have been close to us at some time of the morning.
When they found that I had been successful in meeting
the wild gentry, they agreed ‘that I should accompany
them in a day or two after to see what mischief they
were up to ; so four of us started very early one morning, and
after riding horribly slowly and silently for some hours, I
was glad when an old stockman, named “Tom,” took out of
one of his holsters a parcel, which proved to be some ex-
cellent sandwiches, although made of cold veal. Tom had
not even foggotten some salt; and I assisted him in getting
through his luncheon; indeed, I don’t know when I had felt
more pleasure than in hearing him say, “ Have a bit summat
to eat, ma’am ?”
After our refreshment we journeyed on, and at last saw
the smoke of the blacks’ fires; and then the male portion of
our party dismounted and left their horses with me, whilst
they walked up to the camp. I heard a great screaming of
women and yelping of dogs, but only one shot; this proved
to be from old Tom’s gun, “by accident,” he said, but it
told in the leg it was fired at, notwithstanding. The camp
was composed of many mia-mias, or native huts. These are
constructed of branches of trees, lodged against one another
so as to form a shed something in the shape of an open um-
brella. The interior is too low for anybody but a child to
stand upright in. They are decidedly an improvement on
the hovels which are to be seen in Ireland, in the precincts
of Killarney, for the front of the Australian mia-mia is quite


open, and the wood fire is therefore outside nearly of the
tenement, and the eyes do not suffer so much from the smoke
as in the Irish habitations. The natives had in the camp I
speak of some very good rugs of opossum and kangaroo
skins, quantities of spears and baskets : all these were burnt,
excepting a few spears and boomerangs which we kept. I
have never known the natives to sweep out their dwellings;
when one becomes too thickly populated to be comfortable,
the inhabitants move away to some new place and make
another.
Not long after this last encounter with the blacks, the
native police were sent*down to the Portland district, under
the charge of a most efficient officer, who had the corps in
excellent order and discipline. They remained some time
every winter in our neighbourhood, and they frightened their
sable brethren into better manners.
After we had been some weeks at Yambuck, we had several
blacks about the place, who made themselves very useful,
and I believe they were slightly attached to us, but of course
more so to the place, as that of their birth. One of these
men was called “ Old Man Jack,” although quite a young
man. He seemed to have more genuine worth in him than
most of his set, and on my going to Tasmania for three
months he absented himself all the time. On my return, as
Mr. B was driving me home, he was telling me that he
had only seen Old Man Jack once since I left, when we heard
a “ cooey,” and on looking in the direction from whence it
came we saw the youth running down a hummock to meet
me ! I asked him why he had been away so long? “ Plenty
me look out for you along a big one water,” said he;
and positively the tears of joy were in his eyes at seeing me
again. I had gone across the Straits in a small sailing
vessel of, I think, a hundred tons burthen, and certainly
not A i at Lloyd’s; she took, besides myself, the captain
and three men as crew, and two boys as apprentices, one
of whom was heard to say that he had heard of hardships,
but that was the very hardest ship he had ever met with !
The good schooner took over cattle from Port-
land to Launceston ; we had a splendid run over, but I was
frightfully sea-sick; I could not leave my berth, and I had
to call the captain once (which was no violent effort, as a


whisper at one end of the vessel on a fine day might be
heard at the other) to ask him what it could be that kept on
kicking so continually at the slight partition at my feet. He
went to look, and came back, saying very good temperedly,
“ Oh ! you never mind it, ma’am; it’s only a dying bullock !”
But I was in no good humour, and answered sharply, “ And
am I to be kicked to death by dying bullocks ? ” driving the
captain by this speech up the small corkscrew stair on deck,
where I heard him laugh outright.
We found the dingos very troublesome in Port Fairy,
and, notwithstanding the squatters killing many, they
seemed to increase very fast, until strychnine was used,
which was after I left in 1848. There was a nice pack of
hounds at Mount Rose, not very far from Belfast, and they
were brought down every season to hunt there, and a pretty
sight it was in that wild-looking country to see so many
well-mounted men, and at the “ meets ” such a number of
pretty women, for who that remembers those days will not
agree with me that there were some exceedingly pretty and
good-looking women in Port Fairy ? And the “ Queen ”of
the Fairy tribe—who can ever forget her sweet, gentle
manner, and kind-hearted hospitality ? She will ever live
in our hearts.
I have known two gentlemen to ride from Portland to
Belfast, a distance of thirty-five miles, on the morning of the
hunt, and, meeting us going to see the fox uncarted, asked
us to wait a few minutes for them to change horses, and in
that time joined us, looking as fresh as anybody at the meet,
and enjoying the hunt in thorough sportsmanlike manner.
I call this very spicy.
At one time the hounds were down at Belfast, and the
dingo that was intended for the hunt had committed suicide
by hanging himself at the back of the dray to which he was
(not) attached. Some gentlemen came to Yambuck and
told me, and I had just mounted my horse, although it was
raining, to go and bring in some other horses. I said,
jokingly, that I would try and secure another fox for them,
and took a small rope with me. I had not gone far when
my dogs scented some wild ones, and we soon were up with
five of them. I knew it was of no use calling Ada off the
one she had taken possession of, so I let them worry that


one to death, and then, after giving my pets a little breathing
time, followed on the track of the dingos, and, as good luck
would have it, there sat one, evidently the widow of the
slain one, howling piteously close by. The excitement was
such that even the rain could not damp our ardour, and the
dogs and I dashed forward and secured the “ weeping fair.”
I jumped off my horse, and had to whip right and left at my
dogs, but succeeded at last in getting the dingo tied round
a small tree with the rope and one of my reins. I again
mounted my horse, and, calling off my dogs, cantered home.
“ Come along, quick,” said I, “ and bring a sack and a dog-
chain.” I could see that my friends were doubtful as to
whether I was joking or in earnest; but the two visitors
came, and a little man-servant who was living with us at the
time. We all kept very quiet as we walked along, for the
three were on foot by my horse’s side, and I was rather
dubious as to whether I should find the spot where I had
left my captive, although I would not have mentioned this
for the world. At last I thought I was somewhere near the
place, so I called to the dogs to “ go on,” and I followed as
fast as I could, but not in time to save my fox from getting
her death-wound from Ada, who, thinking the animal should
have been dead by that time, gave her a favourite bite of
her’s, which was at the heart of the prostrate foe, and always
had the desired effect.
Up came the walkers, and sad were the countenances of
the three. We tried to revive the dingo by giving her water
out of a piece of bark, and, indeed, the rain that was falling
should have had the effect, if possible, and she seemed
grateful to us for our attention, as she never attempted to
snarl or snap. Then we got her into the sack, and left her
head out at the top, and the servant took the load on his
shoulders and walked towards the house, we following close.
Of a sudden the man said, “ I think, ma’am, he’s a groan-
ing.” She was immediately deposited on the ground and
examined by one of my companions, who was a doctor;
he looked sage, but shook his head. The dingo seemed to
be better for a time, and the man was again put under
heavy marching order ; but he stopped once more, saying,
“ His hours is numbered, he’s a dyin’.” Sure enough, the
game was lost to us; the dingo expired, and I took home


the brush. I was thanked by the gentlemen of the hunt for
trying to procure a fox, although I did not succeed.
My neighbours used to laugh very much at my tales
relative to dingoes that I had killed, and my husband said
he would like to see the brushes. I had a fine couteau de
chasse, but I could not make up my mind to cut off the
brushes of my victims ; one day, however, after a good
deal of quizzing, I went out, and killed a dingo and brought
it home on my horse, whilst I walked beside it; so this was
proof positive.
One day I had sent some blacks down to the mouth of
the river to fish, the morning being very fine for that
sport, and one of them returned soon after and told me
that they had found a white man’s body near the lake.
I sent a man with the boy to see about the remains, and
have them buried. Mr. B reported the circumstance
to the police, and it proved to be the skeleton of a whaler
who had deserted from his ship in Belfast, and was going
with a mate to Portland. They were on the road, when, in
crossing the Shaw, the foremost of the two sank in the quick-
sands, and his comrade was so afraid that he might be
thought guilty of his murder that he returned to Belfast
and gave information to the authorities there.
The deceased was from Hobart Town. I promised, there-
fore, that as I was going over there I would let his widow
know the particulars of her husband’s death. Accordingly, on
the day after my arrival, a constable came to the house
where I was staying, and sent in word to say that he had
brought the widow up to see me. The poor woman seemed
distressed when I told her the facts, and cried as she was
leaving. The constable was behind her, and as I said,
“ Poor woman, she seems to feel his death very much,” he
said to me, “ Why, ma’am, she was only waiting to hear
from you for a certainty of his death, to get married
again.” And so it proved, and the constable was right in
his surmise.
I never thought that I should like the Port Fairy country,
nor should I, had it not been for the delightful society which
I found myself in there. How many I could name who were
to me very esteemed and dear, and who can in truth never
be forgotten by me. The actual country and scenery of


New South Wales was decidedly much more attractive and
romantic, and I liked it better ; and then I had such very
pleasing reminiscences of friends whom I could never replace
in any other country : but I have neglected to mention the
part of the colony which I admired so much during a short
stay which I made there, and, as it is really worth mentioning,
with the then agreeable squatters who resided there, I shall
now relate my trip to New England.
CHAPTER VI.
NEW ENGLAND.
j|M|S[T is the table land of New South Wales, and I must
Hl® say that, with few exceptions, the society then there
were much above the level of any other which was
to be met with, in a body , in any other portion of the
country.
There was a great debating as to whether I should form
one of the party of travellers which were to go on this bush
trip from Port Macquarie, or rather from the MacLeay river :
and one morning, when a heavy mist seemed the pre-
dominant feature in the weather, I got permission to stay
for three weeks from Yesabba.
We commenced our peregrinations in the following party.
Messrs. M r, the commissioner for our district, A.
McL d, and B , three policemen, a black boy, two
pack horses, and myself. As I said, it was misty, and few
persons would have liked to commence a long journey in
such weather ; but what was the weather to us ? We carried
the sunshine in our hearts, most of us ! And we cheered
ourselves by saying “ Fortune ever favours the brave,” and
we rode on, I with our kind commissioner’s cloak round me,
and reached Nobbie very soon, this being only twenty-five
miles.
This was a bachelor’s station, and several of these “neuter
genders ” lived together, but that day all were from home
Before going any further en route I must explain why I give


the above title to bachelors ; a little girl at school was asked
how many genders there were, to which she answered very
correctly, “ Three.” She was then told by her schoolmaster
to illustrate them. “ I am feminine,” said little blue eyes,
“ because lam a girl; you are masculine, because you’re a
man; and Mr. Jenkins is neuter, because he’s an old bach-
elor ! ”
Accordingly we had the house to ourselves at Nobbie, and
were very snug. A strange old man attended us, and ap-
peared a sort of Caleb Baldistone. On the following morn-
ing he brought the boots to the different doors, but mine he
brought into my room, to the entertainment of the gentlemen,
but which stretch of politeness I could have dispensed with.
Our second day’s stage was to a station of Messrs. Betts
and Panton ; I there found an old acquaintance in the stock-
man’s wife, and a very civil woman she was, and gave us an
excellent supper, to which we did ample justice. Another
gentleman Joined us there with his stockman. The commis-
sioner’s tent was pitched, but some of the gentlemen re-
mained in the hut until they were driven out in the night
by insects !
Another misty morning set in, but we did not mind it, and
went on with our journey.
The scenery on the MacLeay river was truly beautiful,
although I had scarcely a fair chance of seeing it. In
some places it is extremely bold, the banks being of an im-
mense height and perfectly precipitous ; in others, all was
soft, entrancing, lovely. There was one exquisite nook
which is quite vivid to my memory, even at the lapse of so
long a time, and which I said I could live quite happily in
with only my books, piano, horse, dogs, and a black boy
to shoot game for me. The idea amused my companions very
much, I remember.
We had to cross the river about twenty-one times in thirty-
three miles. It was disagreeable, as in some of the crossings
the river was very high, but Plantagenet was so good in the
water that, while others had their feet and legs wet, I did
not get in the least so, but he had to swim the last ford, as
he was small, and it was high. Messrs. M and A.
McL rode on with two policemen to get the tent
pitched, and we all joined them as that was being accom-
plished.


After having something to eat, and making a huge fire,
we all got under the covering of the tent. The black boy
stripped a very nice sheet of bark from a box tree, for my
bed ; my two friends arranged some blankets most comfort-
ably in this, and gave me a pair of saddle-bags for my pillow.
I have slept in many more expensive couches, but I don’t
remember ever sleeping better than in my bark bed, with the
tent for curtains. I was very nearly being boxed up with
a vengeance, though; for my bed, becoming warm with the
fire, and being perfectly green, curled up in a most ridiculous
manner, and nearly made me into a bolster shape.
We had a further addition to our party this night in the form
of seven shepherds watching three thousand sheep of Major
Innes’, and which were to steer our course on the morrow.
The men were singing and laughing so merrily, few would have
thought that they were in bondage, and not “ as free as the
Governor.” After all, which of us is a free agent?
The gentlemen retired for a little, and I took off my habit
and made my toilette arrangements for the night. When the
good people returned they sat by the fire, smoked their pipes
and told travellers’ tales. The commissioner, being no smoker
and a delightful companion, enlivened the interior of the
tent and chatted away with me. I may say these complimen-
tary, things now, as time has passed since then, and these
remarks must be set down as agreeable, too agreeable, recol-
lections of byegone days.
Mr. McL had one of the sheep killed for the benefit
of all, and such a cooking as went on even Mrs. Dumple
would have been astonished at, more especially at the mode
of sending up the viands. I think I drank nearly two quarts
of tea out of my pannikin on that night; I never had such a
.thirst. What vulgar prejudice, preferring china cups to
tin pannikins ! One only becomes liberal by travelling.
We sat talking until eleven o’clock, when the three
gentlemen went to repose by the fire, although by this time
the mist had turned to rain, and I was entertained with Mr.
McL ——s putting his mackintosh on the wet ground, and
lying on it flat on his back, and, notwithstanding the rain,
snoring away very soon. Such is the force of habit, he being
an old bushman.
Talking of habits, by the way, reminds me that I was


sitting up in my box mending mine by the firelight, when I
espied our commissioner jump up and run about most fran-
tically. “ A nest of ants,” thought I; “ how pleasant! ”At
last, when he appeared more collected, I asked what was the
matter. It appeared that my poor friend had not taken
off his boots since we left Mobbra, and having be-
come thoroughly saturated he had lain down with them on,
and his feet to the fire ; of course, they became extremely
hot, and his pretty feet (for he had remarkably pretty ones)
became victims to cold and heat.
We ascended the “ Table Land ” on the following morn-
ing, the sun having kindly come out to welcome us to New
England. The scene was really pretty, and I wished I could
have taken a sketch of our party. As the sun shone out,
the sheep, with their masters and dogs, commenced winding
up the immense aclivity, feeding as they went, and seemingly
unconscious of what a mountain they were ascending.
It is a long mountain, in, what is called out in the colony,
steep “pinches.” Mr. M and I rode up, both of us
being light-weights. So there is an advantage in sometimes
being a light creature. After reaching the top I changed
horses, and rode one of Mr. M ’s, but I found he tired
me so much that I dismounted, to be furnished with an
easier animal; I forgot he was so very high, and instead of
landing on my feet, I sat down and fell with my head
under the horse. He never moved, the good animal, and I
at the time did not feel much hurt; afterwards, however, I
constantly suffered from the pain in my back.
We reached Captain Richards’ station and there remained
all night; Messrs. M—— and A. McL went on to Mr.
McL ’s to try and procure a gig for me for the morrow.
Mrs. Richards was very hospitable and nice-looking; she
had such fine black eyes, and a profusion of black hair, and
a pretty little figure. She most kindly wished me to remain
some days with her, but this I could not do, as I was bound
for the races. Mrs. Richards asked me if I could play chess
and ride. I said “No” to the former, and “ A little” to the
latter. “ Then,” said she, “ you’ll not do for New England,
I can tell you.” I only remarked that I felt peculiarly unfor-
tunate in this, but must try my luck.
On the morning after reaching New England we started


again on our way to Armidale, or rather Salisbury, where I
was to stay with an old friend at her mother-in-law’s. Mrs.
Richards rode with us as far as Dr. Thompson’s ; she sat
very gracefully, so perfectly at ease on her horse. She
wished to impress on my mind that Mr. A. McL would
forget all about the gig, and that I should not see him again
until I reached Salisbury, for that was the way in which the
gentlemen up in those parts acted. I replied that I felt sure
that he would be at the station waiting to meet me, and
that I had always found any New England squatters that I
had met very punctual in their engagements. “You’ll see,
the air will cause the forgetfulness.” To her amazement, the
gentleman in question was waiting at Dr. Thompson’s, and,
as he had failed to procure Mr. McL ’s gig (the owner
being from home), we said adieu to our late host and
hostess, and cantered on to Salisbury.
It seemed so strange to travel on such level land after all
the hills and dales that I had been traversing for the past
few days. The environs of the house reminded me of the
Salisbury plains in old England.
The station was Mr. M ’s ; the cottage was a wooden
one, consisting of six rooms, with a shingled roof, and having
the same drawback as all wooden houses, that of being
a whispering gallery; and as to telling your friend anything
in one room that you don’t wish everybody in the next to
hear, it would be folly to think of, and a fruitless attempt:
one had much better trust to the open air for telling secrets.
I recollect a friend of mine in this colony who became
smitten with a pretty woman, and one day they were walk-
in the bush, when, of a sudden, he gave vent to the following
exclamation, “ I wonder if the trees have eyes ? ” and, before
she had time to look round, he gave her a kiss! It was
most irregular conduct, and I shall not mention names !
To resume my narrative. On our way to the cottage we
saw four persons very busily employed making hay ; it was
of no use my two companions shouting to them with all
their strength of lung ; the hay-makers were determined to
make hay while the sun shone —this in the literal, as well as
another meaning—for they had “ pressed ” two visitors into
their service and were getting as much work as they could
from them, especially as the day was so fine. Failing, there


fore, to make these deaf ones hear, we proceeded to the
chateau, where Messrs. M and several others were
awaiting me with Mrs. C. M . I had never before seen
the proprietor of the station, Mr. M , but had heard
an immensity of him and his unbounded hospitality. He
was good-looking ; his head might serve for a model, the
forehead was so nobly formed ; and the contour of the face
was good, but his figure was not so, and yet it puzzled one to
find out where the fault lay. I saw him one day sitting on
horseback, dressed in a red flannel shirt, knee-breeches and
gaiters; his straw hat was decorated with a fine plume of
emu feathers ; a number of gentleman were standing around
him, and as he was saying something energetically he ex-
tended his hand towards them, and I remarked to Mrs. C.
M , “ What a bandit chief he would make.” He was
exceedingly clever and well read, and was a charming com-
panion, hospitable to a fault.
I was taking off my habit, when I heard a manly voice
singing—
“ They have given her to another,
They have broken every vow ;
They have given her to another,
And she’s Mrs. I r now.
Lost, lost.”
In the same breath almost came, “ Oh ! what nice tobacco !
you might have had the civility to offer a friend some ; thank
you—and when did you come ? Is your wife with you ? ”
Now this same wife was inspecting the speaker at the mo-
ment, for he reminded me much of a very dear lost friend,
both in appearance and manner.
Mr. B , for so was this eccentric being named, was
rather nice-looking, with very bright blue eyes, and these
had acquired a look which it was exceedingly difficult to meet
without feeling a visible sensation. He was very well in-
formed, and one of the best readers I ever heard, and if he
can be met with in a steady humour for three minutes
together he will be found a sensible, agreeable companion,
but he is very like good champagne when in society. lam
now speaking of people as they were , but I must here re-
mark that the gentleman above-mentioned has proved his


sense since my visit to New England, and is very much
respected and esteemed by all who know him.
About seven o’clock in the morning Mr. M went
down to bathe in a creek that runs close to the house. On
his way down he knocked at the several room doors, and
called out, “ I shall be ready for breakfast in a quarter of an
hour.” Immediately Mr. B called “Up, up,” vociferously.
There was then a general move in the house : all were bent
on collecting their clothes; some complaining they had none
at all ; others in melancholy voices saying how hard the
boards were (for many of the gentlemen had to sleep on
them with blankets). Then again one would say, “Oh !
but I say, it will be my turn to night for one of those gig
cushions ; this sharp fender will break my neck, and the
doctor says I must sleep with my head high, or I shall have
apoplexy.”
The servant-woman would walk into the large room where
these good folks were, and would say, “ If you please, gentle-
men, can I come and do the room ?” She was answered, “Oh,
yes, come in, that’s right ; I never saw such a woman as
you are ; always putting things to rights, and turning one
out of bed.”
By the time all were dressed, breakfast was ready, and a
most substantial one it was. The favourite cat “ Caesar ”
got his share, and a fine St. Bernard dog called “ Lion ” was
in great request, and used to go round the table answering to
the different calls for him, and getting considerable portions
of chops in his promenade.
After breakfast the gentlemen used to go away in every
direction ; collecting vegetables from the garden was the
favourite amusement. Mr. M maintained that he had
twenty-four vegetables on the dinner table. Dinner was at
one o’clock; we used to be twenty at dinner during the race
week, or rather the week previous, and all could not be ac-
commodated at the one table, so those who came first sat
down to the long table in the verandah, whilst the remainder
would stand below and have a cloth spread on the verandah ;
these were the “ upper” and “ lower houses.”
Mr. M sat at the head of the table, and his superin-
tendent at the foot; the former would assist Mrs. C. M
and me to the joint before him, but after that he would pass


the dish, saying, “ I hate carving, and only help those I love
best.”
After which license I’m afraid “ Mangling done here”
might have been posted on the dish. Oh ! those amusing
dinners ; how often have I laughed at their recollection '
Of an evening we sometimes rode, and Mr. B very
kindly offered me a most delightful horse of his to ride • the
first time I mounted him, a gentleman whose personal ap-
pearance was very sadly against him held the bridle, but
somehow, just as I was making the spring to the saddle, the
horse shied from the habit, and I went over his tail on to the
ground. Mr. B—— was rather vexed, and said sharply,
“ How could you be so awkward ?” to the unfortunate man,
who looked despair. As he was answering “He shied from
me,” the servant woman had come up, and said crossly, “No
wonder he shied at you, so /mgly as you /hire ; ” which
caused a general laugh.
Tea was brought in at seven o’clock, and soon after that
meal was over wine and spirits were placed on the table,
and we two ladies did not remain very long after that in the
sitting-room, but retired to Mrs. C. M ’s room.
On the morning of the races all were astir at a very early
hour; there was no need for calling them ; and there
was such a demand for looking-glasses. Gentlemen are
naturally vain, although they “ do not wish it known; ” but
there was an excuse for some of the party at Salisbury liking
to look at their good faces ■ I know / liked to look at them,
and I was perfectly disinterested.
Mr. C. M drove his wife in a tandem ; I rode, ac-
companied by eight cavaliers. We had twenty-two miles to
ride to the racecourse, which was close to Armidale, the com-
missioner’s station. The latter being from home, Mrs. C.
M and I had possession of his room. His domicile
was a small hut of three rooms, very badly finished outside,
but when you went inside you felt quite astonished how
very snug a building of the sort may be made. It was not
neater than our commissioner’s cot, but more as if a lady
were its inmate : the drawing-room furnished so well, and
on a round table in the centre of the room annuals placed
on it in such a tasty manner, and five good engravings hang-
ing on the walls. The dining-room was covered with oil


cloth, and on either side of the fire-place was a nice
collection of books. The bedroom was small, but very
comfortable; the toilette-table prettily ornamented with
articles in silver, crystal and china; and three paintings of
exceedingly pretty female forms, nicely framed and well
hung, showing the owner to be a man of taste.
At twelve o’clock the races commenced ; there were some
tolerable horses amongst the collection, but the principal
winner was an old chesnut stock horse, and it was amusing
as well as sad to see the good animal walked about when
every other horse was taken into his stable, because, if he
once got cool, he would take hours to thoroughly warm
again, so as to be able to gallop !
The gentlemen used to dine at a house some distance
from the commissioner’s, and Mrs. C. M and I by
ourselves. After dinner Messrs. M and A. McL
always joined us, and how much I enjoyed those evenings.
We used to retire soon after ten o’clock : and four gentle-
men had beds made up for them in the drawing-room, and
Mr. C. M slept in the dining-room.
The first night we two ladies had just gone to bed when
we heard some one go quietly into the drawing-room, and
make himself comfortable on one of the couches ; the man
servant went in and told him not to go there, as all the beds
were bespoken by other people; but the person would not
mind, so we thought it right to send up for Mr. A. McL ,
Mrs. C. M ’s brother. Accordingly down he came,
accompanied by Mr. M ; they tried their persausive
powers with the intruder; however, nothing could make him
move. We ladies stood by the window shivering in our
dishabille , the night as dark as Erebus, and as cold as it
could well be: at last we shook hands with our two unsuc-
cessful allies, and they departed in peace.
This was more than those did who came after. Very
soon Messrs. M , B , and my husband arrived, and
the scene reminded us of the three bears in the fable, in-
quiring who had “been sitting in my chair,” etc. Our
neighbour had locked the door to prevent further intrusion,
so Mr. B jumped in through the window, and, in so doing,
broke a pretty lamp that was on the table; he then unfas-
tened the door, and the rest of the party entered the room ;


then commenced Act the first, but scene the second. The
intruder was pulled out of bed, and had to put on his
clothes at the door-way ; during the time he was thus en-
ployed he kept on vindicating his conduct, by saying, “ The
commissioner told me to come to his house and stay,
whether he was at home or not. When he came down my
way I gave him a jolly good bed, and jolly good grub ; and
he said / should have the same when I came his way.”
How we laughed ! Soon all was quiet, and young “ Jolly”
was not heard any more then ; but the following morning
he apologised. I’ve often wondered what for ? Whether for
his giving the trouble of being pulled out of bed, instead of
jumping out ? I’m astonished that he did not offer to pay
for the broken lamp. Perhaps he did, and I was not told
the fact.
The second morning of the races Mr. C. M missed
all his clothes from his bed-side. Mr. Macdonald’s servant
was asked about them, but knew nothing of their where-
abouts ; twice he went in search but returned unsuccessful ;
the third time was a little more fortunate and brought in the
breeches. Now these without gaiters or leggings were awk-
ward-looking, and especially as the wearer had on socks in-
stead of stockings. At last he said to his wife and I, “Do
you know where there is a long-tailed coat ?” His wife
laughed in her quiet way, but I, more bent on mischief,
looked about and found a handsome flowered silk dressing-
gown. Was ever anything more apropos .? “ Now put it on
quickly, do, and go and ask everybody where your leggings
are ? ” said I. Away he went, and paraded up and down
in front of the house, asking man, woman, and child if they
had seen his clothes ? Some looked cross, others laughed,
and I could contain my merriment no longer, when he
exclaimed—
“ Some of you must know, that’s clear.”
Mr. M , senior, in the meantime, had noticed a large
cat, very like one which he had lost some time previously ;
and he made a chassez across the enclosure and, seizing the
cat in his arms, said—
“ My long-lost Alcibiades, and do you wander here, or were
you stolen?” The servant-man, who was near, said very
quaintly, “ Oh ! sir, that ’un isn’t Alcibiades, he’s Barbarous .”
We ladies did not remain long at the races, but each
H


minute I regretted not having the gift of being able to take
sketches, for I might almost have filled a book with rare
ones. The party, after dinner, were merrier and noisier a
little ; we could even hear snatches of songs, such as “Jolly
nose,” “ A bushman’s life is the life for me,” “ Rome, Rome,
thou art no more,” “ Who deeply drinks of wine,” and
sundry others.
The third day I only remained for one race, and rode
home with my own escort, as I called my two kind travel-
ling companions up the MacLeay. Three days more I re-
mained at Salisbury, and then left all there with regret.
We started, six in number, to return to Port Macquarie by
the dray road, not the way we had gone ; and we reached
our first stage, Mr. McL ’s station, at seven o’clock in the
evening. This was the prettiest and neatest station I had
seen in New England.
The country about the cottage was what I had not seen
anywhere else, prettily timbered. The paddock was quite
park-like, the garden in front of the cottage neatly kept, the
hut itself very tidy, but very bachelor-like, with guns and
whips ornamenting the walls (these were papered, quite an
uncommon thing). I was at one hut where the master had
tried to paint the walls to resemble paper ; the colors were
pink and black, and they put one in mind of a jail door,
studded with nails.
Mr. McL came in from a ride soon after our arrival,
and we sat down to a very good dinner ; indeed, everything
was very comfortable in and about this establishment.
The next morning Mr. McL drove me in his tandem
to Messrs. Todd and Fenwick’s station; I don’t remember
how many miles. I did not think of the distance, for I was
so delighted with my kind companion’s company and driving.
He is dead, poor soul; I may therefore praise him and his
accomplishments with impunity. We passed Mr. Rusden’s,
and the gentlemen tried some good ale there. This Mr.
Rusden had given me a handsome dog, but he was from
home when we reached there, and I could not therefore get
the animal.
We next went through Waterloo ; no scene of desolation
was there, no marks of cannon and musket balls ! Oh ! ye
heroes of Waterloo, what would you say to a sheep station
being called after the plains on which ye bled ? As well


might one have expected to see his Grace, the immortal
Duke of Wellington, turned shepherd. The place put all
historical recollections out of my mind. Further on our
route we stopped to take our luncheon at the MacLeay falls.
Bruce, in his travels in Abyssinia, gives a most exquisite de-
scription of some falls which he passes. Would that I were
able, either with pen or pencil, to describe these that I saw,
or even to describe what I thought of them. I will, how-
ever, say this much, that I never remember seeing a more
grand scene in all my travels. The country around is far
from pretty, and the main road does not go close to the
falls, so that a person may easily pass them without seeing
anything of this wild gap. We had gone some distance
past when I said to Mr. McL , “ But where are these
falls ? ” He looked round, and saw that we had passed them.
We returned, and the horses were taken out of harness to
graze about; and then we walked to the head of the falls.
The basins from whence the water descends were dry, so
that I lost more than half of the beauty of the view in the
torrent’s dash into the chasm below, the sides of which are
very precipitous, and look like a huge mass of rock rent in
twain. I was told that a rifle had been fired from the side
on which we stood, and that the bullet struck the opposite
side, so that the width is not so very considerable ; but its
beauty consists in its extreme singularity and wildness. It
brought quite a melancholy feeling with it; and as we were
trying its echo, I said, “ Friends of my youth, where are
they?” but before echo could answer “ where are they?”
my companion made some pretty little kind speech, and I
lost the shadow in the substance.
The rest of our party soon joined us, when we partook of
luncheon, pic-nic fashion. I had the gig cushions nicely
arranged for me to lie on, and was obliged to feel eastern.
It is very pleasant to be the only lady with a large party :
everybody is so attentive and considerate ; one is so petted.
And I must allow that I liked two things very much, namely,
attention and admiration. This may be easily accounted
for, when, in the first place, I was only a woman (and all
ladies are fond of both, although they will not all confess to
it) ; and, in the second place, I had been all my life in the
army, where, if we cannot call for “ attention,” we may at
all events “ stand at ease.”


Before we proceeded on our journey, Mr. McL and
I were seated in his gig, and the rest of the travellers had
started, thinking we were just behind them. He wished me
to promise him something or other, and asked me to tell
him some ridiculous wish that I had expressed days before,
and which he had only caught the commencement of. I re-
fused, and he said if I did not do what he asked he would
drive over the falls. He drove to the very edge, his leader’s
forefeet were positively on the brink, and a move either
side would have sent us over. He looked very intently at
me, and said, “ Shall we go ?” I answered, “As you please:
I have little to regret; but we will go together ” —and I put
my arm inside his. Poor Mr, McL ! He said, so
quietly, “ Well, I cannot frighten you, so we’ll back out of
this and, calling to “Jingle,” the very prince of tandem-
leaders, he turned round and drew us out of the dilemma.
This animal was so wonderfully instinctive and clever; his
master would ride him in quiet, but with anybody else he
would buck-jump. Mr. McL once made a bet that he
would ride Jingle over his stockyard slip-rails at night, lighted
by a candle on each post by the rails, and he carried out his
bet.
After the above little adventure we proceeded on our
road, and reached Messrs. Todd and Fenwick’s station ; the
latter gentleman vyas at home, and came out to meet us. I
was walking into the verandah of the cottage, when some
one called out, “ Mind the dog.” I made my way quickly
to the other side of the way, when I heard some one, as I
thought, laugh ; when, on turning to see who it was, to my
horror I espied my great aversion, a monkey. I thought to
myself that I should never be safe until fairly housed, so in
I went. The interior was snug, and the book case in literary
confusion, bachelor-like, and over this hung thirteen brushes
of wild dogs, and on the opposite wall a good picture of
Potiphar’s wife.
Mr. Fenwick did the honours of his house well, and after
I had gone to my room he sang a song! Another gen-
tleman, a clever, eccentric being, who was fairly tired, sunk
on the floor fast asleep. This would not do for the rest of
the community, so they insisted on his getting up and singing
“ Jolly nose.” That song had become very popular in New
England, the chorus having great charms, seemingly ; and I


believe I lost considerably on that especial occasion, not
witnessing the gestures accompanying it. The singer was
so vexed at being aroused, that, once started, he determined
to give the company enough of it, and long after his being
entreated to stop, he continued calling out (for he had no
tune in his voice) “ Jolly nose !”
Although there was rain enough the following morning to
allow of the gentlemen saying New England was weeping at
my departure, we once more started on our tour. Mr.
M‘L was again my Jehu, and certainly no one ever
drove better than he did.
He had a thorough command over his horses with-
out seeming to have, and they knew his voice directly,
although I never heard him cross with them but once,
and that once on the day of which I am writing. The
roads were very greasy, but that only served to amuse us
the more, witnessing the sliding which some horses made.
Dr. Carlyle’s horse fell with him three successive times, at
each of which my companion would say, “ Hold up, Doctor ;
go ahead ! ” Another of the party said he would follow us
immediately, and remained at Mr. Fenwick’s.
When we reached a desperate scrub, about seven miles
on the rood, we found the rain coming down in torrents, so
we all thought it prudent to return, with the exception of
two who had gone on before us. We again went to Mr.
Fenwick’s, where the sun was shining finely ; and some of
the gentlemen were preparing to go for a hunt, amongst
the number our deserter; and Messrs. McL and A.
McL joined the party. Dr. Carlyle and my husband
went fast asleep in their chairs, so I walked out to see the
environs.
The hunting party returned without any game, and the
evening passed much as the previous one.
The following day we again made a start, and Mr.
McL drove me to the scrub, but before getting there the
horse in the shafts laid down in a mud hole; we had to
dismount and try to make another, sadly misnamed “Job,”
go as wheeler, but not he; nobody’s horse was ever more
troublesome. Job would not stir. “ Can nobody give me
a stick?” said his master. One was procured, but my being
there saved the old gentleman from getting what he most
decidedly deserved; although I must say that lam of the


same opinion as the man who sings, “If I had a donkey,”
et cetera.
At length we got the horse to go, and then we soon
reached the rest of the party ; and I there parted from my
kind driver for ever : and, leaving New England and its
characters behind us, we rode on.
We had heard a great deal of the dreadful state of the
roads, the mud we should see, and all sorts of uncomfortable
things; but for once I found a traveller’s tale did not
exaggerate. I never could have imagined anything to equal
it ! In some places sticks were thrust into the centre of the
road to warn dray drivers not to go there, as the mud
was four feet deep. We met several drays, some broken
down, others on the verge of it. The drivers would say to me,
“ They will have to carry you, ma’am ! ” One dray had an
investment of monkeys on it, and there they sat, the hideous
creatures, grinning at us and our misfortunes. I never was
fond of monkeys; they seem to me such a burlesque on
human nature, but of course they cannot help that. An
acquintance of mine in Sydney had a marmotte, and one
day, when her master was out of the house, she got posses-
sion of a tiny baby belonging to the landlady of the house.
The mother, hearing the child’s cries, ran upstairs to where
it was, and there found the marmotte picking out the
infant’s brains. The animal would not let the mother near
her child ; and she sent off for the owner, who could do
nothing with the beast but beat it out of the room, and it
then got out on the top of the houses where it was shot by
a sentry of the Treasury. The infant, of course, died im-
mediately ; and I never see a monkey without thinking of
this sad story.
We had some luncheon about half-way on our road, as we
were to make a constable’s station some long way on. I
began to think we never should get there. Oh ! how I
ached with fatigue ; and when we did reach our destination
late at night I had begun to faint and finished it in the hut.
I never experienced anything before or since, like the fatigue
of that night. I was carried on to a small stretcher in an
inner room of the hut, and when I awoke from my swoon
I saw something near me like a body hanging from the
beams, whilst the moon shone through a small hole in the
outer wall, and gave the thing in question a most ghastly


look; so I again closed my eyes, and did not open them
until Dr. Carlyle took my hand and asked me if I felt
better. I then motioned to the figure. He laughed gently,
and said, “ Oh ! that is a sheep.”
The constable made us very comfortable. Mr. S
slept in the larder with the sheep ; this saved me any more
visions of dead bodies.
The next morning I did not feel any better, or more
rested, but I was determined to go on with my journey, and
reach Yesabba, if possible, on the day which I had named.
Mr. A. McL procured a gig and drove me to Yanas.
This was a station of Major Innes’. It is beautifully
situated, and the hotel made it quite a resort for the neigh-
bouring “ nobility and gentry.”
When we had entered the sitting-room, and Messrs.
C and S were sitting talking to me, a most fascin-
ating barmaid made her appearance ; she came up towards
me, rubbing her hands, and asked me if I would take any-
thing ? I was answering, when she of a sudden saw Mr.
S and made a bound towards him, saying, at the
same time, “Oh ! Mr. S , how are you ?” My neigh-
bour was most certainly taken aback, and appeared quite
shy; that, I thought, was the effect of sleeping in company
of a sheep. “ Very well, thank you, Mrs. Graham,”
answered he, and they both sneaked out of the room
together, evidently to finish their conversation without
witness. What bewitching persons some of these barmaids
are.
I was glad to rest myself whilst the gentlemen had
luncheon, so I retired to a bed-room, and here Mrs. Graham
joined me. She said they had expected us there to dinner
the previous evening, as Major Innes said I should go then.
When we were sitting down to dinner she said to Mr. W ,
“ I’m afraid poor Mrs. B has met with some accident,
and broken some of her bones.” Then, seeing me look ill,
she said, “ You had better persuade your party to remain
to-night, and rest yourself,” but all her persuasions were of
no avail, and at ten o’clock I sent in to ask the gentlemen
if they were ready to start ? An affirmative being returned,
we prepared to continue our way to Big-house. Mr.
S then took the reins in his hand, and he got not a
little quizzing about Mrs. Graham.


We arrived at Big-house at six o’clock, just in time for
dinner. Three gentlemen greeted us on our arrival, and
at first sight I thought that one of them had arisen from his
bed, and forgotten to take off his night coiffure; but on
inspection I found this an erroneous opinion; it was
merely a skull cap, to keep his brains from scattering , as he
had had a very bad fall from his horse.
The gentlemen who own this station have a very nice
cottage in a frightfully ugly situation, like “ toad-in-a-hole.”
You may here study canine anatomy with ease if so
disposed, as one may count the dogs’ ribs and joints
without trouble. I could not at first understand why the
most part of the horses near the cottage looked so like
living skeletons, until I was given to know that a dark species
of farriery (not White’s) was practised by one of the hospit-
able hosts, who had studied the veterinary art.
We were kindly invited to remain the next day, Sunday,
at Big-house, but I was obliged to refuse, as I was most
anxious to get to Yesabba. We had some very disagreeable
road to get over before we passed Colonel Grey’s estate on
the Hastings river. In one of the worst places, Mr. S ,
who was driving me, wished to take a rise in the world, so,
without the three half-pence more, up went the gig, and very
nearly out went I. He jumped out in the most active
manner, dancing a sort of Jim Crow step on the off-wheel,
to try and steady the vehicle, while he called to me in loud
tones, “My conscience ! jump out." In the first place, a
lawyer is never supposed to have a conscience (although
this one was called “ the honest lawyer’’); in the next, to
have the conscience to upset me was rather too much of
that commodity. Then, again, where was I to jump to ?
In my season of distress up came Mr. A. McL to
help to extricate me from my perilous situation, and in
a soothing tone said, “ I will take you.” Immediately he
seized me by the waist and deposited me in a mud hole.
Oh ! ye continental tourists, ye happy ones who can see a
country through a railroad carriage window, imagine your-
selves in my plight; and I, who detested mud so much.
There I stood quietly awaiting my fate like a good Mussul-
man ; and when I said, “ Why did you not take me a little
further?” he answered, “I thought if I carried you any
longer you would kick me.” Was ever woman so vilified ?


When out of that scrape we got on famously, and reached
Thrumster about 4 o’clock, and Mr. Taylor lent us his
horse to go into the settlement, as our two were so very
jaded. So we got to Mr. S ’sin Port Macquarie in good
time, and remained there all night. Two of our friends
came down to see us, and said that our horses were under-
going an inspection from the “ townies,” who considered us
very courageous people to have trusted ourselves on such
skeletons. And there ended my New England peregrination,
a truly delightful one, notwithstanding the mud.
CHAPTER VII.
HOME AGAIN.
husband and I also made a pleasant trip from
Yambuck to a beautiful part of the Portland Bay
StelSls district, the Wannon. In those days there were
but few settlers, but they were most hospitable and kind.
We drove in our gig and two horses, in outrigger fashion,
the roads very rough and uneven in some places, but we
passed a pleasant ten days at the houses of Messrs. H
At the one station a pack of hounds were kept, and one
day we went out with them, I riding a horse of Mr. H ’s.
We had to go the pace when the dogs once took scent, and
up and down the undulations we went, and keeping very
well with them, until they crowned a hill before we came up
to them, but shortly had them in view again, and a laugh-
able sight it was. In the midst of the pack stood a man
holding a dog as high as he could out of the reach of the
eager pack. I wonder how it was that they did not tear the
man to pieces. The “ whipper-in ” drove them off their
prey, and, after a hearty laugh at Mr. H——, in which he
joined, we rode back to the house.
We remained some days with our kind friends, and then
turned our heads towards Portland. We had to go through
some frightful roads, the horse in the outrigger being some-
times in a pitiable plight, as the track was so worn by dray-
wheels that the poor animal was at times quite in a dell


while his comrade was enacting the part of “ high horse,”
and looking down on his friend. On the second day the
horse in the shafts fell and broke one of them ; this was
pleasant, and more especially so as it poured with rain at
the time, and we had to get out and mend the broken limb.
We had rope with us, and so we were not very long fixing
it, and soon after got to an inn, at the door of which stood
two fine young men, Messrs. White and Vansittart; they had
not been there very long, but long enough to have had
dinner, and were now smoking their pipes. One of them
kindly assisted me to alight, and when I got into the house
I found myself perfectly drenched to the skin by the rain.
Now, I was provided with under-clothes, but had only the
one dress, so what was I to do ? Sit by the fire whilst it
dried rolled in a blanket, or stay in bed ? Neither of these
two courses were adopted ; the obliging landlady said, if I
would wear a dress of her’s that had just arrived from the
milliner’s, and was perfectly new, she would bring it for me
with pleasure. So I arrayed myself in a handsome merino
dress, which, although a misfit, still was preferable to my
own damp one. My husband went to pass the evening with
the two gentlemen, and I was highly amused between my
book, a sketch of Napoleon crossing the Alps, and a cat
with four kittens : the latter would go on with such absurd
antics that I every now and then would burst into a fit of
laughter ; whereupon the young things would stand still and
put up their backs into such royal arches that even masonry
could not rival.
I was not introduced to the two gentlemen who were at
the inn until the morning following our arrival, and then
just before we left our room to go into the breakfast-room ;
we all had that meal together, and very sociable it was, as
both our acquaintances were pleasing. They are both dead,
poor fellows ! The one had been educated for the church,
and had had a living in England ; but he left the church
owing to his having had a severe reprimand from his Bishop
for attending a christening in his red hunting coat under his
surplice. When I met him he had just received a letter
from home containing the agreeable intelligence that he
was the possessor of twelve thousand pounds.
We agreed before leaving the inn that Mr. Vansittart
should join our company at an hotel in Portland, and in the


evening we again met, and passed a pleasant one. The
ensuing day we passed much together, and I felt quite
interested in him.
He rode with us to Yambuck when we returned, and a
most amusing scene occurred at the Surrey river, a few
miles from Portland. There were no bridges to cross on, and
we had to go through all; the rain having fallen heavily
of late had caused the rivers to rise and they were unsafe :
as we neared the Surrey, my companion said, “ I’m not
going into that water to be drowned, I can tell you ! ”
To which I answered that I saw no danger if we kept the
horses well in to the sea, into which the river was running
rapidly. I must admit that the look of the fresh and salt
waters meeting was anything but quiet, and the horse in the
shafts did not approve of the crossing. Mr. Vansittart had
never seen the place before, and as he came up with us he
said, “ Let me go first, and see if all is right !” I told him
he had better not go if he was not very sure of his horse,
and Mr. B , himself horribly frightened, said, “Oh !
there’s not the slightest danger on horseback; I would go in
a minute if I were on my horse ! ” I told our friend to keep
well in the surf, and on he went. As he was nearly safe on
the opposite side a heavy wave came in, and almost swept
his horse off his legs : the rider got a thorough drenching,
but arrived safely on the hummock close by, where he got
off his horse and unsaddled him to let him roll in the sand.
I then urged my husband to move on. For some time he
would not stir; but at last I said we had better go back
than remain like two born idiots on the cold beach: so we
went into the sea, and were getting on nicely when a wave
came to us sooner than we expected, and the horse in the
shafts laid down to receive it. Our feet were over the splash-
board, and the water came into the body of the gig in nice
style. “ I’ll go no further,” said Mr. B ; “we shall be
drowned ! ” Mr. Vansittart had caught and saddled his
horse again to come to my assistance, but I made a sign or
him to remain, and, leaning over the gig as well as I could,
I commenced stirring up the frightened horse, which caused
him to recover his legs and his senses, and, as my com-
panion was about to turn round to return to Portland, I
gave “ Greybeard,” the outrigger horse, a slight tap with my
parasol, and he dashed through surf and sand, dragging the


other horse with him. Our friend praised my presence of
mind, as he called it; but I said my presence of body was
worth more just then.
We got to Yambuck in the evening, and Mr. Vansittart
passed a week at our station; and then he left and I never
met him again. I must, however, mention that when we
reached Yambuck the servant told me she had heard some
very sad cries in the afternoon down at the blacks’ camp,
but she did not like to go from the house. I went down
immediately after dinner, and although it was dark I made
my way, with the help of my dogs, to the place where a poor'
lubra was lying in a dying state, and I never saw so pitiable
a creature. She lingered for a week, during which time I
was constantly running down to see her, and was sometimes
accompanied by Mr. Vansittart, who showed considerable
feeling. We went over to the camp where all the others of
her tribe had gone, and found out from them and an elderly
white man about her, and how she came to be left and
completely unattended. What sufferings that poor creature
underwent, neglected, unattended, almost starved at times ;
not a soul to care or mourn for her. Generally speaking, the
blacks of a tribe have a death-lament more mournful than a
pibroch, if possible ; but she had no cry but that of the wild
dogs, who came down to her grave in packs, seemingly;
and I expected they would have torn her up again only for
the large logs of wood that I had placed on the mound.
It is frequently said, and more often thought , that if we
were in such and such situations what good we would do.
Of course, clergymen and doctors may see more distress, and
consequently, if inclined, do more good than most persons ;
but I’m convinced that, in whatever sphere we move, or
wherever we may be, good may be done to our fellow-
creatures. This was strongly exemplified in this wild country
in bye-gone days. True, we never saw a beggar; all were
provided for, and the working class better than any : but the
poor blacks were totally ignorant and savage. Three
times, within a short period, were white men lost in the bush
near to us, and nearly starved from the coldness of the
nights. One day the blacks brought up a poor fellow whom
they found sitting by the next river to this (the Eumeralla),
crying bitterly. He was half crazy, and I made him drink
some beer, warm with spices, which seemed very grateful to


him : he remained two days, and I then sent a black to
show him the road.
On the station next to ours lived a superintendent, who,
although a good-natured person, was far from trying to
pacify and make friends with the natives. One day he
found they had been robbing his potatoes, so he followed
them, and, on coming up to their camp, very wrongly fired
in amongst them. I really don’t think he intended com-
mitting murder, but he certainly did so, as the boy into
whose leg the slugs went died from the wounds. I deter-
mined on making him miserable for a time, so I procured a
summons and signed a fictitious name to it. He came to
see me, and I gave the paper to him. He examined it,
turned it over and over, and then said—
“ Who is this Mr. Smyly ? Do you know him ? When
did this come ?”
All these queries I answered, and then said the summons
had been given to me, and I had said I would see him get
it; all of which was true. He turned quite pale, and I told
him if he liked I would lose the paper.
“ No, I’ll go through with it,” said he ; “ it was quite a
mistake, my shooting the child ; but my father always said
I should be hanged, and now I’m in for it.”
I begged of him not to thiftk too much of it, that perhaps
he would only be tried for “ manslaughter,” and transported.
He said —
“ I’ll go anywhere, I’ll do anything they wish, but it must
be alone, without a policeman and handcuffs ; if it comes to
that, I’ll cut my throat.”
1 told him if he refused to go they would send him by water;
that I should probably be in Melbourne about the time, and
would visit him in jail, and, if necessary, attend to his last
wishes. He seemed to feel the attention, and, in a sort of
manner, promised to leave me his favourite horse “ Jupiter,”
and his dog. For some weeks I carried on the joke, to me,
but the unfortunate man looked more like a ghost than his
former self by the time he was to go down to Belfast to
answer the summons. The night previous to riding down
he came to Yambuck, and sat by the fire rocking himself to
and fro in an agony ; and in the morning, when he was
ready to start, I broke gradually to him that it was all a jest.
His rage was intense. He said he would have me up for


forging a man’s name, and all kinds of things that he could
think of to vent his spleen. For a long time he never came
near the house • but we met at a friend’s some time after,
and one morning before breakfast several of us were
walking by a beautiful clear and deep creek, when I asked
him to jump in to please me, and he did. He had on a
pair of those very long boots in which gentlemen ride, and
these filled with water, and I thought he would have been
drowned. He got out somehow, and then we all laughed at
him very heartily.
Portland, in those early days, had no jetty, and the vessels
were anchored at some distance from the shore.
Whilst I was waiting in town for a severe gale to abate,
so that a vessel then in harbour might be able to sail and
take me to Tasmania, I walked down to the cliff overhang-
ing the bay to watch a boat which had been sent to the said
vessel to bring the captain on shore. The whole town had
been kept in a state of great anxiety as to the fate of four
vessels then in harbour. Two of them went on shore, and
one of these, built of Bermuda cedar, went into the tiniest
pieces in an incredibly short time. One could scarcely
think it possible that so seemingly strong a vessel could be
broken up in little more than.two hours.
A friend and I were watching the boat as she neared the
frightful surf. How intense my anxiety became, and, alas ! it
was but too well founded. The poor souls were first on the
top of a mountainous wave, and then down in a perfect
abyss. At last they were swamped in a trough of the sea.
Oh ! it was a frightful sight indeed ! I had seen sketches
of such scenes, but never but once before witnessed them,
and God grant I never may again see another such.
One man clung to an oar, another to the boat, which was
keel up, and how tenaciously he clung to life, being all the
time dashed about in the tremendous surf. How my heart
throbbed when I saw one brave man dash past the lookers-
on, and enter the surf. I inwardly ejaculated, “ God bless
him!” And how I prayed that he who so gallantly went to
the rescue of his fellow creatures might, if ever in need, find
the same assistance held out to him. I did not know at the
time that it was the lady’s husband with whom I was walking,
and the young bridegroom whom we took compassion on, at
Yambuck.


Immediately he showed the example others followed
him, and five men out of seven were saved from a watery
grave.
It used to be very entertaining to see cattle taken on
board ship from Portland to go to Tasmania. They were
brought down to the beach by men on horseback, next
caught by the horns with a rope attached quickly to a boat,
and then the animal had to swim after his captors until
close to the vessel, when he was hoisted on deck by the
sailors.
All these things are altered now ; and if one mentions any
of the anecdotes which are in these pages, most of the grave
and reverend signiors will say, “Oh ! those were in the
barbarous ages.” But in some respects I think those days
preferable to these, and the bush society decidedly more
agreeable in general, as so many who were only then
working-men are now owners of stations. Times were on
the change when I left in 1848, and even then one might
hear a dray-driver at a publichouse say, “ Give us a bottle
of the stuff that the swells used to drink.” And I have
known one man pay ten shillings for a bottle of Hock, and
then have to drink a glass of brandy to correct the taste;
like the master of a vessel going from Tasmania to England,
who, on being told that the wine on board was acid, said,
“ Sir, it is your stomach what’s aciduous.”
The thing that strikes us as most strange in Australia is
Christmas-day being warm instead of cold, and I have no-
ticed so many years that the 25th of December is invariably
hotter than most other days ; it seems on purpose that we
may be reminded of things so far from our old country,
'fhe day is generally one of carousal with the lower classes,
and a merry time with all. From our earliest childhood this
season is associated with visions of plum-puddings and
mince pies ; then comes the time when we look forward to,
and receive, gifts from friends, always with the hope that the
following Christmas may find us good or improved children.
Then comes school time, the really happy days of our
life, when our joys and sorrows are like April showers.
Which of us scarcely would not gladly hail those days again
with pleasure ? How we looked forward to Christmas for
going home, seeing those we loved, and who loved us ; re-
counting all our sports and mischief while at school, and,


whilst it is impossible to help laughing at our tricks, the
seniors say, with forced gravity, “ Yes, but next Christmas I
hope will find you steadier.”
Can we not all imagine the family groups sitting round a
cheerful fire, the heads of the circle looking at their children,
their children’s children, and, as I have seen, their great-
grandchildren, with a look of honest pride known and felt
only by those favoured members of society ? I have heard
a child ask, “ What is Christmas ?” and answered with,
“ Oh, the time for mistletoe, holly, and all sorts of fun.”
But, methinks a child cannot be too soon taught the true
meaning of the word and season. In this colony we are
glad to throw open windows, and keep blinds down, any-
thing to make ourselves cool at Christmas ; so this alone
tells us that we are from home. What a sweet word home
is; the chez nous and zu Zvugn of our continental neigh-
bours cannot express the meaning of the word home.
“ In every clime the magnet of the soul,
Touch’d by remembrance, trembles to that pole ;
For ’tis a spot of earth to memory blest,
A dearer, sweeter spot than all the rest.”
And yet when we think of leaving the colony, how sorry
we feel to part with the many friends we have made here.
I remark, that everybody speaks of England as
“ home;” so,..wifh ail of a new country, and
there areohfany here which the common run of people do
not enjrfy in Europe, still the old country cannot be for-
gotten /.and this Is as it should be. There is no doubt that
this is a wjjnderful country now, and it has vast wealth and
attraction!', ljst.lh£ imm'cnsp-' drawback is, like America, the
great wanCof^gbod. ‘servants. What would any lady say in
England to a servant who, on being asked if the coffee
boiled, was answered by the servant putting her finger into
the coffee-pot to try. Such a thing happened to me only
a short time ago. Yet the woman was very tidy in her
attire, and wore an immense crinoline.
But I will not enter into occurrences of the present day,
as there are so many other and better narrators of these
than lam; so I shall content myself by closing my little
sketches, and hope they may be read by some of those
persons who have witnessed many of them in my company
W. H. Williams, Printer, 68 Elizabeth street, Melbourne.
