





NORTH MOUNT LYELL COPPER COMPANY,
LIMITED.
SPECIAL RESOLUTION.
Passed 6th July, 1899. Confirmed 21st July, 1899.
At an Extraordinary General Meeting of the North Mount Lyell
Copper Company, Limited, duly convened, and held on the 6th July, 1899,
the subjoined Special Resolution was duly passed, and at a subsequent
Extraordinary General Meeting of the said Company, duly convened, and
held on the 21st July, 1899, the subjoined Special Resolution was duly
confirmed.
RESOLUTION.
That the Articles of Association be altered in manner following:—
1. By inserting in Article 74 after the word “time” in the first line thereof
the following words, viz.:—“previous to the General Meeting in the
year 1900.”
2. By inserting in Article 90 (A) after the word “ than ”in the second line thereof,
the wmrds “ Trustee for Debenture holders or otherwise as ”
3. By striking out from Article 91 the words “or to any agreement for
participation by the Directors with the Company or with third parties in
any transaction in which the Company is interested.”
153-155, Leadenhall Street,
London, B.C.
Filed 22nd July, 1899.
H. MACDONALD,




No. 54,123.
giertificafe of gncorporalton
THE NORTH MOUNT LVELL COPPER
COMPANY, LIMITED.
§ jTfH&JJ ®trtifg that The North Mount Lyell
Copper Company, Limited, is this day Incorporated under “ The
Companies Acts, 1862 to 1893,” and that the Company is Limited.
Given under my hand, at London, this 20th day of September,
One Thousand Eight Hundred and Ninety-seven.
ERNEST CLEAVE,
Assistant-Registrar of Joint Stock Companies.
Fees and Heed Stamps £5O.
Jtamp Duty on Capital £5OO.




THE COMPANIES ACTS, 1862 to 1893.
COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES.
Memorandum of Jte^ociafion
THE NORTH MOUNT LYELL COPPER
COMPANY, LIMITED.
1. The name of the Company is “ The North Mount Lyell
Copper Company, Limited.”
2. The Registered Office of the Company will be situate in
England.
3. The objects for which the Company is established are :
(1.) To acquire and take over the leasehold mines, mining
rights, water rights, easements, lands, buildings, mills,
stamps, plant, machinery, stock, ore and other property
belonging to the North Mount Lyell Mining Company,
No Liability (a company established under the laws of
the Colony of Aictoria), as specified and subject to the
exception mentioned in the Agreement next hereinafter
referred to, and for that purpose to enter into and
carry into effect, with or without modifications, an
Agreement which has already been prepared, and is
expressed to be made between the North Mount Lyell
Mining Company, No liability, by its Attorney, James
Crotty, of the one part, and this Company of the other
part, a draft whereof has, for the purpose of identification,
been initialled by two of the subscribers hereto.


To purchase, take on lease, or acquire by exchange,
license, hire, or otherwise (whether in the Colony of
Tasmania or elsewhere), any mines, mining rights, water
rights, patents or other rights or claims (whether
absolute, exclusive, optional, conditional or limited), and
any lands, buildings, or other kind of property what-
soever, which the Company may think necessary or
convenient for the purposes of its business.
To search for, work, win, quarry, convert, manufacture,
use, crush, wash, smelt, reduce, refine, or otherwise
treat and render marketable, gold, silver, copper, ore
and other mineral and metal substances of all kinds, and
to carry on any other metallurgical operations which
may seem conducive to any of the Company’s objects.
To sell, improve, manage, develop, or otherwise turn to
account or deal with all or any of the property and
rights of the Company.
To buy, sell, manufacture and deal in copper and other
minerals, plant, machinery, implements, conveniences,
provisions and other things capable of being used in
connection with metallurgical operations or refined by
workmen and others employed by the Company.
To erect, construct, establish, or acquire by purchase,
hire, or otherwise, and carry out, maintain, improve,
develop, manage, work, control, and superintend any
roads, ways, bridges, harbours, reservoirs, water works,
gas works, electrical works, canals, tramways, railways,
quays, wharves, furnaces, mills, crushing and hydraulic
works, brick works, factories, warehouses, ships,
steamers, tugs, barges, machinery, locomotives, wagons,
appliances, apparatus, and other works and conveniences
which may seem directly or indirectly conducive to any
of the objects of the Company, and to contribute to,
subsidise, or otherwise aid and take part in any such
constructions, works or operations.
To establish, form, and subsidise or otherwise assist in the
establishment, promotion or formation of any other
companies having for their objects, or some of them,
any of the objects mentioned in this Memorandum, or
the prosecution of any other undertakings or enterprises
of any description having objects which may advance


directly or indirectly the objects of this Company
and to secure, hy underwriting or otherwise, the sub-
scription of all or any part of the share or loan
capital of any such company, and to pay or receive
any commission, brokerages, or other remuneration in
connection therewith.
(8.) To lend or advance money on the security of any kind
of property, rights, stocks, shares, bonds, debenture
stock, mortgages, debentures, obligations, bills, notes or
other instruments or securities, or on the undertaking
of any company or any part thereof.
(9.) To advance money for, or otherwise assist in making
explorations and surveys of every kind, and in
promoting immigration into any country, Colony or
State.
(10.) To guarantee the performance of any contracts or
engagements, and to become liable or responsible for
money, or for the fulfilment of contracts entered into
hy others.
(11.) To borrow or raise money with or without security, and
to secure the payment of money borrowed or raised, and
in particular by the issue of debentures or debenture
stock (perpetual or terminal), bonds, mortgages or any
other security upon such terms as to priority or discount
or otherwise, as shall he thought fit, and to secure the
same if thought fit hy mortgage or charge upon the
undertaking of the Company and all or any of its real
and personal property, present and future, aud all or
any of its uncalled capital, or in any other manner, and
to purchase or redeem (at a premium, if deemed expedient)
any debentures, debenture stock or securities of the
Company.
(12.) To sell, lease, charter, or otherwise dispose of, absolutely,
conditionally, or for any limited interest, the whole or
any part of the undertaking, property, rights, concessions
or privileges of the Company for such consideration in
cash, shares, or otherwise, as the Company may think
fit, and to abandon any part of the business for the time
being of the Company, and to carry on any of the
objects mentioned in this clause, to the exclusion of the


(13.)
(14)
(15.)
(16.)
others, and to acquire or institute any new business
falling within the objects of the Company, or any of
such objects.
To subscribe for, purchase, or otherwise acquire the
shares or stock, whether ordinary, preferred or deferred,
or the debentures, bonds, or other securities of any
company, and to accept the same in payment for any
property sold, or business undertaken, or services
rendered by this Company, and to hold, sell, or other-
wise deal with the same.
To pay for any rights or property acquired by the
Company, or any services rendered to the Company in
fully or partly paid shares or stock, debentures or other
securities of the Company, and to make such payments
or gifts by way of bonus or otherwise, and either in
money or in any other value as may from time to time
he deemed expedient for information or advice given or
for services of any kind rendered to the Company, or
in conjunction with which the Company may he directly
or indirectly interested, and generally to make any
payments or agree to pay any commissions, with or
without any consideration moving to the Company, if it
is considered by the Directors in the interests or directly
or indirectly to the benefit of the Company to do so.
To promote any company for the purpose of acquiring
all or any part of the undertaking, property and
liabilities of the Company. Also to acquire the under-
taking and assets, and undertake the liabilities of any
now existing or future company, and to conduct
liquidate, or wind up the business of any such
company.
To enter into partnership or into any arrangements for
sharing profits, co-operation, reciprocal concession or
otherwise, with any person or company, and to
remunerate any person or persons, joint stock or other
company, by fixed salary or specified remuneration, or
by a share of profits present, past or future, or part one
way and part the other. Also making and carrying into
effect any arrangement for the amalgamation in whole
or in part with any company or person or persons having
the same or similar objects.


(17.)
(18.)
(19.)
(20.)
(21.)
(22.)
To make and carry into effect or determine arrange-
ments with British or foreign manufacturers, railway
and shipping companies, proprietors or charterers of
shipping, carriers, proprietors of steam or other
mechanical power, and other persons or company, or
with any Government or Authority, municipal, local, or
otherwise, and to obtain any rights, privileges and
concessions which may seem desirable.
To do all or any of the above things as principals, agents ?
contractors, or otherwise, and by or through agents or
otherwise, and either alone or in conjunction with
others as may he found expedient.
To pay any commission or brokerage for the purpose of
securing the subscription of any part of the share or
loan capital of this Company, or of any company
promoted by this Company, or in which this Company
is or intends to be interested, and generally to
remunerate any persons for underwriting such capital
or for services rendered in placing, or assisting to place,
or guaranteeing the placing, of any shares, debentures,
or other securities of the Company, or for promoting
or guaranteeing the raising of capital for any other
company, and to underwrite or otherwise guarantee
the subscription for or placing of the share or other
capital of any other company.
To procure this Company to he legalised, domiciled
or recognised in any foreign country or colony, and to
procure its incorporation in a like character or as a
Societe Anonyme in any foreign country and to carry
on the business of the Company, or any part thereof,
in any foreign country or colony, or dependency of the
United Kingdom, or in any part of the world, under
any other style or name.
To draw, accept, make, indorse, discount, and negotiate
bills of exchange, promissory notes, warrants and
other negotiable instruments other than bank notes.
O
To distribute among the Members in specie any property
of the Company, or any proceeds of sale or disposal of
any property of the Company, but so that no
distribution amounting to a reduction of capital be


made except with the sanction (if any) for the time
being required by law.
(23.) To exercise the powers given by “ The Companies’ Seals
Act, 1864,” and “ The Companies (Colonial Registers)
Act, 1888.”
(24.) To establish and support, or aid in the establishment and
support of associations, institutions, funds, trusts, and
conveniences calculated to benefit officers, servants or
persons in the employ of the Company or its predecessors
in business, or the dependants or connections of such
persons, and to grant pensions and allowances, and to
make payments towards insurance, and to subscribe or
guarantee money for charitable or benevolent objects, or
for any exhibition, or for any public, general, or useful
object.
(25.) To do all such acts and things as are incidental or
conducive to the above objects.
(26.) It is expressly declared that the intention is that the
objects set forth in each of the foregoing paragraphs of
this clause shall he construed in the most liberal way,
and shall he in nowise limited or restricted by reference
to any other paragraph, or by inference drawn from
the terms of any other paragraph.
(27.) The word “ Company ” in this clause, when not applied
to this Company, shall he deemed to include any
partnership or other body of persons, whether incor-
porated or not incorporated, and whether domiciled in
the United Kingdom or elsewhere, and whether now
existing or hereafter to he formed.
4. The liability of the Members is limited.
5. The Capital is £500,000, divided into 500,000 Shares of
£1 each.
The Capital of the Company for the time being may be
divided into several classes, and preferential, deferred, qualified, or
special rights, privileges, or restrictions may be attached to the Shares
in any such class, and the rights attached to the Shares respectively
may be varied or abrogated.


the several persons whose names and addresses are subscribed,
are desirous of being formed into a Company in pursuance of
this Memorandum of Association, and we respectively agree to
take the number of Shares in the Capital of the Company set
opposite our respective names.
Number of
Shares taken by
each Subscriber.
NAMES, ADDRESSES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF SUBSCRIBERS.
Alex. Mackay,
138, Leadenball St., E.C.,
Agent.
One.
D. G. Lumsden,
221, Hainault Road,
Leytonstone, N.E.,
Secretary to a Public Company.
One.
Hector A. MacDonald,
52, Great Russell St., W.C
Gentleman,
One,
J. Waddell Black,
13, Sherriff Road,
West Hampstead, N.W.,
Gent.
One.
Norman G. Newington,
76, Ondine Rd., E
Dulwich
Articled Clerk.
One.
Reginald D. Mackenzie,
Solicitor,
Chudleigh, Merstbam, Surrey
One.
H. G. Caryall
52, Mortimer Road,
Kingsland, N.,
Clerk.
One.
Dated this 20tb day of September, 1897.
Witness to the above Signatures: —
J. H. BODELL,
Clerk to Messrs. Renshaw, Kekewich & Smith,
2, Suffolk Lane, London, E.C.,
Solrs.




THE COMPANIES ACTS, 1862 to 1893.
OOMPANTT HAHMUTIBID BY SHARES.
JVrficCes of Jlooocialion
THE NORTH MOUNT LYELL COPPER
COMPANY, LIMITED.
It is Agreed as follows :
I.—PRELIMINARY.
1. The regulations contained in Table “A ” of the First
Schedule to “ The Companies Act, 1862,” shall not apply to this
Company, but the following shall be the regulations of the Company.
2. In the construction of these Articles, the following words
shall have the respective meanings hereby assigned to them, uoless
there he something in the context inconsistent therewith:
(a.) Words denoting the singular number only shall include
the plural number also, and vice versa.
(b.) Words denoting the masculine gender only shall include
the feminine gender also.
(c.) Words denoting persons only shall include corporations.
(d.) “ Special Resolution ” and “ Extraordinary Resolution”
shall have the meanings assigned thereto by Sections 5
and 129 respectively of “ The Companies Act, 1862.”
(e.) “ The Board ” means the Board of Directors for the
time being, including their alternates; and every
provision herein contained relating to a Director shall
apply equally to his alternate qualification for office
excepted.
(f.) “ The Office ” means the registered office for the time
being of the Company.
(g.) “ Month ” means a calendar month.
3. The Board shall forthwith affix the seal to the Agreement
mentioned in paragraph (1) of Clause 3 of the Memorandum of


Association, and shall cany the same into effect, with full power
nevertheless from time to time to agree to any modification of the
terms thereof either before or after its execution, the basis on which
the Company is established being that the Company shall acquire the
property comprised in the said Agreement on the terms therein set
forth, subject to such modification (if any) as aforesaid, and accordingly
it shall he no objection to the said Agreement that the promoters of
the Company are making a profit on the sale to the Company, or
that the Directors or some of them are vendors to or promoters of
the Company, or interested in the purchase money, or otherwise stand
in a fiduciary relation to the Company, or that under the circumstances
the Directors do not form a Board independent of the Vendors, and
every Member of the Company, present and future, shall he deemed
to join the Company on this basis, and to assent to the Directors and
promoters respectively retaining any profit made by them respectively
on the sale to the Company, without being liable to account for such
profit.
II. —CAPITAL.
1. SHADES.
4. The Shares of the Original Capital of the Company may be
allotted, or otherwise disposed of, to such persons, and for such
consideration, and upon such terms and conditions as the Board
may determine; subject to the terms of the said agreement with
reference to the Share to he allotted in pursuance thereof, and
the Board may subject as aforesaid make arrangements on the
issue of any Shares for a difference between the holders of such
Shares in the amount of Calls to be paid, and the time of payment
of such Calls.
5. If several persons are registered as joint holders of any Share,
their liability in respect thereof shall be several as well as joint.
6. If by the conditions of allotment of any Share the whole or
any part of the amount thereof is payable by instalments, every such
instalment shall when due he paid to the Company by the person who
for the time being is the registered holder of such Share.
7. The executors or administrators of a deceased Member, not
being a joint holder, and in the case of the death of a joint holder,
the survivor or survivors, shall alone he recognised by the Company
as having any title to the Shares registered in the name of the
deceased Member, but nothing herein contained shall be taken to
release the estate of a deceased joint holder from any liability on
Shares held by him jointly with any other person.


8. The Company shall not be bound by, or be compelled in any
way to recognise, even when having notice thereof, any other right
in respect of a Share than an absolute right thereto in the registered
holder thereof for the time being, or such other rights in case of
transmission thereof as are hereinafter mentioned.
9. The funds of the Company shall not he expended in the
purchase of, or lent upon the security of its own Shares.
2. CERTIFICATES OE SHARES.
10. Every Member shall be entitled without payment to one
Certificate under the Common Seal of the Company, specifying the
Shares held by him and the amount paid up thereon.
11. The Certificate of Shares registered in the names of joint
holders shall be delivered to the holder whose name stands first on
the Register of Members.
12. If a Certificate be worn out, destroyed, or lost, it may be
renewed upon payment of one shilling (or such less sum as the
Company in General Meeting may prescribe) upon the production
of such evidence of its having been worn out, destroyed, or lost, as
the Board may consider satisfactory, and upon such indemnity, with
or without security, as the Board may require.
3. CALLS ON SHARES.
13. The Board may from time to time (subject to any terms
upon which any Shares may have been issued) make such Calls as
they think fit upon the Members in respect of all moneys unpaid on
their Shares, and not by the terms of allotment made payable at fixed
times. Provided that no Call shall exceed 25 per cent, of the nominal
amount of a Share, or be made payable within two months after the
last preceding Call was payable. Each Member shall be liable to
pay the Calls so made to the persons and at the times and places
appointed by the Board.
11. A Call shall be deemed to have been made at the time
when the resolution of the Board authorising such Call was
passed.
15. If any Call payable in respect of any Share, or any money
payable on any Share under the terms of allotment thereof, be not


paid on or before the day appointed for payment, the holder or allottee
of such Share shall be liable to pay interest upon such Call or money
from such day until it is actually paid at any rate fixed by the Board,
not exceeding £lO per cent, per annum. But the Directors may
when they think fit remit altogether or in part any such sums
becoming payable for interest under this clause.
16. The Board may, if they think fit, receive from any Member
willing to advance the same all or any part of the money unpaid
upon any of the Shares held by him beyond the sums actually called
for, either as a loan repayable, or as a payment in advance of Calls,
but such advance, whether repayable or not, shall, until actually
repaid, extinguish, so far as it shall extend, the liability existing upon
the Shares in respect of which it is received. Upon the money so
received, or upon so much thereof as from time to time exceeds the
amount of the Calls then made upon the Shares in respect of which
such advance has been made, the Company shall pay interest at such
rate as the Member advancing the same and the Board may agree
upon.
4. TRANSFER AND TRANSMISSION OF SHARES.
17. The Transfer of any Share in the Company not represented
by a warrant to bearer shall be in writing in the usual common form
and shall be signed by the transferor and transferee. There shall be
paid to the Company in respect of the registration of any transfer a
fee of two shillings and sixpence, or such less amount as the Board
may direct.
18. The Board may decline to register any Transfer of Shares
upon which the Company has a lien, and in the case of Shares not
fully paid up may refuse to register a Transfer to a transferee of
whom they do not approve. No transfer of Shares shall be made to
an infant or a person of unsound mind.
19. The instrument of transfer shall be lodged with the Com-
pany, accompanied by the certificate of the Shares comprised therein,
and such evidence as the Board may require to prove the title of the
transferor, and thereupon and upon payment of the proper fee the
transferee shall (subject to the Board’s right to decline to register
hereinbefore mentioned and to their approval of the title of the
transferor) be registered as a Member in respect of such Shares, and
the instrument of transfer shall be retained by the Company. The
Board may waive the production of any certificate upon evidence
satisfactory to them of its loss or destruction.


20. Any person becoming entitled to a Share in consequence of
the death or bankruptcy of a Member, or otherwise than hy transfer,
may, subject to the regulations hereinbefore contained, be registered
as a Member upon production of the Share Certificate and such
evidence of title as may be required by the Board, or may, subject to
the said regulations, instead of being registered himself, transfer such
Share. There shall he paid to the Company in respect of any regis-
tration on transmission a fee of two shillings and sixpence, or such
less amount as the Board deem fit.
5. LIEN ON SHABES.
21. The Company shall have a first and paramount lien on all
Shares not fully paid up, and on the interest and dividends declared
or payable in respect thereof, for all moneys due to and liabilities
subsisting with the Company from or on the part of the Begistered
Holder or any of the Begistered Holders thereof, either alone or
jointly with any other person, whether the period for payment,
fulfilment or discharge thereof shall have actually arrived or not, and
may enforce such lien by sale or forfeiture of all or any of the Shares
on which the same may attach. Provided that such sale or forfeiture
shall not be made, except in the case of a debt or liability, the period
for payment, fulfilment or discharge whereof shall have arrived, and
that only so many Shares shall be so forfeited as the Auditors of the
Company shall certify to be the equivalent, at the then market value,
of such debt or liability.
6. EOBEEITUBE AND SUBBENDEB OE SHABES.
22. If any Member fail to pay any call or money payable under
the terms of allotment of a Share, on the day appointed for payment
thereof, the Board may, at any time while the same remains unpaid,
serve a notice on him requiring him to pay the same, together with
any interest that may have accrued thereon, and any expenses that
may have been incurred by the Company by reason of such non-
payment.
23. The notice shall name a further day, not being less than
seven days from the service of the notice, on or before which such call
or other money, and all interest and expenses that have accrued by
reason of such non-payment are to be paid, and the place where
payment is to be made (the place so named being either the
Begistered Office of the Company, or some other place at which calls
of the Company are usually made payable), and shall state that in the
event of non-payment on or before the day and at the place appointed,


the Share in respect of which such payment is due will be liable to be
forfeited.
24. If the requisitions of any such notice as aforesaid are not
complied with, the Share in respect of which such notice has been
given may at any time thereafter, before payment of all money due
thereon with interest and expenses shall have been made, he forfeited
by a resolution of the Board to that effect. Such forfeiture shall
include all dividends in respect of the forfeited Share not actually
paid before the forfeiture.
25. Any Share forfeited shall be deemed to be the property of
the Company, and may he held, re-allotted, sold, or otherwise disposed
of in such manner as the Board think fit, and in case of re-allotment
with or without any money paid thereon by the former holder being
credited as paid up; but the Board may at any time before any Share
so forfeited shall have been re-allotted, sold, or otherwise disposed of,
annul the forfeiture thereof upon such conditions as they may think fit.
26. Any Member whose Shares have been forfeited shall, not-
withstanding such forfeiture, be liable to pay to the Company all calls
or other money, interest, and expenses owing in respect of such Shares
at the time of forfeiture, together with interest thereon from the time
of forfeiture until payment at the rate of £lO per cent, per annum.
27. The Board may accept the surrender of any Share by way
of compromise of any question as to the holder being properly
registered in respect thereof. Any Share so surrendered may be
disposed of in the same manner as a forfeited Share.
28. In the event of the re-allotment or sale of a forfeited or
surrendered Share, or the sale of any Share to enforce a lien of the
Company, a certificate in writing under the Common Seal of the
Company that the Share has been duly forfeited, surrendered or sold
in accordance with the regulations of the Company shall be sufficient
evidence of the facts therein stated as against all persons claiming the
Share. A certificate of proprietorship shall be delivered to the
purchaser or allottee, and he shall be registered in respect thereof,
and thereupon he shall be deemed the holder of the Share discharged
from all calls or other money, interest and expenses due prior to such
purchase or allotment, and he shall not be bound to see to the
application of the purchase-money or consideration, nor shall his title
to the Share be affected by any irregularity in the forfeiture, surrender
or sale. The remedy of any person aggrieved by the re-allotment
or sale shall be in damages only and against the Company.


7. SHARE WARRANTS TO BEARER.
29. The Board may issue, under the Common Seal of the
Company, Share Warrants to Bearer in respect of any fully paid-up
Shares, and all Shares, while represented by Warrants, shall he
transferable by delivery of the Warrants relating thereto.
30. Any person applying to have a Share Warrant issued to him
shall, at the time of application, pay, if so required by the Board, the
stamp duty (if any) payable in respect thereof, or if the Company
shall previously have compounded for such stamp duty, then such
sum (if any) as the Board may determine in respect of the amount
payable by the Company for such composition, and also such fee as
the Board shall from time to time fix.
31. Subject to the provisions of these Articles and of “The
Companies Act, 1867,” the Bearer of a Share Warrant shall be
deemed to he a Member of the Company to the full extent, hut he
shall not be entitled to attend or vote, personally or by proxy, at any
General Meeting, or to sign a requisition for a Meeting, or join in
convening a Meeting, unless three clear days previously he shall have
deposited the Warrant relating to the Shares in respect of which he
proposes to vote or act at the Registered Office of the Company, or in
the case of holders of Warrants resident abroad at such place as the
Directors may appoint. No Shares represented by Warrants shall he
reckoned in the qualification of a Director.
32. The Company or its agent shall deliver to a Member
depositing a Share Warrant in the manner above mentioned, a certifi-
cate stating his name and address, and the number of Shares represented
by such Share Warrant, and the certificate shall entitle him to attend
and vote at a General Meeting in respect of the Shares specified therein,
in the same way in all respects as if he were a Registered Member.
Upon delivery up of the certificate the Company shall return him the
Share Warrant in respect of which such certificate shall have been
given.
33. No person, as Bearer of a Share Warrant, shall be entitled
to exercise any of the rights of a Member (save as hereinbefore
expressly provided in respect of General Meetings) without producing
such Share Warrant, and stating his name, address, and occupation.
34. The Company shall not he hound by, or he compelled in
any way to recognise, even when having notice thereof, any other


right in respect of the Share represented by a Share W arrant, than
an absolute right thereto in the hearer thereof for the tune being.
35. The Board may provide, by coupons or otherwise, for the
payment of the future Dividends on the Share included in any Share
Warrant, and the delivery up of a coupon shall be a good discharge
to the Company of the Dividend thereby represented.
36. If any Share Warrant be worn out, destroyed, or lost, it
may he renewed on payment of one shilling (or such less sum as the
Company in General Meeting may prescribe) upon the production of
such evidence of its having been worn out, destroyed, or lost, and of
the title of the person claiming the Share represented by it, as the
Board may consider satisfactory, and upon such indemnity, with or
without security, as the Board may require.
37. If the Bearer of a Share Warrant shall surrender it to be
cancelled, together with all outstanding Dividend Coupons issued in
respect thereof, and shall therewith deposit with the Company an
application in writing, signed by him in such form, and authenticated
in such manner, and with such fee, as the Board require, requesting
to be registered as a Member in respect of the Share specified in the
said Share Warrant, and stating in such application his name,
address, and occupation, he shall be entitled to have his name
entered as a Member in the Register of Members of the Company
in respect of the Share specified in the Share Warrant so surrendered.
8. CONSOLIDATION AND SUBDIVISION OB SHARES.
38. The Board may consolidate and subdivide the Shares of the
original Capital of the Company, or any of them, into Shares of a
larger or smaller amount.
39. The resolution of the Board whereby any Share is subdivided
may determine that as between the holders of the Shares resulting
from such subdivision one of such Shares shall have any preference
or priority as regards Dividends or in the distribution of assets or
otherwise over the other or others, and that the profits applicable to
the payment of Dividends or assets thereon shall be appropriated
accordingly.
9. INCREASE AND REDUCTION OE CAPITAL.
40. The Board may, with the sanction of a General Meeting of
the Company, from time to time increase the Capital of the Company
hv the issue of new Shares.


11. Sucli new Shares shall be of sucli aggregate amount,
divided into Sliaiea of sucli denomination, and sliall lie issued for
such consideration, on such terms and conditions, and with such
preference or priority as regards Dividends or in the distribution of
assets, or otherwise, over other Shares of any class, whether then
ah eady issued or not, or as Shares to be postponed to any other
Shares with regard to Dividends or in the distribution of assets, and
with any special, or without any, right of voting, as the Company
in General Meeting may direct, and subject to, or in default of any
such direction, the provisions of these Articles shall apply to the new
Capital in the same manner in all respects as to the original Capital
of the Company.
12. The Company may by Special Resolution reduce its Capital
by paying off Capital, cancelling Capital which has been lost or
is unrepresented by available assets, reducing the liability on the
Shares, cancelling Shares not taken or agreed to be taken by any
person, or otherwise, as may seem expedient, and Capital may be
paid off upon the' footing that it may be called up again, or
otherwise.
111. —MEETINGS OF MEMBERS.
1. CONVENING OE GENERAL MEETINGS.
43. The first General Meeting shall be held at such time (not
being more than four months after the registration of the Company)
and at such place as the Board may determine. Subsequent General
Meetings, other than those convened by Members under the power
hereinafter contained, shall be held at such time and place as may
be prescribed by the Company in General Meeting, and if no time
or place is so prescribed, a General Meeting shall be held in 1899,
and every subsequent year, on such day and at such place as may be
determined upon by the Board.
44. The above-mentioned General Meetings shall be called
Ordinary General Meetings; all other Meetings shall be called
Extraordinary General Meetings.
45. The Board may, whenever they think fit, and they shall
upon the receipt of a requisition made in writing by five or more


Members holding together at least one-tenth of the issued Capital,,
convene an Extraordinary General Meeting.
46. Such a requisition shall express the object of the Extra-
ordinary General Meeting proposed to be called, and shall be deposited
at the Registered Office of the Company.
47. Upon the receipt of a requisition, the Board shall within
14 days proceed to convene an Extraordinary General Meeting, to be
held within one month from the date of the receipt of the requisition.
In default the requisitionists, or any other five or more Members holding
one-tenth of the issued Capital, may themselves convene an Extra-
ordinary General Meeting, to be held on such day and at such place,
in London, as the persons convening the same may determine. In
case at any such Extraordinary General Meeting a resolution capable
of being confirmed as a special resolution shall be passed, the requisi-
tionists, or any Members holding the required amount of Capital,
may in like manner, but without a further requisition, convene the
Extraordinary General Meeting necessary to confirm the same.
48. Seven days’ notice of any General Meeting (inclusive
of the day on which the notice is served, or deemed to be served, and
exclusive of the day of the Meeting), specifying the day, hour, and
place of the Meeting, shall be given to the Members in manner
hereinafter mentioned, or in such other manner as may from time
to time be prescribed by the Company in General Meeting, but the
non-receipt of such notice by any Member shall not invalidate the
proceedings at any General Meeting.
49. The notice convening an Ordinary General Meeting shall
state the general nature of any business intended to be transacted
thereat, other than declaring Dividends, electing Directors and
Auditors, and voting their remuneration, and considering the
accounts presented by the Board and the reports of the Board and
the Auditors. The notice convening an Extraordinary General
Meeting shall state the general nature of the business intended to be
transacted thereat.
2. PROCEEDINGS AT GENERAL MEETINGS
50. Tive Members present in person, or by proxy, shall be a
quorum at a General Meeting.


51. If within half-an-hour from the time appointed for the
Meeting a quorum he not present, the Meeting, if convened upon the
requisition ot Members, shall be dissolved. In any other case, it
shall stand adjourned to such day in the next fortnight, and to such
place as may be appointed by the Chairman.
52. At any Adjourned Meeting the Members present, and
entitled to vote, whatever their number or the amount of Shares or
Stock held by them, shall have power to decide upon all matters
which could properly have been disposed of at the Meeting from
which the adjournment took place.
53. The Chairman of the Board, or in his absence the Deputy
Chairman (if any), sha]l preside as Chairman at every General
Meeting of the Company.
51. If at any General Meeting neither the Chairman nor the
Deputy Chairman is present within fifteen minutes after the time
appointed for holding the Meeting, or if neither of them is willing
to act as Chairman, the Directors present shall choose one of their
number to act, and if there be no Director chosen who shall be
willing to act, the Members present shall choose one of their number
to act as Chairman.
55. The Chairman may, with the consent of the Meeting,
adjourn any General Meeting from time to time, and from place to
place, but no business shall be transacted at any Adjourned Meeting
other than the business left unfinished at the Meeting from which the
adjournment took place.
56. Every question submitted to a General Meeting shall be
decided in the first instance by a show of hands, and in the case of
an equality of votes the Chairman shall, both on a show of hands and
at a poll, have a casting vote in addition to the vote or votes to
which he may be entitled as a Member.
57. At any General Meeting, unless a poll is demanded, a
declaration by the Chairman that a resolution has been passed or lost,
and an entry to that effect in the minute book of the Company, shall
be sufficient evidence of the fact, and in the case of a resolution
requiring any particular majority that it was passed by the majority
required, without proof of the number or proportion of the votes
recorded in favour of or against such resolution.
58. A poll may be demanded in writing upon any question
(other than the election of a Chairman of a Meeting) by not less than


five Members personally present and entitled to vote, and holding
together Shares of the Company of the nominal amount of not less
than one-tenth of the issued Share Capital.
59. If a poll is demanded, it shall he taken in such manner, at
such place, and either immediately or at such other time, within
14 days thereafter, as the Chairman shall before the conclusion of the
Meeting direct, and the result of such poll shall be deemed to be the
resolution of the Company in General Meeting as at the date of
taking the poll.
60. The demand of a poll shall not prevent the continuance of
a Meeting for the transaction of any business other than the question
on which a poll has been demanded.
3. VOTES AT GENERAL MEETINGS.
61. Subject to any special terms as to voting upon which new
Capital may be issued, every Member present in person shall on a
show of hands have one vote, and on a poll every Member present in
person or by proxy shall have one vote in respect of each Share held
by him.
62. Votes may be given either personally or by proxy.
63. If any Member be of unsound mind, he may vote by his
committee, curator bonis, or other legal curator.
64. If two or more persons be jointly entitled to a Share, any
one of such persons may vote at any Meeting, either personally or by
proxy, in respect thereof, as if he were solely entitled thereto, and if
more than one of such joint holders be present at any Meeting, either
personally or by proxy, that one of such persons so present whose name
stands first in the Register of Members in respect of such Share shall
alone be entitled to vote in respect thereof.
65. No Member shall be entitled to be present or to vote either
personally or by proxy at any General Meeting or upon any poll, or
to exercise any privilege as a Member unless all Calls or other money
due and payable in respect of any Share of which he is the holder
have been paid, and no Member shall be entitled to vote at any
Meeting held after the expiration of four months from the registration
of the Company in respect of any Share that he has acquired by
transfer, unless he has been registered as the holder of the Share
in respect of which he claims to vote for at least three months
pieviously to the time of holding the Meeting at which he proposes
to vote.


66. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing
under the hand of the appointer, or if such appointer be a corporation,
under its Common Seal, and may be in the form following ;
Ihe North Mount Lyell Copper Company, Limited
“ of
((
being a Member
“of ‘ The North Mount Lyell Copper Company, Limited,’ hereby
“ appoint of
“ or failing him of as my
“ proxy to vote for me and on my behalf at the
General Meeting of the Company to be held on the
day of , 189 , and at any adjourn-
“ ment thereof.
“As witness my hand this day of
67. No person shall he appointed a proxy who is not a Member
of the Company or otherwise entitled to vote ; provided that where a
Corporation is the registered holder of Shares of the Company the
proxy may be any Member of such Corporation, and such proxy shall,
during the continuance of his appointment, be taken in virtue thereof
to be a Member of the Company in respect of the number of Shares
held by the Corporation by whom he is appointed, for all purposes
except the transfer of such Shares or the giving receipts for any
Dividend thereon.
68. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be deposited at
the Registered Office of the Company not less than forty-eight hours
before the time for holding the Meeting at which the person named
in such instrument proposes to vote.
4. MEETINGS OE CLASSES OE MEMBERS.
69. The holders of any class of Shares may, by an Extraordinary
Resolution passed at a Meeting of such holders, give on behalf of
all the holders of Shares of the class any consent required to the
issue or creation of any Shares ranking equally therewith, or having
any priority thereto, or may consent to the abandonment or variation
of any preference or priority, or of any accrued Dividend, or to the
reduction for any time or permanently of the Dividends payable on
Shares of the class, or to any scheme for the reduction of the Company s
Capital affecting the class of Shares, and such Resolution shall be
binding upon all the holders of Shares of the class, provided that this


Article shall not be read as implying the necessity for such consent in
any case in which, but for this Article, the object of the Resolution
could have been effected without it.
70. Any Meeting for the purpose of the last preceding clause
shall be convened and conducted in all respects as nearly as possible
in the same way as an Extraordinary General Meeting of the Company,
provided that no Member, not being a Director, shall be entitled to
notice thereof or to attend thereat unless he be a holder of Shares of
the class intended to be affected by the Resolution, and that no vote
shall be given except in respect of a Share of that class, and that at
any such Meeting a poll may be demanded in writing by any five
Members personally present and entitled to vote at the Meeting.
IV. —DIRECTORS.
1. NUMBER AND APPOINTMENT OE DIRECTORS.
71. The number of Directors shall not be less than three nor
more than eight.
72. The Company may from time to time, in General Meeting,
increase or reduce the number of Directors then in office; and, upon
passing any Resolution for an increase, may appoint the additional
Director or Directors necessary to carry the same into effect, and
may also determine in what rotation such increased or reduced
number is to go out of office.
73. The continuing Directors, or Director if only one, may act
notwithstanding any vacancies in the Board. Provided that if the
numbei of the Board be less than the prescribed minimum, the
remaining Directors or Director shall forthwith appoint an additional
Director or Directors to make up such minimum, or convene a
General Meeting of the Company for the purpose of making such
appointment.
74. The Board may at any time appoint any qualified person as
a Director, either to fill a casual vacancy or as an addition to the
Board, but so that the number of Directors shall not at any time he
more than the maximum number hereinbefore provided, or such other
less number as may from time to time be fixed as the maximum by
the Company in General Meeting.
75. No person other than a retiring Director shall be elected a
Director (except as a first Director or a Director appointed by the


Boaid) unless at least four and not more than seven clear days*
notice shall have been left at the Registered Office of the Company
of the intention to propose him, together with a notice in writing by
himself of his willingness to be elected.
/6. The first Directors shall be nominated by a majority of
the subscribers hereto, and shall, subject to Article 90, continue in
office until the General Meeting to be held in the year 1900.
2. QUALIFICATION AND REMUNERATION OF
DIRECTORS.
77. The qualification of a Director shall he the holding of £250
of the nominal Capital of the Company. A first Director may
act before acquiring his qualification, but shall in any case acquire
the same within one month from his appointment, and unless he
shall do so he shall be deemed to have agreed to take the said Shares
from the Company and the same shall be forthwith allotted to him
accordingly.
78. The remuneration of the Directors shall be a sum of £3OO to
the Chairman, and £250 to the Vice-Chairman, and £2OO per annum
to each other Director; and whenever the dividend or dividends
declared and paid in respect of any year shall exceed 20 per centum
upon the paid-up Capital of the Company for the time being, the
Directors shall be entitled for that year to an additional sum equal to
5 per cent, of the excess of such dividend or dividends over and
above 20 per cent., to be divided amongst them in such proportions
and manner as they may from time to time determine. Such
remuneration may be exclusive of the sum paid by way of salary to
any Managing Director or Directors, Any Director performing extra
set vices for the Company, at the request of the Board shall be paid
such additional sum as the Board may determine.
3. POWERS OF DIRECTORS.
79. The business of the Company shall be managed by the
Board, who may pay all expenses of or incident to the formation
and registration of the Company, and the issue of its Capital,
including brokerage and commission for obtaining applications
for or placing Shares. The Board may exercise all the powers
of the Company, subject nevertheless to the provisions of any Act


of Parliament or of these Articles, and to such regulations (being
not inconsistent with any such provisions or these Articles) as may
be prescribed by the Company in General Meeting, but no regula-
tions made by the Company in General Meeting shall invalidate any
prior act of the Board which would have been valid if such regula-
tions had not been made.
80. Without restricting the generality of the foregoing powers,
the Board may do the following things ;
(a.) Appoint from time to time any person or persons, and
whether or not one or more of their number, and whether
or not resident in Great Britain, to be Managing Director
or Managing Directors, or other officer of the Company,
on such terms as to remuneration by way of salary
commission, participation in profits, or any or all of these
modes, and with such powers and authorities and for
such period as they deem fit, and may revoke such
appointment. Appoint and at their discretion remove
or suspend managers, sub-managers, officers, agents,
or servants for permanent, temporary, or special
services as they may think fit, and invest them with
such powers as they may deem expedient, and delegate
any of the powers hereby conferred to any person or
persons.
(b.) Appoint any person or persons to hold in trust for the
Company any property belonging to the Company, or
in which it is interested, or for any other purposes, and
execute and do all such deeds and things as may be
requisite in relation to any such trust.
(c.) Borrow or raise any sum or sums of money on such
security, and upon such terms as to interest or other-
wise as they may deem fit, and for the purpose of
securing the same and interest, or for any other
purpose create, issue, make and give respectively any
perpetual or redeemable Debentures or Debenture
Stock, or any mortgage or charge on the undertaking
or the whole or any part of the property, present or
future, or the uncalled Capital of the Company; and
any Debentures, registered or otherwise, Debenture Stock,
and other securities may be so framed as to constitute a
charge, or may be otherwise charged upon all or any of
the Company’s property, undertaking, —— uncalled


Capital, present or future, and may be made assignable
free from any equities between the Company and the
person to whom the same may be issued. Every Deben-
ture, Debenture Stock Certificate, Mortgage, or other
charge shall be under the Common Seal of the Company.
Provided that the amount to be so raised or borrowed
shall not at any time exceed the nominal amount of the
Capital without the sanction of a General Meeting of the
Company. But no lender or other person dealing with
the Company shall be concerned to see or enquire
whether this limit is observed.
(d.) Make, draw, accept, endorse, and negotiate respectively
promissory notes, bills, cheques, or other negotiable
instruments; provided that every promissory note, bill,
cheque, or other negotiable instrument drawn, made,
or accepted, shall be signed by such person or persons
as the Board may appoint for the purpose.
(e.) Invest or lend the funds of the Company not required
for immediate use in or upon such securities as they
deem fit (other than Shares of the Company), and from
time to time to transpose any investment.
(f.) Make special arrangements as to discounts with
Shareholders or others being customers of the
Company.
(g.) Execute in favour of any Director or other person, who
may incur or be about to incur any personal liability
on behalf or for the benefit of the Company, such
Mortgages or charges on the undertaking, or the whole
or any part of the property, present or future, or
uncalled Capital of the Company, as they think fit, and
any such Mortgage or charge may contain a power of
sale, and such other powers, covenants, and provisions
as shall be agreed on; but so that no mortgagee or
chargee of uncalled Capital shall have the power of
making Calls.
(h.) Sell, let, exchange, or otherwise dispose of absolutely
or conditionally, all or any part of the property,
privileges, and undertakings of the Company, upon
such terms and conditions, and for such consideration,
as they may think fit.


(i.) Affix the Common Seal to any document, provided that
such document be also signed by at least one Director,
and countersigned by the Secretary, or other officer
appointed for that purpose by the Board.
(j.) The Directors may from time to time provide for the
management of the affairs of the Company abroad in
such manner as they shall think fit, and the provisions
in the next following clauses shall not prejudice the
general powers conferred by this clause.
(k.) The Directors may from time to time establish any
Local Boards, Committees or Agencies for managing
the affairs of the Company abroad, and may appoint
any persons to be members of such Local Board, or
managers or agents, and may fix their remuneration, and
may exercise the powers conferred by “The Companies’
Seals Act, 1864,” and may cause a branch register of
Members to be kept, and to make provision respecting
the keeping of any branch register.
(l.) The Directors may, by power of attorney, appoint any
persons to be the attorneys of the Company for
such purposes and with such powers and authorities
(not exceeding those vested in the Directors) for such
period and on such conditions as the Directors may
think fit, and such appointment may be made in favour
of a corporation or members of a firm or other
fluctuating body.
(m.) Any such delegates or attorneys may be authorised to
sub-delegate any of the powers or authorities vested
in them.
4. PEOCEEDINGS OE DIEECTOES.
81. The Board may meet together for the despatch of business,
adjourn, and otherwise regulate their meetings as they think fit, and
may determine the quorum necessary for the transaction of business.
Until otherwise fixed, the quorum shall be two Directors. It shall
not be necessary to give notice of a meeting of the Directors to a
Director who is not within the United Kingdom. Board Meetings
may be held without the United Kingdom.
82. The Chairman, or any two Directors, may at any time
summon a Meeting of the Board.


83. Questions arising at any Meeting shall be decided by a
majority of votes, and in case of an equality of votes the Chairman
shall have a second or casting vote.
84. The Board may elect a Chairman or Deputy Chairman of
their Meetings, and determine the period for which they are to hold
office, but if no such Chairman or Deputy Chairman be elected, or if
at any Meeting they he not present at the time appointed for holding
the same, the Directors present shall choose some one of their number
to be Chairman of such Meeting.
85. The Board may delegate any of their powers, other than
the powers to borrow and make calls, to Committees consisting of
such Member or Members of their body as they think fit. Any
Committee so formed shall in the exercise of the powers so delegated
conform to any regulations that may from time to time be imposed
on it by the Board.
86. The Meetings and proceedings of any such Committee,
consisting of two or more Members, shall be governed by the pro-
visions herein contained for regulating the Meetings and proceedings
of the Board, so far as the same are applicable thereto, and are not
superseded by any regulations made by the Board under the last
preceding clause.
87. Bach Director shall have the power to nominate any person
approved for that purpose by a majority of the other Directors to act
as an alternate Director in his place during his absence from the
United Kingdom or inability to act as such Director, and at his
discretion to remove such alternate, and an appointment being made
the alternate Director shall be subject to the terms and conditions
existing with regard to other Directors, and each alternate Member
shall exercise and discharge all the duties of the Director he
represents.
88. All acts done by any Meeting of the Board or of a Com-
mittee of the Board, or by any person acting as Director, shall,
notwithstanding that it be afterwards discovered that there was some
defect in the appointment of any such Directors or persons acting as
aforesaid, or that they or any of them were disqualified, be as valid
as if every such person had been duly appointed and was qualified
to be a Director.
89. The Board shall cause minutes to be made, in books pro-
vided for the purpose, of all resolutions and proceedings of General
Meetings and of Meetings of the Board or Committees of the Board,
and any such minutes, if signed by any person purporting to be the


Chairman of the Meeting to which they relate, or at which they are
read, shall be received as conclusive evidence of the facts therein
stated.
5. DISQUALIFICATION OF DIRECTORS.
90. The office of Director shall be vacated—
(a.) If he hold any office or place of profit under the Company
other than herein authorised :
(b.) If he become of unsound mind, bankrupt, or compound
with his creditors :
(c.) If he cease to hold due qualification.
(d.) If he send in a written resignation to the Board :
(e.) If he he absent from the Board Meetings continuously
for six months without the consent of the Board.
91. No Director shall be disqualified by his office from
contracting with the Company, either as a vendor, purchaser or
otherwise, nor shall the agreement mentioned in paragraph (1) of
Clause 3 of the Memorandum of Association be avoided by reason
of the Directors or any of them being vendors to or promoters of, or
otherwise interested in the sale to the Company, nor shall any
Director interested under the said agreement, or by virtue of any
agreement mentioned therein, he liable to account for any profit
realised or received by him under or as a result of the said agreements
respectively, nor shall any contract or arrangement entered into
by or on behalf of the Company in which any Director shall be in any
way interested he avoided, nor shall any Director so contracting or being
so inteicsted he liable to account to the Company for any profit realised
by any such contract or arrangement by reason only of such Director
holding that office, or of the fiduciary relation thereby established,
but no such Director shall vote as a Director in respect of any
contract or arrangement in which he is interested, as aforesaid,
and if he do so vote his vote shall not be counted, and the
nature of his interest must be disclosed by him at the meeting of the
Directors at which such contract or arrangement is determined on if
his interest then exists, or in any other case at the first meeting of the
Directors after the acquisition of his interest. The above prohibition
as to \ oting shall not apply to the said agreement mentioned in
paragraph (1) of Clause 3 of the Memorandum of Association, or to
any agreement for participation by the Directors with the Company,
or with third parties in any transaction in which the Company is
interested, or to any co7.tract by or on behalf of the Company to give
to the Directors, or any of them, any security by way of indemnity,
and it may at anytime and from time to time be suspended or relaxed
to any extent by a General Meeting.
v o


6. RETIREMENT AND REMOVAL OE DIRECTORS.
92. At the Ordinary General Meeting in the year 1900, and in
every subsequent year, one-third of the Directors for the time being,
or if their number be not a multiple of three, then the number
nearest to one-third shall retire from office. A Managing Director
holding that office for an unexpired term shall not be subject to
retirement under this clause, or be taken into account in ascertaining
the number of Directors to retire.
93. The Directors to retire shall be those who have been longest
in office since the last election. In case of equality in this respect,
the Directors to retire, unless they agree among themselves, shall be
determined by ballot.
94. A retiring Director shall he eligible for re-election.
95. The Company at the General Meeting at which any Directors
shall retire shall, subject to any resolution reducing the number of
Directors, fill up the vacated offices by appointing a like number of
persons.
96. If at any Meeting at which Directors ought to be elected
the places of any retiring Directors are not filled up, then, subject to
any resolution reducing the number of Directors, the retiring
Directors, or such of them as have not had their places filled up
and may be willing to act, shall he deemed to have been re-elected.
97. The Company in General Meeting may by an Extraordinary
Resolution remove any Director before the expiration of his period
of office, and may by an Ordinary Resolution appoint another
qualified person in his stead. The person so appointed shall
hold office during such time only as the Director in whose place he
is appointed would have held the same if he had not been removed,
but this provision shall not prevent him from being eligible for
re-election.
7. INDEMNITY TO OEEICERS.
The Directors, Trustees and officers of the Company shall be
indemnified out of the funds of the Company against all costs,
charges, losses, damages and expenses which they shall respectively
incur and be put to in the execution of their respective offices, or by
reason or on account of any contract, act, deed, matter or thing
which shall be made, done, permitted, entered into or executed hv
them respectively on behalf of or bona fide in the interest of or with
the view of benefiting the Company, notwithstanding that the same
may be ultra vires in point of law; and any such Director, Trustee


or other officer shall be chargeable only for so much money as he
shall actually receive, and they respectively shall not he answerable for
the acts, receipts, neglects or defaults of each other, but each of them
for his own acts, receipts, defaults or neglects only; nor shall they
respectively he answerable for any banker, broker, collector or other
person appointed by the Directors or Trustees with whom or into
whose hands any property or moneys of the Company may be
deposited or come, nor for the insufficiency of the title to any estate
or property which may from time to time be purchased by order of
the Directors on behalf of the Company, nor for the insufficiency of
any security upon which any of the moneys of the Company shall he
invested by ordei of the Directors or -trustees, nor for any loss or damage
v hich may happen in the execution of their respective offices, unless
the same shall happen through their own respective wilful neglect
or default.
V.—ACCOUNTS AND DIVIDENDS.
1. ACCOUNTS.
99. The Board shall cause accounts to be kept of the assets
and liabilities, receipts and expenditure of the Company.
100. The Books of Account shall be kept at the Registered
Office of the Company, or at such other place or places as the Board
think fit. Except by the authority of the Board, or of a General
Meeting, no Member shall be entitled as such to inspect any books or
papers of the Company, other than the Registers of Members and of
Mortgages.
101. At the Ordinary General Meeting in 1899, and every
subsequent yeai, the Board shall submit to the .Members a
balance sheet and profit and loss account, made up to as recent
a date as practicable, and audited as hereinafter provided, accompanied
by a report from the Board on the transactions of the Company during
the period covered by such accounts.
102. A copy of such balance-sheet, account and report shall,
seven days previously to the Meeting, he sent to the Members in the
manner m which notices are hereinafter directed to he served, and two
copies of each of these documents shall he forwarded at the same
time to the Secretary of the Share and Loan Department of the
London Stock Exchange.
2. AUDIT.
103. Once at least for every year, after the year in which the
Company is incorporated, the accounts of the Company shall be
examined, and the correctness of the balance-sheet and profit and loss
account ascertained by an Auditor.


104. The Auditor may he a Member of the Company; hut no
Director or other officer of the Company shall he eligible during his
continuance in office.
105. The first Auditor shall he appointed by the Board; sub-
sequent Auditors shall he appointed by the Company at the Ordinary
General Meeting in each year.
106. The remuneration of the first Auditor shall be fixed by
the Board; that of subsequent Auditors shall be fixed by the Company
in General Meeting.
107. Any Auditor shall be eligible for re-election on his quitting
office.
108. If any casual vacancy occurs in the office of Auditor, it
shall be filled up by the Board.
109. If no election of Auditor he made in manner aforesaid,
the Board of Trade may on the application of not less than five
Members appoint an Auditor for the current year, and fix the
remuneration to he paid to him by the Company for his services.
110. The Auditor shall have, at his request, a list delivered
to him of all books kept by the Compauy, and shall at all reasonable
times have access to the books of account of the Company. He
shall also he supplied with a copy of the balance sheet and profit and
loss account, and it shall be his duty to examine the same with the
hooks, accounts, and vouchers relating thereto.
111. The Auditor shall certify to the Members as to the
correctness of the balance sheet and profit and loss account, and may
make such report to the Members thereon as he thinks proper.
3. DESEDYE EUND.
112. The Board may, before recommending any dividend, set
aside out of the profits of the Company such sum as they think proper
as a Deserve Eund, to meet contingencies, or for equalising
dividends, or for repairing or maintaining any property of the
Company, erecting plant, or for any other purposes of the
Company, and the same may be applied accordingly from time to
time in such manner as the Board shall determine. And the Board
may, without placing the same to Deserve, carry over any profits
which they think it not prudent to divide. The Board shall not be


bound to keep the Beserve Fund separate from the other assets, and
may employ the same or any part thereof in the business of the
Company.
4. DIVIDENDS.
113, The Company in General Meeting may declare a Dividend
to be paid to the Members according to their rights and interests in
the profits, but no larger Dividend shall be declared than is recom-
mended by the Board, and such Dividend may be payable wholly or
in part by the distribution of specific assets.
114. Subject to any priorities that may be given, the profits of
the Company available for distribution, subject to the provisions
hereinbefore contained, shall be distributed as Dividend among the
Members in accordance with the amounts paid up, or credited as paid
up, on the Shares held by them respectively.
115. When in the opinion of the Board the position of the
Company permits, Interim Dividends may be paid to the Members on
account of the Dividend for the then current year.
116. All Dividends and Interest shall belong and be paid
to those Members who shall be on the register at the date at
which such Dividend shall be declared, or at the date on which
such interest shall be payable respectively, notwithstanding any
subsequent transfer or transmission of Shares.
117. If several persons are registered as joint holders of any
Share, any one of such persons may give effectual receipts for all
Dividends and Interest payable in respect thereof.
118. No Dividend shall bear interest as against the Company.
VI.—NOTICES.
119. A notice may be served by the Company upon any
Member, either personally, or by posting it in a prepaid letter
addressed to such Member at his registered address.
120. Any Member residing out of the United Kingdom may
name an address within the United Kingdom at which all notices
shall be served upon him, and all notices served at such address shall
be deemed to be well served. If he shall not have named such an
address, he shall not be entitled to any notices.


121. Any notice, if served by post, shall be deemed to have
been seix ed on tlie day on wliicb it was posted, and in proving
such service it shall be sufficient to prove that the notice was properly
addressed and posted.
122. All notices directed to be given to the Members shall, with
respect to any Share to which persons are jointly entitled, be given to
whichever of such persons is named first in the Register of Members,
and a notice so given shall be sufficient notice to all the holders of
such Share.
123. Every executor, administrator, committee, or trustee in
bankruptcy or liquidation, shall be absolutely bound by everv notice
so given as aforesaid, if sent to the last registered address of such
Member, notwithstanding that the Company may have notice of the
death, lunacy, bankruptcy, or disability of such Member.
124. All notices shall be deemed to have been served upon
the holders of Share Warrants if they shall have been advertised
once in two London daily newspapers, and the Company shall not
be bound to serve any notice on the holders of Share Warrants in
any other manner.
125. When any given number of days’ notice, or notice
extending over any other period is required to he given, the day of
service shall, unless otherwise provided, be counted in such number of
days or other period.
VII.—WINDING- UP.
126. If upon the Winding up of the Company the surplus
assets shall be more than sufficient to repay the whole of the paid-up
Capital, the excess shall be distributed among the Members in
proportion to the Capital paid on the Shares held by them
respectively at the commencement of the winding up, other than
amounts paid in advance of Calls. If the surplus assets shall be
insufficient to repay the whole of the paid-up Capital, such surplus
assets shall be distributed so that as nearly as may be the losses shall
be borne by the Members in proportion to the Capital paid on the
Shares held by them respectively at the commencement of the
winding up, other than amounts paid in advance of Calls. But this
clause is to be without prejudice to the rights of the holders of
Shares held upon special conditions.


127. The Liquidator on any winding up (whether voluntary,
under supervision, or compulsory) may, with the sanction of
an Extraordinary Resolution, divide among the contributories,
in specie, any part of the assets of the Company, and may,
with the like sanction, vest any part of the assets of the
Company in Trustees upon such trusts for the benefit of the con-
tributories as the Liquidator shall think fit.
128. Any such Liquidator may (irrespective of the powers
conferred upon him by the Companies Acts and as an additional
power), with the consent of a Special Resolution, sell the
undertaking of the Company or the whole or any part of its
assets for Shares fully or partly paid up or the obligations
of or other interests in any other Company, and may
by the contract of sale agree for the allotment to the
Members direct of the proceeds of sale in proportion to their
respective interests in the Company, and may arrange for the
allotment to holders of different classes of Shares in this Company
respectively of obligations of the purchasing Company, or of
Shares having such priority or special privileges as may nearest
accord with their several interests in this Company.
129. Upon any sale under the last preceding Article, or undei
the powers given by Section 161 of “ The Companies Acts, 1862,” no
Member shall be entitled to require the Liquidator either to abstain
from carrying into effect the sale, or the resolutions authorising the
same or to purchase such Member’s interest in this Company;
but in case any Member shall be unwilling to accept the Shares,
obligations, or interests, to which under such sale he would be
entitled, he may, within fourteen days of the passing of the resolutions
authorising the sale, by notice in writing to the Liquidator, require
him to sell sucli Shares, obligations, or interests, and thereupon the
same shall be sold in such manner as the Liquidator moy think fit,
and the net proceeds shall be paid over to the Member requiring
such sale.


Alex. Mackay,
138, Leadenhall St., E.C.,
1). G. Lumsden,
221, Hainanlt Road,
Leytonstone, N.E.,
Hector A. MacDonald,
52, Great Russell St., W.C.,
J. Waddell Black,
18, Sherriff Road,
West Hampstead, N.W.,
Norman G. Newington,
76, Ondine Rd.,
E. Dulwich,
Reginald D. Mackenzie,
Solicitor,
Cliudleigli,
H. G. Carvall,
52, Mortimer Road,
Kingsland, N.,
Dated this 20th day of September, 1897.
Witness to the above Signatures: —
J. H. BODELL,
Clerk to Messrs. Renshaw, Kekewich & Smith,
NAMES, ADDRESSES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF SUBSCRIBERS.
2, Suffolk Lane, London, E.C.,
Agent.
Secretary to a Public Company.
Gentleman.
Gent.
Articled Clerk.
Mersthana Surrey.
Clerk
Solrs




The North Mount Lyell Copper Company,
At an Extraordinary General Meeting of the North Mount Lyell
Copper Company, Limited, duly convened and held at Winchester House,
Old Broad Street, in the City of London, on Wednesday, the Bth day
of November, 1899, the subjoined Resolution was duly passed, viz.
“That the Capital be increased to £600,000, by the
“ creation of 100,000 new Shares of £1 each.”
WILLIAM JACKS,
Chairman.


‘ • ~ , • ..... . 5 -. ■• .




■
THE COMPANIES
RENSHAW, KEKE
COMPANY LIMITED
OP
A]SD
articles of assoi
THE NORTH MOUNT LYE
COMPANY, LUTE
