

THe Companies Act.
COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES.
Memorandum of Association
Company Limited.”
of “ The Bulletin Newspaper
1. The name of the Company is “The Bulletin Newspaper Company
Limited.
2. The place in which the registered office of the Company is proposed
to be situated is Sydney in the Colony of New South Wales.
3. The objects for which the Company is established are
(a) To print and publish the “ Bulletin ” Newspaper.
(,6) To carry on generally all or any of the following businesses—
viz. the businesses of Publishers Printers Engravers Litho-
graphers Stationers and Bookbinders.
(c) To purchase or otherwise acquii'e and undertake all or any part
of the business property and liabilities of any person or
Company carrying on any business which this Company is
authorised to carry on or possessed of property suitable for
the purposes of this Company.
(d) To promote any other Company for the purpose of acquiring all
or any of the property and liabilities of this Company or of
advancing directly or indirectly the objects or interests
thereof and to take or otherwise acquire and hold shares in
any such Company and to guarantee the payment of any
debentures or other securities issued by any such Company.
(e) To take and otherwise acquire and hold shares in any other
Company having objects altogether or in part similar to those
of this Company or carrying on any business capable of being
conducted so as directly or indirectly to benefit this Company.
(/) To enter into partnership or into any arrangement for sharing
profits union of interests or co-operation with any person or
Company carrying on or about to carry on any business
which this Company is authorised to carry on or any business
or transaction capable of being conducted so as directly or
indirectly to benefit this Company and to take or otherwise
acquire and hold shares or stock in any such Company.
(g) To purchase take on lease or in exchange hire or otherwise
acquire any real or personal property and any rights or
privileges which the Company may think necessary or con-
venient for the purposes of its businesses or any of them.
(h) To sell the undertaking properties and businesses of the Company
or any of them or any part thereof for such consideration as
the Company may think fit and in particular for shares
debentures or securities of any other Company having objects
altogether or in part similar to those of this Company.


(j) To distribute any of the property of the Company among the
members in specie but so that no distribution amounting to a
reduction of capital be made without the sanction of the
Court if requisite.
(k) To make accept endorse and execute promissory notes bills of
exchange and other negotiable instruments.
(l) To construct maintain and alter any buildings or works necessary
or convenient for the purposes of the Company.
(m) To invest the moneys of the Company not immediately required
upon such securities as may from time to time be determined.
(n) To lend money and in particular to customers of and persons
having dealings with the Company.
(o) To raise money in such manner as the Company shall think fit
and in particular by mortgaging or issuing debentures charged
upon all or any of the Company’s property both present and
future including uncalled capital.
(p) To improve manage develope lease or otherwise deal with all or
any part of the properties and businesses of the Company or
any of them.
(q) And it is hereby declared that the word Company in this Memo-
randum except where used in reference to this Company shall
be deemed to include any partnership or other body of persons
whether corporate or unincorporate.
(r) To do all such other things as are incidental or conducive to the
attainments of the above objects.
4. The liability of the members is limited.
5. The capital of the Company is £lO,OOO divided into 10,000 shares of
£1 each.
We the several persons whose names and addresses are subscribed are
desirous of being formed into a Company in pursuance of this Memorandum
of Association and we respectively agree to take the number of shares in the
capital of the Company set opposite our respective names.
No. of
Names Addresses and Description
of Subscribers.
Witness to
Signatures.
Shares taken
by each
Subscriber.
One.
One.
One.
One.
One.
One.
One.
1883.
Dated this
day of


The Companies Act
0 iraQ-cri <■ i
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
OF THE
BULLETIN NEWSPAPER COMPANY
(LIMITED).
SHARES.
1. If several persons are registered as joint holders of any
share any one of such persons may give effectual receipts for holders. 8 ° J °"'
any dividend payable in respect of such share.
2. Every member shall on payment of one shilling or such Share certificate,
less sum as the Company in general meeting may prescribe be
entitled to a certificate under the common seal of the Company
specifying the share or shares held by him and the amount paid
up thereon.
3. If such certificate is worn out or lost it may be renewed Renewal of
on payment of one shilling or such less sum as the Company in certificate,
general meeting may prescribe.
CALLS ON SHARES.
4. The Managing Director may from time to time make
such calls upon the members in respect of all moneys unpaid call*!* t 0 make


on their shares as he may think fit provided that twenty-one
days’ notice at least is given of each call and each member shall
be liable to pay the amount of calls so made to the persons and
at the times and places appointed by such Director.
Call when made.
5. A call shall be deemed to have been made at the time
when the requisition of the Managing Director authorising such
call was entered in the Book of Proceedings of the Company.
6. If the call payable in respect of any share is not paid
before or on the day appointed for payment thereof the holder
for the time being of such share shall be liable to pay interest
for the same at the rate of ten pounds per centum per annum
from the day appointed for the payment thereof to the time of
the actual payment.
Interest on
unpaid call.
7. The Managing Director may if he think fit receive from
any member willing to advance the same all or any part of the
moneys due upon the shares held by him beyond the sums
actually called for and upon the moneys so paid in advance or
so much thereof as from time to time exceeds the amount of the
calls then made upon the shares in respect of which such
advance has been made the Company may pay interest at such
rate as the member paying such sum in advance and the
Managing Director agree upon.
Payment in
advance.
TRANSFER OF SHARES.
Execution of
transfer.
8. The instrument of transfer of any share in the Company
shall be executed both by the transferor and transferee and the
transferor shall be deemed to remain a holder of such share
until the name of the transferee is entered in the Register Book
in respect thereof.
Form of
transfer.
9. Shares in the Company shall be transferred in the
following form—l A.B. of in consideration of
the sum of pounds paid to me by C.D. of
do hereby transfer to the said C.D. the
share (or shares) numbered standing in my name in
the books of the “ Bulletin Newspaper Company Limited ” to
hold unto the said C.D. his executors administrators and assigns
subject to the several conditions on which I held the same at the
time of the execution thereof and I the said C.D. do hereby
agree to take the said share (or shares) subject to the same
conditions. As witness our hands the day of 18
10. N o share shall save as provided by Clause 17 hereof be
transferred to a stranger so long as any member is willing to
purchase the same at a fair value and such purchase will not
have the effect of reducing the number of members below
seven (7).
11. In order to ascertain whether any member is willing to
purchase a share the person whether entitled in his own right
or otherwise proposing to transfer the same (hereinafter called
the seller) shall give notice in writing to the Secretary that he
desires to transfer the same and such notice shall constitute the
Secretary his agent for the sale of the share to a member of the
Company at the fair value to be determined as below.
12. If within the space of fourteen days after receipt of such
notice the Secretary shall find a member desiring to purchase


the share (hereinafter called the purchasing member) and shall
give notice thereof to the seller he shall be bound within thirty
days afterwards upon payment of the fair value as determined
below to transfer the share to the purchasing member.
13. If in any case the seller after having become bound as
aforesaid makes default in transferring the share the Secretary
may receive the purchase money and shall thereupon cause the
name of purchasing member to be entered in the Register as
the holder of the share and shall hold the purchase money in
trust for the seller his executors administrators or assigns.
The receipt of the Secretary for the purchase money shall be a
good discharge to the purchasing member and he shall not be
bound to see to the application thereof and after the name of
the purchasing member has been entered in the Register in
purported exercise of the aforesaid power the validity of the
proceedings shall not be questioned by any person.
14. If within the space of fourteen days after being served
with any such notice as aforesaid the Secretary shall not find a
member desiring to purchase the same and give notice thereof
in manner aforesaid the seller shall at any time thereafter be at
libei’ty (subject to Clause 18 hereof) to transfer the share to any
person and at any price.
15. The value of a share offered for sale through the Secre-
tary as above provided shall be fixed in the first instance by the
seller. If a member otherwise willing to purchase the share is
not willing to give the price named the value shall be fixed by
some indifferent person to be mutually agreed upon and whose
fee shall be payable out of the funds of the Company.
1(5. The Company in general meeting may make and from
time to time vary rules as to the mode in which any share or
shares specified in any notice served on the Secretary pursuant
to Clause 11 hereof shall be offered to the members and as to
their respective rights in regard to the purchase thereof and in
particular may give any member or class of members a pre-
ferential right to purchase the same.
17. Any share may be transferred by a member and any
share of a deceased member may be transferred by his executors
or administrators to any son daughter or son-in-law of such
member or deceased member without Clause 10 hereof applying
to any such transfer.
18. The Directors may refuse to register any transfer of a
share (a) where the Company has a lien on the share (ft) where it
is not proved to their satisfaction that the proposed transferee
is a responsible person (c) where the Directors are of opinion
that the proposed transferee is not a desirable person to admit
to membership. But paragraphs (ft) and (c) of this clause shall
not apply where the proposed transferee is already a member.
19. The Transfer Books shall be closed during the fourteen
days immediately preceding the ordinary general meeting in transfer
each year.
TRANSMISSION OF SHARES.
20. The executors or administrators of a deceased member Persons entitled
shall be the only persons recognised by the Company as having ceasoTmember.
any title to his share.


Registration of 21. Any person who may consistently with these articles
person entitled, become entitled to a share in consequence of the death bank-
ruptcy or insolvency of any member or in consequence of the
marriage of any female member may be registered as a member
upon such evidence being produced as may from time to time be
required by the Company.
Power to register 22. Any person who has become entitled to a share in con-
nominee. sequence of the death bankruptcy or insolvency of any member
or in consequence of the marriage of any female member may
instead of being registered himself elect to have some person to
Transfer to be name d by him registered as a transferee of such share.
nominee.
23. The person so becoming entitled shall testify such
election by executing to his nominee an instrument of transfer
of such share.
Registration of 24. The instrument of transfer shall be presented to the
Company accompanied with such evidence as the Directors may
require to prove the title of the transferor and thereupon the
Company shall register the transferee as a member.
FORFEITURE OF SHARES.
Notice to mem- oc rr , . n .IT
berinarrearwith 20. it any member tails to pay any call on the day
appointed for payment thereof the Managing Director may at
any time thereafter during such time as the call remains unpaid
serve a notice on him requiring him to pay such call together
with interest and any expenses that may have accrued by reason
of such non-payment.
Form of notice, 26. The notice shall name a further day on or before which
such call and all interest and expenses that have accrued by
reason of such non-payment are to be paid and shall also name
the place where payment is to be made (the place so named
being either the registered office of the company or some other
place at which calls of the company are usually made payable)
and shall also state that in the event of non-payment at or
before the time and at the place appointed the shares in respect
of which such call was made will be liable to be forfeited.
non-eompHance 27. If the requisitions of any such notice as aforesaid are
with notice. not complied with any share in respect of which such notice has
been given may at any time thereafter before payment of all calls
interest and expenses due in respect thereof has been made be
forfeited by the Managing Director.
to* belong 2B. Any share so forfeited shall be deemed to be the pro-
Company. perty of the Company and may be disposed of in such manner
as the Company in general meeting thinks fit.
shares” forfeited 29. Any member whose shares have been forfeited shall
notwithstanding be liable to pay to the Company all calls owing
upon such shares at the time of the forfeiture.
forfeiture 0 * 30. A statutory declaration in writing that the call in
respect of a share was made and notice thereof given and that
default in payment of the call was made and that the forfeiture
of the share was declared by the Managing Director shall be
sufficient evidence of the facts therein stated as against all
persons entitled to such share and such declaration and the
receipt of the Company for the price of such share shall con-
stitute a good title to such share and a certificate of proprietor-
ship shall be delivered to a purchaser and thereupon he shall
be deemed the holder of such share discharged from all calls


due prior to such purchase and he shall not be bound to see to
the application of the purchase money nor shall his title to such
share be affected by any irregularity in the proceedings in refer-
ence to such sale.
CONVERSION OF SHARES INTO STOCK.
31. The Managing Director may with the sanction of the Power to convert
Company previously given in general meeting convert any paid- into stock.
up shares into stock.
32. When any shares have been converted into stock the Transfer of
several holders of such stock may thenceforth transfer their stock,
respective interests therein or any part of such interest in the
same manner and subject to the same regulations and restric-
tions as and subject to which any shares in the capital of the
Company may be transferred or as near thereto as circumstances
admit.
33. The several holders of stock shall be entitled to parti- Rights of stock
cipate in the dividends and profits of the Company according to holders,
the amount of their respective interests in such stock and such
interests shall in proportion to the amount thereof confer on
the holders thereof respectively the same privileges and advan-
tages for the purpose of voting at meetings of the Company and
for other purposes as would have been conferred by shares of
equal amount in the capital of the Company ; but so that none
of such privileges or advantages except the participation in the
dividends and profits of the Company shall be conferred by any
such aliquot part of consolidated stock as would not if existing in
shares have conferred such privileges or advantages.
INCREASE IN CAPITAL.
34. The Managing Director may with the sanction of a P owei t 0 . ,
. n ... ? n •• • i increase capital,
special resolution of the Company previously given in general
meeting increase its capital by the issue of new shares such
aggregate increase to be of such amount and to be divided into
shares of such respective amounts as the Company in general
meeting directs or if no direction is given as the Managing
Director thinks expedient.
35. Subject to any direction to the contrary that may be New shares to be
given by the meeting that sanctions the increase of capital all
new shares shall be offered to the members in proportion Co the
existing shares held by them and such offer shall be made by
notice specifying the number of shares to which the member is
entitled and limiting a time within which the offer if not
accepted will be deemed to be declined and after the expiration
of such time or on the receipt of an intimation from the mem-
ber to whom such notice is given that he declines to accept the
shares offered the Managing Director may dispose of the same
in such manner as he may think most beneficial to the Company.
36. Any capital raised by the creation of new shares shall New shares to
be considered as part of the original capital and shall be subject J^pita*] 8 011gllia
to the same provisions with reference to the payment of calls
and the forfeiture of shares on non-payment of calls or other-
wise as if it had been part of the original capital.
GENERAL MEETINGS.
37. The first general meeting shall be held at such time not First general
being more than four months after the registration of the meeting.


Company and at such place as the Managing Director may
determine.
3- Subsequent general meetings shall be held at such time
fngs.™ " I< ( and place as may be prescribed by the Company in general meet-
ing and if no other time or place is prescribed a general meet-
ing shall be held on the first Monday in Februazy in every year
at such place as may be determined by the Managing Director.
Ordinary and 39. The above-mentioned general meetings shall be called
meednKs. nar ’ V °binary meetings. All other general meetings shall be called
extraordinary.
Requisition for 40. The Managing Director may whenever he thinks fit and
extraordinary he shall upon a requisition made in writing by not less than
one-third in number of the members of the Company convene
an extraordinary general meeting.
Form of requisi- 41. Any requisition made by the members shall express the
tlon - object of the meeting proposed to be called and shall be left at
the registered office of the Company.
42. Upon the receipt of such requisition the Managing
Director shall forthwith proceed to convene an extraordinary
general meeting. If he does not proceed to convene the same
within twenty-one days from the date of the requisition the
requisitionists or any other members amounting to the required
number may themselves convene an extraordinary general meet-
PROCEEDINGS AT GENERAL MEETINGS.
Meeting’ to be 43. Seven days’ notice at the least specifying the place the
requfsitlon° n day and the hour of meeting and in case of special business the
general nature of such business shall be given to the members in
manner hereinafter mentioned or in such other manner (if any)
as may be prescribed by the Company in general meeting but
the non-receipt of such notice by any member shall not invali-
date the proceedings at any general meeting.
Notice of meet- 44. All business shall be deemed special that is transacted
ing ‘ at any extraordinary meeting and all that is transacted at an
ordinary meeting with the exception of sanctioning a dividend
and the consideration of the accounts balance sheets and the
ordinary report of the Managing Director.
Special business. 45. No business shall be transacted at any general meeting
except the declaration of a dividend unless a quorum of mem-
bers is present at the time when the meeting proceeds to busi-
ness and such quorum shall be ascertained as follows that is to
say if the persons who have taken shares in the Company at the
time of the meeting do not exceed seven in number the quorum
shall be three if they exceed seven but do not exceed ten the
quorum shall be five if they exceed ten there shall be added to
the above quorum one for every five additional members up to
fifty and one for every additional ten members after fifty with
this limitation that no quorum shall in any case exceed twenty.
quorum. 46. If within one hour from the time appointed for the
meeting a quorum is not present the meeting if convened upon
the requisition of members or under Clause 72 hereof shall be
dissolved in any other case it shall stand adjourned to the same
day in the next week at the same time and place and if at such
adjourned meeting a quorum is not present it shall be adjourned
sine die.


47. The Managing Director shall preside as chairman at Proviso in
every general meeting of the Company not convened under default of
«/ o o j. %j nnonint
Clause 72 hereof. q ‘
48. If at any meeting the Managing Director is not present Chairman of
within fifteen minutes after the time appointed for holding the meetin "-
meeting or in the case of a meeting convened under Clause 72
hereof the members present shall choose some one of their num-
ber to be chairman.
49. The chairman may with the consent of the meeting Chairman may
adjourn any meeting from time to time and from place to place ad -i ourn meet-
but no business shall be transacted at any adjourned meeting mt> ‘
other than the business left unfinished at the meeting from
which the adjournment took place.
50. At any general meeting unless a poll is demanded by at Evidence of
least three members a declaration by the chairman that a resolu- resolu *
tion has been carried and an entry to that effect in the Book of
Proceedings of the Company shall be sufficient evidence of the
fact without proof of the number or proportion of the votes re-
corded in favor of or against such resolution.
51. If a poll is demanded by three or more members it Poll,
shall be taken in such manner as the chairman directs and the
result of such poll shall be deemed to be the resolution of the
Company in general meeting. In the case of an equality of
votes at any general meeting the chairman shall be entitled to a
second or casting vote.
VOTES OF MEMBERS.
52. Every member shall have one vote for every share up Number of votes..
to ten. He shall have an additional vote for every five shares
beyond the first ten shares up to one hundred and an additional
vote for every ten (10) shares beyond the first hundred shares.
53. If any member is a lunatic or idiot he may vote by his Provision for
J , n , , J J lunatics, &c.
committee or other legal curator.
54. If one or more persons are jointly entitled to a share Provision for
or shares the member whose name stands first in the Register •' oint holders-
of Members as one of the holders of such share or shares and no
other shall be entitled to vote in respect of the same.
55. No member shall be entitled to vote at any, general *v"tin ° n
meeting unless all calls due from him have been paid and no ng ° 'oinfe-
member shall be entitled to vote in respect of any share that he
has acquired by transfer at any meeting held after the expira-
tion of three months from the registration of the Company unless
he has been possessed of the share in respect of which he claims
to vote for at least three months previously to the time of hold-
ing the meeting at which he proposes to vote.
56. Votes may be given either personally or by pi’oxy. Proxies.
57. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing Mode of appoint-
under the hand of the appointer or if such appointer is a corpor- ing Proxies-
ation under their common seal and shall be attested by one or
more witness or witnesses. No person shall be appointed a
proxy who is not a member of the Company.
58. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be deposited Deposit of in-
at the registered office of the Company not less than seventy- P "
two hours before the time for holding the meeting at which the
person named in such instrument proposes to vote but no in-
strument appointing a proxy shall be valid after the expiration
of twelve months from the date of its execution unless it pur-


ports to appoint a proxy to act for the appointer during his
absence from the Colony.
Form of instm- • 59 ' Any instrumenfc appointing a proxy shall be in the fob
ment appointing' lowing form—
proxy- “The Bulletin Newspaper Company Limited.”
I of
in the Colony of being a member of the
“Bulletin Newspaper Company Limited” and entitled to
vote [or votes] hereby appoint
as my proxy to vote for me and on my
behalf at the ordinary [or extraordinary as the case may
be] general meeting of the Company to be held on the
day of 18 and at any adjournment thereof
or at any meeting of the Company that may be held in the year
or during my absence from the Colony of New South Wales.
As witness my hand this day of 18
Signed by the said in the presence of
00. There shall be only one Director who shall be styled
the Managing Director. The first Managing Director shall be
Mr. William Henry Traill who shall hold his office (subject to
Clause 63 hereof) for four years from the registration of the
Company.
„ . 61. The remuneration of the Managing Director shall be
Dh'ectoi ,ratlon ° f determined by the Company in general meeting.
POWERS OF DIRECTORS.
Powers of 62. Tlie business of the Company shall be managed by the
Directors. Managing Director who shall sign all cheques and may pay all
expenses incurred in getting up and registering the Company
and may exercise all such powers of the Company as are not by
the “ Companies Act ” or by these articles required to be exer-
cised by the Company in general meeting subject nevertheless
to any regulations of these articles to the provisions of the said
Act and to such regulations (not being inconsistent with the
aforesaid regulations or provisions) as may be prescribed by the
Company in general meeting but no regulation made by the
Company in general meeting shall invalidate any prior act of
the Managing Director which would have been valid if such
regulation had not been made.
Disqualification DISQUALIFICATION OF MANAGING DIRECTOR.
of Director.
83. The office of Managing Director shall be vacated—
If the capital of the Company be increased.
If he become bankrupt or insolvent or imbecile.
If he is concerned in or participates in the profits of
any contract with the Company.
If by special resolution at a general meeting two-
thirds of the members present and voting shall
resolve that the office be vacated.
But the above rules shall be subject to the following
exception—That the Managing Director shall not vacate his
office by reason of his being a member of any Company which
has entered into contracts with or done any work for this
Company.
Re-eligibility. 64. A Managing Director who has vacated his office only by
reason of the expiration of the term for which he was appointed


or <>f an increase of the capital of the Company shall be
re-eligible.
05. The Company in general meeting shall fill up the Vacancy to be
vacated office. filled by general
66. The vacating Managing Director shall subject to any Retiring Direc-
resolution of the Company in general meeting continue in office tor to hold office
until his successor shall have been appointed. ment of l sue*'
VALIDITY OF ACTS OF MANAGING DIRECTOR. cessor -
(57. All acts done by any person acting as a managing Validity of Acts.
Director shall notwithstanding that it be afterwards discovered
that there was some defect in his appointment or that he was
disqualified be as valid as if he had been didy appointed and was
qualified to be a managing director.
SECRETARY.
68. Mr. of shall Secretary,
be the first Secretary to the Company.
69. The office of Secretary shall be vacated—
If he becomes bankrupt insolvent or imbecile.
If he is concerned in or participates in the profits
of any contract with the Company (subject to
a like exception as is mentioned in Clause (53
hereof).
If by special resolution at a general meeting two-
thirds of the members present and voting shall
resolve that the office be vacated.
70. The Managing Director may at Ids discretion fill up the
vacated office of Secretary.
71. The remuneration of the Secretary shall be determined
by the Company in general meeting.
72. The Secretary shall keep the books and accounts of the
Company and shall countersign all cheques. He shall also be
the Treasurer of the Company and perform such other duties as
may be required by the Managing Director finding such security
as such director shall require. It shall be Ins duty if he lias
reason to suppose that any cheque has been signed improperly
to refuse to countersign it and he shall in such case of Ids own
authority (hereby given to him) at once convene an extra-
ordinary general meeting to which the clauses hereof relating to
proceedings at general meetings shall mutatis mutandis apply.
73. If the meeting so convened shall be dissolved under
Clause 46 hereof or if at such meeting or any adjournment
thereof the members shall resolve that the Secretary do counter-
sign the cheque in question he shall countersign it and be
absolved from all liability for so doing.
DIVIDENDS.
74. The Managing Director may with the sanction of the Power to declare
Company in general meeting declare a dividend to be paid to dividends.
the members in proportion to their shares.
75. No dividend shall be payable except out of the profits Dividends pay-
arising from the business of the Company. able only out of
76. The Managing Director may before recommending any Power to consti-
dividend set aside out of the profits of the Company such sum as tute reserved
he may think proper as a reserved fund to meet contingencies or fund-
for equalising dividends or for repairing or maintaining the
works or premises connected with the business of the Company


or any part thereof and mty invest the sum so set apart as a
reserved fund upon such securities as the company in general
meeting may select.
Deduction of 77- The Managing Director may deduct from the dividends
dfvidend" 1 payable to any member all such sums of money as may be due
from him to the Company on account of calls or otherwise.
Notice of 78. Notice of any dividend that may have been declared
dividend. shall be given to each member in manner hereinafter mentioned
and all dividends unclaimed for three years after having been
declared may be forfeited by the Managing Director for the
benefit of the Company.
No interest on 79. No dividend shall bear interest as against the Company,
dividends.
ACCOUNTS.
Accounts to be 80. The Managing Director shall cause true accounts to be
kept- kept—
Of the stock-in-trade of the Company.
Of the sums of money received and expended by the
Company and in respect of which such receipt
and expenditure takes place and
Of the credits and liabilities of the Company.
The books of account shall be kept at the registered office of the
Company and subject to any reasonable restrictions as to the
time and manner of inspecting the same that may be imposed
by the Company in general meeting shall be open to the inspec-
tion of the members during the hours of business.
Annual state- 81. Once at the least in every year the Managing Director
ment. shall lay before the Company in general meeting a statement of
the income and expenditure for the past year made up to a date
not more than three months before such meeting.
Contents of 82. The statement so made shall show arranged under the
statement. most convenient heads the amount of gross income distinguish-
ing the several sources from which it has been derived and the
amount of gross expenditure distinguishing the expense of the
establishment salaries and other like matters. Every item of
expenditure fairly chargeable against the year’s income shall be
brought into account so that a just balance of profit and loss
may be laid before the meeting and in cases where any item of
expenditure which may in fairness be distributed over several
years has been incurred in any one year the whole amount of
such item shall be stated with the addition of the reasons why
only a portion of such expenditure is charged against the income
of the year.
Annual balance 83. A balance sheet shall be made out in every year and
sheet. laid before the Company in General meeting and such balance
sheet shall contain a summary of the property and liabilities of
the Company arranged under the heads appearing under the
form annexed to these articles or as near thereto as circum-
stances admit.
Copy to be sent 84. A printed copy of such balance sheet shall seven days
to members. previously to such meeting be served on every member in the
manner in which notices are hereinafter directed to be served.
AUDIT.
Audit to be 85. Once at the least in every year the accounts of the
annual. Company shall be examined and the correctness of the balance
sheet ascertained by one or more auditor or auditors.


86. The auditors shall be appointed by the Company in Appointment of
general meeting. Auditors.
87. If only one auditor is appointed all the provisions single Auditor,
herein contained relating to auditors shall apply to him.
88. The auditors may be members of the Company ; but Persons eligible
no person is eligible as an auditor who is interested otherwise as Au(l 'tors.
than as a member in any transaction of the Company and no
managing director or other officer of the Company is eligible
during his continuance in office.
89. The election of auditors shall be made by the Company Election of
at the ordinary meeting in each year. Auditors.
90. The remuneration of the auditors shall be fixed by the Remuneration.
Company in general meeting.
91. Any auditor shall be re-eligible on his quitting office. Re-eligibility.
92. If any casual vacancy occurs in the office of any auditor Casual vacancies
the managing director shall forthwith call an extraordinary how filled,
general meeting for the purpose of supplying the same.
93. If no election of auditors is made in manner aforesaid Appointment in
the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies may on the application by
of not less than three members of the Company appoint an joint stock
auditor for the current year and fix the remuneration to be paid Companies.
to him by the Company for his services.
94. Every Auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the Duties of
balance sheet and it shall be his duty to examine the same with Auditor,
the accounts and vouchers relating thereto.
95. Every Auditor shall have a list delivered to him of all inspection of
books kept by the Company and shall at all reasonable times *( ( ’”j^’ o^ c ” by
have access to the books and accounts of the Company and he
may in relation to such accounts examine the Managing Director
or any other officer of the Company.
96. The Auditors shall make a report to the members upon Report of
the balance sheet and accounts and in every such report they Auditors,
shall state whether in their opinion the balance sheet is a full
and fair balance sheet containing the particulars required by
these regulations and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true
and correct view of the state of the Company’s affairs and in
case they have called for explanations or information from the
Managing Director whether such explanations or information
have been given by him and whether they have been satisfactory
and such report shall be read together with the report of the
Directors at the ordinary meeting.
NOTICES.
97. A notice may be served by the Company upon any Service of
member either personally or by sending it through the post in notlces-
a prepaid letter addressed to such member at his registered
place of abode.
98. All notices directed to be given to the members shall Service on joint
with respect to any share to which persons are jointly entitled hol(lers-
be given to whichever of such persons is named first in the
Register of Members and notice so given shall be sufficient
notice to all the holders of such share.
99. Any notice if served by post shall be deemed to have Ser.ice by post,
been served at the time when the letter containing the same
would be delivered in the ordinary course of the post and in
proving such service it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter


containing the notice was properly addressed and put into the
post office.
SALE OF UNDERTAKING AND DISSOLUTION.
Sale of under- 100. (1) The sale of the undertaking properties and busi-
dtiolutTon nesses of the Company or of any of them or of any part thereof
respectively for such consideration as the Company may think
tit and in particular for shares debentures or securities of any
other Company having objects altogether or in part similar to
those of this Company and (2) the dissolution of the Company
may be determined on for any purpose whatsoever and whether
the object be the absolute dissolution of the Company and its
reconstruction or modification or its amalgamation with any
other Company the purchase of the business of ally other
Company or any other object.
101. Such sale or dissolution may take place whenever it is
determined on by a resolution passed by members holding at
least two-thirds of the shares of the Company for the time being
at an extraordinary general meeting convened by a notice
specifying the intention to propose such resolution and when
such resolution shall have been confirmed by a majority of the
members for the time being at a subsequent general meeting of
which notice shall have been duly given and held at an interval
of not less than one month and not more than two months from
the date of the meeting at which such resolution was passed.
102. Except in the case of a winding-up of the Company by
the Court under the “Companies Act” the winding-up shall
unless otherwise determined upon by a general meeting be
effected by the Managing Director.
103. When the affairs of the Company have been wound up
closed and settled so much of the capital as shall remain after
discharging all claims shall be paid to the members in the pro-
portion in which they are entitled thereto and these Articles
shall thereupon become void and such dissolution shall operate
as a final and general rule between all parties concerned therein
Dated this
Sydney : The Bulletin Newspaper Company Limited, 24 Pitt-street.




JAFp
Bt&U’O
F l6Si>
DATED
1883.
THE
BULLETIN NEWSPAPER COMPANY,
LIMITED.
Memorandum and llfticka of- ;JR^ociation.
CERTIFICATE OE INCORPORATION.
Dated
1883.
NORTON, SMITH, WESTGARTH & SANDERS.
Sydney The Bi lletin Newspaper Company Limited, 24 Pitt-street.


Special Resolutions passed at the Extraordinary General
Meeting of the Shareholders of “The Bulletin” Newspaper
Company, Limited, held at the office of the Company, 214
George-street, Sydney, on 22nd August, 1896, and confirmed
at the Extraordinary General Meeting of the Shareholders held
on the 9th September, 1896 :
Ist. That the following words be inserted between the fifth
and sixth lines in clause 63 page 10 of the Company’s Articles
of Association —“ Always provided that the Managing Director
shall not vacate his office by reason of his contracting with the
Company either as Vendor Lessor Purchaser or otherwise nor
shall any such contract or arrangement or any contract or
arrangement entered into by or on behalf of the Company in
which the Managing Director shall be in any way interested
be avoided nor shall such Managing Director so contracting
or being so interested be liable to account to the Com-
pany for any profit realised by any such contract or arrange-
ment by reason of his holding that office or of the fiduciary
relation thereby established but the nature of his interest must
be disclosed by him at the meeting of the Directors at which
the contract or arrangement is determined on if his interest
then exists or in any other case at the first meeting of the
Directors after the acquisition of his interest Provided never-
theless that no Managing Director shall as such vote in respect
of any contract in which he is so interested as aforesaid.
2nd. That Clauses 10 to 17 inclusive, on pages 4 and 5 of
the Company’s Articles be cancelled.


. . -■/
.
*
