

"p
754.S
Memoirs and Instructions of Dutch Governors, Commandeurs, &> p\/
MEMOIR
HENDRICK BECKER,
GOVERNOR AND DIRECTOR OF CEYLON,
FOR HIS SUCCESSOR,
ISAAC AUGUSTYN RUMPF,
1716.
Translated hy SOPHIA ANTHONISZ,
Dutch Translator.
With an Iw reduction and Notes hy the Government Archivist.
COLOMBO :
H. C. COTTLE, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CEYLON,
be purchased at the Government Record Office, price 75 cents.
1914.


(K&xi


Memoirs and Instructions of Dutch Governors, Commandeurs, &c.
MEMOIR
HENDRICK BECKER,
GOVERNOR AND DIRECTOR OF CEYLON ,
FOR HIS SUCCESSOR,
ISAAC AUGUSTIN RUMIT,
1716.
Translated by SOPHIA ANTHONISZ,
Dutch Translator.
With an Introduction and Notes by the Government Archivist.
COLOMBO;
H. C. COTTLE, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CEYLON.
1914.


2 7 SEP
INTRODUCTION.
Hendrick Becker had been in Ceylon as a Captain in the
Military Service of the Dutch East India Company some time
previous to his return here as Governor. He is mentioned in
Governor de Heere’s Diary of his tour to Jaffnapatnam in
1697 as one of the deputation which met the Governor at
Negombo. He succeeded Comelis Joan Simons in the Govern-
ment of Ceylon on December 22, 1707, and, after nine years’
rule, left Ceylon for Europe on December 7, 1716, as Admiral
of the Return Fleet. He was married to Anna Catharina
Collardt, and died at Amsterdam in 1722.
In the Memoir left by Baron van Imhoff for his successor in
1740, that Governor describes the changes of policy introduced
at various periods in the Government of Ceylon, chiefly in
regard to the native inhabitants of the Island, and he divides
the history of the period antecedent to his arrival into three
distinct epochs. The first, which ended about the close of
the rule of Governor van Rhee (1697), he characterizes as a
period in which the authority of the Company was maintained
with a strong hand and by force of arms, in opposition even to
the King of Kandy; so that the Company might enjoy as a
matter of right the advantages which it had purchased at so
much cost. This was the policy advocated by the famous
Governor Rycklof van Goens, for which the arguments offered
were then considered to be sound and reasonable. During
the next period, which may be said to have commenced with
the rule of Governor de Heere, a milder policy was adopted.
The natives were now treated with special kindness, with
a view to gain their affection and goodwill. Liberal conces-
sions were made to them in the occupation and cultivation of
lands, and efforts were made to secure for the Company the
good offices of the native chiefs by trust and confidence. The
plan, however, does not appear to have worked well. The
trust and confidence so imposed appear to have been in most
cases abused, and many of the Company’s own officers were
2 74-13


found to have perverted the policy of their superiors to ah a
depriving the “ lords of the land ” of their lawful rever i.
One result of this policy, to quote the words of Governor
van Imhoff, was that “ the Company lost much good and
profitable territory.” In the northern district lands are said
“ to have been filched from the Company and usurped
without any title or deed,” and in the south it is stated “ how
shamefully the natives used to deal with the Company’s
revenue, appropriating the greater part of it to themselves.
They also usually usurped and cultivated the best and
most fertile fields without paying revenue to the lawful lord
of the land, leaving only the worst for the Company, from
which also no profit was obtained, as they rendered false
accounts of receipt and expenditure.” Other evil conse-
quences are said to have followed in the wake of these, and the
Company was compelled to again change its policy. A third
period was therefore inaugurated with the commencement of
the rule of Governor Becker. What his course of action was
is best described in his own words : “ From the commence-
ment,” he says, “ I made it a point to endeavour by every
available means to discover the real state of affairs, and with
God’s blessing I have worked on steadily from year to year,
and have been in a position to expose all the fraud and to lift
the veil from the subtle mysteries presented before the eyes
of rulers by dishonest servants.” Again he says, “ I met with
many obstacles and much opposition, especially because the
evils I proposed to redress were long standing.” With a good
deal of pardonable egotism he proceeds to enumerate the
various reforms effected by him, by which larger revenues
were obtained than “ at any time previous to my rule.” *
Meanwhile his relations with the Kandyan Court were, on
the whole, of an amicable description. When some rebel
Wannias appealed to the king against the Dutch with presents
and offers of submission, “ the King not only refused to grant
an audience to the embassy but had them put in chains,
and sent to us with their credentials to be punished according
to their deserts for their audacious conduct. At first His
Majesty was so roused by the occurrence that he would have
had the men beheaded then and there, but his courtiers


intervened and pacified him.” He was a young king, who had
ascended the throne just at the time Becker assumed the reins
of Government, of whom Valentyn says : “ This Prince was
then but 17 years of age, of a very wild disposition, who showed
in all his acts to be a dangerous man and a great tyrant.” Yet
during the period of Becker’s rule there was no trouble between
him and the Dutch, except for slight differences with regard
to the closing of the gravets and the persistent efforts on the
part of the Kandyans- to have the ports opened. This was
said to be clearly due to the intrigues of the king’s courtiers.
That Becker’s was, on the whole, a successful administration,
so far as the Dutch East India Company was concerned, may
be gathered from the following brief passage, which is all that
Valentyn vouchsafes to the subject: “As to the Government
of the Heer Bekker, this gave the Lords XVII. so much
satisfaction that they made him a Councillor in Ordinary of
Netherlands-India three years after his assumption of office,
viz., in 1710. His Honour, however, remained in Ceylon with
great acceptance up to the year 1716, when he left as Admiral
of the Return Fleet, and settled down in Amsterdam, where he
departed this life in August, 1722.” —Byzondere Zaaken, p. 351.
The quaint spelling of the names of places has been retained
throughout the translation, no attempt having been made
to alter the spelling, even where the same name appeared
differently spelt in different places.
R. G. ANTHONISZ,
Government Archivist.
Colombo , February, 1914.




MEMOIR
Compiled by Hendrick Becker, Extraordinary
Councillor of India and Governor of this
Island of Ceylon and its Dependencies, for his
Successor, Isaac Augustyn Rumpf, 1 Extra-
ordinary Councillor of India and Governor-
elect, to serve as a guide until receipt of
further Orders from our Lords and Masters
and from the Supreme Government of India
at Batavia so far as time and circumstances
will permit.
Whereas it has pleased Their Excellencies, our Superiors, to
relieve me, on my repeated application, from the weighty charge
of this important Government, and to appoint Your Honour
as my successor, and they have desired me expressly to
compile and leave with Your Honour a Memoir or Instructions
relative to the manner in which the affairs and interests of
the Company in this country are to be guarded and promoted,
I will, in compliance with the said esteemed order, state
here the most necessary and important points, which may
serve as a guide until time and experience have acquainted
Your Honour with the Company’s schemes and its consti-
tution, when my directions will be no longer required. If I
were to give Your Honour a detailed description of the
Company’s position here, and the history of its acquisition of
this Island and its dependencies, its mode of defence against
foreign and native invasions, and the strength of the garrison
in each of the strongholds both in times of peace and of war,
I would not only be wasting much paper, but would also be
repeating what has been already so often described in the
various documents and instructions preserved here at the
Secretariat. A perusal of the several Memoirs compiled by
former Governors, and especially the Journal kept by His
late Excellency the Extraordinary Councillor Gerrit de
Heere during the year 1698, 2 will furnish you with a clear idea
of the natural and artificial features, the strength of the
3 74-13


garrison in the various places, and particulars relating to the
harbours and the provinces. The latter are also clearly
indicated in a map hanging in my house, so that I presume
that Your Honour may obtain sufficient information from
the foregoing with regard to those points. I may therefore
be excused from superfluous demonstration, which would only
take up the brief time left to me, and perhaps prevent my
touching upon other and more important points. I consider
it the more necessary to come to the chief points at once,
because the description given of this Government in former
documents is entirely different from its condition at present.
From the commencement of my rule here I made it a point
to endeavour by every available means to discover the real
state of affairs, and with God’s blessing I have worked on
steadily from year to year, and have been in a position to ex-
pose all the fraud and to lift the veil from the subtle mysteries
presented before the eyes of rulers by dishonest servants; so
that the affairs of this valuable Island are now in a condition
in which they could never have been expected to be, a con-
dition w'hich would by many have been considered impossible.
It would be understood that, in thus furthering the interests
of our Lords and Masters, I met with many obstacles and
much opposition, especially because the evils I proposed to
redress were long standing and had to be thoroughly remedied.
To put in writing all these details would be too tedious
a task and would only weary Your Honour. I will therefore
pass the matter by in silence, and merely refer you to the letters,
resolutions, journals, and other documents registered at the
Secretariat, where I had the papers properly arranged.
I would wish to compile a compendious explanation of the
manner in which redress was given and trickery and fraud
uprooted. This will form the basis of my Memoir, presuming
that Your Honour will be desirous of continuing the work
thus commenced on the same footing. We have to thank
God for the flourishing condition in which I may now resign
this Government to Your Honour, and I would advise you
to follow my example in furthering the interests of the
Company wherever possible. This is to be done by vigilance
and unremitting supervision, with a view to prevent the old
evils creeping in again. It ought to present no difficulty now,
because all the instructions and the statement of the altera-
tions made by me are preserved here at the Company’s Office
of Trade Accounts, together with the other documents men-
tioned above. A perusal of these would at once expose any
attempt made to depart from the prescribed procedure. The
chief point to be borne in mind is that the Governor should
not allow himself to be deceived by false arguments, or accept 1


without personal inquiry any statements made by his sub-
ordinates. He must investigate every matter for himself and
endeavour to get at the truth of it. Although this would
involve much trouble, he should, wherever necessary, place
himself in opposition to the wrongdoer without any regard to
persons. These are the only means by w'hich the advantages
so dearly paid for may be retained by the Company in these
territories. The exclusive possession of territory is the lawful
right of the Company, as will be demonstrated later on; and a
close study of this point in the various documents will enable
Your Honour to administer this important Government to the
best advantage of our Masters and to the establishment of
your reputation.
• The Commandement of Jaffnapatnam.
I will take all the various points in order, and commence
with the Commandement of Jaffnapatnam, which was taken
by assault, and has been now for fifty-seven years subject to the
Company. It possesses a beautiful fort or castle known as
Jaffnapatnam. 3 The possibilities of defence of this stronghold
might be greatly increased if its outer moat could be suffi-
ciently deepened, but this seems impossible on account of the
peculiar rocks of which the bed is composed. These rocks
are found all over the Commandement, and especially around
the fort. I myself and others have found this project entirely
impracticable, and it will therefore be best to give up the
work, about which so much mention is made in many of the
Jaffnapatnam Compendiums, 4 and to leave the embrasures as
they are. This pentagonal castle was built by the Portuguese,
and measures 375 roods. It is situated on the western side
of the Commandement, in the heart of the bay of Tondy,
which forms, together with the rivers, an outlet to the sea,
where, mostly for the protection of the harbour of Gaits,
situated three miles north of the Castle of Jaffnapatnam, the
Portuguese erected in the sea on a swampy sandbank the
fortress Hammenhiel, 5 which is still in good condition. Beyond
this, along the seashore, is to be seen the fortress called Puntoa
Das Pedros, and also on the eastern and western boundaries of
the Wanni, for the protection of the passes to and from this
barren territory, four other stone fortresses, called respectively
the Elephant, the Beschutter (Protector), the Pyl (Arrow'), and
Ponneryn. All these, except the Castle of Jaffnapatnam, are
garrisoned with natives under the command of a sergeant or
corporal and one or two soldiers, and could be held without
much expenditure by the Company.
The wooden structure at Moeloetivoe will be referred to
later. At present it must be noted that there is also a regular


strong fort, called Manaar, within the jurisdiction of this
Commandement, situated on an island of the same name. The
island is separated from the mainland by a shallow opening or
sand river, which is mile long from the south-west to the
north-east. On the north it is protected by the fort of Manaar,
which, although it has no outer moat, is quite able, by means
of its cannon, to dispute the passage of any smuggling vessels
or European and other ships. This square fort is therefore of
the greatest importance. It, and the whole island of Manaar,
not only protect Jaffnapatnam on the south, but principally
the mouths of the rivers, from the incursions of foreigners,
who, from time to time, have endeavoured to make use of
them. They are thus obliged to go on to the bay of Tondy,
the coast of Coromandel, and further northward, where they
have to wait for the south-west monsoon. Otherwise they,
would be obliged to pay double tolls and make presents to
be allowed to pass through the strait of Pambes, or perhaps
continue their voyage to the east side of this island. It is
for this reason that after the death of the late Theuver 6 I
endeavoured to obtain permission to place a garrison at the
strait of Pambes, on the west side of the island Tamanacoil,
where the strait is connected with the bay of Tondy. I
succeeded in this eventually in the year 1709 through the
assistance of ambassadors. This permission I had obtained
already by contract from his predecessor, and it was of the
greatest importance to have the matter settled, partly because
it serves to prove our lawful possession, partly because we may
thus prevent smuggling. Particulars relating to this subject
may be found in the contract and in the instructions sent to
Madura. We have since learnt that a European vessel made
her way through this passage, but that the Theuver disputed
her right to do so, and she was made to pay the heavy double
toll at the other end, and had to give considerable presents
to the Theuver and his subjects. This trip, therefore, must
have cost her a great deal, and she is not likely to repeat her
visit. Friendship with the Theuver must therefore be culti-
vated, and our lawful rights enforced by contract on such
occasions as these. Your Honour will also find it of the
utmost importance, for the Company’s trade, that the officers
at Manaar are constantly reminded to closely examine all
native vessels, and to see that none but those provided with
our own passports and special licenses are allowed to pass.
Such an examination is rendered easy and unavoidable to a
faithful commander by the shallowness of these straits;
because vessels sailing close along the base of our fort, if they
are at all heavily laden, cannot pass the sandbanks without
unloading, and it may therefore be easily seen what kind of


cargo they are carrying, and whether they contain any
contraband. A row of cliffs at the entrance to the strait of
Pambes makes it necessary for all vessels to unload there,
and this gives the Commandant the time to protest, on behalf
of the Theuver and his subaltern regents, against foreign
European vessels passing, or to inform Your Honour of any
special occurrence. For the present such protests may happen
to be ineffectual, but it would be different when a stone
fortress has been erected. Then the Theuver would find
that if he does not keep to the contract the Company
would refuse him the yearly passports for his two vessels to
Bengal and Atchien. He would also act differently when he
learns that some sloops from Jaffnapatnam are cruising along
the south-east coast of his territory between Moekoen (or
from Kilkare, according to the monsoon) and Otiaar, situated
at the mouth of the bay of Pambes. These cruises could be
easily carried on without much expenditure or interference
with the inland service, and they would prevent entirely any
native vessels passing unexamined at Manaar through the
shallow holy river during the northern monsoons, which they
do on their way to Malabar and elsewhere. This would
prevent their taking arecanuts other than from the Company
through the bay of Chiade and Tondy, because they would
have to show their passports, or letters of instruction.
For the reasons already stated, I will treat only briefly here of
the various sources of revenue ; of the services to be rendered
to the Company ; of the rents, tithes, stamp duties; the new
land survey; the felling of timber, the poll tax, adigary 7
and ofjicie f fines, passports, &c. I will only state here that
the general revenue for the year ending August 31 last at the
balancing of the books proved to be FI. 157,889‘7'8, and the
rent for land farmed out amounted to FI. 64,153’17. The
clear profit in this Commandement during the past year
amounted to FI. 54,935*17, which is considerably higher than
it had been at any time previous to my rule ; for in former
years the income was FI. 104,715*5, and the expenditure
FI. 173,401 *ll. The increase is due to my persistent measures
against untrustworthiness in the officials in regard to the
verification of the Company’s effects, and the abolition of
certain special supplies issued monthly in that Commandement.
Particulars of these matters will be found in the various
instructions relating to them, and in two letters sent to Batavia
bearing date July 20, 1714, and May 20, 1715, resulting from
certain private decisions of April 3, 1714, and a Resolution of
the Council of Colombo of May, 1715. These will show.
Your Honour how unavoidable and necessary it is for the
Company to have a careful verification made every year, and


that great attention should be paid to the small items of
expenditure in the accounts, which I made it a point to
examine minutely. It was in view of this that I established
the Visite Comptoir , 9 the rules for which will be given later on.
It must be stated here that the increased revenue of Jaffna-
patnam is greatly due to the larger sale of elephants. I
succeeded in extending this trade by sending every year a
trustworthy person /with letters to the principal merchants
in Coromandel, who are in the habit of coming here every
year for the purchase of elephants, informing them that a large
number of good and sound animals will be for sale. This
plan I found to be very successful, because formerly these
merchants were often discouraged by false and unfavourable
reports. Moreover, especially during the time of the late
Commandeur van Heuvel 10 and others, much inconvenience
and unnecessary expense was caused to the merchants by the
introduction of the system of dealing with them through
special brokers, I have therefore abolished this practice, as
may be seen from an entry in my diary of May 3, 1710. The
merchants were then assisted in the shipping of the animals,
&c., by one of the three interpreters of the Commandeur,
whom they themselves chose, with a view of putting an end
to the tricks played upon them by the Sinhalese brokers.
But to our great displeasure we discovered that they were
also treated very badly last year by these three interpreters,
and the result has been that this year but few of the merchants
came. Bull particulars relating to this matter, and of the
means employed to put a stop to the evil, will be found in our
letter to Batavia of August 3 last. In the entry mentioned
above in my diary may also be found the recent arrangements
I made with regard to the new Land Thombo, 11 or description
of rents due for fields, trees, gardens, and houses in that
Commandement. I do not know how it was, but again, as
formerly, we have met with so many obstacles and difficulties
that the work could not be brought to perfection. I have
not, however, allowed this greatly needed work to be suspended
on that account. I must describe these matters and circum-
stances more at length, so that Your Honour may see that
the work could no longer be postponed, without the Company
being made to look ridiculous in the eyes of the natives, and
losing the revenue it is lawfully entitled to. The Portuguese
had made an attempt at compiling such a description of lands,
and some fragments of these registers were left by them. It
was only in the year 1677 that such a compilation was com-
menced at the instance of the Honourable Company. This
Land Thombo was compiled according to circumstances, with
a view to obtain for the Company, as Lord of the land in the


Commandement, the dues and rents it was entitled to, such
as those on gardens, trees, and houses, which, until that year,
had been possessed or cultivated by the inhabitants both of
Jaffnapatnam and the island of Manaar. Naturally this
Thombo was defective. More than forty years have passed
since then, and the number of inhabitants has greatly increased,
as may be seen from the yearly census and the rolls for the
last ten years in Willegamo, Wadomoratie, Patchelepale,
The Islands, and the borders of the Wanni. As the number
of inhabitants thus increased, many of the people were
obliged to look for lands which they could cultivate, or
gardens in which they could plant trees and build houses, for
which they ought by rights to pay taxes and rent to the
Company. Notwithstanding the strict orders of His late
Excellency the Commissioner-General, 12 when visiting this
Commandement, it has been impossible to compile a correct
Thombo, although attempts have been made from time to
time. In this way the Company has lost for nearly forty
years, not only the rents that were evaded at the compilation
of the old Thombo in 1677, but also those on the fields, gardens,
trees, and houses cultivated, planted, or built since that time;
as the inhabitants took to cultivating the forest and waste
lands surrounding their fields and gardens, quietly encroaching
on them without paying any rent or dues for their use. The
Majoraals, 13 or village chiefs, whose duty it is to assist the
Company in this work, have on the contrary obstructed it
wherever they had an opportunity, especially where the rich
inhabitants were concerned. This practice of avoiding the
payment of rents was facilitated by the fact that in case
of discovery the Majoraals had only to refer to the old
and imperfect Thombo, where often wrong boundaries were
given. In order to put an end to the practice, the new
Thombo for this Commandement was commenced, and
again the Majoraals, together with some of the most influential
natives, have tried to delay the work under various pretexts,
simply with a view of remaining the longer in unlawful
possession of these fraudulently acquired lands. And here I
do not even speak of the Warrogo 14 lands, which have also
been cultivated and improved from year to year and con-
verted into regular dwelling places. These also ought to
yield considerably more in land rent than is paid for the
ordinary Warrogo lands. When visiting this Commandement
in 1710 I could not disregard this most important work, but
was obliged to take it up again in the interest of our Lords
and Masters in order to secure for them the yearly revenue.
This work, so often urged, but always delayed through the
craftiness of the people of Jaffnapatnam, is now being carried


on again, with my strict orders that it is to be continued
until completed. This may be seen from my diary and the
various orders and despatches to the Commandement, The
lands I have referred to, which have been filched from the
Company and usurped so long without any title or deed, are
to be taken possession of by the Company and sold in its
interest, together with the lands that have remained unculti-
vated and barren. Thus, also, in future, the yearly revenue
of the Company will be increased by the rent of lands, trees,
gardens, and houses which had thus far not been entered in
the Thombo, although there is no prospect of recovering the
large amount the Company lost through neglect of this work.
So far we have been able to proceed without much difficulty.
Besides the slaves employed for this purpose, a trustworthy
committee must be always appointed, and the real boundaries
carefully ascertained in compliance with my orders. The work
must thus be carried out fairly and without intermission, and
I am sure no one could complain of injustice in the matter of
the lands and gardens sold on behalf of the Company, The
Dessave 15 of Jaffnapatnam must also revise the Head Thombo 16
every third year, striking off the names of the old and infirm
and of those who have died, while on the other hand, the
names of youths who have left the schools must be entered,
so that it may be exactly known from whom poll tax and
Ody 11 service is due. This work must be commenced as soon
as possible, in order that the Trade Account Bookkeeper may
be able to enter the poll tax and fines discovered to be due
to the Company and the Ody services which have not been
performed. The last revision of the Head Thombo was
commenced on my orders on October 23, 1714, and was
completed on the 28th February following. At the end of
the last book year the total amount of the poll tax in
Jaffnapatnam and Manaar was FI. 26,794’5.
The taxes on lands, gardens, trees, vessels, nets, bulls, and
houses amounted to FI. 50,077; but this does not include
the tithes of the harvest for the whole of that Commandement,
of which I intend furnishing a separate statement, because
formerly but little was received on this account. Through
my efforts this source of revenue has increased, and from
September 1 last year until August 31 this year the tithes of
the harvest in Ponneryn, the lands of Cornettie, Manaar, the
of Mantotte, Manathan, and Moesely amounted,
according to the last Compendium, to 14,548f parras of nely, 18
besides parras. of the same grain which the inhabitants
of the provinces of Belligammo, Wademoratie, Timmoratie,
and the six inhabited islands owed the Company on account
of tithes. In lieu of this, for several good reasons, and at the


request of our officials at the stations, I agreed that they
should pay cash, at the rate of 3 fanams or £ Ed. for the
parra, which realized the sum of Eds. This is quite
different from former years, and therefore the matter requires
Your Honour’s attention. With regard to the lease of the
Company’s lands in these territories,! have nothing particular
to say, except that they are farmed out publicly every year
on August 31, and are allotted to the highest bidder on good
security. With the view of raising this revenue, I have
included in the general fishery rent the seven villages of the
district Carretta previously mentioned, which is situated
along the border of the Wanni. This territory, being in
their neighbourhood, the Wannias had taken possession of;
but in the year 1714 I recovered it for the Company, and have
since claimed the revenue from the fishery and agriculture
as being right and reasonable. The Compendium previously
cited shows that during the last book year this revenue
amounted to FI. 64,153 ’l7.
The breeding of Persian and Java horses, which was
commenced on the islands Delft and De Twee Gebroeders, 19
has also been very profitable to the Company, because every
year fine animals are caught here, and these are either sold,
employed in the service, or given away as presents. Into
the former of the islands named 8 stallions and 188 mares
were introduced, into the latter 8 stallions and 74 mares.
These will be found to breed yearly a large number of foals,
if only the order that a yearly account be made of all the
animals be carefully kept, and if it is observed that only those
animals which have really died are taken off the list; which
may be done only after verification by the Special Committee.
The Compendium referred to shows that this enterprise has
been much more successful after the new rules and remedies
were introduced.
The dyeing of red cloth in Jaffnapatnam is a very profitable
industry to the Company. It is carried on in workshops
specially erected for the purpose, and a large quantity of cloth
is dyed both for Batavia and the Fatherland, as well as for
Indian stations. All cloths, except the gingams, which are
woven at Jaffnapatnam, are received from the coast of
Coromandel. The cloths are divided among the dyers (who
are under the supervision of the Mudaliyar Anthony Wierrena-
regna) in small quantities, no more being issued to them
than they can finish at once. This is to prevent these costly
goods being damaged in the small dwellings of the dyers. So
also only just sufficient roots are issued for each dyeing oper-
ation, because otherwise they are stolen or used for private
purposes. Last year about 78 parcels of cloth were dyed.


Great care must be taken that the pieces when dyed are put
up to dry in a proper place, so that they may not get stained
or torn; and when delivered by the dyers they must be
carefully examined by some of the members of Council, and
the perfect cloths securely packed for export. In their own
interest this Committee must be very careful with regard to
this matter, because many complaints have been received,
both from the Fatherland and from elsewhere; and as a
result of this, the officials have had to refund the amount
thus lost to the Company by carelessness. The roots used
for this work of red dyeing are called say , and are found in
Jaffnapatnam, The Islands, Calpetty, Carredivo, Warendivo
or Ilja da Vaca, and also in Moelly in the province of
Wallegamo, and in Manaar. The best kinds are found in
Carredivo, Warendivo, and Moelly; those of Manaar are
equally good, and found in much larger quantities. Quantities
are also received at the Company’s stores from the Adigars
in Merendivo and Morry. Besides this, a large quantity is
also received of the so-called “ seven place roots,” which
derive their name from the fact that they are obtained from
seven different places, namely, the islands Palletivo, Irrentivo
or De Twee Gebroeders 20 (The Two Brothers), Illandetoere,
and Orraendie, in the Wanny at Girangy and Mallenkadoe,
and in the province of Wallijammo at Poenale. Some roots
have been discovered lately also in Walligamo at Ulewale
Sambelady, and in Wadamoratie at Allady torren and
Siendancallan; but none of these are as bright in colour as
the two first-mentioned kinds. All the roots obtained from
the eleven last-named places are therefore sorted at the end of
each year ; the best are retained for the Company, while the
inferior are sold or exported to Coromandel. A great deal
more might be said concerning the root found in the fifteen
other places named, but I do not wish to repeat here all that
may be found in the regulations framed from time to time
with regard to this subject. It is only necessary to state that
full particulars may be found in the various orders issued
with regard to the Java roots both by His Excellency van
Myndrecht and Their Excellencies the Supreme Government
of India at Batavia, as also in various Memoirs and other
documents preserved here at the Secretariat. I have only
to add that the finer.cloths, both those intended for the
Fatherland and for Batavia, such as Moeris , 21 Bethilles , 22
Salempoeris, 23 and Parcallen , 24 must not be dyed with the
“ seven place roots,” except in case of an absolute want of
the Manaar, Carredivo, Nevendivo, and Moelly say. As a
rule, they are dyed with Manaar and Carredivo roots mixed
with ruinas roots, about 13/15 Manaar or Carredivo and 2/15


ruinas roots. The roots from the “ seven places ” are mostly
used for the dyeing red of stuff for flags, gingams, and other
cheap materials for India which have to be of a bright red
colour, but need not be so brilliant or durable as the cloths dyed
with roots from Carredivo or Manaar and with ruinas roots.
It must, therefore, be observed that only the inferior roots
are used for the cheap cloths. The men must be kept to
their work as much as possible, and private work among
them must be discouraged, so that the Company may be
able to meet the demand, especially in the Fatherland, where
the cloths must be sent without failure during the months of
July, August, or September of the same year in which appli-
cation is made.
So many Ordinances have been passed relating to the pro-
pagation of religion, the administration of justice,the executive,
and the finances in this Commandement, that it will not be
necessary for me to repeat these matters here, as they may
be found in the various documents in question. Thq, same
may be said with regard to the Christian aims and praise-
worthy zeal of our Lords and Masters in the promotion and
propagation of the Reformed Religion among the hardened
and obstinate heathen people of this land. I ought, however,
to mention here, in regard to this important matter, that I had
the singular pleasure and great satisfaction of seeing the fruit
of the great care bestowed and the expenditure incurred by
the Company in the project of spreading God’s Holy Name.
With this view Their Excellencies had founded, through
the instrumentality of the Hon. van Drakenstein, their
Commissioner-General (of blessed memory), 25 in the year 1690,
just outside Jaffnapatnam, a splendid building, at a cost of
Rds. 5,274, as a Seminary or Training School, where the true
Reformed Religion is to be taught. An Ordinance relating to
this institution was registered at the Secretariat under date
December 2of the same year, which has been since amplified
by letters from here bearing date November 21, 1695, April 4
and June 13, 1696, and several other orders issued during
my administration. For a long time the Seminary has been
without a Rector, owing to the want of a suitable person to
fill the post. A resident Dutch teacher has been entrusted
with its supervision, and he also instructs the youths in the
Dutch language and in the principles of our true religion.
At present the number of pupils is .... Twice a year an
examination is held in the presence of the Commandeur, the
Council, and the Clergy. Those students who are sufficiently
advanced are transferred to the Seminary at Colombo under
the Rev. Petrus Synjeu, of whose care and methods of teach-
ing I will speak later on when I come to treat of the Colombo


Seminary. I merely need state here for the present that,
according to the diary kept during my residence in Jaffna-
patnam shortly after I assumed the Government, one of the
three native Proponents delivered a sermon in the Dutch
language from Rom. I. 10, in the presence of the Jaffna con-
gregation and myself, which was very lucid and edifying. It
greatly pleased all who heard it to find one who had previously
been a heathen now so enlightened as to be able to deliver a
learned discourse in our own language and speak of God’s
wonderful works. I hope and pray that this holy work thus
begun may, by the power of the Almighty God, be brought to
perfection, and that He will daily bless the means employed
towards this end.
With regard to the pearl banks of Aripo in the bay of
Condatie, 5 miles south of the fort of Manaar, and of those
found along the coast of Madura, but mostly north of the
Tutucoryn Forth, various useful and comprehensive reports
are to# be found, which may be read at the Secretariat in
Colombo. They all deal with the fact that every year, at
fixed times, viz., in Madura about November, and in Aripo
in February, the banks must be inspected by trustworthy
Commissioners, aided by Pattangatyns, 26 at whose disposal
are to be placed thonys 27 from Madura, Jaffna, and Manaar.
These Commissioners are to see whether properly matured
oysters are to be found at the places named, so that according
to their report a fishery may either be ordered in proper time
or be postponed as the case should demand. These yearly
inspections are held in the hope that these profitable banks
may furnish the Company with the rich revenue to which it
is indisputably entitled as Lord of the Shores, and also to
enable it to purchase this jewel of the sea at a reasonable
price so as to meet the demand made therefor. To my regret I
have not been so fortunate as to have had more than one fishery
during my rule, although the yearly inspections have not been
neglected. One fishery was held in the year 1708 before the
western coast of Madura. On this occasion there was realized
on behalf of the Company, besides all free stones, 28 the con-
siderable sum of 353,920 fanums, at 6f light stivers, equal to
FI. 119,448. This amount was derived from the “stone
money,” or, to speak more definitely, the regulated tax on
every stone used by the divers for the purpose of going down
to the bed of the sea. The tax on the stones is regulated
according to the character and position of the divers ; a
Christian pays the Company a tax of 70 fanums per stone, a
Moor 120 fanums, and a heathen 94 \ fanums. On 528 vessels
at the fishery in question there were used 4,321 \ stones, of
which 2,380 were used by Christians, 1,55H by Moors, and 390


by heathen. The Naik of Madura was allowed 96J stones of
a different kind free, and the Theuver 60 Moorish stones, in
terms of the contracts and other documents regarding this
matter. It is also an old custom for the Court of the Cail-
patnam Moors to be allowed 10 stones, the Pattangatyn native
officers of Taele or Moekoen along the shore 185, the Pattan-
gatyns of Manaar 30, and those of Jaffnapatnam 13 stones,
as allowed to Christians, without payment. It must also be
observed that when the result of the inspection proved satis-
factory and the banks were found to be covered with a goodly
number of oysters, timely notice of a fishery was to be given
everywhere, and the Commissioners required to employ for
this purpose capable and careful officers, competent to dis-
charge their duties properly, and to promptly settle the
disputes which usually arose to a great extent between the
Manigaar or messenger of the Naik and those of the Theuver
and his subjects, and also between the Moors in their various
quarters. During the fishery these people set up a series of
frivolous pretensions and fanciful prerogatives, which must be
settled at once in a fair manner by the Commissioners, so that
the fishery may not be disturbed; as that would be to the
detriment of thousands of people. The said Commissioners
must also guard against pearls being sold by any other people
than the inhabitants of Wierandepatnam, Cailpatnam, Ponne-
cail, Tutucoryn, and Cailvelho. At the last-named place or
market for pearls 5 per cent, duty is to be paid to the Armano,
as granted to that Prince with the knowledge and authority
of the Company. He is also allowed the full proceeds of the
fishery for a whole day. During my time this was given to him
from all vessels without a murmur. On the other hand, I gave
strict orders that precautions should be taken to prevent the
people of the Armano or of the Theuver usurping any undue
authority. All these matters must be borne in mind in the
interest of the Company, and order must be maintained in a
prudent and judicious manner. Precaution should also be
taken that the overseers of the pearl markets do not levy any
unlawful dues, and that no false coin is brought into circula-
tion, and also that no stones are concealed to the prejudice of
the Company. In order to prevent the latter, the names of
all the divers with their number of stones, each under his
Pattangatyn, must be carefully entered by the Commissioners,
and each individual must receive a certificate signed on behalf
of the Company, while a number of sloops must constantly
cruise about the scene of the pearl fishery, to examine every
vessel and to see that it has no unauthorized divers or stones
on board. The Amande is usually fixed at Rds. 20 or 25 per
stone, and no one is allowed to open the oysters brought


ashore until after the close of the fishery, the oysters being
stored up for the time. After the fishery public proclamation
is made on behalf of the Company that every one is at liberty
to open his oysters and to come and pay the duty on the
stones and to obtain a license for their removal. A great
deal more might be written on this subject; as, for instance,
with regard to the solemnities to be observed in and the time
of hoisting the Company’s flag; with regard to the usual dura-
tion of a pearl fishery; the precautions to be taken and the
guides employed at the pearl banks; of the reason why at
certain times no purchase of pearls was made for the Com-
pany, &c.; but I fear that it would take up too much space,
and I must therefore refer to the notes sent by me to the
Netherlands and to Batavia, together with other documents,
where the general details in reference to this useful w*ork have
been related. In the meantime the most essential instructions
have been given by me.
Of no less advantage to the Company is the regular yearly
income derived from the sale of elephants. This is also a
matter that differs in various places, and, as I am writing at
present of the Commandement of Jaffnapatnam, I will simply
state here in what manner the elephants are obtained. The
hunters of Wringaly, Mantotte, Nanathan, and Moeselypattoe
deliver yearly to the O'p'perhoofd 29 and the Council a con-
siderable number of these animals as tribute, as presents, and
on payment for those in excess of the tribute. The officials
named have instructions not to accept defective animals, or
any female elephants, unless these are of large and splendid
stature, because otherwise the females are left on the hands
of the Company and become a source of expense to the in-
habitants of Jaffnapatnam. I have, therefore, in giving orders
for the capture of elephants on the borders of the Wanni,
forbidden the use of pits and nooses, because they injure the
animals. The capture in kraals is much more troublesome,
but it prevents to a considerable extent the injury otherwise
caused to the animals and which depreciates their value. For
this purpose a new kraal has been formed in the forest of
Calehoene and another in the high forest outside Ponneryn,
somewhere about the place where the village of Walancolan
used to be. The rule I have laid down must be observed in
future, and the inhabitants gradually accustomed to this
method.
The large district of the Wanni, which means “ desert,”
and forms the largest part of this Commandement, has been
from olden times divided into six provinces, which were
granted as fiefs to some of the Majoraals or principal chiefs,
known as Wannias, with the usufruct of these provinces and


the subaltern rule thereof, on certain conditions made by the
Company. This was that they should deliver yearly to the
Company a tribute of 42J elephants, all alias , without tusks,
and of such height as specified in the various Memoirs,
especially in that left by Mr. Laurens Pyl 30 for his successor
Commandeur Rutgert de Heyde. 31 Each Wannia is to con-
tribute his share according to the extent of his province. I
have also introduced some modifications in these conditions,
and have ordered that no elephants should be accepted from
the said Wannias but alias, or female elephants without
the least defects and of a beautiful build. I have also
continually urged these people to pay up their arrears, with
the threat that if they failed to do so they would be deprived
of their posts and possessions, which w r ere granted to their
ancestors simply in order that the Company may obtain the
fixed tribute of elephants. This has at last had effect, for
they delivered more elephants yearly than before, and did
not make any appeal for remission of their arrears; whereas
formerly a great many of these petitions were received.
Strict orders were also given long ago that no cash was to
be paid to these forest chiefs unless they had paid up all then-
arrears (if such an unexpected thing should ever happen). In
that case they must be paid at the higher rate fixed by Their
Excellencies the Supreme Government of India at Batavia in
their letter of December, 1695, to this Commandement.
The six provinces referred to above are called Panengamo,
Carrecattemoele, Meelpattoe, Moeleawalloe, Tinnemarewaddy,
and Carnawelpattoe. At present these are supervised, under
the higher authority of the Honourable Company, by four
Wannias and three Mudaliyars, Don Anthony Collesegras, Don
Philip Candaspa May latte, Don Gaspar Chiandeynaar Wary,
and Candappa, each holding a separate province. Don Anthony
and Don Philip, besides this, have each half of the province
Pannengamo, the one holding also Melpattoe, Moeliawalle,
and Celembenaar,*and the other half of the Wanni in common.
The tribute received for all this is altogether 40| animals
delivered yearly. Besides this, Don Anthony delivers two
elephants yearly for the villages Coparpo and Moeliaan, which
have been assigned to him by contract; which tribute he
pays in lieu of the poll tax and land rent which the Company
would otherwise receive from these tw'o villages. Thus, the
full number of elephants delivered as tribute is 42£. Towards
the tribute for this year 32 animals have been delivered ; so
that at the end of last August they owed the Company in all,
with the arrears of former years, 193£ elephants. They must
be continually urged to pay up these outstanding dues. I
must also state here that I discovered last year, when


punishing the rebellious Wannias Diogo Poewinellamapane
and Diogo Gaspar Niteheachendrayen Mudaliyar, that they
are by no means as formidable as they have been repre-
sented to be in former documents, where it was made believe
that should the Company attack these men they would find
a safe refuge and certain protection in the territory of the
Kandyan king. This is by no means the case, as His Majesty
the Kandyan king not only refused to grant an audience to
the embassy sent to him by the rebels with presents, the
offer of vassalage, and the eternal submission of these
provinces and their subjects, but had them put in chains, and
sent to us with their credentials to be punished according to
their deserts for their audacious conduct. At first His Majesty
was so much roused by the occurrence that he would have had
the men beheaded then and there, but his courtiers intervened
and pacified him. All these circumstances have been stated
at length in our letter to Batavia bearing date May 20, 1715,
and other documents. This, together with the fear of the
Company’s arms, has had the effect of speedily driving away
the rebels and of dispersing their whole faction; while the
Company has been reimbursed the expenditure incurred by
this expedition out of the amount paid by valuation by the
newly appointed Wannias for the properties and possessions
of the rebels confiscated by the Company. On that occasion
I had the singular pleasure of discovering, through the
courageousness of Don Anthony, who was -here in Colombo
at the time, the evil practices carried on in the Wanni and
the hiding places of the smugglers along the east coast of this
Island between Punto Pedro and Trinconomale, or rather
between Moeliawalle and the Pas Pyl. This smuggling,
carried on thus far surreptitiously, is very prejudicial to the
Company’s trade. I will therefore deal with the subject at
length. The Wanni is situated to the south (of Jaffna-
patnam), right across the Island, and adjoins the Kandyan
territory. It is therefore well situated for the clandestine
exportation of elephant tusks, &c., as they could be easily
fetched by beasts of burden, while other articles also may be
exported without the Company being able to prevent it,
much to the prejudice of its trade. It is very necessary that
the Company should hold all seaports in this Island and be
thus* master of the trade. Therefore,, the passes and the
barren territory on the side of Jaffnapatnam must be carefully
guarded. I will refer to Trinconomale and Calp ?tty later on.
The Wanni must be so closely surrounded as to make it
impossible for any articles to be imported or exported without
the knowledge of the Company’s servants. It seems, how-
ever, that the cunning and selfishness of these lords of the


forests have been more than a match for the vigilance of the
officials at Jaffnapatnam, who, instead of having the move-
ments and intrigues of the Majoraals watched by spies, have
allowed them to continue their smuggling. These succeeded
in eluding the Company by making use of three small seaports
on a part of the Ceylon coast which is little resorted to, called
Alembiel, Chialwatte, and Moletivo, situated between Pas Pyl
and Moeliawalle. And from there they secretly and cunningly
despatched by thonys 27 to the Coromandel Coast arecanuts,
elephant tusks, &c., bought in the Wanni, these vessels
returning with cotton goods, and thus again escaping the
duties thereon. This would not have been discovered but
for the reports of the said Don Anthony of December 31,
1714, and January 2, 1715, which will be found registered
at the Secretariat. I have thus been enabled to intercept this
smuggling and to prevent it in future. With this end in
view the Commandeur and the Council of Jaffnapatnam have
been ordered to send one of the sloops to cruise along these
shores during the change of the monsoon, with instructions
to allow no vessel to pass without examination, and to prevent
them entering any of these harbours of the Wanni. As an
encouragement the crew have been promised one-third of the
confiscated goods. In order also to be in a better position to
control and watch these Wannias, I had built near the bay of
Woebletivo, or in the village of Moeletivo, a small wooden
structure of pallisades and earth, to enable us to watch from
close by what these people did on the shore. This is a matter
of great importance in regard to the Company’s trade, because
the existence of three such smuggling coves gave these folk
facilities for importing and exporting whatever would bring
most profit, and for this reason the cruising operations must
be continued. In the structure at Moeletivo are now stationed
24 European soldiers under command of an ensign and two
sergeants, besides* 20 lascoreens under their chief, which is
quite a sufficient force.
These are the principal matters of note relating to the
Company in the Commandement of Jaffnapatnam. I will now
proceed to treat of the other stations. But before doing so I
must strongly commend to you the newly appointed Wannia,
Don Anthony Colesegra, as a faithful and diligent subject of
the Company, although last year he had the misfortune of
incurring the displeasure of the Commandeur of Jaffnapatnam.
This was chiefly on account of the disclosure he made
to me with regard to the rebellious Wannias, a matter referred
to already. These disclosures (in writing) were handed to
me in the presence of Captain Beeckman and the Secretary
de Haan, and he showed therein not only how harshly he had
4 74-13


been treated by the Commandeur during his detention in
Jaffnapatnam, but he also pointed out the comparatively
easy means by which the rebels might be captured in their
smuggling coves. To all appearance a great deal more advan-
tage might have been derived from the information obtained by
those who were entrusted with the execution of this work, if
this man had not been constantly mistrusted and suspected,
and if the expedition had been carried out in a more suitable
manner. 32 All this may be seen in the various documents
preserved at the Secretariat, and especially from the corre-
spondence, both public and private, between ourselves and the
officials referred to.
The Commandement of Galle.
This Commandement, which is situated between the rivers
Bentotte on the west and the Walewe on the east, is secured
against hostile attacks by three stone strongholds. The
principal and most formidable of these is the town of Galle,
171 roods in circumference, which, besides other advantages,
possesses a splendid harbour where the Company’s vessels could
be sheltered and protected, and especially the ships of the
return fleet, which are quite safe and may be loaded there.
The only danger is from the strong south-east wind blowing
from the open sea, which sometimes makes this bay very
stormy and dangerous; the more so, because the crew of
the return fleet are by no means prepared for such winds
at that time of the year, and are rather reckless in having
the vessels anchored very near each other. I considered
it necessary to make some provision in relation to this
matter, and ordered among other things that no foreign
vessels were to remain in harbour during the winter when
our return fleet was in the bay, because they are usually
provided with inferior cables and only cause damage to the
Company’s ships during rough weather. Further precautions
have been prescribed with regard to the anchoring of the
ships and providing them with all necessary requirements.
The harbour near the Oenewatte hill is provided by nature
with a sand bay, which has a tank or water reservoir, where
clear and fresh drinking water is continually collected from
the neighbouring hills, and this water may be obtained for
the use of the vessels without much loss of time or trouble. 33
Besides fortifications, the said Commandement consists of
a large part of the Wallalewitty, Galle, Bellegam, Moruwa, and
Dolas das Cories. It is also protected, as previously stated,
by the fortress of Matura, the usual residence of tfie Dessaves.
This fortress also has been built in a very advantageous posi-
tion, on a narrow projecting strip of land, about 60 roods wide,


enclosed on the east by the sea, and on the west by the river
Nielwallagange. Another stronghold is Catoene, about 7
miles landward of Matura, situated on the boundaries of the
Company’s territory. These strongholds require as garrison
the strength of men stated in the diary of His Excellency the
late Governor, and in order to avoid repetition I would refer
to that document, to which also I would refer with regard to
the garrison required for Galle and the three old paggers , 34
Accuras, Hakman, and Marcade, the latter three being only
garrisoned by lascoreens as a token of our right of possession.
This Commandement of Galle, which before my time had
always been a heavy burden to the Company, I succeeded, by
means of a great deal of retrenchment and carefully planned
economy in administration, to place on such a secure and
profitable footing that it yielded, like other Commandements
under this Government, a considerable profit during the last
year. This year, however, the revenue has fallen off again
to the amount of FI. 9,121'12, a deficit which is chiefly due
to the smaller sale of Galle elephants. This year the number
sold in Jaffna amounted only to 37, against 113 last year.
A statement of the revenue of this least remunerative of all
stations under my rule may be found in the General Account
sent yearly to the Netherlands and to Batavia. I will add
here only in general terms that the improved condition is
chiefly due to the abolition of unnecessary items of expenditure
and the careful supervision of the subordinate employes,
by guarding against dishonest acts on their part. Because,
formerly, they did not hesitate to carry on a private trade in
cotton goods and other articles, thus attacking the Company
in the most important departments of its trade. They even
interfered in the sale of arecanuts; so that, although a consider-
able quantity of this commodity was deposited yearly in the
Company’s stores, both by village and moetets zs taxes and by
purchase, yet very little of it was sold. On the other hand,
these functionaries filled their own pockets by buying up and
privately selling a large quantity of these nuts, which quite
supplied the demand of the vessels arriving there. Thus it
was that the Company sold but very little, and was obliged to
consign yearly a large quantity of spoilt and stale nuts to
the fire. I have not been able to find a better means of
preventing this evil than by appointing two Commissioners,
and by instructing the Collector of the Arecanuts never to
purchase any nuts on behalf of the Company in that district
except in the presence of these two Commissioners. The
two Commissioners as well as the Collector were to bind
themselves by an oath, the purport of which will be found in
one of the documents at the Secretariat. This practice must


always be followed in the appointment of new Collectors oi;
when changing the Committee; because it has been found
that these officers are restrained from the evil practices
referred to by fear of the consequences of violating their oath.
It is also very necessary to revise from time to time the strict
orders made by me to prevent the smuggling of arecanuts in
the bay of Galle, in Belligam, and in Ganduure, as also those
prohibiting the Sinhalese from taking their nuts to the un-
profitable market at Cattergamme. All these orders will
be found contained in the letters sent from here to Galle, and
in other documents preserved there. The foregoing remarks
also apply to the trade in cotton goods, in which the Company
obtained but a small profit, while its servants, without right
or reason, openly carried on a, large trade, in the face of all
Placaats, and without fear of the penalties involved. Indeed,
this evil had taken such root that, with the connivance of
the person in authority, a society was established under the
name of the “ Small Company,” which considered this
forbidden trade to be the privilege of the chief officers in this
Commandement. Against this pernicious state of things I
had to apply strong remedies, and I made the Master Attend-
ant of the Shipping, the Warehouse-keepers, and the Receiver
of Shore Dues bind themselves by a strict oath bearing upon
their duties in the loading and unloading of ships, and the
storage in the Company’s warehouses of these said forbidden
cotton goods. All this may also be found at the Secretariat.
At the same time it will be seen that, as a greater encourage-
ment, I promised the subordinates of the Fiscal and the
Collector as a reward one-third of all cotton goods and areca-
nuts they succeeded in confiscating. Various other useful
precautionary measures and orders were issued, which any one
interested in the matter may always find among the documents
at the Secretariat. That these measures have been successful
in preventing this great evil and in compelling the Company’s
officers and servants to act with greater honesty is proved
by the Company’s trade accounts. They would show what
considerable profits the Company has derived from arecanuts
and cotton goods during my rule, especially in the last
account, which shows as receipts for this year the sum of
FI. 9,420 *l4 and for arecanuts FI. 53,225 •4. The same books
and the Compendium also prove that since the promulgation
of these orders a great deal more, yea, even ten times,
arecanuts have been sold to the Company than during the
time of private purchase, when, indeed, hardly any nuts w r ere
offered to the Company. According to the usual custom I
ought now to state in detail in what manner these nuts are
collected, and how much the inhabitants are obliged to deliver


yearly to the Lord of the land both as village and as moetets
taxes, and also who are under this obligation. But as all
these particulars have been dealt with in the Memoirs of
Their Honours Pyl and Van Rhee, 36 it is hardly necessary for
me to repeat them here, especially as these are fixed revenues,
which vary but little. During my rule, however, I raised the
taxes on arecanuts in a few villages in proportion to the
amount. In all other cases this income depends on God’s
blessing and on a more or less plentiful harvest. Care must
be taken that every year the inhabitants plant young trees
in place of those of the old ones which may have died.
This is a matter that falls within the province of the Com-
mandeur and the Council of Galle as regards both the Galle
and the Matura districts. I have also taken the produce
of the nely 18 and other harvests in these two districts from
the hands of the rich natives and put it into those of the
lawful Lord of the land, i.e., the Company, with the result
that a considerable quantity is now collected for the Com-
pany’s stores, while formerly hardly any was delivered there.
For instance, it is shown in the books that during the year
1714- in the said district, and especially in Matura,
50,943£ parras of nely were received; while the books for
1715- show that so much as 78,216| parras of nely were
received, which is not only sufficient for the needs of that
Commandement, but allows of a quantity being sold to the
inhabitants. Ninety or a hundred lasts of rice must be
yearly sent from Colombo to Galle in the autumn for the
use of the cinnamon peelers and for that of the return
fleet and other vessels that call there. The ships must be
supplied not with nely, but with a good quantity of rice,
because the nely on account of its husk and peel takes up
twice as much room, and is nearly twice as heavy, one parra
of rice being equal to two parras of nely. The cinnamon
peelers also are hardly ever supplied with nely, but nearly
always with rice, because they have to go far into the king’s
territory, and would be too much encumbered if they were
given nely instead of rice. In casks of urgency, however, I
have now and again by gentle persuasion induced them to
accept nely, but never against their determined wish. It
would be very desirable, now that the Company obtains
its nely from the Ceylon harvest, to find the means of clearing
it from the husk and converting it into rice. In that case it
would be no longer necessary to send rice from here. The
extent of the increase of revenue from the harvest may be
fully ascertained from the successive instructions sent to the
Galle Commandement, and especially from our letter of
December 14, 1713, to Their Honours our Superiors in the


Fatherland. It is there stated how shamefully the natives
used to deal with the Company’s revenue, appropriating the
greater part of it to themselves, while even the part left to
the Company was not delivered, but left to be enjoyed by the
village clerks and others. They also usually usurped and
cultivated the best and most fertile fields without paying
revenue to the lawful Lord of the land, leaving only the worst
for the Company, from which also no profit was obtained,
as they rendered false accounts of receipt and expenditure,
referring to the authority of the Dessave, so that in the end
there was hardly any grain available for the Company. I
have opposed these malpractices as far as possible from the
time of my arrival by the dismissal of the dishonest Master
of the Harvest Jan de Leeuw, who for a considerable time
held this post in the Girriways, and most skilfully acted his
part with the knowledge of his superiors, as mentioned by
me in my diary for the year 1708 when I visited this Com-
mandement, and when on personally investigating the matter
I found out his tricks. This obliged me to look out for another
person to fill his office, an honest and diligent native, and I
appointed as Gagienaike, or Master of the Harvest, Don
Simon de Wiedjewardene, Mudaliyar, to whom reference will
be made later on, and whose good qualities I have dwelt on in
my diary. By his honesty and zeal the real income from, and
the value of, the Girriway territory are now known. It was
found that, contrary to the opinion of the former Governors, the
Girriways and Baygams 37 alone could yield sufficient grain for
the whole of the Galle Commandement, including the garrison
and the native servants. It will be seen from the above
account that the quantity stated there was stowed away
in the Company’s warehouse after all necessary clearances had
been made. This increase is also partly due to the orders
issued by me on July 4, 1712, to the Dessaves and the Trade
Accountants at Colombo, Galle, and Matura, and to the Chief of
the Audit Office at Colombo, with a view to further prevent
fraud and neglect. They were to the effect that in future the
Dessaves must send in every month an account of all the nely
left on the land which had yet to be fetched, with a statement
of the villages and korles, and the names of the individuals
in whose care it was left; so that the Trade Accountants
may be able to draw up an exact account of all the rice received
and issued. In order to secure a better observance of this
rule, the Audit Office has been required to compare the Trade
Accounts with the accounts of the Dessave, and also with the
lists kept by the Commissioners, who are yearly sent out to
the fields to make an estimate of the harvest and the Company’s
revenue. To simplify this work I had these lists translated


into Dutch by the sworn interpreters employed at the
Secretariat in Colombo. These orders are preserved at the
Secretariat, and may be found also in the above-cited letter
of the year 1713. The orders and admonitions must be
continually repeated, and their observance strictly enforced,
as being the only means of securing for the Company its lawful
revenue. This revenue has greatly increased by the with-
drawal of several accomodessans , 38 which had been thoughtlessly
and without sufficient discrimination granted from time to
time to different Mudaliyars and other native chiefs, so that
whole provinces and the finest fields were occupied by them
without the payment of any tribute to the Lord of the land.
In this matter also I introduced a reform, as will appear
from the correspondence of the present year with the Com-
mandement of Galle. Each person is now allowed only as
much accomodessan as he is entitled to in right of his office.
The increase of the present revenue was further due to the
sale of uncultivated lands, which has already realized a
considerable sum, and will yield more, as a large number of
lands are yet to be sold. Many objections were raised to the
sale of these lands, the argument being that it would cause
great disturbance; but I have shown already, in regard to
the same matter in Jaffnapatnam, that the difficulties were
by no means as great as had been apprehended. It pleased
Their Honours in the Fatherland by their letter of the year
1714 to order the sale of such lands as were the lawful
property of the Company ; and on the receipt of this esteemed
order I had notices published throughout this Government,
summoning before the Court of Justice all persons who con-
sidered themselves entitled to any of the above-mentioned
lands, requiring them to appear with their deeds within a
period of six months. But thus far very few persons have
been able to prove their right, and it is not likely that many
of the former owners of the lands already sold will be able to
prove their claim. I have taken every precaution to prevent
any one being wronged or defrauded. It is to be hoped that
these orders have been carried out by the persons entrusted
with the work. In a lengthy reply from the Commandeur
and Council of Jaffnapatnam dated August 13, 1715, to our
inquiry of July 25, with regard to this matter, this is stated
to have been done. In order to avoid prolixity I would refer
here to these two letters, and also to two declarations dated
July 25 and 30 on the same subject, to be found at the
Secretariat, where an account is given of the proceedings and
sale by the Dessave of Matura, Jeremias van Vliet.
The capture of elephants in the Dessavony of Matura is
a very important matter, and yields a considerable profit to


the Company, without any other risk than mortality among
the animals. They are captured at a small expenditure in
the kraals at Kitjegosere, Biddigamme, and Goddegamme,
and fed from the trees belonging to the inhabitants. The
Company only pays the keepers a small salary, which is
fixed by regulations. There are also old regulations treating
of the castes that are obliged to perform this work, of the
manner in which these animals are to be caught and tamed,
and of the description of trees which are to provide food for
these gormandizers. All these rules have been set forth in
detail in former Memoirs, but in none of them will be found
such a good account of so many beautiful animals having
been captured in this part of the country as during my rule.
This is due to the change made by me in the post of Overseer of
the Harvest, because the Master of the Hunt and the Overseer
of the Harvest were on bad terms and harassed each other
as much as possible. If the former arranged for a hunt, the
latter pretended that he had urgent need of the people
required to start the elephants, for the purpose of ploughing,
sowing, or mowing, and vice, versa, much to the detriment
of this important wqrk. These two offices having now been
entrusted to one person, i.e., Don Simon, there is no quarrelling,
and consequently the work is done much better and in proper
season. In this way also the services of the inhabitants are
properly distributed, so that one work need not wait for the
other. As a result of this new arrangement, a sufficient number
of elephants was captured for the Company’s trade in this
district alone, and with small expenditure. This was also
partly due to the extraordinary vigilance and untiring zeal
of the Gagienaike referred to, who even out of his private
means made presents to the inhabitants and chiefs of the
Colona and other Kories in the Kandyan king’s dominions,
in order to induce them to start the animals to the Waluwe
river, and across that river into the Company’s territory. It
would otherwise be impossible to obtain so many of these
animals in our land, because they are usually kept back by
the king’s subjects, and perhaps even killed for the sake of
the tusks. With a view to still further promote this work,
I sent orders to Matura that the Dessaves, who used to
be present with great pomp and many ceremonies, much to
the delay of business, were not to attend in future, but that
they were simply to procure for the Gagienaike all that
he required. This, as was to be expected, aroused an
ill-feeling on their part towards the latter, so much so that
they oppose him on every pretext. It will therefore be very
necessary to give this energetic man all the support you can,
and permit him to lay his complaints directly before you.


In this case he will not fail to continue his work with the
same zeal.
The revenue of these districts, known under the name of
Deccum , 39 Enge* 0 and Wattehadde, il have all been described and
specified in the documents already referred to. They have
brought in considerably more during the last few years than
formerly, on account of some villages having been more
heavily taxed than others, as was reasonable. The Dessave
of Matura and the Captain of the Corle must see that these
taxes are paid ; and it will also be necessary, at the end of
August, to publicly lease out to the highest bidder the remain-
ing lands of the Company in that district, so that the revenue
of the district may be received without interruption. The
various sources of revenue are stated in the yearly Com-
pendium, and that for the last year shows that these have
amounted during the last book year to FI. 46,603 •5 • 8, and
the lease of lands to FI. 8,457.
The quantity of Ceyloti cardamoms exported to the Father-
land varies year by year. It has to be collected mostly in
these districts by purchase from Kandy. I must mention
here en passant that instructions have been received from the
Fatherland with regard to its collection and shipping, and
orders were given that funds for its purchase should be given
out early, to prevent the returning vessels being kept waiting,
or the whole of the quantity required not being supplied.
Particulars as to the manner of loading the ships will be found
•in our correspondence. It will be seen there that during
my rule as many as 7 parras of this seed were repeatedly
despatched each time from the bay of Galle. I will now
make an end of my observations relating to this Commande-
ment, but before doing so must refer to some important
orders which I had to issue during the latter part of 1713,
1714, and 1715, with regard to the unloading of cargo, a
work which was being done very carelessly. The persons in
authority were not present, and when goods were afterwards
found missing to the prejudice of the Company, they would
allege that they could not be held responsible. Moreover,
the demands for fittings and provisions were so outrageously
large that one hardly knew where the supply of such large
quantities was to come from. I therefore framed a set of
new rules to regulate these matters, and appointed two perma-
nent Commissioners, with strict orders that they should not
allow even the bottom layers of the cargo, or even pepper, to
be brought into the ships without the captain of the vessel
and the Bookkeeper being present, either of whom was to
accompany the cargo to the ship. Formerly it was not
considered worth the trouble to send any Commissioner or


responsible person along with the goods when pepper was
being loaded, the presence of the two Commissioners at the
loading of the upper cargo being thought sufficient. The result
was that the Company in the Netherlands often received
such goods considerably under weight, and especially so in the
case of pepper. When complaints were sent in, no satisfactory
reason or explanation could be found. The authorities of
the vessels are now held responsible for the cargo that
is loaded under their own supervision. The accounts of
the fittings and provisions also must be carefully examined
at every station in this Commandement, to make sure that
nothing is issued against orders ; and it must also be noted
how much of the goods each ship has left behind, in order to
prevent unnecessary issues. Special attention must be paid
to applications for heavy cables; for these have been asked
for and supplied formerly at an extraordinary rate ; while, on
the other hand, ships bound for the Cape now have to content
themselves with only five good cables, two obtained from
the Fatherland and three made and supplied here. The
latter are very good, and tougher than those made in the
Netherlands, and they show a profit to the Company, as their
cost is onlytwo-thirds of the price of the former. They are made
in Colombo and Galle by our own people from cayer , 42 or coconut
husk, which is obtained in the villages of the Chialas, and
thus yields some profit to the inhabitants. I usually had the
ships under this Government supplied with these cables,
because of the saving in expenditure, and I thus avoided the
use of the more expensive article from Holland, in the interest
of our Lords and Masters. The expenditure for the equipage
of ships and also the cost of the hoys and other small vessels
was thus reduced.
Tbinconomale.
Trinconomale, situated on the eastern side of this Island,
about 22 miles south of Punto Pedra, on a projecting point
of rock, is a fortress with many strong accessories, such as
redoubts, bastions, and moats, some of which,
however, fell into decay a few years ago or had not been
completed. I will therefore speak here only of the fortress
itself. It is situated at the foot of the so-called Pagoda hill,
bounded on the north and south by two outer bays, the
northern of which is a safe anchorage for large and small vessels.
The southern bay, on the other hand, is only useful for small
vessels during the northern monsoon, because of its many
reefs and rocks. The fort itself, measuring on the inside
about 266 roods, is of great importance to the Company, and
must therefore be kept in constant repair. It is important
in regard to our relations with the King of Kandy, if for no


other reason, for its use on the closing of the harbours, and for
maintaining our mastership of the trade in arecanut and cotton
goods which is carried on in that part of the country. It is
also important on account of its close proximity to the coasts
of Coromandel and Bengal, and to safeguard us from the
intrusion of foreign Europeans, who, when opportunity
offered, would be glad to possess themselves of such a
convenient station, which would enable them to obtain con-
siderable privileges which the Honourable Company now derives
from this Island, especially as it would form a very good
port of call. Although at present this fortress is in a con-
dition sufficiently strong to withstand any hostile attack from
outside, I had, as a greater safeguard, and as the expense was
inconsiderable, ordered in 1714 that in Oostenburg and across
the road 8 cannons, 4 on each side, should be placed and given
in charge of a sergeant and six soldiers. This Oostenburg is
a small stone fortress, very favourably situated on the top of
a hill east of the entrance to the inner bay, and thus serves
to protect the bay. The entrance to this fortress on the
land side is a narrow, difficult, and steep path, provided with
embrasures. On the sea side it is entirely inaccessible on
account of the high and steep walls. Just opposite Oosten-
burg, on the west, so as to cover the inner bay from the other
side, is a waterpas* 3 which may also be strengthened; but I
postponed this work because the bay is at present sufficiently
protected. The waterpas, situated 200 roods from the coast,
is guarded by a sergeant, 2 corporals, and 12 soldiers, with
3 pieces of ordnance of 18-lb. balls and 3 of 12-lb. balls, with
such precautions and arrangements as were necessary. This
matter is referred to in our letters of July 25, 1713, and July
13, 1714. I leave it to Your Honour to obtain authority
from Their Excellencies the Government of India, should it
become necessary, to build another waterpas of freestone
below, across the road, or at the other end of Oostenburg, as
a greater protection for the inner bay. This may be easily
done and at small expenditure.
Batticaloa.
Batticaloa, 16 miles from the fort of Trinconomale, situated
on the island of Paleandivo, is also a strong and well-built
fort, at which the Company’s jurisdiction terminates. The
island referred to is separated from the east coast of Ceylon
by the river Batticaloa, which gives its name to the fort
mentioned above, and bounds it on the south and west.
The fort is 120 roods in circumference, and is at present
garrisoned, with a view to prevent as far as possible the
smuggling going on there to the prejudice of the trade of the


Company, and also for the collection of grain and other
articles for the Company. On account of its restricted
jurisdiction here as well as in Trinconomale and more inland,
the Company has no power over the Sinhalese, who are
subject to the King of Kandy; and they must therefore be
treated with special kindness and consideration. So also must
the Veddas, an almost savage tribe, who live in that territory,
and who for various certain reasons are useful to the Company,
especially their chiefs, who sometimes come to visit our people,
and are often able to obtain for us, in return for a small present,
the wax required for the use of this Government, which
would otherwise have to be obtained with much more trouble
and at greater expense from Bengal or Malabar. This wax
was lately obtained at the very small cost of one schelling 44
a pound. Nineteen miles north-west of Batticaloa, or south-
east of Trinconomale, 2 miles from the last mentioned place,
is the district Coetjaar, and in its neighbourhood, round the
curve of the coast line, the province of Tamblagam. From
these provinces is obtained yearly a considerable quantity of
ndy at very reasonable prices, which comes in handy for
the garrison, &c. But, on the other hand, these localities are
very convenient ones for smugglers, who pretend to fetch rice,
but really smuggle cotton goods into, and arecanuts out of,
the Kandyan territory. A strict watch must be kept, and
it must be the duty of the cruising chialoups of Trinconomale
to examine all native vessels passing along that coast, so
that this profitable trade may not be injured. At the com-
mencement of my rule the trade was entirely monopolized
by the Company by the closing of all the Ceylon harbours, a
fact which may be learnt from the orders and regulations of
the latter part of the year 1707, which are preserved at the
Secretariat in Colombo. This must be borne in mind with
regard to these islands, because it is a matter specially desired
by Their Excellencies our Superiors in Holland and in Batavia,
on whose special orders the closing of the harbours was
effected and regulated by me. On this account also I promised
the lascoreens employed in cruising on the east coast one-
third of all arecanuts and cotton goods confiscated, as a
means of securing greater vigilance on their part. It seems
impossible to check these evil practices, in spite of all punish-
ments prescribed in the Placaats. The greed of some
strangers, and more especially of the people of Jaffnapatnam and
of the Moors, seems boundless. I have therefore made efforts
to keep them out of those places as much as possible. I had
the names of the people of Jaffnapatnam and of the people
from the coast entered in a thombo, and levied from them a
tax of two fanaras a year, and also made them perform some


services. I also prohibited the Commandeur and the Council
of Jaffnapatnam from obtaining any grain from Coromandel,
where it is usually very dear, and ordered that it should be
obtained from Batticaloa. I have also ordered that the
timber for Coromandel and Trinconomale should be got ready
and despatched as soon as possible.
The trade which is carried on here in the interests of the
Company, with a view to make up for the expenditure,
consists mostly in the purchase and sale of arecanuts and
Madura cotton goods, although various other articles are also
sold. The cotton goods are much in demand, and large
quantities are transported yearly from Trinconomale by the
coast vessels. Another source of income is the sale of native
liquor to the tavern-keepers, who pay twice as much as
is paid elsewhere. As the Company does not farm out any
of the revenue here, it may be concluded that on account
of the closing of the harbours and of the monopoly in the
trade in arecanuts and cotton goods, this source of income
has also considerably increased. Thus, this station, from
having been so far a burden to the Company, has now become
one which yields considerable profit, which may be seen from
the accounts. This year the surplus was FI. 70,909 *7; and
this is to a great extent due to the various reforms introduced
and to the prevention of all fraud, which formerly was
committed on a large scale, especially where the arecanuts and
cotton goods were concerned ; and this was done publicly
and before the eyes of the whole world. What trouble it cost
to put an end to these practices will be borne out by the
minutes of Council and the correspondence with the local
officials. It is therefore very necessary that the orders on
this subject should be maintained in future, and that the
actions of the officials be watched; and that the strict oath now
required to be taken by the Commissioners for the Arecanut
Department pnd by the Receiver of the Shore Dues, as well as
all concerned in these duties, must be demanded from them,
so that the Company may be saved from the great losses
which it otherwise would be subject to, and that it may
obtain the large profits formerly made by private individuals
and by its own servants.
Calpetty.
Calpetty, with its five bastions, costs the Honourable
Company little in upkeep, but it is necessary in order to
control the trade in arecanuts and to restrain the deceitful
pedlars of Putulang, who, belonging to the king’s territory,
are very anxious to possess themselves of this profitable
trade. They therefore bribe the king’s Dessaves, under


whose jurisdiction they are, and thus it is that they and these
chiefs have repeatedly applied to have the nuts sold to them
for less than Rds. above our usual rate of purchase of 2 Rds.,
that is 5| Rds. per ammonam, in order to export them to the
coast of Coromandel. This request I have each time bluntly
refused, in compliance with the orders of our Superiors in
the Fatherland. If the concession were granted, they would
be sure to spoil the Company’s profitable trade in cotton
goods by importing these on their own account, a matter
which is opposed to the best interests of the Company. In
the instructions for the closing of the harbours issued in 1707,
it was stated how prejudicial such action on their part would
be to the trade in Manaar and Negombo, because the lake of
Putulang is connected by a branch stream with the river of
Chilauw. On account of the isolation of these shores guards
of lascoreens have been stationed along the coast, and all
other possible precautions have been taken. It is in this
way that the state' of affairs has improved in the district,
and we now obtain a large quantity of arecanuts from the
people of Putulang in exchange for cotton goods. The nuts
are sold to the coast merchants. As these matters were
formerly recklessly left to the Opperhoofden; 29 I have now
arranged that they and two Commissioners do take the
same oath as the officers in Galle and Trinconomale. My
expectations herein were fulfilled ; for this station, which
formerly was only a source of expenditure, has now become
a profitable one. Last year there was a clear profit of
FI. 62,501 *ll*B, and this year of FI. 31,556* 11*8.
From our letters and orders sent from time to time to the
same station, and especially from our letter of December 14,
1714, to the Fatherland, maybe seen what difficulties we had
to encounter before this result was obtained. With a view
to a better prevention of smuggling, especially by the Chialias
or Moors, both by water and by land, orders were given that
a vessel was to cruise along the coast from the fort of Calpetty
to the hoek of Coldermaale ; and orders were also sent to
Manaar to double the garrisons at Aripo and at the river
of Moddergamme, a point already referred to. One-third
of all confiscated goods has been promised to the quarter-
master* of the cruisers and one-third to the lascoreens. This
has had a good effect, and has served to frighten the Chialias
considerably. In order to prevent the merchants from the
opposite coast buying arecanuts from the Putulang Wannias,
instructions have been sent to the'former station to warn the
people not to buy arecanuts other than from the Company,
and not to transport more in their ships than is stated in
their passports, because if found doing so, their vessels and


cargo would be confiscated and they themselves put in chains.
Orders have been sent to Manaar to carefully examine some
of these vessels. In other respects the trade at this place
does not amount to much. Sometimes dye roots are found
on a certain island called Paredivo. These roots, as already
stated, are in no way inferior to those of Manaar, especially
when carefully collected and properly treated. But we have
in vain pointed this out several times.
Madura.
On the coast of Madura there are, for the promotion of the
Company’s trade, four separate residencies. The first is called
Tutucorin, which is a stone fort, sufficiently strong for our
force there, and capable of upholding the Company’s right
of possession. This may be seen from the various plans.
North of this fort, in the territory of the Theuver, there is the
station Kilkare, and south of it two stations called Ponnical
and Manapar. These will be found indicated on the map
of the coast in question. The two latter and Tutucorin are
in the territory of the Naik of Madura. The trade which we
are permitted to carry on there is of great importance and
value to the Company, as will be shown in the proper place.
I will merely state here that our profits have greatly fallen
off, owing to much cavilling and opposition on the part of
the Company’s servants and others. When I assumed the
command here, I found that this territory was quite inde-
pendent of Ceylon, so that everything could be arranged to
satisfy the greed and caprice of the former Opperhoofden.
Fraud was committed in every direction, both in regard
to private trade and in the department of the cotton goods,
as well as in the entering of taxes, accounts of expenditure,
&c. All manner of schemes had been started, by means of
which the authorities were hoodwinked This fact has been
clearly proved by the useful reforms made in the year 1712,
referred to in our letter at the end of that year to Their
Excellencies our Superiors, which were accompanied by the
documents showing what rules had been framed from time to
time as a preventive against such practices.
With a view to point out briefly the improvement effected
in the condition of this coast by a comparison with former
years, I will state here for Your Honour’s information that
all obstacles which were urged in excuse, such as the conduct
of the land regents, the expensiveness of cotton yarn, want
of fanums, mutiny, scarcity of provisions, and other similar
difficulties, were entirely of a fictitious character, and served
only as an advantage to the merchants to obtain a higher
price for the cotton goods. Last year the same artifice was


used in Tutucorin, but I declined to accept any such pleas, and
after some of the officers had been reduced in rank, it was found
the complaints received were by no means so numerous. On
the contrary, the trade has been carried on without interrup-
tion up to the present moment, and the required articles
received in proper time. This may be seen from the orders
executed, which are mentioned in the correspondence with the
officials at Madura. Strict orders were issued for the early
despatch of the goods required for the Fatherland and for
Batavia, and I succeeded in reducing the price of cotton goods
in spite of the scarcity of provisions. Care has also been taken
for the cloths to be delivered as quickly as possible and to be of
as good a quality as possible. Thus, all the so-called obstacles
have been removed; no mutiny took place, sufficient fanums
for carrying on the trade were supplied, and I made a contract
with the merchants of the place on December 29, 1710, by
which they have bound themselves to accept the Company’s
ducats at 21 £ fanums each. Thus, the Company makes an extra
profit of | fanum on each ducat over that made during the time
of the late Governor Joan Simons. 45 By this and other measures
there has been always a considerable supply of fanums on hand.
I am sorry to say, however, that all exhortation of the officers
could not obtain us a better quality of cloth for the Fatherland,
about which many complaints were received. This is no
doubt due to the carelessness and selfishness of the Opper-
hoofden, who seem to collude with the merchants when sorting
the cloths, as shown in the above-cited documents, and espe-
cially in our letter of December 13, 1715, to Their Excellencies
our Superiors. In these documents all the difficulties have
been explained, and an account has been given of the action
taken to check the officers and compel them to perform their
duty. We hope that this has been effective, and that the
present officials will be more faithful in the discharge of their
duty. There is some assurance of this, as the profits have
considerably increased. Last year they were FI. 218,468-13 *B,
and this year FI. 233,856*8-8. The increase would have
been still greater if it had been possible for this Government
to be provided with a larger quantity of Japanese and
Tonquin copper, because this metal as well as pewter and
tin are much in demand along the sea coast. I need not
enter into detail of the way this metal is sold here, because
several instructions from Their Excellencies the Supreme
Government of India have been received on the subject, one
only lately, to which I would invite attention. I would also
refer specially to the Malabar trade in arecanuts, which is
carried on both by land along the mountains, and by sea just
below Collesegrepatnam. This is a source of detriment to


the Company’s trade, because it prevents the Ceylon arecanuts
•being sold. Since the issue of my orders prohibiting the sale
of the Malabar arecanuts the trade has been more flourishing;
and last year 2,870 ammonams of these nuts were disposed
of. This is a much larger quantity than was sold in former
years, and it would have been still larger if the supply of
nuts had not run short. From the documents preserved at
the Colombo Secretariat may be seen what reductions had
to be made in the price of chanks, which are found along the
coast a little beyond Mokortoe, by the Paruas at certain
seasons of the year, all of which must be delivered to the
Company. Care must be taken that this is done. Although
these shells do not sell quite readily at present in Bengal,
the diving for them must not be neglected, because it is the
livelihood of the poor Paruas. 46 If this failed, they might go
away, and the Company cannot very well dispense with their
services, especially if a pearl fishery is to be undertaken. At
such a fishery the Paruas divers with their thonys are very
necessary. Under the heading of the Aripo Pearl Fishery men-
tion has already been made of the way this business is carried
on. I will therefore not enlarge on the subject here, but
simply state in conclusion that a large quantity of cowrie
chanks is in store at Tutucorin. I would also refer to the
chapter on Manaar concerning the precautions to be taken
with regard to the territory of the Theuver and the free
passage of Pambes. The Theuver can, and sometimes must,
be forced to keep the contracts made with him before and
during my time. I will state here with regard to him only
that the station of Kilkare is situated within his territory, and
that the trade there is a successful one. The quarrels origi-
nated by the Moor Peria Tamby have ceased entirely since
the making of this contract, and, in accordance with the
instructions of Their Excellencies, he has been prevented from
spoiling our trade by his greed. This may be seen from the
documents of the years 1708 and 1709 preserved at the
Secretariat. They will show that I have often been obliged
to threaten the Theuver with the closing of his harbours and
the stopping of his trade both with Aatchin and Bengal on
the occasions in which he failed to observe the agreements in
the contract, and that these threats* always proved successful.
Last year the Company was of service to him by inter-
fering on his behalf with the Danes, who had given the
Tanjouwers help against him with their navy, in which
encounter the Danes did not scruple to attack his vessels,
though provided with passports and flying the Company’s
flag, and to capture them on behalf of the Tanjouwers. After
some correspondence, however, which is preserved at the
5 74-13


Secretariat, this matter was also brought to a fairly satis-
factory termination.
Leaving now the subject of the Madura coast, I recommend
the preservation and promotion of peace with the Theuver
and the Prince of Madura, as this will best serve the interests
of the Company. Only in the utmost necessity, and if the
Company’s lawful prerogatives are seriously interfered with,
should any rupture with these princes be permitted. The
occurrences of the year 1710, related in detail in the journal
of my visit to that coast, may serve as an example. At
the commencement these differences were the cause of great
trouble, but they have proved in the end to have served
a good purpose, in so far that the letters received by the
Company since that time have been free from complaints
about the vexatious conduct of the land regents. They have
now left the Paruas and the Company’s merchants entirely
in peace. This shows that there are occasions when it is
necessary to employ the means recommended by our Lords
and Masters for enforcing the terms of contracts and for
upholding the dignity of the Company, this latter having
suffered a great deal in Madura. Yet, the consequences must
be well considered before such measures are had recourse to.
It must especially be ascertained whether it would be possible
to withstand the enemy and to gain an apparent advantage
over him, and also whether all that is required for such an
enterprise is on hand. If this be so, no time should be* lost
in hesitation, but a prompt and firm resolution arrived at;
because irresolution in such cases aggravates matters. It
only tends to make this proud but otherwise lazy and
effeminate nation more bold; and it is also very unseemly
for the chief ruler to show diffidence instead of courage and
determination in settling such matters.
Colombo.
The Castle of Colombo is the most important stronghold
in the Island, where are received and from where are distri-
buted to the various Commandements and subaltern stations
all the principal commodities and other effects sent to and
from this Island. For this reason, and because of its situation,
it has been chosen as the* residence of the Governor and the
seat of his Council. This I now desire to give over into Your
Honour’s hands with my best wishes. I must add here that
this Castle, apart from its natural defences and its shores
lined with rocks, has been strengthened by the formidable
bastions Middelburg, Klippenburg, Enkhuysen, Den Briel,
Battenburg, and the Waterpas. Besides these, the bastions
Amsterdam and Leyden protect the bay, while Leyden bastion


with Delft, Hoorn, Rotterdam, and a part of Middleburg defend
the land side. The whole of this fort, with its ramparts,
bastions, &c., is about 989 Rhenish roods in circumference
on the inside, and is provided with gunpowder magazines,
arsenal, armoury, and warehouses, all in good condition and
repair. The Company’s military force consisted at the end
of last month of 516 able-bodied men, who, considering their
small number, are distributed to the best possible advantage.
The garrison has been rather weakened by 108 military men
having been sent to Malabar. As it seems likely that the
war there will endure some time longer, it will be necessary,
in case of any rupture with France or any other Power, to
employ a number of Toepasses, 47 as I have myself done more
than once. Those who have already been in service might
be paid FI. 7 per month, and those who never bore arms
previously FI. 5. If matters remain as they are at present
the European force now employed will be sufficient, especially
because the men are all well trained. All matters relating to
the military have been well arranged, and all that could be
desired for the protection and preservation of this important
place has been attended to. With a view to maintain things
in the same condition and to still further improve them
I have introduced the practice of drill, one regiment twice a
week during the good monsoon, outside the Galle Gate, in the
presence of all officers, one of them in turn taking the
command. The sergeants have to drill their men each at
his post, and each in turn once a week go through the
manual of the grenadiers and musketeers. Sometimes, in fine
weather, I have ordered a full parade with eleven regiments
to be held after Divine Service on Sundays.
Concerning the trade of this place little was said in the
Memoirs of former Governors, and still less concerning the
expenditure which the Company has had to bear contrary to
all right and reason for so many years. I will therefore
enlarge a little on this subject, and point out the chief reforms
made by me in this matter. I will treat first of the arecanuts,
with which the dishonest collectors dealt according to their
own pleasure, and of which, in conjunction with the Com-
missioners, they yearly bought large quantities with the
Company’s money, and sold to the shipowners without any
profit to the Company. Although thousands of ammonams
were collected yearly on behalf of the Company, Very little
of it was sold, so that a large quantity had to be burned. On
my arrival I framed suitable regulations to dispose of this
matter. Yet they were not sufficiently effective to entirely
remedy the evil. I was therefore obliged at last to appoint
two permanent Commissioners, who have to be present at


the receipt of arecanuts, and who, as well as the Collector,
are required to subscribe to an oath, the form of which is
preserved at the Secretariat. I have also introduced various
rules for regulating the private import and transport of
these nuts, one of which is that so long as any coast vessels
are anchored here, the banks of the river Mutwal up to a
point just outside the town must be guarded day and night
by the lascoreens of my guard, and beyond the Castle by the
servants of the Collector. These men receive one-third of
all goods confiscated, whether arecanuts or other contraband.
These precautions have brought about the seizure, several
times, of a quantity of nuts and other articles. I have also
instructed the Collector to warn the owners on the arrival
of vessels to abstain from clandestine trade, at the risk of
their vessels and cargo being confiscated, and they themselves
made liable to such punishment as has been decreed by the
latest Plkcaats against smuggling. In this way the Company
has at last become the sole master of this lucrative trade; so
far indeed that yearly a few thousand ammonams of nuts are
purchased on behalf of the Company and sold again to the.
merchants and others. This year the amount bought was
17,666 ammonams. The increase is also partly due to the
suppression of the rachodores , 48 or forestalled, who used to
go to the king’s territory in large numbers- and force the
Sinhalese who were on their way here to sell to them their
arecanuts and other articles at a very low price, by which
many of the up-country people were discouraged from coming
here. But since I had some of these rachodores arrested and
put in chains, the up-country people have coine to the
Company’s stores with 500 or 600 ammonams of the nuts at
a time, and they also bring various sorts of provisions into
the castle and the town, to the great convenience of the
inhabitants. Care must therefore be taken that our orders
to the Dessaves for the protection of the Sinhalese are
observed. They must be escorted from station to station by
a few lascoreens, with a view to prevent molestation, and they
must be given the right of making direct complaint to the
Governor if they are injured in any way. It has also been
my practice, whenever the merchants from the opposite coast
were unable to transport all the arecanuts from here, as well
as from Galle and Calpetty, to supply it to the Chitties and
Moors on credit, much to the advantage of the Company ;
as otherwise it would have remained on our hands. I also
consider necessary to mention here the arrangement made
for the disposal of the surplus arecanuts. Formerly this was
appropriated by the Opperhoofd 29 and the Collector ; but the
last three years it has been reserved for the Company, the


disclosure having been made, quite in a disinterested manner,
by the Commissioners, and a careful investigation of the
matter having been held. The books prior to that time
will fully explain this. It will be seen there that instead of
receiving less than the amount due, the Company now receive
a good deal more. It is therefore necessary not to permit the
vessels from the opposite coast to transport any considerable
quantity of coconuts. I used to allow those who bought
about 200 ammonams of arecanuts to take away about 4,000
or 5,000 coconuts, for which they had only to pay 1 Rd.
per thousand to the Deaconate.
According to all former Memoirs, the trade in cotton goods
here was of little importance to the Company. The authori-
ties had to be satisfied with all manner of long-winded
statements, in which difficulties of every description were urged,
with no other purpose than to cover the corruption that had
crept in. I exposed the whole scheme, as will appear under
the subject of Galle and Madura. It caused a great deal of
trouble, but had a good effect. For the Company (which
formerly was but a small participant in this trade) now enjoys
the considerable profits to be made from it, and which it has
a lawful right to. Various rules were framed on the subject,
which will be found in the minutes frequently referred to,
and in the various letters to Galle, Tutucorin, Matura, Trin-
conomale, and Calpetty. These rules cannot be conveniently
ignored, but daily supervision is necessary to enforce them
and prevent their falling into disuse.
The Trade Accounts will show the extraordinary difference
in the sale of cotton goods during my rule in comparison
with that of former years ; and that here in Ceylon, though
but 26 hours’ journey from Tutucorin, 65, 70, and up to
72 per cent, profit is made, even on the second and third
qualities. Last year this profit was FI. 39,315, and this year
FI. 30,221 * 16.
Salt, with which the officials at Madura also committed
much fraud in the purchase, about which a full account will
be found in our letter of July 20, 1713, to Batavia, and of
December 19, 1714, to the authorities in the Netherlands, is
also an article which I have restored to the Company. I
made an order that the officials should no longer deliver it,
but that this should be left to the Tutucorin merchants
in cotton goods, who were to supply it at one-third the
former price. Thus, considering the ready sale it finds in
Colombo, the Company now makes a fair profit on this article,
especially since the prohibition of its importation by private
individuals, which used to be carried on in half hoekers
and sloops.


The subject of the Dessavoine , 49 and the shameful manner
in which it was formerly administered, is also shown in detail
in our letters of December 19,1713 and 1714, to the Fatherland,
and the reforms introduced by us will be found mentioned
there, with the effects they have had. I would therefore
refer you to these documents, merely adding here that I had
intended to have a Head Thombo compiled for this province,
like the one for the Commandement of Jaffnapatnam, but
this has proved impracticable in consequence of the people
changing their residence every year. It will therefore be
sufficient if my instructions and the improvements and other
matters referred to be maintained by the strict daily super-
vision of the Dessave. As previously stated, the draught on
Malabar for timber has been put an end to, as we could do
without it, and as much fraud used to be committed therewith.
The inhabitants of the Malabar Commandement are also
excused now from the delivery of kayen . 60 In a few years we
will also need no more timber from Trinconomale, because
the same kind and beautiful kidte 61 beams might be obtained
from the Hine and’Hevegam Kories. This year an experiment
was made, by the felling of over 2,000 trees which had been
specially planted before my time and now reached proper
maturity. These are good for planks and other timber.
The capture of elephants in this part of the country has
often been successful. Thus, the Dessave again lately captured
47 animals, some of which are very fine. All these and a part
of those now kept in the stalls at Matura must be sent to
Jaffnapatnam next spring.
It is also a matter of the greatest urgency that the Moors
should be kept out of the country. As will appear from the
Resolutions of January 29, 1712, the Memoir of His Honour
Thomas van Rhee, and the Journal of His late Honour
Governor de Heere, their presence is very prejudicial to the
interests of the Company. Due attention must be paid to our
order on this subject, viz., the examination of vessels from
the coast on arrival and departure. Those who endeavour to
escape this examination must be put in chains and made to
serve at the public works. But those who have been per-
mitted for many years to live either here or in the Galle
Commandement, and the Chitties and Paruas, are to be
permitted to remain on their performing extra services when-
ever any such work is to be done, which, especially here in
Colombo, they willingly do, as they are now free from poll tax.
Beyond this no Moors may possess any immovable property,
in terms of the Placaat issued by His Excellency Rycklof van
Goens, Sr., bearing date December 2, 1665, and of the letter
from Batavia of December 13, 1700.


The Leper Hospital, commenced by His Excellency Cornells
Joan Simons, but completed by me, is a very large building, and
about eight times the size required. Their Excellencies the
Supreme Government have been justly displeased regarding
this matter ; and because the expenditure for its upkeep
amounted yearly to a considerable sum, I proposed to Their
Excellencies to break down part of it and sell the materials.
Authority having been received this has been done, much
to the benefit of this hospital. It, therefore, now has yearly
a considerable surplus, and its present capital is FI. 91,841 • 7 * 8.
With a view to its affairs being properly managed, I have
appointed the Goopman and Negotie BoeJchouder 52 Jacob Bouer,
besides the Head Physician of the Dutch Hospital, and Dr,
van der Stadt, as regents, and have provided them with
instructions, which are preserved at the Secretariat.
The number of the Company’s slaves and the manner in which
they are distributed may be seen from the General Muster Roll
and from the more detailed list. The minutes often cited will
show what reforms have been introduced in regard to this
matter. It will therefore be unnecessary to repeat them here.
The expenditure on account of salaries of Europeans, the
wages of the slaves, and other items, such as those on account of
hospitals, rations, equipment of ships, presentations, interest,
secret correspondence, salaries generally, warehouses, dwelling
houses, fortifications, council chambers, extraordinary expendi-
ture, &c., has been considerably reduced, both here and in all out-
stations. This may be seen from the books and correspondence.
In the matter of the Seminary or Training School in the
suburb 53 ( buitenstad ) of Colombo, I have also introduced many
changes, which may be seen, for instance, in my amplified
instructions for the Rectors of that institution bearing date
March 2, 1709. As Curators have been appointed the Dessave
Jeremias van Vliet and Captain Joan Beekman, and as
Rector the Rev. Petrus Synjeu. The latter has spared
neither time nor trouble to carefully instruct the students
(of whom there are at present twelve from the most respectable
families of the Matura district) in the foundations of Divine
Truth, in Philosophy, and in the Dutch language. We hope
and trust that some of them will with God’s blessing become
in the course of time useful instruments for the conversion
of their countrymen; to enlighten them with the aid of the
revealed truth which leads to salvation. As stated already,
three students from the Jaffnapatnam Seminary have been
appointed Proponents, and they preach with much success
on Sundays in the Malabar language, one in Negombo and
two in Jaffnapatnam. They fist submit their sermons in
Dutch to the clergy, who revise, and, if necessary, correct


them. We must, however, much to our regret, state here
that a few days ago we discovered infamous and serious
offences on the part of the Proponent Jan Anthonys.
The churches and schools both in this district and in the
Commandements of Jaffnapatnam, Galle, and Matura are
twice a year visited by the clergy, accompanied by an inter-
preter. On these occasions the parents and children are
examined, and the youths who have reached the required age
are discharged and enter the Company’s service. Since my
arrival here many heathen have been admitted into the
bosom of the church by holy baptism, through the zeal of
the clergy, and religion has greatly advanced, in spite of
the blindness of this people. This was due partly to the
translation of three of the Gospels from Dutch into Sinhalese
by the Rev. Wilhelmus Conyn, which were distributed all over
the country and read to the natives with good results. At
the Secretariat may be found the Placaats and other useful
Ordinances for the prevention of irregularities on these visits,
and for the control of the schoolmasters, who, especially
in the lands of Galle and Matura, fell into all kinds of
extravagances and greatly oppressed and harassed the poor
natives. These Placaats have had a good effect.
Indigo fields were happily discovered in this Island in the
year 1713. As this valuable dye grows luxuriantly all over the
country, I set apart a few splendid fields, which I had properly
prepared, and I hope now that our friends at Coromandel will
send us a large quantity of seed, which is found there in abun-
dance. But how little obliging they are, especially in regard to
this seed, will be found referred to in our successive letters to
Batavia and the Fatherland. We have been obliged to fall back
on our own resources and obtain the seed with much trouble
from collections made in the country. It is true that the
Kandyan king kindly sent us a few cartloads of indigo seed,
but through the ignorance of the people who had to look after
them the plants did not come to proper maturity and there-
fore were useless. Owing to all these obstacles I have not
been able to carry out my object in regard to this matter,
and thus the expectations were not fulfilled. It is to be hoped
that after my departure the officials at Coromandel will have
more regard for Your Honour’s wishes in the interests of the
Company. So long as I have been here they have been in an
attitude of persistent opposition towards Ceylon in regard to
all its projects. I hope you will succeed in obtaining a large
quantity of seed, and be able to satisfy Their Excellencies our
Superiors. In our letter of December 13, 1715, will be shown
what instructions have been given and what reforms effected
with regard to the boiling of the indigo.


The work of the Visite Compton 9 (Verification Board) and
its usefulness is shown in our letter of December 19, 1713, to
Their Excellencies our Superiors. It is there explained how
the books are verified, and how all wrong entries and un-
necessary expenditure at the outstations are discovered,
points which were formerly passed over unnoticed. In the
last letter from Their Excellencies, of July 9, 1715, the main-
tenance of this Board has been approved. I would here
refer to that letter and to the Ordinances issued by me from
time to time for the guidance of the Board. I must recom-
mend to Your Honour the continuance of this office. The
letters sent to the Fatherland will also show you the numerous
profitable reforms and arrangements made by me in regard
to the loading and unloading of vessels and the issue of
articles required by the departing vessels, as well as the orders
we issued after the discovery here of the reckless practices
in vogue in regard to the issue of articles. As a specification
of these will be found in the oft-quoted Compendium, I will
not repeat these matters here, but only state that when the
rules are followed all fraud both here and in the outstations
is bound to be discovered. To this Your Honour’s zealous
assistance and fidelity in your quality of Hoofd Administrates 1
has greatly contributed, so much so, that by the avoidance of
unnecessary expenditure and the discovery of new sources of
income I have been enabled to convert this Island from a
burden and source of expenditure to one of considerable
profit, as will be borne out by the accounts. Last year’s
accounts will show that the surplus for the whole of this
Island, with all its dependencies, has been FI. 514,137*15,
And it must be noted here that Colombo (which alone has to
bear nearly as large an expenditure as all other stations
together) last year had a clear profit of FI. 86,025*9, and
this year FI. 135,436*15. Thus, the Ceylon Government’s
accounts show a clear profit of FI. 437,658*5. This would
have been considerably more were it not for the trade in
cotton goods and arecanuts having suffered largely since March
last by the closing of the king’s gravets, and by the trade in
elephants having suffered through the malice of the Jaffna-
patnam interpreters and other opposing influences.
Cinnamon is one of the principal and most profitable
sources of income to the Company in this Island, and the
subject would require an extensive treatise were it not that
it had been fully dealt with in former Memoirs by successive
Governors, especially His Honour the late Governor van Rhee.
In his Memoir is stated at length how many different castes
of Chialias (Cinnamon Peelers) there are, by what names they
are known, what service each has to perform, who are the


chiefs and lascoreens placed over them, &c. I would, therefore,
refer to these documents, and would only mention
changes introduced by me in this important work, as may
be seen also in our letter of December 19,1713, to the Father-
land. One of these is the general prohibition to the overseer
of the Mahabadde and other chiefs to peel or deliver any but
the right kind of cinnamon, viz., that called rassoerende, and
not the thick and tasteless bark, about which Their Excel-
lencies had complained previously. With a view to prevent
such complaints in future, the chief overseers in Galle and in
Colombo have been ordered to be present at the delivery of
cinnamon and to taste and examine it. This must be observed,
as a rule, in future. Care must also be taken that the people
of this useful caste, which is indispensable to the Company,
are not injured by any one. I made it my care to protect
them, and the result has been that all the orders from the
Fatherland for the last two or three years, amounting to
700.000 or 800,000 pounds, could have been executed. This
result was also due to the kindness which the peelers met
with in the king’s territory, and the strict orders of the
Kandyan king to his subjects not to damage the cinnamon
trees, and still less to destroy them. In this way it was
possible to peel a large quantity of this spicy bark in the king’s
territory, although not without much trouble, and to have this
spared our own forests. It was, however, necessary to pass a
resolution that for the next two or three years not more than
6.000 or 7,000 bales should be peeled, for the reasons stated
in our Resolutions of Council of October 7 last, which will
be found in the brief minutes referred to. I also issued
orders against the felling of these valuable trees in the Com-
pany’s territory. The villagers are not allowed to clear and
cultivate any chenas or fields before they are inspected and a
note made of the number of cinnamon trees found thereon by
the Dessave and the Captain of the Mahabadde. Not more than
six or eight trees are permitted to be cut down on any land,
and a heavy penalty is imposed for the breaking of this rule.
This is all I need state here in regard to the subject of cinnamon,
as Your Honour may at any time obtain information on the
subject from the experienced Captain referred to and from
some of the members of Council. In our letter sent to the
Fatherland at the end of the year Your Honour will see what
precautionary measures I had introduced in regard to the
burning of cinnamon oil, with a view to obtain a larger quantity
of this oil than in former years. As may be seen from
the appendix to the letter just referred to, not more than
.... pounds of oil was obtained from 200 pounds of cinnamon,
while last year from cinnamon sticks which had been lying


in the warehouses for more than seven years, and which had
become almost flavourless and odourless, in three successive
distillations of 2,000 pounds each, 7, 8, and 10 pounds of this
valuable oil were obtained respectively. Fifty more pounds
of oil are required for Their Excellencies, and there is still
sufficient old cinnamon in the warehouses to make up the
rest of this quantity. Special care must be taken that this
boiling and distillation is carried out in Your Honour’s house,
under proper security and under supervision by an experienced
Committee, because this seems to have been neglected formerly.
Having now mentioned the chief reforms and improvements
introduced during my rule without any extraordinary trouble
or cavilling on the part of those affected, we will add here
that Their Excellencies lately made an order that the sale of
lands and gardens should be entirely stopped. We have,
therefore, forwarded these orders to Jaffnapatnam and Galle
to stop the sales there. Their Excellencies require information
as regards the condition of these lands, but I will not take up
time in supplying the particulars here, because it would require
considerable time, which I cannot spare before my departure.
I therefore intend on my safe arrival in our dear Fatherland to
make a comprehensive report on this subject to Their Excel-
lencies, for which I am taking with me the necessary extracts.
With regard to the Kandyan Court, I must remark here
that it gave me no little trouble since my arrival in the Island,
now nine years ago. For not only had Ito see a new and
young king mount the throne, but I had also to cut the Gordian
knot with regard to the difficult problem of the closing of the
harbours, and this after the courtiers had already got accus-
tomed to the large profits derived by them from the opening
of these harbours, which had been done by the orders of Their
Excellencies at Batavia. This was put an absolute end to
by the strict orders from the authorities in the Netherlands,
who instructed us not to open them again on any account.
Besides this, I had no little trouble to withstand the dangerous
intrigues of these courtiers, who obviously in various ways
showed their displeasure at the closing of the harbours. This
may be found mentioned in our letter to the Fatherland of
the year 1713. The object .of most of their intrigues was to
monopolize to themselves the trade in arecanuts and cotton
goods, which is also referred to in the above-mentioned letter.
My letter to these courtiers, in which I quoted the Resolutions
of Council of January 29, 1712, has had a good effect, and to
this is largely due the increase in the revenue of the Island.
Although some of the courtiers several times agitated for the
re-opening of the harbours, or at least of that of Putulang,
they did not gain their object, and since the despatch of my


letter they have not dared to use the name of the king any
more, in order to obtain their object, a thing they had done
previously. Should they again attempt to make use of the
king’s name in the endeavour to secure this object, it will be
necessary for Your Honour to write them a sharp letter to
restrain them, and you will have to complain in significant
terms of their unfounded pretences. There are also a few
passages in my letter to them which might be repeated when
Your Honour has acquainted yourself with the matter, and
if they persist in their solicitations you will be obliged to inform
the king of the circumstances. I have often done so with
good results, and Your Honour cannot do better than follow
my example.
As regards the harmonious relations between His Majesty
the King of Kandy and the Company, it may be said that
they have been brought to an excellent footing by my sending
him presents and by the friendly communications we have
carried on. He considers the interests of the Company as
his own, and three instances among many others of this
singular favour stand out from the rest. The first is that
when we complained of the destruction of a large number of
cinnamon trees in His Majesty’s territory, he issued orders
prohibiting this, and threatening those who broke any branches
or sprouts from these valuable trees with pain of death.
Thus, a larger quantity of cinnamon is procurable now than ever
before. The second instance is where the rebellious Wannias last
year sent two persons to the king with presents and a petition
that, being in disfavour with the Company, they might be
granted a safe retreat into the king’s territory, and that he
would also intervene on their behalf on their promise of
eternal obedience and vassalage. Instead of acceding to
these favourable proposals/ the king became indignant at
the presumption of these people to appear at his Court with
proposals so prejudicial to the Company. He would have
had them beheaded were it not that some of his favourites
proposed that these emissaries be sent to the Company that
they may receive their due punishment. They were accord-
ingly brought here in chains in the name of His Majesty,
and the olas written by their chiefs, which the king had
not even condescended to read, were handed to me. The
third mark of favour which His Imperial Majesty has shown
is in his having at the beginning of this year done me the
honour of appointing me to the exalted office of his Privy
Councillor, sending two ambassadors to inform me thereof.
This is referred to in the letter sent at that time to Batavia.
The king has given further proof of his candour and friend-
liness in a manner very different from the former attitude


of his government, by informing us beforehand that he
intended to send the Court Adigaar and Dessave of Saffragam
with a Mahotiar or Court Secretary, as well as other chiefs,
accompanied by a large number of lascoreens, to the boundaries
of the Company’s territory at Aripo, Hangwelle, Galle, and
Matura, for the purpose, as stated, of digging for precious
stones. He informed us of this intention by an ola sent by
two ambassadors, in order to avoid rousing our suspicions
when we saw these chiefs and soldiers near the Company’s
outstations. Such a thing never occurred before. Besides
this information, the ola contained other expressions of
friendship and confidence. Yet, however plausible and
satisfying this unusual notice was, I took the precaution of
sending everywhere special orders to keep guard, and to
observe the movements of these men; and also to double
the garrisons of those stations to which they had come in
proximity without much stir. This may be found referred
to in my secret letters sent at the time and preserved at
the Secretariat. Like measures were always taken whenever
I heard through my spies of the least commotion in the
king’s territory. I would advise Your Honour to follow
the same course, and to always watch the movements
of the Kandyan Court, while at the same time to carefully
avoid giving any cause for displeasure on their part. The
case of the late Ambassador de Bevere 54 and other occur-
rences may serve as examples. The papers on this subject
are preserved at the Secretariat. I would advise you to
always act without regard to persons; to always give the
king and his people what is theirs by right, and to be thus the
better able to oppose any unlawful pretences on the part of
the courtiers, as well as to avoid all suspicion. Bor one
must certainly look upon this court as very cunning and
suspicious in its character, although there is no fear of a
rupture between it and the Company so long as the present
king reigns, even though the gravets have remained closed
since the month of May. The trouble about the harbours
seems to be the work of some malicious courtiers, who
endeavour to compel us in their private interest to open the
harbours of Trinconomale or Calpetty. They have been
furthered in their scheme by the precarious condition of the
king’s health for some time, owing to which these chiefs
were able to arrange everything according to their own
fancies and in their own interests. His Majesty himself did
not inform us of what passed in the lowlands or of the closing
of the gravets, nor does he seem to know anything about the
vexations to which some of the cinnamon peelers have been
subjected in the Seven Kories, as stated at length in our


letter of August 3 last to Their Excellencies at Batavia. An
account is also given there of our conference on July 15 with
the Kandyan Chiefs Hewahetta, Mandangwelle, Batterale, and
Philipitie Mohandiram. But as lam informed that the king
is recovering, I have no doubt that the gravets will soon be
opened, especially as our Ambassador Mr. Johannes Jeimer
will arrive at the Kandyan Court and convey the instructions
of Their Excellencies our Superiors for the continued closing
of the Ceylon harbours. This will put an end to the hope of
the chiefs that they could succeed in having them opened
after my departure.
The ceremony to be observed at the reception of the Kandyan
Chiefs according to their rank will be found described in the
journals preserved here at the Secretariat. Care must be
taken that during their stay at Wolvendal 55 they are hospitably
entertained and regaled with such things as snuff, tobacco, tea,
&c. (if they ask for it). In the same papers will be found a
description of the state and order to be observed when our
ambassadors set out. I usually sent them in the month of
February, 'as being the most suitable time of the year, and
on the same occasion presents were always despatched for
the king. The opportunity is taken at the same time to make
the request that our cinnamon peelers may be allowed to peel
cinnamon in the king’s territory, and that we may be permitted
to transport the elephants along Putulang and other districts
outside the Company’s territory to Jaffnapatnam.
Having now stated the chief points of information needed
by Your Honour, I have only to add as a strong recommen-
dation the careful custody of the Panguan or Java Princes
and the Prince of Macassar Aroebeck. For further particulars
on this subject I refer to the Journals, Resolutions, and other
documents and communications between that place and this,
which are preserved at the Secretariat. I now resign to
Your Honour, in a restful and peaceful condition, a flourishing,
valuable, and important Government, thanking God Almighty
from the bottom of my heart that He has been pleased to
bless this Government during my rule, and to employ me as
an instrument to clear and disperse the clouds in which it had
been wrapped for so many years. Wishing Your Honour no
less a share of blessings from heaven, and hoping that you
may rule this Government for many years in the interests of
the General Company and to your own honour,
I remain, Sir,
Your Servant and Friend,
{Signed) HENDRICK BECKER.
Colombo, November 25, 1716.


NOTES.
1 Isaac Augustyn Rumpf, bom at The Hague, came out to the East
in 1707. After first serving as Political Secretary, he was promoted
Hoofd Administrateur of the Ceylon Government in 1715, from which
post he succeeded Governor Becker in the Governorship, thus super-
seding the Commandeurs of Jaffna and Galle, who were his seniors in
rank. This was the only instance in the whole history of the Dutch
rule in Ceylon where the Hoofd Administrateur was immediately
promoted Governor. Rumpf was a man of exceptional ability, but his
career was cut short by his sudden death on June 11, 1723. For . a
fuller account of him see Report on the Dutch Records in the Government
Archives, p. 31, note.
2 The Journal referred to here is unfortunately no longer extant.
It must have disappeared from the Archives many years ago. A diary
of his tour from Colombo to Jaffna has been translated, and is appearing
in the present series of publications.
3 The castle of Jaffnapatnam was surrendered by the Portuguese to
the Dutch under Rycklof van Goens on June 22, 1658.
4 These “ Compendiums ” were annual reports furnished to the
Governor and Council by the Commandeurs and subordinate rulers at
outstations. They frequently contained separate administration
reports and statistics supplied by heads of departments.
6 Hammenhiel, shank bone of the ham, so named from its position,
Ceylon being in shape like a ham. The little fort in question was built
by the last • Portuguese Governor of Jaffna, Merle Menezes, shortly
before the arrival of the Dutch.
6 Prince of Madura.
7 Adigary, a poll tax imposed in the Jaffna Commandement on some
of the castes for the support of the adigars appointed over them. It
was introduced by the Portuguese and continued by the Dutch.—
Memoir of Hendrick Zwaardecroon, p. 21.
8 Officie (tax) was levied in lieu of service on all castes. — Zwaardecroon,
p. 21.
9 Visite Comptoir. —Here were performed the functions of audit.
The Visite Comptoir in Colombo occupied the site of what was recently
St. Andrew’s Church in the Fort, now the offices of Messrs. Freudenberg
& Co.
10 Nicolaas van Heuvel, who was afterwards Commandeur of Galle,
where, in the Dutch Church, is the tombstone over the grave of his son,
who died in 1721.
11 From the Portuguese Thombo, ou livro em que se tombdo as terras.
It was a register of lands, first introduced into Ceylon by the Portuguese,
and continued by the Dutch during the whole period of their rule in the
Island. It consisted of two parts : (1) the Hoofd Thombo, which gave
the names of the proprietors and those who claimed under them; and
(2) the Land Thombo, which contained the list of lands, with their
description gnd the conditions under which they were held.
12 This was Hendrick Adriaan van Reede, of Drakestein, Lord of
Mydrecht, who was appointed High Commissioner to Bengal, Coro-
mandel, Ceylon, &c.,by the Directors of the Dutch East India Company
in 1684. He died on board the ship Drechterland in 1692, on a voyage
from Ceylon to Surat. For a fuller account of him see my Report on
the Dutch Records, p. 39, note.


11 Mayoraal, a title introduced by the Portuguese. The word means
a chief, as in mayoral do gado, the chief herdsman.
14 Warrago = varaku ( Paapalum scrobiculatum), kada millet.
Dessave, a Sinhalese title for a Governor of a province, used by the
Dutch in the Maritime provinces for a high European official whose
functions corresponded nearly to those of a Government Agent.
14 See note u .
17 Oely is probably from the Tamil “ uliyam,” corrupted into oelian.
Having originally meant the obligation of a slave to his master, it came
in Dutch times to mean a compulsory service of a menial character
which certain inferior classes were required to render.
i* Nely = paddy. Vieyra in his Portuguese-English Dictionary has
“nelle : rice that has not been peeled.”
18 “De Twee Gebroeders ” (two brothers) were the twin islands
Pallaitivu and Iranativu, which were also separately named by the
Dutch “ Hoorn ” and “ Enkhuyzen.”
20 See previous note.
21 The etymology of this word is doubtful. It has been frequently
applied to a kind of cloth obtained from Coromandel for dyeing in
Jaffna.
22 Betteela, heatelle, &c., the name of a kind of muslin constantly
mentioned in old trading lists and narratives. This seems to be a
Spanish or Portuguese word beatilla or heathilla for “ a veil,” derived,
according to Cobarruvias, from “ certain beatas, who invented or used
the like.” Beata is a religieuse.— Yule and Burnell's Anglo-Indian
Glossary.
23 A kind of chintz.
24 A kind of cotton print.
25 See note 12 .
24 Pattangatyn is said to be a corruption of the Tamil pattankutti, and
to be allied to the Sinhalese patabendi in the term “pattabendi-arachchi,”
“ a rank generally held by fishers.” One of the duties of a “ pattan-
gatyn ” would seem to have been the collection of fish market rents.
The word is also applied in this sense to certain natives in authority at
the pearl fisheries.
27 The same as dhoney, a boat or small vessel used in coastwise
navigation and for fishing and ferrying.
28 The revenue having been obtained by a tax on the “stones”
which the divers used to drop down with, the “ free stones ” represented
those who were exempted from tax.
24 The Dutch chief or agent at a minor station.
38 Laurens Pyl was Governor of Ceylon from December 3, 1680, to
January 10, 1693. He had previously been Commandeur of Jaffna-
patnam, and on his journey to assume the Government at Colombo
was met at Manaar by Robert Knox, just escaped from captivity, whom
he took with him to Colombo.
31 Rutgart de Heyde succeeded Adriaan Roothaes as Commandeur of
Galle, and Laurens Pyl as Commandeur of Jaffnapatnam.
32 This disagreement between the Governor and the Commandeur, in
regard to dealings with residents within the latter’s jurisdiction, bears
relation to a grievance which the Commandeurs appear to have often
ventilated, that their authority was interfered with and set at naught
by the practice of complaints being heard and decided «i Colombo
without reference to the local authority. An example of this may be
found in Zwaardecroon’s Memoir.— Translation, p. 8.
83 The “ Watering Point ” at Galle has continued to serve this purpose
up to the present day.
paggers were probably stockades built of wood and mud.


35 Moetets = muttettu, a field which is sown on account of the king or
other proprietor, tem —rary grantee, or chief of a village, as distinguished
from the fields of other inhabitants of the village who are liable to
perform service or render dues. — D’Oyley.
36 A copy of the Memoir of Laurens Pyl (1693), purchased from
Mr. Louis Nell, late Crown Counsel, is preserved in the Colombo Museum.
That of Thomas van Rhee (1697) has been translated in the present
series and will shortly be published.
37 Baygama, same as hatgama, certain royal villages held on condition
of performance of service by persons of the inferior castes. —Oloaaary of
Native, Foreign, and Anglicized Worda, Government Press, Ceylon.
38 Accommedeaaana, or sustenance lands ( onderhouda fonden), were lands
granted to headmen for their maintenance in lieu of salary.
38 Deccum was a tax paid by the deccumcariaa, who corresponded to
coolies among the Chalias. They did duty as kanganies, messengers,
and letter carriers, and were bound to serve in all ordinary, inferior, and
servile occupations.— lnstructions from the Governor-General to the
Governor of Ceylon, p. 47.
40 Enge-badde was a tax paid by the corondahaliaa, the lowest class
among the cinnamon peelers, and consisted of a certain quantity of
cinnamon. It was looked upon as their poll tax.— lnstructions, p. 47.
41 Wattoebadde was a tax on arecanuts, and was paid either in money—
rix dollars and stivers—or in kind,— Memoir of Oustaaf Willem Baron
van Imhoff, p. 36. '
43 Gayer = coir, coconut fibre.
43 Waterpaa, a dam or mole.
44 Schelling, an old Dutch coin equal to 6 d. in English money.— lmhoff,
p. 11, note.
45 Cornells Joan Simons, who was Governor of Ceylon from May 11,
1703, to December 22, 1707, He left a Memoir, of which a translation
is ready for publication.
48 Paruoa, Paravara, or Parawoa were of the fisher caste, and formed
in South India a community by themselves. They were christianized
by the Portuguese.
47 Toepaaaea.— This word is of doubtful origin ; it is probably allied to
“ dubash.” The toepasses, who were of mixed Portuguese and native
descent, were employed by the Dutch in various inferior handicrafts.
48 This word is no doubt derived from the Portuguese rochodor, a
hewer, cleaver, or splitter.
49 The territory within the jurisdiction of a Dessave. See note 16 .
80 Kayen. —Probably Kaya, Tamil ; Tembiliya, Sinhalese (Eugenia
bracteata).
61 Kiate. —lt is difficult to identify this with any of the different kinds
of timber now in use here, unless the word be taken to be a corruption
or variation of Kahata (Careya arborea).
52 Of these two titles, the first, Coopman, or merchant, describes the
grade of the individual; the second, Negotie Boekhouder, or trade
accountant, describes his office or post.
63 Buitenstad, or outer city, was the part of Colombo cut off by the
Dutch from the original Portuguese fortifications, and now known as
the Pettah. These outer fortifications were demolished early in the
Dutch rule.
64 The allusion here is to Major Willem Hendrick de Bevere, who was
in command of the Dutch Forces in Colombo in the early years of the
eighteenth century. The incident referred to in the Memoir occurred
in 1714. I quote the particulars from a memorandum supplied by me
to a paper of the late Mr. Donald Ferguson, read before the Ceylon
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society on November 4, 1907 : “ On the
9th September, 1713, the Council unanimously elected him (de Bevere)
6 . 74-13


Ambassador to the Kandyan Court, and the Embassy soon after set out
with the usual pomp and ceremony. Nothing untoward appears to
have occurred in the journey up-country. The conduct, both of the
Ambassador and of his retinue, was everything to be desired, and the
reception at Kandy was most gracious. But de Severe is said to have
taken umbrage at the quality of the return gifts which the King
presented to the Embassy. ,He looked upon these as of too little value
and unworthy his position and dignity. In the rancour created in his
mind by this, which he looked upon as an insult and indignity, he
appears to have behaved in a most rash, if not insane, manner. When,
immediately after the audience with the Bang, the royal repast was
served out according to the custom of the country, he would not so
much as touch or taste any of the dishes which were presented to him,
but, in the most offensive manner, ordered them to be given to his
slaves to eat. And the royal gifts, which he was bound to convey with
due ceremony, covering them with a white cloth, he treated with great
disrespect and contempt by tying them up at the foot end of his
palanquin. Nor did he treat with any greater consideration the
courtiers whom His Majesty appointed to accompany him on his return
journey. These he insulted and abused, calling them scoundrels and
rascals, and their priest, or tangataar, who was also in the company,
he mocked and mimicked in the most irreverent manner. Not content
with all this, he rushed after one of the coraals and some of the other
chiefs, brandishing a cane, with which he threatened to flog and chastise
them. The first intimation which the Governor and Council at
Colombo received of these doings was from an ola despatched by the
Interpreter Mudaliyar, Don Paulo Dias Gunaretna, who accompanied
the Embassy. The Council, full of concern as to the result which these
rash proceedings of their accredited Ambassador would have on the
friendly relations then subsisting between the Court and the Dutch
Government, decided to place de Bevere under arrest as soon as he
should arrive at the capital, and also to forward to the Kandyan Court
an ola despatch tendering apologies. In the meantime de Bevere was
deprived of his seat in Council and of his local command in the army,
while it was decided to dispatch him to Batavia by the vessel then ready
to sail, so that he might be dealt with for his conduct by the Supreme
Government of India.” —Journal C.8.R.A.5., vol. XIX., pp. 259, 260.
85 A house was kept at Wolvendaal as a lodging for the Kandyan
Ambassadors. They were conveyed in state every day from thence to
the Audience Hall in the Fort (now St. Peter’s Church), for the interview
with the Governor and Council.


INDEX.
Of Principal Names and of Words explained.
Accomodessans .. 23
Account Bookkeeper,
Trade .. .. 8, 22
Accounts, trade .. 2, 20, 37
Accuras .. •. 19
Adigar, Court .. 45
Adigars .. .. 10
Adigary (tax) .. 5
Administrates, Hoofd .. 41
Administration of justice 11
Agriculture .. 9
Alembiel .. .. 17
Alias .. .. 15
Allady torren .. 10
Ambassador de Bevere.. 45
Ambassadors .. 44,46
Amande (contribution).. 13
Ammonams 30, 33, 35, 36
Amsterdam (bastion) . . 34
Anthonys, Jan .. 40
Arecanuts 5, 17, 19, 20, 21, 26, 28,
29, 30, 32, 33,
35, 36, 41, 43
Arecanuts, Collector of.. 19, 20
Arecanuts, Commis-
sioners for .. 29
Aripo .. 12,30,33,45
Armano .. .. 13
Armoury .. .. 35
Aroebeck, Prince of
Macassar .. 46
Arrears .. .. 15
Arsenal .. .. 35
Atchien .. .. 5,33
Audit Office .. 22
Bastions .. ~ 26,29
Batavia, 6, 6, 9, 10, 14, 16, 19, 28,
32, 40, 44, 46
Battenburg (bastion) .. 34
Batterale (Kandyan chief) 46
Batteries .. .. 26
Batticaloa .. .. 27, 28,29
Bayganis... .. 22
Bay of Condatie .. 12
Bay of Tondy .. 12
Bay of Woebletivo .. 17
Bookman. Captain Joan 17, 39
Belligam Bay .. 20
Belligam Corle .. 18
Belligammo (Welli-
gammo) .. .. 7, 8, 10
Bengal .. 5, 27,28,33
Bentotte, river of .. 18
Beschutter (fortress) .. 3
Bethillea .. .. 10
Bevere, Ambassador de.. 45
Biddigamme .. 24
Bookkeeper, Trade
Account .. .. 8, 22
Bouer, Jacob .. 39
Boundaries.. . • 8
Breeding of horses .. 9
Brokers . . .. 6
Brokers, Sinhalese '.. 6
Bulls .. .. 8
Cables .. .. 26
Cailapatnam .. 13
Cailapatnam Moors .. 13
Cailvelho .. .. 13
Gaits, harbour of .. 3
Calehoene (forest) .. 14
Calpetty .. 10, 16, 29, 36, 37, 45
Candappa ~ .. 15
Cape of Good Hope .. 26
Captain of the Corle .. 25
Captain of the Mahabadde 42
Cardamoms . • 25
Carnawelpattoe .. 15
Carrecattemoele . • 15
Carredivo .. •• 10,11
Carretta .. • • 9
Castle of Colombo .. 34
Castle of Jaffnapatnam.. 3
Catoene .. • • 19
Cattergamme • • 20
Gayer .... ... 26


Celembenaar .. 15
Census .. .. 7
Chanks .. .. 33
Chenas . • .. 42
Chiade, bay of .. 5
Chialias .. .. 26,30, 41
Chialoupa .. .. 28
Chial watte .. .. 17
Chiefs, village .. 7
Chilauw, river of .. 30
Chitties .. .. 36,38
Christians .. ... 12
Christian aims .. 11
Cinnamon .. ..41,42,44
Cinnamon oil .. 42
Cinnamon peelers .. 21,45, 46
Clandestine trade .. 36
Clergy .. .. 11
Cloths .. .. 32
Cloth, red .. .. 9
Coconuts .. .. 37
Coin, false .. .. 13
Coir yarn .. .. 31
Coldermale, hoek of 30
Collector of Arecanuts .. 19,35,36
Collesgras, Don Anthony 15, 17
Collesegrepatnam .. 32
Colombo, Castle of 34
Colombo, suburb of 39
Commandement of
Galle .. 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25,
26, 38, 40
Commandement of
Jaffnapatnam 3, 14, 17, 38, 40
Commandeur .. 6, 11
Commandeur of Galle .. 21
Commandeur of Jaffna-
patnam .. 17, 18, 23, 29
Commissioner - General
(van Drakenstein) .. 7, 11
Commissioners 12, 13, 19, 22,
25, 26, 30, 35, 37
Commissioners for Areca-
nut .. .. 29
Company’s flag .. 14
Company’s jurisdiction . 27
Company’s merchants .. 34
Company’s military force 35
Company’s service .. 40
Company’s ship .. 18
Company’s slaves .. 39
Company’s territory 19, 24,42,
45, 46
Company’s warehouses 20, 35, 39
Compendium 3, 8, 9, 20, 41
Convptoir , Visile .. 6
Condatie, bay of -. 12
Congregation, Jaffna .. 12
Contraband .. 5,36
Conversion.. .. 39
Conyn, Rev. Wilhelxnua 40
Goopman (Koopman) ~ 39
Coparpo . . .. 16
Copper, Japanese .. 32
Copper, Tonquin .. 32
Corle, Captain of the .. 25
Cories (Kories), Seven .. 45
Cornettie .. .. 8
Correspondence, secret.. 39
Cotton goods 17, 19, 20, 26,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 37, 41, 43
Council chambers .. 39
Councillor of India,
Extraordinary .. 1
Councillor, Privy .. 44
Council of Galle .. 21
Council of Jaffna-
patnam .. v .. 17, 23, 29
Court Adigar .. 45
Courtiers, intrigues of
the .. .. 43
Court, Kandyan .. 43, 46
Court of Justice .. 23
Court Secretary .. 46
Cowries .. .. 33
Curators (of the Semi-
nary) .. .. 39
Danes .. .. 33
Deaconate .. .. 37
Deed .. .. 8
Deccum .. .. 25
Delft (bastion) .. 35
Den Briel (bastion) .. 34
Dessave of J affna-
patnam .. .. 8
Dessave of Matura .. 23, 25
Dessave of Saffragam .. 45
Dessaves 18, 22, 24, 36, 38, 42
Dessaves, King’s .. 9, 10, 31
Dessavony (Dessavonie) 38
Dessavony of Matura .. 23
Diary .. . • 6
Divers .. 12, 13,33
Divine service .. 35
Divine truth . .. 39
Dolas das Corle .. 18
Drakenstein, van (Com-
missioner-General) .. 7,11
Dues, Receiver of Shore 20, 29
Dutch ho spital .. 39
Dutch language 11, 12, 39, 40
Dutch teacher .. H
Duties, stamp • • ®


Dwelling houses .. 39
Dyeing (cloth) .. 9
Dye roots .. .. 9, 10, 31
Dyers .. .. 9, 10
Elephant Pass (fortress) 3
Elephants .. 6, 14, 15, 19, 38, 46
Elephant tusks .. 16,17
Engebadde .. .. 25
Enkhuysen (bastion) .. 34
Equipment of ships .. 39
Europeans, foreign ~ 27
European ships .. 4
Europeans, salaries of .. 39
Executive .. .. 11
Expenditure .. 5, 6, 41
Expenditure, extraordi-
nary .. .. 39
Extraordinary Council-
lor of India .. 1
Extraordinary expendi-
ture .. .. 39
False coin .. .. 13
Fanam (fanum) 9, 12, 28, 31, 32
Fatherland .. 9, 10, 11, 22, 23,
26, 26, 30, 32, 38,
40, 41, 42, 43
Fiefs •. .. 14
Fields .. .. 6, 7,22
Field, indigo .. 40
Finances . • .. 11
Fines .. .. 5
Fiscal .. .. 20
Fishery, pearl 12, 13, 14, 33
Fishery, rent ~ 9
Flag, Company’s .. 14
Flags .. ~ 11
Fleet, return .. 18
Foals .. .. 9
Forest lands .. 7
Foreigners, incursions of 4, 26
Foreign vessels .. 18
Fortifications .. 39
France .. .. 35
Free stores (in pearl
fishery) .. .. 12
Gagienaike.. .. 24
Galle .. 30, 36, 37, 40, 43, 45
Galle, Commandement of 18,21,
22, 23, 25, 38, 40
Galle, Commandeurof .. 21
Galle Corle.. .. 18
Galle, Council of ~ 21
Galle district ~ 21
Galle Gate (Colombo Fort) 35
Galle, harbour of 18, 20, 25
Galle, town of .. 18
Ganduure .. .. 20
Gardens .. .. 6, 7, 8
Gingams .. .. 9,11
Girangy .. .. 10
Girriways .. .. 22
Goddegamme .. 24
Goens, Eycklof van
(Governor) .. j3B
Gospels, translation of the 40
Government of India,
Supreme .. .. 10, 15
Gravets, King’s .. 41, 46
Grenadiers .. .. 35
Gunpowder magazines .. 35
Haan, Secretary de .. 17
Hakman .. .. 19
Hal] hoekers .. 37
Hammenhiel, fortress of 3
Hangwelle .. .. 45
Harbours, closing of 27, 28, 29, 43
Harbour of Galle .. 18, 25
Harvest .. • .. 8
Harvest, Master of the.. 24
Head Thombo .. 8, 38
Heathen .. .. 12
Heere, Gerrit de
(Governor) .. 1,38
Heuvel, Commandeur
van .. .. 6
Hevegam Korle .. 38
Hewahetta (Kandyan
Chief) .. .. 46
Heyde, Rutgert de .. 15
Hina Korle.. . • 38
Hoek of Coldermale .. 30
Hoofd Administrates .. 41
Holland .. .. 26,28
Hoorn (bastion) .. 35
Horses, breeding of
Persian and Java .. 9
Hospital, Dutch .. 39
Hospital, leper .. 39
Hospitals .. .. 39
Houses .. .. 6, 7, 8
Houses, dwelling .. 39
Hoys .. . • 26
Hunters .. • • 14
Hunt, Master of the •. 24
Ilja da Vaca • • 10
Illandetoere •. 10
Indian stations .. 9
India, Supreme Govern-
ment of .. ..10,15


Indigo fields .. 40
Indigo seed.. .. 40
Inhabited islands ... 8
Instructions (of Governors) 1
Interest .. .. 39
Interpreters 6, 23, 40, 41
Intrigues of courtiers .. 43
Islands, inhabited .. 8
Islands, The (Jaffna-
patnam) .. .. 7, 10
Jaffna congregation .. 12
Jaffnapatnam 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 17, 18, 23,
38, 39, 43, 46
Jaffnapatnam, Castle of 3
Jaffnapatnam, Com-
mandement of 3, 14, 17, 38, 40
Jaffnapatnam, Com-
mandeur of 17, 18, 23, 29
Jaffnapatnam, Council
of .. ..17,23,29
J affnapatnam, Dessave of 8
Jaffnapatnam, people of 7, 14, 28
Japanese copper • .. 32
Java horses, breeding of 9
Java roots .. .. 10
Jenner, Johannes
(Ambassador) .. 46
Journals .. .. 46
Jurisdiction, Company’s 27
Justice, administration
of .. .. 11
Justice, court of .. 23
Kandyan Chiefs .. 46
Kandyan Court .. 43, 46
Kandyan King 16, 26, 28, 40,
42, 44
Kandyan territory 16, 24, 28,29,
42, 45
Kayen .. .. 38
Kidte .. .. -38
Kilkare .. .. 5,31,33
King, Kandyan 16, 26, 28, 40,
42, 44
King’s Dessaves .. 29
King’s gravets .. 41
King’s health .. 45
King’s subjects .. 24
Kitjegosere .. 24
Klippenburg (bastion) . . 34
Kories, Seven .. 45
Kraals .. .. 14,24
Land, Lord of the 21, 22, 23
Lands .. .. 6
Lands, forest .. 7
Lands, rent of .. 8, 15
Lands, sale of .. 23, 43
Land survey .. 5
Lands, uncultivated .. 23
Lands, Warrogo .. 7
Lands, waste .. 7
Land Thombo .. 6
Language, Dutch 11, 12, 39, 40
Language, Malabar .. 39
Language, Sinhalese .. 40
Lascoreens 17, 19, 28, 36, 42
Last (measure) .. 21
Lease .. .. 9
Leeuw, Jan de .. 22
Leyden (bastion) . . 34
Light stivers .. 12
Liquor, native .. 29
Loading of ships .. 20, 41
Lord of the Land 21, 22, 23
Lords and Masters 11, 26, 34
Macassar, Prince of
(Aroebeck) .. 46
Madura 4, 12, 29, 31, 32, 34, 37
Madura, Naik of .. 12, 31
Madura, Prince of ~ 34
Magazines, gunpowder.. 35
Mahabadde .. 42
Majoraals .. .. 7, 14, 17
Malabar .. 5, -28, 32, 33, 35, 38
Malabar language .. 39
Mallenkadae .. 10
Manaar 8, 10, 11, 13, 30, 31, 33
Manaar fort .. 4, 12
Manaar island . • 4, 7
Manapar .. .. 31
Manathan .. .. 8
Mandangwelle (Kandyan
Chief) .. .. 46
Mantotte .. .. 8, 14
Marcade .. .. 9
Mares .. ~ 9
Master Attendant of the
Shipping,. .. 20
Master of the Harvest .. 22
Master of the Hunt
(elephant) .. 24
Masters, Lords and ..11,26,34
Matura .. 19, 24, 37, 38, 40,45
Matura district .. 21
Matura, Dissave of .. 23, 25
Matura, Dessavony of .. 23
Matura, fortress of .. 18
Maylatte, Don Philip
Candaspa . •
Meelpattoe.. .. 15


Memoirs (of Governors) 1, 10, 24, Officie (tax) .. 5
35,37, 41 Oostenburg .. 27
Merchants .. 6, 30, 32, 36, 37 Opperhoofd (Opper-
Merchants, Company’s.. 34 hoofden) .. 14, 30, 31, 32, 36
Merendivo . . .. 10 Ordinances.. .. 11, 40,41
Middleburg (bastion) .. 34, 35 Orraendie .. .. 10
Military force, Company’s 35 Otiaar .. .. 5
Moats .. .. 26 Oysters (pearl) .. 12, 13, 14
Moddergamme . . 30
Moekoen .. .. 5, 13 Paggers .. . . 19
Moeleawalloe .. 15, 16,17 Pagoda Hill .. 26
Moeliaan .. . . 15 Paleandivo (island) .. 27
Moelly .. .. 10 Palletivo Irrentivo (De
Moeloetivoe .. 3, 17 Twee Gebroeders) .. 10
Moeris .. . . 10 Pambes, bay of (Pamban) 5
Moesely . . .. 8 Pambes, strait of .. 4, 5, 33
Moeselypattoe .. 14 Panengamo . . 15
Moetets .. ' .. 19 Panguan Princes . . 46
Mohotiaar . . . . 45 Parcallen .. .. 10
Mokortoe .. .. 33 Paredivo (island) .. 31
Money, stone 0 . . 12 Parras .. . . 8, 21, 25
Monopoly .. .. 29 Paruas .. .. 33, 34, 38
Monsoon, good .. 35 Pas Ryl .. .. 16,17
Monsoon, northern .. 5, 26 Passports .. ~ 5, 30
Monsoon, south-west . . 4 Patchelepals .. 7
Moorish stones .. 13 Pattangatyns .. 12, 13
Moors 12, 13, 28, 30, 33, 36, 38 Pearl banks .. 12,13, 14
Moors, Cailapatnam .. 13 Pearl fishery 12, 13, 14, 33
Morry .. . . 10 Pearl markets . . 13
Moruwa Corle .. 18 Pearl oysters .. 12,13, 14
Mudaliyars.. .. 28 Pedlars .. .. 29
Musketeers. . .. 35 Peelers, cinnamon . . 21,45, 46
Muster Roll, General .. 39 People of Jaffnapatnam. 7,14
Mutiny .. . . 31 Pepper . . . . 26, 26
Myndrecht, van (High Peria Tamby, Moor .. 33
Commissioner) .. 10 Persian horses, breed-
ing of .. 9
Naik of Madura .. 13,31 Pewter .. .. 32
Nanathan .. .. 14 Philosophy.. .. 39
Native liquor .. 29 Philipitie Mohandiram . 46
Native vessels .. 4 Physician, Head .. 39
Navendivo .. .. 10 Pits (elephant catching). 14
Negombo •.. .. 30 Placaats .. 20, 28, 36, 38, 40
Negotie Boekhovder ~ 39 Poenale .. ~ 10
Nely ~ .. 8, 21 Poewinellemapane, Diogo 16
Netherlands 14, 19, 26, 43 Poll tax .. 5, 8, 16, 38
Nets .. .. 8 Ponneryn .. .. 8, 14
Nielwallagange .. 19 Ponneryn (fortress) .. 3
Niteheachendrayen, Ponnocail (Ponnical) .. 13, 31
Mudaliyar, Diogo Portuguese.. .. 3, 6
Gaspar .. .. 15 Precious stones, digging
Nooses (elephant catch- for , . .. 45
ing) .. .. 14 Presents ~ .. 14
Presentations .. 39
Oath • • . • 30, 36 Prince of Macassar,
Oely service .. 8 Aroebeck.. ~ 46
Oenewatte hill •. 18 Princes, Java .. 46


Princes, Panguan .. 46
Priyate trade ~ 19
Privy Councillor .. 44
Propagation of religion.. 11
Proponents.. .. 39
Provisions, scarcity of .. 31
Puntoa das Pedras
(Point Pedro) 3, 16, 26
Putulang .. 29, 30, 43, 46
Putulang, lake of .. 30
Pyl (fortress) . . 3
Pyl, Laurens (Governor) 15, 21
Bachodores .. .. ’36
Ramparts .. .. 35
Rassoerende (cinnamon) 42
Rations .. .. 39
Rebellious Wannias •. 17, 44
Rebels .. . . 16, 18
Receiver of Shore Dues 20, 29
Rector (of the Seminary) 11, 39
Red cloth .. .. 9
Redoubts .. .. 26
Reformed Religion .. 11
Regents (Leper hospital) 39
Religion, propagation of 11
Religion, Reformed .. 11
Rent, fishery .. 9
Rent of lands .. 3, 15
Rents .. .. 5, 7
Reservoir, water (Galle) 18
Resolutions . . 46
Return fleet . . 18
Revenue .. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 19,
21, 22, 23
Rhee, Thomas van
(Governor) .. 21,38, 41
Rhenish roods .. 35
Rice .. .. 21,22
River of Bentotte .. 18
River of Walewe .. 18
Rix-dollar .. .. 9
Roots (for dyeing .. 9, 10, 31
Roots, Java .. 10
Roots, ruinas .. 10, 11
Roots, seven place .. 10
Rotterdam (bastion) .. 35
Ruinas roots .. , 10,11
Rumpf, Isaac Augustyn
(Governor) .. 1
Saffragam, Dessave of .. 45
Salaries generally .. 39
Salaries of Europeans .. 39
Salempoeris .. 10
Sale of lands .. 23, 43
Sandbanks.. .. 4
Say (dye) .. .. 10
Scarcity of provisions .. 31
Schelling .. .. 28
Schoolmasters .. 40
Seaports .. .. 17
Secretariat.. 2, 10, 11, 12, 17, 18,
19, 20, 23, 28, 33, 36,
39, 40, 45, 46
Secretary, Court .. 45
Secret correspondence . . 39
Seminary, Colombo . . 11,12, 39
Seminary, Jaffna .. 11,39
Sermons . . .. 12, 39
Service, Company’s .. 40
Service, Divine > 35
Service, Oely . . 8
Seven Kories (Cories) .. 45
Seven place roots .. 10, 11
Shipping, Master Atten-
dant of the * .. 20
Ships, Company’s .. 18
Ships, equipment of 39
Ships, loading of .. 20, 41
Shore Dues, Receiver of 20, 29
Siendancallan .. 10
Simons, Cornelis Joan
(Governor) .. 32, 39
Sinhalese .. .. 28
Sinhalese language .. 40
Slaves, Company’s .. 39
Slaves, wages of .. 39
Sloops .. .. 5, 17
Smuggling .. 4, 16, 17, 20, 27, 28,
30, 36
Smuggling coves .. 17
Smuggling vessels .. 4
Snuff .. .. 46
Spies .. .. 17,45
Stadt, Dr. van der .. 39
Stallions .. .. 9
Stamp duties .. 6
Stivers, light .. 12
Stone money .. 12
Stones, digging for
precious .. .. 45
Stones, free (in pearl ■
fishery) .. .. 12
Stones, Moorish .. 12
Stones, tax on .. 12
Suburb of Colombo .. 39
Superiors, our 28, 30, 31, 40,
41, 46
Supreme Government of
India .. .. 10, 15, 39
Survey, land .5
Synjeu, Rev. Petrus .. 11 39


Taele .. .. 13
Tamanacoil .. 4
Tamblagam .. 28
Tanjouivers .. 33
Tavern-keepers .. 29
Taxes .. .. 7, 8
Tax on stones .. 12
Tax, poll .. .. 5, 15
Tea .. .. 46
Teacher, Dutch .. 11
Territory, Company’s 19, 24, 42,
45, 46
Territory, Kandyan 16, 24, 28,
29, 42, 46
Theuver .. 4, 6, 13, 31, 33
Thombo .. .. 8
Thombo, Head .. 8,38
Thombo, Land .. 6
Thonys .. .. 12,17, 33
Timber .. .. 5,38
Timmoratie .. 8
Tin .. .. 32
Tinnemarewaddy .. 15
Tithes .. .. 5, 8
Title .. .. 8
Tobacco .. .. 46
Toepasses .. .. 36
Tolls .. .. 4
Tondy, bay of .. 4,6
Tonquin copper .. 32
Trade accounts .. 2, 20, 37
Trade Account Book-
keeper .. .. 8,22
Trade, clandestine .. 36
Trade, private . • 19
Training School,
Colombo.. • •39
Training School, Jaffna 11
Translation of . the
Gospels .. • •40
Trees .. .. 6, 7,8
Tribute .. . • 14, 16,23
Trinconomale 16, 26, 28, 29, 30,
37, 45
Truth, Divine .. 39
Tusks, elephant 16, 17, 24
Tutucorin .. 12, 13, 31, 32, 33, 37
Twee Gebroeders, De .. 9
Ulewale Sambelady .. 10
Uncultivated lands .. 23
Veddas .. .. 28
Vessels .. .. 8
Vessels, European .. 4
Vessels, foreign .. 18
Vessels, loading of .. 41
Vessels, native .. 4
Village chiefs .. 7
Visits Comptoir .. 6,41
Vliet, Jeremias van .. 23, 29
Wadomaratie .. 7, 10
Wages of slaves .. 39
Walancolan .. 14
Walewe, river of .. 18
Wallalewitty Corle .. 18
Wanni .. 3, 7, 9, 10, 14, 17
Wannias .. 9, IS, 16, 30, 44
Wannias, rebellious .. 17
Warehouse-keepers .. 20
Warehouses, Company’s 20, 35,
39, 43
Warrago lands •. 7
Warrendivo .. 10
Wary, Don Caspar
Chiandeynaar .. 16
Waste lands .. 7
Waterpas .. .. 27, 34
Water reservoir (Galle).. 18
Wattebadde.. .. 25
Wax .. .. 28
Wiedjewardene, Muda-
liyar, Don Simon de.. 22, 24
Wieradnapatnam .. 13
Willigammo * (Belli-
gammo) .. .. 7, 8, 10
Wierrenaregna, Anthony,
Mudaliyar .. 9
Woebletivo, bay of 17
Wolvendal .. .. 46
Wringaly .. .. 14
Yam, coir .. .. 31


PRINTED AT THE
GOVERNMENT PRESS, COLOMBO
CEYLON.
3 1508 01290925




A
P
