

pETH-
if
\
MEMORANDUM
UPON
A LETTER
ADDRESSED BY LORD LYTTELTON
SIR GEORGE GREY.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY G. NORMAN, MAIDEN LANE, COVENT GARDEN.
1854.


.
■
.


MEMORANDUM.
I yesterday received a letter from Lord Lyttel-
ton which contained the following’ paragraph.
“ I also feel it my duty to inform you that I have
“ felt bound to give notice of my intention to bring’
u under the notice of the House of Lords on the
“ 13th inst., the same points (g-enerally) which Mr.
“ Adderley recently brought before the House of
u Commons.”
I beg’ to offer the following remarks upon this
subject.
Mr. Adderley’s complaints ag’ainst me, as reported
in the “ Times” of the 27th of June, were —
Ist. That I had called together the Provincial Page 3.
Councils.
2ndly. That I had delayed or not allowed the Pages 9
. " & 19
meeting of the General Assembly.
Srdly. That I had delayed proclaiming the receipt Page 4.
of the Act, for the full six weeks allowed by law
after I had received it; and that I had delayed the
issue of the writs for the elections till the 17 th of Page 21
July 1853, that being actually six months after the
proclamation of the Constitutional Act, so that I
took advantage of the utmost limit of delay allowed.
4thly. That I left the Colony early in January, Page 19


1854 ; the Writs having- been returned; but no
General Assembly called.
sthly. That I had not made a solitary nomination
to the nominee part of the General Legislature; at
the end of the thirteen months after I had been
directed by Sir J. Pakington to use all expedition
in making such nominations.
Cthly. That I had dealt illegally with the Reve-
nues of the Colony; by handing them over to the
Provincial Assemblies.
7thly. That I had shewn an avidity in appropri-
ating to myself; or rather to my office; the popu-
larity of certain acts of grace which ought properly
to be considered as belonging- especially to Her
Majesty; such as with respect to the Crown Lands,
in dealing* with which; notwithstanding the terms
of the Act which were stringent enough; I took upon
myself to revolutionize; as it were; the whole powers
which were deputed to my trust.
Bthly. That in consequence of my illegal acts
with regard to the Crown Lands, an application
was made to the Supreme Court of the Colon}*, that
the Supreme Court decided against the legality of
my acts, to restrain which an injunction was granted,
and that it ivould he found that the only reason why
the injunction was not enforced , and the proceedings
carried further , was simply, because the Governor
had the power vested in him of displacing the judge.
9thly. That the Secretary of State had virtually
reproved me for having refused to act according to


the directions sent to me by the superior Govern-
ment at home, by doing* which I had set an example
which others mig'ht too readily form into a precedent
in similar cases to act upon: therefore Mr. Addeiley P a S e 43
arg*ued I was not a fit and proper person to retain
in my office, or to receive any promotion in the
public service.
lOthly. Sir John Pakington, in addition to the
above remarks, brought against me another accusa-
tion, viz. —That when the Constitution Act was sent Page 47
out by the Government then in power, as the usual
period of colonial service had almost expired in my
case, it vras arranged to meet my wishes, that leave
of absence should be given to me as soon as I had
put the New Constitution into action j and that I,
consequently, was not justified in returning to this
country when I did.
Before entering into any explanation regarding
the above allegations, I will first clear away those
portions of them which being wholly incorrect, have
no shadow of foundation, and therefore admit of no
explanation.
Mr. Adderley, to make good his case, asserted
that I had called together the Provincial Councils.
Now this is quite incorrect; they were called together
by the Superintendents; and although this act on
their part necessarily greatly influenced my pro-
ceedings, I had no power either to call the Provincial
Councils together, or to prevent them from being
called together. —See Clause 15 of the Act.


Mr. Adderlej further states, as he says to shew
the animus with which I dealt with the Constitution
Act, that I delayed proclaiming* the receipt of it for
the full six weeks allowed me by law after I received
it. Although I should have been quite justified in
following this course, had I thought it for the good
of her Majesty’s service to do so, Mr. Adderley’s
statement is in this instance as absolutely erroneous
and injurious to me, as in the others to which 1 have
alluded; and it is less excusable, because he
could have seen from the Parliamentary papers, re-
lating to New Zealand, which have been recently
published, that I had not received the Act upon
the 22nd of December,* whilst I had proclaimed the
receipt of it upon the 17th of January, so that I
proclaimed the receipt of it in about three weeks
from the time I received it, instead of delaying my
proclamation for six weeks, as stated by Mr.
Adderley.
To make the case still stronger, he again asserts
that I had not made a solitary nomination to the
nominee part of the General Legislature, at the end
of thirteen months after I had been directed by Sir
J. Pakington to use all expedition in making such
nominations. This again is quite incorrect; at least
five of these nominations were made, and the letters
patent issued, by the month of May, that is, in less
than five months after I had received the Constitution
* See Address of Governor-iu-Chief to the Legislative Council,
Dec. 22, 1852, p. 175.


Act. The others were made as speedily as possible,
but this was a delicate and difficult duty, which
took much correspondence and time to perform.
Mr. Adderley has probably been led into this error
by thinking- that no appointments were made to the
Upper Chamber previously to the issue of the final
notice containing- the names of all the g-entlemen
so appointed.
Again, Sir John Pakington in his additional
complaint against me, states that when the New
Constitution Act was passed, the usual period of
Colonial Service had in my case almost expired ,
now reckoning from the time of my leaving* Eng-land,
my period of Colonial Service had then amounted
to twelve years, or more than double the usual
period, and even reckoning from the time of my
leaving South Australia for New Zealand, I had
then exceeded the usual period of Colonial service.
I should notice another statement which has been
made, viz. “ That when the Constitution was sent
u out, the Governor himself stated, that in calling
“ together the New Provincial Assemblies, he had
a to arrange electoral districts; assign polling places;
u issue writs ; so that all those things were already
u done , the doing of which had been pleaded as an
a excuse for delay in the present instance
Now the fact is, that what had been done in this
respect, previous to the receipt of the New Constitu-
tion, although of great subsequent use, related only
to two Provinces—New Ulster and New Munster,—


and only incompletely, and imperfectly to the latter
of these • and did not embrace any provisions what-
ever for the General Assembly, or for elected Super-
intendents. In the statement I above quoted, it is
altogether left out of sight, that under the New
Constitution, I had to make arrangements for six
Provinces instead of two; for a General Assembly
of two Chambers j for the election of Superintendents;
for the Executive details necessary to detach six
Provincial Governments under elected Chief Officers,
from the Central Government, and to put these in
full operation ; to make as plain as I could to the
Native population, the meaning of the new state of
things, and to ascertain that they were reconciled to
it; besides making many other preparations, which
it would be tedious to state in detail.
I see, also, that Sir John Pakington made this
charge against me, that “ certain rumours had
“ reached him of the conduct of Governor Grey in
“ relation to the elections in New Zealand ;-—con-
“ duct, if those rumours were true, not at all credit-
“ able to the Governor, and certainly not in accord-
“ ance with the intentions of the Government by
u whom the Constitution Act was passed.”
What these rumours, not creditable to my conduct
were, lam unable to state. It would have been, I
submit, right of Sir John Pakington to have stated
plainly, what they were, and not to have made
so vague a charge. I can only say, that if it is
meant that I directly or indirectly interfered with


the elections, or ever even asked how any one
voted, whether in the Government service or not,
I positively deny the charge; on the contrary,
when persons were elected and became members ot
the Provincial Governments, who for years had
been opposed to my Government, I gave them the
most friendly and cordial advice and assistance, and
they rewarded me by frequently thanking me for
this, and by gladly availing themselves of the as-
sistance which I gave them. My object was to see
the country prosperous and contented, and no per-
sonal feelings could have led me to lose sight of
that end.


Manner of introducing the Constitution , and alleged
delay in bringing it into operation.
As to the manner in which the framers of the Act
intended that it should be brought into operation,
I certainly ought to be the best judge. The Act
contains 82 clauses; sof those may be termed mere
formalclauses, CO clauses were sent home by myself,
either actually drawn by the Attorney-General of
New Zealand acting under my directions, or so fully
sketched out that little remained to he done, although
some of them were in some respects altered; only
seventeen new clauses were added to the Bill, several
of which relate to the debts of tha New Zealand
Company, and to the affairs of the several Land-
selling Associations. Ido not mean that the sixty
clauses which I sent home were all originally framed
by myself, for the outline was principally derived
from that originally drawn by Earl Grey, and other
persons aided me in this duty in the most able and
generous manner, so that I can hardly tell which
suggestions were mine, and which were theirs j the
whole plan as it originally stood for the election of
the Upper House by the Provincial Councils was
undoubtedly Earl Grey’s. But this lam sure will be
admitted by all—that the fitting the frame-work
together in the manner it was sent home was entirely
my work, and that I alone had worked out the whole
plan of the concurrent operation of the Executive


and Legislative powers of the Central and several
Provincial Governments.
I should point out that it was always intended
the framers of both the measures for con-
ferring a constitution upon New Zealand that the
Provincial Councils should meet before the General
Assembly.
Tbe Constitutions of 1846 and of 1858 were iden-
tical in the main outline of a General Assembly, and
of Provincial Councils—in that of 1840, in the Bth
clause of the Bth chapter of the Iloyal Instructions,
it was enacted that the Provincial Councils should
meet first, and elect the members for the Lower
House of the General Assembly ) so that from the
isolated nature of the Provinces, and the little com-
munication between them, the General Assembly
could not under the Constitution of 1846, have met
until nearly twelve months after the meeting of the
Provincial Councils.
Again, the framers of the Constitution of 1852
proposed that the Upper House of the General As-
sembly should be elected by the Provincial Councils,
in which case also the General Assembly could not
have met until long after the Provincial Councils ;
the whole Constitution of 1852 was drawn upon this
supposition, and although the mode of nominating
the Upper House was altered, no corresponding alte-
rations were made throughout the measure to shew
that it was the intention of Parliament, that the
General Assembly should meet before the Provincial
Councils.


On the contrary, Parliament required that the
Provincial Councils should be elected at the same time
as the General Assembly, and then left the power
of assembling the Provincial Councils, whenever they
pleased, with the elected Superintendents, giving the
Governor no control whatever over this subject ;
whilst as the Provincial Councils were merely local
bodies, the members of which had no great distance
to come to their place of meeting, they could be
assembled by the respective Superintendents without
much delay, and generally were so.
Such being the case, as the Superintendents of
Provinces and the members of Provincial Councils
were frequently members of the General Assembly,
it would, if the General Assembly could have been
immediately convened, (which it could not), have been
improper and impolitic to have so convened it whilst
the Provincial Councils were sitting.
Moreover, I think it was reasonable that the
Provincial Councils should have met first. The
General Assembly could only meet rarely, after con-
siderable intervals of time, and with great inconve-
nience to the members. A great part of their duties at
their first meeting would consist in conferring powers
upon the Superintendents and Provincial Councils,
and in passing laws upon general subjects in con-
formity with the wishes of the inhabitants of the
Provinces ; now, until the Provincial Councils had
met, and discussed these subjects, none of these
points could be ascertained, and the General Assem-


Ibly, even if it had immediately met, could not have
performed its proper functions.
I now turn to the subject of my alleged delay,
in introducing the New Constitution.
About the middle of the year 1851, I sent home
the draft of the Constitution at present enjoyed by
New Zealand; being unaware whether it would or
would not be adopted by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, I could in no way make my recommenda-
tions public, for had I done so, and they had been
disapproved of, great discontent would have fol-
lowed ; at the time therefore that I had made
those recommendations, and for long afterwards, I
was sedulously represented by one party in the
Colony and in England as doing everything in my
power to prevent the introduction of representative
institutions, and the unpopularity which I thus ac-
quired, by faithfully discharging that which was my
evident duty to the Home Government, rendered it a
matter of greater difficulty for me to introduce the
New Constitution when it arrived in the country.
About the month of June, 1852, I received a letter
from Earl Grey, informing me that Her Majesty’s
Government adopted and approved generally of the
measure in the form in which it was sent home,
and I without notifying to the public the receipt
of this letter began to make preparations for the
immediate introduction of the Constitution, when
in a few days I received a letter from Sir
John Pakington informing me of the change of


ministry, acquainting* me that it was doubtful if Her
Majesty’s advisers would now g*o on with the mea-
sure, and directing* me, as prejudicial results mig*ht
follow if the Colonists were disappointed in their
expectations, to take care not to make public the
intentions regarding* the New Zealand Constitution
which had been notified to me by Earl
quote from memory as 1 have in my possession no
copy of this letter.)
In compliance with these directions, which ap-
peared under existing circumstances reasonable and
proper, I still kept secret the recommendations which
I had made, and which had been approved of by
Lord John Russell’s administration, and stopped
every proceeding and preparation in reference to the
Constitution which could have made its existence
known to the public, and continued cheerfully to en-
dure the misrepresentations and attacks to which I
was subjected, in consequence of my giving to Sir
John Pakington the assistance which I should have
afforded him, even if he had not instructed me to do
so.
At length I heard that the measure had been laid
before Parliament by Sir John Pakington, and had
passed, and on or about the 25th of December, 1852,
1 received his despatch dated the 16th of July in
the same year, transmitting* me a copy of the Con-
stitution Act in the form in which it received the
Royal assent.
Here the question arises for discussion—Did I,
upon the receipt of this Act, issue the several Pro-


damn lions and perform the several acts necessary
to bring* the Constitution into operation, as speedily
as I oug-ht to have done ?
To this I answer that I issued all the necessary
Proclamations, and performed all the duties imposed
upon me in reference to the introduction of the Con-
stitution within the respective periods of time allowed
Ity Parliament j and this is I think a sufficient an-
swer to the question 5 for clearly Parliament in-
tended, provided I did this, to leave to my own
discretion the precise date at which each act
was to be performed. No person but myself can
be a judg*e of the motives of policy, or of the
stern necessities which compelled me to weig’h with
care and caution every step that I took in intro-
ducing* a new form of government among*st a jealous
and excitable race. I did this successfully and peace-
fully within the time in which Parliament had di-
rected me to do it. Had I attempted to do it hastily
or unadvisedly I might not have done it at all, and
have changed a friendly nation into an inveterate
foe, and yet I am now put upon my trial for a crime
unknown to the law, —for Parliament only made it
an offence not to have performed certain duties
within certain specified dates, and I am not accused
of breaking* that law, but of having fulfilled it.
I am, however, quite willing* that the question
should be opened upon this basis, because lam
satisfied that a full consideration of the nature of
the many and difficult duties entrusted to me by the


Kew Zealand Constitution Act, will satisfy any im-
partial person that I could not have executed them
in a shorter space of time than I accomplished
them in.
I was required by that Act, to fix the boundaries
of each of six Provinces, in such a manner that the
extent of each might have a just proportion to the
Customs’ duties, that could be levied at its port or
ports, so that its Government might have a sufficient
revenue to defra} r the necessary expenses of each
part of the Province j and in such a manner that the
native tribes included within each Province might
properly fall under its control, so that little chance
might arise of collision between them and the Pro-
vincial Governments, regarding their territorial limits,
or other similar questions.
I was further required to assign the number of
members for each of the six Provincial Councils,
and for each of the Houses of the General As-
sembly ; to determine the limits of each separate
electoral district in every one of the six Provinces ;
to fix every polling place; to determine the number
of members that each Province should return to the
Lower House of the General Assembly, and that
each Electoral District should return to their respec-
tive Provincial Councils.
To the above-named duties, I may add the fol-
lowing important ones, which I was also required to
execute, viz. to decide the manner in which the elec-
tions and mode of voting were to be conducted •to


arrange all the duties by which the administrative
functions of the General Government, and of the six
Provincial Governments administered by elected
Superintendents, might be so conducted in their
military, judicial, financial, land, and other depart-
ments, that they might work together harmoniously,
and yet that a strong and efficient Government
might exist in every part of the islands.
To select from each settlement those fittest to be
called to the Upper House, and who would con-
sent to perform duties, which after the disappointment
of the Colonists, in not obtaining an elected Upper
House, had become very invidious ones; and to
explain to jealous Chiefs and easily alarmed tribes,
what were to be their duties under this new state of
things, and how their rights would be protected
where so much power was to be given over into the
hands of the European population, which contained
many persons, whose cupidity, or supposed hostility,
they dreaded. It should further be remembered
that those duties had to be performed in relation to
a vast extent of little known territory, all the settle-
ments in which were extremely isolated and remote
from each other, which latter cause rendered it
necessary for me, in order properly to perform
them, to undertake journeys on foot of more than
one thousand miles, in the aggregate, besides long
journeys on horseback, and voyages to some of the
settlements.
Duties of the nature above detailed are generally


entrusted to a Legislative body composed of members
collectively possessing local knowledge regarding
every portion of the country for which they are
to legislate, although the peculiar circumstances pf
New Zealand required that the almost unprecedented
course should be taken, of entrusting all these
powers to a single person, I think that in estimating
the time in which such varied difficult and delicate
duties were performed by him, great allowances
should be made.
I may state that from the able and zealous
assistance I received from the various public func-
tionaries, I was enabled to discharge these numerous
and delicate duties in such a manner that no com-
plaint of partiality, or unfairness, upon my part,
has } r et reached me, whilst the Colonists as a mass,
both European and native, have on various occasions
expressed themselves towards me in the language
of warm gratitude and affection. All this was
accomplished in addition to the manifold and press-
ing ordinary duties of a very difficult and extensive
Government, within less than twelve months from
the date of my first Proclamation acknowledging
the receipt of the Constitution Act, and within the
same time most of the Provincial Legislatures had
been assembled, and had arranged the affairs of their
respective Provinces, the Constitution was in full
operation, the country tranquil and prosperous in
every part, although such great political changes


had taken place, and the time had arrived at which
the General Assembly could be legally and con-
veniently convened.
To go more into details as to the time in which I
performed the various acts which, by the new Con-
stitution, I was required to execute, I beg to point
out that I received the Act after the 94th of
December, and that, instead of availing myself of
the six weeks allowed by law before I issued
the first Proclamation, that document appeared in
about three weeks —that is, upon the 17th of
January.
On the 28th of February the Proclamation ap-
peared which assigned the limits of the six Provinces
into which New Zealand was divided; and I had,
during the interval between the 25th of December
and the 28th of February, so far completed my
work, that upon the sth of March the Proclamation
appeared which completed all my ministerial acts
with regard to introducing the Constitution; that is,
all my own work was done in little more than two
months —the delay which followed arose from geo-
graphical causes, from the necessity of forming
electoral rolls, and explaining various points to the
native population, &c. &c.
Here I beg to point out, that the sth clause
of the Act of Parliament it was enacted, that in
fixing* the number of members for each electoral dis-
trict, I should have regard to the number of electors
within the same. Perhaps, therefore, in strict law,


(although the question is a doubtful one,) I ought
not to have issued the proclamation fixing the num-
ber of members for each district until the electoral
rolls had been formed, and I had thus ascertained
the number of electors in each district. From the
great extent of territory for which I was legislating,
and the little communication between its several
parts, had I adopted this course, the introduction of
the Constitution must have been delayed for a con-
siderable period of time. Therefore, knowing from
personal knowledge very nearly the number of electors
in each district which I defined, I ventured, acting
solely for the public good, at once to assign by Pro-
clamation, the number of members to each electoral
district, without waiting for the formation of the
electoral rolls, thereby giving the fullest proof of
every desire to introduce the Constitution with the
least possible delay. I regret to add that I was
informed, from sources which entirely satisfied me
of the truth of the fact, that the very persons in
the Colony—who are now promoting the attacks to
which I am subjected in England for an alleged
delay in the introduction of the Constitution, were
taking measures in the Colony to overthrow the
whole Constitution, upon the ground that I had
committed an illegal act in not waiting for the form-
ation of the electoral rolls before I fixed the number
of members for each district. Finding, therefore,
the danger to which the Constitution was exposed
by the proceedings of such persons, I felt it to be


necessary, in reference to all my future acts—such
as issuing Writs, convening’ the General Assembly,
&c. &c.—to take care on no account in any way to
depart from the strict letter of the law.
Acting’ upon this principle, I could not have
issued the necessary Proclamation for calling- the
General Assembly together until about seven or
eigffit days before I left JN T ew Zealand, because it
was only then that I received from Otag’o the re-
turned writs required by the 44th clause of the
Constitution Act; nor is the delay to be wondered
at, when it is remembered that Otag’o is distant
about eig’ht hundred miles from Auckland, that
there is no communication between the two places
but by sea, and that only very rarely.
When the returned writs from Otag’o reached me,
a motive of delicacy prevented me from immediately
issuing- a Proclamation notifying’ the day upon which
the General Assembly was to meet, which must
necessarily from geographical causes have been at a
distant date, because I was so shortly to quit the
colony, and to leave the whole responsibility of its
future welfare and safety in the hands of another
officer; I did not, therefore, feel justified in fully
committing’ him to so important a measure as sum-
moning’ the General Assembly, and I thought as he
was about to enter on such difficult duties, that his
hands would be streng’thened by so popular and
gracious an act as summoning- the Assembly eman-


ating from himself. I therefore merely acquainted
him verbally and in writing* with my intention of
having- immediately issued a notice for the meeting-
of the General Assembly had I remained in New
Zealand, and recommended him to pursue the same
line of policy, which he did by summoning- the
General Assembly for the 24th of May.
I further recommended the officer temporarily
administering- the Government, to convene the
General Assembly at Auckland, telling- him I
should have done so had I remained in the country.
I did this because Her Majesty’s Government had
formerly directed that Auckland should be consti-
tuted the capital of the New Zealand Islands, and
because, when I found it necessary for the public
convenience occasionally to assemble the General
Legislature at Wellington, I g-ave a public and
distinct pledge that it should, in as far as possible,
assemble alternately at Wellington and Auckland ;
notwithstanding this, circumstances had compelled
me to assemble it twice in succession at Wellington,
• O /
to the prejudice of Auckland. I therefore thought
that in order to fulfil the promises made in regard
to the latter place, the next meeting of the General
Legislature ought to take place at Auckland, and
that any change in the capital of the Islands should
be made by the inhabitants of the country themselves,
through their representatives, and not by the Go-
vernor or by the Secretary of State, and that no
apparent convenience ought to lead me to commit a
direct breach of public faith.


I beg’ further to remark, on this part of the
subject, that the statement reported to have been
made in the House by Mr. Adderley, u that the
writs for the election of members were not issued
until the 17th of July, 1853, that being actually
six months after the proclamation of the Act/’ is
not correct. Although I have no means here of as-
certaining the precise dates, I believe that in the
Province of Auckland, the writs were not only issued,
but the elections were concluded at the end of the month
of June or early in July, and the others were issued
when the necessary arrangements could be made, when
I thought the minds of the natives in the particular
districts to be in such a state, and so far prepared
for the important changes about to take place, that
the election of the Superintendent who was to exer-
cise so great an influence over their future, might
not alarm or irritate them, and when the requisite
preparations had been made for handing over the
details of the Executive Government of the new
Province to the Superintendent.
Having thus replied to the first five complaints, I
now come to the sixth, the
Alleged Illegal Appropriation of Revenues .
The Constitution Act, by the 66th clause, directs
that all the revenues arising from taxes, &c. “ levied
“in virtue of any Act of the General Assembly ,
“ shall be subject to be appropriated to such specific


u purposes as by any ad of the General Assembly
u shall be prescribed in that behalf and the surplus
u of such revenues which shall not he appropriated ,
u shall he divided oniony the several Provinces , in
u the like proportion as the gross proceeds of the
u said revenue shall have arisen therein respectively,
“ and shall he paid over to the Treasuries of such
u Provinces for the public uses thereof and shall he
u subject to the appropriation of the respective Pro-
u vincial Councils of such Provinces
Before the passing of the Constitution Act, I
pointed out to the Secretary of State, (Despatch,
No. 106, October Bth, 1847), that this language,
which had been used in the previous Constitution
Act was ambiguous, as it gave no power either to
the General Assembly, or to the Provincial Coun-
cils to deal with the existing revenue raised under
the laws of the previous Legislature ; but I was in-
formed (March 7, 1848) that this was a matter of
no practical importance; for, that if I should con-
stitute separate Provincial Legislatures, I should
be able, if I thought fit, to adopt the regulations
laid down in chapter IS of the Koyal Instructions,
and to leave the appropriation of the surplus revenue
to the Provincial Legislatures, after making the
deductions specified.
When the New Constitution Act was drawn, the
framers of it still left the same framework of Go-
vernment, namely, a General Assembly, and Pro-
vincial Councils j and Parliament, notwithstanding


my having 1 pointed out the objections which existed,
adopted exactly the same language as regarded
the appropriation of the revenue j and as no other
course was left open to me, I followed the instructions
I had received, and directed that the law in as far
as was practicable should be complied with, that is
that the revenue raised under the laws of the pre-
vious General Legislature, should be first applied to
the specific purposes to which they had appropriated
it, that the Civil List and other charges directed by
Parliament, should then be deducted, and that after
these deductions had been made, the surplus should
be paid over to the Treasuries, in the manner, and
in the proportions, directed by law.
I see that the question of the legality of this
proceeding was recently raised in the Provincial
Council at Wellington, and that the Law Officer of
that Province, who has nearly always been in direct
opposition to the former General Government, gave
it as his opinion that the acts of the General Govern-
ment in this respect were perfectly legal, and although
I have heard it stated in general terms that they were
illegal, I have never heard any reason advanced in
support of that opinion; nor can lin any way under-
stand it. The former General Legislature had raised
the revenue, and had subjected it to such general
charges as they thought proper, leaving the residue to
be appropriated by the Provincial Councils —Parlia-
ment from that residue had appropriated such portion
as thought proper for the Civil List and other
analogous purposes— why therefore was not the


balance, that is about two-thirds of the whole income;
to go to the Provincial Treasuries.
Moreover it was clearly reasonable that the
balance should be paid to the Provincial Treasuries,
for as I have before shewn, the Provincial Govern-
ments and Legislatures were called by Parlia-
ment into immediate existence, whilst the General
Assembly could not under any circumstances have
assembled for a considerable period of time ; had
therefore no revenue been at the disposal of the
Provincial Legislatures when first the Provincial
Governments came into existence, the country must
have been left without any efficient Government,
property would have been depreciated in value, life
would have been insecure, great disasters would
have ensued, if indeed the whole Constitution had
not fallen to pieces.
It will be seen from this explanation that the
whole revenue of New Zealand was appropriated
under the authority of Parliament, of the previous
General Legislature (whose laws are still in force),
or under the authority of the Provincial Councils;
and how Members can be induced to stand up in
the House and repeat, again and again, that <( I
u had committed the illegality of appropriating the
u revenue under my own authority,” I am quite at
a loss to understand. I feel certain that had I
acted in any other manner than I did, the very
persons who by misrepresenting my acts have led
Members to adopt this course, would have seen with
delight the disasters which would have sprung from


my proceedings; and would then with good reason,
and with a certainty of success, have moved Parlia-
ment to censure my conduct.
Alleged avidity in appropriating to myself, or rather
to my office, the popularity of certain acts of
grace which ought properly to he considered as
belonging especially to Her Majesty.
Mr. Adderley says, u that this is another accusa-
“ tion, and no slight one, which he brings against
a me •” but I am not quite sure , what he means.
If he means that I always earnestly strive to
seize with avidity and gratitude every opportunity
of doing good which my country affords me, I
suppose that in common with every other British
officer I should plead guilty. But if Mr. Adderley
means that I have ever used such powers to diminish
the loyalty and affection of Her Majesty’s subjects
for their Queen, or to increase my own popularity
without any regard for the consequences that my
proceedings may produce to the State, that, I am
fortunately in a condition absolutely to disprove.
With regard to the first point, the attachment of
Her Majesty’s subjects to their Sovereign, it is noto-
rious that when I assumed the government of New
Zealand the natives were in a state of rebellion, and
that a very disaffected feeling prevailed amongst
large numbers of them, and that when I’ left the
country, in no part of Her Majesty’s dominions


could subjects be found, who regarded their Queen
with greater love, reverence and attachment than the
inhabitants of New Zealand.
Upon the second point, I have to state that upon
three occasions recently I have had, with no solici-
tation upon my own part, and at no suggestion of
my own, extraordinary and unusual powers con-
ferred upon me.
Firstly—Lord Grey, with the most generous con-
fidence in my discretion, induced Parliament in 1848
to pass an Act conferring upon me powers of a mag-
nitude which had never I believe been before trusted
to a British Governor, for they authorised me in
point of fact to create temporarily in New Zealand,
if I thought fit to do so, a representative system
upon any basis that appeared to me suited to the
circumstances of the country.
Secondly—The last Constitution Act for New
Zealand conferred upon me most unusual powers
with regard to fixing the number of members for
the Upper and Lower Houses of the General Assem-
bly, and for the Provincial Councils, as also the
proportions in which they were to be returned by
the different electoral districts, the boundaries of the
Provinces, &c. &c.
Thirdly —I had recently conferred upon me ex-
tensive and unusual powers in relation to the
Crown Lands in New Zealand*
Now it is quite true that in each of these two last
cases I exercised to the fullest extent the powers


with which I was entrusted. I did this because I
believed my duty to my country required me to do
so. It may be argued, as Mr. Adderley does, that
it was not a sense of duty, but a love of popularity
that led me to exercise the powers entrusted to me
in the last instance. Of course I have no direct
means of disproving an assertion which relates to
mere alleged motives, but I can shew that there are
at least some probabilities in my favour.
For in the case of the first instance I have
alluded to, at the same time that Parliament en-
trusted me with such ample and unusual powers of
legislation upon the subject of representative institu-
tions in New Zealand, it was itself legislating upon
the same subjects in reference to Colonies in the im-
mediate vicinity of those islands, so that I could
easily have set up my own judgment in opposition
to that of Parliament, and have acquired very great
popularity by establishing by my own authority a
more liberal or popular system of representation in
New Zealand than Parliament established in the
neighbouring Colonies.
On the contrary however, although I incurred very
great unpopularity and odium by the course I pur-
sued, and had to withstand the most severe pressure
from those who hoped to force me to concede demands,
which they knew I had authority to grant, I steadity
refused through a long intervalof time, and to the last,
to exercise the powers with which I was entrusted, in
the manner which the popular voice demanded, in-


forming’ the Secretary of State that I pursued this
course because “ I judged it was my duty as an
“ officer of a great Empire, entrusted with high
“ powers, not to attempt rashly to set up my judg-
“ ment against the opinions of the majority of the
“ Great Council of that Empire, and by legislating
“ in a manner different from that which they thought
“ proper to pursue in immediately neighbouring
" Colonies, create perhaps great embarrassment and
“ much discontent,” In this instance, clearly shew-
ing that acting under a sense of duty I could brave
any amount of attack and odium rather than gain
popularity by performing acts within my powers, but
which 1 believed to be adverse to the interests of the
Empire.
That I dealt in an illegal and improper manner with
the Crown Lands of the Colony.
On this point I have to state, that myself and my
advisers appointed by the Crown believed that my
acts in reference to the Crown Lands were legal,
and I have never yet met any one who doubted this,
after having read the despatches addressed to me by
the Secretary of State upon the subject, especially
that of the 15th of December, 1852, which contains
this delegation of power :
«Until therefore the General Assembly shall
<( otherwise provide, it will be lawful for Her Ma-
jesty to regulate the disposal of these, as well as
u the other Waste Lands of the Province, under the


“ powers reserved to her by sec. 72 of the Gonstitu-
u tion Act, which powers, under sec. 79, she dele-
u gates to yourself.”
I shall therefore assume, as I am sure will be
generally admitted, that the legality of my acts in
this respect is really beyond question.
The powers with which I was thus entrusted in
reference to the Waste Lands of the Crown were
never sought for by me.
That I exercised them in conformity with the ad-
vice and earnest recommendations of the advisers
chosen for me by the Crown, is clear from the pro-
ceedings of the Executive Councils.
It is not pretended that I exercised them for the
advantage of any particular class or interest.
That by my measures I inflicted no injury upon
the inhabitants of New Zealand, and in no way
offended their prejudices or feelings, is clear from
their numerous and warm addresses upon the sub-
ject.
That I would not have taken the steps I did, if I
thought they would have been repugnant to the feel-
ings of the Colonists, is clear, because in the case of
the District of Canterbury where I had some doubts
upon this point, I have always refused to extend the
New Regulations to that District, until the wishes
of its inhabitants on the subject were made known
to me.
That the measures I adopted were entirely suc-
cessful, and attained the ends contemplated, is clear


from the present tranquillity and prosperity of the
country.
I think that the above would he sufficient answers
to the questions raised on this subject, hut I am
quite willing* to defend the policy of the measure.
To do this, I should first remark that upon the
subject of the questions between the different races
in New Zealand, in relation to their conflicting
claims to land, the local Government owed a duty to
Great Britain, as well as to the Colony. Upon the
satisfactory settlement of these questions, it al-
together depended, in the event of a war breaking
out between Great Britain and Foreign Powers,
whether New Zealand was to be a cause of weakness
and anxiety to the mother country, or a source of
strength. Whether at the moment we were making
great efforts elsewhere, large demands were to he
made upon our financial and military resources, to
subdue a revolted population in New Zealand, or
whether, that population being loyal and contented,
would not only aid in the defence of their own
country against a foreign enemy, hut would cheer-
fully furnish men to aid in the defence of our other
Colonial possessions.
It was the consideration of the subject under this
point of view, that made myself and my advisers
think, that Sir John Pakington had acted with
much wisdom, in instructing me, that in his opinion
a great boon would be conferred upon the Colony,
if I could make such arrangements that its future


Legislature could take the land question into its
own hands, comparatively free from the many diffi-
culties which had unavoidably beset them during-
my administration.
For it was known to everybody, who knew any-
thing of the Colony, that the great difficulty in the
introduction of the New Constitution, was this: that
although the Queen and Parliament had conferred
upon the General Assembly of New Zealand the
power of regulating the sale and occupation of the
Waste Lands of the Crown, wherein the title of natives
had been extinguished by purchase by the Crown , it
really had given the General Assembly very little,
because, except in some parts of the Islands, the
Crown had little or no Waste Lands of any value, or
which was immediately required by the settlers.
Hence there were two parties in the Colony; one,
in favour of acquiring the land from the natives by
fair purchase from the owners; the other, in
favour of assuming all lands which they regarded
as unoccupied by the natives, as waste lands of the
Crown, by prerogative. The natives dreaded this
latter party obtaining power, which they knew they
would do under the New Constitution, and they
would certainly have resisted by force of arms any
attempt to take their lands. There was therefore
great fear that disturbances might take place upon
this subject, and any successful steps which were
taken for the settlement of so difficult a question,
would clearly be most advantageous to the mother


country and to the Colony. Whilst if they were of
such a nature that in handing* over to the General
Assembly the Waste Lands of the Crown, the gift
was changed from a mere nominal one, into a noble
endowment of immense tracts of territory, that body
would be clearly benefited by the transaction.
The Native Chiefs were, at frequent interviews
which I had with them, made so perfectly aware
that the Europeans were really pressed for fresh
lands, and of the advantages which would result
from the settlement of such difficult questions, that
they at last became very anxious to have them
adjusted before I left the country; and I found that
if I proposed to issue land regulations, under which
they saw they could easily acquire lands from the
Crown under a crown title, that they would be dis-
posed at once to concede large tracts of land to me
for a very moderate price; and that if those regula-
tions were of such a nature that Europeans could
readily purchase land under them, they would make
immediately considerable purchases from the Crown,
and thus afford the Government the means, with
the funds so obtained, and which could be obtained
in no other way, of making other large additional
purchases of lands from the natives, and of thus
still more completely settling the outstanding diffi-
cult questions connected with native lands. I should
mention that under the price fixed upon land by
the New Zealand Company, all land sales had in
their district for years almost ceased, so that there


was no land fund ; and even in the Auckland district
no lands were sold, except those in the neighbourhood
of the town. But X will revert to this subject again.
The question of the acquisition of the tracts of
land which the natives desired to part with, was one
which admitted of no delay. They are a versatile
and changeable people; they were willing to sell
their lands, then, to myself, and to the Commis-
sioner upon certain terms. Long before the Genei al
Assembly could have met, they would probably
have changed their minds, or something that was
maintained by one party in the Assembly might
have irritated their pride, and have altogether pre-
vented them from disposing of their lands.
The discovery of gold in Australia was also lead-
ing the colonists in New Zealand to abandon it in
g-reat numbers: they had but trifling inducements
to remain there. The Government had little choice
of land to offer them, and that only at a price at
which they could not profitably purchase it. If the
Government at once threw immense fertile districts
open to them, at a reasonable price, it might not
only induce many to remain, but might lead large
numbers of persons who had realized money in
Australia to come at once to settle in New Zealand ;
and this end was obtained by the New Kegulations
to an extent which quite surpassed my expectations.
This also was a matter which admitted of no delay.
Before the General Assembly could have met, large
numbers of persons would have gone, and none


would have come, and all the wealth which was
realized to the country by those who remained, and
by those who arrived purchasing* land, and raising-
on it exports, which produced hig’h prices in the
g*old districts, would have been lost to New Zealand;
and the General Assembly, instead of meeting- to
legislate for a wealthy, prosperous, and rapidly in-
creasing- population, would have had to devise mea-
sures to try to save a number of impoverished
settlements.
Another subject which required to be immediately
adjusted, was that of providing- sufficient lands ; to
pay the debts in land, which the New Zealand Com-
pany owed to their purchasers. For years these
persons had been promised to be put in possession of
lands to which they were entitled; and the duty of
fulfilling- those promises had now devolved upon the
Government, which had no such sufficient choice of
lands to offer, as would enable it fairly and honestly
to fulfil the engag-ements under which it had come.
If, therefore, I could procure from the Natives such
tracts of land as would enable me to pay in a just
manner the debts which the Government owed, —
justice to long-disappointed, and very badly-treated
creditors, required me, at once, to secure such
tracts of land for them, and not to lose an oppor-
tunity which, if then neglected, might not soon pre-
sent itself again, and the loss of which might inflict
irretrievable injury upon innocent parties.
Again, the question to which I have before ad-


verted of no county lands being’ purchased, re-
quired the immediate attention of the Government.
The result of the hig-h price of land was twofold.
Firstly, the Crown lands were occupied by squatters,
not in small farms, but in immense districts occu-
pied by each, for which they paid a merely nominal
rental—they were viewed with jealousy and dislike
by the small cultivators, and those who wished to
purchase small portions of land—and yet on their
part many of them desired still to retain the great
advantages which they possessed, and their tenure
of which principally depended upon the high price
of land being maintained, as that price prevented
others from purchasing the lands which they occu-
pied. Another large portion of the squatters who
wished themselves to purchase portions of their runs
at a fair value, were prevented from doing so by the
hig’h price demanded for them. Thus great social
evils were rising in the country, as well as class
interests, and class hatreds, which there was little
chance of being remedied by the General Assembly
as now constituted 5 for the Upper House being
nominated by the Crown, would be very little under
the control of public opinion, yet must have been
selected chiefly from persons holding large runs,
who were therefore not likely generally to favour
any measure for reducing the price of land; a con-
test therefore seemed likely immediately to take
place between the two Houses upon this subject,
and this, as the General Assembly would only so


rarely meet, would have been attended with much
more serious inconvenience than in other countries,
as it would have been a long- time before the Upper
House could have retraced any erroneous steps
which it had taken upon this subject.
Secondty, The high price of Crown Lands led
large numbers of persons (in spite of every precau-
tion which the Government took to prevent such
proceeding’s) to rent lands from the natives in dif-
ferent parts of the Islands, upon which they made
improvements, and broug’ht parts of them under
cultivation. These persons, who had a great influence
over the natives, and who saw no chance under the
former Government regulations of being’ able to
purchase the lands they rented, if they became
Crown Lands, almost universally exercised the in-
fluence they had over the natives, to protect their
own interests, that is to prevent the natives from
selling- their lands to the Crown. A class of most
difficult and perplexing- questions was from this
cause springing* up in the country, which must have
caused great future difficulties, and which could
most readily be solved, by the Government issuing-
such reg-ulations for the sale of land as would render
it more profitable upon the whole, (security of tenure
being considered,) for the occupiers of native lands
to deal with the Government, than with the natives.
This end was obtained by the New Regulations, and
there can be no doubt that it was partly through
,the influence of the class of persons that I have


described, that the natives were induced to part with
some portions of the tracts of territory which the
Crown has acquired for the General Assembly.
Again, there were many persons in the northern
part of the Islands, who had claims to land to which
they were attached, and who would gladly have
closed their claims by purchasing the land if they
could have obtained it at its value—but who could
not afford to pay the price demanded for it by the
Government under the old regulations, and yet im-
mediately purchased the land under the new regu-
lations, thus settling another class of questions of
great difficulty, which it was most desirable to have
adjusted before the General Assembly met.
It was also absolutely necessary for me to issue
immediately New Land Regulations for the whole
of the New Zealand Company’s Settlements, in
order to close the affairs of those settlements. This
was a duty that I could not avoid. I had no in-
structions given to me as to the kind of regulations
which I was to issue for those settlements, but an
entirely discretionary power was left to me. It was
therefore I think my duty to issue the very best re-
gulations in relation to them which I could devise,
and not to render myself the tool of a small party
in the Colony, who held theoretical views regarding
a hig'h price for land, and who were all then, or had
recently been, the paid Agents or Directors of Land
Selling Associations, and whose judgments were
therefore likely to be biassed (perhaps unconsciously


to themselves) upon this subject. I felt also the
more justified in issuing the regulations I thought
best ; because they were evidently satisfactory and
acceptable to the great mass of the inhabitants of
New Zealand.
I was further certain in issuing the Regulations I
did, that whilst they would enable me to cause very
large tracts of territory to be handed over to the
General Assembly, that body would shortly have the
power of repealing or modifying them, if after they
had been subjected to the test of experience, it was
found that they were in any respects injudicious
or unsuited to the circumstances of the country. I
also felt that there was little danger of individuals
availing themselves of them, to acquire large tracts
of land for speculative purposes, because in each
Province a Legislative body existed, returned by
persons opposed by interest to such speculations in
land, and who had the power, which they were pre-
pared to exercise, of placing such a tax upon un-
occupied lands, as would effectually prevent persons
from holding land for merely speculative objects.
I have only to add that the success of the mea-
sures I took surpassed all reasonable expectation;
whether in enabling the Government to purchase on
very reasonable terms large tracts of land required
by the Europeans, or in inducing persons to resort to
or remain in the Colony to develop its resources, or
in promoting its prosperity and the welfare of its
inhabitants.


That I had held out the example of setting at de-
fiance an injunction of the Supreme Court of the
Colony of which I was Governor.
The proceeding’s in the branch of the Supreme
Court at Wellington, connected with the injunction
alluded to, appear to have taken place between the
15th of March and the 17 th of May, in the year
1853; and as I left Wellington for Auckland upon
the 10th of March in the same year, and did not
return there until the Ist of June, it is not in my
power to afford much information upon the subject,
more especially as I brought no papers with me to
England which related to a question which, although
it has been swelled into importance in this country,
excited little interest in the Colony, and which I
believed long since to be finally closed and at rest.
On referring to such documents as I could obtain, it
appears that the following were the facts of this case.
Upon the 30th of March, 1853, upon an ex parte
application, a single Judge of the Supreme Court
sitting at Wellington, refused to grant an injunction,
to the full extent prayed for by Mr. E. C. Wake-
field and Mr. Sewell, in the name of a Mr. Dorset,
but he stated that he would “ grant it to the extent
“ of restraining the defendant (the Commissioner of
“ Crown Lands) from taking any final steps which
“ would actually alienate the land within the dis-
“ trict of Wellington until answer , or further order.”


It appears from a letter from Mr. Sewell of the
Bth of April to the Civil Secretary, that the injunction
in the limited form above detailed, had not then been
sealed (consequently it could not have been issued),
nor can I find any thing* to shew that it ever was
sealed or issued.
Upon the 17th of May, the same single Judge
granted the plaintiff's application to amend his bill,
by making the Attorney-General a party, and that
without prejudice to the injunction.
Four days after this, that is upon the 21st of
May, Mr. E. G. Wakefield notified to the Secretary
of State, in a letter which he addressed to him, and
which he published at the same time in the local
newspapers, that the Supreme Court would not be
moved to further action, because, a that were the
u Judge to maintain the authority of his Court , he
a mighty and there appears every probability that he
u would , be suspended from office by the Governor.”
I have before stated that I believed that I possessed
the necessary legal powers to take the measures in
reference to the Crown Lands, which I adopted, and
I have shewn why I thought they would promote
the interests of all classes of the inhabitants of the
country, and that they would be in accordance with
their wishes.
Nothing that took place in the proceedings before
the Judge of the Supreme Court shook my belief
in the propriety of the course which I had adopted.
These proceedings were taken by two strangers,


before a single Judge, in my absence. They were
heard ex parte. No one was present at the spot who
was authorized to produce the Secretary of State’s
instructions or despatches to rae ; and the Judge had
no complete knowledge what these were. If there
had been any doubts about my legal powers in the
first instance, they were set at rest before the Judge
gave his opinion, by the receipt of other instructions
before referred to, making’ the delegation of powers
complete, of which the Judge knew nothing. After
the Attorney-General was made a party, when it
was known that I was on the point of returning to
Wellington, and that I had received further instruc-
tions, all proceedings in the Supreme Court were
dropped; and the reason assigned for this, as I will
presently shew, was a discreditable one, and calcu-
lated to create suspicion that there were other
reasons for this proceeding which were not divulged.
The injunction, if ever finally issued, (which I have
no knowledge that it ever was,) related only to a very
limited district, and thus did not practically interfere
with the proceedings of the Government. It was
given in a private action, and related only to certain
acts of a single Commissioner over a very incon-
siderable portion of his district.
It was clear that nothing which passed in the
Supreme Court led any important portion of the
public to think that the Government was not justified
in the course it was pursuing, for in New Zealand
(as in all countries) there were many persons ready


to embarrass the Government. Five large Provinces
were interested in the question, yet in not one of
these (each of which had its own Land Commis-
sioner) was any other application made to the
Supreme Court.
I have remarked upon the reason alleged by Mr.
E. G. Wakefield for himself and Mr. Sewell
stopping all proceedings in the case \ it was because,
“ that were the Judge to maintain the authority of his
“Court, he might, and there appears every probability
“he would, be suspended from office by the Go-
“ vernorT
Had I pursued such a course as to use the high
powers entrusted to me by the Queen for the pui-
pose of suspending a judge for having performed his
judicial duty, I should have been guilty of a highly
criminal act, and I hold it to be utterly inexcusable
in a man who was seeking to enforce alleged public
rights, to stop in such a course —excusing his doing
so by the assertion of a mere groundless accusation.
So long as this accusation of a mere suspicion of
base intentions on my part came from a man of Mr.
Wakefield’s character, I entirely disregarded it; but
I think Mr. Adderley was not justified in adopting
such an opinion, and in repeating it in the House of
Commons and that Lord Lyttelton ought not to
adopt it in the manner I am bound to infer from his
letter he intends to.
I believe that a consideration of the above facts
will shew that the course I pursued was a judicious


and proper one, and that there was nothing- in the
proceeding’s before the Supreme Court which should
have induced the Government to have suspended the
measures it was taking-, and had taken, for the
welfare of the colony. From the time the Attorney-
General of New Zealand could be informed of what
had occurred, all the proceeding’s of the Government
were taken under his advice and opinion j and
I feel satisfied from his known ability that his advice
was sound and good.
That I had refused to act according to the direction
sent to me hy the superior Government at Home ,
hy doing which I set an example which others
might too readily form into a precedent in similar
cases to act upon , and that therefore lam not a
ft and proper person to retain in any office , or
to receive any promotion in the Public Service.
The facts of this case are as follows : under in-
structions from Her Majesty, or from Her Majesty’s
Secretary of State, formal promises had been made
by the Representatives of the Crown to the native
population of one portion of New Zealand, that the
sums realized from the sale of the lands which they
had been induced to part with to the Crown, should
be expended for their benefit, and for that of the
settlements in the northern part of New Zealand ,
and when the Chiefs have objected to part with their


lands for the inconsiderable sums offered to them by
the Government, or have complained that they have
been defrauded, I and others have repeatedly assured
them, under the authority and with the approval of
the Home Government, that the sums they had
received, or which were to be given to them, were
not the true payment for the land, but that the real
payment would be, the future expenditure of the
fund realized from the sale of those lands upon cer-
tain objects specified to them, which would promote
alike their own benefit, and that of the European
population.
The European settlers in that district had also
become purchasers of land there, and had invested
large sums of money in the improvement of their
lands on the faith of Instructions under her
Majesty’s signet and Royal Sign Manual, pledging
the land fund to certain specified objects.
Parliament apparently overlooking these circum-
stances, enacted in the 74th clause of the Constitution
Act, that one fourth part of the sum realized from
the sale of all lands in New Zealand should be paid
over to the New Zealand Company in liquidation of
the principal and interest of a debt of £268,370 15s
claimed by that body, this being in direct opposition
to the frequent promises that had been made to the
natives of the Northern Province which is in no way
whatever mixed up with the affairs of the New
Zealand Company, and I was advised by the Lieu-
tenant-Governor and Executive Council of the North-


era Province, that any attempt to bring- this
arrang-ement into practical operation would endan-
ger the peace and prosperity of the Colony.
I therefore directed that one-fourth of the land
fund should be remitted home from every other part
of New Zealand except the Province of Auckland,
advised Her Majesty’s Government of the amount
due from Auckland under the arrang-ement made by
Parliament (then about £9000), directed that it
should be retained in the chest to await their orders,
so that the Treasury in Eng-land could, if they
thoug-ht proper, at once pay the amount in London,
and draw for it through the military chest; at the
same time earnestly entreating that the subject might
be reconsidered, which could easily be done, for Par-
liament had b} r the 74th clause of the Constitution
Act authorized the New Zealand Company to re-
lease all or any part of the lands in New Zealand
from the payment charged upon them by the
Act.
I contend that, in adopting this course, I set a
good example, not a bad one. As a high British
officer, I had induced a simple people to let us into
the quiet possession of tracts of land by frequently
and formally making them promises of direct future
advantages. If, because Parliament with insufficient
information before it, legislated in a manner which
required me to break those promises, I had de-
liberately broken them, and a new war and rebellion
had followed, involving a large loss of life and pro-


perty, and great expense to this country, I should
have been deservedly deemed not to be a fit and
proper person to retain in any office.
I contend that it was my duty, at the risk of
every consequence to myself, to decline to break
those public promises, which in order to obtain va-
luable lands for the Crown, of which we still had
possession, I had in my character of a British Go-
vernor, made to the people I was sent to rule over.
When Parliament, from want of sufficient informa-
tion, legislates wrongfully or unjustly for a distant
nation subject to its laws, unless the high officers of
the Empire will take the responsibility of delaying to
act until they receive further instructions, the Empire
cannot he held together; for the moment such an
Act of Parliament arrived in a country, the people
hopeless of that redress which ought to be afforded
them, would break out into revolt; whilst, could they
have hoped that their complaints would have been
listened to before the law was enforced, they would
have continued loyal and dutiful subjects.
In declining, therefore, to break promises which
I had made as her Majesty’s representative, and in
endeavouring to obtain a further consideration of the
course which I feel certain Parliament had unad-
visedly taken, of subjecting the lands near Auckland
to the payment of so large a portion of the New
Zealand Company’s debt, I felt that I did my duty
as a faithful servant of my Queen and country, and
will cheerfully undergo every risk and punishment


which may follow from my haying 1 adopted that
course.
That I was not justified in returning to this country
when I did.
I left England in June 1837, returned here at
the end of September 1840, left ag-ain on the
2nd of January 1841, and reached England
ag’ain in April 1854, thus completing 1 exactly
seventeen years’ service, with an interval of three
months rest in my own country; having- been absent
on the last occasion for thirteen years and a half.
When I at last asked for, and received leave
of absence it reached me in May, hut I did
not, anxious as I was to g-et home for the most
pressing- reasons, leave the country until the follow-
ing-January.
x4g-ain, when I had applied for leave of absence
and when I left New Zealand, England was at
peace ; when I reached England, she was at war.
I thought under such circumstances the Govern-
ment might think it necessary that every Governor
should be at his post; I therefore immediately
offered, if the Government thought this, or wished
it, to return to New Zealand without a day’s delay.
I had hoped that Sir John Paking-ton who now
reproaches me with coming- home so soon, would
have remembered what my services during- the last
seventeen years have been.


No reproach could be more injurious to a British
officer than that of abandoning' a difficult duty en-
trusted to him, and it is a peculiarly gulling* one to
me, as coming* from Sir John Pakington, because,
to repeat nearly the language of a letter which I
recently addressed to him, I cannot forget that he
was Colonial Minister under Earl Derby, and has
been united with him by the strongest political ties.
When Sir Robert Peel’s Government was in the
year 1845 involved in the most serious difficulties
in regard to New Zealand, Earl Derby thus ad-
dressed me:—
u After the repeated testimonies I have borne to
“ the value of your public services in administering
“ the Government of South Australia, it would be
cc very gratifying to me to prove my esteem for
u your capacity and your public spirit by proposing
“ to you some other office of higher rank and of
a increased emolument, still I am convinced that I
u shall give you a yet more welcome proof of the
a confidence which Her Majesty reposes in you, by
“ inviting* you to undertake public duties more
“ arduous and responsible than those in which you
“ have hitherto been engaged, though recommended
a to your acceptance by hardly any other cousidera-
u tion. The urgent necessity which has arisen for
ce invoking }’Our aid in the administration of the
“ Government of New Zealand is the single apology
u I have to offer (to a man of your character it will
“ be an ample apology) for calling on you, with no


u previous notice, to incur the sacrifice and incon-
a venience of proceeding’ thither with the least
u possible delay after your receipt of this despatch.”
Then, after giving- me some g-eneral instructions,
Earl Derby added :
(< I trust, also, that Her Majesty’s Government
u will receive from you reports so frequent, punc-
a tual and complete, as to enable them hereafter to
u substitute for these indeterminate directions, others
u applying- specifically to the actual circumstances
a of your position ; and in that hope, I devolve on
a you a responsibility which it is impossible for me
u to narrow, and of which I am persuaded you will
C( acquit yourself in such a manner as to enhance
cc your claims to the approbation of the Queen, and
u the gratitude of Her Majesty’s subjects.”
Not only did I not hesitate when thus appealed
to, to do my utmost to assist Earl Derby in such
difficult circumstances, but stimulated by his lan-
g-uag-e, and by that of Sir Robert Peel, I have spent
more than eig-ht of the best years of my life in New
Zealand, without once either directly or indirectly
asking- for promotion or reward, and I would not
leave the country (as I originally determined when
I went there) until I had fulfilled even to minute
details every duty Earl Derby had called upon me
to perform, and until I could leave a country which
Her Majesty had by his advice placed in my hands,
in a state of rebellion and ruin, in a condition of
profound peace, and of great prosperity, with repre-


sentative institutions in full and successful operation,
and followed by the prayers and blessing-s of the
£*reat mass of its inhabitants.
Tj
I feel sure that any one who considers these cir-
cumstances, and reflects upon the difficult nature of
the public duties I have for so long- a period been
required to perform, will admit that after nearly
fourteen years absence from my country, I did not
deserve to be received with the taunt, that I had
returned sooner than I was justified in doing-.
G. GEEY.
July §th, 1854.
