

C'sy r 't
~o i o
-c 13 ■
PROCEEDINGS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA
1935—PP. 215-248
MEMORIAL OF T. W. EDGEWORTH DAVID
PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY
JUNE, 1936
Made in United States of America


GEOL. SOC. AM., PR. FOR 1935
Sir T. W. Edgeworth David


PROCEEDINGS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA
FOR 1935
PP. 215-248, PL. 9.
JUNE. 1936
MEMORIAL OF T. W. EDGEWORTH DAVID
BY E. C. ANDREWS
In the passing of Sir Edgeworth David, Australian Science has lost a
leader, and the Geological Society of America has lost one of its distin-
guished Correspondents.
Although David chose the subject of geology for special study, his
scientific sympathies were so universal that all Australian science has been
laid under a lasting debt of gratitude to him.
Wherein are we, his friends and colleagues, to seek the source of his
acknowledged leadership in Australian science? Wherein lay the spell,
the magnetism, of his personality? Some have thought it lay in his
knowledge of geology in general, and of Australian geology in particular.
But geology, depending, like medicine, for its application, on methods of
diagnosis, cannot be considered as being more attractive, spectacular, or
valuable, than physics, chemistry, astronomy, biology. David certainly
possessed the ability to present the charms of geologic truths to any
audience, whether of friends in the home, fellow-travellers in a railway
compartment, students in a lecture room or on excursions, or the general
public in a crowded assembly hall; but this was simply by reason of his
power of exposition and his love for any worthy object or cause understood
by him. Power such as his comes not merely from skilled knowledge of a
particular subject; it proceeds rather from higher qualities inherent in the
man himself. “Character is far above intellect” runs a saying, and this
certainly appears to apply to David, for, though all unconsciously, he
magnetised students from other departments of knowledge to a life study
of geology; nevertheless it was rarely in his special field of geology that his
disciples became known, but rather in other divisions of the subject, as
geodesy, geophysics, petrology, mining, metamorphism, and structure.
David was not great simply because he was a skilled geologist. He would
have commanded respect and affection in various other departments of
learning —in classics, modern languages, literature and drama, natural
science. The secret of his marked success lay rather in the possession of a
luminous galaxy of qualities and a combination of attainments, conspic-
uous among which were a brilliant course in classics conducted at Oxford;
histronic power conjoined with a gift of tongues; a facile pen; fervid
enthusiasm; untiring zeal and capacity for work; talent as a teacher, sug-
gestive somewhat of Arnold of Rugby; loyalty to an ideal; a deep love of


Nature; a romantic and spiritual nature, combined with a love for the
companionship and friendship of his fellows. Here was no hermit, no
anaemic saint avoiding the rough contacts with the world, but a dynamic
personality seeking truth in the society of his fellows.
His enthusiasm was infectious, and revealed itself in each and every one
of his manifold activities; whether working for classical Greats at Oxford;
competing for athletic honors; exploring the rugged topography of the
new mineral fields in the New England of his adopted country of Australia;
thrilling the imaginations of the New England prospectors with the
romance of geology, when the day’s field work was over; piecing together
the scattered threads of information known at the time about the Permian
climate and life in Australia; improvising cradles from “kerosene” boxes
for his first infant, in the rough camp of the Maitland Coal Field; attending
art classes, the better to illustrate his forceful lectures; lightening the
“flat intervals” of long enforced tramps (between the “high moments”
of spectacular geologic exposures) during student excursions, with fascinat-
ing summaries of important novels and dramas; toiling in the equatorial
heat of the Funafuti lagoon; arranging for the collection of Fiji fossil corals
for Harvard; deciphering the tale of Recent glaciation on the Kosciusko
Plateau of New South Wales; advancing on Antarctica through tempest
and ice in the devoted little “Nimrod”; with Mawson and Mac Kay,
accepting the hardships and dangers of man-power sledging in “The Home
of the Blizzard,” in the search for the South Magnetic Pole; scaling the
slopes of mighty Erebus, in the “teeth of armed antagonisms”; choosing
sites for tunnelling on the Western Front (of the War Zone); searching
unceasingly for evidences of life in the upper pre-Cambrian rocks of South
Australia; presiding over meetings of international scientists in Australia;
addressing crowded assemblies on matters of vital importance in schemes
of social welfare; or in collaboration with colleagues and representatives
of governments, concerning the correlation and publication of geological
information of Australia.
Retiring by nature in youth, in later years he would electrify his audi-
ences with his clarion voice when he became fired with his subject. “Per-
haps,” says W. R. Browne, “he was most inspiring when, on a geological
excursion, standing, a picturesque figure on some commanding height, he
expounded with Celtic fire and fervour the geological significance of the
landscape. That he taught to some purpose is attested by the number of
his former students who hold important posts, academic and otherwise,
both in Australia and in other parts of the world.”
As some at least of his colleagues understood him, the real secret of his
appeal to workers in all departments of activity with whom he came in
contact lay in the rich and deep vein of romanticism and natural reverence
that pervaded his whole life. His supremacy lay in the ethical and spirit-


ual elements of his nature. Whether as a teacher of geology in the
class-room, or as a student engaged in field work, he cheerfully acknowl-
edged the closed nature of the system in which he worked unceasingly.
He sought thus to render a natural, or evolutionary, account of what had
happened, for, as a man of science, he was concerned with the gradual
progress of knowledge concerning the organic unity of his subject. As a
man among men, however, he was accustomed, at times, to go outside his
closed geological system, whether on the inorganic or on the organic side,
and chat after hours, as it were, with the physicist, the philosopher, the
divine, the artist, the historian, about their particular closed, or water-
tight, systems. He sought thus to break down the apparent barriers
separating all as closed systems. As a student of philosophy, he perceived
that all syntheses or totalities appear to possess attributes that are not
discerned when studied only in their individual aspects. Emergence of
new qualities or activities appears to be inseparably associated with
synthesis. In his view, a grand underlying principle or activity emerged
from a study of Nature as a whole. His nature and training caused him
to break through the methodological bounds supposed to isolate the world
of phenomena from that of noumena. To him, it seemed that, in an honest
study of the universe, one must take into account the intelligence with
which Nature, as it were, gathers up and includes itself. In this respect,
he takes rank with many of the most gifted scientists, as also with the more
far-seeing of the poets, artists, and philosophers, who refuse to regard
consciousness and the higher qualities as mere appanages of material
phenomena.
Truly might it be said of him, as of Ben Adhem, that his main desire
was to be written down “as one who loved his fellow men.”
Tannatt William Edgeworth David was born in the rectory of St.
Fagans, Wales, on the 28th of January, 1858.
His father was the Rev. William David, M.A., Fellow of Jesus College,
Oxford, and rector of St. Fagans, near Cardiff, Glamorganshire. Sprung
from a long line of David-ap-Davids, whose genealogies and traditions
absorbed such time as he could spare for literary research, the elder William
devoted himself to the early mental training of his three sons, of whom
Edgeworth was the oldest. This influence was reflected in the boy’s
early love of good poetry, as also in the success that accompanied his
classical studies both at school and at college.
His mother was Margaret Harriet Thomson, daughter of a distinguished
military officer in Quebec. Two notable family names were included in
the maternal ancestry —Ussher and Edgeworth. The former named is
perhaps the best known through the work of the Archbishop of Armagh,
whose Chronologia Sacra , published in 1686, was generally accepted as the


authority on world chronology in orthodox circles until recent times.
“The latter branch, of which David was very naturally proud, contained
the distinguished names of Maria Edgeworth and the Saintly Abbe Edge-
worth, memorable for the last service and salute to his unfortunate king,
Louis XVI.”
The peculiar combination of Scottish, Irish, and Welsh in his ancestry
is perhaps worthy of mention. Tannatt Houston Thomson (Scottish)
married Margaret Ussher (Irish), one of their children being Margaret
Harriet Thomson, who married William David (Welsh), the father of T. W.
Edgeworth David.
St. Fagans possesses historic interest, being the scene of a battle in the
days of Cromwell. The Brecon Hills of the neighborhood were the scene
of David’s earliest studies in geology.
He attended Magdalen College School of which he became dux, and
where also he became captain of the football and the boat clubs. He was a
natural student, especially of Greek and Latin. Mathematics he tolerated
rather than enjoyed. The study of science came later, but the study of
literature, an art in which he was a master, helped him marvellously in the
presentation of the claims of science to governments and to the general
public.
The head-master of Magdalen College School wrote of him: —“There
could scarcely have been a better specimen of English boyhood —this in
character, manners, and scholarship.”
Early in his university career, he won the Senior Scholarship in Classics
at New College, Oxford. A fellow undergraduate has left a description of
him; —“an exceptionally fresh-complexioned, good-looking chap, known
in the college as ‘David the Psalmist.’ ”
He gained First-class Honours in Moderations, the coveted test of
classical scholarship at Oxford. In sport, also, he excelled, rowing “bow”
for his college eight.
About this time, however, his health failed, and, acting under medical
advice, he took passage in a sailing ship to Melbourne, On his return,
he read for an ordinary degree (1880). The enforced rest from classical
study seems to have proved a gain to geology, for he took a course in
geology under Prestwich. William Ussher, who about this time was
making a geological examination of the neighborhood of St. Fagans, also
found an ardent associate in his young cousin.
In South Wales, he commenced his studies in glacial action, and, in 1881
contributed a paper to the Cardiff Naturalists’ Society, on the “Evidences
of Glacial Action in the neighbourhood of Cardiff.” The freedom of the
city of Cardiff was conferred upon him, an honor for one so young as
David.
About this time, he resisted very considerable pressure from his parents


to enter the Church. A mental conflict was thereby set up, in which the
feeling exhibited was so keen that his very religious beliefs became suspect.
He turned his attention, temporarily, to medicine, then he resumed the
study of geology again, attending the lectures of Judd at the Royal School
of Mines. Another teacher was Boyd Dawkins, of Owens College,
Manchester,
In 1882, he was selected by Sir Henry Parkes, Premier of New South
Wales, for a position on the Geological Survey of New South Wales, the
Government Geologist of that time being the late C. S. Wilkinson. By a
curious coincidence, the steamship by which he went to Sydney carried
another passenger who was to become his wife, and who, moreover, to a
marvellous extent, was to influence his long and memorable life. This
passenger was Miss Caroline Mallet, who had been selected by Sir Henry
Parkes, while in England, to be head of the Plurlstone Training College
for State women teachers. “Each of these unusual migrants had been
advised of the official position of the other, but for some time failed to
recognise the proverbial man of science and the preceptress” in the charm
of each other’s youth. 1
David’s first work of importance in New South Wales was the survey
of the tinfields of northern New England, an extensive plateau, dissected
by wild precipitous gorges. Here, he found the difference between work
in areas of closer settlement in the British Isles and that under the trying
conditions of a new country of sparse population, far removed from a
populous center and almost inaccessible in rainy periods.
In 1885, he married, and the following year he was entrusted with the
geological mapping of the Maitland Coal Field, of Permian age.
In 1891, the position of Government Geologist in New South Wales
became vacant through the death of C. S. Wilkinson. The Chair of
Geology at the Sydney University was also vacant. David was offered
each of these positions, and special inducements were extended to him by
the State Government to retain his services for economic work. But here
a conflict arose in David’s mind. He desired to teach, but, in the first
place, he felt that he was in honor bound to State service for a longer period
than he had been engaged therein, although the terms of his engagement
revealed no obligation on his part to continue in the State employ. In the
second place, he was, according to the testimony of his friends, a most
modest and retiring student, avoiding appearance in public as much as
possible. His wife, who had accompanied him to the Maitland Coal Field,
and who had shared with him all the discomforts of the long-continued
camp-life, urged him to accept the University offer, and to prepare himself
for the work by attendance at classes designed to assist public speakers
1 For much of the foregoing note on the boyhood and youth of David, the writer is indebted to H. J. Carter,
a life-long friend of David.


and teachers. David accepted university work, and, in the necessary
change involved, his wife assisted him in every possible way, whether in
translations of scientific publications, attending art classes with the object
of presenting his lectures in the simplest and most effective way, or making
provision for his work to receive due assistance and recognition.
With his occupancy of the Chair of Geology in the beginning of 1891
began that long and brilliant academic career that was to mean so much
for the University and for the students who attended his classes. Among
others, the writer attended his first lectures in 1891, and his magnetic
personality diverted him, with many others, from earlier choice of subjects,
to the study and practice of geology, academic or economic.
During the first year or two at the University, the whole of the work of
instruction devolved upon him alone, all the assistance received, whether
in general geology, mineralogy, petrology, or palaeontology, being limited
to the services of an ordinary attendant, who prepared, with him, the
material illustrating lectures and demonstrations. From these small
beginnings was to grow the important Department of Geology in later
years. W. R. Browne, one of David’s students, has said that “though his
lectures were not invariably delivered according to plan, they never failed
to stimulate and arrest the attention of those who heard them, for his
powers of graphic presentation and vivid description were such as to invest
even the most unpromising material with interest and romance. .., ”
On his geological excursions (long to be remembered), he would lighten
the toil of the frequent forced marches with stories from great authors, or
recitals of famous poems, of which Tennyson’s “Ulysses” was perhaps
his favorite. The comfort and convenience of students and guests was
always his first consideration. One could modify Longfellow’s lines
slightly to express the feelings of his students on these coveted outings: —
“And whenever the way seemed long
Or our hearts began to fail,
He would sing a more wonderful song,
Or tell a more wonderful tale.”
In 1897, David was asked to lead the Second Expedition to the coral
atoll of Funafuti in the Ellice group. The expedition of 1896 had not been
successful in its main object. The object of the Second Expedition was to
sink a bore through the coral rock to a depth of 600 feet, to test Darwin’s
theory of coral reef growth during slow submergence of the basement.
David’s persistence and resourcefulness allowed boring to be continued to
a depth of 698 feet. The next year, he organized a Third Expedition under
Finckh, which carried the bore to a depth of 1,114 feet. For this work,
David was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London.
In the meanwhile, he had continued his examination of the Hunter
River area. He had for some years been interested in the tillites of the


Permian of that district, following on the discoveries there of Permian
glaciation by C, S. Wilkinson and Oldham of India. This study of ice
action became one of David’s main scientific interests, whether of pre-
Cambrian, Carboniferous, Permian, or Pleistocene.
Von Lendenfeldt had discovered (1885) many traces of Pleistocene ice
action on the Kosciusko Plateau, and R. Helms, in 1894, also had found
terminal moraines, tarns, and a glaciated pavement at Kosciusko. These
observations, however, seemed incredible to local geologists, but David,
being struck by the simple and forceful description of his colleague Helms,
visited this wild and unfrequented area, and found it abounding in traces
of moraines, tarns, cirques, erratics, and other signs of recent ice action.
Subsequently, this area became a great tourist center for winter snow
sports.
David, however, at this time had not published the results of his work on
the Maitland Coal Field. In 1904, while presiding over the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science at the Dunedin (New Zealand)
meeting, the Department of Mines, New South Wales, urged him to com-
plete the Coal Field report. David, thereupon, returned to Sydney and
the memoir on the Hunter River Coal Field was completed in 1907.
Many interesting incidents occurred during his excursions with students,
to the Maitland District to complete the Permian work. Country people
found great difficulty in “placing” David in any satisfactory category of
activities, for he walked about the countryside with an air of enthusiasm
and inquiry, only to break off at times into a run, to stop at an outcrop of
rock and hammer away at it with two-handed blows, a fixed air of deter-
mination characterizing his attitude meanwhile. On one famous excursion
in January, 1899, the writer, with others, accompanied him to Maitland.
The trip was an arduous one, involving heavy tramping for a week or more
in a true shade temperature exceeding 100°F. As the party approached
the Maitland Coal Field in their long walk from the south, each member
showed signs of heavy wear, being unshaven and much travel-stained from
the tramping through clouds of dust. A murder of particularly revolting
nature had just then horrified the whole State, and the murderers were still
at large. One Saturday—practically the end of the approach to the Coal
Field —David and the writer were in advance of the main party, when,
suddenly, at the sight of a settler’s shack standing in a clearing amidst the
great enveloping Eucalypt forest, David, for some unknown reason, said,
“I don’t like sleeping out in the road like this on Sunday; let us ask this
settler if we may not camp in comfort to-night in his paddock.” To the
house we went, and the settler appearing at the door, David bowed to him
in a courtly fashion and explained our position. The man looked at the
week’s growth of beard, the other signs we showed of long exposure to the
weather and the road, our belts adorned with hammers, Bowie or Queens-


land knives, clinometers, and finally drawled: “It would be all right but
for the women, who would be scared as them ’ere Gatton murderers is still
not caught.” There was nothing to do but to disappear and move into
the forest again, with its soldier ants, mosquitoes, and frequent snakes;
but David, in spite of his utter weariness, rocked with laughter once we
were out of sight of the house at the mere thought of being mistaken for
a genuine first-class criminal. Earlier in the trip the party noted how he
was laboring under a heavy load, or “swag,” one extra bag having a mys-
terious appearance. He obstinately refused to be relieved even of this
relatively small part of his load —“A mere dozen pounds or so,” he said.
The next day the mystery was solved. David opened up this little un-
considered parcel, and handed out therefrom to each student muscatels,
chocolates, “brewer’s crystals,” and other delicacies, for dessert. This
ceremony was repeated at camp after dinner each night until the now-
famous bag was emptied and could be carried as an “empty” on the end
of a stick. In ways like these, he continually evidenced his real affection
and consideration for the comfort of fellow-travellers and his love for giving
pleasant surprises.
In the midst of his studies on ancient and recent glaciations, the First
Shackleton Expedition to the Antarctic departed from England. Upon
arrival at Sydney, Shackleton invited David to visit the southern regions
with him for the summer. David accepted, and secured passage also for
Douglas Mawson and L. A. Cotton (Cotton being, since 1925, David’s
successor to the Chair of Geology in Sydney), Shackleton, however, was
set upon securing David’s company during the stay of the Expedition in
Antarctica. David consented.
In 1914, the British Association for the Advancement of Science held its
meeting in Australia. Many notable names in European and American
science were registered. The sudden announcement of war, however, was
a damper on the enthusiasm with which meetings had been held at Perth
and Adelaide, prior to the main meetings at Melbourne and Sydney. To
David, the idea of duty to one’s country appealed so powerfully that,
despite his 57 years, he might be seen, shortly afterward, exerting all his
energy in the formation of a Mining Corps, which did valuable service on
the Western Front. Quoting again from W. R. Browne:
“He was with the Tunnellers from March, 1916, till September of the same year,
when he met with a severe accident, falling about 70 feet down a shaft through the
failure of a windlass. As he himself whimsically described his experience in a letter —
‘I suddenly realized that I was finding the value of g for that particular part of
Europe’ . . .; there is no doubt that the injuries he received eventually hastened his
end. After his recovery he was transferred to G. H. Q. to the office of the Inspector
of Mines. The feeling of his comrades-in-arms towards him was voiced in 1919 by
General Liddell, Chief Engineer of one of the British armies, who said —‘We regarded
him always with the most affectionate admiration. He was one of the finest char-
acters we have ever met.’ ”


David was happy in his family life; he brought into his domestic relations
those qualities which endeared him to his colleagues and the general public.
Newman’s description of a gentleman was applicable to David’s attitude
both to his family and to the world, in that he was never mean or little in
his disputes; never took unfair advantage; never mistook personalities or
sharp sayings for arguments, nor insinuated evil that he would not say
aloud. If he engaged in controversy, his disciplined mind preserved him
from “blundering discourtesy.” To his wife he owed much, and his
gratitude for her invaluable help and encouragement at all times never
failed. Their family consisted of two daughters and one son, Mrs. W. K.
Macintyre, Miss Mollie David, and Captain William E. David, who won
the Military Cross for bravery at Loos and Ypres.
David was President of the Linnean Society of New South Wales (1894-
1895); Royal Society, New South Wales, (1895 and 1910); Australasian and
New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science (1904 and 1913);
Australian National Research Council (1919); Dean of the Faculty of
Science for eight years, and Chairman of the Professorial Board for twelve
years at Sydney University. He received the honorary titles of D.Sc.Oxon.
(1911), Manchester, Cambridge (1926), Sydney (1933), M.A.Oxon. (1926).
He was awarded the titles of C.M.G. (1910), D.S.O. (1918), and K.B.E.
(1920). His military title was Lieutenant-Colonel.
The medals awarded to him for scientific work included the Bigsby Medal
(Geological Society of London, 1899); the Mueller Medal (Australasian
and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science, 1908);
Wollaston Medal (Geological Society of London, 1915); Conrad Malte
Brun Medal (Paris, 1915); the Clark Memorial Medal (Royal Society of
New South Wales, 1919).
He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1900, and a
Correspondent of the Geological Society of America in 1923.
From 1930 onward, increasing physical weakness interferred seriously
with his work. A severe attack of pneumonia in August, 1934, brought
about the end, while he was yet struggling with the voluminous notes he
had accumulated on Australian geology. Yet even on his death-bed, his
habitual sense of humor, cheerfulness, and thoughtfulness for others did
not desert him.
He was awarded a State funeral with imposing military honors. Every
phase of Governmental and Civic life was represented at the funeral
service in St. Andrews Cathedral, Sydney, and at the cremation service
(North Sydney).
Never previously, perhaps, in the history of Sydney has there been a
more striking expression of reverence for the memory of a citizen. Hun-
dreds of wreaths had come from Commonwealth and State representatives,
from the Governor-General, from State governors, from the universities,
the judiciary, the military, social organizations, scientific societies, tech-


nical institutions, business and trade groups, from personal friends and
admirers. The leaders in all walks of life were there in person or were
represented by their deputies. The cathedral was incapable of accommo-
dating more than a mere portion of those seeking to pay respect to one
they had revered in life. Extracts from orations made by the officiating
divines, both at the cathedral and at the cremation services, illustrate well
the general feeling of the people of Sydney and of New South Wales —if
not of Australia generally —to David’s memory:
“We are assembled” [at the cathedral] “to pay a last tribute of respect to a fine
scholar, a great scientist, a gifted teacher, a distinguished explorer, an ardent patriot,
a warm-hearted philanthropist, a gracious friend, and a humble-minded Christian
gentleman. Few men have combined so many qualities in one character, or crowded
so much real constructive service into one lifetime. . . . His influence upon his own
students was deep and lasting, but the record of his life, which reads like a romance,
will inspire many students who personally never knew him. . . . There was a depth
of courage and endurance beneath his pleasing personality that surged up when the
occasion demanded. . . . Professor David was one of those many sons of the rectory
and parsonage who have gained distinction in the wider world of thought and action.
. . . The religious faith of the late Sir Edgeworth David was the simple faith of a
great mind that expressed itself, on the one hand, in innumerable acts of . . . kind-
ness, and, on the other, in a profound reverence for truth. Only last year, when he
received from the Chancellor of the University the honorary degree of Doctor of
Science, he declared, with the utmost sincerity, before a large gathering of uni-
versity people and the general public, his profound conviction that the universe was
guided by a great Mind. ...”
On approaching the site chosen for the cremation, the coffin was placed
on a gun-carriage, over the head of which was draped the banner of the
Tunnelling Corps. The military units were early in position, the firing
party marching with rifles reversed. Midway in the cremation service,
the leader delivered a panegyric, extempore:
“Sir Edgeworth David was one of the rarest spirits it had been their privilege to
know. . . . His was a personality in which there seemed to be blended, in such choice
proportion, those qualities whose sum was character at its best. Greatness and
humility, strength and tenderness, uncompromising moral rectitude, and, with it,
tolerance and charity. He matched dignity with simplicity, the power to rule with
the will to serve.
“If he had the wealth of knowledge that made him a master, he had also the living
truth that made him a student to the end, following fearlessly wherever light should
lead. And because to him Nature was the 'garment of God’ he pursued his quest
with a reverence which became him. He was no recluse and his were no cloistered
virtues. Life for him was a great adventure. He loved to feel the wind in his face.
At the call of duty he was found ready to march with the rest. The courage and en-
durance that were of the very stuff of him, the passion for freedom characteristic of
his race, sent him out to serve and to suffer for honour’s sake. He was a patriot of
the noblest sort. His most conspicuous attribute was a certain lovableness of dis-
position. ... Its ingredients were a native courtesy and chivalry and unalloyed
sincerity by which he gave himself so freely and generously to others. He seemed


unaware of it; it was the expression of his natural self, born of an unfailing respect
for human personality. ... It transmuted esteem for him into affection, and the
affection was universal. ...”
Thus were expressed the sentiments held by the Rotarians for their es-
teemed comrade.
At the close of the simple cremation service, the military fired a grand
salute. After the third volley, buglers sounded the “Last Post.”
THE WORK AND WRITINGS OF T. W. EDGEWORTH DAVID
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
State Geological Surveys. —David’s early geological studies had been under
Prestwich and Judd, and his first geological publication was on the glacial
history of his home neighborhood in South Wales.
In 1882, he was appointed to the Geological Survey Staff of New South
Wales, the Government Geologist of that time being C. S. Wilkinson. To
understand geological activities in Australia about this time it is necessary
to go back a little in time. The State of Victoria had been proclaimed in
1850, at the expense of New South Wales territory, which at the beginning
comprised the whole of Eastern Australia. The gold discoveries of 1851
within the new State of Victoria rendered the formation of a Geological
Survey extremely advisable. This was accomplished in 1852; inciden-
tally, it gave a great stimulus to areal geological surveys in Australia
generally. Alfred R. C. Selwyn was the first Director. His staff included
Richard Daintree, C. D’Oyly, H, Aplin, Norman Taylor, G. H. F. Ulrich,
C. S. Wilkinson, R. A. F. Murray, H. Y. L. Brown, R. Etheridge, Jr.,
as field geologists; C. S. Wood and Cosmo Newberry, as analysts; and F.
(afterward Sir Frederick) McCoy, as palaeontologist. Skeats, in the
“David Lecture” of 1933, entitled Some Founders of Australian Geology,
stated that “a writer in the Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society
(Vol. 35) referred to the Geological Survey of that time as ‘one of the most
complete geological surveys ever organized, except, perhaps, that of the
United States Territories under Dr. F. W. Hayden.’ This Survey laid
the foundations of detailed and accurate geological mapping in Australia.”
In 1869, the Victorian Survey was discontinued for the time being on
the score of economy. Selwyn left Australia to direct the Geological
Survey of Canada; most of the other members of the field staff were wel-
comed and absorbed by the State governments of New South Wales,
Queensland, South Australia, and Western Australia, in the formation of
State geological surveys. These men, trained under Selwyn, brought to
their new positions “the traditions of thoroughness and accuracy estab-
lished by the first Victorian Geological Survey.” C. S. Wilkinson, the
Government Geologist of New South Wales, was one of Selwyn’s old staff,
and he it was who welcomed David to his new home.


New England Tin Fields. At that time, the State geologists were occu-
pied mainly in the examination of the various mining areas, which, in quick
succession, were being found by keen prospectors. Advice was to be
tendered to the prospectors, and recommendations for State financial aid
were made in many instances. It was only as opportunity offered that areal
mapping and geological research could be undertaken. Wilkinson saw a
man of promise in David, and determined to free him as much as possible
for research work. With this purpose in view, he instructed him to prepare
a map and report for publication on the extensive tin-mining area of north-
western New England, a wild plateau, composed of coarse siliceous granite,
deeply dissected, and situated between 400 and 500 miles north of Sydney.
This was, indeed, an adventure for the classical scholar, but he carried it
through, and prepared a memoir on the occurrence and genesis of the tin
deposits, whether as shallow “leads” (placers), deep leads under basalt,
or as veins, “pipes,” “bungs,” or impregnations occurring in the pegma-
tites, greisens, elvans, or coarse siliceous granite of the large bathylith of
northern New England. David, the young geologist, was puzzled at the
appearance of the high plateau over which he worked, with its general
slope, of slight angular value, to the northwest, and with its extensive tin-
stone gravels. He experienced great difficulty in assigning an origin for
the masses of well-rounded pebbles of the most resistant material, such as
quartz, agate, topaz, zircon, spinel, ruby, sapphire, diamond. English
geologists, observing the tremendous power of marine action on their own
coasts, as compared with the gentle action along their short streams,
ascribed erosive action, in the main, to storm waves. American geologists,
on the other hand, with their relatively straight coast-line, and with the
tremendous activity of their turbulent streams, ascribed land reduction
mainly to stream erosion. David, following British traditions, was led
to assign a marine origin for these gravels, with redistribution later along
the stream courses:
“The only power in nature capable of doing such a work is the sea, where it breaks
on a rocky coast. These Tertiary gravels are, therefore, probably of marine origin,
a fact of great significance as bearing on the probable richness of the stream tin of
the ‘deep leads’; for marine beds must have had a wide extent, and the great richness
of the small outliers favours the expectation that the far larger portions which have
been swept away were equally rich; so that large bodies of ore, derived from this
source, must have gravitated into the lower level gravels subsequently buried under
lava; as the land continued to rise, the sea would recede further west, and the rivers
being increased in size and power, subaerial degradation would proceed more rapidly.
The channels of the rivers would be continually deepened and the whole surface of
the land gradually lowered to adapt itself to the increasing fall of the rivers.”
A comparison of this statement with his matured opinion on sedimentation
and structure shows how rapidly his geological insight was to expand with
his growing experience in the great new field of Australia.


Maitland Coal Field. —David’s part in the mapping of the famous Greta,
or main, coal seams of the Lower Measures of Permian age in New South
Wales is noteworthy, leading, as it did, to his lifelong study of Permian
sedimentation and climate.
The Permian in New South Wales (and Queensland) falls naturally
into four divisions, which, in descending order, are known as the Upper
Coal Measures, the Upper Marine Stage, the Lower Coal Measures, and
the Lower Marine Stage. The Main Coal Province occupies a large basin
of gentle dip, with Sydney as a center, the uppermost coal seams, at this
point, lying beneath a cover of 2,500 feet of Mesozoic sediments, whereas
they crop out 1,000 feet above sea-level, 50 miles south of Sydney, and
3,000 feet, about 70 miles west.
Outcrops of the upper coal seams had been noted, and worked in places,
from the earliest settlement of the Colony (now State), but the seams of
the Lower Measures (Greta and Homeville) were not recognized until
long afterward, their outcrops being limited in area and not at all promi-
nent. The Greta coal is a most valuable asset to the State, occurring as
a massive seam, 50 feet in maximum thickness, bituminous in nature,
highly volatile, hard, of 14,000 B.T.U. gross, a coal excellently adapted for
general heating purposes.
In 1864, W. Keene, Government Examiner of Coal Fields, had inferred
the existence of coal and “oil-shale” deposits in the Maitland area, from
the occurrence of fragments of “oil-shale” recovered during dredging
operations along the Hunter River. Prospecting in 1865 revealed the
existence of a valuable coal seam near Maitland, below the Upper Coal
Measures. Wilkinson, as State Geologist, examined the Maitland area in
1884, and correlated various coal “prospects,” exposed over a length of
many miles, with the Greta seams. This correlation he effected by means
of the associated Greta conglomerate, which by its resistant nature pro-
vided a prominent outcrop.
During the same year, Wilkinson summed up his important work thus:
“. . .it will be seen that the Greta seams are the lowest of the series in this
district, and that their present outcrop at the surface is due to the denuda-
tion of a great anticline caused by the eruption of the diorite near Lochin-
var.”
Wilkinson, however, owing to the exigencies of routine administration,
was unable to continue this work himself. In 1886, he instructed David
to map the Greta seam, or seams, round the Lochinvar structure.
This survey was duly completed by David, and, as soon as he, by map-
ping, had confirmed Wilkinson’s belief in the persistence of this group of
seams, the Department of Mines reserved the area of 23,700 acres involved,
in the interests of coal mining. Some of the most important collieries in
Australia are situated along this belt mapped by David.


CARBONIFEROUS AND PERMIAN PROBLEMS
David’s contributions to the understanding of these important periods
in Australia are here considered together, because of the great difficulty
in determining their respective limits.
He became interested in the Permian in 1886, when mapping the Greta
measures, and was led to study the problems of Permian marine encroach-
ments and recessions, of glaciation, and of the Gangamopteris and Glossop-
teris floras. Early in this study, he encountered the Rhacopteris flora in
associated sediments, and the difficulty thereupon arose of assigning,
satisfactorily, the upper limit of the Carboniferous and the downward
limit of the Permian.
As the result of the brilliant field work of many geologists (former stu-
dents of David), it is now known that the Permian, Carboniferous, and
Devonian rocks of western New England and the adjoining Hunter River
area were deposited in a sequent geosyncline, dating back apparently to
the Ordovician. The maximum thickness of these upper Palaeozoic sedi-
ments, lavas, and tuffs, is estimated at 55,000 feet, approximately, the
maximum for individual periods not occurring at the same portion of the
geosyncline. The sediments were deposited progressively in a westerly to
southerly direction, in subparallel belts.
David’s areal survey of 1886-1890 in the Hunter River district had
shown the great development of the Upper and Lower Marine stages and
of the Upper and Lower Coal Measures, the maximum thickness recorded
by him being approximately 17,000 feet. Toward the southwest or the
direction in which lay the stabilized block of western and southeastern
New South Wales, the Permian sediments thinned to a mere skin of the
Upper Marine and the Upper Coal Measures.
At the beginning of David’s work on the Hunter Valley Coal Field, these
rocks were known as the Permo-Carboniferous, and his survey soon sug-
gested to him that a series of sediments, named the Lochinvar beds, con-
stituted the basal portion of this Permo-Carboniferous group.
In 1914, at the time of the Australian meeting of the British Association
for the Advancement of Science, the base of the Permo-Carboniferous in
eastern Australia was accepted as the lower limit of the Lochinvar beds in
the Hunter River valley. In the notes on the geology of the Common-
wealth, prepared by him for that meeting, David drew attention to the
term “Permo-Carboniferous” as being unnecessary, as, in his opinion, the
strata above the basal Lochinvar beds should be considered to be Permian.
Wilkinson, in 1884, had discovered evidences of glacial action in the
Upper Marine series of the Hunter River area. Oldham, of the Indian
Geological Survey, visited Australia in 1885, and not only confirmed Wil-
kinson’s belief in the glacial nature of these beds, but also found an ice-
scratched boulder. David’s later work not only proved the widespread


evidence of ice action in the Upper Marine, but the still more strongly
marked evidence in certain beds of the Lower Marine series. These he
called the Lochinvar Glacial beds, including them in his Lower Marine
stage of the Permian. Complexity, however, entered into the problem
when later field studies by C. A. Sussmilch indicated clearly that certain
glacial beds in the district belong to the Kuttung Series, in the Carboni-
ferous. David, with his wide knowledge of the Hunter Valley area, now
collaborated with Sussmilch on the important problem of finding the plane
of separation between Carboniferous and Permian. They published a
joint paper on this work in 1920, entitled 11 Sequence, Glaciation, and Corre-
lation, of the Carboniferous Rocks of the Hunter River District in New South
Wales. In this paper, David, with his general knowledge of the Australian,
European, Indian, and South African Carboniferous and Permian, at-
tempted a correlation of the Carboniferous and Permian glacial beds with
occurrences elsewhere.
It is not too much to say, in passing, that David’s Hunter River work,
published in 1907, was the source of inspiration for the important researches
conducted during the past 25 years, to the immediate west and south of
New England, on the upper Palaeozoic sedimentation and structure by
C. A. Sussmilch, W. R. Browne, W. N. Benson, A. B. Walkom, M. Morri-
son, L. J. Jones, G. D. Osborne, H. G. Raggatt, and S. W. Carey.
In this work of Sussmilch and David, the dividing line between the Car-
boniferous and the Permian formations was placed about 2,500 feet,
stratigraphically, above the base of David’s earlier “Lower Marine.” The
base of the Permian, as thus defined, was a coarse conglomerate containing
abundant remains of Eurydesma cordatum.
In 1923, however, David felt impelled by reason of the field evidence, to
return to his earlier classification. At this period, he placed the separa-
tion of Carboniferous from Permian “at the point where, at Lochinvar,
the soft shales of the Lower Marine Series (Permian) are replaced by the
harder rocks of the Kuttung (Carboniferous).”
In 1924, W. R. Browne and W. S. Dun found Eurydesma hobartense in
the Lochinvar shales, with these resting directly on the Kuttung. They
suggested, therefore, a return to David’s earlier classification, as David
himself had done in 1923,
By this time, interest in this matter had extended beyond Australia,
and Charles Schuchert proposed raising the Seaham glacial beds from the
Kuttung and placing them in the Permian.
A. B. Walkom, with his knowledge of the Rhacopteris and Gangarnopteris
floras, entered the discussion a little later. In 1929, he, “from comparisons
of the fossil floras, placed the base of the Permian in the position originally
suggested by David, that is, at the base of the Lower Marine Series,” The
basal portion of the Lower Marine was correlated with the Dwyka Con-


glomerate of South Africa. Attention was also drawn by Walkom to a
point needing careful consideration in matters like the one under discussion;
namely, “the greater importance of the first prominent appearance of a
new flora (or fauna) in the determination of age than the presence of the
last lingering representatives of an earlier one.”
In 1930, David proposed the name “Kamilaroi System” for the “strata
in the type district of the Hunter from the top of the Newcastle (Upper)
Coal Measures to the base of the Lochinvar glacial beds.”
Again, in 1931, David and Sussmilch, replying to Schuchert’s paper,
repeated their correlation (of 1919) of portion of the Lower Marine series
with the upper portion of the Upper Carboniferous. The difficulty ap-
peared to lie, in great measure, in reconciling the continuous passage of
glacial conditions from Carboniferous into Permian. Walkom’s paper,
however, indicated a Lower Carboniferous age for the Rhacopteris beds,
and that the Kamilaroi System is wholly of Permian age, and that it “rests
directly on Lower Carboniferous.”
David returned to this problem as late as 1932, in his “Explanatory
Notes” to the Geological Map of the Commonwealth. In this work, he
finally fell back on his earliest separation of Permian from Carboniferous.
In an addendum to the “Explanatory Notes,” he refers to the statement
by Schuchert that the “ Paralegoceras jacksoni” (of Dighton Thomas) of
the Kamilaroi of Western Australia is in reality Metalegoceras, “a genus
not known outside the Permian.” “This evidence,” writes David, fa-
vours the placing of all the Kamilaroi strata of Australia and Tasmania in
the Permian, as has been argued for some time by Professor Schuchert
and Mr. W. S. Dun.” In his table of the Kamilaroi, however, he placed
the base of the Permian as in his correlation of 1919 with Sussmilch.
GLACIAL STUDIES
David’s first published contribution to science was a paper in 1881,
entitled Evidences of glacial action in the neighbourhood of Cardiff . By this
study, he became conversant with the signs of great ice visitations, modern
or ancient, and, from that time onward, the study of ice action became one
of absorbing interest to him.
In view of his contribution to the existing knowledge of glacial phenom-
ena in Australia and Tasmania, it may be well to mention the extent of
the information known concerning ice action in Australia prior to David’s
study of it (1886).
In 1859, A. R. C. Selwyn had recorded the existence of a glaciated pave-
ment in ancient rocks in South Australia. The age of the glacial action
was not known.
W. B. Clarke, “the father of Australian geology,” in 1860 had recorded
signs of Recent glacial action in the Kosciusko region of New South Wales,
in the nature of perched blocks and other evidence.


In 1866, R. Daintree and C. S. Wilkinson recorded the existence of
ancient glacial deposits in Victoria, containing many large erratics, to-
gether with “grooved pebbles.” In their published note, the age of the
deposits is not given definitely;
“As the lower Mesozoic age of these beds has been assumed by Professor McCoy
on the European analogies of the only distinct fossil in them— Gangamopteris longi-
folius —and as Glossopteris, another Mesozoic type in Europe, has been found in New
South Wales and Northern Queensland distinctly associated with Carboniferous
fossils, it may not be asking too much to suspend judgment in this case a little
longer.”
R. Tate, in 1877, had discovered a second glaciated pavement, associated
with glacial beds, apparently of Palaeozoic age, at Hallett’s Cove, South
Australia. (Selwyn’s discovery of 1859 was at Inman Valley.)
R. L. Jack, in 1879, had found a tillite of Permian age in the Bowen
River Coal Field of Queensland.
R. M. Johnston, in 1884, had described a Permian tillite from Tasmania,
and C. S. Wilkinson, during the same year, had described a glacial deposit
in the Upper Marine series (Permian) of the Maitland district in New South
Wales.
Again, R. von Lendenfeldt, in 1885, had reported evidences of Recent
glaciation on the Kosciusko Plateau of New South Wales. At a later date
(1894), this region had been visited by R. Helms, who published a detailed
account of the evidence of ice action there in Recent time.
In 1893, E. J. Dunn published an account of associated Permian and
Recent glacial deposits on the West Coast of Tasmania.
Not all the published accounts of glacial action, however, were as trust-
worthy as these. Fragments of material, which had been broken up and
redistributed by flood action during contemporaneous erosion, had been
reported also as evidence of ice action. On the other hand, certain leading
geologists held conservative views on the occurrences reported above.
Shortly after David’s appointment to the Chair of Geology at Sydney
University, he determined to correlate the information about ice action in
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. His first main summary was an
ambitious one, and formed the subject of his presidential address in 1895
to the Section of Geology of the Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science (Brisbane meeting). The address contains a summary of
the knowledge to date, and is followed by an account of his personal exami-
nation of glacial deposits reported from Bacchus Marsh and near Heath-
cote, in Victoria; Hallett’s Cove, near Adelaide in South Australia; to-
gether with those from the Blue Mountain and Hunter River districts in
New South Wales,
He concluded:
“. . . it is extremely probable that the glacial beds of . . . Victoria were homo-
taxial, if not of contemporaneous origin, and probably also homotaxial with the older


glacial conglomerates ... in Tasmania. The occurrence of several varieties of
Gangamopteris in . . . Victoria suggests the correlation of the latter with mudstones
... in Tasmania; with the similar beds ... in New South Wales; and with those of
the Bowen River Coal Field of Queensland. The evidence for this is that Gangamop-
teris spathulata, McCoy, has been found in Tasmania associated with the mudstones
containing large erratics; and the same species occurs in the glacial conglomerates of
Bacchus Marsh. In New South Wales Gangamopteris is very abundant in the Middle
Coal Measures (Tomago) of the Permo-Carboniferous system. It is also plentiful in
the Lower Coal Measures (Greta), but in the Upper Coal Measures (the Newcastle)
Glossopteris predominates. In the Greta Coal Measures Gangamopteris and Glossop-
teris are sandwiched in between the erratic-bearing mudstones of the Lower Marine
series, and those of the Upper Marine series of the Permo-Carboniferous system. . . .
Gangamopteris, in Tasmania, is associated with a similar marine Permo-Carbonifer-
ous fauna.
“If, therefore, this correlation be conceded, ice of some kind made itself manifest
in Permo-Carboniferous time in the Australasian region from . , . Lat. 42° S. to . . .
Lat. 20° 30'S
“This early glaciation of the Australasian region was probably homotaxial with
that of Southern Africa and Southern India. . . .”
David, with his desire to be accurate, found a real difficulty in his at-
tempted correlation of these various glacial deposits in Australia, by reason
of the apparent lack of ice-scratched boulders in Tasmania, New South
Wales, and Queensland, as contrasted with the abundance of these forms
in the Victorian deposits.
His address, however, had inspired a search for ice-scratched pebbles,
and in 1899 a great number of them were found in the Lower Marine of
Maitland, the finest examples being found shortly thereafter in abundance
in the Permian of Tasmania.
After a temporary intellectual excursion into the study of coral-reef
problems, from 1897 to 1900 inclusive, during which he conducted the
work of the Second Funafuti Expedition and arranged the work of the
Third Funafuti Expedition and of the Harvard Expedition for the collec-
tion of specimens from the raised coral reefs of Fiji, David returned to his
former allegiance with redoubled energy. He visited the Kosciusko
Plateau of New South Wales, to examine the nature of the evidence of ice
action there in Recent time, recorded by Clarke, Lendenfeldt, and Helms.
He confirmed their work, and his enthusiasm was so infectious that pil-
grimages thither by geologists and geographers became a recognised pro-
cedure for years.
He interested himself deeply in the pre-Cambrian tillite described by
W. Howchin from the Adelaide District, and, having examined the type
area at Sturt’s Gorge, he did not rest until Howchin’s “Sturtian” tillite
was generally recognised. The deposit was described as Lower Cambrian
by Howchin, but it appears to be Upper pre-Cambrian in age.
When C. A. Sussmilch had proved the Carboniferous age of certain
massive glacial deposits in the Hunter River district, David collaborated


with him in publishing an account of that occurrence, together with a
correlation of the Carboniferous and the Permian. The report contained
a description of included “varves.”
In recent years, also, he collaborated with workers who had discovered
abundant evidence of Cretaceous ice-action in Australia.
As Secretary of the Glacial Phenomena Committee, he informed each
meeting of the Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, for many years, of the most recent advances in the knowl-
edge of ice visitations in Australia.
It was this intense interest in the part played by ice-action generally
that decided him to accompany Shackleton to Antarctica in 1908.
Shackleton, having chosen his base, prepared his plan for the polar
explorations, but David, before winter set in, led a party to the summit of
Mt. Erebus (13,200 feet). When the winter had passed, Shackleton made
the South Geographic Pole his objective, and he selected David, Mawson,
and Mackay to locate the South Magnetic Pole. The members of the
Magnetic Pole party were to rely solely upon their personal strength for
transport of themselves, their food, instruments, and camping material.
In this way, David was to learn the details of present-day ice-action so
clearly that they were to remain forever fixed deeply in his memory. The
following extract from the notes of Cotton (who travelled to Antarctica
with the party), in an address to the Royal Society of New South Wales,
in 1934, gives an idea of the work undertaken by David, at fifty years of
age, in his determination to learn the evidence of Recent and present glacial
action in Antarctica:
“The party set out with two sledges and a load of more than half a ton. As it was
not possible for ®ne man to drag a sledge, a great part of the journey had to be made
in relays. This method had to be used until the Drygalski Glacier was reached and
crossed. . . .
“. . . The first part of the route was over the sea ice along the western shores of the
Ross Sea. Long before the Drygalski Glacier was reached the screw pack ice was
encountered and its jagged surface made the sledging heart-breaking work. Worse
still was the risk of the ice becoming broken up. . . . This danger became greater as
the summer advanced. . . . Even when the Drygalski Glacier was reached . . . new
dangers and difficulties arose. The great glacier had to be crossed, and it was found
to be heavily crevassed. Although only twenty miles wide, it took a fortnight . . ,
to cross this barrier. Now the party had to leave the sea and turn inland seeking the
Magnetic Pole. The time was ... all too short for this enterprise. A depot was
made of one sledge, to which a black flag was hoisted to attract the notice of the ‘Nim-
rod’ when she should search for them six weeks later. Meanwhile 520 miles had to be
travelled to and from the Pole, and this, too, on restricted rations. . . .
“. . . When nearing the Magnetic Pole it was discovered that the Pole had wandered
and was farther off than had been reckoned. The last dash for twenty-four hours
to the Pole, leaving the sledge behind . . . shows the determination of that great
leader of the party. . . . The return journey . . . and a miraculous rescue, crowned
this great achievement.”


After his return from Antarctica in 1909, David was for some years
occupied in preparing reports on the geological work of the expedition and
in continuing his studies of glacial phenomena in the Greater Hunter
River district.
PREPARATION OF THE GEOLOGICAL MAP AND TEXTBOOK ON THE
GEOLOGY OF THE COMMONWEALTH
David’s all-absorbing interest in the cause of geology within the Aus-
tralasian region manifested itself not only in original field work, whenever
and wherever practicable, together with personal examination of the main
critical geological exposures and occurrences, but in the correlation of the
information extant in published form, and in the use of this as a point of
departure for a better correlation. Nevertheless, his methods were not in
the nature of Icarian flights, but, rather, those of maintaining touch con-
tinually with the earth itself. His ideal was to present to the world a
clear and truthful picture of the geology of the Commonwealth, both in
the form of a coherent geological map, and in that of an accompanying
and detailed textbook.
When he arrived in Australia, he found that a great amount of geological
information had been obtained in the various States. This, however, had
not been correlated properly, because the official geologists of Australia,
for the most part, of necessity had confined their observations to their own
States, and there had arisen neither institution nor individual genius to act
as a clearing house for observations made on varying, but basically related,
occurrences.
David soon attempted a correlation of Strzelecki’s and Jukes’ early
coastal observations; of the splendid work of Selwyn and his able official
staff for Victoria; of A. W. Howitt and F. McCoy, also for Victoria; of
Clarke and Wilkinson, for New South Wales; of Daintree, Jack, and Ethe-
ridge, for Queensland; H. Y. L. Brown, R. Tate, J. E. Tenison-Woods, and
W. Howchin, for South Australia; the brothers Gregory, E. T. Hardman,
G. Maitland, and E. P. Woodward, for Western Australia; R. M. Johns-
ton, for Tasmania; and J. Hector and F. W. Hutton, for New Zealand.
This first correlation was presented as his presidential address to the
Linnean Society of New South Wales in 1894, being entitled, A sketch of our
present knowledge of the geological history of Australia , Tasmania, and New
Zealand from Archaean time down to the commencement of the Permo-Car-
boniferous period.
In this early attempt at an explanation of the structure of Australia
and New Zealand, he prepared a map showing the principal axes of geologi-
cal structure, as recorded by field workers. This map was accompanied
by a generalized sketch of the structural inter-relations of the main Palaeo-
zoic formations as known in Australia.


Among other items of wide importance discussed in the paper, he con-
cluded that:
“At least five important foldings have taken place in the Australasian region
between Pre-Cambrian and Carboniferous time inclusive, and each has had an impor-
tant influence on the evolution of the continental area of Australia, but the last
extensive folding . . . took place ... in Carboniferous time. . . .
“The folding along the New Zealand axis which commenced in Pre-Silurian time
was continued, as shown by Captain Hutton, up to the close of the Mesozoic Era.”
Great as was this advance in knowledge, David was not at all satisfied
with the results, and, from that time onward, he kept steadily in view the
preparation of a trustworthy and uniform Geological Map of the Common-
wealth, together with an accompanying textbook of the geology.
The next definite stage toward the attainment of this objective is found
in his presidential address to the Royal Society of New South Wales, in
1911, in which he summarized the information available at this later stage;
structural and formational maps accompanied the record.
This second correlation by him shows, in a marked manner, the definite
progress that had been made in the period 1893-1911, and it illustrates
well the part that he himself had taken in that advance, both by personal
field work and by inspiration of an army of students and disciples.
A still more important stage was reached by the issue of his lengthy
report on the Geology of the Commonwealth, which was prepared for the
Australian meeting of the British Association of the Advancement of
Science, in 1914. A comparison of the structural maps prepared by him
in 1893 and those of 1913 illustrates the rnarked advance which strati-
graphic, structural, petrographic, and palaeontologic studies had made in
Australia in twenty years. Moreover, David extended his report to in-
clude the structural and stratigraphic history of the Mesozoic, Tertiary,
and post-Tertiary time, together with notes on the geology of New Guinea.
Still not satisfied with these extended notes, he determined, about 1919,
to visit the principal geological occurrences known in Australia, and, this
field work accomplished, to prepare a book embodying the results of his
years of observation and study. The public of Australia now began to
evince the keenest interest in this projected work, and, in 1921, an an-
nouncement appeared in the Sydney Press that Sir Edgeworth David had
left Sydney “to undertake an extensive geological survey in reference to
underground water-supply, surface features, and mineral deposits, princi-
pally in South and Western Australia. The investigations will occupy the
. . . period of leave granted ... by the Senate of the University, and he
hopes to gather extensive material for inclusion in a book on the geology
of the Commonwealth, which he proposes to complete next year.”
In 1924, he had visited various States, and conferred with his colleagues


from universities, State surveys, and other institutions, on critical areas
“on the spot/’ prior to attempting a final correlation.
Two incidents illustrate the hold which the idea of this proposed publica-
tion had upon the mind of the citizens of New South Wales, and the con-
fidence and esteem reposed in him by the University authorities and the
representatives of all classes of society.
At some time during the period 1921-1924, the University, owing to the
generosity of a citizen, had been enabled to free David for two years, on
full salary, to gather information for the proposed publication. In addi-
tion to this, a check, or checks, for amounts not exactly known but re-
ported at approximately £2,000, had been presented to him during August,
1925. The amounts had been “subscribed by his friends amongst business,
manufacturing, colliery, and pastoral, interests, and at the University, to
Professor Sir Edgeworth David at the Chamber of Commerce . . . Speak-
ers” (including leaders in commerce and learning) “emphasized the value
of .. . David’s work for Australia and the world. Those who had sub-
scribed . . . felt it a great privilege that they should be permitted to assist,
if only in a small degree, in . . . meeting the heavy expenses connected with
preparing and publishing his book.”
The same month, a truly representative group of colleagues and citizens
bade him farewell on his departure for England, where he had determined
to complete the publication. During 1926 and 1927, he worked on his
notes, mainly in London and in Cambridge. He returned to Australia in
December, 1927, and there continued the work.
In his desire to make the proposed Geology of Australia as comprehensive
as possible, he was accustomed to incorporate additional information
bearing on his subject as it became available. In this way, he had become
interested in certain peculiar forms in the folded and somewhat altered
sediments of upper pre-Cambrian near Adelaide in South Australia.
He was led, in 1922, to report on the Occurrence of remains of small
Crustacea in these rocks; and again, shortly after his return from England
in 1927, he had repeated his examination of this Adelaide series, whose
peculiar markings appeared to him to possess relationships with phyllo-
carids, eurypterids, annelids, and other organic types. In 1928 and 1929,
he prepared reports on these forms for publication by the Royal Society
of South Australia.
An account of organic types in the upper pre-Cambrian, capable of
being referred definitely to a genus, tribe, family, order, or even to a phy-
lum, would form an important addition to geological knowledge, and,
following this clue, David searched high and low for forms that might
admit of definite classification. In this study, he collected an immense
amount of material, which now is stored at Sydney University. Financial


assistance to this work had been granted by the Royal Society, and Geo-
logical Society, of London.
Although the writer of this memorial, after an examination (based on
long field experience) of this material, fails to recognize the organic origin
of the forms under consideration, nevertheless it must be remembered that
David himself, who was the recognized leader of geological thought in
Australia, considered the discovery and description of these forms as, per-
haps, his greatest contribution to science.
The Commonwealth Government, a little later, granted a sum of £5OO
to assist in the publication of the geological map. This appeared in 1932,
together with an accompanying publication entitled Explanatory Notes, of
177 pages, of the Commonwealth geology.
His death in 1934 left the book still unpublished. For that work, he
had enlisted the services of a considerable number of his colleagues, to the
extent of contributing information “on aspects of the geology with which
they were specially familiarhe himself was to act both in the capacity of
a “clearing-house” for the general information gained in the States from
institutions and individuals, and as a contributor of original personal
observations.
The State of New South Wales, in its desire to make the results of this
work available, has granted a sum of £7,000 for its preparation and publi-
cation. W. R. Browne, a geologist with a rare literary gift, has been se-
lected to assemble the information available and bring it successfully to
publication.
This note on the life and work of David would not be complete without
mention of the public subscription of approximately £2,000, which has
been raised, to be called the “David Memorial Fund/’ and which is to be
deposited with the authorities of Sydney University for the promotion of
the science of geology.
BIBLIOGRAPHY* OF T. W. EDGEWORTH DAVID
Evidences of glacial action in the neighbourhood of Cardiff. Cardiff Naturalists
Society, Transactions, pages 1-19.
Evidences of glacial action in South Brecknockshire and East Glamorganshire.
Geological Society of London, Quarterly Journal, volume 39, pages 39-54.
Report on the fossiliferous beds at Yass. Department of Mines, New South Wales,
Annual Report, 1882, page 148, map.
* Bibliography to 1920 adopted from list prepared by W. N. Benson; from 1920 onward, prepared by Alma
G. Culey.


Progress Reports for 1883. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report,
1883, pages 155-157, map.
Progress Reports for 1884. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report,
1884, pages 153-155.
Progress Reports for 1885. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report,
1885, pages 136-140.
Notes on some points of basalt eruption in New South Wales, Geological Society of
Australasia, Transactions, volume 1, part 1, pages 24-30.
Progress Reports for 1886. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report
1886, pages 144-166, maps.
Geology of the Vegetable Creek tin-mining field, New England District. Geological
Survey of New South Wales, Memoirs, volume 1, page 109, map and 9 sections.
On the evidences of glacial action in the Carboniferous and Hawkesbury series, New
South Wales. Geological Society of London, Quarterly Journal, volume 43,
pages 190-196.
Progress Reports for 1887. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report
1887, pages 145-154.
Notes on remarkable variety of intrusive basalt from Bulli Mountains hear Bulli,
and a rock belonging to the gabbro group. Linnean Society of New South Wales,
Proceedings, pages 423-424.
Notes on (a) The occurrence of basalt-glass (tachylite) in the Vegetable Creek Dis-
trict, New England; (b) The occurrence of dacite at Mona Vale; (c) A pitchstone
from Port Stephens; (d) Chiastolite in a stone hatchet found at Strathbogie near
Vegetable Creek. Linnean Society of New South Wales, Proceedings, pages
1078-1085.
Progress Reports for 1888. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report
1888, pages 164-176.
Origin of laterite in the New England District of New South Wales. Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science, Transactions, volume 1, pages
233-241.
Cupriferous tuffs of the passage beds between the Triassic Hawkesbury series and
the Permo-Carboniferous coal measures of New South Wales. Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science, Transactions, pages 275-290.
Micropetrographical notes on some of the hydrothermal rocks of New South Wales.
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Transactions, pages
290, 291.
(With R. Etheridge, Jr.) Report on the discovery of human remains in the sand and
and pumice beds at Long Bay. Geological Survey of New South Wales, Records,
volume 1, pages 9-15.


On the physical characters of telluric-bismuth ores from Norongo, near Captains
Flat. Geological Survey of New South Wales, Records, volume 1, pages 29-30.
(With R. Etheridge, Jr.) On the examination of an aboriginal rock shelter and
Kitchen midden at North Harbour, Port Jackson. Geological Survey of New
South Wales, Records, volume 1, pages 140-145.
(With W. Anderson.) The leucite-basalts of New South Wales. Geological Survey
of New South Wales, Records, volume 1, pages 153-172.
Notes on a collection of igneous rocks from Lord Howe Island. Australian Museum,
Memoirs, number 2, pages 3-6.
Note on the origin of kerosene shale. Linnean Society of New South Wales, Pro-
ceedings, pages 483-500.
Progress Reports for 1889. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report
1889, pages 209-233.
Proposed petrographical classification of the rocks of New South Wales. Geological
Survey of New South Wales, Records volume 2, pages 1-15.
(W. Etheridge, Jr.) The raised beaches of the Hunter River delta. Geological
Survey of New South Wales, Records, volume 2, pages 37-52.
A correlation of the coal fields of New South Wales. Australasian Association for
the Advancement of Science, Transactions, volume 2, pages 459-466.
The coal measures of New South Wales and their associated eruptive rocks. Royal
Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, pages 257-270.
Geological notes (a) On the laccolites of the Junction Mine near Mandurama; (b)
On the occurrences of Glossopteris in a remarkable state of preservation in the
Greta coal measures at Richmond Yale, near Maitland; (c) On the occurrence of
andesitic lava at the Canoblas, near Orange. Linnean Society of New South
Wales, Proceedings, pages 421-428.
Progress Reports for 1890. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report
1890, pages 219-220.
Notes on a collection of rocks and minerals from Mount Morgan near Rockhampton,
Queensland. Geological Survey of New South Wales, Records, volume 2, pages
85-93.
The associated minerals and volatility of gold. Geological Survey of New South
Wales, Records, volume 2, pages 100-108.
Notes on Mr. J. C. H. Mingaye’s analyses of New South Wales coals and cokes. Geo-
logical Survey of New South Wales, Records, volume 2, pages 117-118.
Artesian water in New South Wales; preliminary note. Royal Society of New South
Wales, Journal and Proceedings, pages 286-296.
Progress Reports for 1891. Department of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report
1891, pages 217-248.
Geology and mineralogy course. Australasian Home Reader I, number 2(June) pages
36-41; number 4 (August) pages 106-109; number 5 (September) pages 141, 145;
number 6 (October) pages 166-171; number 8 (December) pages 228-234.
Report on kerosene shale deposits, Doughboy Hollow, near Murrurundi. Depart-
ment of Mines, New South Wales, Annual Report 1892, pages 159-163.


(With E. F. Pittman.) On the occurrence of Lepidodendron Australe in the Devonian
rocks of New South Wales. Geological Survey of New South Wales, Records,
volume 3, pages 194-201.
Presidential address: Volcanic action in eastern Australia and Tasmania. Aus-
tralasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Hobart, 1892, part iv,
section C, pages 64-81.
Notes on the occurrence of the mineral sphene in granite from Bathurst, New South
Wales. Linnean Society of New South Wales, Proceedings, 2nd series, volume 8,
part 1, pages 44-45.
Note on the occurrence of Lepidodendron in Upper Devonian rocks at Mount Lambie,
near Rydal, New South Wales, Linnean Society of New South Wales, Proceed-
ings, 2nd series, volume 8, part 1, pages 121-125.
Contribution to the study of volcanic action in eastern Australia. Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science, Adelaide, 1893-1894, volume 5,
pages 1-7.
Report on Research Committee to collect evidence as to glacial action in Australia
in Tertiary or post-Tertiary times. Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Transactions, volume 5, pages 229-232.
(With W. F. Smeeth and J. A. Watt.) Preliminary note on the occurrence of a chro-
mite-bearing rock in basalt at the Pennant Hills Quarry, near Parramatta.
Rojml Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1893, volume 27,
pages 401-406.
Note on the occurrence of a calcareous sandstone, allied to Fontainebleau sandstone,
at Rock Lily, near Narrabeen. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and
Proceedings, 1893, volume 27, pages 406-407.
Note on the occurrence of barytes at Five Dock and also at the Pennant Hills Quarry,
near Parramatta, with a suggestion as to the possible origin of barytes in the
Hawkesbury sandstone. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and Pro-
ceedings, 1893, volume 27, pages 407-408.
Notes on artesian water in New South Wales and Queensland, Part 11. Royal So-
ciety of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1893, volume 27, pages
408-443.
(With E. F. Pittman.) Notes on the Cremorne bore. Royal Society of New South
Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1893, volume 27, pages 443-465.
A sketch of our present knowledge of the geological history of Australia, Tasmania,
and New Zealand from Archaean time down to the Permo-Carboniferous period
(Presidential address). Linnean Society of New South Wales, Proceedings,
2nd series, volume 8, pages 540-607, 2 plates.
Note on stratigraphical distribution of Glossopteris in Australia. Linnean Society
of New South Wales, Proceedings, 2nd series, volume 9, part 2, pages 249-257.
Forming part of a paper on Glossopteris by R. Etheridge, Jr.
Hunting an Ice Age (Presidential address). Linnean Society of New South Wales,
Proceedings, 2nd series, volume 10, part 1, pages 134-161; The Australian Home
Reader IV (July) pages 65-68.
Evidences of glacial action in Australia and Tasmania (Presidential address to Sec-
tion C). Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Brisbane,
Report, 1895, volume 6, pages 58-98.


(With R. Tate and W. Howchin.) Evidence of glaciation at Hallett’s Cove. Aus-
tralasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Brisbane, Report, 1895,
volume 6, pages 315-330, 2 plates.
(With W. F. Smeeth and J. A. Schofield.) Notes on Antarctic rocks collected by
Mr. C. R. Borchgrevinck. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and
Proceedings 1895, volume 29, pages 461-492, 3 plates.
Evidences of glacial action in Australia in Permo-Carboniferous time. Geological
Society of London, Quarterly Journal, volume 52, pages 289-301.
(With R. Etheridge, Jr., and J. W. Grimshaw.) On the occurrence of a submerged
forest, with remains of the Dugong, at Shea’s Creek, near Sydney. Royal So-
ciety of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1896, volume 30, pages
158-185.
Notes on the occurrence of diatomaceous earth at the Warumbungle Mountains, New
South Wales. Linnean Society of New South Wales, Proceedings, 1896, 2nd
series, volume 11, part 2, pages 261-268.
Summary of the state of our knowledge as to the structure and origin of the Blue
Mountains of New South Wales (Anniversary address). Royal Society of New
South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1896, volume 30, pages 1-69.
Sill structure and fossils in eruptive rocks in New South Wales. Royal Society of
New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1896, volume 30, pages 285-290.
The occurrence of radiolaria in Palaeozoic rocks in New South Wales. Linnean So-
ciety of New South Wales, Proceedings, 2nd series, volume 11, part 4, pages 553-
570.
(With W. Howchin.) Note on the occurrence of casts of radiolaria in pre-Cambrian
(?) rocks, South Australia. Linnean Society of New South Wales, Proceedings,
2nd series, volume 11, part 4, pages 571-583.
(With W. Howchin.) Notes on the glacial features of the Inman Valley, Yankalila
and Cape Jervis District. Royal Society of South Australia, Transactions,
pages 61-67.
(With C. C. Brittlebank and C. Sweet.) Further evidence as to glaciation in the
Bacchus Marsh District, Victoria. Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Sydney, Report, pages 361-365, 2 plates.
(With other members of Glacial Research Committee.) Report on the occurrence of
glacial boulders at Yellow Cliff, Crown Point Station, Finke Valley, Central
Australia. Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Sydney,
Report, pages 109-113.
(With other members of Glacial Research Committee.) Evidence of glacial action
in the Port Victor and Inman Valley districts. Australasian Association for
the Advancement of Science, Sydney, Report, pages 114-127.
Descriptions of the Palaeozoic fossils of New South Wales (translation from the
French of L. G. de Koninck), Geological Survey of New South Wales, Paleonto-
logical Memoirs, no. 6.
(With Mrs. T. W. E. David and W. S. Dun.) Stratigraphical note in the above
memoir, pages 290-293.
(With E. F. Pittman.) On the Palaeozoic radiolarian rocks of New South Wales.
Geological Society of London, Quarterly Journal, volume 55, pages 16-37.


(With J. L. C. Rae and E. F. Pittman.) Records of rock temperatures at Sydney
Harbour Colliery, Birthday Shaft. Balmain, Sydney. Royal Society of New
South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1899, volume 33, pages 207, 224.
Discovery of glaciated boulders at base of Permo-Carboniferous System, Lochinvar,
New South Wales. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings,
1899, volume 33, pages 154-159.
(With B. G. Corney and F. B. Guthrie.) Note on the edible earth from Fiji. Royal
Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1899, volume 33, pages
224-227.
Notes on the limestones and general geology of the Fiji Islands, with special reference
to the Lau Group; based upon surveys made by Alexander Agassiz, with a preface
by Professor David. Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard College,
Bulletin, Geological Series, volume 38.
(With R. Helms and E. F. Pittman.) Geological notes on Kosciusko, with special
reference to evidences of glacial action. Linnean Society of New South Wales,
Proceedings, 2nd series, volume 26, part 1, number 101, pages 26-74.
(With W. S. Dun and H. Rands.) Note on the occurrence of diatoms, radiolaria,
and infusoria in the Rolling Downs formation, Lower Cretaceous, Queensland.
Linnean Society of New South Wales, Proceedings, 2nd series, volume 16, part
2, number 102, pages 299-309.
(With F. B. Guthrie and W. G. Woolnough.) On the occurrence of a variety of tin-
guaite at Kosciusko, New South Wales. Royal Society of New South Wales,
Journal and Proceedings, 1901, 1902, volume 35, pages 347-382.
The science departments (in the University of Sydney). Hermes, Jubilee number,
pages 101-104.
(With B. F. Davis and W. G. Woolnough.) Occurrence of gadolinite in West Aus-
tralia. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1902, vol-
ume 36, pages 286-289.
An important geological fault at Kurrajong Heights, New South Wales. Royal
Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1902, volume 36,
pages 359-370.
Report of the Glacial Committee. Australasian Association for the Advancement
of Science, Hobart, Report, 1902, volume 9, section C, pages 190-204.
University science teaching. Record of the Jubilee celebrations of the University
of Sydney, 8 volumes, pages 93-121.
(With E. F. Pittman.) Irrigation geologically considered, with special reference to
the artesian area of New South Wales. Royal Society of New South Wales,
Journal and Proceedings, 1903, volume 37, Engineering Section, pages 103-153.
Narrative of the second and third expedition, Funafuti: the atoll of Funafuti.
Report of the Coral Reef Committee of the Royal Society of London, section 4,
pages 40-60.


(With G. Sweet.) The geology of Funafuti: the atoll of Funafuti. Report of the
Coral Reef Committee of the Royal Society of London, section 5, pages 61-124,
19 plates.
(With G. H. Halligan and A. E. Finck.) Report on dredging at Funafuti: the atoll
of Funafuti. Report of the Coral Reef Committee of the Royal Society of Lon-
don, section 7, pages 151-159.
(With F. B. Guthrie.) The flood silt of the Hunter and Hawkesbury rivers, New
South Wales. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings,
1904, volume 38, pages 191-202.
(With T. G. Taylor.) Occurrence of the pseudomorph glendonite in New South
Wales, Part I. Geological Survey of New South Wales, Records, volume 8, part
2, page 161.
The aims and ideals of Australasian science (Inaugural address). Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science, Dunedin, Report, 1904, volume 10,
pages 1-43.
Glaciation in Lower Cambrian, possibly in pre-Cambrian time. Congres Geologique
International, Mexico, part 1, pages 271-274.
Les conditions du climat aux epoques g£ologiques. Congres Geologique Interna-
tional, Mexico, part 1, pages 275-398.
Conditions of climate at different geological epochs, with special reference to glacial
epochs. Congres Geologique International, Mexico, part 1, pages 437-482.
Occurrence of diamonds in matrix at Pike and O’Donnell’s claim, Oakey Creek, near
Inverell. Congres Geologique International, Mexico, part 2, pages 1201-1210.
The occurrence of diamonds in the matrix at Oakey Creek, near Inverell, New South
Wales. British Association for the Advancement of Science, York, Report, 1906,
pages 562-563.
Notes on the Permo-Carboniferous coalfields of Australasia. British Association
for the Advancement of Science, York, Report, 1906, page 576.
Further note on the occurrence of diamonds in the matrix in New South Wales.
[Abstract] British Association for the Advancement of Science, York, Report,
1906, page 562.
The geology of the Hunter River coal measures, New South Wales; general geology
and the development of the Greta coal measures. Geological Survey of New
South Wales, Memoirs, volume 4, part 1, pages 1-372.
Introductory note on the Report of the Glacial Committee. Australasian Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science, Adelaide, Report, 1907, volume 11, pages
263-264.
Permo-Carboniferous beds at Wynyard, near Table Cape, Tasmania. Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science, Adelaide, Report, 1907, volume 11,
pages 274-279.
Some problems of Australian glaciation. Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Adelaide, Report, 1907, volume 11, pages 457-465.


Geological notes on Kosciusko, with special evidences of glacial action. Linnean
Society of New South Wales, Proceedings, 2nd series, volume 33, part 3, pages
657-668, 1 plate.
Revision of Sollas’ Translation of the face of the earth. Chapter IV, volume 111.
(With G. H. Halligan.) Evidence of recent submergence of coast at Narrabeen.
Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, 1908, volume 42,
pages 229-237.
Professor David’s Narrative of a journey to the south magnetic pole, in E. H. Shack-
leton: The heart of Antarctica. London, volume 2, pages 73-222.
(With R. E. Priestley.) Geological observations in Antarctica by the British Ex-
pedition, 1907-1909, in E, H. Shackleton: The heart of Antarctica. London,
volume 2, pages 268-310.
(With Lieutenant Adams.) Meteorology: A summary of results, in E. H. Shackle-
ton: The heart of Antarctica. London, volume 2, pages 376-383.
The chief tectonic lines of Australia (Presidential address). Royal Society of New
South Wales, Journal and Proceedings, volume 55, part 1, pages 1-60.
(With R. E. Priestley.) Geological notes of the British Antarctic Expedition, 1907-
1909. Extrait du Compte Rendu duXL e Congres G6ologique International, pages
767-811.
Discovery by the Australasian Antarctic Expedition of important submarine banks.
Geographical Journal, volume 41, number 5, pages 461-463, 2 figures.
Mawson’s Australasian Antarctic Expedition. Nature, volume 91, page 65.
Antarctic problems (paper read before the Royal Geographical Society). Nature,
February 1914, volume 92, pages 700-702.
Note on an expedition to Dutch New Guinea (paper delivered by A. F. R. Wollaston
before the Royal Geographical Society, London). Geographical Journal, March
1914, volume 43, number 3, pages 272-273.
Antarctica and some of its problems. Geographical Journal, 1914, volume 43, num-
ber 6, pages 605-630, 8 figures.
Remarks on physiography and glacial geology of East Antarctica (paper read before
the Royal Geographical Society, London). Geographical Journal, December
1914, volume 44, number 6, pages 566-568.
Presidential address to Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science.
Melbourne, 1913, volume 14, pages 43-92.
(With R. E. Priestley.) British Antarctic Expedition, 1907-1909, under the com-
mand of E. H. Shackleton, C. V. O. Reports of Scientific Investigations, Geol-
ogy, volume 1, pages xxiv, 319, 96 plates, 67 text-figures.
The tectonic geology of New South Wales. British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Handbook for New South Wales, pages 567-577.
Permo-Carboniferous System. British Association for the Advancement of Science,
Handbook for New South Wales, pages 590-600.


Tertiary stratigraphy of New South Wales. British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Handbook for New South Wales, pages 608A-608H.
The geology of the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth of Australia Federal
Handbook. British Association for the Advancement of Science, Melbourne,
Report, pages 241-290, 8 plates, 6 text-figures.
(With E. W. Skeats.) Igneous rocks. British Association for the Advancement of
Science, Melbourne, Report, pages 302-314.
(With E. W. Skeats.) Metamorphic rocks. British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Melbourne, Report, pages 314-316.
Papua. British Association for the Advancement of Science, Melbourne, Report,
pages 316-325, 5 plates.
(With J. T. Wilson.) The Talgai skull. Scientific Australia, volume 20, number 1,
pages 4-5.
Sir Norman Maclaurin —an appreciation. The Review, volume 15, number 9, page
440.
(With J. T. Wilson.) A preliminary communication on an Australian cranium of
probable Pleistocene age. Medical Journal of Australia, volume 1, number 13,
page 308.
(With W. S. Dun.) On the term Permo-Carboniferous and on the correlation of that
system. British Association for the Advancement of Science, Report, pages
379-380.
(With J. T. Wilson.) Preliminary communications on an Australian cranium of a
probable Pleistocene age. British Association for the Advancement of Science,
Australia, Report, page 531.
(With others.) Sections of Australian fossil plants. Reports of the Committee
appointed to cut sections of Australian fossil plants. British Association for
the Advancement of Science, Manchester, Report, 1915, page 231.
(With others.) Nomenclature of the Carboniferous, Permo-Carboniferous and
Permian rocks of the Southern Hemisphere: Report of the Australian Members
of the Committee. British Association for the Advancement of Science, Man-
chester, Report, 1915, pages 263-266.
Discussion of the above notes and table. British Association for the Advancement
of Science, Manchester, Report, 1915, pages 266-274.
(With R. E. Priestley.) Preface, British Antarctic Expedition, 1907-1909. Report
of Scientific Investigations, Geology, volume 2, pages 5, 6.
Reports cited by Captain W. B. R. King: Geological work on the Western Front.
Geographical Journal, pages 201-221.
(With C. A. Sussmilch, W. R. Browne, and A. B. Walkom.) Sequence, glaciation,
and correlation of the Carboniferous rocks of the Hunter River District, New
South Wales. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings,
volume 53, pages 246-338.
Report of Macquarie Island Committee. Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Hobart, Report, volume 15, page 292.


Alteration of sea-level caused by melting of Antarctic ice, with particular reference
to Bass Strait. Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Ho-
bart, Report, volume 15, page 358. (Title of paper only.)
Oil prospects in Queensland. Queensland Government Mining Journal, volume 22.
page 473.
(With W. S. Dun.) Notes on the occurrence of Gastrioceras at the Irwin River coal-
field, W. S., and a comparison with the so-called Paralegoceras from Letti, Dutch
East Indies. Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and Proceedings,
volume 56, pages 249-252.
The “Varve-Shales” of Australia. American Journal of Science, sth series, volume
3, pages 115-116.
The occurrence of remains of small Crustacea in the Proterozoic (?) or Lower Cam-
brian (?) rocks of Reynella, near Adelaide. Royal Society of South Australia,
Transactions, volume 46, pages 6-8.
R. M. Johnston Memorial Lecture. Geological evidence of the antiquity of man in
the Commonwealth, with special reference to the Tasmanian aborigines. Royal
Society of Tasmania, Papers and Proceedings, pages 109-150.
(With W. Howchin.) Glacial Research Committee Report. Australasian Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science, Wellington Report 1922, volume 16, pages
74-94.
Notes on the stratigraphy of the Permo-Carboniferous beds of Kimberley. Aus-
tralasian Association for the Advancement of Science, Adelaide, volume 17,
Report, page 62.
Summary of Report of Glacial Phenomena Committee. Australasian Association
for the Advancement of Science, Adelaide, Report, volume 17, pages 64-66.
Pleistocene glaciation near Strahan, Tasmania. Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, Adelaide, volume 17, pages 91-103.
Discovery of glacial erratics and tillite, by T. Blatchford, B. A., and H. W. B. Talbot,
in Kimberley Area of Western Australia. Australasian Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science, Adelaide, Report, volume 17, pages 77-80.
(With W. G. Woolnough.) Cretaceous glaciation in Central Australia. Geological
Society of London, Quarterly Journal, volume 82, pages 333-350.
Salient features in the stratigraphy, tectonic structure and physiography of the
Commonwealth of Australia. Geological Society of London, Quarterly Journal,
volume 82, pages 105-107 (Lecture).
The determination of the age of the so-called Permo-Carboniferous tillite of Aus-
tralia. British Association for the Advancement of Science, Oxford, Report,
page 346.
On the occurrence of the genus Helicoprion, possibly Toxoprion, in the so-called
Permo-Carboniferous rocks of Western Australia. Third Pan-Pacific Science
Congress, Tokyo, volume 2, page 1845.
Note on the geological horizon of the Archaeocyathinae, Royal Society of South
Australia, Transactions, volume 51, pages 410-413.


(With H. S. Summers and G. A. Ampt.) The Tasmanian Tektite-Darwin glass.
Royal Society of Victoria, Proceedings, volume 39, pages 167-190.
Nullagine-Adelaide Series. Australasian Association for the Advancement of Sci-
ence, Hobart, Report, volume 19, pages 231-234.
Further notes on the newly-discovered fossils in the Adelaide Series (Lipalian or
Proterozoic), South Australia. Royal Society of South Australia, Transactions,
volume 53, pages 1-4.
Report on evidence of glacial action in the strata associated with the Ashford coal
seam, New South Wales. Australian and New Zealand Association for the
Advancement of Science, Brisbane, volume 20, pages 84-85.
Permo-Carboniferous correlation. Australian and New Zealand Association for
the Advancement of Sciences, Brisbane, Report, volume 20, pages 62-67.
(With C. A. Sussmilch.) Upper Palaeozoic glaciations of Australia. Geological
Society of America, Bulletin, volume 42, pages 481-522.
Geological map of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Explanatory notes to accompany a new geological map of the Commonwealth of
Australia.
(With C. A. Sussmilch.) The Carboniferous and Permian periods in Australia.
Sixteenth International Geological Congress, Washington.


