





ol o
4
S" h
Pauls (Eatljs&ral,
Mvihmxnz*
Okfor nf
Okrmmmurats % burial
%ta ittuat Qkarinua majealij
King Simtarfr VII.
Hunt, fitly iX'mmmirr, lfi4l.
mm, .fitly Jiag, iam.
“A MAN GREATLY BELOVED
“HIS BODY IS BURIED IN PEACE, BUT HIS NAME LIVETH
FOR EVERMORE.”


I AM the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord : he that believeth
1 in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live : and whosoever
liveth and believeth in me shall never die, St. John xi. 25, 26.
I KNOW that.my Redeemer liveth. and that he shall stand at the
1 latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God ; whom I shall see
for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another. Job xix, 25,
26, 27.
WE brought nothing into this'world, and it ls certain "we can carry
nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away ;
blessed be the name of the Lord. 1 Tint. vi. 7, John. 21. (Croft.)
Psalm xc.
ORD, thou hast been our refuge : from one generation to another.
Before-the mountains were brought forth, pr ever the earth and
the world were made; thou art God from everlasting, and world
without end.
Thou turnest man to destruction; again thou sayest, Come again,
ye children of men.
hor a thousand years in' thy sight are but as yesterday : seeing
that is past as a watch in the night,
As soon as thou scatterest them, they are -even as a sleep : and
fade away suddenly like the grass. ‘
In the morning it is green, and groweth up : but in the evening
it is cut down, dried up, and' withered. '
For we consume away in. thy displeasure:" and are afraid at thy
wrathful indignation. 1


Thou hast set our misdeeds before thee ; and our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance.
For when thou art angry all our days are gone : we bring our
years to an end. as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten ; and though
men be so strong, that they come to fourscore years: yet is their
strength then but labour and sorrow ; so soon passeth it away, and
we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of thy wrath : for even thereafter as
a man feareth, so is thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days : that we may apply our hearts
unto Wisdom.
Turn thee again, O Lord, at the last : and be gracious unto thy
servants.
O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon ; so shall we rejoice
and be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that thou hast plagued us ;
and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity.
Shew thy servants thy work: and their children thy glory.
And the glorious Majesty of the ' Lord our God be upon us :
prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our
handy-work.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world with-
out end. Amen. (Purcell.)
Ist LLSSON--ELcclesiasticus xliv., 1-15.
HYMN.
VJ OW the labourer’s task is o'er
i > Now the battle day is past;
Now upon the farther shore
Lands the voyager at last
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the tears of earth are dried ;
There its hidden things are clear;
There the work of life is tried
By a juster Judge than here.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the sinful souls, that turn
To the Cross their dying eyes,
All the love of Christ shall learn
At His feet in Paradise.
Father, in Thy Gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.


There no more the powers of hell
Can prevail to mar their peace
Christ the Lord shall guard them well,.
He who died for their release.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
“ Earth to earth, and dust to dusty”
Calmly now the words we say.
Leaving him to sleep in trust
Till the Resurrection-day.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
2nd LELSSON - Ist Thess., iv., 13-18.
HYMN.
AT RARER, my God, to Thee, nearer to : Thee,
IN ' .E’en though it be a cross that raiseth me,
Still all my song shall be
Nearer, my God, to Thee, nearer to Thee-:
Though like the wanderer (the sun gone down),
Darkness be over me—my rest a stone ;
Yet in ray dreams I’d be
Nearer, my God, to Thee, nearer to Thee
Then let the way appear steps unto heaven,
All that Thou sendest me in mercy given ;
Angels to beckon me
Nearer, my God, to Thee, nearer to Thee.
Then, with my waking thoughts bright with Thy praise,
Out of my stony griefs Beth-el I’ll raise ;
So by my woes to be
Nearer, my God, to Thee, nearer to Thee.
Or if on joyful wing cleaving the sky,
Sun, moon, and stars forgot, upwards I fly
Still all my song shall be,
Nearer, my God, to Thee, nearer to Thee. Amen.
ADDRELss—The'Archbishop of Melbourne.
The following sentences will he sung hy the Choir :
MAN that is born of a woman hath but a short time to live, and is
full of misery. He corned; up, and is cut. down, like a flower :
he fleetb as it were a shadow, and never continued! in one stay.
In the midst of life we are in death ; of whom may v.e seek for
succour, but of Thee, O Lord, who for our sins are justly displeased ?


Yet, O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and
most merciful Saviour, deliver us not into the bitter pains of
eternal death. [Croft.)
THOU knowest, Lord, the secrets of our hearts ; shut not thy mer-
ciful ears to our prayer; but spare us, Lord most holy, O God
most mighty,,. O holy and merciful Saviour, thou most worthy Judge
eternal, suffer us not at our last hour, for any pains of death, to fall
from thee. [Purcell.)
I HEARD a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, From hence-
forth blessed are the dead which die in the Lord : even so saith
the spirit; for they rest from their labours. [Croft.)
Then the Priest shall say
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
QUR Father
deliver us from evil. Amen,
0 ALMIGHTY God, who hast knit together thine elect in one
communion and fellowship, in the mystical body of thy Son
Christ our Lord ; grant us grace so to follow thy blessed Saints in all
virtuous and godly living, that we may come to those unspeakable
joys, which thou has prepared for them that unfeignedly love thee ;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A LMIGHTY and everliving God, who by thy Holy Apostles hast
i\ taught us to make prayers and supplications and to give thanks
for all men; we humbly beseech thee most mercifully to comfort and
succour all them who in this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need,
sickness, or any other adversity, especially thy servants our Sovereign
Lord King George, our gracious Queen Mary, Alexandra the Queen
Mother, Prince Edward Duke of Cornwall, and all the Royal Family.
And we also bless thy Holy Name for all thy servants departed this
life in thy faith and fear, especially thy chosen servant King Edward;
beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow their good examples, that
with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom : Grant
this, O Father, for Jesus Christ’s sake, our only Mediator and
Advocate. Amen.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, we are taught by thy holy word
that the hearts of kings are in thy rule and governance.
We give thee most humble thanks that thou didst’ so govern the
heart of Edward our King, that he ever studied to preserve thy
people committed to his charge, in wealth, peace and godliness :
for all the .manifold blessings of his reign, and for all that he did
according to thy will we bless and praise thy Holy Name ; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


THE ANTHEM.
From “The Requiem” (Brahms).
Behold, all flesh is as the grass, and all the goodliness of man is
as the flower of grass. For 10, the grass withereth, and the flower
thereof decayeth, / Peter i. 24.
Now therefore be patient, O ray brethren, unto the coming of
Christ. See how the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the
earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early rain
and the latter rain. So be ye.patient. James v. 7.
Behold, all flesh is as the grass, and all goodliness of man is
as the flower of grass. For 10, the grass withereth, and the flower
thereof decayeth. 7 Peter , i. 24.
But the Lord’s Word endureth for evermore. / Peter i. 25
The redeemed of the Lord shall return again, and come
rejoicing unto Zion. G-ladnesss, joy everlasting upon their heads shall
be ; joy and gladness, these shall be their portion, and tears and
sighing shall flee from them: Isaiah xxxv. 10.
Übe JSenebicfion.
HYMN (Kneeling).
PEACE, perfect peace, in this dark world of sin ?
The Blood of Jesus whispers peace within.
Peace, perfect peace, by thronging duties press’d ?
To do the will of Jesus, this is rest.
Peace, perfect peace, with sorrows surging round ?
On Jesus' Bosom nought but calm is found.
Peace, perfect peace, with loved ones far away ?
In Jesus’ keeping we are safe and they.
Peace, perfect peace, our future all unknown ?
Jesus we know, and He is on the Throne.
Peace, perfect peace, death shadowing us and ours ?
Jesus has vanquish’d death and all its powers,
It is enough : earth's struggles soon shall cease,
And Jesus call us to Heav’n’s perfect peace.
THE DEAD MARCH [Handel).


RLCESSIONAL HYMN.
ON the Resurrection morning
Soul and body meet again ;
No more sorrow, no more weeping,
No more pain.
Here awhile they must be parted,
And the flesh its sabbath keep,
Waiting in a holy stillnes
Wrapt in sleep
For a space the tired body
Lies with feet toward the dawn ;
Till there breaks the last and brightest
Easter morn
But the soul in contemplation
Utters earnest prayer and strong ;
Breaking at the Resurrection
Into song !
Soul and body reunited
Thenceforth nothing shall divide,
Waking up in Christ's own likeness
Satisfied.
Oh ! the beauty, oh ! the gladness
Of that Resurrection day !
Which shall not, through endless ages,
Pass away !
On that happy Easter morning
All the graves their dead restore,
Father, sister, child and mother,
Meet once more.
To that brightest of all meetings
Bring us, Jesu Christ, at last;
To Thy Cross, through death and
judgment.
Holding fast.
Amen.
Crawford & Son, Printers, Latrobe Parade, 111 Collins Street.






