





MEMOIRS
OF
WILLIAM COX, J.P.




William Cox, J.P.


MEMOIRS
...0F...
WILLIAM COX, J.P.,
LIEUTENANT AND PAYMASTER OF N.S.W. CORPS,
...0R...
102nd REGIMENT.
LATE OF CLARENDON, WINDSOR.




CONTENTS.
Chapter. Page.
I.—Windsor Church ... ... ... 9
ll.—Wimbourne Minster . ... ... 14
111. —The Transport “ Minerva ” ... ... 19
IV. - The Perils of the Deep ... ... ... 24
V.—Brush Farm ... ... ... ... 29
Vl.—Farming in New South Wales ... .... 35
VII. —The Cowpastures ... ... ... 41
VIII.—The Blue Mountains ... ... ... 48
IX. —The Mountain Road ... ... ... 53
- X. —The Reward of Labor ... ... ... 105
XI. —Over the Ranges ... ... ... 120
Xll.—Australian Development... ... ... 126
-Xlll.—Family History... ... ... 137
XlV.—The Old Families- ... ... ... 140


ILLUSTRATIONS.
William Cox, J.P., ... ... ... Frontispiece.
Windsor Church ... ... ... ... 13
The Old Home at Wimbourne ... ... ... 18
Armorial Bearings ... ... Facing Contents.




WINDSOR CHURCH.
Chapter I.
In the days that are yet to be, the old brick church
at Windsor, N.S.W., will be the object of the pious
pilgrimage of multitudes. St. Matthew’s was erected
by Governor Macquarie, and the massive brick walls
bear testimony to the building class of that date and the
price of labour. It stands on the edge of the tableland
that overlook's the valley of the Hawkesbury River, where
the first real fight with Nature was made by the early
settlers a century ago. The river looks like a thread of
molten metal glittering in the sun, wending its devious
way to the sea, giving but little suggestion of its savage
might in the days of flood.
Inside the little church are low-backed, modern
pews, marks of Windsor progress, but the flat ceiling and
the whited walls speak of earlier days. Most of the
windows have small panes, but there are six stained glass
memorial windows which tell of love and loss. Here is
one to the Rev. Henry Tarlton Stiles, M.A., who died in
1867. Another is to John Terry, Box Hill, who passed
beyond the flood in 1842. Another is in memory of
Edwin Rouse, who died in 1862; and another is to the
memory of the wife of Anthony Hordern, whc died in
Genoa, Italy, in 1872. We think of the Horderns as
Sydney people, but once in a day Miss Towns was the


belle of the Windsor district, and Anthony Hordern was
the fortunate man who carried her off, and the end is—
a memorial window, for, —
“ Life’s way is the wind’s way ; all these things
Arc but brief voices, breathed on shifting strings.”
Here, too, is a memorial window to Captain Thomas
Wingate, of the 2nd Queen’s Royal Regim.nt, who died
in 1869. There are tablets to the Fitzgeralds and
Blakes, and many notable people, and they look old, very
old; yet ’tis only 113 years since the First Fleet anchored
in Botany Bay. And the church looks old, old, very
old, and the broad arrow is cut on the foundation-stones;
but our young nation is far, far away from the old
church.
In the churchyard are laid the bones of the men
who made the history of New South Wales : the lawyer,
the civil servant, the squatter and J.P., and the military
men of our long ago, which yet lie so close to us. Here,
for instance, is the tomb of Thomas Arndell, one of the
earliest civil officers in the Medical Department, who
died in 1821. He came out with the First Fleet under
Governor Phillip, and was one of those who saw that
original landing at Kurnell, in Botany Bay, on January
18th, 1788. And here, in the graveyard of St. Matthew’s,
overlooking the Hawkesbury River, is raised his simple
monument, that will appeal so powerfully to generations
yet unborn. Close beside him is the tomb of Francis
Beddock, the lawyer of the olden time. They still recall
the stories about him in the district, and it seems odd
to sit beside the creeping, crystal river, listening to the
stories of the olden days, and then come on the oil man’s


grave. The natives say that there was an old settler in
the district—they show you his house and tell you his
name —who could neither read nor write. He had some
dealings with the lawyer, and in a matter of interest
Mr. Beddock said it would be so much. “Nay,” said the
old illiterate, “not so much as that.” Ths lawyer took
down the “ready reckoner” of the day, and showed him
the figures. “I don’t know nothin’ about figures,” said
the sturdy farmer; “but that’s wrong.” The lawyer
stood by the “ready reckoner,” and the old man had to
pay; but the incident impressed the legal mind. Mr.
Beddock went home and reckoned the interest up for
himself, and, lo! the book was wrong! And now the
lawyer and his old client sleep side by side in the church-
yard, and the interest on the earthly debts is forgotten,
save as a fireside story.
Here, too, lies Captain Brabyn, cne of the New
South Wales Corps, who died in 1835, aged 76, and his
story is a full and varied one, for the three were giants
in those days, and the men who made the country were
men of true British grit. Near by him is a paling en-
closure, containing two flat-topped tombs. Over them
the trees have grown, a privet, and a couple of peach
trees; but time has dealt lightly with ths graves. The
palings look fresh and young, and the lettering is still
very clear on the lichen-specked stones. On the nearest
one is carved—
“HERE LIETH ENTOMBED THE REMAINS
OF Mrs. REBECCA COX, WIFE OF WILLIAM
COX, Esq., OF CLARENDON, WHO DEPARTED
THIS LIFE THE sth OF MARCH, 1819, AGED 56


YEARS. IN TESTIMONY OF THE EXALTED
VIRTUES THAT ADORNED HER CHARACTER,
NOT ONLY AS A WIFE AND MOTHER, BUT IN
ALL THE OTHER RELATIVE DUTIES OF LIFE,
THIS TOMB IS ERECTED TO PERPETUATE HER
MEMORY BY HER AFFECTIONATE HUSBAND.”
That occupies one half of the stone. Below it is
the inscription:
“ HERE ALSO LIE THE REMAINS OF WIL-
LIAM COX, Esq., J.P., WHO DEPARTED THIS
LIFE THE 15th DAY OF MARCH, 1837, AGED 72
YEARS. ‘NOT BY WORKS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS
WHICH WE HAVE DONE, BUT ACCORDING TO
HIS OWN MERCY HE SAVED US.’ READER,
‘BELIEVE IN THE LORD JESUS CHRIST, AND
THOU SHALT BE SAVED.’ ”
Standing on the tombstones, close by the frail old
wooden fence, gazing on the carven record, one seems
very near to the fountain of the history of our country.
The old church is very near us; we are indeed in “God’s
acre.” And the twitter of countless birds but deepens
and intensifies the silence, and the air is full of a sweet,
life tonic, vibrating with a stillness which is audible.
Here we stand with all that is left to us of that grand old
"William Cox whose name is so closely interwoven with
all that is best in New South Wales. One of the Bell
family, who are closely interwoven by marriage with the
Coxes, said that he could travel from the Gulf of Car-
pentaria to Sydney and never sleep one night out of the
house of a relative. And here sleeps the father of the
Australian Cox, who only died in 1837, the year in


St. .Mattiikw’k Ciiiucii. Winiisou.


which our late Gracious Queen came to the throne. So
close do we stand to the beginning of Australian history.
The other tomb within the Cox enclosure has also a
history. It says:
“ HERE LIE THE REMAINS OF Mr. JAMES
KING, OF MULGOA, WHO DEPARTED THIS
LIFE ON THE 27th OF JUNE, 1829. MANY
YEARS A RESPECTED AND FAITHFUL ASSIST-
ANT TO WILLIAM COX, Esq., J.P., OF CLAREN-
DON. THIS MEMORIAL IS ERECTED TO HIS
MEMORY BY A GRATEFUL FRIEND.”
Who will tell the story of James King; He died
after Mrs. Cox, but before William Cox, and he was
buried in the family selection. There was something
truly patriarchal in the life of those days; but, note ye,
gentle reader, and ’tis a quaint sign; the servant was
“Mr.”, but the master was “Esq.” There is something
pathetic in the inscriptions if you pause to consider on
them. James King was a good man and true, who died
at Mulgoa in that far away 1829, and they carried his
body from the out-of-the-world place by the Nepean to
the town of Windsor, on the Hawkesbury, and laid him
near his dear old mistress. He left his wealth to his
god-child, who was called Edward King Cox, but that
child has also passed away ere this ; and so passeth all
the sons- of men ! From the quiet graveyard on the
banks of the Hawkesbury River to Wimborne, in
England, is a long cry, but the life of William Cox began
beyond the seas, and there we will seek him out.


WIMBOURNE MINSTER.
Chapter II.
William Cox, of Clarendon, N.S.W., was born at
Wimbourne Minster, Dorset, England, on December 19th,
1764. He was the second son and fourth child of Robert
Cox, and he was educated at Queen Elizabeth’s Grammar
School. And strange it seems that Wimbourne Minster,
one of the oldest towns in Britain, should be connected
(through William Cox) with Windsor, one of the oldest
towns in New South Wales. We stand too close to
Windsor to be able to read the romance of its history,
but Wimbourne Minster is mingled with the wars of
Romans, Saxons, and Danes in the olden time The
little town is of no account now; it has slept through the
fevered centuries, only sending out its sons to fight the
battles of the nation in far lands. But in Roman days
it was a fortress; it was a Roman camp; it was Venta-
geladia, or the town on the river. It was on the banks
of the Allen River, near its confluence with the Stour,
and there the Roman soldiers enjoyed the sweet English
country life in the days when the world was wide.
But Rome had her own troubles, and the Britons were
a hard, masterful race; and so Ventageladia was deserted,
and the Saxons gave the place a new name. There was
the river, or Wim, and there was a creek, or bourne ,


which ran on the other side of the town; and so, with
the old Roman glory of camp and court about it, there
arose the new Saxon town of Wimbourne. And the cen-
turies were born and died, and Alfred the Great came
and saw the scones burn in the cottager’s kitchen, and
he brought peace to the troubled land. Then Edward
the Elder, his son, ruled the land, but his Cousin-German,
Ethelwald, would fain have been King, and they fought
at the old Roman camp at Wimbourne, and Ethelwald
had to flee. Then he came again, at the head of the
Danes, but Edward mustered his Saxons and defeated his
forces and slew him ; and so waged the war through the
dreary, blood-stained centuries, until Alexandra, the Sea-
King’s daughter, was married to our Prince of Wales in
1863, and our great poet sang, —-
“ Saxon and Norman and Dane are we.
But all of us Danes in our welcome of thee.
Wimborne Minster was one of the places in Britain
where the races fought for mastery; where the cross of
Christ was raised, and the heathen made a vain struggle.
In the year 705 a.d. the sweet Saint Cuthburga erected a
great nunnery at Wimbourne, and the Gospel was
preached through gentle service to all who came thither,
but the Danes swept that away, and erected thereon a
great college, which endured until the time of Henry
VIII., when its princely endowments were forfeited to
the Crown. But Queen Elizabeth restored part of the
estates to the school, and in that Queen Elizabeth's
Grammar School was educated William Cox, of Claren-
don, N.S.W. So are we bound together in this brief life
of ours!


In the old church, or Minster, which gave its second
name to the town lie the bodies of the Kings and Queens
and mighty ones of old. In that church, as in St. Mat-
thew’s at Windsor, is written the history of the country.
Here lies entombed Ethelred, the brother of King Alfred
the Great, and his ponderous Latin epitaph seems to
resemble in some sort the epitaphs on the Cox’s at Wind-
sor :
“S. ETHELREDI REGIS WEST SAXONUM
MARTYRIS, QUI ANNO DOMINI,
DCCCLXXII-XXIII.
APILIS PERMANIS DANORBUM PAGONOR
OCCUBIT.”
From the King of West Saxony and his Pagan surround-
ings in 872 a.d. to William Cox, and his Hawkesbury
home, 1837 a.d., is a long stretch, yet the thread of
history binds them together in union strange.
The Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, and all the
warring tribes coalesced to make the British race, and
the little town faded from history. The old school still
stands where Saint Cuthburga founded the nunnery, and
there William Cox was educated. Then he moved to
Devizes, in Wilts, where he married Rebecca Upjohn, of
Bristol, in 1789, at the age of 25. They were stirring
days those: the gates of the temple of Janus were for-
ever open, and the sons of the Carline wife ■vere teaching
the prowess of England’s sons to all the world. Young
Cox was a man of good estate, and served in the Wilts
Militia, in the service where the country gentleman
showed both their will and ability to serve their country.
During the French war he got a taste of the anxieties of


hostility, but he longed for action, and on July Btli, 1795,
at the age of 31, he received his commission as ensign in
the 117th Foot. A year after (June 20th. 1796) he ex-
changed into the 68th Foot, and on February 17th, 1797,
he was made lieutenant; out there came a woful time
of peace, and his opportunity for war was not. On Sep-
tember 28th, 1798, he was appointed paymaster, and was
ordered to Cork Harbour.
In that year—the famous ’9B—of song and story,
Ireland was in a ferment. Rebellion had raised its head,
and the two races, English and Irish, were at deadly
enmity. The rebels were being deported to “Botany
Bay,” and Lieutenant William Cox was ordered to await
the filling up of the transport ‘“Minerva” (Captain Sal-
keld) with rebels, and take them on to Australia.
How he came to be ordered on this service opens
one of the most singular chapters in English history.
The Government of that day had need for all its soldiers.
It had accepted Australia as a fit place to send its con-
victs to, but there were no soldiers to send out to guard
them. The Government, therefore, called for volunteers
to form a “New South Wales Corps,” for in those days
New South Wales was Australia.
The New South Wales Corps was to consist of 1000
men, and the first officer to command it was Captain
Grose. The conditions for entrance into lhat corps
were much easier than for other regiments at home, and
there can be no doubt but some exceedingly undesirable
men joined it; but there were some noble men amongst
them, such as William Cox, and they were the salt of the
body. The officers were to be soldiers first and colonists


afterwards. The terms offered were very good, as the
Government of the day understood them, but very few
knew anything about Australia, and still fewer cared.
Some men had already gone out to New South Wales as
members of the corps, which afterwards became the 102nd
Regiment, but their going was of little interest to Eng-
land. In those days Australia was far, far away, much
further than it is to-day, and little was known about it.
In fact, if it had not been for Sir Joseph Banks, who
came out with Captain Cook at his own expense, it
might never have been an English colony at all. Tho
ten years of possession had done a little to open the eyes
of England to the value of the Terra Australis, the Great
South Land of earlier days, but even then the recognition
of its true value had not come. Lieutenant Cox had
volunteered for the service, and no better man was ever
appointed, for he was not only a strong man, but he was
a true man, whp could manage men, and not only get
them to work for him, but could also obtain their love
and respect as well.
He took with him to Cork Lieutenant Maundrcll,
of the New South Wales Corps, and 30 men of the rank
and file. There they waited for their complement of
rebels, who were being expatriated for doing what they
held to be a stern and holy duty.


The Old Home, Wimbouknk.


THE TRANSPORT “MINERVA.”
Chapter III.
It is pleasant to interweave the history of William
Cox with the records of Romans, Saxons, and Danes, and
the early races of our far-off island home, but when he
touches the rebellion of ’9B we draw back with a shudder.
No true Englishman ever takes pride or pleasure in the
records of those awful days, and most of us wish that they
could be forgotten. Fortunately, Captain Cox (his com-
mission was really that ,of lieutenant, but he was in com-
mand of the troops) had nothing to do with Vinegar Hill
or the other terrible events of that sad time. His duties
were simple: they were to command the little detach-
ment that went out in charge of the “transports” by the
“Minerva” to New South Wales. One cf the men who
went out with him was Jos. Holt, a Protestant “rebel,”
who has left his autobiography, which gives a vivid pic-
ture of the times. He was known as “General” Holt,
and he had led the Irish against the English on many a
bitter day. He had escaped to the mountains and, like
Prince Charlie, he had found shelter and comfort amongst
the poorest classes, in spite of the rewards that were
offered for his head. He had at last offered to surrender
and leave the country, and his offer was accepted. He


delivered himself up to the Government, but his treat-
ment was such as to make Englishmen ashamed of their
race. However, when Holt reached Cork, after most
incredible sufferings, he met Captain C x, and his
troubles were practically over. He recognised that the
treatment he and his fellows had received was not what
the Government intended: it was the work of miserable
under-strappers, with small souls and itching fingers.
When Holt met men of the Captain Cox style, who re-
cognised his worth, he was well treated, and he has left a
record of the voyage which becomes, each passing year,
of more intense interest to us.
Captain Cox took Holt down into his cabin, and
introduced him to his sweet wife, for whom Holt conceived
a reverent respect from the very firsthand tc his four
sons—-James, who afterwards settled in Tasmania;
Charles, who was killed by the natives of the South Sea
Islands; George and Henry, afterwards of Mulgoa and
Mudgee. Another son, Edward, was afterwards born in
New South Wales, and settled first at Mulgoa, but later
acquired property at Rylstone.
The record of that eventful voyage deserves a book
to itself, for it is full of suggestions of the history of that
“most distressful” time. We are apt to think of the
Irish “rebels” as being poor, ignorant wretches, who were
the dupes of clever knaves, but the ‘ passenger” list of
the “Minerva” opens the eyes of careless folk. Amongst
the “rebel felons” were the Rev. Henry Fulton, a clergy-
man of the Church of England; the Rev. Father Harold,
a priest, and his brother-in-law, Captain William Henry
Alcock, an officer in the British Army, on full pay, with


an independent income of £3OO a year as well. Yet he
was a “rebel” sent out to expiate his crime on the
“Minerva,” and afterwards at what was called “Botany
Bay.” His wife came aboard while in Cork Harbour,
and got him to assign the £3OO a year to her, and once
she obtained it she bade him an airy farewell, and he
never heard from her more. Then there were Captain
John St. Leger, also a captain on full pay, and Dr.
O’Connor, all “rebels.”
Captain Cox introduced Holt to General Myers, who,
on behalf of the Government, offered him his liberty, on
condition of taking command of a cavalry regiment and
rooting out the “rebels.” Holt refused that, but General
Myers took no offence at it. He even told Captain Cox
that when he reached New South Wales he should see
Governor King, and, presenting the General’s compli-
ments, ask him to do what he could for Joseph Holt.
It was a great pity that Holt was not treated more
liberally in our country, but they were terrible times
then, and it is not easy to measure the events of those
days by the standards of these. Holt was a fairly well-
educated man, and had acted as deputy-manager in the
estate of Sir John Blaguiere, where he was also road-
making, and a great many other things. He was a
very able man, as he afterwards proved to Captain Cox,
and he was an affectionate man to his family and a true
•man through all.
On August 24th, 1799, the “Minerva” sailed from
Cork Harbour, having on board 34 women (besides Mrs.
Cox), 132 male prisoners, one lieutenant (Maundrell),
four sergeants, 27 privates, three mates, four quarter-


masters, and 20 sailors. She was a well-armed ship, and
carried several guns, but her crew sounds very small
compared to the number of prisoners.
Such a voyage is generally a record of suffering,
sorrow, and bitter injustice, for the men in charge of the
ships of that day were often of a very poor type. Cap-
tain Salkeld had his faults, no doubt—most people have
—but he had also some virtues, which are likewise some-
what prevalent. When the weather was fine, Captain
Cox would ask his permission to bring the prisoners up
on deck for the air. The captain sometimes pleaded
that he had no quartermaster to spare to watch them.
Then Captain Cox would respond, “I’ll get a quarter-
master, and I’ll look out for them.” And he’d get the
keys and get Joseph Holt to act as quartermaster. So
the prisoners saw more of the sunshine and the sea and
the sky than prisoners generally did, and they had full
and plenty of good food; and Joseph suggjsts that many
of the “passengers” never had such a good time in their
lives before. But he recognised who was at the bottom
of all the peace and enjoyment. He put it all down to
Captain Cox. He wrote in his book that “this excellent
man contributed to the health and happiness of all the
unfortunate persons on board.” Such is the power of
one strong, true man on a ship or in a country. Where-
ever William Cox went he made his mark and impressed
his intense individuality on the society in which he
moved. There was no special reason why the “Minerva”
should have been a particularly good ship, yet it stands
on record that she was the best ship that ever carried
prisoners from the Old Land to here. There were only


three deaths on board during the whole live months of
the trip, and there were a good many births. Never was
a cleaner, healthier, or heartier crowd landed in Port
Jackson under the old regime than came in the
"Minerva,” and that was due, beyond a doubt, to the
influence of Captain William Cox.


THE PERILS OF THE DEEP.
Chapter IV.
When we sail from Sydney for Home, we reckon
on possible storms, and even—--on rare occasions—quar-
antine, but those are almost the only dangers. In the
days when the “Minerva” sailed the seas there were
many and grievous dangers. One day there were cries
of “A sail! A sail!” and all the free people were full of
excitement to learn what the on-coming ship was. It
is a pleasant break to the monotony of a rrip to catch
a glimpse of other people on the great sea. In those
days, however, the excitement was deeply tinged with
'danger, for every sail was a possible enemy. England
was always at war with somebody, and the men of old
were not too particular about the laws of war. The
ports were crowded with light vessels bearing “letters of
marque” and ships
‘ ‘ Dart from the nooks and crannies
White eagles athirst for prey ;
Room for a little adventure,
And plenty of room for play. ”
The free people on the “Minerva” were excited,
but, remembering the condition of the others, one can


only wonder what their sensations were. Before the end
of the voyage we will get a glimpse of that. The strange
sail that had excited the voy*agers so much hoisted
Spanish colours and signalled for the “Minerva” to
“heave-to.” She was a fine frigate. Instead of heaving-
to, Captain Salkeld resolved on a race for it, and, putting
his ship on her best tack, he started to clear out before
the frigate had time to fire a shot. But the piratical
stranger had no idea of letting a fine-looking ship of the
“Minerva” type escape him. The Spaniard cracked on
every stitch of canvas, and started on a determined
endeavour to overhaul the flying Britisher. It was a
long chase, for there was very little difference in the sail-
ing qualities of the two ships. What there was, how-
ever, was in favour of the “Minerva.” All day long the
Spaniard urged his ship after the Britisher, and when
night fell he was so close that he could keep her in sight,
and so the next day broke with the Spaniard still in
chase. It was an exciting time for all on board the
“Minerva,” because capture meant to the “transports”
freedom; whilst to the crew and free people it meant a
Spanish dungeon, or perhaps death, for the Dons were
not a particular race, and they hated the English sin-
cerely.
During the next night the “Minerva” lost the
Spaniard. When the next day dawned, and the enemy
had vanished from off the surface of the shining, track-
less waters, then were the voyagers glad. They realised
that they had enjoyed an exceedingly narrow escape,
thanks solely to the sailing qualities of the “Minerva.”
That such a good sailer should have been used in the


transport service is not a little remarkable, but to that
alone was due the fact that William Cox and his family
arrived in Australia.
For many a day the ship ploughed steadily along
towards the antipodes, and life on board sank into the
usual dull routine. There were little quarrels and little
reconciliations. There was an evil-tongued, mean-
minded man on board, who made mischief. The doctor
tried to cure him by being good to him, but Joseph Holt
managed to spoil his tricks. So the ship sailed on until
it happened on a day that two sails were raised. They
were fairly in the track, and Captain Salkeld was no
coward. His ship was a good sailer, and he felt fairly
easy in trying to make out the strangers. Again they
were Spaniards, but this time it looked different. One
was a “galleon,” and the other looked like a “prison
ship.” They were a tempting bait to an Englishman;
for are we not a pious race ? And a bold 2 And is not
the sea ours? To capture two big Spanish ships on the
high seas was a most noble and venturesome thing to
do, the only question at issue being the attitude of Joseph
Holt and his “United Irishman.” He was asked if he
would fight. With a stern, set face, he said, “ I will;”
and he meant it, but he didn’t mean it the way Captain
Salkeld thought he meant it. He made a “mental re-
servation.” But the Englishmen were not aware of that,
and he was invited to pick his gun’s crew from amongst
the Irish prisoners; and he picked out six strong, brave
men. Joseph knew how to handle a big gun. He got
out the rammers and sponges, loaded his gun, and his
crew stood ready for action.


The “Minerva” was in a good state for a fight. Cap-
tain Cox had his soldiers on the quarter-deck, all ready
for action. Lieutenant Maundrell was sick at the time,
but Captain Cox was a born commander, and there was
no trouble over that. The crew was in fighting trim,
and they said their prayers ere yet they fought, as the
Englishmen of those days did, and in their own language
they cried—
“ The sinner that foreswore Thee,
The fool that passed Thee by,
Onr times are known before Thee—
Lord, grant us strength to die.”
And they moved forward to capture the two Spaniards
upon the King’s highway—the English crew, and the
Irish “rebels,” and the men of the New South Wales
Corps. Closer they came, and ever closer, and the
Spaniards made no sign. They did not so much as haul
down their flags as a sign of surrender. The Spaniards
were aye but a foolish folk! Closer and closer came the
now silent “Minerva.” There was to be no wasting of
good powder on foolish Deigos. It was to be a close,
sudden, awful blow, and no wordy argument. Soon it
would be “Fire !” and the angels of death would flash
from the sides of the British ship into the silly sea-folk
of Spain—when, lo !an awful thing happened. The sides
of the “prison ship” seemed to suddenly move and a
great row of ports lifted up, and out came tiers of savage-
looking cannon, and before the startled “Minervians”
fairly understood the movement, there belch tcl from the
sides of the big Spanish frigate a sheet of fire and iron!
It was a dreadful mistake; but nobody, not even an old


sailor, would have taken her for-a ship of war. Yet there
she was: she had given indubitable proof of her char-
acter. But her sailors were bad marksmen! They had
tried for a dramatic effect to terrify the innocent English-
men, just as they were m the habit of terrifying the
savage natives of lonely islands. They didn’t know the
sons of John Bull. Before the smoke had cleared away,
Captain Salkeld had put his helm over and leached the
stern of the frigate, and was sailing away out of reach
of a better-directed broadside. Before the Deigos could
alter their course to bring their guns to bear, the
“Minerva” was almost out of range, and not another
shot reached her; but it was a narrow escape ! It shows
how free and easy were the manners of the sea-folk in
the days that were before Trafalgar and the Nile.
When they were safely away, “General” Holt was
congratulated on his attitude towards England’s foes.
He smiled bitterly, and said, “If a chance had come, you
would have found that ‘England’s foes’ are my friends.”
He meant to have turned his gun against, the crew of
the “Minerva,” and make a bold bid for freedom for
himself and his fellow “passengers” beneath the Spanish
flag. He was so frank about it, and so honest, and,
withal, so much in the right, tnat all hands forgave him
for what he had meant to do; and so he suffered not for
his intentions. They were of a manly make, those men,
and we may not gracefully measure their doings by
modern ideals. The hearts of them were true and
honest.


BRUSH FARM.
Chapter V
On January 11th, 1800, the good ship “Minerva"
dropped anchor in Sydney Harbour, after a voyage of
nearly five months. They left Cork Harbour on August
24th, 1799, and arrived in Port Jacksou on January
11th, 1800. As giving some idea of the state of manners
in Sydney at that time, the following incident is sugges-
tive. As soon as the anchor was down, Captain Cox and
his family went ashore, but the “passengers" were de-
tained until suitable arrangements could be made. A
little boat came alongside, and was warned off by the
sentry. The occupant of the boat paid no attention,
and the sentry fired, according to his instructions, and
shot him through the heart. There was a turmoil over
it, of course, and the sentry was duly tried; but he had
only obeyed orders, so he was acquitted. That gives a
fair idea of the state of matters in the young colony at
that date. This was only twelve years after the first
settlement, and civilisation was still in its swaddling
clothes.
The banks of Sydney Harbour were still clothed
with dense scrub, except at what is now Farm Cove and
Circular Quay. The first attempts at farming had not
been brilliantly successful, and when we think of the


ground on which farming was tried, it is wonderful to
think of those primitive and unskilled men being able
to grow anything at all. A colony had been established
on the Hawkesbury River, but what with floods, droughts,
and drunkenness, the results were sad. Perhaps the
best idea of the state of the colony at this time may De
gathered from the following letter sent by Captain
McArthur to the Duke of Portland in 1796 :
“A great number are settled on farms without any
means being adopted to ascertain the quality of the soil
that is to be cultivated; the consequence of which is
that after a year’s labour has been expended it is dis-
covered there is no prospect of such land ever supporting
its owner. Many who are settled on the most fertile
parts of the country are so dissolutely disposed and con-
firmed in such habits of idleness that it can never be
expected they will voluntarily labour whilst, there is a
possibility of subsisting by plunder. Had those men,
instead of being permitted to become settlers, been
obliged to employ themselves in the service of an indus-
trious and vigilant master, they would not only have pro-
duced by their labour enough to maintain themselves,
but there would have been a surplus to contribute to the
furnishing of the civil and military establishments.
“When the stores were opened this season to receive
maize from the settlers, there were in the granaries more
than 20,000 bushels of wheat; there were also unthreshed
nearly 6000 bushels that were raised under my direction
on the public ground last year. This wheat was more than
sufficient to supply the colony until next harvest, and
it is a fact of which Governor Hunter could not be igno-


rant. Notwithstanding this, he has since permitted
more than 30,000 bushels of maize to be purchased at
an expense of nearly £BOOO sterling. To what uses this
corn can be applied is not yet known, as it is certain
there will be no want of it.
“Had the settlers, instead of having their corn pur-
chased from them, been obliged to keep it, it is probable
they would have raised an immense number of hogs;
but, as they have now sold their grain and have no
means of feeding them, they have no alternative but to
destroy their breeding-sows. Already so many of these
animals have been killed, and bought by the Government
at Is. per lb., that I am convinced the whole race would
be exterminated in a few months, but for the care of the
officers of the settlement.”
That was, practically, an impeachment of Governor
Hunter, who had succeeded Governor Phillip; but it
gives an excellent idea of the colony from the pen of a
man on the spot at the time. Perhaps the man was
prejudiced, and not easy to work with, but he was a man
with a seeing eye, a fluent tongue, and a ready pen. The
fact was simply this: men were sent out to govern the
colony who had no idea of political economy, nor even
of the simplest elements of government by law. The
Governors had enormous power for good or evil, and, as
a rule, very little knowledge of what was required from
them. That they should have succeeded as well as they
did is a great tribute to their common sense. Governor
Hunter endeavoured to fix a minimum wage for the
colony in 1797, but one of the most difficult things in
the world for any man to deal with is the labour ques-


tion. But the less a man understands the subject, the
more apt he is to meddle with it, for
“ Fools rush in where angels fear to tread.”
Yet, Governor Hunter tried his best to develop the
resources of the young country, and even woollen cloth
was manufactured (called in those days “Parramatta
cloth”) under the most grievous disadavantages, and he
sent samples of it to England, with apologies. That was
the initial step in “colonial industry.” That was just over
a century ago, and our woollen mills are not very extensive
yet, but their output is not inconsiderable. Captain McAr-
thur had imported a large number of sheap, and when
a record was made in the colony of the live stock and
cultivated land, in the August preceding the arrival of
the “Minerva,” the results were as follow: —-Horses, 47 ;
mares, 91; bulls and oxen, 192; cows, 517; male sheep,
2016; female sheep, 3087; male goats, 912; female
goats, 1851; hogs, 3459. Land under cultivation:
Wneat, 6125 acres; barley, 82 acres; maize, 2532 acres;
oats, 74 acres; potatoes, 4 acres.
When William Cox landed here, the entire stuck
of sheep was a little over 5000, and they were of a type
that our sheep-breedera of to-day would laugh to scorn.
Into this wild land, bounded on all sides, appar-
ently, by the Blue Mountains, the boy from Queen Eliza-
beth’s Grammar School at Wimboume Minster was thrust
to make his way. His first move showed his capacity.
He asked “General” Holt to be his manager in the de-
velopment of whatever land he took. Holt was not
really a prisoner—he was only exiled; and he resented
the idea of going as a “servant.” But Captain Cox had


a great capacity for handling men. It is a royal gift,
and if not possessed can never be acquired. Holt be-
came manager for William Cox. When Brush Farm wa9
offered for sale, Holt went to inspect it, and reported
very favourably on it, and William Cox purchased it.
It was but a hundred-acre place, yet the cleared land of
the colony was so limited that it seemed a large space.
Here Holt went to work and showed his great capacity.
He had “assigned servants” handed over to him, and
with their labour he made Brush Farm, on the Parra-
matta River, into a model.
The enemies of the farmer were the same then as
now—rust, blight, hoods, fires, and insects. The first
wheat crop that was coming towards harvest at Brush
Farm looked well. It was a grand crop. Within tnree
weeks of harvest there arose a terrible hailstorm, which
levelled the crop with the ground. Holt’s story of the
struggles of that time were pathetic in the extreme, but
he was a success, and added other farms and other allot-
ments to the original one, until Brush Farm became a
most notable place.
The farm was taken in January or February, 1800,
and in October, 1801, the farm is thus described in the
Public Records: —“Mr. Cox purchased from settlers
1380 acres—4oo acres cleared, 248 acres wheat and maize
—24 horses, 20 head of horned cattle, 1000 sheep, and
200 hogs.” That was rapid development!
Captain Cox purchased Canterbury Farm from the
Rev. Mr. Johnson, who seems to have been a most enter-
prising and intelligent gentleman farmer, who raised
oranges that he had the seeds of from Ria Janeiro, and


sold them for sixpence and ninepence each. He was a
most excellent farmer, and made a fortune early. When
this place was added to Brush Farm, it rendered it an
exceedingly extensive place. In 1802 there were 110
men employed on it—the largest establishment in the
colony—-and they were the best-dressed, best-behaved
men in the country. Holt was a perfect genius for get-
ting good, satisfactory work out of them. Mr Cox once
asked him how it was that he never had to bring his,
men to punishment, having more men under him than
any other employer of labour in the colony. His reply
was, “Come with me, and I will show you my private
flogger.” He produced two hoes, one weighing 3} lbs.,
the other 7 lbs. “Now,” he said, "when a man , misbe-
haves, he gets the seven-pounder; and, usiig it once he
never wishes to use it again.”


FARMING IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Chapter VI.
The method of farming in those early days and
disposing of the produce of the farm was exceedingly in-
teresting. The Government was responsible for the food
and clothing of a very large number of people who had
been “sent out; ” and, as we mentioned previously, the
Governor was glad to purchase all the wheat and grain
that was grown locally. A well-known man says :
“Agriculture flourished in these early days of the colony,
notwithstanding it was all done by human labour. The
Government purchased all the wheat farmers could grow
at a given price, generally 10s. the bushel, and as assigned
servants only cost their board and clothing, farming must
have been very profitable. Stock at this time was very
dear. Holt quotes a brood mare as being worth £lOO
to £l5O, a cow from £3O to £5O, and sheep from £3 to
£4.”
Joseph Holt would be greatly interested if he only
knew how valuable his autobiography has been to those
interested in the early days. He has given us simple
pictures of life as it was then, which are perfect
gems. He made no literary effort. He had a simple
story to tell, and he told it. His story of how Mr.
Cox bought a flock of “rotten Bengal ewes” at 60s. a
head and a brood mare for .£.150 makes good read-


ing. Holt thought that Mr. Cox had been taken in,
and he made the next deal with the seller and got square ;
but that is only one side of the story, for Holt was a good
deal biased. But his picture of the times is lurid. He
never failed in his deep and enduring affection for Mr.
William Cox and his wife, and he had some terrible trials
to go through. The men who were at the head of
affairs were rough, strong fellows, generally, and the Irish
“rebel” seems to have been sincerely hated; but he was
a good man. In the dark days that came he was faithful
to the Cox’s, and we can but sympathise with him in his
sufferings. Mr. Cox laid the foundation of one of the
finest flocks of Saxony merinos in Australia, and the in-
dustry has been in the family ever since.
The character of William Cox stands out like a
beacon fire all through the troubled days of colonial de-
velopment. Holt sketched him admirably. He said :
“There never was a man who desired to serve another
more than he did, or do a kind act. When the pur-
chaser of a horse or a mare came to make his first pay-
ment, Mr. Cox would often indulge them with six
months’ longer credit. He was truly a good friend to
every honest man he met with. His good treatment of
the convicts in his service had the happiest effect upon
many of those who were so lucky as to get into his ser-
vice : most of them, by finding out that honesty was the
best policy, became sincerely honest and well-conducted,
and were purged and purified from their former delest-
able propensities, and lived and died valuable members
of society. So much does gentle and mild treatment
win upon the minds of men, while harsh severity and


coercion hardens their hearts and brutalises their char-
acter.”
Here and there in the records of the time we catch
a passing glimpse of Brush Farm and its kindly owner.
Some of these, like little cameos, set in the bosom of
past Time, have a deeper interest even than iheir refer-
ence to our hero gives them. One of the visitors to
Brush Farm was Mons. Peron, who visited Port Jackson
for Napoleon Buonaparte in 1802. His record of a visit
to Brush Farm is exceedingly interesting. He said:
“Often on the summit of a picturesque hillock may
be discerned a large and elegant mansion, surrounded by
more considerable cultivated lands, and covered by
greater numbers of flocks and labourers, all indicating
it to be the property of a rich and industrious owner.
The one in question belonged to Mr. Cox, the paymaster
of the colony, to whom I had been introduced at Colonel
Paterson’s. As soon as he perceived M. Bellefin and me,
he got into a boat belonging to his farm, and, coming to
our vessel, invited us in so pressing a manner to pass
the night at his house that we could not resist his friendly
solicitations. While they were preparing a hasty dinner
we amused ourselves in going over his farm, every de-
partment of which was to us a new subject of surprise.
It was not, however, the only possession of the kind
which Mr. Cox had acquired on these banks, for on a
second voyage which I made to his estate- -with Colonel
Paterson and his lady, and Mr. Laycock, juu., a lieute-
nant in the New South Wales Regiment—Mr. Cox took
us all to dinner to another farm, still more rich and
elegant than that I have just described. It is situated


.more inland, on the side of Castle Hill. The road which
leads from one to the other of cnese farms is so wide and
convenient that we went over it in a carriage. It is
between six and seven miles in length, and to make it
immense loads of rubbish were necessary. The whole of
.Mr. Cox’s land amounts to 860 acres, of which more Ilian
300 were sown with wheat, 15 with maize, 6 with barley,
and 12 with oats. Three hundred and forty-nine acres
were reserved for the pasturage of the cattle, which com-
prised 5 horses, 3 mares, 27 horned cattle, besides 800
sheep of the finest breeds.”
Mons. Peron has left us some charming records of
his visit to Australia when the ships “Naturaliste” and
“Investigateur” visited our shores. When our poor Cap-
tain Flinders visited the Mauritius he was put in gaol
there, and robbed of his papers. He had to suffer six
years’ cruel imprisonment at the hands of the French
Governor, and one can but compare the kindliness of the
British reception of Frenchmen with the reception of
Englishmen by Frenchmen. However, that, too, is one
of the subjects that were almost as well left to sleep
now.
When we read Moils. Peron’s account of the quan-
tity of stock on Brush Farm in 1802, we can but surmise
that the season was a most prosperous one, and utterly
unlike the average season. In the very next year, i.e.,
1803, we have this record:
“On the 21st October a more beautiful appearance
of a successful harvest never flattered the expectations of
a farmer. It was within three weeks of being ripe; the
ears were full and plump; the straw clean and well


coloured; and in every respect it was gratifying to look
at. . . . In three days it was completely destroyed
by the rust, and the produce of 266 acres was not worth
£2O. This extraordinary blight, which, 1 believe, is
peculiar to this country, is produced by fogs which come
on suddenly and obscure *he sky for some days; and if it
happens when the wheat is near ripe, inevitably destroys
it. It covers the whole straw and ear with a reddish
powder, like the rust of iron. It was a loss of at least
£l5 per acre, which amounted to £3990--a te? riblc loss
at the time.”
For this to occur in a young colony, just struggling
into methods of self-support, this was exceedingly disas-
trous. It reduced the colony to the verge of starvation,
and meant absolute ruin to many good, hard-working
men. If any other race except our own had endeavoured
to colonise Australia, the attempt would have been given
up in despair. It is easy to look back now and criticise
the pioneers, but their lives were cast in cruelly hard
places. Not man alone was vile, but the very elements
appeared to conspire against them. Why the rust should
have appeared then is a mystery! Some people affirm
that rust is the product of a long series of years of the
same crop in unmanured ground. But the colony was
new then: the soil had scarcely been turned o'er. They
had no ploughs, and the hoeing the soil got was not of a
nature to prove exhaustive. Yet here came the rust,
to the almost total ruination of the young colony. It
afterwards disappeared, and was not seen in the colony
till about 1862 and 1863, when it re-appeared with de-
structive virulence. The wheat crops in those years


were an almost total failure, and wheat crops in the
coastal districts are always risky.
In these days we consider droughts and hot winds
as evils indeed, but then they were disasters of a fearful
magnitude, and the early men had their full share of
every evil. So early as 1791 there was a record of a hot
wind, as follows, by Collins :
“At Kose Hill the heat on the 10th and 11th of the
month (February), on which days at Syduey the ther-
mometer stood at 105 deg. in the shade, was so excessive
—being much increased by fire in the adjoining woods—
that immense numbers of the large fox bat were seen
hanging at the boughs of the trees and dropping in the
water, which, by their stench, was rendered unwhole-
some. They had been observed for some days before
regularly taking their flight in the morning from New
South Wales and returning in the evening. During the
excessive heat, many dropped dead while on the wing;
and it was remarkable that those which were picked up
were chiefly males. In several parts of the harbour the
ground was covered with different sorts of small birds,
some dead and others gasping for water. The wind was
from the north-west, and did much injury to the
gardens.”
There were no evils that we are subject to to-day
that those lion-hearted men had not 'to endure in the
early days. They lacked our comforts and conveniences,
but they had to face the evils; and as we eook calmly
back into that dawn of our colonial life, the men and
women rise into Titanic proportions. Their heroic en-
durance can never be told.


THE COWPASTURES.
Chapter VII.
While the colony was suffering from mis-govern-
ment, drought, rust, hot winds, and ruin, there were
earnest men ever lifting their eyes to the hills and look-
ing abroad for betterment. The Hawkesbury River had
been discovered by Governor Phillip, who named Rich-
mond Hill, and had settled a lot of people there. We
may call the Hawkesbury the first-settled place outside
of Sydney. Then the “Cowpastures” had been dis-
covered somewhat by accident. During the first year of
the colony’s existence some of the imported cattle had,
strayed away into the dense scrub, haunted by the
blacks, and had been hopelessly lost. It was a terrible
loss at the time, but it was one of the incidents that led
ito great events.
The blacks who came to the settlement at Sydney,
the local blacks, used to hold corroborees, to which blacks
came from the country districts. As these new-comers
became acquainted with our people they used to try to-
get up conversations. In the early days of Governor.
Hunter’s administration they tried to convey the idea
that they had seen some strange animals in the bush.
They were very big, made a terrible roaring, and butted


savagely at the blacks. Somebody was clever enough
to connect this pantomimic story of the blackfellows with
the long-lost cattle. This was in 1795, some seven years
after the loss, but, being an event of supreme import-
ance, it had been remembered. There were two convicts
who were usually employed in shooting for the officers’
mess, and they were more familiar with the hinterland
than anybody else; so they were invited to verify the
story of the natives. They boldly struck out into new
paths, and after some days returned with the report that
they had seen a herd of cattle in a remoce part of the
colony. This was a matter of such supreme importance
that the Governor took in hand to investigate the matter
himself. On November 18th he started from Par-
ramatta with Captain Collins, Captain Waterhouse, Mr.
Bass, Mr. Hacking, and the two aforesaid convicts. They
travelled two days from Parramatta to the south-south-
west, and it must have been hard travelling. They
crossed the Nepean River, and came on a splendid herd
of about forty, grazing in one of the loveliest spots in the
colony—one of those places which is said to have re-
sembled “those spots in the most improved countries,
where the refinements of art are employed to imitate the
happiest effects of Nature. Here were found a verdant
sward, a graceful inequality of surface, and intermixture
of trees, shrubs, and thickets, with here and there beauti-
ful openings in which were seen pieces of water covered
with ducks, black swans, and other fowls, and fringed
with various plants and flowers.”
That place was named “The Cowpastures,” and to-
day it forms part of Camden Park, which was taken up


bv Captain McArthur in 1805. It was a sweet and
pleasant place then —it is equally so now; but the dis-
covery of the herd of wild cattle was an event of exceed-
ing great importance. It is interesting to listen to the
remarks of Captain Collins on the subject, knowing what
we do now of the capacity of Cumberland and Cook
counties for fattening cattle. He said: —-
“It was a most pleasing circumstance to have in
the woods of New Holland a thriving herd of wild cattle.
Many proposals were made to bring them into the settle-
ment ; but in the aays of want, if these should be sacri-
ficed, in what better condition would the colony be for
having possessed a herd of cattle in the woods ?—a herd of
which, if suffered to remain undisturbed for some years,
would, like the cattle of South America, always prove a
market for the inhabitants of the country, and perhaps
not only for their own consumption, but for exportation.
The Governor saw it in this light, and determined to
guard as much as was in his power against any attempt to
destroy them.”
They left the cattle to run wild, but somehow they
never increased. They were alleged to have perished in
later droughts, but it stands to reason that the maraud-
ing settlers had a weakness for fresh beef. The wild
cattle were too much for the blackfellows, but, the white
men in the sparsely-settled district would soon make away
with them.
What led to the most important results from the
discovery of the cattle was the action of the sous of
William Cox. They were fine strapping fellows, George
(father of the Hon. Geo. H. Cox) and Henry. They


went prospecting. Captain McArthur had taken up
what is now Camden and the Cowpastures, but the valley
of the Mulgoa was still unoccupied, and it was a fine
pastoral and agricultural country. The young men went
out to view the land, but there were tribes of blacks who
resented their intrusion, and they had almost paid for
their temerity with their lives. But they discovered
the Promised Land, and their father took up the land
along with them, and they called it “Littlefie.'ds.” That
was about 1810, and a new life began at Mulgoa, for they
started a dairy farm.
Another event of supreme importance -connected,
too, with the Mulgoa settlement—was the departure
from the colony of Captain Waterhouse. He had a very
valuable flock of Spanish merinos, which he had im-
ported from the Cape of Good Hope. Time had done
excellently, for it was early discovered that the merino im-
proved on the natural grasses of New South Wales. When
Captain Waterhouse was leaving the colony he sold part
of his flock to Mr. William Cox, who took them to Cap-
terbury. There they did fairly well, until he took up
Mulgoa, when he sent them over there. Mr. Geo. Cox
took to breeding sheep as the primal industry. He pur-
chased some excellent Rambouillet merino ewes from
Sir John Jamieson, of Regentville, and a number of rams
from Mr. Riley, of Raby, and so laid the foundation-stone
of that magnificent breed of sheep which have rendered
the name of Cox famous all the world over.
It would not be out of place here briefly to refer to
the enormous strides made in sheep-breeding during the
next hundred years. At this time there were 6124


sheep, chiefly Bengal-bred, hairy, worthless animals, as
far as wool was concerned. Pure merinos probably did
not number more than 500; and from this small be-
ginning we have now in Australasia some 120,000,000,
or nearly one-third of the sheep in the world, and which
for value of fleece are unsurpassed, bringing in an annual
profit of £22,000,000. Then, again, some 4,000,000 sheep
are annually shipped in either a frozen or tinned state,
realising about £3,000,000 more. It is surprising that
sheep throve in the early days in the sour forest country
(all that was at this time known), for there was no
cleared country except that under cultivation, and ring-
barking was not then practised. Still, the returns from
sheep-farming must have been very satisfactory. The
Agricultural Gazette for January, 1901, publishes an ac-
count sale of 75 bales of New South Wales wool for the
year 1821, realising from Is. 3d. to 10s. 4d. per lb. After
the discovery of the country to the west of the Blue
Mountains, and to the south beyond Goulburn, the sheep
were quickly removed from their limited pastures in the
county of Cumberland, and took possession of the rich
plains in the interior, which have since been their home.
How little could these pioneers of the wool industry in
Australia have imagined even the gigantic strides it
would have made within the century, and the marvellous
prices obtained for choice rams; neither could they have
dreamt of the perfection to which scientific and careful
breeding has developed in the fleeces of the present day.
The limits of New South Wales at that time were
fixed by the Blue Mountains, which rose from the Nepean
River, close to Mulgoa and Emu Plains. All attempts to


cross the range and find a path to the interior had so far
proved utterly hopeless. Convicts had fled from the settle-
ment, and had taken to the mountains, but they had re-
turned cowed by the solitary magnificence of the pathless
precipices. Men had formed expeditions and had gone out
full of hope and energy to win their way tc. the far side
of that awful range, but they had also been defeated
over and over again. It seemed as though nobody
would ever succeed in crossing them. But the men were
born—-aye, the men were in New South Wales—who were
going to do it. They were Blaxland, Lawson, and
Wentworth. They started from the Nepean, and found
their path easily enough to the mark of the limits of the
last explorer, and then struggled on along the top of
the range to where they could look down on the rolling
lands that lay beyond the mystic hills.
When that little party of explorers returned to
Sydney with the story of their discovery, in the year
1813, it opened a new world to the struggling colonists.
Beyond that frowning range there were vast possibilities ;
beyond the mountains lay, perchance, the El Dorado of
the poets and the dreamers. Everything was possible
now. The man in charge of the colony in those days was
Governor Macquarie, and his soul was large enough to
realise the importance of the discovery and the necessity
for making the best use of it. Surveyor Evans was sent
off at once to report on the lands, and, that report being
exceedingly favcurable, the Governor determined on
making a road over the mountains. The likeliest man
in the colony to make the road was the chief magistrate
of the district, Mr. William Cox, of Clarendon. He had


sold out his Brush Farm and Parramatta River proper-
ties, and had moved out to Clarendon, near Windsor
He had a name for fair dealing, for stern integrity, and
for capacity in dealing with men.


THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
Chapter VIII.
Governor Macquarie having determined on a road
to Bathurst, on the plains beyond the Blue Mountains,
wrote at once to William Cox, Esq., J.P.. Clarndon :
(No. 43.) Government House, Sydney,
14th July, 1814.
Sir,—
1. Having some time since determined on having
a carriage road constructed from Emu Plains, on the left
bank of the river Nepean, across the Blue Mountains, to
that fine tract of open country to the westward of them,
discovered lately by Mr. Evans, and having recently re-
ceived from you a voluntary offer of your superintending
and directing the working party to be employed on t his
very important service, I now most readily avail myself
of your very liberal and handsome offer of superintend-
ing and directing the construction of this road; and do
invest you with full power and authority to carry out
this important design into complete effect. Government
furnishing you with the necessary means to enable you
to do so.


2. The number of artificers and labourers—namely,
thirty—--and the guard of eight soldiers you have yourself
already selected, or required, shall be allowed, and fur-
nished to you forthwith for this service, and they shall
be supplied with a plentiful and adequate ration of pro-
visions whilst employed upon it.
3. Herewith you will receive a list of tire number
of artificers and labourers allowed for this purpose, to-
gether with a scale on the back thereof of the weekly
ration of provisions they are to receive. You will also
receive herewith for your guidance copies of my letters
addressed to the Deputy Commissary-General on the sub-
ject of the provisions, stores, tools, utensils, arms, ammu-
nition, slops, and other necessaries to he furnished from
his depot for this service, all of which will be forwarded
to you to the depot established on Emu Plains forthwith,
and which you will be pleased to receive and take charge
of on their arrival there, placing such a guard over them
as you may deem expedient, the sergeant commanding
the guard of soldiers being instructed to receive all his
orders from you for the guidance of himself and party,
and for their distribution. You will likewise receive
herewith for your information a general list, or schedule,
of the provisions, stores, slops, tools, implements, and
other necessaries intended to be forwarded to you from
Sydney by the two separate conveyances or convoys, in-
cluding one horse, two new carts (with harness), and two
yokes of well-broken-in bullocks, it being my intention
to send off the first convoy from Sydney to-morrow morn-
ing for Emu Plains, and the second convoy in a fortnight
afterwards.


4. I am in hopes the provisions, tools, and other
necessaries will arrive on the banks of the Nepean in
time to enable you to commence the construction of the
new intended road on Monday, the 18th inst. Enter-
taining the fullest confidence in your zeal, knowledge,
and abilities for conducting and executing this service
in the manner intended, it becomes unnecessary for me
to enter into any detail on the subject, the more espe-
cially as you are already in full possession of my wishes
and sentiments, as communicated to you in our late
conversation on this head. Suffice it. therefore, for me
to specify here a few of the principal leading points neces-
sary to direct your more particular attention to :
Firstly: The road is to commence ai the ford
(already determined on) on the river Nepean, Emu
Plains, and from thence across the Blue Mountains to
the Macquarie River, and a centrical part of Bathurst
Plains, following the track laid down by Mr. Evans’ map,
of which I have already furnished you with a copy. But
in case you should, upon further examination of the
track he followed, find it advisable to make any occa-
sional deviations therefrom, you have my full permission
to do so.
Secondly : The road thus made mu.it be at least
12 ft. wide, so as to permit two carts or other wheel car-
riages to pass each other with pase. The timber in forest
ground to be cut down and cleared away 20 ft. wide,
grubbing up the stumps and filling up the holes, so that
a four-wheel carriage or cart may pass without difficulty
or danger.


Thirdly : In brush ground it is to be out 20 ft. wide
and grubbed up 12 ft. wide. Any small bridges that may
be found requisite to be made must be 12 ft., wide. I
conceive this to be a sufficient width for the proposed
road at present; but where it can with ease and conve-
nience be done, I should prefer the road to be made 16 ft.
wide.
Fourthly: You will use your own discntion in es-
tablishing one or two more depots for provisions, accord-
ing as you may find them necessary, after you have
once crossed the Blue Mountains and descended into the
plain country, taking care to establish such depots, how-
ever, in such places as affords plenty of good, wholesom*
water for man and beast. Whatever extra expense you
may incur in constructing these depots will be paid from
the Colonial Police Fund, and also the amount of such
slops, stores, or other articles as you may find it necessary
to supply the working party with for their use and com-
fort during the time they are employed on this service.
5. I have now only to add that I shall at all times
he happy to hear from you during the progress of the
service you have thus been so good as to offer to see
executed; and I shall most readily comply with any de-
mands for provisions, stores, or tools you may have occa-
sion to make during the continuance of it : having an
entire confidence in your discretion and prudence, and
being convinced that you will not make any demands
that are not essentially requisite for promoting the pre-
sent undertaking.
6. As it might prove of very great inconvenience,
expense, and trouble to you personally, and greatly in-


terrupt and disturb the working party, if idle people,
from motives of curiosity, were permitted to visit you
or your party during the time you and they are employed
on the present service, I have deemed it advisable to
issue a Government and general order prohibiting such
idlers from visiting you, or crossing the Nepean at Emu
Plains, without a pass signed by me. I enclose you here-
with some few printed copies of this order, which I re-
quest you will have posted up at proper conspicuous
places, and give the necessary order to your guard and to
your constable to see it strictly enforced.
I remain with regard, Sir,
Your most obedient and humble servant,
(Sgd.) L. Macquarie,
Governor-in-Chief of N.S.W.
To William Cox, Esq.
That letter was dated July 14th. Before the letter
had been officially delivered, Mr. William Cox had se-
lected his men—thirty in number—and, with a guard of
eight soldiers, had crossed the Nepean and started work.
Only those who have crossed the Blue Mountains with
their eyes open can estimate the magnificent courage of
the man who entered on such a Herculean labour witli
what we would consider such a totally insufficient staff.
It is incredible to us that such a small party could have
done such a mighty work; but this, more clearly than
any argument, proves what mighty men dwelt in the land
in those days.


THE MOUNTAIN ROAD.
Chapter IX.
William Cox, Esq., J.P., of Clarendon, N.S.W., was
a worker. He was not a literary man, nor a juggler in
cunning words. What he saw to be done, he did. He
made no fuss about it. He came into conflict with no-
body. When you think of the great work this man did
in the olden time, all unhonoured and unsung, you feel
a thrill of justifiable pride in belonging to the same race.
William Cox, of Clarendon, was one of the men who
made Australia, and it seems utterly pathetic that he
should have been absent from our great celebrations on
the making of our Commonwealth. He was one of the
heroes of whom Will Ogilvie was thinking when he
sang,—
“ They are sleeping in the graveyards in their silent graves apart,
With empty arms and eager that would hold her to their heart,
Those statesmen of the buried years, those loyal men long dead ;
Are they turning in their dreaming to the dull tramp overhead ?
When they pin the stars and garters, when they write the titles
rare,
The men who earned the honours are the men who won’t be there!’
No, William Cox was not there when the honours were
distributed, but posterity will see him in a true light,


and will glorify him. He was an exact man, and he kept
a record of his work. His story, written day by day
during the progress of that wonderful road, is one of the
literary marvels of the age. There is not a word in it
of “style.” There is no superfluous phrase in it. The
man who wrote it was keeping a record of work done on
a business basis, and it makes wonderful reading. It is
as interesting as a novel, because it is a record of the
greatest colonial undertaking up to that time. It is a
record that will appeal to the men who come after us.
Here it follows:
Journal kept by Mr. \V. Cox in making a road across
the Blue Mountains from Emu Plains to a new country
discovered by Mr. Evans to the westward.
1814—
July 7.—After holding conversation with his Excellency
the Governor at Sydney relative to ihe expedition,
I took leave of him this day.
July 11.—Began converting a cart into a caravan, to
sleep in, as well as to take my own personal luggage,
which was completed on the I6HI.
July 17.—Left Clarendon at 9 a.m.; arrived at Captain
Woodruff’s farm at noon. The carts from Richmond
arrived at 2 p.m., and at 4 the two carts and waggon
arrived from Sydney with provisions, slops, tools,
etc. Mustered the people, and issued bread to them.
July 18.—At daylight gave out the tools to handle and
put in order. Issued half a week’s provisions to the
whole party. Began work at 10 a.m. to make a pass


across the Nepean River; the banks very steep on
the east side. In the afternoon issued to the work-
men a suit of slops, and a blanket to each man
(thirty in number). In examining the slops, two
pairs shoes and three pairs trousers were deficient.
Gorman, who had charge, states the case had been
broken open when he took it out of the Parramatta
store. Wrote to his Excellency the Governor for
additional bullocks and some small articles of tools.
Weather fine, clear, and frosty.
July 19.—Tuesday. Finished the road down the right
bank of the river. The swamp oak on Emu side very
hard to cut and root. In the afternoon began our
operations on Emu Plains. A complaint being made
of the pork, which was issued at 6 lb. pieces, were
very deficient. I examined the Commissary’s re-
turn, which stated there were 53 6 lb. pieces in each
cask. Counted the remaining, and found 51 left.
Examined the mess book, and found 18 pieces had
been issued, making 69 in all, instead of 53. Weighed
the 51 pieces, and they weighed 24 lb. over 4 lb.
pieces quite, with brine and salt. Ordered Gorman
to issue the remainder as 4 lb. pieces until further
orders.
July 20.—Sent the smith to Field’s to make four new
axes and steel two of the English ones. Gave him
20 lb. of iron and 4 lb. of steel. Fine, dry weather.
July 21.—The smith completed laying the axes, and
steeled five others. Much trouble to-day with the


axes; the timber being hard, they all turned. Kept
the grindstone constantly going. Made good pro-
gress on Emu Plains; the men worked very well.
Weather clear and frosty.
July 22.—The smith steeled two more axes, and made
nails of one. The working gangs removed two miles
to the south-west on Emu Plains. Wind very high
in the afternoon. One of the fellers, W. Lonain,
received a hurt in the face and shoulder through the
limb of a tree falling on him. Hard frost and clear.
July 23.—Hard frost and clear weather. Sent all provi-
sions, tools, etc., to a hut on the left bank of the
river, which hut is fitted up to receive our provisions
as they arrive from Sydney. Gave the blacksmith
the tools, iron, steel, etc. Lonain, who was hurt yes-
terday, much better. I wrote to the Governor for
two men’s pit-saws, iron, and steel. Examined
the ground leading from Emu Plains, and fixed on
the spot to cross the creek at, as well as one to begin
ascending the mountain. The soldiers with Gorman
and Kelly all went for Emu Plains to-day.
July 24.—Examined the ground and marked the road
from the creek to the first depot (with Lewis). Gave
a pound of tobacco to Field for a lot of cabbage,
which I gave to the workmen. Purchased 4 cwt.
1 qr. of bran for myself, which I forwarded to the
depot, at 10s per cwt., delivered at Martin's. The
workmen exerted themselves during the week, much
to my satisfaction.


July 25. —Finished a crossing-place over the creek, and
worked from the creek to the crossing-place where
you ascend the mountain.' Sent the two carpenters
to the depot to build a tent-hut, and put in order the
depot fit for the receipt of the provisions, etc. Cloudy
weather, but dry.
July 26.—Made a complete crossing-place from the end
of Emu Plains to the foot of the mountains, and
began to work up them. Tlie ascent is steep ; the
soil very rough and stony; the timber chiefly iron-
bark. Sent the stonemason to the depot to build or
line the clnmney, as also the smith to put up his
forge. Sent the superintendent with a man to mark
the road from the depot through the bush to the
next forest ground, a distance of about five miles.
Ordered the corporal and soldiers to prepare to re-
move in the morning from the bank of the river to
the depot, with a cartload of provisions, and there
to remain until further orders.
July 27.—Removed the soldiers and provisions from the
river to the depot. Worked up the mountain;
measured the ground from the ford in the river to
the creek leading from Emu Plains to the mountain,
three miles; marked the trees at the end of each
mile, at the left side of the road. Removed my cara-
van from the river to the depot on the mountain, a
distance of five and three-quarter miles and slept
there the first night.
July 28.—Went to Clarendon, and left R. Lewis in
charge.


August I.—Left Clarendon at 10 a.m., and arrived at the
depot at 2 p.m. Found the road completed to the
said depot, much to my satisfaction.
August 2.-—The workmen go on with much cheerfulness,
and do their work well. Gave them a quantity of
cabbage as a present. After dinner I gave directions
to Lewis to inform Burne he was to take the three
forward fellers to fire-making. Soon after he came
to me and said he would not receive any orders from
Lewis, but would obey any I gave him, on which I
told him I should send any orders I had to give to
him by whom I pleased. He went away, but soon
returned again, and said he would leave, on which
I ordered the constable to receive his gun and ammu-
nition, and he went away. Ordered him to be struck
off the stores, and informed the party he was dis-
charged from being a superintendent under me, and
had nothing more to do with me or them.
August 3. —Sent the two working gangs, with their bed-
ding, etc., two miles ahead. Heard the report of a
gun, and soon after heard the chattering of natives,
on which they returned and reported the same. Gave
notice to the sergeant to provide a corporal and
three men to go forward and take up their quarters
with the working men. The second pork cask being
issued, I found it to contain 74 pieces, on which I
had the third cask opened, and the pieces counted
by the sergeant and Gorman in my presence. It
also contained 74 pieces. Brought the remaining


provisions from Emu Plains, and had the store com-
pleted, with a lock on the door, etc. The weather
fine. Cleared the roads to the entrance to a thick
brush two and a-half miles ahead.
August 4.-—Removed the depot to seven and a-half miles
forward, as also the corporal and three privates.
Lewis got leave to go to Richmond and return again
on Sunday next. The men at work in a very thick,
troublesome brush. A fine day, but close. The
wind in the evening got round to the south.
August s.—Timber both thick and heavy, with a thick,
strong brush, the roots of which are very hard to
grub up, making it altogether extremely hard work.
August 6.—Timber and scrub brush the same as yester-
day, but got through it this evening, and measured
the new road and found we had completed nine
miles. Marked the trees at the end of each mile.
Went forward, and found a good-sized piece of forest
land, with good water, to the right of an intended
road about one and a-quarter mile ahead. The men
all healthy and cheerful. Mr. Hobby joined ’.re last
evening. The people all moved forward to the end
of nine miles.
August 7.—Removed to the nine miles on the road. I
sent a man from last camp to the depot to draw
their rations. Wrote to his Excellency the Gover-
nor


August B.—Timber and brush very heavy and thick from
the ninth to tenth mile. Thos. Kendall ill, unable
to work. Mr. Hobby, with R. Lewis, went forward
with John Tye about four miles, and marked the
trees. Two natives from Richmond joined us; one
shot a kangaroo.
August 9.—Fine weather continues. Good water at
seven and a-half miles to the right of the road;
about eight and a-half to the left of the road; ditto
at four and a-half to left. Good forest ground down
in the valley at four and a-half miles to the right.
Mr. Evans came to us just before sunset.
August 10.—Mr. Evans left us for Sydney at 2 p.m.
Removed forward to four and a-half miles. The
workmen remain a little behind us. Kendall some-
what better, and undertook the cooking for his mess.
August 11.—Clear weather. The wind, very strong from
the west, made it dangerous in falling the timber,
which is both heavy and thick. Workmen removed
10J miles. Water to the right of road. The 'smith
set up his forge ; employed in repairing tools, ivir.
HoODy, with Lewis and Tye, went forward six miles
and marked the road for the fellers. Gave the
people a quantity of cabbage.
August 12. —Mr. Hobby went to Castlereagh. Fine
weather, with cold wind. Gorman reported there
was not any meat or sugar, and that he had only
14 4 lb. pieces left in store, and no sugar.


August 13.—At daylight sent Lewis to the depot with a
letter to Mrs. Cox to send me out immediately
300 lb. of beef to serve to the people in lieu of salt
pork. Gave orders to the corporal to send Private
Ashford to the depot, and for Sergeant Bounds to
send ms Carrol in lieu of him. The former being
ill and unfit for the advance party, he has not done
any duty this week past. Measured 11 miles this
morning, and this evening got through the brush
ground, which has given us very hard work since
leaving the depot, the timber being heavy and the
brush strong. Gave orders to all hands to remove
forward to-morrow morning to the forest ground,
about half-a-mile ahead of our work.
August 14.—Removed to the forest ground. Sent Lewis
with- a letter for the Governor, informing him we
were without meat or sugar.
August 15.—Fine morning, and, being out of the brush,
had six fellers at work. At 9 a.m. arrived a cart
from Clarendon with a side of beef 386 lb., 60 cab-
bages, two bags of corn, etc., for the men.
August 16.—Fire-making on the 12-mile ridge Timber
very heavy, thick, and long; extremely troublesome
to get rid of. Having no sugar, borrowed 40 lb.
from Mr. Hobby, and I gave 1 lb. to each man.
August 17.—Removed forward to a hill ahead of tha
workmen. Water at 11| miles to the left; ditto 12
to the right; ditto to the left; ditto 13| to the
right. At the three first places in very small quan-


tities; at the latter plenty, with a place fit to drive
stock to water. The timber on the forest from 11|
miles to 13 very tall and thick. Measured a dead tree
which we felled that was 81 ft. to the first branch,
and a blood tree 15 ft. 6 in. in circumference. There
is some good stringy bark timber in this forest
ground.
August 18.—Wind very high the last two nights, and
this evening stormy, but the wind blew off the rain.
Measured the 13th mile this evening, and just en-
tered a scrub with stunted timber. Mr. Hobby re-
turned this day. Got 2 lb. of shoemakers’ thread
from Clarendon, and put Headman, one of our men,
to repair shoes during die week. The ’smith em-
ployed this week in making and repairing tools and
nails for the men’s shoes. The stonemason went
forward to examine a rocky ridge about three miles
ahead, and on Monday next he will go there to work
to level them.
August 19.—At 7 a.m. left the party for Clarendon. Mr.
Hobby and Lewis left in charge. Stephen Parker
ran a splinter in joint under his ankle; unable to
work.
August 26.—At 10 a.m. arrived at Martin’s, where I
found the sergeant of the party, he having died the
day before. Sent to Windsor to the sergeant com-
manding there for a coffin and party to bury him
at Castlereagh, but Sergeant Ray sent for the corpse
to bring it to Windsor. Wrote to the Governor for
another sergeant, and sent back Corporal Harris to


the depot, there to remain until relieved. Called at
the first depot at 12; ordered a cask of pork to be
opened; counted the pieces in the presence of
Gorman, my son Henry, and a soldier; it con-
tained 75 pieces. Arrived at the working party at
2 p.m. Found Mr. Hobby well. The road finished
during my absence.- Done well. Lewis left the
party on Monday last, very ill of a sore throat.
August 27.—Measured to the 16th mils, immediately
after which the ground got very rocky, and in half-
a-mile we came to a high mountain, which will cost
much labour to make a road over. Got two natives,
who promise to continue with us —Joe from Mulgoa
and Coley from Richmond.
August 28.—Removed, with all the people, to a little
forward of the 16th mile. (Lewis returned.)
August 29.—Commenced operations on the mountain,
with all the men. Continued the same on Tuesday,
except with the fellers, who went forward on the
next ridge. Had to remove an immense quantity
of rock, both in going up the mountain and on the
pass leading to the bluff on the west of it. Ex-
amined the high rocks well, and fixed on making a
road off it from the bluff instead of winding round
it. Began cutting timber and splitting stuff to
frame the road on the rock to the ridge below it,
about 20 ft. in depth. The men worked extremely
hard and smart to-day.


SICK LIST, MONDAY.
Sam. Davis, splinter in his hand.
Thos. Kendall, ill from bad cold.
Step. Parker, from sick list to work again.
August 31.—A1l hands employed at the bridge.
September I.—Retained eight men to work at the bridge.
Sent the rest forward road-making. Sent back
Walters’ bullocks to Emu, and received Myers’ team.
September 3.—Augmented the men at work on the pass
at the bridge to 10, both yesterday and to-day. The
road finished to Caley’s heap of stones, 17| miles.
September 4 (Sunday).—■Removed forward to the bridge
the working road gang. Removed forward to Caley’s
pile. No water for stock near the bridge, nor a blade
of grass. The water we get is near a mile distant, and
that in a tremendous gulley to the right. Went for-
ward to Caley’s pile, and from thence up the rock to
Evans’ cave you get a view of the country from
north-west round to south-west as far as the eye can
carry you. From hence the land to the west is
still higher. The country to the northwards ap-
pears extremely hilly, with nothing but timber and
rocks. To the east there appears much level coun-
try. Windsor and various parts of cleared land is
seen from this.
September 5. —Davis returned to labour; Kendall to
cooking. Appledon ill; splinter in the foot. Set
the following persons to the pass and bridge : —Two
carpenters, two lawyers, two quarrymen, two cutting


timber, and two labourers. ’Smith employed mending
tools and making shoe-nails. Shoemaker mending and
nailing shoes. The remainder of the men-employed
in road-making forward, under the direction of Mr.
Hobby and R. Lewis. J. Tye got a week’s leave on
Friday last to go to Windsor. Sent a soldier on
Thursday last to the Governor for blocks, augurs,
and irons, etc.
September 6.—A1l hands employed as before. One extra
man brought back to assist at the bridge and pass.
Soldier returned from Sydney.
September 8. —Men at work as yesterday. The wind has
been very high and cold from the west since Sunday
last, and last night it blew a perfect hurricane. Saw
a few flying showers yesterday, but we got scarcely
any rain, and it appears the wind will carry it away.
The country about here very barren. No kangaroos
to be seen. Shot one pheasant, with tail complete;
shot two others without tail. It appears to be too
early in the season for them, as their tails are just
shooting, and others not at full length. Scarcely
any small birds to be seen.
September 9 and 10.-—Workmen employed as before.
The bridge rises very fast, and the quarrymen well
on with the stonework.
September 11 (Sunday).—Went three miles forward to
examine the road with Mr. Hobby and Lewis. From
the bridge it continues rocky over two or three
small passes to Caley’s pile ; from thence, at least
two miles further, the mountain is nearly a solid


rock. At places high broken rocks; at others, very
hanging or shelving, which makes it impossible to
make a level, good road. The more the road is used
the better it will be.
September 12.—N0 person on sick list. Continued with
10 men to get on at the bridge and pass until Thurs-
day, when it was completed all but the hand-rails
and battening the planks. Gave orders for six men
to pack up and go forward in the morning, leaving
to complete the bridge two sawyers and two carpen-
ters, which they expect they will complete in three
or four days. Sent forward part of our heavy lug-
gage, and intend removing myself to-morrow.
Issued a pair of strong shoes to each mar . The
bridge we have completed is 80 ft. long, 15 ft. wide
at one end and 12ft. at the other; 35 ft. of it is
planked, the remainder filled up with stones. The
face from the bluff end of the rock was about 20 ft.
before we began to work. At the left there is a side
wall cut from the solid rock. At the right, where
the ground is lower, we have put up a rough stone
wall about 100 ft. long, which makes the pass to the
bridge quite a lane. It is steep from the top of the
mountain quite to the lower end of the bridge, a
distance altogether of about 400 ft. The bridge and
pass have cost me tne labour of 12 men for three
weeks, which time they worked very hard and cheer-
ful. It is now complete —a strong, solid bridge, and
will, I have no doubt, be reckoned a good-looking one
by travellers that pass through the mountain.


September 13.—Removed forward; found the road com-
pleted to 21 miles. At the latter end of this the
ground was completely covered with gum roots. Was
obliged to turn all hands to grubbing and finishing
the road, and with very hard labour nearly com-
pleted the 22nd mile by Saturday night.
September 15 (Sunday).—Went forward to examine the
road about three miles ahead. Got on very high
ground. The greater part of the scrub burnt here
last summer, and the trees also much burnt.
September 16.—Moved forward, ahead of the cleared
road. Went as far as the fire-makers had finished.
Shot several small new birds the last week, and also
a young cockatoo, quite mottled or cuckoo colour.*
There was one old one and three young ones in com-
pany, which are the only ones we have seen of the
sort. Ordered Angus to bring forward a load of
provisions on Wednesday next. Kept a strong party
at the grub hoe.
September 17 to 24.—Kept all hands at road-making,
and they did a very good week’s work, having com-
pleted four miles of good road this week. Removed
on Saturday to the 26 mile, being just at the foot of
a steep mountain. Examined it well, and found it
too steep to ascend in a straight direction.
September 25 (Sunday).—Went up the mountain; ex-
amined it, and fixed on the way to make a winding
road up. This is the highest mountain on the whole
range we cross. From it Windsor houses, etc., are
* A small cockatoo called Gang-gang ; the head of male bird pink.


distinctly visible, as are the wheatfields, farmhouses,
etc. There is a river running to the east about a
mile south of this, the banks of which are so high
and steep it is not possible to get down. This river
empties itself into the Nepean about four miles
higher up than Emu Plains. Went forward to fix
on a site for a second depot* Chose one about two
miles ahead, close to a stream of excellent water.
We have found much greater quantities of water
these last six miles than we did before, and all very
good.
September 26.—Sent forward two sawyers and two other
men to procure the necessary timber, etc., for the
second depot. Set 10 men to work making the road
up the mountain. The remainder at work as usual
road-making. Sent T. Randall to the Windsor Hos-
pital, sick. P. Handrigan ill with a bad sprained
ankle.
September 27.—Finished the road up tne mountain this
evening. Made a very good job of it (cost 10 men
two days). The ground extremely rough and rocky
for about a mile oetween the high mountain and
second depot.
September 28.—Worked at the road forward to the
second depot, where we removed on Thursday morn-
ing. The rocky ground we had to pass over was
very troublesome, being obliged to turn out of the
road a very large quantity of stone, it being too hard
to break with sledge-hammers.
"* Cox’s River, emptying’ into the Wollondilly, about 20 miles above Emu
Plains.


October I. —Began on Friday to put up the building for
the second depot. The situation is very pleasant,
being on a ridge high enough in the front (which is
due east) to overlook the standing timber altogether,
and at the back there is a considerable quantity of
ground without a tree, and a rivulet of fine spring
water running through it. On this ground there is
the grass tree and other coarse food, which the bul-
locks eat and fill themselves pretty well. The build-
ing for the store is 17 x 12, with 3 ft. sides, gable-
ended, all weatherboards, and a door on the east
end. Got well on with it this evening; finished on
the Bth inst. Cost me eight men, six days. It is
just 28 miles from Emu ford.*
October 3.—Sick list ■ Handrigan, Lowe, sprained ankle.
Several men have bad colds, but none laid up.
Sawyers, carpenters, and ’smith are at work at the
depot. The remainder gone forward, road-making.
Went forward to see the workmen. At the 29th
mile is a very handsome long reach, quite straight,
which I call, from the layer of it out, “Hobby’s
Reach.” Finished the road this evening to the 30th
mile. The carpenters, getting well on with: the
depot. Nothing left to be done but weather-board-
ing part of the roof. Sent workers to the first depot
to bring forward the sergeant and Gorman to the
second depot. Gave charge of all the bullocks to
Walters, and ordered Cryer to labour for his bad
management and inattention to the bullocks. There
are many large emmets, or ant-hills, in this part of
* The site of the old Weatherboard Inn, now Wentworth Falls.


the mountain. I measured one at the 26 miles, of
a sugarloaf shape ; it was 6 ft. high, and 20 ft. round
at the bottom. S. Parker laid up with a cold to-
day. The blacksmith employed in steeling axes and
grub hoes, and repairing tools ; at other times making
nails for the second depot. At 5 p.m. my servant
arrived with horses from Clarendon, and to-morrow
morning at 7 o’clock intend returning there, leaving
the party under the direction of Mr. Hobby and R.
Lewis. Wrote to the Governor to inform him of my
going, stating to him my arrangements, etc., I had
made.
September 22.—Having made my arrangements, etc., at
Clarendon and Mulgoa with respect to my sheep
and ensuing harvest, and attended his Excellency
the Governor at the muster, I left Clarendon on
Saturday afternoon in a single horse chaise, and slept
at Castlereagh.
September 23 (Sunday).—At half-past 5 this morning left
Rev. Mr. Fulton’s. Remained two hours at the first
and second depots to examine the stores, and make
arrangements for forwarding the provisions, etc., for
the people; and at 6 p.m. came up with the working
party at the 39th mile, to which place the road was
completed, having finished, during my absence of
two weeks and four days, nine miles. Found Mr.
Hobby and all the party in good health. On Mon-
day morning Mr. H. returned in my chaise to the
Nepean for a week or 10 days, and for want of grass
I also sent back my saddle-horse to Clarendon. On


Sunday evening R. Lewis returned from the end of
the mountain, about 10 miles forward, having been
with three men to examine the mountain that leads
down to the forest ground. His report'is that the
descent is near half-a-mile down, and extremely
sharp; that it is scarcely possible to make a road
down; and that we cannot get off the mountain to
the north to make a road; that it appears to him
much more difficult, now he has examined the hill, to
get down than he was before aware of.
September 24. —Set all hands to work road-making, in-
cluding blacksmith, carpenter, stonemasons, etc.,
being extremely anxious to get forward and ascertain
if we can descend the mountain to the south before
we get to the end of the ridge.
Tuesday and Wednesday the men continued the same
work, and getting on extremely well. Wrote to the
Governor for a further supply of gunpowder, to
enable us to blow up the rocks in our way; as also
rope and blocks, to expedite us in building bridge
and getting off the mountain.
Monday and Tuesday, wind at east, with cold showers.
Wednesday, at west, blowing very high and cold.
September 27.—Wind at east; very cold, with rain. All
hands working only half a day.
September 28.—Removed forward to 42nd mile. Wind
south, with constant rain. No work done, except
the cobbler mending shoes. Sent the cart back to
the second depot for rations. Two other horse carts


employed in bringing forward provisions from first
and second depots, which they appear to do very
slowly. Heard nothing of the bullock cart belonging
to Walters.
September 30 (Sunday). —Rain until about 5 o’clock in
the evening. Wind at south-west. Blankets be-
longing to the men very wet and uncomfortable.
September 31.—The weather appears to iiave broken up.
All hands went to work at half-past 5 a.m. The men
removed to the 44th mile this day. The high, short
ridge of mountains seen from Windsor was this day
observed at 43J miles, bearing nortn, 60deg. east,
distant about eight miles. A table rock seen by us
from the rocks near Coley’s pile to our right, and
from all high lands since, was observed to-day, bear-
ing east-north-east, distant about two miles. Two
parties of natives are seen on the low lands to the
west. One within two miles of us; the other about
six miles.
November I.—Fair weather. Three persons sent to ex-
amine the mountain to the left, to find a place to
make a road down to the forest ground. Returned
unsuccessful.
November 2.—Fine morning. Thunder, with light
showers. Sent three men again to examine the
descent of the mountain, and ascertained tnat there
is no other way but from the bluff originally marked.
To-morrow I intend going to survey it, as a road
must be made to get off the mountain.


November 3.—At 6 this morning went forward with
Lewis, Tye, and a soldier to examine the mountain
'at the end of the ridge—four miles. Found it much
worse than I expected. It commences with going
down steep between immense large boulders, when it
opens with a very steep gulley in front, and towards
the left it falls off so steep that it is with much diffi-
culty a person can get down at all. The whole front
of the mountain is covered with loose rock, at least
two-thirds of the way down; and on the right and
left it is bounded both by steep gullies and rocks, so
that we cannot, by winding short to the left, get half
length sufficient to gain ground to get down without
a number of circular turns both to right and left,
and in that case the hill is so very steep about half-a-
mile down that it is not possible to make a good road
to go down and up again without going to a very
great expense. I have, therefore, made up my mind
to make such a road as a cart can go down empty or
with a very light load without a possibility of its
being able to return with any sort of load whatever ;
and such a road will also answer to drive stock down
to the forest ground. After getting down this said
mountain, we got into very pretty forest ground, and
went as far as Blaxland’s rivulet, about two miles.
The grass on it is generally of a good quality—some
silky; some hard, intermingled with rib grass, butter-
cup and thistle. Timber thin, and kangaroos—plenty.
In returning back, we had to clamber up the moun-
tain, and it completely knocked me up. It is a very
great drawback to the new country, as no produce


can be brought from thence to headquarters, except
fat bullocks or sheep. The sheep also will be able
to bring their fleeces up, and be shorn on the moun-
tains, or driven to the second depot for the purpose.
In either case, waggons can fetch the wool. Gorman
came forward with a cartload of provisions. From
him I learnt that Walters had got some fresh Gov-
ernment bullocks at the first depot, but that he could
not harness them—they were so wild. Sent another
man down to assist him. Also sent a man to bring
up the remainder of the bullocks that are unable to
work from lameness or poverty, to get them down
the mountain, where there is good feed. The Gov-
ernment bullocks have not carried a single load of
anything for me since Sunday week last. Made an
agreement with Sergeant Minehan and another
man for their horse and cart to remain with us until
we have performed the whole of our work, and the
sergeant went to the Hawkesbury for them. T.
Tindall received a hurt in his arm from the fall of a
tree. Removed all hands this morning to 454 miles.
Put up the forge for the blacksmith to repair all
tools for the Herculean mountain. Issued to all
hands a gill of spirits.
November 4.—Sent three men to examine all the ridges
and gullies to the north, offering a reward if they
found a better way down. All returned unsuccessful.
Removed to 47 miles.
November s.—Wind to the east; rain and cold. All
hands employed on the road. The blacksmith made


eight pikes for self-defence against the natives. Lewis
and a party took the dogs down to tne forest ground.
Killed a fine kangaroo; weighs about 120 lb. Ex-
amined the big mountain, and fixed on tht spot where
to begin on Monday, having given up all thoughts
of attempting it elsewhere. J. Manning sprained
his ankle in bringing up a keg of water from the
rocks below. T. Raddick ill; believe it arises from
the wet weather. There is timber here, which ap-
pears to bear all the property of the ash in its young
state. It is easily transplanted, as the sprouts are
like the white thorn. It grows quickly, tall and
straight, bends to anything. When large it splits well,
and will, I have no doubt, make very good hoops.
In its appearance it is like the black butt, but the
leaves are unlike. The bark ties much better than
stringy bark. In falling the timber trees it cut re-
markably free, and in order to try it I cut a small
one down, and quartered it, which I mean to send to
Clarendon and try them for light cart or chaise
shafts.
November 6.—Rain in morning; began to clear up about
noon. Received a letter from the Government,
dated 2nd. Sent S. Davis to Sydney with a letter to
the Governor at 2 p.m. to bring up powder and
spirits.
November 7.—Mr. Hobby joined me this morning. At
6 a.m. went forward with 10 men to commence
operations for a road down the mount. Light rain
and heavy fogs.


November B.—Employed the same hands in the same
; manner. Light rain as before. The men very wet
and uncomfortable, their clothes and bedding being
also wet.
November 9.—Removed to the extreme end of the moun-
tain with the whole of the party. The rocks here are
so lofty and undermined that the men will be ablg to
sleep dry, and keep their little clothing dry also,
which is what they have been unable to do this last
fortnight. Left 12 men to finish up the road; the
rest employed with myself. Cold rain set in about
noon. Wind S.W.
November 10.—Raining; cleared up at 9 o’clock. Got
a good day’s work done. Evening fine and starlight.
November 11.—Rain commenced before daylight, and
continued the whole day. Wind S. and very cold.
Sent T. Raddock to Windsor, being very ill. S.
Freeman, the carpenter, laid up with a cold and
swollen face. Jas. Dwyer ill; pain in side and
breast. Sent two carts to the second depot for
provisions. Sent three men with the dogs to catch
kangaroos three times this week. Brought one home
every day. The bullock driver, with 11 bullocks
joined me yesterday. All they have done this last
fortnight has been to bring in one bag of biscuits
from the first depot to this place (43 miles). Ordered
the bullocks down the mountain to the forest ground,
where I intend letting them remain to recover
themselves until we remove forward towards the


Fish River. One of them is quite blind. He got
into the gully going down, but we got him out to-day
safe.
November 12.—Very fine day. Wind east and cold.
Completed the road to the beginning of the large
mountain, which we have to descend to the forest
ground. Measured it up; it is 28 miles 50 chains.
Continued to clear away the timber and rubbish
through the large rocks, and to the beginning of the
bluff end of the mountain. Two men on the sick list.
November 13.—Went down to the forest ground; from
thence on to the rivulet, and traced it to the river,
about five miles down. Went one mile down the
river and came back on the high lands, exploring the
best ground for a road. The grass on the greater
part of the land we went over to-day is good. The
timber thin. The ground is hilly, but sound; some
parts near the rivulet and river is rocky, but no iron
stone, it being rather of a sandy soil, and very good
pasture for sheep. The ground on the other side of
the rivulet appears also to be equally good for feed,
thinly timbered, and very hilly, with good grass clear
up to the hut. The river runs nearly east, and must,
from its course, empty itself into the Nepean River.
The horse carts arrived to-day from the second
depot. They brought very small loads indeed.
Ordered two of the carts to go to-morrow to the first
depot, and to return here again on Sunday next
loaded. Saw the working bullocks this morning.
They are improving quite fast. Mustered the whole


of the tools, harness, &c.; found nearly all right.
Ground the axes and put the grub hoes and picks in
order to begin to-morrow. Ordered Gorman to issue
4 lbs. biscuit and 3 lbs. flour for each mess, instead
of 6 lbs. each, the biscuits running short, and being
also too bulky to bring so far, being 90 miles from
head-quarters.
November 14.—Sick list: F. Dwyer, cold, pains in limbs ;
S. Freeman, cold and swelled face; S. Crook, cold,
bad eyes; V. Hanragan, cold, pains in limbs; S.
Walters, hurt by bullock. The extreme wet weather
we had for a fortnight before we arrived here has
given most of the men colds, but as they are now
dry lodged, and, in addition to their large ration,
have fresh kangaroo at least three times a week, it
is to be hoped they will soon recover. So many men
sick, and chiefly very useful ones, breaks in on our
working party much, and the continuous rain also
prevents so much work being done as I could wish.
Fine morning; at noon thunder, with rain and hail.
Wind east; very cold. Steady rain all the evening.
Got on erecting the bridge at the beginning of the
descent off the mountain, and blowing up the rocks
that are in the line of our intended road down to the
forest. Find is difficult work, and it will cost us
much labour.
November 15.—Five men sick. Sent Mr. Hobby, with
Lewis and Tye, to trace a ridge that leads to the river
a little below Blaxland’s rivulet, it being my wish
to cross the river in preference to crossing the rivulet


twice. The report was favourable, but the water
being too high they could not cross. I intend going
myself the first fine day I can leave the work. Got
on well with our work on the mountain. Fixed two
large trees as side pieces—one 45, the other 50 ft.
long. Fine weather ; wind east, thunder, no rain.
November 16.—Dwyer and Cook returned to labour.
Sullivan laid up, sick. Most beautiful morning.
Thunder at noon and in the evening, with showers.
Got a very good day’s work done. The rocks cut
extremely hard, and cost us much labour. Sent
Lewis and Tye back to the 57 miles to see a working
bullock left there three weeks since. Found it in
so bad a state from sore feet and unable to walk that
they killed it.
November 17.—Sick list: Freeman, Walters, Sullivan.
Fine day. Worked on the front of the mountain.
The ground extremely hard, and very large rocks as
we dig into it. Some we blow up, but the greater
part we turn out with long levers and crowbars. Kept
six men cutting and blowing up rocks, two splitting
posts and rails, and it is as much as the 'smith can
do to keep their tools in order.
November 18.—Hard at work on the rocks this day. Kept
our six pickaxes at work; and W. Appledon (a sailor)
fixed the blocks and tackle to trees, and got a most
capital purchase to turn out an immense large rock
at the side of the mountain in the way of our road,
which he performed well. Two men received slight
hurts in doing it by one of the purchases slipping


(J. Tindall and T. Adams). This rock would have
cost me at least 51b. of powder to have blown'it up.
Two carts arrived with provisions, and brought a
supply of gunpowder and a keg of spirits.
November 19.—Sick list: S. Freeman, S. Walters, T.
Davis, J. Finch, T. Adams, J. Tindall. Fine morn-
ing. Work as on Friday. At 5 p.m. heavy thunder,
with hail and rain, continued about two hours. Sent
the sergeant with a two-horse cart to the second
depot to bring away Gorman and the remainder of
the stores. Discharged six men, with three carts and
six horses, from the mountain work, namely, J. Crow-
ley, J. Toone, M. Bryan, S. Stanley, S. Whitney, P.
Hoddrigoddy.
November 20 (Sunday).—At 7 a.m. went with Mr. Hobby,
Lewis, and Tye to examine the rivulet, river, and
ground as far as Blaxland’s Mountain, to find out
the best passage across the water, as also to mark the
road to it. After going on different ridges and ex-
amining the crossing-places, we got to the foot of the
mountain at noon, where we remained an hour and
refreshed. Immediately after leaving it we crossed
a small swamp to look at another ridge, when my
horse got stuck in a bog, and plunged until he fell.
I received no hurt, but got wet through. Pulled off
my clothes, wrung them, and left them in the sun
an hour, when they were tolerably dry. Crossed the
lower rivulet on our return just at the junction, in
doing which Mr. Hobby’s horse stumbled and- threw
him into the water, which from the last heavy rains


was quite rapid. Came from thence back on the
north side of the rivulet, and crossed three miles
from thence up. The ground on this side is better
for feed than any we have seen. It is extremely
hilly ; the timber thin; the ground perfectly sound,
intermixed in places with large loose rocks, and the
sort of grass fit for cattle and sheep. It is also very
well watered, as stock can go to almost any part of
the rivulet to drink. The crossing-places over the
river are so encumbered with rock, and the access to
it from the hilly ground on each side so bad, that I
did not fix on a crossing-place on it, but intend
having both rivulets well examined the ensuing
week. Came back at 6 p.m., completely knocked up
from fatigue. Late in the evening violent gusts of
wind, with three or four hours’ rain.
November 21.—-Thick, misty morning. All hands at
work on the mountain. At 10 a.m. it began to
thunder and rain. About noon it increased, and
continued the whole day, at times very heavy. Only
four hours work done this day. Issued to all hands
yesterday afternoon a gill of spirits each.
November 22.—Thick, moist morning. The sick list re-
duced to one (S. Davis). All hands again on the
mountain. Light rain and heavy fogs during the
day, but the men continued out and did a good day’s
work. Turned out a great number of very large
rocks this day; blew up one. The ground as we dig
discovers many more rocks than we expected.


November 23.—-j Cloudy morning, with a very cold wind,
east-south-east. Cleared up at noon, and continued
fine the rest of the day. T. Cook and J. Ross sick.
Sent two carts to Emu Plains, with three horses and
the sergeant and two men, to bring a load of flour
from Martin’s. Sent Gorman with them, and he
took six weeks’>provisions for two of the soldiers that
are to be left at the first depot. The other soldier
ordered to return here with the carts. Sent J. Tye,
with a soldier and another man, to re-mark the trees
from the second rivulet to the Fish River, a distance
of about 20 miles from hence, and gave him direc-
• tions to return by a ridge of high land that hears, as
we suppose, from within three miles of the Fish River
back to Mount Blaxland, it being.my wish to make
the road on that line, if practicable. They took
each a week’s rations with them.
November 24.—Sick: T. Cook, J. Ross, J. Finch (pains
in his back and limbs from wet and cold). Close
morning, but dry weather until 5 p.m., when it miz-
zled, and continued so all the evening. Wind south-
east, and cold. The men did a very good day’s work.
Turned out of the road an immense quantity of rock,
which was handsomely veined, very like marble. The
bullocks having been missing since Sunday last, sent
Lewis to look after them. He returned, but could
not find them. There is a handsome shrub here,
very like the laylock. It grows larger, but is a pretty
flower. The stems of them make good walking-
sticks.


November 25. —Sick list as yesterday. Wet, drizzly
morning. At 10 a.m. it rained so hard as to break
off the men from work. Took up a little again at
2 p.m. Turned out the men again, and continued to
work until sunset. Light rain all the afternoon.
Harder rain in the evening. Wind south-south-east;
quite cold.
November 26.—Issued to all hands one pair of trousers
each. The stone on the mountain is uncommon
hard, and flinty. Cuts extremely bad, and some
of it will not split. We have been fortunate in turn-
ing out very large solid rocks 2 ft. thick without
breaking them, and we have used but little powder
this week. Light rain the whole day. Wind east-
south-east; blowing very hard at times, and quite
cold. The men kept out at work the greater part of
the day, but so much wet and for so long a time
makes them quite cheerless. The working bullocks
not having been seen these 10 days, sent Lewis again
after them, and found them up a valley three miles
away, east-north-east. Ordered the bullock driver
to repair the harness, and be prepared to set off with
a strong team to-morrow for Emu Plains, to bring
us a load of provisions. Sick list as yesterday;
Cook and Ross getting better. Finch much worse.
Carpenter got 100 posts split and 200 rails for fencing
the road down the mountain.
November 27 (Sunday).—Heavy rain all night, and until
9 this morning, when it became lighter, but con-
tinued raining until 1 o’clock, when it began


to clear up. Issued one pair of shoes to each
man. Gorman arrived at 8 this morning with an
account that Allen’s horse was knocked up and re-
turned to Emu Plains, and that he did not expect
the other two horses would bring more than two
small casks of flour. Sent the bullock cart, with two
men and five bullocks, to Emu Plains for a load of
provisions, and ordered Gorman to see it safely
loaded at Martin’s. In this cart I sent J. Finch,
who was very ill, and anxious to return to the
Nepean. At 5 p.m. J. Tye and his party returned
from the Fish River. They brought some fish with
them, which proved to be rock cod, weighing about
5 lb. each. They report the waters to be very high,
and that it has rained constantly from Wednesday
evening until a few hours since, in consequence of
which they could not examine the ridge which I sup-
pose leads towards the river, but returned the same
way they went, which is by no means favourable for
a road, on account of hills and valleys. During their
stay at the river they caught 10 fish, and state that
had the water not run so strong they would have
caught as many as they pleased. Quite a fine, clear
evening.
November 28.—A clear, beautiful morning. All hands
out at work at 5 o’clock. At 5 p.m. turned cloudy,
and we had a dirty evening, but got a good day’s
work done. At noon the sergeant and Frost re-
turned from Emu ford with their horses and one
cart, bringing two casks of flour, of 336 lb. each.


Allen’s horse got stung by something, and was left
behind. T. Adams sick; has a strong fever on him.
The stonemason completed the rock a little below the
bridge. It has cost us 10 blasts of powder and great
labour to get rid of it.
November 29.—A dirty morning. Got a tree 55 ft. long
and 9 ft. in circumference by the men in the woods
into his place as a side piece below the bridge, and
joining the rock, which is the last we want for this
job. Men stuck very hard picking and grubbing the
rocks and forming the road. Pine evening.
November 30.—A fine day; thunder at noon, but no rain.
Men working as yesterday, and got a very good day's
work done. The rock picks extremely hard. Sick
list: T. Adams, P. Hanley, S. Parker, T. Watkins.
December I.—Mr. Hobby and Lewis again examined the
river to find a proper place for a bridge that can be
got at from a main ridge we discovered about two
miles from the valley below. They found two places
and marked back the best one they can find, accord-
ing to the orders they last evening received.
December 2.—Sent a soldier with letters, etc., to his Ex-
cellency the Governor. At 2 p.m. Gorman came here
from Emu Plains. Reports that he left one bullock
cart, with two casks of flour, at the 15-mile yester-
day. Also reports that there are two Government
teams at Martin’s, and, the water being too high for
them to cross at the ford, they refused to swim the
bullocks over to come here with the provisions with-


out a written order from me. Sent down to the
forest to get a Government horse. They searched
until night, but could not find it. Directed Gorman
to remain until the morning. Fine day. Work
went on cheerily. Sick : Parker, Hanley, Watkins,
and Appledon.
December 3.—At daybreak sent the men to look after the
horses; returned at 10, without seeing them. Sent
Gorman to Emu ford on foot, 50 miles, with written
order to have the bullocks swam across the Nepean
and come forward, and for him to return again as
soon as he saw the carts loaded, and as far as the
first depot. At 2 p.m. Tye and the soldier returned.'
They report unfavourably, and say we cannot go on
either of the ridges pointed out, and that we must
cross the valley by Blaxland’s Mountain. A final
day. Men worked extremely hard on the mountain
to finish a road on the second circle, to admit my
caravan to come down to-morrow. Sick list: Wat-
kins and Appledon. Fowler, scurvy in his leg. Two
men out all day to look after the horses; returned
unsuccessful.
December 4 (Sunday). —About 10 o’clock last night the
bullock cart arrived from Emu ford, bringing two
large casks of flour and some odd tools that had been
left at the first and second depots. In the absence
of Gorman, Mr. Hobby and Lewis issued the rations
and delivered over the remainder of the provisions
in charge of the sergeant, with a written list, and
also ordered two soldiers to sleep under the rock


where it is deposited. At 10 a.m. removed thj
caravan and cart down to the valley at the foot of
the mountain. Took them down by men, the road
not being finished sufficient for horses or cattle to
draw on it. At 2 p.m. removed 18 chains forward
to a valley about two miles where there is water.
The bullock cart took the provisions, etc., forward.
At 3 p.m. the horses were brought back by Sullivan
and two others. They look very well. Gave the
promised reward—half-a-pint of spirits. Mr. Hobby
and myself immediately mounted and gave directions
where the men are to begin to-morrow, under the
charge of Watson. He is to'put on six fellers, six
fire-makers, and five cleaners up the road. Went on
to the river, and fixed on the spot to make the first
bridge. There is a most beautiful ridge, near three
miles long, that leads direct to the spot. Could not
see any timber near the place fit for it. Issued to
all hands a gill of spirits each. In the evening wind
shifted to the west. At 7it began to rain. At Bit
came on very heavy, and rained nearly all night.
December s.—Very cold, windy morning, with light rain
in showers. Put the remainder of the men to work
at the mountain, which I expect they will complete
by Saturday. Wrote to Rev. M. Cartwright to send
two of the gaol gang to cut and house Tindall’s wheat
(about three acres) at the Nepean. He has a large
family, and it is his all. He could not allow himself
to go in, as many others would fancy they were en-
titled to the same indulgence. Went on to the
fellers in the morning. The timber being thin, they


got on well. Attended the gang on the mountain in
the afternoon. Weather very cold. Wind west;
showers of sleet and hail at 5 p.m. At 8 thunder
and lightning; no rain; and a fine, clear evening.
December 6.—Beautiful, clear morning. Brought a cask
of pork and two bars of iron down the mountain to
carry forward. Removed after breakfast with the
caravan, horse, and bullock cart to the junction of
the two rivers, about six miles. Examined the river
and rivulet up and down, and fixed on a spot over
each as being less trouble and more convenient than
making one bridge over the river, the obstacles to
the latter being more rocks on the ground between
the river and high land, and also the ascent up the
hill is much steeper and worse ground for a road.
Sent the bullock cart back to the mountain to bring
a load of provisions to-morrow. A fine day.
December 7.—Cloudy morning; wind south. At 11 a.m.
the bullock cart brought four casks of flour from the
mountain. Goman came from Emu ford, and
brought a new chart from the Fish River to Bathurst
Plains, with the Governor’s despatches. Brought
word that the two Government carts were on the
road with provisions, and that they had taken the
whole from Martin's except two casks of pork.
.Directed the sergeant to go back to the second depot
with a two-horse cart to-morrow morning for provi-
sions, and also to impress one of the Parramatta
carts at the second depot to bring a load on to the
mountain. Showers began at noon. At 6 p.m.
rained heavily, and continued all the evening.


December 8. —Heavy rain during the night, but a fine,
clear morning. Sent 12 men making and bringing
up the road from the mountain to the river, under
charge of Mr. Hobby. Left 12 men to finish the road
down the mountain, under charge of R. Lewis. J.
Tyo returned last evening, making the road 10 miles
ahead. Finished the road this evening from the
mountain to the river. Measured down the moun-
tain to the valley to the 50th mile from the ford.
Here I drop this reckoning and commence from the
50th mile to the west, and which is 5 miles 10
chains to the bridge on the east branch of a river
running to the east not yet named. A fine, clear
day.
December 9.—Fine day; wind west. Afternoon hot and
sultry. All hands employed at the first bridge before
breakfast. At 9 a.m. took all hands to the second
bridge, and before dinner got one of the side pieces,
45 ft. long, about 100 yards down the river, and fixed
it in its place without accident. The other side piece
we got by falling a tree across the river, about 60 ft.
long, and that was also fixed. After dinner gave all
hands a gill of spirits. Several of the men appear
to be inclined to give in and shirk work, the greater
part of whom, in my opinion, are quite as well as
myself. Gave them a reproof in earnest, which I
expect will make them all well by to-morrow. A
cart arrived on the mountain with stores.
December 10.—Fine day ; wind west. Finished the
bridge over the east branch, 22 ft. long, 13 ft. wide.


Carpenters, etc., made a good, strong job of it. The
working bullocks strayed, and not found till sunset.
Sick :P. Hanragan, J. Tindall, H. Morton. Ordered
six married men to go back to the mountain to finish
the road down it to the valley. When done, they
are to be discharged—S. Parker, J. Ross, J. Tindall,
P. Hanragan, P. Marman, and J. Watkins. Also
ordered J. Wilson to go forward on Monday with
nine others road-making.
December 11 (Sunday).—At 6 a.m. sent six men back to
the mountain to complete the road. At 7 sent 10
men forward to encamp at Blaxland’s Mountain,
under Watson’s charge. Set out on horseback, with
Mr. Hobby and Lewis (J. Tye and a soldier having
previously gone), to go as far as the Pish River to
examine the ground for a road. After passing Mount
Blaxland we ascended a high ridge, and found it still
continue to ascend until we got extremely high.
Continued on until noon, and found the ground very
unfavourable for a road, when I made up my mind
to return by the route Mr. Evans laid down on his
chart; but, to my great surprise, found it impractic-
able to make a road even for a horse. I, therefore,
returned, and examined all the ridges and valleys for
several miles, and got back at sunset extremely
fatigued and much disappointed. The land between
the river and Mount Blaxland is very favourable for
grazing—a light, sound soil, and good sort of grass,
thinly timbered, and well watered. This appears a
tract of about 10 miles long, and probably, on the


average, five miles wide, of good grazing ground.
Westward it is not as good. Again, the hills to the
south I have not been on; those to the north again
become rocky. The hills to the west; north, and
south are extremely high and difficult of access, but
in many of them the feed is good to the highest
part.
December 12.—Sick list: P. Heningham, J. Allen, H.
Martin, and R. Hanley. Men at work getting tim-
ber, etc., for the bridge, the greater part of which we
are obliged to get down the river by the men, six of
whom were in the water nearly all day. Gave these
men a gill of spirits each. Got a good day’s work
done. At 6 p.m. a violent thunderstorm, with wind,
lightning, and heavy rain, which lasted till 9 o’clock.
December 13.—Mr. Hobby went forward to Blaxland’s
Mountain to superintend the 10 men ahead in road-
making. Got on well to-day with the work at the
bridge. Gave the men who worked in the water a
gill of spirits.
December 14. —Yesterday afternoon a Parramatta cart
and the sergeant’s cart brought forward the re-
mainder of the provisions from the mountain, leaving
there two soldiers and the six men finishing the job.
A fine day. Men worked well at the bridge. The
bullocks employed in drawing timber for the bridge.
Detained the Parramatta team and men, and put
them on my store until further orders. Ordered the
three carts that I have to be taken oyer the bridge
at daylight, and also to get over casks of provisions,


to load them on that side the river (the bridge not.
being finished), and to proceed with their loads to
Blaxland’s Mountain, under Gorman’s charge, where
Mr. Hobby’s party is at work.
December 15.—Loaded the three carts, and sent them for-
ward at 6 a.m. At 7 a.m. went forward myself, and
came up with the party at the 10-mile, to which
they had completed the road, except turning some
rock out of it after you ascend the hill at Blaxland’s
Mountain. Returned at 10, and sent forward three
men with crowbars, pickaxes, etc., to complete the
road, and remain with the party ahead. J. Allen
very ill; ordered him back from Mr. Hobby’s party
to mine. At 1 p.m. one of the party at the mountain
came to report they had finished their task. Sent
Lewis back to examine it, and found it completed.
Gave them their discharge (six men), and sent a cart
with them as far as the Nepean, to carry their bed-
ding. A dull, heavy day, with light rain in the
afternoon. Men worked well at the bridge and
causeway to it.
December 16.—Cloudy morning, with light rain; broke
up at 2, and continued fine. At 7 sent two bullock
carts, with provisions, etc., under Gorman’s charge,
to the party ahead. Sent the sergeant back to the
mountain to bring forward the tools, and also the
two soldiers stationed there. At 2 p.m. finished the
bridge over the west branch of the river, 45 ft. long,
14 ft. wide. It is a good, strong job. There is also
a causeway on each side to the high lands, which is


filled up with stone and covered with earth. One of
the side pieces is an oak tree, with girth of 9 ft. at
least 6 ft. above where it was fallen, and was good
50 ft. long. I never saw such a tree of that sorb
before. Sent the carpenter and five men forward to
join Mr. Hobby’s party, and intend breaking up from
here to-morrow with the soldiers and remaining
party. The carpenter worked remarkably well while
at this job.
December 17.—Loaded the two bullock carts, etc., at 6
a.m., and sent them forward to Mr. Hobby’s camp.
Sent Lewis back to find the six bullocks we had feed-
ing in the valley near the mountain, and to bring
them forward to us. At 7 a.m. broke up quarters
at the bridge, and joined Mr. Hobby at 9. Mea-
sured up the work to the 12th mile (except two small
bridges left to make at miles), where we en-
camped. Began falling the timber with the car-
penter and two other men for these small bridges.
Tasked the people for next week’s work, and selected
14 men to go forward road-making, the remainder to
be at my quarters. J. Allen continues very ill; the
other persons much recovered. At 6 p.m. a thunder-
storm, with about an hour’s rain.
December 18.—At half-past 7 went forward on horseback
to examine the road from hence to the Fish River.
Found the country very hilly and rocky in many
places. There are also two other small bridges to
make before we get there. Took Mr. Hobby, J. Tye,
and three others witn me; caught some fish, and


dined on the banks of the river. Fixed on the road,
except going up the hill, which must be avoided, if
possible. Returned at 6 p.m. It being a clear, fine
day, we had fine views to the north and west from a
high hill. Saw some plains without timber to the
west, but in general the whole country around is
extremely hilly, and apparently fair grazing land.
Lewis brought the bullocks forward to us this day.
December 19.—At work very hard on the bridges, and
got on well. The day extremely clear and hot. At
3 p.m. had a violent thunderstorm, with small rain
for about an hour. Evening fine again, though close
and sultry. Found a way to avoid the high hill we
were over yesterday, and marked the ground for a
road.
December 20.—At 10 ordered the sergeant to take J.
Allen, who continued to get worse, back 25 miles,
where there was another cart and horse to relieve
him. To my surprise, he made such frivolous objec-
tions as I did not like, and when I went to know if
he was getting ready, he said neither his horse or
himself had shoes; but if he was ordered, he must go.
I immediately ordered the Parramatta cart to return,
and at 12 he set off, taking the sick man, and J.
Hoddy in charge of Allen, to see him safe to the
Nepean. Ordered the sergeant to be ready to set
off in the morning to the first depot to relieve Cor-
poral Harris, who is to come here. A hot, sultry
afternoon. At 6 had heavy thunder and lightning,
but no rain. Finished the woodwork of the largest


bridge, and got on well with the other; but in con-
sequence of Kelly, our Parramatta bullock driver,
going in, sent forward to Mr. Hobby to send me two
labourers back this evening, to enable me to finish
all here to-morrow. A verv cloudy, close evening,
with lightning to the south-west; wind north all
day.
December 21.—At 6 a.m. the sergeant went off to the
first depot with written instructions for his guidance
there. Finished both bridges this afternoon, and re-
moved all hands one mile and a-half on, where there
is another bridge to build. One of the bridges is
15 over, the other 10 ft. There is a great'deal of
work done here by the spade, the ground being very
hanging and awkward. It is now a good job.
December 22.—Heavy thunder and lightning at 10 last
night. Finished the bridge this day by 3 o’clock.
It is 12 ft., and well finished. Removed one mile and
a-half at 3, where we are brought up again by another
run of water. Set to work on a bridge, and got all
the large timber in its place before dark. Thunder,
with showers, from 5 till dark. Had a fish brought
this evening of about 4 lb. from the river. Worked
the bullocks very hard yesterday and to-day, but am
. still behind-hand with getting our provisions, tools,
etc., forward. Wind west.
December 23.—Much thunder and lightning, witn ex-
treme heavy rain, from midnight till 3 o’clock.. At
10 a.m. a Parramatta constable arrived here with the
Governor’s despatches dated Tuesday evening. At


noon, having finished the bridge, removed about half-
a-mile forward, and began another bridge. At 4
p.m. it began to thunder again, and continued until
night with light showers. H. Morton received a hurt
in his leg from a large log. Wrote to the Governor
by the constable who brought the despatches. Bul-
locks brought four men from yesterday’s camp to
this. We are now 15J miles. On account of the
Parramatta team being sent in, we are obliged to
get the timber for the last six bridges by the men.
December 24.—Thick, misty morning; cleared up at 10,
and continued fine the whole day. Finished a very
good bridge at 1 o’clock. Went on after dinner half-
a-mile, and began another bridge. This bridge re-
quired great labour to fill it in with timber at the
ends before the earth was put on, as the ground
was swampy from springs. The constable set off at 6
this morning; the distance is 90 miles. Went for-
ward this afternoon to ascertain if I could get my
caravan with safety to the Fish Kiver, and have
given orders to strike tents and pack up in the morn-
ing. Sick list: H. Morton, hurt in the leg; car-
penter, very bad hands. T. French returned yes-
terday from the Hawkesbury, and left his cart on the
road, his horse having knocked up. Bullocks brought
two tons from the two bridge camps.
December 25 (Sunday).—Cloudy morning, with light
rain until 9 o’clock. The Christmas Day continued
dull throughout, with a south wind. At 8 a.m.,
after serving out the rations, went forward to the


Fish River, and removed the caravan and one cart-
load there, where I pitched my tent, leaving three
bridges to make and five miles of road. It being
Christmas Day, issued to the men a gill of spirits and
a new shirt each. Examined the river to find the
best place to cross it, and fixed on a spot about 10
chains below where Mr. Evans crossed. The timber
appears to be bad and scarce about here. Cannot find
any for sawing. The land on both sides of the river
extremely hilly, and awkward for road-making.
December 26.—Cloudy morning, with a south wind. At
8 a.m. sent T. Frost to Clarendon for a good cart
horse, to prevent delay after we cross the river.
Brought four men forward to get the materials for
the bridge. Also put up the forge, to repair the
tools, they being much out of order. The remainder
left behind. Afternoon cold, with showers.
December 27.—Cloudy morning; wind east-south-east.
Quite cold, which prevented our catching any fish
during the day. At 9 a.m. crossed the river for the
first time with Mr. Hobby, J. Tye, and a soldier and
one man to look at the ground a few miles to the
west over the hills, to ascertain the best place for a
road. Went over the hills, bearing to the south of
west, and found it favourable for road-making. Con-
tinued going west until we came to a valley bearing
nortli-west, where the grass was so good that I fol-
lowed it till we came to the river in about an hour.
The grass in this valley was the best and thickest on
the ground I have yet seen in this colony. Wo


made the river at a spot where a small stream falls
into it from nortli-north-east, about two miles below
Evans’ Mountain, to the west. During our journey
this day we saw six kangaroos, a flock of 11 emus,
wild ducks and pigeons, but for want of dogs killed
none. At 6 p.m. returned, and reached the rivev
quite tired.
December 28.—Cloudy, unsettled morning ; wind east-
south-east, and cold. Sent two soldiers to mark some
trees across the river on a ridge to the west that I
saw yesterday. The two carpenters came forward
this morning, having finished the last bridge on the
road from the mountain to this place (10 in number).
Lewis reports the men getting on well at the road,
but that they will not complete it to this place before
Saturday. Gave directions for a party to be ready
to go on a few days’ journey to-morrow by 2 p.m.
with me to Camjrbell’s River, consisting of Mr.
Hobby, Lewis, Tye, Watson, and two soldiers. The
distance down the river is 40 miles; in a direct line
west, about 21 miles.
December 29. —A fine morning, which the birds seem
most to enjoy on the banks of the river. The shrubs
and flowers also are extremely fragrant. Left six
men preparing materials for the bridge across the
main river. The remainder at work bringing up
the road. Gorman came forward this morning at 10
o’clock with the small stores, etc., and has charge
here during my absence. Sent two soldiers as a
guard. The party going forward are all preparing,


and are to cross the river at 12 precisely. Wrote to
his Excellency the Governor with the proceedings
down to this period, but shall not send it away until
my return from the western excursion.
1815—
January I.—OnThursday, at noon, crossed the river, and
after proceeding up the hill bent our course vest as
near as the land would allow. At half-past 1 made
Emu Valley. We here started six kangaroos, killed
two, and stopped an hour. At three and a-half got
to very fine grazing ground. In 20 minutes after
crossed Sidmouth Valley, a most beautiful one ; then
over the hills, west, until 5, when wo came to a dry
creek. This ground about three miles over is very
fine. Steered north-nortli-west, and in three-quarters
of an hour made a ford on the river, about seven
miles due west from our crossing-place, where we
remained for the night. Started a kangaroo half-a-
mile before we got in, which we killed. At half-past
4, Friday morning, started steering due west. At 6
crossed O’Connell's Plains, and at 7 stopped on a
point of the river to breakfast. Saw six or eight
wild turkeys, and as many kangaroos; one of tlio
latter we killed. At 9 set off again west-north-west,
about three miles; then north-north-west, soon after
which, seeing Macquarie Plains, we went down to
it on our right, and followed the course of the river
about three miles until we came to the point
where the Macquarie and Campbell’s rivers unite,
at 11.30, where we sat down for the day. In


the afternoon of yesterday crossed Campbell’s River,
about three miles. Found it very good pasture for
sheep and cattle. On Saturday morning, at 4.30,
started again, and went about two miles up Camp-
bell’s River; then steered due east, until 11 o’clock,
witnout halting. Here meeting with water in a
creek, we stopped to refresh, and remained until 1,
when my compass being out of order we made our
way by the hills and sun, and arrived at our old
encampment at 6.30, having been the whole length
from Macquarie River up to where we are building
a bridge in the day. The day was cold, with wind
from east. No foot men could have performed
it in the day. During these three days’ travelling
we passed over a great quantity of most excellent
pasturage. Fine, dry, healthy hills, gravelly soil,
and good grass, and so thinly timbered, that it re-
sembled parks in England rather than a forest.
There are few gullies and no swamps, but the hills
passed gradually into fine valleys, some of which have
fine grass in them. At Sidmouth Valley I never saw
finer grass, or more on the same quantity of land in
a meadow in England than there was here, and just
in a fit state for mowing. The whole of the line,
about 20 miles due west, would make most excellent
grazing farms, with the river in front and the back
on east and west line. This is the south side of the
Fish River lam describing. On the north side I
have not yet been, but I see there are some good
farms to be had there. Ordered a bullock to be
killed for the use of the people, which I had issued


to them in lieu of giving them a ration of salt pork.
It ran to about 12 lbs. a man. Some fish have also
been caught this week, and when the men were mus-
tered this morning they were extremely clean, and
looked cheerful and hearty.
January 2.—Sent a soldier off with letters to the
Governor and Commissary, and in the afternoon
received letters from the Governor and Clarendon.
Sent Lewis, Watson, and cart to ascertain if a
better place could not be found to make a road than
the high hill in our front. Returned unsuccessful.
Mr. Ilobby measured the road up to this place ;
it is 21 miles fro:n the mountain
January 3.—Went with Mr. Ilobby up the south side of
the Fish River, about four miles. The land got
hilly, and falls more into gullies than lower down.
It is also scrubby in places, and more timber on it,
and altogether not so good as lower down. There is
room for two or three good grazing farms on the
front of the river from the bridge upwards. The men
finished filling in the piers at each end of the bridge,
and a gang of 10 men ordered to begin road-making
to-morrow morning. In the afternoon went over the
hill in our front, and made considerable alterations
in our line of road. Got all the split logs brought in
for the bridge. They are very good, heavy logs,
well split. Brought some of them three miles. The
cobbler finished mending the men’s shoes again.


January 4.—At 8 a.m. went with Mr. Hobby, Tye, and
two soldiers to Emu Valley, to mark the intended
line of road from thence to Sidmouth Valley. Re-
turned at 4.30, having marked very good ground for
road-making. We also traced down the rich valley.
There are about two miles of it equally good as where
we cross, when it falls into a creek that goes to the
Fish River about north-north-west ; distance, one mile
and adialf. Much disappointed at not receiving the
Parramatta cart with provisions this evening. Re-
moved the gang of 12 men forward to Emu Valley
this evening, three miles. ’Smith employed repair-
ing the tools, shoeing our horses, etc., as it is not my
intention to put up the forge again until we arrive
at Bathurst Plains. The carpenters getting on very
well with the bridge over the river, as also a small
one over a creek near it.
January s.—About midnight I was taken violently ill
with excruciating pains just above my left hip. In
about two hours it became easier, when I got into a
perspiration and slept a little. Was in considerable
pain until about 9, when I again dozed, and got up
at 11 considerably better. Removed three soldiers
and J. Tye forward to Sidmouth Valley, about seven
miles, this morning. Finished the bridge over the
Fish River this evening. It is a strong and well-built
one. On each end is a pier of 25 ft., which is well
hlled up with stone, and a very little earth over it.
The span across is 25 ft. more, which is planked with
split logs; and as floods will go over it, there is no
earth put on top. It is altogether 75 ft. long and 16 ft.


wide. There is also another small bridge 10 ft. long
across a creek leading to it, which is also completed
this evening, and we remove to-morrow morning.
January G.—At 8 a.m. crossed the river over the new
bridge with the caravan and two carts, as also pur
horses, and went as far as Sidmouth Valley. Mea-
sured the road ; it is seven miles from the bridge and
28 from the mountain, which last reckoning I intend
to keep until we arrive at Mount Pleasant, on
Bathurst Plains. In the afternoon marked the trees
for our road from the valley to the next creek, where
we have a bridge to build, as also one in the valley.
January 7. —It began to thunder at daybreak, and to
rain at 5.30. Continued with little intermission
until 2 p.m., when it cleared up. Ordered the whole
of the men forward to a creek about two miles ahead
this evening, and rode up to the head of Sidmouth
Valley, about two miles. Returned by the hills,
which are very fine. An emu and kangaroo passed
quietly along. The valley in our front to-day.
Here the diary ends abruptly.
The party consisted of 28 men and six soldiers.
Memo, for watering and feeding stock :
Ist.—Nepean River to Emu Island, both grass and water.
2nd. —Five to six miles, grass and water at first depot
(Blaxland).
3rd.—Nine and a-half miles, grass and water in a valley
to the right of the road, about a quarter of a mile;
entrance to it between two rocks (The Valley).
4th.—Eleven and a-half to thirteen miles i 9 forest land.


and at 12 miles good water to the right of the road
(Springwood).
sth.—Fifteen and a-half miles, water to the right, amongst
the rocks, but no grass whatever.
6th.—Twenty-one miles, water to the right and coarse
food for stock (20-Mile Hollow).
7th.—Twenty-eight miles, running stream and coarse
grass (Wentworth Falls).
Bth.—Thirty-two miles, water to the right and coarse
grass.
9th.—Thirty-five miles, water to the left.
10th.—Thirty-seven and three-quarter miles, water and
coarse grass to the right.
11th.—Forty and a-half miles, water and coarse grass, a
large plain to right (Blackheath).
12tli.—Forty-three miles, water and coarse grass to the
right on a low flat. This is the last place fit for
watering stock until you descend the mountain.
(Mount Victoria.)
13tli. —Forty-nine and a-half miles, at the bottom of the
mountain water and good food, except in very dry
season, when you must go to the rivulet, about a
mile and a-half north-west.
14th.—At five miles west of bridges over two creeks, good
watering-places, rocky bottom, with grass most of
the way from the mountain ; after this there are
six or eight running streams before you get to the
Fish Eiver.


THE REWARD OF LABOR.
Chapter X.
That road across the Blue Mountains, begun on July
7tli, was finished on January 14th, 1815, and in April of
that year Governor Macquarie drove his carriage across
it from Sydney to Bathurst. It is utterly unbelievable
even now, with the official records to hand. To climb the
mountains was a task that had tried sorely the power of
the best men, but to make a road across the mountains
in six months seems absolutely impossible, and with such
a small body of men, too ! They had to hew their way
across, through dense thickets, such as we see there to this
day. They had to blast out vast rocks, bridge deep
gorges, fill in great chasms, and make a carriage road
across the hitherto untrodden mountains. One would
have thought that such a labour would have taken a small
armv of skilled men several years, yet this indomitable
colonist, with a small party of workers, made it in six
months. When the Governor reached the river on the
far side of the range, lie named it after the hero who had
bridged it—the Cox River; and so it stands to this day.
He also gave him a grant of land on what was called the
Bathurst Plains, but it was, more correctly speaking, on
the right bank of the Macquarie River. This jilace Mr.
Cox called “Hereford.”


At the same time. Governor Macquarie did one of
those graceful acts which only a man of sense and keen
governing instinct is capable of. He wrote Mr. Cox a
letter, which was a public document, and which is still
preserved in the family archives as a precious document.
It sets forth clearly the services rendered to the State by
William Cox, and runs as follows :
“Government House, Sydney,
“June 10, 1815.
“The Governor desires to communicate, for the infor-
mation of the public, the result of his late tour over the
Western or Blue Mountains, undertaken for the purpose
of being enabled personally to appreciate the importance
of the tract of country lying westward of them, which
had been explored in the latter end of the year 1813 and
beginning of 1814 by Mr. George William Evans, Deputy
Surveyor of Lands.
“To those who know how very limited a tract of
country has been hitherto occupied by the colonists of
New South Wales, extending along the eastern coast to
the north and south of Port Jackson only 80 miles, and
westward about 40 miles to the foot of that chain of
mountains in the interior which forms its western boun-
dary, it must be a subject of astonishment and regret that
amongst so large a population no one appeared within
the first 25 years of the establishment of this settlement
possessed of sufficient energy of mind to induce him fully
to explore a passage over these mountains. But when
it is considered that for the greater part of that time
even this circumscribed portion of country afforded suffi-
cient produce for the wants of the people, whilst on the


other hand the whole surface of the country beyond these
limits was a thick and in many jffaces, nearly an impene-
trable forest, the surprise at the want of effort to sur-
mount such difficulties must abate very considerably.
“The records of the colony only afford two instances
of any bold attempt having been made to discover the
country to the westward of the Blue Mountains. The
first was by Mr. Bass, and the other by Mr. Caley, and
both ended in disappointment—a circumstance which
will not be much wondered at by those who have lately
crossed those mountains.*
“To Gregory Blaxland and William Wentworth,
Esquires, and Lieutenant Lawson, of the Royal Veteran
Company, the merit is due of having effected the first
passage over the most rugged and difficult part of the
Blue Mountains. The Governor, being strongly im-
pressed with the importance of the object, had, early after
his arrival in this colony, formed the resolution of en-
couraging the attempt to find a passage to the Western
country, and willingly availed himself of the facilities
which the discoveries of these three gentlemen afforded
him. Accordingly, on the 20th of November, 1813, he
entrusted the accomplishment of this object to Mr. G. W.
Evans, Deputy Surveyor of Lands, the result of whose
journey was laid before the public. The favourable ac-
count given by Mr. Evans of the country he had explored
induced the Governor to cause a road to be constructed
for the passage and conveyance of cattle and provisions
to the interior; and men of good character, from amongst
a number of convicts who had volunteered their ser-
* Governor Macquarie overlooks M. Barrilier’s attempt.


vices, were selected to perform this arduous task, on con-
dition of being fed and clothed during the continuance
of their labour, and being granted emancipation as their
final reward on the completion of the work. The direc-
tion and superintendence of this great work was entrusted
to William Cox, Esq., the chief magistrate at Windsor;
and, to the astonishment of everyone who knows what
was to be encountered, and sees what has been done, he
effected its completion in six months from the time of its
commencement, happily without the loss of a man or any
serious accident. The Governor is at a loss to appreciate
fully the services rendered by Mr. Cox to this colony in
the execution of this arduous work, which promises to be
of the greatest public utility, by opening a new source of
wealth to the industrious and enterprising. When it is
considered that Mr. Cox voluntarily relinquished the
comforts of his own house and the society of his numerous
family, and exposed himself to much personal fatigue,
with only such temporary covering as a bark hut could
afford from the inclemency of the weather, it is difficult
to express the sentiments of approbation to which such
privations and services are entitled. Mr. Cox having
reported the road as completed on the 21st January last,
the Governor, accompanied by Mrs. Macquarie and that
gentleman, commenced his tour on the zsth of April over
the Blue Mountains, and was joined by Sir John Jamieson
at the Nepean, who accompanied him during the entire
tour. The following gentlemen composed the Governor’s
suite : —Mr. Campbell, secretary; Captain Antili, major
of brigade; Lieutenant Watts, aide-de-camp; Mr. Red-
fern, assistant surgeon; Mr. Oxley, Surveyor-General;


Mr. Melian, Deputy Surveyor-General; Mr. Lewin,
painter and naturalist; and Mr. G. \V. Evans, Deputy
Surveyor of Lands, who had been sent forward for the
purpose of making further discoveries, and re-joined the
party on the day of arrival at Bathurst Plains. The
commencement of the ascent from Emu Plains to the
first depot, and thence to a resting-place, now called
Springwood, distant 12 miles from Emu ford, was through
a very handsome open forest of lofty trees, and much
more practicable and easy than was expected. The
facility of the ascent for this distance excited surprise,
and is certainly not well calculated to give the traveller
a just idea of the difficulties he has afterwards to en-
counter. For a further distance of four miles a sudden
change is perceived in the appearance of the timber and
the quality of the soil, the former becoming stunted, and
the latter barren and rocky. At this place the fatigues
of the journey may be said to commence. Here the
country became altogether mountainous and extremely
rugged. Near to the 18-mile mark (it is to be observed
that the measure commences from Emu ford) a pile of
stones attracted attention; it is close to the line of road
on the top of a rugged and abrupt ascent, and is sup-
posed to have been placed by Mr. Caley as the extreme
limit of his tour. Hence the Governor gave that part of
the mountain the name of Caley’s Repulse. To have
penetrated so far was at that time an effort of no small
difficulty. From henceforward to the 26th mile is a suc-
cession of steep and rugged hills, some of which arc so
abrupt as to deny a passage altogether; but at this place
a considerable extensive plain is arrived at, which con-


stitutes the summit of the Western mountains, and from
thence a most extensive and beautiful prospect presents
itself on all sides to the eye. The town of Windsor, the
River Hawkesbury, Prospect Hill, and other objects
within that part of the colony now inhabited, of equal
interest, are distinctly seen from hence. The majestic
grandeur of the situation, combined with the various ob-
jects to be seen from this place, induced the Governor
to give it the appellation of the King’s Table Land. On
the south-west side of the King’s Table Land the moun-
tain terminates in abrupt precipices of immense dej>th,
at the bottom of which is seen a glen, as romantically
beautiful as can be imagined, bounded on the further side
by mountains of great magnitude, terminating equally
abruptly as the others, and the whole thickly covered
with timber. The length of this picturesque and remark-
able tract of country is about 24 miles, to which the
Governor gave the name of The Prince Regent’s Glen.
Proceeding hence to the 33rd mile, on the top of a hill,
an opening presents itself on the south-west side of The
Prince Regent’s Glen, from whence a view is obtained
particularly beautiful and grand—mountains rising be-
yond mountains, with stupendous masses of rock in the
foreground, here strike the eye with admiration and as-
tonishment. The circular form in which the whole is so
wonderfully disposed induced the Governor to give the
name of Pitt’s Amphitheatre (in honour of the late Right
Honourable William Pitt) to this offset or branch from
The Prince Regent’s Glen. The road continues from
hence, for the space of 17 miles, on the ridge of the moun-
tain which forms one side of The Prince Regent’s Glen,


and then it suddenly terminates in nearly a perpendicu-
lar precijiice of 67G £t. high, as ascertained bv measure-
ment. The road constructed by Mr. Cox down this
rugged and tremendous descent, through all its windings,
is no less than three-quarters of a mile in length, and has
been executed with skill and stability, and reflects much
credit on him. The labour here undergone, and the
difficulties surmounted, can only be appreciated bv those
who view this scone. In order to peipetuatc the memory
of Mr. Cox’s services, the Governor deemed it a tribute
justly due to him to give his name to this grand and extra-
ordinary pass; and he accordingly called it Cox's Pass.
Having descended into the valley at the bottom of this
pass, the retrospective view of the overhanging mountains
is magnificently grand. Although the present pass is the
only practicable point yet discovered for descending by,
yet the mountain is much higher than those on cither-
side of it, from whence it is distinguished at a consider-
able distance when approaching it from the interior, and
in this point of view it has the appearance of a very high
distinct hill, although it is in fact only the abrupt ter-
mination of a ridge. The Governor gave the name of
Mount York to this termination of the ridge, in honour
of his Royal Highness the Duke of York.
“On descending Cox’s Pass the Governor was much
gratified by the appearance of good pasture land and soil
fit for cultivation, which was the first he had met with
since the commencement of his tour. The valley at the
base of Mount York lie called The Vale of Clwyd, in
consequence of the strong resemblance it bore to the vale
of that name in North Wales. The grass in this vale


is of good quality, and very abundant, and a rivulet of
fine water runs along it from the eastward, which unites
itself at the western extremity of the vale with another
rivulet containing still more water. The junction of these
two streams forms a very handsome river, now called by
the Governor Cox’s River, which takes its course, as has
been ascertained, through The Prince Regent’s Glen, and
empties itself into the River Nepean, near Mulgoa; and
it has been conjectured, from the nature of the country
through which it passes, that it must be one of the prin-
cipal causes of the floods which have occasionally been
felt on the low banks of the River Hawkesbury, into
which the Nepean discharges itself. The Yale of Chvyd,
from the base of Mount York, extends six miles in a
westerly direction, and has its termination at Cox’s River.
Westward of this river the country again becomes hilly,
but generally open forest land, and very good pasturage.
Three miles to the westward of The Vale of Clwyd,
Messrs. Blaxland, Wentworth, and Lawson had formerly
terminated their excursion, and when the various difficul-
ties are considered which they had to contend with, espe-
cially until they had effected the descent of Mount York,
to which place they were obliged to pass through thick
brushwood, where they were under the necessity of cut-
ting a passage for their baggage horses, the severity of
which labour had seriously affected their healths, their
patient endurance of such fatigue cannot fail to excite
much surprise and admiration. In commemoration
of their merits, three beautiful high hills, joining each
otner, at the end of their tour at this place have received
their names in the following order, viz., Mount Blaxland,


Wentworth’s Sugar Loaf, and Lawson’s Sugar Loaf. A
range of very lofty hills and narrow valleys alternately
form the tract of country from Cox’s River, for a distance
of 16 miles, until the Fish River is arrived at; and the
stage between these rivers is consequently very severe
and oppressive on the cattle. To this range the Governor
gave the name of Clarence Hilly Range.
“Proceeding from the Fish River, and at a short dis-
tance from it, a very singular and beautiful mountain
attracts the attention, its summit being crowned with a
large and very extraordinary-looking rock, nearly circular
in form, which gives to the whole very much the appear-
ance of a hill fort, such as are frequent in India. To this
lofty hill Mr. Evans, who was the first European dis-
coverer, gave the name Mount Evans. Passing on from
hence, the country continues hilly, but affords good pas-
turage, gradually improving to Sidmouth Valley, which
is distant from the pass of the Fish River eight miles.
The land here is level, and the first met with, unencum-
bered with timber. It is not of very considerable extent,
but abounds with a great variety of herbs and plants,
such as would probably interest and gratify the scientific
colonist. This beautiful little valley runs north-west and
south-east, between hills of easy ascent thinly covered with
timber. Leaving Sidmouth Valley, the country becomes
again hilly, and in other respects resembles very much the
country to the eastward of the valley for some miles.
Having reached Campbell’s River, distant 13 mile 3 from
Sidmouth Valley, the Governor was highly gratified by
the appearance of the country, which there began to ex-


hibit open and extensive views of gently rising grounds
and fertile plains. Judging from the height of the banks
and its general width, the Campbell River must be in
some parts of very considerable magnitude, but the extra-
ordinary drought which has apparently prevailed on the
Western side of the mountains, equally as throughout this
colony for the last three years, has reduced this river so
much that it may more properly be called a chain of ponds
than a running stream at the present time* In the
reaches or pools of the Campbell River the very curious
animal called the ornithorhynchus paradoxus, or water-
platypus mole, is seen in great numbers. The soil is rich,
and the grass is consequently luxuriant. Two miles to
the southward of the line of road which crosses Campbell
River there is a very rich tract of low lands which has
been named Mitchell Plains. Flax was found growing
here in considerable quantities. The Fish River, which
forms a junction with the Campbell River a few miles to
the northward of the road and bridge over the latter, has
also two very fertile plains on its banks, the one called
O’Connell Plains and the other Macquarie Plains, both of
considerable extent, and very capable of yielding all the
necessaries of life.
“At the distance of seven miles from the bridge over
the Campbell River, Bathurst Plains open to the view,
presenting a rich tract of champaign country of 11 miles
in length, bounded on both sides by gently rising and
very beautiful hills, thinly wooded. The Macquarie
River, which is constituted by the junction of the Fish
and Campbell rivers, takes a winding course through
the plains, which can be easily traced from the high lands
* This seems very extraordinary after the exceedingly wet summer experienced by
Mr. Cox.


adjoining by the particular verdure of the trees on its
banks, which are likewise the only trees throughout the
extent of the plains. The level and clean surface of these
plains gives them at first view the appearance of lands
under cultivation. It is impossible to behold this grand
scene without a feeling of admiration and surprise, whilst
the silence and solitude which reign in a space of such
extent and beauty as seems designed by Nature for the
occupancy and comfort of man create a degree of melan-
choly in the mind which may be more easily imagined
than described.
“The Governor and suite arrived at these plains on
Thursday, the 4th of May, and encamped on the southern
or left bank of the Macquarie River, the situation being
selected in consequence of its commanding a beautiful and
extensive prospect for many miles in every direction
around it. At this place the Governor remained a week,
which time he occupied in making excursions in different
directions through the adjoining country on both sides
of the river.
“On Sunday, the 7th May, the Governor fixed on a
site suitable for the erection of a town at some future
period, to which he gave the name of Bathurst, in honour
of the present Secretary of State for the Colonies. The
situation of Bathurst is elevated sufficiently beyond the
reach of any floods whicn may occur, and is at the same
time so near to the river on its south bank as to derive
all the advantages of its clear and beautiful stream. The
mechanics and settlers, of whatever description, who may
be hereafter permitted to form permanent residences to
themselves at this place, will have the highly important


advantages of a rich and fertile soil, with a beautiful
river flowing through it for all the uses of man. The
Governor must, however, add that the hopes which were
at first so sanguinely entertained of this river becoming
navigable to the Western sea have ended in disappoint-
ment.
“During the week that the Governor remained at
Bathurst, he made daily excursions in various directions.
One of these extended 22 miles in a south-west direction,
and on that occasion, as well as on all others, he found
the country composed chiefly of valleys and plains, sepa-
rated occasionally by ranges of low hills, the soil through-
out being generally fertile, and well circumstanced for
the purpose of agriculture and grazing.
"The Governor here feels much pleasure in being en-
abled to communicate to the public that the favourable
reports which he had received of the country to the west
of the Blue Mountains have not been by any means ex-
aggerated. The difficulties which present themselves in
the journey from hence are certainly great and inevitable ;
but those persons who may be inclined to become per-
manent settlers there will probably content themselves
with visiting this part of the country hut rarely, and, of
course, will have them seldom to encounter. Plenty of
water and a sufficiency of grass are to be found in the
mountains for the support of such cattle as may be sent
over them, and the tracts of fertile soil and rich pasturage
which the new country affords are fully extensive enough
for any increase of population and stock which can pos-
sibly take place for many years. Within a distance of
10 miles from the site of Bathurst there is not less than


50,000 acres of land clear of timber, and fully one-lialf of
that may be considered excellent soil, well calculated for
cultivation. It is a matter of regret that in proportion
as the soil improves, the timber degenerates; and it is
to be remarked that everywhere to the westward of the
mountains it is much inferior, both in size and quality, to
that within the present colony. There is, however, a suffi-
ciency of timber of tolerable quality within the district
around Bathurst for the purposes of house-building and
husbandry. The Governor has here to lament that
neither coals nor limestone have yet been discovered in
the Western country, articles in themselves of so much
importance that the want of them must be severely felt
whenever that country shall be settled.
“The road constructed by Mr. Cox and the party
under him commences at Emu ford, on the left bank of
the River Nepean, and is thence carried 101 i miles to
the flagstaff at Bathurst. This road has been carefully
measured, and each mile regularly marked on the trees
growing on the left side of the road proceeding towards
Bathurst. The Governor in his tour made the following
stages, in which he was principally regulated by the con-
sideration of having good pasturage for the cattle, and
plenty of water : Miles.
Ist stage, from Emu Ford to Springwood 12
2nd „ „ Jamieson’s Valley . 16
3rd „ „ Blackheath 13
4th „ „ Cox’s River 15
sth „ „ Fish River 16
6th ~ „ Sidmouth Valley... 8
7th „ „ Campbell River .... 11
Bth ~ „ Bathurst 10J
Total 10H


At all of which places the traveller may assure himself
of good grass and water in abundance. On Thursday, the
11th May, the Governor and suite set out from Bathurst
on their return, and arrived at Sydney on Friday, the 19th
ultimo. The Governor cannot conclude this account of
his tour without offering his best acknowledgments to
William Cox, Esq., for the important service he has ren-
dered to the colony in so short a period of time by open-
ing a passage to the newly-discovered country, and at the
same time assuring him that he shall have great pleasure
in recommending his meritorious services on this occasion
to the favourable consideration of his Majesty’s Ministers.
“By command of his Excellency the Governor,
“John Thomas Campbell,
“Secretary.”
In the month of March, 1817, the Surveyor-General,
John Oxley, received instructions from the Governor to
explore the River Lachlan, and endeavour to discover
where it emptied itself; or did it and the Macquarie River
join? This river had been discovered by Deputy-Sur-
veyor Evans four years before, and at the particular re-
quest of the Governor Mr. William Cox had visited it,
and suggested that a boat be constructed, and learn
whether it was navigable.
In the despatch conveying instructions to Mr. Oxley,
the following paragraph occurs :
“On your arrival at Bathurst you will find William
Cox, Esq., there, and to him I beg leave to refer you for
every information relative to the provisions, stores, horses
for carriage, and other equipments ordered to be for-


warded to the depot on the Lachlan River for the use of
the expedition, the arrangement and conveyance of all of
which has been wholly entrusted to him. Mr. Cox having
promised to accompany you as far as the depot on the
Lachlan River, he will be able to remove any unforeseen
difficulties that may arise on your arrival there in getting
the provisions and stores for the use of the expedition
forwarded.”
This shows what implicit confidence the Governor
had in the man who constructed the road over the Blue
Mountains, and who, through his long and energetic life,
had also the confidence and esteem of his fellow-men.


OYER THE RANGES.
Chapter XI.
When William Cox had finished that wonderful road
across the Blue Mountains, a new chapter in the history
of New South Wales began. There was an opening for
the race beyond the ranges. For nearly 30 years our
people had struggled along on the coast, shut off from the
vast world beyond by the impassable range of blue hills.
To all men everywhere, and everywhen, there has been a
weird interest in what lay on the other side of the moun-
tains. “Banjo’s” story of the little girl who lived, walled
in by the Moonbi Range, is the story of all the human
race. The little one’s idea was that beyond the range—
“ They never need work, nor want, nor weep ;
No troubles can come their hearts to estrange.
Some summer night I shall fall asleep,
And wake in a country over the range.”
Our people went “over the range” on the road made
by the bold pioneer from Wimbourne Minster, and they
settled in the new, good land; but life has proven the same
there as here. Sometimes it is easy, sometimes hard;
life has smiles and tears, and joys and woes, whatever
side of the range we are.


To recall the names of the people who crossed the
range in the year 1815—the year of the battle of Waterloo
—makes a music of words, a prose melody. There was
Lowe, of Sidmouth, who settled on the left bank of the
Fish River. There was Hassall, of O'Connell Plains ; and
Lawson and Street, of Macquarie Plains. Then you had
the “Church and School Lands,” which the early men
carefully set apart for the times that were yet to be, and
you reached the town of Bathurst, at a distance of 145
miles from Sydney. That was a long trip in 1815 ! Now
it is a town of over 12,000 inhabitants—a busy, enterpris-
ing town, set in the middle of a fertile district. Close by
the town were a few small farms, and then the gigantic
estate of General Stuart. On the right bank of the river
were the brothers West, Mackenzie, Cox (the Hereford
Estate). Hawkins, Piper, and the Rankin Brothers, Kite,
Lee, and Smith. Some of them had small farms.
Mr. Geo. Suttor had been promised a farm in the
new district, but he was crowded out, and had to go fur-
ther out to the Wimburndale Creek, on which Walker
and others already had farms. Queen Charlotte’s Yale
was cut up into small farms, which were occupied by
veterans and emancipists. Sheep and cattle soon began
to roam the gentle downs, and an industrious population
gave a new character to the country. The Rankins es-
tablished a cheese factory, and the products thereof were
soon spread abroad amongst ~ie small population of the
young colony.
When Governor Macquarie visited Bathurst Plains
and saw the nature of the country, he was pleased beyond
expression, and he was evidently under the impression


that the arrangements for settlement that ue had made
would suffice for years to come. He little dreamed that
the few thousands of sheep in the colony would soon in-
crease to millions, and that the people who had primarily
adventured across the range would soon be moving hun-
dreds of miles to the west, the north, and the south. But
nobody could have imagined, in that far-off day, that
Australia would have developed so enormously. Our
antipodal distance from the Mother Country seemed to
preclude all idea of rapid advance and permanent de-
velopment, but the world moves rapidly nowadays, and
the pressure of population against the means of sub-
sistence is very great. The history of the advance from
Bathurst is really a record of colonial expansion. The
men of that day were making history, just as we are, but,
like ourselves, they were unaware of it. We are generally
under the impression that we are each, individually, work-
ing our own way to make our own career. As a matter
of fact, each individual is working out his racial contract
as part of a mighty movement.
Those men were living in a great time. But so are
we! As the old hymn says :
“ We are living, we are dwelling, in a grand, an awful time,
In an age on ages telling—to be living is sublime ! ”
Aye, we think that was true of mem; but it is equally
true of to-day.
Lieutenant William Lawson heard from the blacks
that there was a fine country far away, “over there,” to-
wards the north-west. Surveyor Evans had traversed the
country away back as far as the Lachlan, about 140 miles,
but the blacks told Lieutenant Lawson that there was a


land of milk and honey far beyond that to the north.
Finally, Lieutenant Lawson made up a small party, in-
cluding Mr. Scott, and the guide was a blackfellow named
Aaron. They travelled along for a good while till they
had crossed the Turon River, and when they reached a
bold granite hill, Aaron struck. He pointed to the good
country, and said that was it, and he showed them the
beautiful river flowing through the Cudgegong country,
but further he would not go. He was afraid of the hostile
blacks. When, years afterwards, the Mudgee-road had
been traced, this hill was named after the blackfellow,
and unto this day the place is called “Aaron’s Pass.”
Mr. Lawson and his party travelled down the river
to the place that is now called “Mudgee,” and bore away
to the north to try and find their way on to the Liverpool
Plains, which had been discovered some two years before
by the Colonial Surveyor, Oxley. Mr. Lawson crossed
the head of the Goulburn, one of the tributaries of the
Hunter River, and got as far as the Liverpool Range. He
discovered a stream, which he called the Wymmis, and
another the Smith, now the Collaroy or Krui, and also the
Minnamurra at Cassilis. He continued westerly, and
came on the Talbragar, which he named the Erskine.
Some two years after Allan Cunningham, the botanist,
discovered the same river, and named it the Lawson.
Mr. Lawson was one of the most enterprising men
of that day, and has made a large mark on our early his-
tory, but he failed to find a passage over the range on to
the Liverpool Plains. That was reserved for Allan
Cunningham. In 1823 the Government commissioned
him to try and find a pass, and he went over Mr. Lawson’s


old track. He found the marked trees of his predecessor,
but the frowning range presented an utterly impassable
front. He crossed the Goulburn, and went east as far as
Hall’s Creek, but there was no opening possible for man
or beast. But his orders were to find a feasible pass, and
he was made of grand stuff : he simply kept on searching,
and he eventually found an opening at the head of Coolah
Creek, which he named Pandora’s Pass. It seems an odd
name, for Pandora was the beautiful woman formed out
of clay by Vulcan, at the express command of Zeus, who
meant through her instrumentality to bring trouble and
misery into the world. She was married to Epimetheus
(after-thought), and he possessed a beautiful jar, in which
were all the blessings that the gods held in reserve for
mankind. He was forbidden to open it; but the beauti-
ful clay woman opened it, and every blessing except Hope
escaped. Pandora closed the lid in time to retain that
blessing, and if that had gone it would have been a dreary,
dreary world. Why did Allan Cunningham call that
“Pandora’s Pass ?”
On his way back to Bathurst he was startled by the
sight of the tracks of cattle on the banks of the Pipeclay
Creek, which runs into the Cudgegong. After some
search he found, not only the cattle, hut the stockman in
charge of them, Tom Frome, and who led him to the cattle
station at Menah, or Munnar, where Mr. Geo. Cox had
his oul>station. This is one of the little incidents that
open our eyes of the hardships of the early men. He
had run short of rations, and the discovery of a white
man at such a time was a benediction. But far more than
that was the fact that Mr. Cox’s stockman had a vegetable


garden, and, for the first time in months, Mr. Allan Cun-
ningham had a royal feast of fresh vegetables. To us who
live in towns and beside big gardens this may have but
little significance, but to the early man, who had lived
long on damper, salt beef, and tea, it was a rich treat.


AUSTRALIAN DEVELOPMENT.
Chapter XII.
How Mr. Geo. Cox came to be at Menah forms an-
other chapter of colonial history that is exceedingly in-
teresting. When William Lawson returned to Bathurst
after his unsuccessful attempt to cross the Liverpool
Range, he gave a glowing account of the grand country he
had seen. This stirred the ambition of the young Cox’s,
and George Cox (father of the Hon. G. H. Cox, M.L.C.)
and Henry volunteered to join him in taking up the
land. In those days there was great need for companion-
ship in such adventures, for the method of travelling was
slow in the extreme. The fastest way was on horseback,
but when the pioneers went forth to take upland they
had to take their flocks and herds with them; their ox
waggons and their household goods. There were no
stores, no parcels post, no means of replenishing. They
went out from the filmy borders of a young civilisation
into the strange, roadless land of the blackfellow, the wal-
laby, and the laughing jackass. So they moved slowly,
and watch had to be set all the time to guard against
attack from the blacks. William Lawson wanted a friend
and neighbour; so he persuaded George and Henry Cox
to set out on that long march to the good land


that lay afar off. Their agreement was that the Cox's were
to take all the land on the south bank of the Cudgegong
River, and Lawson would take all that on the north. And
yet, that w,as little over 75 years ago !It sounds so far off,
in its simple, patriarchal method of dividing the country
that it stands beside an earlier story —-listen: “And L(jt,
also, which went with Abraham, had flocks and herds and
tents. And the land was not able to bear them both, that
they might dwell together : for their substance was great,
so that they could not dwell together. And there was
strife between the herdmen of Abraham’s cattle and the
herdmen of Lot’s cattle . . . and Abraham said unto
Lot, ‘Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen, for we
be brethren. Is not the whole land before thee 1 Sepa-
rate thyself, I pray thee, from me. If thou wilt take the
left hand, then I will go to the right hand ; or if thou
depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.’ ” So
the squatterß, in the genesis of the world, selected their
stations, and the story is old and hoary, thousands of
years olck But so also did William Lawson and George
Cox, and that day is but little over 75 years from us.
And here it is well to pause and make a remark. Some
of the hypercritical, even of our own people, say unkind
things about the morality of the men who made Aus-
tralia. Some would measure the men of the days of
Phillip and Hunter and Macquarie by the standards of
the Commonwealth, but the standard is false, for the con-
ditions of existence were vastly different. The gentlemen
who came out here then found a wild, hard land, with
none of the fashions or customs of the land they had left.


They were masterful men, brave men, and they stood not
upon ancient methods, but they adopted the best means
to win to an end; and Garran sings now—
There was shame in the bitter beginning ;
There was Freedom’s averted face ;
But honour was there for the winning,
And the breed of a sturdy race ;
And the solitudes sang of endeavour,
And the cities arose by the sea :
God spake : “ One destiny ever,
One people that is to be ? ”
They made Australia for us, and the reading of the
darkest days of Australian history is not so dark as the
days of Genesis, of the days of Sodom and Gomorrah, of
the cave-dwelling days of Zoar. Men sneer at our
pioneers, but it is the sneer of ignorance. They were
grand men, those pioneers of Australia !
When George Cox started out with his stock he was
going to a new land. It is strange reading now, when we
see what the land has become. These two passed a place
that is now called “ Burrundulla,” one of the finest
places in the colony, where George Cox final ly’made his
home, but he thought it was “ too swampy.” Strange it
sounds indeed when one looks over the beautiful station
that stands there to-day. They moved down to a water-
hole which the blackfellows called “ Mudgee,” and there
they camped in the year 1822. To-day the town of
Mudgee occupies the site of the old camp. It is distant
190 miles from Sydney, and is easily reached by train.
It is a busy town, of nearly 5000 inhabitants, and all
around are the homes of the famous sheep-breeders of
Australia.


Some three miles down the river a hut and yards
were erected on a pretty piece of park land called Menah,
and that was where Mr. George Cox had his out-station
when Allan Cunningham found him in 1823, It was a
memorable meeting, and when one stands in the town of
Mudgee now, on a show day, when the town is all alive
with excitement, the story of 1823 becomes utterly
incredible. Yet such has been our rate of development.
So has Australia grown.
One other item that belongs to the period must be
told, in order to make clear the position of the men of
that day. The blacks were very dangerous. They were
plentiful and exceedingly treacherous. • They used to
come about the stations, and were very difficult to deal
with, because to shoot them for coming near was repellant
to English ideas, yet to allow them to loaf about was to
endanger the lives of all the white people in the camp.
It is easy to criticise, but it was difficult to exist, and the
pioneers had grievous troubles. The chief blacks of the
district had been named by the white people after the
days of the' week. The great chief was “Sunday,” but the
deadliest enemy of the newly - arrived whites was
“ Saturday.” He was a powerful black, cunning as
serpent, and an inveterate foe of our race. The servants
of the new stations stood in mortal terror of the blacks,
for their stealthy methods got on to the nerves of the
hirelings, and when a white man was speared they all fled
to Bathurst. Those were the days that tried men’s souls,
and nobody can understand the courage that was
required to face the situation except those who saw the
influence of the Breelong blacks, only a little time ago.


The Governors had murdered several people, and had
taken to the bush. Our poor selectors and labourers
could have faced a white foe as well as any people in the
world, but the horror of waiting, waiting, waiting for the
creeping, stealthy, treacherous blacks was too much for
them. Thomas Carlyle said it was not the crowing of the
cocks that worried him at Ecclefechan; it was “waiting
for the next.” There is philosophy in that: waiting
makes people nervous. George Cox and William Lawson
had to wait and be ready to defend their places when all
their servants had fled. The big blackfellow “Sunday”
affirmed that he owned all the land about Mudgee, and
that “Missa Cox only got it.”
What the man of that day required was cool nerves
and readiness of wit. One day Henry Cox had been left
alone at Menah. He was not feeling “fit,” so he stayed
at the hut to mend his clothes while the rest went to
their duties about the station. As he was sitting quietly
stitching, dreaming about the home at Mulgoa, a shadow
fell across the floor, and, looking up, he saw that the place
was surrounded by big, savage, armed blackfellows. He
realized that his hour had come, for he could not reach
the arms, and there was not a soul near the place to help
him. Instead of giving way to terror, and making a rush
,to escape, he sat and smiled on the savages. He tempted
one inside to show him the colours of the fancy tapes he
'was using. He showed him how to sew on buttons. He
,gbt the crowd about him, and tied tapes round their
heads and decorated them in childish fashion, as suited
best cneir savage minds. He kept them amused and
interested till the slow-moving sun was casting long


shadows about him, and the footsteps of returning well-
armed comrades were heard, and then the strain was over.
The blacks had forgotten their murderous mission, and
Henry Cox was saved. But it took a man’s nerve to play
a game like that with “Saturday” and “Sunday.”
While such men were at the head of the Mudgee
and Guntawang tribes, no peace was possible, and it was
only when “Saturday” was shot that the dwellers by the
Cudgegong began to live in peace. “Saturday” was finally
captured by six white men, but a musket was broken on
his ribs before he could be overpowered. But the blacks
really exterminated themselves. As the district became
more populous they moved further .back, or stayed in the
village and drank themselves to death; but the final crisis
was reached with the discovery of gold in 1851. When
they could pick up gold and sell it for rum, their doom
was sealed, poor wretches. The last of all the blacks of
the district was Tom Penney, and he died about 25 years
ago, so that the present generation has scarcely seen a
black in the district.
In the meantime William Cox was to the fore in
looking up good cattle and sheep country. He established
a station' near the junction of the Cudgegong and Mac-
quarie Rivers, and called it “Burrendong,” now belonging
to the Hon. F. B. Suttor. He also took up land at Coolah,
along with Mr. Lawson, and his son George Cox was soon
across the range, by the Pandora Pass, where he took up
Garrawilla and Nombie, which Oxley, when he first came
in sight of that rich pastoral country, called “Lushmgton
Valley.”


With reference to the taking up of the Liverpool
Plains country, the late Sir J. Robertson tells the
following story: He had started from the Upper Hunter
to explore this new country through the pass in the range,
just discovered above Murrurundi. He went westward
until he crossed the Mooki and Cox’s Creek, and there, to
his surprise, saw two men riding towards him and his
party down the plain. Thinking they were bushrangers,
he hid in a clump of myalls until they came nearer, when
he came to the conclusion that they were, like himself,
looking for new country. He then came forward, and
discovered that it was Mr. George Cox and his stockman,
who had already formed a station called Nombie. He
(Sir John) then took up a station on the Namoi, but he
remarked that it was a curious coincidence that this
grand tract of country should have been taken up almost
simultaneously from the Eastern and Western borders.
The early pioneers of Australia have but scant justice
meted out to them. They must have been men of more
than ordinary pluck and energy. When we find a number
of gentlemen prepared to give up all the comforts of
civilized life, and brave the dangers of an unknown
region, to herd with felons and risk their lives amongst
savages, to be cut off for months from all communication
with the friends and relatives they left behind them,
shows that they were men whom we, their descendants,
should delight to honour, and we owe them a debt of
gratitude for ail they have done for us.
Hard woixls have been uttered because in the early
days of the colony the state of morality was not very
high; but sufficient allowance has not been made for the


peculiar circumstances in which these men were placed.
The system of assigning convicts to masters who were just
and kind was, there can be no doubt, the best means ever
adopted to reform any but the most hardened criminal.
Governor Macquarie was most energetic on this subject,
and, during the twelve years ( he ruled in New South
Wales, did more to ameliorate the position of the convicts,
and more particularly the emancipists, than any previous
or subsequent Governor. In 1821 a general meeting
of the emancipated colonists was held in Sydney, pursuant
to a requisition addressed to the Provost Marshal. At
this assembly a series of resolutions were adopted, to this
effect:—l. That by the humane and benevolent policy
of Governor Macquarie—a policy hitherto sanctioned by
the Mother Country—the emancipated colonists had been
encouraged and protected, had acquired and were now
possessed of the larger moiety of the property of the
colony, and were becoming the middle class of society
therein. 2. That from the establishment of the colony
up to April, 1820, it had been held and acted upon that
persons arriving in the colony under sentence of trans-
portation, and afterwards obtaining their pardon, either
by service of the term or otherwise, might acquire and
possess landed and other property, and enjoy all the civil
rights of free citizens. 3. That by a late determination
of the Court of Queen’s Bench in England, it was declared
that pardons were of no effect in restoring the emancipists
to their legal rights, that this state of the law affected the
emigrated colonists, because the titles to much of the
land which they possessed had been obtained from the
emancipists, and humbly praying relief from the


Sovereign and the British Parliament. These resolutions
show the importance this class had now attained, and the
estimation of the people of the Governor, who had
uniformly been their friend and protector.
Writing to Lord Sidmouth, Governor Macquarie
states : “ The almost entire failure of the colony as a place
of reformation ” was an assertion which he positively
denied. The number of families now established as
settlers, living on their farms, useful, industrious, and—
taken generally —as respectable as the yeomanry of any
other country, would prove to anyone that the colony had
not failed as a place of reformation.
“The convict settlers had, in 1820, 2,618 acres of land
in cultivation; they had 40,643 head of cattle, and
221,079 sheep.
“On the general subject of the good or bad policy of
transportation he would not presume to speak; but he
could not avoid saying that this country could be made
the home, and the happy home, to every emancipated
convict who deserved it. 1 ”
It must be remembered that many convicts who were
transported were not criminals. How many hundreds of
Irishmen were transported, not because they committed
any criminal offence, but because they had foolishly taken
up arms against England. Again, many misguided men
were transported for machine-breaking, believing that the
introduction of machinery would injure their position as
workmen. Others, again, were sent across the seas for
snaring a hare or a rabbit or committing some trifling
offence which would now be met by a three months’
imprisonment.


No doubt many of the convicts were fiends in human
shape, notably one John Lynch, whose career is described
by Judge Therry in his Reminiscences. Being convicted
,of a murder, he confessed to having killed no less than
nine persons, some apparently for no other reason except
the lust of shedding blood. One boy he killed by giving
him, he said, one crack on the head, and soliloquises
“If people knew how easy it is to take away life, things
of this kind would happen oftener.” Before killing a
man named Mulligan, he stated that he walked out of
the hut. It was a clear, cold, windy night. “I looked
up at the moon, and I prayed to Almighty God to direct
me. I said to myself, ‘I am an injured man, and the
Mulligans have defrauded me of what I perilled life
and liberty to obtain. That fellow, when I was starving
in Berrima Iron Gang, has often passed me by without so
much as giving me a shilling, when he had many pounds
which were justly mine in his hands. And now, would it
not be right that they should lose all they possess, as a
judgment upon them for withholding his own from the
poor prisoner. Heaven guide me, and point out to me
what to do.” He then murdered the old man Mulligan,
wife, son, and daughter, and placed them upon a heap of
wood. “I was surprised,” he said, “to see how the bodies
burned. They flared up as if they were so many bags
filled with fat. It was an awful thing to stand alone in
the dead of night, and to see the four bodies burning to
ashes.”
The bushrangers were discriminating in their acts
of lawlessness, and would not injure the property of men
who were good and kind masters. On one occasion when


Donohue, the noted bushranger, and another (Walmsley)
stopped Mr. Geo. Cox on the road between Windsor and
Mulgoa, when driving in his gig, they robbed Mr. Cox and
his coachman of their /watches, money, etc., and then
asked who the victim was. Upon being told, they at
once stated that they would not rob a good master, and
at once returned the valuables they had taken. Mr. Cox
happened to have some tea in his gig, and gave it to the
robbers, thanking them for their consideration, and pro-
mising not to give information to the police.


FAMILY HISTORY.
Chapter XIII.
To attempt to follow out the ramifications of the
Bells and Cox’s in Australia would be a Herculean task,
and one of only an academic interest. Yet, in the first
or second generation of the grand old pioneers we find the
secret of their success. William Cox, of Clarendon, and
Archie Bell, of Belmont, were men of intense physical
force. They were strong men physically, and their pro-
geny is all over Australia. One of the Bells, of Pickering,
as we have previously mentioned, said that he could ride
from the Gulf of Carpentaria to Sydney, and hardly sleep
one night out of the house of a relative. Such a state-
ment, made 100 years after the landing of William Cox,
seems utterly incredible, yet a brief sketch of William
Cox’s family tree will show that it is well within reason.
In 1819 Mrs. "William Cox died, leaving five sons.
In 1821 William Cox married again, and took to wife
Miss Anna Blachford, the sister of Mrs. Beddek, the wife
of the Hawkesbury lawyer. By her he had three sons and
one daughter. Edgar, the eldest (who inherited Here-
ford), who still lives in Hew South Wales, married Miss
Piper, the daughter, of Captain Piper. Thomas entered
the Church, and moved to England, where he died,


leaving a large family. He inherited some property from
his father, which was situated at the corner of Bent and
O’Connell streets, in Sydney.
The third son, Alfred, inherited Burrandong, on the
junction of the Macquarie and the Cudgegong Rivers, and
other properties. He sold Burrandong to the late W. H.
Suttor, and moved to New Zealand, where he has a large
family. Anna married the late Captain Ramsbottom,
who afterwards changed his name on inheriting some pro-
perty, and became Captain Isherwood. They moved to
England, where Captain Isherwood was killed. They
also left a large family.
The first family of five sons left a good record. Wil-
liam, jun., and George, each had large families. James
married three times, and settled in Tasmania. He car-
ried the family names with him, and founded “Claren-
don,” on the River Esk, near Launceston. His great
grandson is in possession there now.
Henry Cox married Miss Mackenzie, of Bathurst,
and he left four sons and two daughters, one of whom is
the wife of the Hon. G. H. Cox. He was possessed of
considerable property in the Mudgee district.
Edward Cox married Miss Brooks, daughter of Cap-
tain Brooks, who was famous in the history of New South
Wales in the early days. He was a noble-hearted sailor.
Edward Cox lived and died at Mulgoa, and left a family
which has been, and is, most notable in New South Wales.
One of his sons was Edward King Cox, the famous stud-
breeder. Another son is Dr. James Charles Cox, President
of the Fisheries Commission, and Medical Adviser of the
A.M.P. Society. One of his daughters is now Countess of


Lindsay. Out of the seven sons of George Cox, there are
only three surviving—Hon. Geo. Henry Cox, M.L.C., and
J. D. Cox, of Cullenbone, and A. T. Cox, of Mudgee. One
of the sons who has since died, was the famous sheep-
breeder, Chas. Clarendon Cox, of Broombee.
Up to the third generation of Cox’s the descendants
numbered nearly 500, hut as soon as the fourth generation
is entered on they become countless as the sands on the
sea-shore. They reach not only all over Australia, but
into nearly every part of the world; and the early men of
New South Wales showed the secret of their great strength
in their numerous offspring. They were no weaklings,
those men who founded Australia! When old William
Cox, of Clarendon, died at Fairfield, Windsor, on March
15th, 1837, there passed awav a truly great man. He was
72 years of age, but he was very old and very honourable,
measured by events, and his descendants have proved
their breeding by their honourable careers.


THE OLD FAMILIES.
Chapter XIV.
Australia lacks a “Sacred Place!” We have, as yet,
no "Shakespeare country,” no holy river like the Ganges,
no Delphic Temple, no Mecca, no tomhs of saints, nor
holy martyr places. We have not yet risen (?) to a
Lourdes or Holywell. Some day men will travel tx> Wind-
sor to see where sleep “the rude; forefathers” of Australia.
They will stand beside the Hawkesbury and read from
its stolid flood the romance of the earlier days. But that
time is not yet. The gods walked with men in the far-off
times; we never dream that the gods are with us to-day.
Nor have we yet acquired a leisured class, which can afford
to take interest in purely sentimental matters. Yet the
Windsor district, where our history began, is full of in-
tense interest to-day. The old “Government House”
still stands beside the river, on a high spot, where it was
safe from floods. Not that the Governor dwelt there,
mind you; but it was a house built by the Government
for public use, and it was a brave house in its day. The
broad shingle roof is perfect yet, but it has sagged from
the line of truth and beauty, and is failing fast; yet the
cedat beams and door-posts are strong as ever. The town
is old and sleepy. It may be a little larger than it was


in the days of Governor Macquarie, but—not much. It
is quiet and heedless. No storms come to Windsor. The
fevered life of modern days has gone over the ranges, or
north, or south, leaving Windsor to sleep and dream.
Just a few miles out you come to Clarendon, once
the home of William Cox. The homestead is close to the
big common, on one side, and on the other it overlooks a
great stretch of river-flat, rich as a Dutch valley, where
the horses and cattle are rolling fat. As you ride along
the fences you are shaded by the great big English oaks
that were planted there by the boy from Queen Eliza-
beth’s Grammar School at Wimbourne Minster. There
is a square, correct waterhole inside the fence that is sug-
gestive of William of Orange and the fashions of the
English Court long ago. It is covered with fat duck-
wood and water-lilies, and you can imagine that golden
carp are living there now, as they have lived for centuries
—but your imaginings would be wrong. Our country
has no “centuries” yet. It is only 100 years since William
Cox landed here, and he came early. There is a new
house inside of the fence, and new children look on a
world that is new to them ; but, away to the right of the
modem house is the old house of the founder of Clarendon.
It is a large cottage house, built of brick and plaster. It
has large, handsome rooms, and a wooden wainscot runs
round the ancient drawing-room. The man who built
that house in the olden times had a big soul. He had
seen grand places in England. He came to our land as a
gentleman, and expressed his deepest convictions in mas-
sive work. But, alas, in our land woodwork endureth
not. We have “white ants,” which eat the inside from


solid timbers, and leave only a thin shell for Time to play
with. As you walk across the once solid floor of native
timber it gives way beneath the feet, and the gray dust
rises that tells of rot, ruin, and decay. The covered paths
of deadly termites on some of the spider-haunted beams
tell of the force that lives when all is decaying. Poor
old house!
Outside, the grass and the weeds are working havoc
with the once truly-laid stones, and the old levels are all
askew. The rose bushes have run wild, and are tangled
up with the box borders that run beside old guava trees.
The wisteria flowers as beautifully as ever, even while it
climbs over the orange and the lemon trees. All is wild
and uncared for. The trim paths are overgrown with
weeds, and the wind is moaning and sighing through the
oak trees; and the old master who built the house and
laid the paths is sleeping beside his wife, over yonder at
St. Matthew’s. And all the old, familiar objects that -iS
eye loved to rest on are tumbling to decay, and we sing
as we wander—
‘ ‘ Change and decay in all around I see,
Oh, Thou, who changest not, abide with me.”
Old William Cox left this house to his son George,
and by him it was left to his son Charles, and he sold it
to Arthur Dight, because he could not live there owing
to his asthma; and so it passed out of the family.
But look around, and everywhere you find traces of
the Cox family. Near by is the once stately Hobartville,
with its great trees and its famous horse paddocks, and its
history. Wm. Cox, jun., formed that place. He was old
William Cox’s eldest son, and when the father came out


in the “Minerva” young William was left at Home. He
was an officer in the English Army, and served in the
Peninsular War, and married Miss Piper, daughter of the
famous man who gave his name to Point Piper, in Sydney
Harbour. William Cox, jun., came out after his father
had settled here, and he made a good colonist. He settled
first at Hobartville, and afterwards took up stations about
Muswellbrook, on the Hunter River.
Then, away across the river, above the bridge, jou
can see shining the roofs and chimneys of Belmont, where
old Archie Bell lived. He came out in the year 1803 as
Lieutenant Archibald Bell, with the 102nd Regiment
(the New South Wales Corps). He was one of the strong
men of his day, and founder of the far-reaching Bell
family. His son, Archie, was the bold young bushman
who found his way over the Kurrajong to the Bathurst-
road, after Lawson, Wentworth, and Blaxland had found
the way via Penrith and Emu Plains. The road that
young Archie found was called “Bell’s Line,” and so it is
even unto this day. He received a grant of land on the
Hunter for his discovery, and was the first man who drove
cattle into that district. The Bells of Pickering are his
grandchildren.
George Cox, son of old William Cox, married Miss
Bell, of Belmont, and so the house on Belmont Hill be-
came a sort of centre from which the Bells and the Cox’s
radiated all over the country, so that to-day, wherever you
go in Australia, you come across some members of those
grand old families. On the hillside at Belmont sleeps
old Archibald Bell, his wife, and his granddaughter. In
the churchyard at Windsor, just across the river, sleeps


old William Cox and his wife, the forefathers of the great
race that fills the land to-day, and a new world has sprung
up since they left the troubled young colony. We of the
larger Commonwealth are just beginning to take an in-
terest in the men who made our history, and as the years
roll on, and Australia grows larger and more important,
so will our interest increase in the early men who laid the
foundations of our country. They braved the dangers
of the deep jn the olden time to found a new nation in the
Southern Seas, and to-day we have proven our love to the
old land. The men of the Cox type who laid the first
timbers of Southern Empire are the ones who enabled us
to sing—
“ Shake out each fold of the ensign old—the emblem fair and free
Of the island throne that’s an Empire grown—the flag that sweeps
the sea;
The flag of the folk who with hearts of oak braved the uncharted
sea.
For the old blood runs in Briton’s sons, and, tho’ the seas exile,
We bridge the wave with banners brave that float from isle to
isle—
The flag of the Little Islands, and the flag of the Great South
Isle ! ’
[the END.]
