

TiVfp
MEMORIES
OF MY UFE
FROM MY EARLY DAYS
IN SCOTLAND TILL THE
PRESENT DAY IN ADELAIDE
By Mrs. J. S. O. ALLEN




MEMORIES OF MY LIFE
FROM MY EARLY DAYS IN SCOTLAND TILL
THE PRESENT DAY IN ADELAIDE
By Mrs. J. S. O. ALLEN
ADELAIDE
J. L. BONYTHON & CO., “ THE ADVERTISER” OFFICE
King William Street




DEDICATED
THE LADIES OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
TN a sense I am no stranger to you. It may be
asked why I should bring the names of people and the
incidents of my life into book-form. Loneliness is the
principal cause. What would become of me if I could not
recall past years. I have written something of the history
of what I have lived through. Many times over I have
promised to write a cookery book from my colonial experience
—I am talking about cookery all day. I try to live on
recollection, although occasionally it hurts me. Many will
discern in these pages some of the observations they have
listened to while I have been giving lessons on cookery.
It has been habitual to me to allude to by-gone days and
customs.
Mrs. J. S. O. ALLEN.
77 Tynte Street,
North Adelaide.




CONTENTS.
M y First Place
Life’s Battle Begins
I Return Home ...
On the Coal Mines
I go to Glasgow ...
I Change my Occupation
The Country of Burns
I go to a New Place
I Leave Ayrshire
Dr. Dykes, Dr, Guthrie, and Dr. MacLeod
Another New Place
Abraham Lincoln
The Isle of Arran
Back in Glasgow again
I Decide to come to Adelaide
On an Emigrant Ship
I Arrive in Adelaide
My Father and Brother Arrive
I go to the South-East
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide
I go back to Sunnyside
Prince Alfred in Adelaide .
I Leave Government House
I Get Married ...
A Parting of Ways
I Return to Scotland
I Arrive in London
I Return to my Old Home ...
I Reach Adelaide again
Housekeeper at Government House
I Return to my Husband ...
Yet Another Parting




memories of illy iTife
FROM MY EARLIEST DAYS IN SCOTLAND TILL
THE PRESENT DAY IN ADELAIDE.
MY FIRST PLACE.
We did not talk of a ‘'situation” in those but of a
place. My sister, who was a few years older than 1, was out
at a place five miles from where we lived. She came home,
as she had not been well, and my father sent me to tell the
people that Mary could not return for a few days. They asked
me if I could stay in her stead till she was better. I was quite
willing, provided that my father would allow me. They ob-
tained my father’s consent, as he said if I was any use they,
could keep me; so at the age of ten I began to be a house-
servant.
We had no mother. She died when I was six years of
age. The name of the town was Denqy, not far from Falkirk.
The people with whom I went to live were bakers and confec-
tioners in a large way. With their sons and journeymen and
apprentices, in addition to the master, there were, all told, 12
men living on the establishment, and the mistress, with one
daughter and myself, did all the work, except that a woman
came to help with the washing. Some of the journeymen and
two apprentices slept over the granary or store where the flour
and other materials were kept. Every night at 10 o’clock those
men and boys had to be in their room; one of my duties was to
sjee that the door was locked and to bring the keys to the
master. The mistress would bring them to me again in the
frnorning at 4 o’clock, when I had to run up this long stone stair
and open the door and tell the men it was time to get up. I
always went back to bed again till 6 o’clock.
It was a busy house, 'There was a large shop facing the
front street, with two windows filled with beauteous cakes and
confectionery. There were five carts to load up every morning.


for the establishment served the locality for miles round with
bread.
Stirling town was not far off, and the neighborhood Was full
of historical events. The battlefield of Bannockburn was clo t e
by, and also an old castle; I was told that once it was the
stronghold of Bruce and Wallace. I liked to wander through
the old ruins on my way home from Sunday-school. I got to
like the place, and they were kind to me. It was not displeas-
ing to me when I learned that I could stop there for a time and
that my sister would live at home. I used to go home about once
a month. There were no tramcars or conveyance of any kind
on that wild moorland. .Nothing but heather met the eye all
the way from Denny to Slamannan, which was the name of the
village I came from. The Edinburgh and Glasgow railway ran
through it, and we could see {Stirling Castle from our door.
I did not have npich wages, but the mistress saw to my
clothes and made some of them. I was taught to be careful
and useful. One of the things I liked was to go into the shop
window to hand out all the nice cake and confections. The work
of bakers and confectioners has moved forward by great strides
since then. For Aveeks and Aveeks the daughter of the house
and myself had to help in the Avork-shop while some of the men
and one of the apprentices were aAA'ay ill with measles.
I shall never forget the first morning I Avent to the bake-
house. There Avas a long trough, Avhich stretched the full
length of the bakehouse. Overhead there Ava,< a strong beam
timber, Avith ropes hanging doAvn for a balance. In this big
trough I suav six men with their trousers up to the knees, and
they were tramping in the dough to make the bread. I put up
my hands and gave a scream, and someone threw a flour bag at
(my head. I felc as if 1 did not Avant to eat any more bread.
I did not like the Avay that they made bread, but I soon got in-
terested in other beautiful work which was done, and I had to
help. What I learned then I have never forgotten.
The master told the mistress that she Avas not to give me
any AA’ages, as I Avas learning more than the apprentices. So he
said I Avas to have no Avagcs, but that I Avould have to pay him
some ’‘sil-ler” for Avhat I Avas learning. When he said “sil-ler”
he meant money. I knew the apprentices had to pay Avhen they
were bound for so long a period. Time Avent on. and I was
happy.
There was one daughter who had a runaway marriage,
sometime before I Avent there to live. The old folks had for-
given her and she and her husband came on a Afisit. It Avas the
first since the elopement, and everyone seemed pleased to
see her again. Even I, the little maid, Avas alloAved to enjoy
the gay times. They came from GlasgoAV, and had seen some
style in city life. The gentleman brought AA r ith him an apparatus
2
My First Place.


for taking photographs. It was the tir*t ever seen in Denny.
They fixed up a studio in the garden for him, but he did not take
photographs to make money, but only as a pastime. It made
quite a stir in the place. Ministers and doctors and all kinds of
people came to see this wonderful thing. I will add here that
this was 46 years ago. Things are different now. I had my
photograph taken without my knowledge.
I was sent with a cup of coffee on a tray in the morning as
so many people were round that the gentleman could not come to
breakfast. Just as I got to the gate I was told to stand still
and look straight at what proved to be the camera. I was told
to wait and get something to take back to give to Miss Isabel,
and to ask her to put it in the shop window. I carefully car-
ried back the parcel, never thinking it was my own photograph
il had. It was taken on glass, and in some way it seemed to
have a kind of tar put on. However, there I was, holding or.
to the tray, and on either side by the gate stood the doctor of
the town and the Congregational minister. After I gave the
picture to the young lady I could hear roars of laughing. AH
the bakers came running from the bakehouse to the shop, and
I saw the people staring at the window. So I went to look,
and when I suav my own picture was exhibited there I cried till
they took it out of the window. That was my first photograph.
1 never saw it again.
I was interested in all I saw. It was new to me after our
poor home. I had one little brother three years younger than
myself, and one sister four years older. Father became addicted
to drink after mother’s death. It was agreed that my sister
and myself should go to service in alternate years. So I was
to stop at my first place for two half years, or two terms of
six months each. That was how you were engaged then. If
you left your place before the term expired you were liable to
be arrested, or at any rate, you would lorfeit your wages.
LIFE’S BATTLE BEGINS.
To me life’s battles began at the age of 10 years. I was
known all about as Baker Miller’s “wee maid.” The family all
attended the Congregational Church, and I had to go also. The
minister’s name was Dr. Jeffrey. The “Manse” was close by,
and I was often sent there with messages. Dr. Jeffrey was a
bachelor. I would find him sometimes digging in the garden,
dressed up very queerly. He liked to tease me about having my
3
Life's Battle Begins.


photograph, which was taken with him that morning at the
gate. What attracted my attention to him was his hair. It
was in long ringlets, hanging uown on his shomders, and parted
in the middle. When he was working in the garden or preach-
ing his hair would hang down beautifully, like that of a lady.
1 went to his Sunday-school, and some words from him helped
me, too, to face the future.
I can truthfully say that I only knew the alphabet, ana
how to read from a little spelling book, some words to my mother
who died a few days after I was six years old. My greatest
misfortune has been the want of schooling. There was a school
in Slamannan, but it was a mile from where we lived, and there
was no one to care whether we went or not. People were
not compelled to send their children to school in those days. I
could read some easy words in the Bible and Testament. What
I could not make out I would ask; someone to tell me. There
were family prayers every Sunday morning and evening, and all
had to attend, or at least all who lived in the house. We had
to read a verse each as it came to our turn all through the
chapter, either in the Bible or the Testament, as the master gave
it out. I did try to be able to read my verse, for fear that
the apprentice boys would laugh at me—how I used to hope
that my verse would be an easy one. I was fond of reading,
and they gave me nice books, while there were so many old
places about in connection with the “History of Scotland” that
it was pleasant to read about the deeds that were done, and then
to go and look at the mins.
As the time went on I grew strong and hardy, and there
was plenty of good food. All had porridge and milk in the morning,
with plenty of hot scones and butter, and relishes of some sort.
There was no waste, and the mistress was a good cook. I was
told that when she and her husband began business that she
d!id all the fancy cooking. Even in my time she did a lot of
things for the bakehouse. I used to help with the raisins and
currants and lemon-peel, and the meat for the raised Scotch
mutton pies and so on. Those Scotch pies produced more profit
than any other item in their trade. When I come to think
•of it, even noAv, I remember that Saturday was the only day
they made them. The large boards, on which the bakers used
to carry the bread into the shop, would hold about eight or ten
dozen raised mutton pies which were sold for two-
pence each. Ever so many of the great boards were filled with
pies and sent to meet orders all around. There was a fair in
Denny every six months. Talk about pies! There were no
clothing factories or shirt factories in Denny. There were, how-
ever, some cotton mills, to which I used to see so many poor-
looking people going every morning when I was attending to
the front of the shop and the private entrance. I often thought
4
Life's Battle Begins.


to myself that I was better off than them. The girls had no
hats, and some of them had no boots, and they looked
wistfully into the shop window, I know they were hungry.
There were no sewing machines in those days. If a man
wanted a suit made he would employ a tailor. The tailor would
bring an apprentice boy and a large iron, called a “goose/ and
they would be there ever so long. Sometimes they worked on
the kitchen table. Everything was made by hand; there was
no machinery. I saw two dress suits made for the young gentle-
tmen of the house. While I recollect how they made the out-
side clothing, it was evident to me that the tailors did not
make the men's shirts and under-garments. These were made
by women, and if a man’s wife could not make his shirts, as well
as and iron them, she would be the talk of the place.
Quite wee “lassies” could knit their own and their father's or
brothers’ stockings. The wool was not dear. At a date more
remote they used to spin their own wool. There was often
to be seen in some lumber place the old discarded “spinning-
wheel.” Alloway was famed for its fingering wool. The
women of to-day should be thankful to see how nicely they can
-chess their children and themselves.
I often recall the apparel of the dim past. You could see
well-to-do farmers’ wives come to church, wearing a lilac or
print gown in the summer, and in the winter it was replaced by
a “linzewince,” with a plaid or kind of woollen cloth or shawl.
This was two yards long and two yards Avide, and Avas folded
to hang three-cornerwise doAvn the back from the shoulders.
And then the boys and the girls. I remember Avell seeing quite
big boys Avith petticoats and pinafores when 6 or 7 years old.
ido not mean the “kilt.” It Avas just the same as that the
girls Avore. Of course the mother could make things like that
when she could not do the needlecvork of tAveed. There never
was a time previously Avhen dress Avas so becoming for all as
it is at present. Think of the old grandfathers Avith knee-
breeches and long stockings, I only saAV my grandfather once,
and that is hoAV he Avas dressed.
To say that I Avas always happy and had an easy life would
not be true. I AA’as often in tears and in disgrace. I Avould
break some thing, or put things Avhere they could not be found.
I felt as if I belonged to nobody, and Avould have a cry to myself.
Still, I must confess that I receded kindly appreciation from all.
The only daughter Avas about to be married, and I kneAv that
neither myself nor my sister Avould be old enough to do the work
when that time came. A healthy body makes a healthy mind
Avhether happy or not, so I began to think of going home after Miss
Isabel Avas married. What I had seen of my father did not
■comfort me. My heart cried out for someone to slioav me how
to write. Miss Isabel AA'as giving me lessons on a slate. From
5
Life’s Battle Begins.


all I remember of our home life in looking back into the past,,
after all these years, I know that I did my best to gain instruc-
tion. I tried my hardest to find out for myself the way to do
things.
The months passed by, bringing the New Year. Christmas
time was not much spoken of then. My master noticed how
earnest I was, and must have thought that I should learn the-
baking. I could see that Miss Isabel could work in the bake-
house like the men. I got to like going there, too. What a.
time we had getting cakes ready for the new year. I remember
that one bedroom had the carpet taken up and all the furniture
removed and the floor cleaned, while the cakes were put in, and
built on some framework nearly to the ceiling.
It was the custom to give to the customers at New Year's-
time a fruit cake. They called it a currant bun, but sometimes
it weighed from 2to 4 lb. There were all sorts of fruit in them,
with boxes and boxes full of raisins, candied peel, currants, and
all sorts of spices. AH of these were prepared in the kitchen,
and I used to help often till late at night. I know that they
■were not iced like the Christmas cakes we see here. But those
bakers could do some lovely work with sugar. What I saw
then has been valuable and important to me all through my
life to this date, which proves that a special interest in the use-
fulness of cooking may become a part of a young girl's training,,
as much as reading or writing. I have been teacher of cookery
for many years now, and I teach without a textbook. Instead of
giving pupils recipes, I teach that which I have tried and proved
by experience.
But I must keep to the bygone days. It was customary
when there was a funeral in the neighborhood, and the people
■were not too poor, for them to send an order for a special
kind of sponge biscuits, which had to be made at once. Some-
times such a large quantity was wanted that all hands had to
help. If there were frost and snow about it was hard to
whip up the eggs., so they used to get a good-sized cask, half
fill it with hoc water, and stand the mixing basin on that.
The steam from the water helped in the whisking of the eggs.
If there were no heat the eggs would be frozen while whisking.
It was always my duty to whip the eggs. Then some skilled
hand would come and put in some of the sugar, and keep on
putting in more sugar time after time till the specific weight
•was used. Then the flour was added. At last I got so ex-
perienced that I could add the sugar myself by the appearance
of the eggs, and, eventually, 1 could add the flour and take the
basin of mixture to the bakehouse all ready to drop into the-
desired shape. I make sponge cakes in the same way. yet, only
here we require no hot water.
6
Life's Battle Begins.


I RETURN HOME.
I may burn this some day, but still I will put down the
story, or, at least, those parts that are most essential. I have
no literary attainments fitting me to write a long book, though
my memory would furnish me with plenty of material. I was
in comfort and luxury in my first place, yet I longed to go back
to my humble home and to my wee brother, who had not got
into “pants” yet.
Miss Isabel got married before I left, and as I continue my
story I will have to tell some more about her. I got to like her
so much that I would do anything she asked me. I knew she
liked to see things look bright and clean, so I felt happy to be
able to shine anything that I could. They gave me some wages,
and the time came when I was to leave. I had on my best
things, with the rest of my clothes tied up in a parcel, which
was not very heavy. So I walked from Denny to Falkirk to
spend my first money. It was not the only time I had been to
that town. I used to visit it with father when he bought things
for us, so I bought something for everyone at home, and my,
dear brother in particular.
I can remember my thoughts yet. I w r as a good deal wor-
ried about my prospects. If I only had an oven I could make
Scotch mutton pies to sell in the village. The fact that I made
some subsequently serves to show that knowledge and percep-
tion can be stamped on the mind of youth.
And so I found myself at home. My sister W’ent to a place
close by at a farm. She had to help with cows and work in
the field.
I remember I used to go and see her. They had all sorts
of things growing. Corn, wheat, and flax, which I like.d to
see. They pulled it up by the root and let it stand tied up
in bundles. When it was dry 7 it was thrown into a pond of
water, formed by an inlet from the stream, and left there till
it got soft and pulpy. Then it was drawn out and left on the
bank to dry. The Scotch named the flax lint, and when the
water in the lint hole was drained off the smell was something
awful. I think I can smell it yet. What excited my imagina-
tion was that they told me that the beautiful fine white linen
was made from flax, or otherwise “lint.” It was taken in to
the barn or hay house and thrashed by means of a “flail,” an
instrument used then for thrashing corn or ■wheat. There was
no machinery for that purpose, at least in that district. This
“flail” looked like two broom-handles, and was as long with a
hinge in the middle. I never saw a woman doing the thrashing.
It was always done by a strong man, but the women did a lot
of work from the first. Quite young girls, from 12 years old up-
7
I Return Home.


wards, were employed in pulling up the “lint.” They got 4d.
'or 6d. a day. It seemed hard. work. I never tried it, buc I
used to look on. Then, after it was thrashed, both old and
young women would be employed touring or pulling it out.
After this “flailing” it was no longer a plant nor lint, but was
called “tow.” Then it had to be carded. 1 helped with the
carding, which is slow work. Then I saw them spinning this
tow into threads. It was no uncommon sight to see several
■women carry their spinning-wheels to a neighbor’s house in the
long winter evening*, and spin and laugh.
I never got the length of trying to spin, I did love to sit
and watch those that spun. There was che nice humming of
the wheel, with no noise to distract the reason or the nerve.
When I think of it I see the women sitting upright. It looked
so easy, the wheel being very light, and made of wood for the
most part. There was no bending over. 1 have compared the
attitude since then with the attractive way a lady sits at the
harp. It is so graceful, and just like the spinning-wheel.
1 may add here that a river in Scotland is always known as
a “burn.” The water is not hard, and the people did not have
water taps in their wee houses, so we had to go to the bum
for water. That would do for odd things and washing. Just
think of it. This lint water went into the burn! Nobody
w r anted to wash clothes till that rolled off to the sea.
In the summertime the housewives would bring their washing
to the burnside and make a fire, and that was quite a picture.
They would have a big tub, and they washed the blankets in
this way. They had che water hot with soap melted in ; t.
Then they put in the blankets, and a woman would take off her
shoes and stockings (that i.*, if she had any on), and go
in and tramp on the blankets. Young children were there
as well as their elders, as the mothers could look after them, or
they could be otherwise protected. We were not afraid of any-
body with a camera taking snapshots, as such a machine was
then unknown, I have also washed in that fashion.
I would not have anyone think that the burn was the only
water we had. Close by there were more than one beautiful
well of spring water, but we had to carry it. Those who lived
near the wells were best off. We had a yoke with a wooden
frame shaped to rest on the shoulders. A portion of rope hung
from each end with an iron hook to hold the vessel for water.
The rope could be adjusted so as to make it suitable for a tall
or short person. I have seen Chinamen carrying their wares as
we once carried the water. It was the same in all the country
places. But as if to make up for the water carrying we had no
■wood to chop, the coal being so plentiful and cheap. There
were numerous coalpits all round and ironstone. We had not
long lived there.
8
I Return Home.


I could just remember the nice home we had when my mother
lived. Everything seemed so changed. The little house we
jived in was at the end of a long row of houses all of the same
size. The railway going through from Glasgow to Edinburgh
passed close by. How I u«ed to look out for the train, and
particularly if the Queen was expected co pass. I only saw her
once with Prince Albert. That w«s at the inauguration of the
Loch Katrine water supply. Previously Glasgow had obtained
its water from the River Clyde.
OX THE COAL MIXES.
My father! How can 1 write of him. He descended from
being a house-carpenter and having men working for him to the
doing of rough carpenter’s work about those awful-looking coal
pits. I used to go there sometimes with his dinner if he did
not come home. And then to see the men coming up and going
down into the pits! Some of them were hundreds of fathoms
deep. They descended in what they called a hutch, and the
coals came up in it. It had wheels. When it reached the top
someone pushed it off and wheeled it to where its contents were
lipped out on a great heap of coals. There was an engine work-
ing all the time pumping Avater night and day. If it had stop-
ped the works underground would have been flooded. No one
-could go down and no one could live underneath if the engine
were not working all the time. I remember how 1 stared at the
men entering the trucks in which the coals were brought up.
How queerly they were dressed! On their heads they had a
•close-fitting cap made of leather, with a place in front to hold a
small lamp that would hold half a gill of oil. It had a narrow
projection at the side for a wick. Each man had to have his
own lamp.
I must say something about the manner in which those men
and lads were dressed. Some were laddies from eight to nine
years of age. Ah, and some were old men! In fact, there was
nothing else for them to do, and they came from all parts of the
country to work in the pits. They did not seem to mind it,
but I had never seen pits before, and, while Availing for my
father, in fear and alarm I watched them going up and doAA'n.
They were the colliers, and rows of houses Avere built on purpose
tor them. Wherever you saAv a coal pit there also AA’ere the
houses, built on the same plan. Noav about the clothing. 1
have mentioned the cap. Their shirts AA'ere of a dark, thick,
woollen material, while their trousers and coat AA'ere of a warm
9
On the Goal Mines.


material without any shape. They wore a leather belt round the
waist, to wh’.ch was attached a flagon of oil to fill up their lamps.
If they had good, kind wives they would have on long knitted
stockings and strong shoe* with big nails in them. It looked
horrible even to see them going down dry, but when they came
up drenched with water or perspiration and all so black and
grimy it was worse still. If there were frost and snow their
clothes would be frozen on them ere they got to home. Frost
and snow lasted many months in the winter in Slamannan. Each
one had his own pick to take down with him. and he had to-
bring it back again to get it made sharp for the next day. Some
had more than one. They al*o took with them some food tied
up in a handkerchief. When they were washed and clean I did
not know them to be the same men and lads that previously I
thought did not belong to the human race.
The impression made on my mind then is as distinctly there
now, even at this distance of time. I got the idea that they
were different from ordinary men. Yet the children of the
colliers took no notice of the things that filled me with fright.
All the pits were not so deep as the particular one to which I had
to go.
There was a heartrending scene one day when a rumor spread
that the “New Pit” was on fire. Thank heaven, all the men
and boys had been drawn to the top. It was no uncommon
thing to hear of a pit catching fire, through foul air or gas,
which, if the miners were not careful, ignited and rushed through
all the spaces whence the coals had been taken. Some of those
pits had been working for year*. But. I never knew where coal
came from till we came to Slamannan. There were many old
pits all about that had been worked out. They were fenced
around for protection. It made a lot of work to fill the long
train of waggons every day with coal and ironstone, to be taken
away to Glasgow and Edinburgh by rail. There were many
other men and boys employed about the works beside the
colliers. All the waggons and hutches for bringing up the coals
were made there, and that gave work to rough carpenters. Then
blacksmiths, engineers, clerks, timekeepers, and other men.
many of whom never went down into the pits at all, were on the
mines. I learned also that there were gangs of men who, under
contract, cleared away the ironstone in the nighttime, after the
colliers had left the pit. The stone had to be blasted out of
its place with powder. It was as well, perhaps, that I did not
know at that time, although I often wondered what was in
some little barrels I saw stacked in the carpenters’ shop. Years
afterwards, when I was in South Australia, I had a newspaper
sent to me containing an account of an awful explosion which
happened in a carpenters’ shop at Benny Hill, near Slamannan.
Many lives were lost, including those of children who had come
10
On the Goal Mines.


with their fathers’ picks to get them sharpened. I knew the
place so well, and I felt thankful that I was not there.
How little do the people think as they sit at a bright fire
what a risk to life and limb is needed in order to get this coal
when it is so far down in the earth. I saw some very old
women, who remembered when they were young having worked
in the pits. I saw a young man that was born down in the
pit.
When the dear Queen Victoria came to the throne it was made
illegal for women to work in' coal pits. Here and there through
Scotland a mine was found where they could dig in from a hill-
side and find coal, and get horse power to haul the coal out,
but never in such quantity as was produced when they dug
hundreds of fathoms under ground.
I am always grateful when I think how land some of those
colliers’ wives were to us two “mitherless bairns/’ as they called
my w’ee brother and me. In almost every house you would find
a wood frame, on which the women did work called tambonng
on muslin, in window-curtain lengths, or a hanging cloth for a
bed. The pattern being stamped on, they tambored it over with
a needle, very like a crotchet-needle. They also used a cotton
made for the purpose. These women used to go to Ardria, a town
eight miles They could go by train for a very few pence,
but, to save that, I have known some of the dear creatures to
walk there and back You will say that they would wear out as
much in shoe leather as they saved in money. But shall I tell
you in a whisper that they would take off their shoes and stock-
ings and walk bare-footed till they came near the town. They
did the same on the way back. When the tamboring was finished
anyone could take it back and get the money. Some would
send their wee lassie on those messages. While I think of this
long-ago time and the waves of the colliers, the memory of them
is always dear to me. I found much kindness beneath what
would appear a harsb surface.
As a rule both men and women married very young. It was
no uncommon thing to see a young girl of 16 or 17 wdth a cap,
or what was known as a “mutch.” When married, this strange-
looking headdress was donned. It did not matter how beautiful
the hair was, you could not see it for this mutch. It was made
of muslin, white, of course, and with two and sometimes three
rows of goffered frills all around, with long strings to tie under
the chin. The old women wore them too, but not with so many
frills. They were more plain, with a black band of ribbon
around.
Every now and then a strike would occur. It always involved
a severe struggle between master and men, for a little more wage«
or some alteration in the work, but it was always about the
pay. These strikes brought the workers to the lowest ebb.
11
On the Coal Mines.


They never made complaints, but it was sad to see a battalion
of over 500 or 600 men, young and old, marching about. They
often suffered from hunger, for sometimes the strike would last
for many weeks, so that they were reduced to an awful plight.
On three different times a strike broke out while I was in that
place. lam sure that no negro for whose liberty America
was then in conflict was more miserable even in his bonds than
those whiteslaves in the thrall of ,-ome of the uncharitable coal mas-
ters, who lived away in a grand place in great style in luxury. More
than one of these poor women,with hungry children and a
hungry husband, has said to me, “See, Annie, this is our last
handful of oatmeal.” There was some aid or relief organised
from a fund that other miners would send, for if they were on
strike their comrades in work would help to sustain them. There
seemed to be a league with a kind of “help one another club,” a
kind of freemasonry. 'lney would know if any were in dis-
tress, even so far away as England. So few of them knew how to
write, but yet they were so kind to each other, were those col-
liers.
There was a church in Slamannan, with a churchyard for the
burial of all the dead. There were a few little shops here and
there and a large store, which, was also a public-house. You
could buy drapery, china, wool, iron, or whisky. There, too,
someone would bring his fiddle to a big room, and they tvould
dance Scotch reels. They would gather from miles away, both
the lads and their lassie.*. There were no law courts
in Slamannan, so if anyone broke the law they were taken to
Falkirk to be dealt with. There was only one policeman. lie
wore a tall hat and a queer kind of uniform, and he was well
liked, for he did not take many to Falkirk if he could help it.
There was a post-office, but such a thing as a telegram was then
unknown. There was also a school, and the teacher was called
the Dominie. He was not liked, as it was said he ‘was cruel..
Tiie schools were not so interesting in those days. -Near those
rows of houses known as “Benny Hill” there was a general store,
where provisions of all sorts were sold, and whisky, too. Only
to think of that maddening beverage—we had to suffer for it,
my brother and 1.
All round the people were paid once a fortnight. How we
dreaded the pay-day. Sometimes we would not see my father
for two or three days after he was paid. He would go away
with a lot of young fellows on what they said was a "spree.’'
He would come back, but all hia money gone. Sometimes
with some more he would come into the house and bring a jar
full of whflsky. Then my brother and I had to run to some
kind neighbor and stay there till they had drunk the whisky
and got sober again. We dreaded my father when he took
whisky, but he was nice to us when not in drink, and we loved
12
On the Coal Mines.


him, and hoped he would soon get away from the coal pits. He
did not drink when mother was alive, so I know now it was
not habitual with him. I used to say then, and I have faith-
fully kept my word, that if I ever grew up to be a woman 1
would not have any whisky in my house. This was a strange,
wild place. I wondered what brought my father to “Benny
Hill.” I was there only a little while before I went to Denny,
and lost hold of the past. Almost a year had gone since the
terrible experience of my mother's death, which had an effect
on me as though I had been awakened from a dream. Some
say that childhood’s grief is short-lived, but what I suffered
then will till the hour of death continue in my memory.
Things got gradually worse. My father had a little place
fitted up, where he did some carpentering work in the evenings,
and people would come for odd jobs. All about there seemed
so many who had “fiddles” and played, and many of them would
get father to make a bridge for their fiddle. Then they would
play cards and send for drink, and to get rid of the smell of
whisky and tobacco we would drag the bedclothes over our
heads and try to sleep.
At last one night there was a fearful quarrel. We heard
the things getting smashed, including all the crockery and fur-
nature. I looked in and saw a man with his face bleeding.. 1
ran and picked up my little brother, and carried him to the
house of a woman who had been a good Samaritan to us before.
She made a shakedown for us in front of the tire, and that was
my last night in Benny Hill for some years.
I GO TO GLASGOW.
I made up my mind that I would go to Glasgow to find Miss
Miller, of Denny, so I watched till I saw my father go away
in the morning. Then I went into the little place, which was
awful to look at. Everything was thrown about, and my hat
had been knocked off from behind the door and trodden on.
So I had no hat. I knew where there were two shillings on a
shelf. I took the shillings, and as I knew that when my father
was all right he would look after my brother, I did not say
anything to the kind woman, but went off to the railway-station
and goc a ticket for Glasgow, which cost one shilling and eight-
pence. When I landed in Glasgow I had not the slightest idea
of how large a city it was. I only had the lady's address in my
memory. Her husband was a wine and spirit merchant, Mr.
13
I go to Glasgow.


George Stirling. I made enquiries, and found the street, but
•Wats' mystified by the length of it. After wandering up and
down for some time looking for Mr. Stirling’s house he saAv me,
and, happily for me, he knew me as the little maid at the
baker's. He said, “Little Susie, where are you going?” I told
him I was looking for Miss Isabel. He stared at me, and asked
me to come inside, while, sobbing, I told him all my trouble.
While he came to the house at Denny he always called me Susie,
and I did not mind. He said now, “Well, Susie, you cannot see
Mrs. Stirling; she is very ill, and you must not call her Miss
Isabel now, but I will see what can be done for you till my wife
is better.”
So he sent some food for me, and wrote a note, and got a
boy to take me to a friend of his in Argyle-street. This was
a large place, known as the “Steak and Chop House.” The pro-
prietress was Mrs. Wilson, a widow wuth three daughters. In
the note she was requested to find something for me to do till
Mrs. Stirling could decide what was to happen to me. I was
sent amongst the cooks downstairs, and I helped to do the
vegetables and other things. This was in a very busy street,
and it was a busy house. There seemed such a lot of people
employed, both men and women. Everything was different to
me, and the whole world was changed, and I did not care whether
I was called Susie or Annie.
I had to work underground in a room always lighted with
gas. I did not see real daylight again for a long time. Through
thick glass in the pavement some light entered a room where
another girl and I slept. All night I could hear the people pass-
ing, and at first I could not sleep for the noise. I had a lot
to do, and I did not like my surroundings, Eor instance, all
the meat and similar food was brought direct from the slaughter-
house. A man cut it up in the different portions allotted for
different purposes. He had the ox feet and the tripe for his
perquisites. This was all done where I attended to the
vegetables.
How often I wished I were back again amongst the bakers.
I liked that better. In my anguish I often gave vent to my
feeling in sobs and moans when nobody could see. I could not
write, but could only make symbols that had no meaning to me.
They were only strokes and crooks. I saw nobody from Slamannan,
and no one there knew where I was for the first six months.
I got no wages, but the mistress obtained for me some little
changes of garment, for which I was thankful. I did not see
the mistress very often. She kept a woman as manager, and 1
thought she was the most awful woman I had ever seen. She
used to take snuff. I never went to see Mrs. Stirling, being
afraid of the thronged streets, but I learned that she was a
little better, and had gone away for some months. So 1 thought
14
I go to Glasgow.


the best thing I could do was to stop where I was till someone
came whom I knew. There were always such a lot of people
coming in and out, for although there was a framed card in the
large window, stating that it was a “steak-house/’ there were
all sorts of soups and roasts, with pies, and frequently gentlemen
would order large suppers for their friends, sometimes on the
premises, and at others to be sent to their flats or rooms, as the
case might be.
On a busy day I got to be helpful, and went into the rooms
to assist the waiters. The day that Sir Colin Campbell was made
Lord Clyde was the first time that I helped inside. That was a
day never to be forgotten. We all tried to see him in an open
carriage as he was driven to the Town Hall to receive the freedom
of the city. I saw him going and coming back. The streets
were something to remember. It was stated that many Avere
carried out of their AA'ay, and did not get their feet to the
ground for ever so far.
I had been at this place for a year and some months Avhen
one day I sent a message, I heard someone say, “That is
“Anna McDonald.” To my joy, I suav tAA r o young men from
Slamannan. I kneAA r them at once. One Avas James Simson,
and the other William Robinson. I could only ask them to
come in and tell me if my father, sister, and brother Avere
alive. They told me that I had been given up as lost or dead,
and that all the old pit-shafts had been searched for my body.
Still, through my disappearance and the shock it gave him, my
father had become a sober man, and had entirely given up the
drink. They never thought I had found my Avay to Glasgow.
Both of them said together, “Your sister is in GlasgoAV to-
day. We suav her.” I just stood rigid and helpless till one of
them set out to find her, and the other stopped with me until
she Avas brought to me. Not a sound could pass my lips. We
kissed and looked at each other. She had groAvn. and so had
I. There was noAv no home, she told me. My father and
brother Avere in lodgings and my sister still remained at farm
service. 1 got permission for my sister to stay with me all
night. She told me that she had been in GlasgOAV two or three
times before to see if she could find me.
The young men AA-ent back to Slamannan that night and told
my father Avhere I was, and a little while after my sister left, my
father and my dear little brother arrived. That Avas the first
time I suav my brother in pants. My father looked so different
and so young-looking and Avell. I had no wish to go to Slaman-
nan to live, so that was settled. I was still hoping to go and
li\ T e Avith Mrs. Stirling Avhen I would be a little bigger and
stronger.
I was very troubled about my throat, for I could hardly speak
AAdthout an effort, it being very painful.
15
I go to Glasgow.


I CHANGE MY OCCUPATION.
A change came that I did not expect. One day a lady
came in for some refreshment?, and I was in attendance. She
knew us, and she saw that I was not looking as well as my sis-
ter. She a.-ked if I would come with her and help her with her
children. Her husband was a contractor, and undertook rail-
way works. With his partners he had a contract to build a
railroad from Maybole to Helmaiington, in Ayrshire. Delmaling-
ton was close to “the banks and braes of bonny Doom” As
some nice houses were on the route of the line, and would have
to be pulled down, he lived at different places till the five and
twenty miles of line was finished. I thought it would oe nice to
see once again the green fields and flowers, so I promised to go
to Mrs. Scott. She had been a servant lass herself once, but she
had a good husband and they were comfortable. She was then
on her way to one of the houses near Maybole, which had to be
pulled down.
I had two more months of my time to serve, as I had agreed
to stop for six months with Mrs. Wilson, and they did not like
to part with me, but I would not agree to stop on after the
terra. I was to get as wages 30/ for the six months. We could
not give a week’s notice and leave.
To give some idea of how this kind of business paid, I may say
that Mrs. Wilson had a summer-house in a place at the seaside,
“doon the water/’ as it was termed. The name of the place was
“Killmunn.” Another girl and myself were sent there to get
some of the rooms in order, the youngest daughter. Miss Jane,
being ill, and the doctor having recommended that she should be
sent to the seaside. It was a good distance from Glasgow. We
went in the steamboat “lona,” and saw Balmoral Castle as we
passed. Mrs. Wilson’s house had 40 rooms altogether. It was
a beautiful place and very interesting with its house-boat and
other conveniences. There was some lovely furniture, but it was
all covered up with holland, and all the carpets had been taken
up and carefully put away. The mistress and the young lady
came two days after us, and they said that I would be able to
do all thac they would require for a week or two, so the other
girl went back to Glasgow. Life was then brighter than it had
been since I left Benny Hill. It was a new experience to me to
see the ships passing. Many persons had their summer-houses
there, and were beginning to arrive. I was sent up to Glasgow
with some message all by myself, but it was pleasant, and I was
not a bit afraid. A man and his wife acted as caretakers during
the winter months. They were very old, but still useful. I
used to go cut with Miss Jane to carry her books and other
16
I Change my Occupation.


things, and I watched the excursions or pleasure trips up and
down to Kilhnunn. There were villas and what were called
“self-contained” houses, let whole or in part, with sometimes “a
but and a ben,” which were filled to overflowing. All faced the
sea and were close to the very water’s edge, and so were nicely
suited for summer visitor*. What wdth the yachts and skiffs
and the glad voices of the mothers and their children on the
beach the place was very merry. There was nice shade from the
trees. I did not think the five weeks we stayed there a long
time. We returned to Glasgow a week or so before the end of
my term.
I saw Mrs. Scott again, and she told me that if I "would stay,
with them till the railway was finished that they were going
back to Slamannan, and I could go with them. So she gave
me the address to put on my box and the money to pay my
fare to Maybole. I went through to Slamannan to tell w r here
I was going, and with whom. 1 had hoped when Mr. and Mrs.
Scott came back that my father would have a house, and that
I would live at home. He was still in lodgings, but I knew that
I could stop there for a few days. It seemed like “auld laug
syne” to me. And those dear kind women, how pleased they
were to see me, and to tell me how’ I had grown! How different
their speech, too, to the dialect of Glasgow! They said it was
a long journey to Ayrshire, and tried to persuade me not to go.
However, I liked the appearance of Mrs. Scott. She looked so
motherly and kind. L wa.« all excitement; I would have to
go to Glasgow again, but I knew that I could get a train from
the station at Glasgow right through to Kilmarnock, and change
for Maybole, where they would be waiting for me. I w r ent and
saw my sister, who was still at the same place. I thought what-
ever I had to do I would never be a farm servant. It was
rough and hard feeding and milking cows, attending fowls and
horses and other animals. Sometimes she would harness a horse
and go harrowing in the field after the men had ploughed it.
1 took my departure from Benny Hill, caught the train in the
early morning, but had to wait till the afternoon, as I missed
the train in the forenoon. I got a third-class ticket for 3/3 for
35 miles. I had a whole compartment to myself for the last
part of the way, and went to sleep and did not hear them
calling out to change at Kilmarnock for Maybole. I woke up
and came out at the next station and asked where I was, when
a guard told me I was in a train on its way to London. Then I
cried, and asked for my box, and the man looked in the van, but
there was no box of mine. He asked if it was addressed, and I
said it was. He then remembered that it had been sent on to
Maybole, and he said I should have had an address put on me
too, as then I should be comfortably in my bed. It was then
midnight. Some more men gathered round, and they were sorry
17
I Change my Occupation.


for roe. They did not. often see such a young girl so far
away from home. They took me into the station, where a nice
tire was burning, and obtained some rugs and brought me a cup
of coffee and some bread and butter. Then they told me to go
to sleep, as a train would be coming from London in the morn-
ing, and they would wake me up. I did not sleep, but cried all
the time, for I thought I had lost all my clothes and my box. It
was the first box I ever had, and I was so pleased with it. 1 did
not look at the name of the station I had reached, as it was
dark, but it must have been a long way, as I did not get to
Maybole till about 8 o’clock in the morning. I found my box
was there, and the people were anxious as to where I "was. M”.
Scott made enquiries, and the railway men said that they saw a
little girl asleep, but they thought I was with someone who was
travelling by the train. They never thought of me as a lone pas-
senger.
I felt quite at home with Mrs. Scott and the dear children.
It was my first experience amongst children, and I was delighted.
We got into the trucks that were used on the line, and got
pushed along as far as the line was made, Mr, Scott and Mrs.
Scott also came sometimes. It was great fun. We nearly lived
out of doors all the time. It was a grand house, but had to be
pulled down, so there was not much trouble taken over it. I
was very happy at changing from work by stifling gaslight to
the light of day. A daily governess came a few hours to teach
the children, and I also had lessons with them. It was a new
life for me.
I never heard Maybole called either a village or a town.
It was only “Maybole.” It was close to the house; it must have
been very old. The buildings looked so gloomy and dark.
There ■were no bright gardens or flowers, and, oh, the people
were so poor! The only industry I saw was that of the
weavers. The people all had looms in their houses —big, clumsy
•wooden structures. Men, women, and children ail worked at
the looms in such small places, and they lived and slept there.
To me it seemed as bad as the collieries. There came a depression
in the weaving trade, but I never knew" th e cause of it. It might
have been that machinery was constructed to do away with hand-
weaving. At any rate, I had once again the awful dread of
seeing people perish with hunger. They broke out and took
everything they could obtain in the way of eatables, while they,
tore off the palings and fencing, and armed themselves with
sticks. They came to our place, and we could only stand and
look at them divide the flour. I remember we had what
was known as the American flour. It came in large barrels
from the United States. Mr. Scott was up the line when they
came, and they took everything in the way of food, but nothing
else. They broke into the bakers' shops, and the grocery shops,
18
I Change my Occupation,


and butchers’, so we were told, and cleared 'away with all they
could lay thedr hands on.
I did not see much of Maybole, being afraid to go there.
There were no tall chimneys to the mills or factories, or we
could have seen them from the house. I saw the castle from
which Sir James Fergusson brought his wife. Lady Edith Fer-
gusson, who died in Adelaide, whence her body was taken back
to the vault at the castle, near ‘‘Maybole.” Meanwhile we
tried to be ignorant of the excitement stirred up. as we knew
we would not be: long there, but the touch of m*elancholy was
felt by all.
THE COUNTRY OF .BURNS.
This was the land of Burns, and the district of Ayrshire.
It seemed to be a large, plain, open country. The town of Ayr
had a castle once, and the walks about Ayr were pleasant. i
did like to go there. There were some old buildings, >vhich
people come from all parts to see. Churches are still preserved
there as ruins traditionally famous.
There was no smoke and dust in Ayr, as at Glasgow, and
visitors could get easily to any of the places of attraction, either
by train or steamboat. Ayr was nine miles from Maybole. Mr.-.
Scott was most ardent in every object about Burns, and she took
us with her wherever she went. On one occasion, W'hen at Ayr,
we had luncheon at a tavern, the name of which I forget, but we
were shown three such queer-looking old chairs, with high backs,
and in the back of each were portraits. In the middle was
Robert Burns, and on either side was Tam o’ JShanter and JSuter
Johnnie. The chairs were only for show. They told us that
those three jolly men used to meet in that room, and sit in the
chairs. Girl-like, I did not pay much attention then, but in
after years, as I grew older, it gave me joy to think I had seen
them. The influences of those times entered into my being, and
have grown up -with me. For myself, I made it a rule to visit all
the objects of interest, and I would go round and round them till
1 was tired. We all went another day to see Burns’ monument.
I gathered a few pebbles from the foot of the monument and had
them for years. They are lost, but the journey lives in my recol-
lection as if it was only yesterday. I saw a very old lady walk-
ing about and talking to the people. She had on what was
known as a sow-backed mutch. Mrs. Scott told us that was the
youngest sister of Robert Burns. Her name was Mrs. Back. I
19
The Country of Burns.


read the account of her death in the paper some years afterwards.
Then we went to see the Burns’ cottage. And, again, on my own-
account I visited it, and took all the children with me, from where
they were building the railway.
We were in the waggon with Mr. Scott and some other gentle-
men. I heard them say, “That is Burns’ cottage over there,” and
when they were not looking I started off for the cottage. It
must have been quite three miles, and I had to carry the youngest
child on my back all the way to and from the place. Mr. Scott
was cross, and gave me a severe talking to, and told me if ever I
did such a thing again I would not be allowed to come out in the
waggon. It was cold weather. Little maids were dressed then in a
print dress with short sleeves, low at the neck, and opened at the
back. I was cold, and so were the children, and we kept them
waiting so that they could not go back in the waggon without us.
The gentlemen were either engineers or directors, for they had on
tall hats. At least they were in position over Mr. Scott. They
came from Glasgow to look at the new line.
There were a lot of navvies working, and they had little tents
all along the line. Anyhow, I saw the cottage where Burns was
born on two different occasions. I saw both the outside and the
inside. It was not a grand place to look at, but merely a white-
washed wee house To think that a man born there would have
a monument like what I saw made me think of my earlier years.
I can yet remember the names of the places in passing to and
from the place.
Ayrshire has plenty of rivers, and on the Clyde years after-
wards I saw where it began just a little burn. It was pointed
out to me while I was in the train travelling from London to
Glasgow. But I must keep to the far-away times. Ayrshire is
divided into districts, and what always perplexed me was when a
neighborhood was called a burgh. I liked the parts, such as the
rough high hills and the Ailsa Craig, which you could see fron>
a long way off.
I GO TO A NEW PLACE.
The winter came in and we had to keep in doors, but the line
was getting near to an end. Mr. Scott got another contract on
the Dumfries line, so I was to go back to Slamannan, but Mrs.
Scott said sh e would be going through for a trip and I could go
with her. Before the time came for us to go a friend of Mr.
Scott’s came on a visit from Grangemouth, near Falkirk. She was
20
I go to a New Place.


about to be married to a gentleman living at the railway terminus
at Dalmellington. This was her second husband, although she
was quite young. She and Mrs. Scott thought I would do nicely
for her little maid. She had a little boy, whom she hoped to
have with her. Mrs. Scott knew my home troubles. They asked
me if I would go to Dalmellington with her when she got married.
I liked the lady and I said I would go with her, or, at least, she
was to come for me. It was agreed that when she went to Fal-
kirk that I would go with her. So she came for me. The name
of the gentleman she married was Mr, Macblean, and he kept
the new Railway Tavern. It was all taverns, or inns, then,
and seldom you saw a hotel. Neither Mrs. Macblean nor myself
had anything to do with the drink traffic, for which 1 was
thankful. Before I left Maybole we all went to have something
woven by those poor weavers. I chose the colors I would like,
and saw them put into the loom. I had that skirt in Adelaide
as a reminiscence of that time of mixed feelings. Mrs. Scott also
knew the housekeeper at the Fail of Cathcart’s, on the
banks of the Doon. I thought I would try any of the places
rather than go to Slamannan, or stop at Maybole after Mr.
and Mrs. Scott had gone. I did not seem to fear the people.
I knew that I would have to go amongst strangers wdterever I
went. So it was all the same to me.
I never regretted going with Mrs. Macblean, but, young as
I was, I think I was right in my idea that she regretted having
married a tavern-keeper. He was very unwilling to have her little
son taken there, as he did not want the people to know that
he had married a widow, I know she was not Very happy,
although he seemed a nice man. She had every comfort, but she
did long to see her son. I was beginning to want to see my
friends, and I missed the children, who were with me at Mrs.
Scott’s, and the out-of-doors life in the w T aggons. I had agreed to
istay for six months, so I was made useful in the house. There
wa* a big maid as well, but I kept with Mrs. Macblean for the
most part. She was a stranger, and, as I knew no one there, We
often went for long walks together. The place was delightful,
and the absence of poverty a relief. I could see as the weeks
went on that if her little boy was not allowed to come I would
not be wanted there. The next week Mr. and Mrs. Scott and chil-
dren came to stop at the tavern for a few weeks, and that was a
great joy to me. They took me everywhere they went, while the
children were affectionate and. pleased to see me again.
Then for the first time I saw that beautiful locality ‘The banks
and braes o’ bonnie Doon.” which was about two miles or so from
Delmallington. The road was good, and there was pasture land,
with plenty of cattle and ,*heep, and high knolls covered with grass
and the sheep on top. The Loch Doon is said to be seven miles
long and seven miles wide. It flows to the sea near to Ayr, and it
21
I go to a New Place.


is “banks and braes” all the way. I have often tried, to tell my
first impression. But this is the first time I have written about
it. I know I cannot say much. There were two paths, one was-
dose to the water and the other on top of the hills. The Earl of
Cathcart’s seat was most romantic. He was noted for his love of
hounds and huntsmen. He kept stags and deer there. They
would look at you and rush up the rugged height and get caught in
the bushes with their wonderful horns. There were trees growing,
all the way up the side of the bank, so that on the top walk you
could put up your hand and pull off nuts from such tall trees, I
did nor go to the top walk that day. But again and again I found
myself on the brae* of Doon.
Mrs. Scott went to see the housekeeper at the earl’s, and took
the children and me. I thought it was the lady countess. She
was dressed in black satin, with a lovely lace cap and white hair.
She went to that family when she was a girl about my age. The
place looked magnificent, and I learnt afterwards that 20 men were
employed to look after the stags and horses and hounds. There
was a page boy and ladies 7 maid, but no children. The ladies went
also to the hunt, and I used to go and see them. The earl and
eounte«s only came there for the hunting season. It made me
think of the colliers in Slamannan and the weavers in Maybole,
and to wonder. There was a lot of queer talk about the earl. We
had a peep into the kitchen, and never shall I forget it. There
were men cooks and women cooks. The men alwa}*s went when-
ever the earl went.
Loch Doon was a favorite excursion, and for the fishing season
some noblemen would come there and have tents erected with
men-servants in attendance. The loch is famed for the trout and
salmon, and is a good place for fishing for those who are allowed
to catch them. Both coal and ironstone are found in many,
places in Ayrshire.
At Delmallington there was a large ironworks, where they
smelted the ore into iron, and whence they sent it to all parts of
Britain for making railway iron. They put the ore in a great blast-
ing furnace. Then they made beds of sand all around to receive
the melted iron in moulds while it was hot. It was generally well
known when this iron would be let out of the furnace and the
people would rush to see it and to watch the men gauging that reu.
hot melted iron, so that it would run in to the moulds. It seemed
awful. It was said those men never lived long, and no wonder,
seeing how they worked amidst that fluid. I only went once, but
we could hear when the iron was cast off. It always made me
shudder.
The tavern was not far from the railway-station, and on the
road leading to Loch Boon. Mr. JVlacblean seemed to do well.
Some refreshments were also obtainable, and there were a tew
rooms to let. After the Scotts went away I felt lonely. Some-
1 go to a New Place.


time* I saw a drunken man, and on the Saturday nights such a lot
would be about. Both Mrs. MacbJean and I would shut ourselves
in a dark room and cry. I knew that I was a long way from
where my sister and brother were. If I could have seen them
sometimes it would have been something to look forward to. Mrs.
Macblean could not see her way to leave her husband and home for
a week or so. We talked the matter over, and it was arranged
1 should go. I knew Grangemouth was close to Falkirk. I
could go thence for a week’s leave and see my friends and take
some things to Mrs. Macblean’s boy, she paying for my return
ticket to Glasgow. I had some nice new clothing and was grow-
ing 1 thought for 11 years of age I had seen the serious
side of life and some of its vicissitudes, and had gained experience
from my trials. I felt happy to go back, and I knew the places.
I was not likely to get lost on the Caledonia and Glasgow line.
1 could write a little, but I did not let them know I wai coming
home. I thought I would take them by surprise. What wonder-
ful possibilities lie in store for the young!
I was glad to find that ray father kept from the drink, and my
dear brother, how he had grown! I did not see my sister for a
day or two, as she had gone to a place further away. My brother
came with me the next day, and we walked all the way to Grange-
month, It was a shipping port, with good-sized vessels lying at
the quays. We had no trouble in finding the house of Mrs,
Macblean's mother. Although close to the dock, it had a nice ap-
pearance. They knew by letter that I was coming, but they did
not know on what day during my week’s leave. I shall never
forget the dear little son of my mistress. He was five years old.
He wanted to be taken to his mamma. They were gracious and
kind to my brother and me, I have seen many shipping places
since then, but none so clean-looking as Grangemouth. They
wished to keep us for the night, but we walked back to Slamannan
that night. It was late, but we were not afraid. It wa fl eight
miles there and eight miles back. That made it sixteen to walk
in one day, so we were tired the next day. lam quite sure that
on some of the other days we walked just as far. I know that we
went to Linlithgow to see someone we knew. We went all along
the railway line and it was a long way, but we had no money to
pay for train fare. It must have been more than nine miles there
and nine miles back. From Slamannan the youngsters would
think nothing of walking to Castle Carrey, a wood where a queer-
looking berry grew wild. It was called a blea berry, and grew on
short stems low down, not bunchy. The people used to send their
children there in the season to pick those berries and make jam
them. They had to take a can or a jar to carry them.
The juice of the berry was in itself a perfect dye, and it was amus-
ing to see the hands and lips and teeth of those who picked or eat
the berries. My brother and myself went, and our teeth were
I go to a New Place.


soon black like coals with juice. In Scotland we did not know
anything about snakes. At that date I had never heard of them,
6o we could wander about without fear in the woods.
My week soon came to anend, and I returned to Delmalling-
ton. I did not like being so far away, so when 1 got to Glasgow
I saw Mrs. Stirling. For her home she wanted someone who
could do everything in a house. She thought I would be too
young to be left when she went away. However, if I wanted to
come to Glasgow she promised to do what she could for me, and
then I would be nearer to my friends. It cheered me to know
that. I had still three months to stop with Mrs. Macblean, I
was taught to work and be handy and tidy, but I did not like
the idea of being in a tavern. Mrs. Stirling advised me not to
engage for another term, but to go to Colonel CathcarCs, if I
wished to live in Ayrshire. I had no fault to find with Mr. or
Mrs. Macblean. They were kind and good to me.
The warm, bright weather continued nearly all the time. Mrs.
Macbean and I had long walks all round in the evenings. If
anyone was met whom she knew there was only a brief, respectful
salutation and she passed on. lam quite sure she was a lady,
and she was beautiful.
We had no garden, not so much as a pot-plant about the place,
but close to the end Of the house a good, wide burn ran under
an important looking bridge, or, as they were called, “brig." It
was wide enough for two large vehicles to pass. The roads were
splendid, but the buildings were strange. They must have been
very old, and were built here and there along the roadside. Some-
times the end of the house would face the street, and often the
side or back of the house would be next the road. Mrs, Macblean
called my attention to them, or I would not have heeded them.
The place had no pretence to the rank of a town, yet it was not
called a village. There were two churches and a school. I took
notice that, even if it were a tavern, the minister came and asked
the lady to let me come to the Sunday-school, and I went to church
with Mrs. Macblean. I never went to Sunday-school or Bible-
class all the time I was in Glasgow,
What with being healthy and strong, I begad to take a bright
and hopeful view of life from every point. I could write a little,
and was fond of reading and knitting. It was merry' and lively.
There was a large room upstairs, where one evening every week
meetings were held of some lodge. Mo women went to meetings
of that kind in those days, but the men seemed to enjoy them-
selves. You could tell that by their laugh and song. There was
always something to make one laugh. VV o had a gentleman up
to stop for a few days. There was a gate which opened on some
steps to go down to the water of the burn. We used it for
some household purposes, but, as in Slamannan, the water for cook-
ing had to be carried from the spring*. One evening the gentle-
I go to a New Place .


man opened the gate, thinking he was going into a garden, but lie
fell in the stream and was carried under the bridge, Luckily,
some men saw the accident, and rushed after him and got him out
of the water. He was nearly dead and the incident made a great
stir. He was ill for some time. There was a heavy rain once
while I was there, and it wa* something awful to see how the
water swept along that burn. The cattle were carried away too.
I saw some sheep rolling away under the bridge, and learned that
cows were drowned also. The whole of Delmallington lay nicely
on a fiat surrounded by a group of hills and valleys. After I had
left I received a letter to say that a waterspout had burst over
the place, and that people had left their houses and had taken
their belongings to the tops of the mountains. A log of wood
floated into the end window of the tavern and all the rooms
doAvnstairs were flooded. Some poor people, who lived in small
houses, had their rooms full of water.
The autumn was passing, and I thought I would not like to
be at this place in the winter. I had really no one to care what
I did with my life or "where I lived. There were no Christian
friendly societies for young girls at that time. I felt the want of
sympathy and approval in what I did. I saw the housekeeper
at Colonel Cat heart’s, and hoped when I was a grown woman to
return there. I was old enough to admire the lovely scenery, but
not old enough to disbelieve in witches and warlocks’and fairies.
Ayrshire is so full of glens and caves that I expected to see natural
wonders, and not the work of man, for the imagination runs riot
at times.
Gipsies I saw in plenty, and was afraid of them. They did
not live in houses, but only in the wood; quite large numbers of
them all together, and there were children, young girls, and
youths who had never lived in a house. They came and went at
will, and nobody seemed to take any notice of them. They were
travelling tinkers. They made tinware, and sold it as they went
through. The older women would come about to tell fortunes,
and they would steal fowls or anything else they could lay hands
on. The fanners always lost sheep and lambs when the gipsies
were about, while one heard tales of them stealing away children
of the high-class people.
I LEAVE AYRSHIKE.
It was the end cf October when I left Ayrshire, and Mrs. Mac-
blean’.i son had not come. I know she was grieving acutely about
him. I promised that I would go and see him again when 1 re-
25
I Leave Ayrshire.


turned to my own people. I found myself in Glasgow, and left
my box at the station, and paid a penny tor a ticket, for which
they agreed to keep my box till I came for it. I saw Mrs. Stir-
ling, and stopped there all night, and read the paper with a long
column of advertisements for all sorts of working-girls. One, she
thought. I might enquire about. It was from a lady and gentle-
man at No. 5, Florence-place, who wanted a young country girl,
who must be useful. So I went. I found it was a furnished flat
in a stylish part of the city. I told the lady that 1 had come
from Delmallington the day before, and that Mrs. Stirling would
.•peak for me. 1 was engaged to come that evening. They only
intended to stay in Glasgow for three months, but I thought I
could get something else at the end of that time. -they seemed
rich people, but were in trouble. Their name was Skirven. They
had one daughter at home. I was not long there before I learned
that it was through another daughter that they came from their
home in Fifeshire, The youngest daughter, while going to board-
ing-school, fell in love with a young medical student. She ran
away with him and got married, and came to Glasgow. He was
a Reman Catholic and an Irishman, while her parents were Scotch,
As they were married by a Catholic priest, Mr, Skirven said it was
no marriage. That is what broughc him to Glasgow. He came
to find those two runaways, and to make them get married again
in their church. Mr. Skirven had nis gun loaded to shoot the
young doctor if he objected. His name was JDr. Reily, They
found the young lady and took her to Florence-place, and the doc-
tor was not alloAved to come near her. It seemed so sad. She
was a pretty little lad}’, and so young. A strict watch was kept
on her, and she saw nobody. She soon found that she could
trust me with a letter, and many times a letter came for her in my
name from the husband. I even saw him, and brought messages
to her from him. He was waiting for his diploma, and he had a
good practice in view. Then he intended to show that they could
not keep his wife from him. It was my first experience of the fact
that love can destroy happiness.
I never knew how matters were fixed up, but the old folks
went, back to Fife, and I got another place as under-nurse with
Dr. Fargus, in Elmbank-street, off SauchihaU-street, Glasgow, close
to where I had been living. Dr. Fargu,< was eminent in his profes-
sion as a medical man, and of great distinction. And his wife —How
can I write about that gentle lady? It was a Christian home, and
well appointed. The nurse had been with them ever since they
had got married, and there were three children. It was a large,
new house, four storej’s high, with everything up to date, and so
convenient. There was no carrying water, for both hot and cold
water w r ero in all the rooms, and there w’ere bathrooms right up
to the top, w’here the nurseries W’ere. The lady’s mother had
died a w’eek before I went there. There w T ere other servants, and
I Leave Ayrshire.


we all had mourning, a dressmaker being in the house. I had a
black-and-white print, and a black stuff dress, with a cape and
hat to match, because 1 had to go out so much with the children
and the nurses. We were well looked after, both as regards our
bedrooms and our food. And there was a whole pew for us in
a church in Cudoging-street, not far from the Clyde. They had
a summer residence, about seven miles from Glasgow, and a man
and his wife to keep it always ready for them. The children were
all small, and if the doctor thought they wanted a change, the
nurse and I very often went to this old castle, some of which was
in ruins, but there was plenty of room for us and lovely grounds
for us to romp about In. The lady would come sometimes and
stop for a few days. The locality was Eastkillbride. There wa-
ne railway. On the way we passed through the very old towni
of Rutherglen and Hamilton. All along near at hand I could see
the coal-pits, like Slamannan. But there were none at Eastkill-
bride. The doctor would sometimes bring his wife in his car-
riage, or in the omnibus, the only way of conveying passengers to
that part. She was kind to the poor and the sick. There were
no district nurses heard of then. Every day she took some broths
and dainties to those who needed them. One poor woman ap-
pealed to me. She was in bed for seven years with rheumatism.
She had the use partly of the right hand and that was all, I
often went when I could, and tried to do something for Mis.
Kennedy. If Mrs. Fargus was not there the nurse looked after
her poor pensioners all the same. The houses were spread about
with quite a distance between. There was no interesting scenery,
but only an old ruin.
DR. DYKES, DR. GUTHRIE, AND DR. MACLEOD.
Close by there was a church with a manse. It seemed out of
keeping with all the rest of the place, for it looked new. It had
an air of freshness about it, and belonged to the Free Church of
Scotland. The minister was quite a young man and a friend of
Mr. and Mrs. Fargus. He came much to the home, and the chil-
dren knew him, so that we often found him rambling about with
them. His housekeeper used to be his nurse when he was a
child. We went to the manse often. The minister was
the Rev. Dr. James Oswald Dykes, and he came out to Australia
many years ago. The church in Eastkillbride was his first appoint-
ment. His fame as a preacher and a good man spread all about.
The way he filled that church with the scattered people was
wonderful. He would go miles and miles after parishioners. He
27
Dr. Dykes, Dr. Guthrie, and Dr. MacLeod.


had a pereuaviveness in his preaching, although it was homely and
plain. I went to the Bible-class, and he explained things to me
of which I was formerly ignorant. After months of catechising
I became a member of the Free Church of Scotland. It gave me
thoughts which enabled me to resolve to do the common tilings I
had to do well, and to be happy in doing what was right.
I was in the marise one night with Mrs. Clark, hie housekeeper,
when he came in all wet and muddy. He had found a man and
woman living together who were not married. The man was ill
and likely to die, and he thought the children would be guarded
from some threatening injury if the father and motner were mar-
ried. The man, however, did not care what became of woman or
children. He turned his face to the wall, and for a long time
would not listen to the minister, but Dr. Dykes got him face-to-
face with the woman and a witness, and married them while the
man was still in bed. Dr. Dykes was very upset about this event.
Happily, in Scotland such things are rare.
One of the maids had not been well, and Mrs. Fergus thought
I might do for the house in town for a week or so, so as to let
Elsie come to Killbride. The climate there was mild and
healthy. The doctot arranged to dine out, so i had only to get
breakfast for him and taise any messages and write them on a
slate. By this time I knew how to do many things neatly. The
lady would come and go to see how I got on. Sue had not
been long in one afternoon when a fearful ring came at the
door. I opened it, but could see nobody. I went away, but the
bell rang again. I looked over the other side of the street
and saw a tattered looking sailor. He came over and asked
(if Elise was in. I answered in the negative. He could hardly
speak. The lady came to see what was the matter; he told
her who he was. She told me to take him downstairs and get
him something to eat. Then she told me that he was Elise’s
sweetheart, and that Elsie had heard that he was wrecked
and drowned four years before. She went in mourning for him.
The ship in which he had arrived within half an hour before had also
been imported a wreck. There was such excitement. Mrs. hargus
wrote to Elsie to look out for her lost lover the next day. His
ship was at the Broomilaw, whence they had sailed long ago.
The man had come back well off, but he was brown and rough.
The next day he had other clothes and his whiskers were
trimmed. Elsie had been with Mrs. Fergus for a long time,
so Mrs. Fergus said that she would like her to get married there.
The date was settled, and the Rev. Dr. Oswald Dykes was to per-
form the marriage ceremony. We had plenty to talk about, for
it was the first wedding for me to see, Elsie came to town, and
I went back to Eastkillbride.
Mrs. Fargus was skilled in botany and the natural history of
insects as well as plants. She had a museum full of all sorts
28
Dr. Dykes, Dr. Guthrie, and Dr. MacLeod.


of things. While at Killbride she would take me with her to
carry her things, and talk to me so nicely all the time. VVq
went down deep dolls and to all the out-of-the-way p.'aees hunting
for specimens. One day, in a deep dell, she found a gooseberry
bush, with large gooseberries on it quite green, although the
season for the berry was over, She sat down and explained
why that berry was not ripe. She said the sun had not shed its
rays on that bush, as it was far down in the dell. ISome birds
had dropped the berry, and it grew into a bush, but the fruit
would always be green and sour. She compared this with some
poor people whom we visited. They were hard and sour, and
she thought if their environment were more bright they would
not be so sour. She meant spiritually and temporarily. It was
new to me to listen to so grand a lady. She w T ould get us all
in her beautiful room and kneel down and pray and read with,
us. God’s best blessing rest on her if she is living, or on her
memory if she is dead.
It was drawing near time to go back to town, and there
was Elsie’s wedding to look forward to. It was a common occur-
rence to let the servants have a party two or three times a year.
We had had one already, and the wedding was to be the next.
We were to have games and dancing, and Elsie was to be married
in the best drawing-room, upstairs. By this time I had seen
the sailor many times and many of his relations. His home was
in Dundee. The Rev. Dr, Oswald Dykes had received a call to
go to a grand church in Edinburgh, but he agreed to come for the
wedding. I was passionately fond of dancing, and 1 knew that
we were to have dancing, but I thought, being a member of the
church, I must not dance any more. I met Dr. Dykes in the cor-
ridor and asked him if I could dance at Elsie’s wedding. He
said “Yes; by all means. Those who can dance, let them dance,,
and those who want to play games, let them play.” Then he
showed me how dancing could be made both wrong and sinful, if
we went to objectionable places to gratify the pleasure of dancing.
How little did I think that in so short a time I would be out
here all alone, without any of this moral directing power to act
upon.
So the wedding night came. Elsie looked lovely, and the
sailor looked splendid. He had some trouble to get off his white
kid gloves. Mr. and Mrs. Fargus, and also some of their friends,
were present. The cake was cut in the drawing-room, and then,
brought down to the hall, where the supper was laid, and all
the place was fiTed with plants and bunting. We kept the
gaiety up all night. In the middle of the fun our master and
mistress and the minster came to have a look at us. The
minister said if he could dance he would have a dance with the
bride, just to show that it was good recreation. Elise had some
lovely presents. The master gave her a kitchen range, while the
29
Dr. Dykes, Dr. Guthrie , and Dr. MacLeod.


mistress gave her a chest of drawers and a dressing-table and
washstand. She had something from all. The servants from ali
round were kind, and we spent a good time.
After Elise went away the nurse took the children to her own
home, ■which she often did. They were too s'oung for instruction,
and only childish books were read for them. There were two
boys and one girl, the girl being the oldest. I shall say more
about them later on.
I found where the Dr. and Mrs, Reily lived, and saw them.
They were w T ell and happy. Mrs. Stirling was not in good
health in Glasgow, so she was often away. I was happy any-
ho-w, and hoped for courage to face the life that lay before
me. I had a holiday, and went to Slamannan, and learned that
my sister was to be married very soon, so the dresses 1 had for
Elise’s wedding would just do. It was at New Year's time, and I
was the bridesmaid. They were married at the Cnd Established
Church of Scotland, and in the evening the snow was falling,
and thick on the ground. I felt glad for my sister’s sake. it
was not much of a prospect, but they were young. My brother
was my whole care; I did not know what my father -was going
to do with him. He was growing up and learning nothing.
Father kept off the drink, and we all the time thought that
some news would come to us from our relatives who had gone to
“America.” These were uncles and aunts; we had no grand-
parent living. For myself, I knew that I had to work hard for
everything I got; but I could not see how to help my dear
brother. I was afraid that my father would take him down into
the pits to work. If only my mother had lived she would have
put him. to some useful pursuit. I suppose the mind seeks some-
thing upon which the emotions may grow as we get older. One
thing I was nearer than if I had stopped in Ayrshire. I could
do some things for him. There seemed no “self-help” for him.
I got back to my work again, feeling inspired with the idea
that 1 would try and get my brother to Glasgow also. At Hr.
Fargus’ the Sundays were properly observed. We set aside toil
for that day and were not allowed to do anything that could be
avoided. Our own clothing had to be laid all ready to put on.
The dinner was cooked the day before. Such peaceful days I
have never had since. We went to the Rev. A. JSI. SommerviTs
Church. It was near to the shipping part of the city, and the
ehurch and congregation were large. Other ministers would come
some times. Dr. Guthrie came from Edinburgh. He was a real
friend to the servant girls, and pleaded with the mistresses to
be kind to their handmaids and see to their general -wellbeing
and the cheerfulness of their surroundings.
Hr. Thomas Guthrie was then a popular preacher. He started
the ragged school movement in Edinburgh, and his efforts to
suppress vice and to promote temperance made him a power on
30
Dr. Dykes, Dr. Guthrie , and Dr. MacLeod.


social questions. He used to hold, services in the open air and
in barns, or wherever people would come. While on his visits
he found so many houses without a Bible or any book at all. He
often stood in rooms bare of furniture, where father and mother
and half-a-dozen children had to .deep, the destitution being
all through drink. The stories he told were sad and true.
Wherever he preached, there you would see the serving-maids and
the persons of every rank in life. He had a good voice, and would
sometimes descnbe in his sermon natural scenery, showing the
wisdom of God, and that the earth is full of beauty. We had
Hr. Norman Macleod, who preached to the Queen while she was
at Balmoral. I could not follow his speeches like Dr, Guthrie’s,
although he wrote books and was the editor of “Good Words’’
and others, as well as a leading minister.
The misery 1 suffered, by reason of seeing so much of human
woe and want and sin, made an old woman of me at the age of
16. I shall never forget one Sunday after church I went with
*wne other girls to see their “district,” if it could be called a dis-
trict. In some instances there were foul underground cellars,
where the inmates never breathed the fresh air. The children
were covered with rags, and hunger reigned everywhere. This
afternoon a starved-looking boy had broken a street lamp, and
the policeman was taking him to the lock-up. One of the girls
knew him, and asked the man how much it would cost for the
lamp. If 7/6 could be found he *aid he would let the boy go. 1
told them to wait and I would get the money. I went to my
mistress and to my Bible-teacher and to some others that I knew,
and got the 7/6, and the boy was released, or, at least, I thought
so. We took the money to the boy’s mother, and told hereto
go to the office and get the boy back. That was on Monday
evening. I went to see on my own account if the boy had got
back. It was so dark that I could not find my way to the cellar.
I went to a shop to buy a candle to see the underground room.
The man in the shop paid, “Are you the youngster that found
the 7/6 for that awful woman that lives down in that cellar?”
“1 said, “Yes.”
W ell, he said, “that woman hag been drunk ever since. She
did noD go for the boy, but has been quarrelsome and is making
euch a noise.” •
To my view it was sad, but not singular. 1 went down to
ihe cellar and saw the sweetest and prettiest little girl I ever saw
in my life stretched on the door sleeping. There was no mother
or anyone else there. I learned that the father was a sailor, and
that was why. The girl was eight years old. Oh, what a picture
she was as she lay calm in sleep, forgetful of her sorrows!
The daughters of well-to-do farmers and mechanics went to
service to help themselves. There seemed no other way. Then
31
Dr. Dykes, Dr. Guthrie, and Dr. MacLeod.


through Elise and the nurse I got to know a number of nice girls.
We could come and go to each other. In different homes there
were different rules. There was always plenty to be done. 1
know the sanitary part of the work was a study at the doctor’s
house. The furniture was mostly carved, and that meant some
polishing. Then the wide halls and bannisters must be kept
free from dust, while the fireplaces and the steel had to be kept
bright. I was not old enough to have charge, but I learned how
the work was done. In the winter it was hard, but I felt as if
I were getting taught everything. My mind was full of hope the
more I knew.
Unaware of what had happened, we went to church on a Sun-
day morning and found it all draped in black. The news had
come that very morning that Prince Albert, the Queen’s Consort,
was dead. It cast a sadness over all the place, as he had been in
Glasgow not long before to lay the foundation-stone of some public
building. - 1 Li
ANOTHER NEW PLACE.
I had nothing to grumble about, but still the array of so much
sorrow among the people round me made me wonder what failure
or success lay in the future for me. Independence is so fondly
sought after. Reluctantly, and with a touch of uneasiness, I
heard of a place that I thought I would like. The lady was a
friend of Mrs. Fargus, and the house was close by, while a smaller
girl than myself would do for Mrs. Fargus’ children. Then, too,
I would have a little more wages. It was spoken of between the
cwo ladies, and I was engaged to go in six weeks, when my term
ended. Mrs. Mouncey was the name of the lady, and there were
three in family. Mr. Mouncey had been married twice, and had
one grown-un daughter by the first wife, with a son and daughter
by the second wife —a boy of eight and a girl of ten. It was not
a large house, and was on Victoria-terrace, facing the West-End
park. From the windows could be seen the pleasure ground of
the city, with its shrubs and monuments; that was its beauty spot.
The West-End looked like the countrv yet in a few minutes one
could be in the Trongate or Buchanan-street. I thought those
two streets seemed the most busy, at least, with fashionable iolk.
Mr. Mouncey was the editor of some publication, and also wrote
for some magazine. He seemed a man of independent means.
They did not live in a showy manner, but they travelled a good
deal. “You will have plenty of hard work,” my fellow mates
32
Another New Place.


used to say to me, but I thought I would extract some happiness
by coming to see them, and I would be gaining fresh experience.
Before I went to my new place I had an excursion to Slaman-
can. Glasgow, like all large cities, had its grievances and dis-
tresses in some of the dark and destitute parts. I had seen a little
of both sides of the picture. I wondered at the goodness of those
ladies, who went to the squalid and neglected. One had only to
read the newspapers to learn that evil was not confined to the poor
and degraded. Close to where I then lived the daughter of people
in high rank was arrested for giving her lover poison. Her name
was Madeliene Smith. So widespread was the interest felt that
people chipped bits of the stone window-sill, where she passed the
poison to him which caused his death. Her trial took place in
Edinburgh. “Not proven,” was the Scotch verdict returned. I
saw a book with the w T hole account when I came to South Aus-
tralia. I found comfort in going to see my own friends. A whole
week before going to Mr. Mouncey* s there was trouble in the air.
A fresh gloom was over the place, as war in America was
threatened, and people were rushing back from America as fast
as the boats could bring them. In less than two weeks one could
get to America.
We made the most of my holiday at home. I went once more
lo work. It was a mixed kind of position to rely on, but 1 deter-
mined to do my best. I found no difficulty; the mistress said,
“Come along, my lass, you are welcome.” I had a comfortable
bedroom, and everything was convenient. The mistress undertook
the care of providing and attending to the cookery, that nothing
should be lost by carelessness, and there was Miss Mouncey wdth
me to help to keep the house beautiful, and in a state of cleanli-
ness. I cou’d go to the same church and see my friends at JDr.
Fargus’. I goon learned that Miss Mouncey was looked on as a rich
woman, and that her mother’s money would come to her. She had
a mind of her own, and did not intend to marry. I think the con-
dition of the homeless and uncared-for children was her special
care. She would come and sit with me and tell me about the
wretched little urchins she found amid dirt and disease, while the
parents of the poor creatures were drinking. I confess many
things seemed to me hopeless. It was depressing to hear of evil
about everywhere I went. Mind and memory in moments of soli-
tude tell me still how much I owe to the impression and influence
of that sad time. In after years, when one or another would say
what happy times they had when they were young, I thought “no,
I would not like to be young again if this is all.” I could not
shut out of mind the long years that lay before me in that far-
away time. In the present, all the world is behind me, and what
doefj it matter?
Such a lot of people came to see Mr. Mouncey. Some wished
to see Miss Mouncey particularly, and some she wanted to avoid.
Another New Place.


She only laughed. She was 22 years of age, fair, and accomplished,
without a touch of vanity, and with the sweet name of Mary. The
youngest child went to school. They liked to tell me of the good
times we would have when we tvent to the Island of Arran, where
they spent the summer months. We had family worship night
and morning. By that time reading was no effort to me. I could
read writing and write a little, with the aid of Miss Mouncey.
I brought a canary songbird from Slamannan to Mrs. Reily. I
had no cage, but I had a strong paper-bag, and cut some tiny holes
in it for air. I knew she had a cage, so I went one evening to
see her and to learn how the bird was getting on. The doctor
opened the door, and did not speak. He led me into a room, and
there, in a coffin, lay Mrs. Reily. I flung myself on my knees be-
side her and cried bitterly. The doctor stood by and said, “Weep,
girl, weep, for that is the first tear I have seen shed for my wife.’’
He told me that her father, mother, and sister had come only to
see what of her jewellery they could take and then they went
away. He sent for the nurse, and I saw a little baby girl, which
he said was all he had left. He had a good practice, and was
growing rich, and, as he stood there with bent head, he looked sad
and cheerless, but young and handsome. Such is the inevitable!
I saw the little bird that I gave her; it was hanging in the window
of the same room. My heart was full of compassion, as I remem-
bered the beautiful face of that young wife. She was only 20
years of age. All must have courage to submit to their own
destiny.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN.
Preparations for going aw’ay for the summer w T ere hurried on,
and there seemed more visitors than usual. I was pleased at the
idea of going to the Island of Arran, which had many attractions for
visitors, I longed to see the place, having heard so much about its
hills and mountains. Miss Heslip, a young friend of Miss Moun-
cey’s, was with them for the summer. From that day things were
pleasing and mirthful. One evening, while I was passing the cake-
basket in the drawing-room, I held the cake to a tall and dark
genleman. In place of taking some cake he took hold of my hand
and shook it warmly. I was not used to shaking hands with
people in the drawing-room. I felt so confused that 1 nearly let
the basket and cake fall. I couid see that the act was noticed
by the smiles on the faces. I knew that Garibaldi was in the
room, for I had seen him there before, but who could this be?
34
Abraham Lincoln .


"When Miss Mouncey came out I asked her, and she told me I had
shaken hands with a great man. He was the .President of America,
Abraham Lincoln. She told me then that there was going to be
a civil war. I did not know what that was.
THE ISLE OF ARK AN.
It was so delightful to see lona again. We left in the morning
and called at so many places. There seemed quite a crowd, and
such beautiful scenery. We arrived in the afternoon at LamJash.
There was someone to take the luggage, and we walked by the sea.
The name of the house was Oakbank, and it was right on the top
of a hill, 'with steps leading down to the boating-house, and there
we could see the house-boat. The boat was called Oakbank, too.
The house seemed small after Glasgow, with its little green gate,
but the people only wanted somewhere to sleep. We lived out-
side, either on the water or on the mountains, there being plenty
of caves as well. It was the month of June, The people who
belonged to the house lived on the place in some way for the time.
We could get milk and butter and eggs and poultry from them, but
all the rest of the provisions came from the city, and the lovely fish
they could get themselves in plenty. What a different life for
the people who lived there when compared to that I had seen in
the city. Whether they took me with them or not I had very
little to do, there being a lot of people on the island known to
each other. They -would go off in the morning and take provisions
with them, and I would not see them again till dark. Very often
they took me as well. I could climb on my hands and feet, and
did not trouble if I rolled down, so long as the sea -was not imme-
diately underneath me. How the people lived has often puzzled
me more since than it did at the time.
It seemed that the whole, or nearly all, the island belonged to
the Duke of Hamilton, and he was said to be eccentric. He would
not let people make any alteration, but wished every place to re-
main in its wild state. It was known that coal could be got there
in any quantity, but they dare not dig to get it. Some of the old
people, with whom I liked to talk, told me that they were born
on the island, and had never been out of it, even to cross the Clyde
and they hoped to die there. Only in summertime, -when visitors
were there, they spoke in English. To each other they spoke in
Gaelic. The language was very strange to listen to, and more so
when they made blunders, for one must laugh. The church was
at Brodic, and it was quite two miles and a half to walk there.
35
The Isle of Arran.


The minister preached in the morning in Gaelic, and it was good
to see the old men and women coming over the hills to hear thi&
Gaelic. I went one Sunday with the people of the house to hear
the preaching. The minister was Mr. Davis, and he did look so
cross, and railed at the dear creatures, who had come six and
seven miles to hear him. I used to like to hear some of the old
stories about the place.
It interested me when they told me that the deep valleys we
‘were then passing would be filled up with snow in the winter
months, and they showed me places here and there where some
poor shepherd had perished in the snow, while he was looking tor
his sheep. They also said that for many months in the year they
could not go to see anyone, and no one could come and see them be-
cause of the snow. There were no roads, but only footpaths on
top of the hill or at the bottom. On seeing the place one
could understand what it would be like after a heavy fall of snow.
Then it would roll down from the mountains. The habits of those
people were plain and without art. They let their houses in the
summer, and that brought them a little money. They had little
patches of land on which they grew flax and all sorts of things.
It was rare to see a ploughed field between Lamlash and Brodic.
The Duke of Hamilton’s palace was at Brodic. It looked a grand
place. He need not stop shut in it all the winter, however, for he
had other places. Then the people had to make provision for the
winter. They killed a sheep, and had it dried in some way. I
saw some of it. They called it braxxie. Then there wa& the fish,
also dried, in plenty. They made cheese and they had bacon.
Those who were too far back from the sea had to have stores inside
their homes. From Oakbank one could clear away the snow trom
the steps and get to the ships in a small boat, but none of the
steamers could come near, although they would come as close as
they dare in the rough weather. We counted as many as four-
teen one morning, after a stormy night. There were all sorts,
some being good-sized sailing vessels and yachts.
One more thing I found, and that was that the people made
the linen from the flax that grew on the place. The bed-lmen that
they had in use for the visitors they said was a hundred years
old. I saw some that was newly made. It would be something
to remember to sleep between sheets newly made, I ought to
explain that these shins I saw came in for the shelter of the hills
from the fearful gales. I think now that was the most enjoyable
time I ever spent. One way and another I got to see a good deal,
and was learning to know that there was both dignity and indepen-
dence in the labors of a house-servant. The charm is to feel as-
sured that your services are approved. lam quite sure that Mi.
Mouneey cou'd get plenty of inspiration for his magazine; he was
always taking notes, and was not above calling my attention to
things interesting or instructive if I were with them.
36
The Isle of Arran.


Miss Heslip came from near Falkirk, and knew all about Denny.
Both she and Miss Mouncey often took me with them. I rejoiced
inascamper, so one morning we took the two childen and tracked
off to climb a hill called Goat-Fell, We had some lunch with us.
Mr. and Mrs. Mouncey had gone somewhere else; at any rate, we
began to climb, and kept on climbing and resting for I do not know
how long. Well on in the afternoon we had lunch, and started
tc come down. We did not go to the top. It was awful, per-
fectly awful to see the sheep browsing about on those hills. They
looked like mere specks. My wonder was that they did not roll
into the sea, w r hich foamed at the foot in some places. We were
to be there from June 1 till the last day in August. The beach
was a picture, with the cliffs above and underfoot the Scotch
pebbles and shells and the rocks and seaweed. I had only to sit
and think.
Many people came to the island on a Saturday afternoon and
brought tents with them, and stopped till Monday. The caves
were used as well. Some minister ■would come from the city and
preach in the open air. We all went on the hilltop to hear him.
It was like a fairyland. From there you could see the Ailsa Crag,
which looked as if ic were in the clouds. There were no public
buildings, no fine arts, and yet few places have so much natural
attraction for the holiday season as the Island of Arran.
While bathing I made the acquaintance of a young girl, who,
like myself was with some visitors from the city. She could swim
nnd float on the water for ever so far. She told me that her father
and brothers were fishermen, and that she had been often away
with them for weeks at a time, and they had taught her to swim.
I used to watch her in terror when she would go under water and
•come up in another place. Her name was Annie Smith, and she
took me in hand to teach me to swim. I tried to do as she told
me, but one morning 1 went too far. I could not see her, and i
felt myself being carried out to sea. I was helpless, and the sea-
water was in my mouth and ears, and I was trying to eaten hold
of some seaweed. All at once Annie got sight cf me. She gave
a scream, and, coming out, pulled me to the shore. I did not
know how I got there, but I found myself in bed with ail the
young people and the master and mistress in my room. 1 soon
got alright, but never again went beyond my depth in the sea.
It was a strange feeling, and for days I could hear the roaring of
the water. I felt that I should always remember that girl who
raved me from drowning. Annie could manage a boat and use
the oars. The young ladies often went ion a sail and took me
with them. They had gentlemen friends, and sometimes we had
the Scotch bagpipes on board. I thought what a pity it was that
*uch glorious days should pass so quickly.
Mrs. Pringle, from whom we rented the house, would let
me come with her to the dairy, and 1 helped her sometimes with
The Isle of Arran.


the churning. The butter was made differently then. She had.
fowls and plants and a vegetable garden Everything was speck-
lesa and clean. All this pave me an insight into the ways of
the world not to be regretted. She had three children, and her
husband and her brother, who was an elderly man, worked about
the place. They had some hay growing some distance from the
house. Mrs. Pringle let the young couple and me go to see the
haymaking. We would go off in the cart and come back on top
of a load of hay, which was put in the loft for the winter. The
fresh sea wind and the smell of the hay were beautiful. How one
can enjoy life in the open air! I looked forward to coming again
the next year.
It looked such a short distance from where we bathed to cross
over to The Holy Isle, which was once the burying-piace. The
dead were taken there in boats, and there was an old monastery
where the monks lived, and where many of them were buried. It
was much patronised by visitors. There .was but one house there
with people living in it, and that was a public-house. AH our
people with some friends went one afternoon. It was not con-
venient to take me, although it had been promised that I should
go to The Holy Isle before we left.
That memorable summer was nearly ended, Mr. Mouncey had
gone to Glasgow. Mrs. Pringle’s brother and his nephew got the
boat. I made arrangements with Annie Smith to come with me
to see ihe isle. The days were still long, so we got there in time
to see the ruins of the abbey, and to try and read the indiscernible
names on the tombs. There were no headstones, but all were lying
flat, and were covered over with moss. Such were the graves of
the monks. We rushed about to see all we could. The moss was
more than a finger in length, and there were feathery-hke ferns.
The higher up the old building the more dainty they appeared, i
asked the young man if he thought he could get some for me from
the top, for I wanted some pulled up by the root to plant. At
some risk he went, and, to my grief, he just pulled the ferns off.
I brought different curios to keep in remembrance. We went into
the house. I only saw one woman, and she did not look very
bright. No wonder, either, surrounded by the sea and its dead-
liness. Mr. Cook, who was with us, spoke to her in Gaelic, and
she brought in some scones and whisky. Neither Annie Smith nor
I drank whisky, nor were we asked to, but the scones I shall never
forget. They were made of flour, ground from green peas. I
tested them, and I asked Mr. Cook afterwards what they were
made of. He said they had a field of green peas, which, on being,
gathered, they dried and ground after the Bible custom between
two stones. They were as green as grass, but not bad to taste.
Mr. Cook was well acquainted with the isle, and he showed ali
the places of antiquity. The people who lived there had boats,
and some more than one, and ran to and fro from Lamlash and
38
The Isle of Arran.


Brodic. They made a good living in that way in summertime.
We went back to our boat, and the tide had gone and left it high
and dry on the side, such a long way from the water. Mr. Cook
stood and looked in despair. He forgot that the tide was receding,
as we were in such haste to get ashore, and he told us afterwards
that he had never been on the isle after dark. The men who lived
there had gone either to Brodic or Lamblash. The young man
who was with Mr. Cook was named Cooke also. The strength ot
the four of us could move the boat, but it could not be dragged
down, the side of the rocks for fear of damage. So three we had
to wait till the tide came in. It was moonlight, and the mental
visions that passed through my mind are there yet. The people
were anxious about us, Mr. Cook had only one eye, and they
thought that some mishap had occurred. We got home alright,
and I was glad I had seen The Holy Isle.
While it is fresh in my mind, I may add here that many years
after I was telling a friend about my trip to The Holy Isle. A
friend of hers came in and sat down. She begged me to finish
the incident, and I went all through about the ferns, and so on.
Someone called to the man that sat by me. I looked to see if he
were going. He called out to the questioner that ne would not
move till I had told my experience of that night on the isle. Il«
then said he was the young man that climbed up the ruins to get
me the ferns. His name was Cook, and he was employed in a
confectioner’s shop in Adelaide. He had a wife and children.
I hoped to see him again, but I was away from Adelaide for some
time. When I returned I made enquiries, and was told that he
bought a place near B'ackwood. It was laughable that, not know-
ing the man, I should be telling a story in which he had a part.
If he is alive and sees his name in print I hope he will pardon
me.
I still love the beautiful and the true. Nothing lasts, plea-
sure least of all. I knew the joy of Jiving and. of my freedom,
with no one to make me afraid. My name was then Anna Mac-
donald. The name gave me an entrance amongst the people of
Arran, as I w r as one of them. I understood that my by-gone re-
lations had all drifted from Scotland through some religious mat-
ter, but that did not trouble me.
But I must not linger over by-gones. I felt a sort of respon-
sibility to myself and those I loved. I had only myself to depend
on for my food and clothing and to help others. It seemed very
well for the preachers to tell you of the lilies of the field that
toiled not, neither did they spin, and so on. Scotland is not the
place for that style of life. This is not meant ironically.
The time for going back to town was drawing nearer, and
we had only two more Sundays. I used often to go with some of
the people to church in the morning, although I did not under-
stand the Gaelic. They had Gaelic Bibles as well. The gam#
The Isle of Arran.


minister would preach in English in the afternoon, and then we
often saw people from Glasgow. I saw a young gentleman one
Sunday from Mr. Somervili’g church. His name was Malcolm
White, and he was studying to be a minister, but was not yet
ordained. I told the young ladies on the way home. I was so
pleased to see him, although I was not near enough to speak to
him, as I would like to have done, as he was my teacher at a
Bible-class.
Miss Heslip said she wished that she had seen him, as he
had been one time tutor to her brothers. He had just published
a book, of which he was the author. They asked me many things
about him when they saw that I knew’ him. We all knew at the
class that he w’as a young man from amongst the working people.
It was he who helped me to gather the money to pay the tine
for the little boy w'ho broke the lamp-glass one Sunday. I had
to tell him of the sad sequel at the time, and he told me to try
and forget it. I had been thinking of all the questions I would ask
him when I got back about Arran. One very old man told me that
■when the apostles Avere sent “far hence,” that some of them landed
at Arran.
Soon the time of our stay concluded. We were getting some
pebbles and shells and seaweed, and I dearly wanted some ferns
with the root attached. There were a lot of large ferns growing
near the bathing-place, so I got Master Robert and Miss Annie
Mouncey to come and help me. Miss Annie and I held them back
and Master Robert, in the hope of finding some tiny fronds, pushed
right through till he entered a large cave. He ran and called his
father, and then Mr. Cook came and made a clear way into a place
that went ever so far in the rock. There was a strange-looking
thing, like a lamp, hanging from the roof. Mr. Mouncey could
stand upright in the place. Neither Mr. Pringle nor any of the
others knew anything about it. How Ave Avisihed AA'e had found it
in the early part of our stay, but AA’e hoped to examine it the next
year, and begged the people to let it remain hidden till Ave came
back. No doubt something could be discovered about it to tell
a tale. It seemed natural that AA’e should think of all the count-
less cruel deeds of olden times wrought by a blind and brutal
humanity.
The thought of ‘'home, sweet home,” brought happiness to the
young people. Annie Smith promised to come Avith me to Slaman-
nan w’hen I went, and to tell my relatives hoAv she saved me from
the deep sea. After many kind good-byes, Ave AA’ere once more on
board the lona, and the Isle of Arran w’as far aAvay. As it was
Avell towards the end of the season there Avas a scene of excite-
ment coming and going betAveen the shore and the boat. We had
to go in small boats. How it has all clung to my memory. There
Avas one laughable incident. Some economist had been saving or
buying eggs till he had a hamperful. Because they were not
40
The Isle of Arran,


packed well, or owing to the heedless way they were carried, they
tumbled on the deck. The eggs began to roll about. Lake that
of some sudden explosion was the effect, and both ladies and
gentlemen got up on the seats. Anyone who saw those sailors
mopping up the decks and cleaning away the eggs would never
forget the look on their faces. Every now and then, when they
thought all was cleared, the lurching of the ship would send some
more eggs rolling out from under the seats. The comic episode
•caused laughter to everyone but the sailors and the person to
whom the eggs belonged.
BACK IN GLASGOW AGAIN.
I could not help being glad that I was back in Glasgow again.
Everyone seemed so happy. Yet all was strange, and in the midst
of my happy feelings I could not forget the uncertainty at home, or
the trouble as to what we were going to do. My dearest
ambition was to live at home with my father and brother and sis-
ter. But I had a dread of the pinch of poverty, and Glasgow was
then in a fearful state. The war in America had broken out, and
hundreds and thousands of people were thrown out of employment.
All the cotton-mills were stopped, as the raw cotton came from
America. Then all the commerce or trade from Glasgow to
America was at a standstill. I thought it bad enough before we
went to Arran, but it was worse then. Every day persons w r ere
eoming to the door begging, and one could see tradesmen and
mechanics digging in the West-End park for a shilling per day.
How often I have found, too, in the morning sleeping in the
-archway some poor boys that had been there all night. They
had no home. I was all the time in sadness, but what could I do?
No efforts of mine could lessen the sorrow of even one human
being. I should assist my own people first. And despair some-
times possessed me.
Miss Heslip went to her home, and Mr. Mouncey went away
to Italy, ana when we had things straight I was to have a few
days and go to Slamannan. I went and saw my friends at Dr.
Fargus’, and to th e Bible-class, and told Mr. White that I had
seen him at Brodic, and I told him about Miss Heslip being a
visitor with Mr. Mouncey’s people. Mr. White said he knew Mr.
Mouncey, but he had never met Miss Mouncey. Before Miss Hes-
lip went there was a concert at the Queen’s Rooms, close to us.
Jenny Lind was the singer. It was a guinea to go in to hear her.
ohe gave all she got for that night and many other nights to the
41
Back in Glasgow again.


relief of the poor and the distressed. Our two young ladies were
in evening-dress, and I was to bring wraps. While I was waiting,
together with some other girls on the same errand, the man at
the door asked us if we would like to see and hear the singer, there
being a place on the ground-floor from which we could both see and
hear her without being seen. We were glad, and thanked the man.
There was only Jenny Lind’s husband with her to play the accom-
paniment, She had just commenced to sing “John Anderson,
my jo, John/’ and her husband was at the piano. He seemed
older than she was, and his head was bald, but the singing and
the playing were beautiful. She sang a Swiss song, too, and that
was all 1 heard. Could anyone ever forget the voice of that
woman? And it seemed no effort for her to get the Scotch words
so nicely. The ladies were pleased that I saw and heard her, even
ever so little. I thought that Miss Mouncey and Miss Heslip sang
very well, but both said that they would never sing again after
hearing Jenny Lind.
Glasgow was a manufacturing city and crowded with human
beings in the struggle to live. Edinburg did not seem to me so
bad, but I never lived there. There was some restless discontent
going on in Italy. The world must move on. Life’s destiny lay
hidden from me. Mrs. Mouncey was good and kind. My sister
came to see me. She had a baby girl! I was allowed to go out
with her and show her some wonderful places about, and she stop-
ped with me all night. My father and brother called to see me
now and again, and my sensitive nature was keenly alive to every
act of kindness shown to them.
In conversation with Mr. Malcolm White I told him that Miss
Mouncey was going to Miss Heslip’s for a time. He said he
wished that he was acquainted with Miss Mouncey, as he had
something to send to Miss Heslip. It came out very unexpectedly
that I heard Miss Mouncey express herself equally anxious for an
introduction to him, so I said, “Why not come to-morrow after-
noon, Miss Mouncey will be at home?” I went into her room
when I got home that night, and told her that Mr. White was
coming to see her the next day. She could not understand it,
and questioned me a lot as to what I said. She was perplexed,
but not angry. He came, and I opened the door to him, and led
him to the drawing-room. I found Miss Mouncey and announced
her and shut the door, and I learned that the Kev. M. White be-
came Miss Mouncey’s husband two years after I came to Ade-
laide. He was a gentleman, according to my standard, and in
every sense of the word she was a lady. Everything came about
as I hoped. She often said that if ever she married she would
like to marry a minister. I knew that she was sought for by
■o/flhers. I did not forget to ask about the apostles landing at
Arran. I asked Mr. Somervill, as well as Mr. White. I had
some things made plain to me which need not be added here.
42
Back in Glasgow again .


The time came for me to go to Slamannan. All was turmoil
there. I had not long been in the little house when my father
came in and said., “Anna, why don’t you go to Australia?" He
had seen two young girls whom I knew, and they had only that
day received a reply from London to tell them they were to sail
for Queensland in two weeks’ time. I sat and looked at him. 1
thought he was joking, and I said, “No, father, I will do all 1 can
for you, but I will never cross the sea so far."
Later on, when I went out with my brother, I said, “Well,
Mac, what would you say if I went to Australia?" He told me
how he wished he could go somewhere out of Slamannan, 1 learned
for the first time that he was working down in the coal-pits. And
the next day when I saw him come in I made up my mind to come
to Australia if they would take me. Mo one but myself knew
my thoughts. My brother was a little over 14 years of age, and 1
was not 17. When I returned to Glasgow I knew that there were
bills all about in the streets notifying that free passages would
be given to capable young women as domestic servants to three
different colonies, Queensland, South Australia, and Victoria. The
notice went on to say that a doctor and a matron would be on
board, and that the ships were fitted up with sanitary and other
arrangements according to rule. I had often seen the advertise-
ment before, but I never read it. I went to the place in Hope-
street, and saw the agent, and asked if I could get my brother
to come with me. When I told him the age he said “No," but
added that if I had some friends out in the colonies they could
send a grant or get an assisted passage for my brother. I said
I had no one out there.
“Well,” he said, “we will take you, and you can soon send
for your brother." He talked to me for a long time, and gave
me some papers to get filled in and to bring them back to him
again. I took the papers, but I did not like to say anything to
Mrs. Mouncey. That night I went to friends at Hr. Fergus’*
and they tried all they could to persuade me not to go to Aus-
tralia. The Dr. and Mrs. Fargus were in London at the time,
as there was a great exhibition there, and they had gone to see
it.
I had no wish to see the world, and doubted if 1 would have
the courage at the end. I mistrusted myself,, but still 1 had the
papers filled up. Some said I had lost my senses. When 1 ex-
plained the facts to my master and mistress, and showed them
the conditions of the voyage in a printed form, they added their
names as to what they knew of my reputation. Then the minis-
ter’s name and the doctor’s name were put on in addition, and the-
forms were sent to London.
Back in Glasgow again .


I DECIDE TO COME TO ADELAIDE.
Meanwhile I bad gone to hear a man who was lecturing. He
■dealt with all the colonies in turn, and when he referred to South
Australia and Adelaide, so pleasing were the pictures he drew of
the country all round, that they made a deep impression on me.
I knew no one in Adelaide, and I knew no one in that lecture-
hall, but as I sat there my mind was made up to come to South
Australia, having the choice between it and either Melbourne or
Queensland. I told the Rev. A. N. Somervill, when I showed
him the papers, that I would like to come to Adelaide, and he
said that a college friend of his was in the city of Adelaide. His
name was Dr. Gardner, and they wrote to each other. From Dr.
Gardner’s account he thought it w’ould be a nice place to live,
and when I left Glasgow Mr. Somervill gave me a letter to Dr.
Gardner, who was minister of Chalmer’s Church, North-terrace.
I was healthful, sound of body, and free from disease, and 1
did not think so much of the trouble of the voyage.
It seemed such a short time after the papers were sent away
till I had an answer back to say that I was to hold myself in readi-
ness to sail from Liverpool or Birkenhead in a ship called the
Morning Star. That was near the end of October. I had not
told them at home what I had done in regard to applying for a
passage, and I was to be at the place of embarkation not later than
November 2. With a fluttering heart I went to Slamannan. They
would not believe me. Then they did not want me to go. I was
sorely tried. I wondered at the maze of difficulties; the only
thing which determined me was that it was too late to draw back.
I craved lor their sympathy, and asked them to let me go. I over-
heard a man speaking to my father. He asked if it was true that
I was going out to the colonies. My father said “Yes.” He replied,
'“Surely you will not let your daughter go.” My father said “Yes.”
The man had some family himself, and he then said, “If it were a
daughter of mine that wanted to go to that wild, outlandish place
I would take her to the plantation and take a gun and shoot her
rather than let her go to such a place.”
I heard it all, and had a cry. I did not know enough to rea-
lise the distance or the time I would be on the sea. The Morning
Star was a sailing vessel.
In spite of my impulsive nature it was hard to give up all the
humble joys of youth, and I thought I could face the future bet-
ter in Scotland. What would a strange land hold for me? It
is no use to tell how the colliers and their wives and friends
-crowded to see me, as they said to mix up the sour with the
eweet. We were living in the main street of Slamannan then, and
my sister and her husband, as well as the colliers and others,
44
I Decide to Gome to Adelaide.


gathered together and got the large hall and arranged a concert on
ray behalf. I felt grateful to many whom I had never seen be-
fore. All round I was asked such strange questions, and was told
1 was rushing to destruction. Some thought I would get eaten
when I got out here.
The final morning came. It was dark and cold on November
2. All my own relations travelled with me to Glasgow, but at the
railway-station at Slamannan there were the people again with
their hearty farewells. I told them I would come back and see
them some day, and I did so. The brave spirit which sustained
me gave way, and I went in tears to say good-bye to my friends
in Glasgow. Oh, the bitterness of that hour! To see the old
scenes of my daily life and say the last word. I saw Dr. Reily,
and he gave me some useful advice for ship life. In Scotland the
days are short in November. The train left at 5 p.m. It was
dark, and every familiar object grew dim. There w r as no one in
the train whom I knew. I was told that it would be 7 o’clock the
next morning before I would get to Liverpool. All night the
train journeyed on, and at some of the stations we picked up some
more weeping passengers. It seemed to console me when 1 saw
others who I learned were going to Adelaide in the Morning Star
When we got to Liverpool we were taken to Birkenhead*
There was a queer-looking building where we were taken. X
soon found that plenty of people were there to the appointed time
for the voyage, and they did not seem afraid to travel to the fair
land beyond the sea. Such a mixed lot of strangers I saw. There
were W 7 elsh and English married couples with tneir families.
There were Welsh and English single young men and Welsh and
English single young woman. Then there were Scotch and Irish
married couples, and also their families, and single young Scotch
men, and single young Scotch women. I can still remember how
many single women there were altogether. There were 105. We
had nothing to complain of. There were separate divisions for
all the young women in a department by themselves with the
married couples next to us. Then the young men were at the
other side, and in the ship the same plan was carried through
all the way on the vovage.
We did not sail till November 19, but there were no unreason-
aide restrictions. We went in and out at will. 1 went about
with some of the married people, and clung to them all the way
out and after. I go and see some of them at this date when I can
find the time. The ship was brought alongside of the depot, as
tns place was ca led, and I thought it looked so splendid,
so clean and nice; but, for all that, more than I thought it might
be our last resting-place. The touch of kindness in it all was
wonderful to me. One lady, also a free passenger, was elected as
matron. She was an English lady, and she endeared herseli to
all. The doctor had all our names on a roll, and he called them
45
1 Decide to Gome to Adelaide.


over every evening and morning, and we had to answer to our
names to see that none of us got lost. The doctor acted as chap
lain. He was a bachelor, and had many years’ experience of sea
life. There was a punt that went to and fro from Rirkenhead
to Liverpool, and vehicles of all kinds with horses attached parsed
over on this punt. It cost a half-penny for each individual. We
cften wont in companionship in that way, and we saw many things
to surprise us in Liverpool,
We were watching to see when; the Morning Star would sail,
and wondering why we were there so long and were provided
for, without payment, with good as well as suitable food. The
last afternoon before we sailed we had our tea on board the ship.
Some were skilled in music amongst the men, and they formed
in a harmonious way and marched on board in order playing some
lively tunes with flute and fiddle. Only to think that we must
gradually get settled and be pent up within the walls of a ship for
three months and not see land in that time! We gii’ls were ar-
ranged so many for each table, and the table had a number. We
took it in turns to keep the utensils and vessels that we used
clean. The sleeping convenience, too, was adjusted for sleeping
only. There were comfortable hammock-like beds, and two shared
a compartment together. A young English girl came to me and
said her name was put with mine for sleeping in the same division.
I had not seen her before, as she came on board only in time to
sail, as her home was in Liverpool. She cried bitterly at leav-
ing home and mother. She was about 20 years of age, and so
beautiful and pleasing, and she could sing. We went to sleep,
and in the morning when I awoke I found the ship moving gently.
We were being towed out of the dock by a steamboat.
ON AN EMIGRANT SHIR.
It was a foggy morning. I could see the boat and 1 learned
that we were in the River Mersey. How different it looked from
the River Clyde! I was on the poop and a man was standing
waving to a woman in the boat, who was also waving a handker-
chief. He was a tall, strong-looking man, with such a tanned face.
I looked up at him and saw the tears standing on his brown
cheeks. That was our captain. When we got fairly out to sea
a great many felt ill. Strange to say, I did not, and was able
to be helpful and to go here and there and assist the others.
Some were never on the deck for weeks, but rough or fine I never
missed being in the open air for one day during the voyage, i
On an Emigrant Ship.


loved to watch the wheel that controlled the helm and guided
that great ship in a direct course to Adelaide. A few verses,
written by one of the married men, will give some idea of the
high opinion we all had of the captain. They are still in a
legible state, although written so long ago. I will add them here.
The author of them is dead, but in his lifetime in South Australia
his name was popular and high in public favor. Here are the
lines:—
ON THE MORNING STAR.
Come, let us be cheerful, at last we are afloat
Alone on the ocean, where battles were fought
By England’s true sons, to memory so dear,
Whose cannons were never yet seen in the rear.
Brave Captain Mathews, he is truly a hero.
His barque is his pride on the wide, rolling sea.
His voice through the tempest sounds strong and clear,
And the deck is his cabin when danger is near.
No favor yet asked has he ever refused,
In the fair weather all the young girls are amused.
Always so cheerful, with a sweet, pleasant smile;
See him romp with, the children, the time to beguile.
Mr. Granger, the first mate, like the captain, is free.
Always happy when he sees some amusement and glee.
Amongst the young women he is nothing amiss—
I judge by the number that I’ve seen him kiss.
Mr. Hudson, the second mate, has a fitness of mind.
In his place he is ever upright and kind.
Truth and sincerity you discern in his face,
He will never the cause of old England disgrace.
Then may success attend those three brave sons of the sea.
May fortune befriend them wherever they be;
When old age comes on may their pillow be soft.
When called from below, God grant their souls go aloft!
When scenes and places were pointed out to us I began to
realise how far away I was. When the captain gave orders
that Ave were to be kept below, as the ship would get a toss-
mg m the Bay of Biscay a solemn silence fell on us all.
Ihe dear old Morning Star ploughed her way through that
awful -water, and I could see no bay, but only stormy billows.
All our things swung to the other side of the ship, and the
things from the other side came over to us. We soon regained
■confidence, and there were merry peals of laughter to see
the plight of the passengers when their goods and chattels
were rushing from side to side. Fancy us being afraid of sea
or storm after that. If any other ship that flitted across the
/f s , near nnough the men got out some flags and
Signalled to her, and in that way found out who she was and
47
On an Emigrant Ship.


where she was going. If she was close enough and was home-
ward bound we could send letters. An American warship came
close by, but when the captain discovered that we were a ship
full of people voyaging to Adelaide he let us go. I learned
that they were bent on plunder. The warship was the
famed Confederate privateer Alabama. I used to read about
it and the desperate things Captain Semmes did on the high
seas, not sparing either boats or schooners, but overhauling
them in a most merciless manner. Our captain knew who
they were, but we did not at the time. Although 1 saw the
name I was not the least disturbed, and years afterwards,
when reading a description of the Alabama, I knew that I had
seen her.
The doctor read the Anglican Church service every Sunday
forenoon, and usually we all attended, sailors as well. How
sweet the singing sounded on the sea. It was so solemn and
so mysterious with only the sky for a roof. The ways and
the saying and the doings of those on the Morning Star
were very peaceful in that never-to-be-forgotten time. Health,
and contentment were unspoi t by contact with the world. I,
for one, too often turned with regret to the old times in
Scotland, although our days were full of excitement. If any
isolated places could be seen as we travelled along the captain
would let us have his telescope in turns, and would tell the
name and the situation and all particulars. We learned tuat
he had children at home, and that when I saw him first
he was waving good-bye to his wife and children. He would
come up in the afternoon with his pockets full of sweets
and put them on a canvas to see us scramble tor them. He
was beloved by the sailors, and it was good to see how they
would run when he called. He always said, “Come along,
my boys, and let that go every inch.”
We were a long time at sea before he knew that
I had no relatives on board, and when I told him I knew no
one in Adelaide his voice trembled. “Oh, well, be brave,” he
said, “you are young, and you must take your part in labor
and in life.” The days seemed to pass so quickly, and as day
followed day the companionship grew more strong, as we were
grouped together with only the noise of the waves to listen
to. How little did some think of the deep shadow of sorrow that
would reach them through those bright, rolling waters.
Scarlet fever had already seized some of the young children,
and one by one they were lowered down into the bitter
waters. They would be enjoying their hours of play in the
sunshine on the deck one day and the next they would be
gone. The trouble continued ti I twenty-seven had died. A
man died also, and one family lost six children, some of them
grown up. After seeing so much of the troubled horrors of
48
On an Emigrant Ship.


the deep we were heavy-hearted, and no wonder. Everything
passed like a mist, and we did not know who would go over
next.
Captain Mathews showed much sympathy for the grief and
suffering. How we watched him as he sat with his telescope,
and anxiously wondered how long it would be ere we got
to Adelaide. Wild winds would toss the ship with such cruel
force that we were very anxious. Once we saw icebergs
floating about in the sea, and it required some skill to steer
clear of them. They looked awful. There was a skylight just
above where the other young girl and I slept, but it was always
shut and made fast every night at 10 o’clock. One fearfully
rough night when the wind, was blowing strongly the water
came rushing down the ladder. It was sea water. Our
berth was getting full, and I could not go on deck for the
hatchway was locked. I called as loudly as I could, but
could not get anyone to hear. So I thought of a plan, and
I found a mopstick and tied my towel on it, and poked it up
through the bars of the skylight, and rattled it to and
fro with such vigor that the captain, who was at the wheel,
came running and calling what was the matter. I said,
“Please, captain, will you put the cover on the skylight to keep
the water from coming down the steps?” He said I would
have to appear before the doctor in the morning to answer
for the fright I had given him, and I was sent for in tha
morning for the first time.
Fever was in the captain’s cabin; the doctor was there
and the mates. The captain said he had been to sea for
thirty-three years and had met all kinds of incidents, but that
he had never before had such a fright as I gave him with
that broomstick. He was horrified to see this white thing
come up in the middle of the night. I promised never to offend
again, but I received a good scolding. He said it looked like
a goblin, and he pretended to be angry, but I could see the
smile on his face. I could only look from one to the other,
for if the ship had got wrecked they said I would have
been to blame, for the captain was at the wheel himself,
and he let it go when he saw this white object thrust
out in the darkness, while the sound disturbed him as much as
the sight of the thing.
I shall never forget that time. Sometimes doubt and despair
were at war. I felt that I could not undertake the journey again,
for the task I had undertaken seemed harder than any I had
learnt before.
A lot of nonsense was talked about “crossing the line.” What
dreadful things some of us thought we would see! We feared the
Equator and the Southern. Cross, but there was, after all, only
fun and merriment, there being nothing strange to see. The ship
49
On an Emigrant Ship.


went on steadily just the same, but when they told me a certaip
constellation of stars was che Southern Cross, and I lost sight ot
some stars I was familiar with, I knew we were making our way
to the new land. After crossing the great dividing of the seas
we often had it very hot. This was new to me. Often in the
tropics the ship would just roll to and fro, and sometimes make
no headway. Then we would see the tar boiling in the seams
on the deck. We had plenty of time for dreams and fan.cies,
as we longed for the first glint of freedom, so as to start into life
again. It was getting on towards the end of December, and we
thought of the New Year on board ship, and set to work to form
some plans for being joyous.
Christmas and Yew Year’s Day were festive times. Some of
the young girls who had friends amongst the married people were
allowed to go to their quarters to spend the day, and we had all
sorts of enjoyment by direction of the captain. We were well
content with che arrangements, and the whole time was restful
and quiet, despite the monotony of the voyage. The share ol
joy and sorrow that comes to every life was not absent on sea.
What troubled me was that I was growing tall, and I wondered
what I should do for clothing. I grew in height and got
broader. I could only with difficulty get on some of my garments
that fitted me well before I left on the long voyage. Some actually
laughed, and asked me why I came before I had stopped growing.
I only had one hat, and that blew over the side of the ship. 1
stood and watched it as far as I could see it with tears in my
eyes. That had fitted me alright. We got up our boxes every
now and then to look through them. But I must not keep on
about my discomfort, although what seemed droll to others was
to me a matter for serious thought. I had a new pair of boots
and would not wear them on board, but was saving them to
go ashore with. I put them in what I thought a sale place in a
corner where we slept, but when I went to get them tne rats
had eaten all the kid off them. There were only left the canvas
or lining and the leather on the toes. I took them and showed
them to the captain, and he said it was good to have rats on board
ship, as it indicated that we would not get wrecked on the voyage.
I had been so helpful to the matron all the way that the doctoi
told me I would be rewarded with some payment when we got
to Adelaide. I was thankful for that, because I had no money.
We were told that it would take to the middle of February,
supposing everything went right, before Adelaide would be
reached. Many on board were travelling to relations or friends,
and there was no home-sickness amongst them. They counted
the moments until their arrival. Neither the captain, the doctor,
nor any of the mates had ever been to South Australia, nor .had
any of the passengers been either, so we had no one to tell us of
anything encouraging about this new country. We could only
50
On an Emigrant Ship.


have hope and courage. Everything was done for our comfort.
When the weather was 1 too hot awnings were spread to protect us
from the sun, and we always seemed to have a reasonable supply
•of water. I never saw the least sign of whisky or grog, as it was
called, in the case of any of the officers of the Morning Star.
Cleanliness was universal, and every, precaution was taken
ngainst infection by the use of carbolic. That South Australia
was a place for men and women who believed in themselves was
recognised, and the question was often discussed. There were
men of culture and training on board the ship, and so they proved
themselves afterwards. It made me proud to think of having
come a sea-voyage with them. The same remark applied also to
the women, with but few exceptions. We had all signed an
■agreement to stop in the colony for two years. The thoughts ol
a return to Great Britain were shared with many of us, and
they gave me hope.
The most painful experience I ever had on that deck was one
Saturday morning. I was sitting in my usual place, when I saw
a seaman going up in the rigging. All at once 1 heard a fearful
cry, and I saw him fall into the sea. They shut down the skylight
to keep the people from causing confusion. On either side of the
ship a lifeboat was lowered’in a moment, and before I had time
to look round I could see the mates and the men in the boats, and
the lifebuoys thrown over. The captain had the ship heaved to.
It was awful. They did not rescue the sailor, and it was af-
firmed that a shark had pulled him under, as one had been seen
that morning. Sharks were often seen. The sight of that man
falling into the water has lived in my memory. I had not seen
him before, except amongst the others, when they were all to-
gether pulling the ropes, but I could see his face so plainly as he
fell that I would have known him again. This occurred on Janu-
ary 17. The sea was calm, and there "was no breeze. We all felt
sad, and the flags were dropped half-mast. All the man’s chattels
were given in charge to the steward. He was a young (Scotchman,
from the Orkney Islands, and a single man. How I shuddered at
the sight of a shark after that! They followed us nearly all
the way. Anyone-who has heard the cry of the sailors when a
man falls overboard will never forget it forever. Then there was
the confused mingling of the people, with the murmurs of “hush,
hush.”
51
On an Emigrant Ship.


I ARRIVE IN ADELAIDE.
It was a glorious sight on February 14 when we came on deck
to see the land of the south. There was such intense excitement,
and the scene is beyond my description. Dr. Duncan and some
other officials came on board soon after we reached the anchorage.
They had puggarees on their hats and hanging down their backs.
That was the only foreign sign in the clothing. It was a hot day.
I, for one, quite expected to find that the people dressed dif-
ferently, and that the houses were on some other plan from those
at home, considering the long distance from Scotland. After the
officials had convinced themselves that everything was satisfactory
the gangway was let down for the people from the shore, who came
in numbers to welcome the friends whom they had not seen for so
long. Amongst the very first was the head-gardener from Sir
William Milne’s, at Glen Osmond. The gardener came to meet
his sister and her husband with their family. He had instruc-
tions to employ a young girl to do laundry work at Sunnyside,.
Glen Osmond, and he pointed out the place from the side of the
ship under the hills. It looked so nice, and he told me they were
a Scotch family. I knew that I was strong, and that 1 could do
laundry work nicely. He tried amongst the older girls, but came
back to me, and I agreed to go to Sunnyside when we got to the
shore. The captain, the doctor, and the matron were pleased,
as there was a home found for me before I left the ship, and such
a dear home it proved to be.
The married people and the single men went off first, with
such of the young women as had friends to receive them. The
next day we were brought to Adelaide, where a few of the single
girls had gone. We were all on deck next morning in good time.
There was no railway from Port Adelaide to the Semaphore then,
so everything was left in its place. All were making prepara-
tions to leave, with hearts full of gratitude to the captain. While
he was sitting looking through his telescope, not thinking of what
was going on behind his back, one of the girls slipped up quietly
and cut off the tails from his old blue serge frock coat. She
then cut it into little bits and gave it to us to remind us of that
grand man. The look on his face when he saw what was done was
good to see. The young woman who did the cutting became a
captain’s wife two yearg after we arrived, and sh© and I were
friends all the time to her death, which occured a short time ago.
The doctor was very kind to us all, but not with, the hearty in-
terest that touched the captain for the forlorn condition of some
of us. We saw four large omnibuses on the beach, and in a tempest
of sobs we were brought ashore. The doctor had been to town
in the morning. He and the captain came to see that we were ail
52
I Arrive in Adelaide.


in the buses safely. We all came to Adelaide that way and got
into King William-street, some inside, and some outside.
I bad no bat to wear, and the matron, who was with, us, pro-
mised to get one for me that day. The air of cheerfulness amongst
these girls was splendid, and some of them were singing on the
way. We were taken to the home for servants, which stands yet.
It was a little way from the railway-station in King William-
street. When I pass it now the past all comes back to me just
as it was as I was getting out of the omnibus. I could not go
back from the thought of what my life and work would be. A
new gladness came to me, for Adelaide seemed a wonderful place.
We admired the brightness of the sky and the splendor of what we
saw coming along, as well as the grape vines about the houses.
We had plenty of fruit of all sorts sent to us on the Morning
Star, with many grapes, I had never before seen a grape-vine
growing. The very earth seemed new. We were kindly spoken
to at this home, and everything was done for our comfort. A
committee of ladies were appointed; one, I remember, who was so
nice was Mrs. Henry Gawler. She was so sympathetic, I told her
where I was going, and she knew the lady. Mts. Gawler took a
fancy to me, and for years afterwards I used to go to her if I was
in any difficulty.
It was on a Thursday afternoon that we arrived, and on the
Saturday after tea the coachman w'as sent to take me to Sunnyside
in a spring-cart. I was shown into the mistress’ room, and the
dirst words she said were, “Dear me, you are young!" It was
the same complaint as I had heard in Scotland, and 1 wondered
if I would ever get older. I showed the lady the letters and
papers I had to give in proof that I could do what was likely
to be required of me willingly. They were a large family, some
were grown up, but there was a baby in arms. There were other
servants. One I found in the kitchen had only been in the colony
a month, but a housemaid who showed me to my room had been
in South Australia all her life. She brought me some grapes, and
was so anxious for my comfort. lam quite sure that thankful-
ness for the kindness of them all touched me with a sense of se-
curity.
I was early astir in the morning. What a scene was spread
out to view. As far all round as I could see there was nothing
but grapes and fruit trees. I was told that two-and-two the girls
went out on Sundays, and if I liked I could go to town with the
cook, and that I should stay home the next Sunday with the
cook. I knew where to find some of my shipmates if 1 could get
into town. So it was settled that I should go that morning, be-
cause the other girl knew all about Adelaide. There were nc
tramcars then. There were two carriage-drives to the house at
Sunnyside. One led to Glen Osmond and the other* towards town.
We got on a road and kept the town i nview till we got there. 1
I Arrive in Adelaide.


found my way to Wakefield-street just in time to see some of my
friends getting ready to go to the Port and get on the Morning.
Star, which, was not going away for some time. They asked me if
I would like to go with them, and, having been so mucli with
this lady and her children, I was pleased to go. I showed my
fellow-servant where and when to come for me, so that we might
go home together, and I went gladly once again on board the ship.
They had got into Port Adelaide and everything looked so dif-
ferent. Most of the sailors had deserted, which, was no unusual
thing in those times. When the captain saw me be said he
thought I had told him that I had a place to go to. I replied that
it Avas my Sunday off. He could not understand, and the lady 1
was with tried to explain to him, but he merely laughed, and his-
face was a study.
Such a lot of the people who came out with him went to see
him again. The ship did not leave the Port till March. 17. I
never saw the captain again, but I liked to hear about his safety
and that of the ship, as well as that of my shipmates, with whom
I felt most at home. There were five brothers, three had wives-
and families. One was a widower and one a youth. They had
a young Highlander always with them who wore the kilts, and
when we got back from the Port the young man in kilts was there.
I Availed and Avaited, but the young girl from Sunnyside did
not come at the promised time. I was distressed, not knowing
my Avay to the Glen. We were all strangers. I went to the
servants’ home, and I met one of the young girls, and she said
she Avould go Avith me to enquire the way to Sunnyside. We re-
turned to tell my friends, and the young Highlander with one of
the brothers said that they would see that I got safely home. fSo Ave
all started off, and they made enquiries for the road to Glen Os-
mond. The young girl came as well. It must haA T e been the
first time for a man to have kilts on in the colony, for everyone
stared so fixedly at him. I had been so used to see men dressed
thus that I could not understand Avhat the people were so rude
for. We kept along till we got to the Vine Inn. They asked
there for the house, and we had to pass into quite a plantation of
trees, which did not look anything like what I saw when going
to Sunnyside the preAdous night. It was bright moonlight, but
ne\-er a body did Ave see. I caught sight of the house when we
got to the top of a rise. Oh, the joy of the discovery!
At one entrance was the coachman’s house and at the other
the house for the gardener. The coachman’s house was OA*ergroAvn
with a lovely creeper, and the Highlander, AA'anting to know if this
was the right place, tried to get to the door. We could see the
light. He was tall. 'There was a woman sitting inside Avith a
baby on her knee. She saw only the kilts as the Highlander
had to stoop doAvn to get in. She ran and screamed. It was the
coachman’s wife, and she had never seen anyone in kilts before.
54
I Arrive in Adelaide.


She made such a scene, and brought her husband out of bed. The
gardener told me afterwards that bis first thought was to lay hold
of his gun; but when he saw me the matter was soon explained.
I saw the mistress when I went in and told her that Lizzie, vhe
cook, did not call for me, and how I got home. It appeared that
Lizzie had a lover, and they thought that two was company, and
that three was none.
Just a word about the dear friends that brought me home.
There being no bright gaslight to show the road distinctly they
got out of their way, and travelled on till they came to Glenelg,
and did not reach home till near morning. There was a com-
mittee meeting about it and such a lot of talk, for the young girl
was staying at the home in King William-street. But when they
went into the details there 'was nothing to say, except that we
were “new chums/' Such were the events of my first Sunday in
South Australia, which appear vividly among the strange happen-
ings of the past and the planning for the future.
I began to work the next day. Through the skill and kindness
of some of my friends I got over the trouble about my working
clothing. Only I had short sleeves and my arms were burnt by the
sun. I did not mind that. I felt well and strong, and the look
of the place was an inspiration. From where I worked I could see
the sea over which I had come. How I watched the ships com-
ing in and going out, and wondered when I would cross it again.
But the people I was with, well, they were kindness and good-
ness itself, and the children—How I did love to scamper over
the hills with some of them when I could get the chance, even
if. I had to carry them part of the way. it was a well-ap-
pointed and happy home. They entertained a lot, for there was
a grown-up family with such gay and pleasant manners. They
must have been welcome guests wherever they went.
Sir William was in Parliament, and was Minister for Crown
land;? and Emigration. Sir Dominic Daly was the Governor then.
The Government House party came to Sunnyside on festivals and
on other days. There was the Governor and Lady Daly, with two
sons and two daughters, young ladies and gentlemen. The sons
in stature and height were so unlike their father. He must have
been brave enough, but he was neither tall nor stout. I was often
in the room as an attendant. I liked to hear the Governor talk.
I always helped in waiting on the assembled guests. Hotv the
times have changed since then! The young ladies from Sunnyside
and the Miss Dalys and many others belonged to an archery club.
Shooting with the bow and arrow w'as a favorite sport both for
ladies and gentlemen. There were targets all about. One w r as
at the Government farm, which is now called the .National
Park. More than once I have been sent to assist in spreading
lunch there when they had their customary meetings. How ex-
citing it all looked to me. The bright activity of the young
55
I Arrive in Adelaide.


people and the scenery were so entrancing that I was glad I
came here.
Lizzie and the cook got married. I u«ed to go to town once
in every three weeks, but soon found where to get the omni-
bus both in and out of town. I always went to the home to
look for my young friends of the voyage, and we were so
pleased to learn of each others’ welfare. I found many who
had not got such a nice home as I had. And I told my mis-
tress of one young girl that I thought would do in Lizzie
Ross’ place. So the lady asked the master to call at the
Servants’ Home and ask this girl to come. He did so and told
the matron to send her on my recommendation, and she came
and stopped at Sunnyside till she also got married. That
girl grew very attached to the family of Sunnyside and
kept the respect all her life. Only to see some of them was
a joy for Mary. She came from Scotland, and she and I
got into the same train at Glasgow. So we went out on the
same Sunday every other week and came to town together. All wag
well for a long time, but Mary had given her affection to a
young man on board the Morning Star. He wa,« the baker
of the ship, and when we landed in Adelaide he went out with
some exploring party.
I received some letters from home and I sent some. I had
good news to tell of what I had seen in Adelaide. Those
were prosperous times. The gas was getting laid on in the
streets, but in some streets they had only oil lamps. Four of
the brothers already mentioned went to work as plumbers
and gasfitters at first. They were all plumbers and painters
except one, who was a mason. There were no unemployed in
the streets in those days, and no poor children without boots.
Everything, too, was so cheap. So many of the houses have
been pulled down in all the streets and the place has so
changed that if one had not seen the alterations he could
not believe it to be the same place. All the time I was
hoping to get my relatives here. I gave a full description
to my master of the reason I had come out to the colony and
had left all my friends. He told me to rely upon him to
do what he could and showed much sympathy. I was anxious
to get all the family out together, so as not to have any more
partings. A great peace settled on my mind when I found that
Sir William would use his influence in securing the dispatch
of six persons with assisted passages to Adelaide. There
was a lot for me to do, as it would at least cost £2O for me
to send the land grants to them, and may I add here that X
saved that in one year from 10/ a week. After sub-
scribing for the voyagers, it amounted to just the same, as my
wages in Glasgow, which were six pounds a j’ear, so I had enough
for my needs.
I Arrive in Adelaide.


It is hard to explain about the kindness of the people of
Sunnyside. The gardener and his wife and family lived on the
domain. As he was the very first man I had spoken to of the
South Australians, I used to go to him and his wife, and tell
them of my hopeful desires. I saw that man the other day in
town, and he looked as upright as he did many years ago. And
we talked of the long ago days. If it were not for the craving
of the lone heart for love and for kindred, there would have
seemed nothing but brightness, peace, and plenty at Sunnyside,
Glen Osmond. Satisfaction being mutual, the year went by so
quickly. If this should fall into the hands of any of this house-
hold, concerning which I have such happy reminiscences, I hope
they will pardon me if I refer to a few of the incidents that
appealed to me.
It was good to see the fruit that grew there of every kind.
Some I had never seen before. My chief wonder was at the
grapes, and the making of wine. I had read about the wine-
press, but I then saw a great number of people gathering in
the grapes, and then watched them crushed and the juice put
into a large vat. I wag not long there before it was known
that I had a terror concerning snakes. There were some about,
even amongst the vines. The boy from the stable saw a dead
one at Sir Thomas Elder's place and dragged it all the way to
put in the laundry to give me a fright, but the coachman saw
him and took it from him, and brought it to wdiere I was, and
told me not to be afraid. It was such a size when he put it
down at its full length, and told me if I saw anything like that
to get away from it. I was thankful I did not see it unawares.
Fhe boj thought it would be fun. A governess came daily on
horseback to instruct the youngest child. The eldest son went
to college. The young master and some other youths about his
age would ask in a gentle way if they could melt some lead c 0
form bullets for their guns. The laundry was not far from
the carriage house. While working I could hear them tell of
their playful merriment and of the birds' nests, just like the boys
in Scotland. It may not be out of place here to add that some
of those youths so full of frolic, are men of dignity to-day in this
State. The young gentleman used to bring his trifling property
and ask if I could let them stop there where he could find them,
as the housemaids were always putting his trappings where he
could not find them. All had horses who were old enough to
n i had the kdl6S also - If no man were there I would
they wanted help > and vei T Pretty
The eldest daughter married a gentleman who owned a farm
near Port Augusta. It was a gay time. The Parliamentary
caterer and his waitresses were there for days, and there was a
breakfast in great magnificence for a hundred guests, with a ball
57
I Arrive in Adelaide.


in the evening. Such wealth and beauty I never saw before.
The wedding service was performed at the Scotch Church in
Wakefield-street. How feeble it all looks in written words.
Only in some way to show the experience gained in early years,
I had taken the letter I brought from Glasgow to Dr. Gardner,,
on North-terrace, and I often went to Chalmers Church with the
friends who were so kind to me on the voyage. One of the
gentlemen took a leading part in the singing, and I went with
his wife and family. All of those five brothers mentioned went
there, and many others who came in what we called “our ship/ 7
On more than one occasion the master and mistress took me and
left me at the Manse the night before a tea-meeting so that 1
could help. My work was always done at the end of the
week, and I gladly helped the others, answering the door, bell,
or otherwise, and amongst ourselves we had merriment in the
home-time. One of the housemaids was married, and I got an-
other of my fellow-passengers to come to Sunnyside. I knew
by that time that some treaty was in hand to obtain the earliest
passage for my people in the first ship that would come with
assisted passengers. I began to be busy in preparation to meet
my relatives. The time would be coming soon when I would
want to go away, and the thought was disagreeable to me. I did
leave Sunnyside, but went back years afterwards. One Satur-
day afternoon I was in attendance, and I was told to bring in
the decanter and cake to the library. There were two or three
men there looking so weary and dusty. I learned while in the
room that one of the men was John Macdouall Stuart, the ex-
plorer. I hardly knew then what exploring meant. At any
rate those men looked broken down, but the master was so
pleased to see them.
I had a letter to say that my people were coming by a ship
name the Art Union when there were the number required. 1
cheered up, for although I had plenty of everything and friends
included, when I saw other girls 7 eyes fairly shine when they
talked about home, I hoped to begin life afresh and to forget
about the past. I looked forward not the least discouraged.
When I thought of what a sea of water divided us, I tried to be
practical. I came to this distant land in the hope that they
might better their fortunes and that happiness would be ours.
But I must soon turn out of the home where I had been sheltered
and hbppy, and where I led a new life in this new land which
was still strange to me. Anyone who lived in the full safety of
family ties could not understand the dread I had to leave Sunny-
side. In all the years past I could yield to the wishes of others,
I had so far cared but little for my own preference. Now i
must decide for myself what I ought to do.
Time passed on. The young master went for a long visit
to his young married sister at Port Augusta. He brought back
58
1 Arrive in Adelaide.


a good sized kangaroo. He asked if I was at Sunnyside yet,
and being told I was he wished the man to take the kangaroo
out of the hamper and let him loose in the laundry. It was
late, and I did not know anything of this. But the young master
was so used to putting his odds and ends in there that he thought
I would not mind. I went in the morning and opened the door,
and when I did so this kangaroo made one bound for the open
ing. I had never seen one, even in a picture before. The sudden
spring it made for the door and the length of its tail frightened
me, and I was insensible with terror. I ran shrieking to the
bouse, and the kangaroo rushed through the vines down the gully.
All the bedroom windows were thrown open, and everyone had
seen “him.” I leave anyone to guess what I thought I had
seen. They had some trouble to find the kangaroo, but it was
not put in the laundry again.
0 looking back from now I intend to say a few words
to young serving maids. If any of the incidents which hap-
pened to me in my early life also happen to you, the fact that 1
got through them may convey some courage to you. I think
you will see that pleasure is possible in life as a domestic ser-
vant. Only let our needs be natural, and let us lead a life 'with-
out vain, empty show, not trying to appear richer than we really
\are, or to spend all our money on dress and amusements. I
noticed the difference between this colony and Scotland. The
pleasant evenings we passed would not be understood now. Plea-
sure with unrest has led and will lead our young girls to spend
money they cannot afford to make a show. How did they
manage before there were so many clubs and the so-called friendly
societies? They all go to the club now, and the home is too dull.
The hearth is solitary. Men and women are spoiled for home
life. Many would have us believe how good it is to be seen smiling
and talking on some platform, and to care no longer for home in
the old sense of the word. In the rush for and the love of ex-
citement very heavy demands are made on the endurance of the
working woman. Perhaps Ido not see the humorous side oi
life, but that no doubt is because it has been all so real to me.
I often went to the coachman's house to see his wife and
children, and more so when the carriage was out late. She was
a nice, pleasant woman, and there were some pretty little children.
We often laughed about the man with the kilts. My shipmate,
Mary, the cook, was sought for in marriage by the baker of the
ship. I was her bridesmaid. They had the goodwill of every-
one. I sorely missed her. She was older than I, and so bright,
land we went out a lot together. The man went to work at
his trade at Unley, and I went to see them at Goodwood in their
little home. Goodwood and Unley were then in their littleness.
There were but few houses here and there, and no tramcars.
How changed all is! One of the housemaids had her home in
I Arrive in Adelaide.


Glen Osmond, and kindly took me to see her parents and brothers
and sisters. What pleasure they all gave me, and they wished
t’d make me glad, because I was a lone girl, so far from all I
My fellow-servant belonged to the Anglican Church in
the Glen. I went with her sometimes. Onr lady mistress gave a
tray in aid of something for the church, and had suitable provi-
sions sent there. Then she graciously allowed the housemaid and
myself to attend, as she could not go herself. The retention of the
memory of those days is easy, seeing that only the other day I
saw my helper at that tea-tray looking so well. She has been
a happy wife for many years. Many others wfth whom I got ac-
quainted at that time, and who were well satisfied with being
house servants, could be named to-day.
Letters came to say that my people were on the way out, 1
got restless and ill at ease, anxious to make some household ar-
rangement for them. I thought Glen Osmond and the hills were
beautiful, but I knew that they could not come there to live.
I could get an afternoon to visit town now and then. 1 could
have done so more often than I did if I had cared to. I came
to town one afternoon, and went to the home in King William-
street to learn about my ship friends. While I was speaking
to the matron a gentleman came to ask if she knew of a young
girl who would do for a house of business at No. 10, Rundle-
street, in the city. She asked me if I knew of anyone. Im-
pulsively I offered myself, as it would mean that I would be in
town to look out for some place for my relatives when they
landed. The gentleman, too, spoke with such a Scotch accent.
As it would all be a possible help, there seemed to be nothing
to do but to accept the offer, although anguish and indecision
was there also.
MY FATHER AND BROTHER ARRIVE.
So I came to Rundle-street. No. 10. It was a butcher’s shop
then. My employer had been the shopman, and had bought
the business from his employers, who had lived on the premises.
Being a bachelor, he, too, lived there, and my duties were to at-
tend to his needs and to those of his shopman, and some youths
who slept on the premises, and to prepare plain meals for them.
It was odd to me at first, for everything was upstairs, except
the dining-room. The rooms were plainly furnished, and I had a
lot of time to go out and in. There was no one to say an un-
kind word to me. My master had some brothers in a different
Father and Brother Arrive.


business. They came frequently, and were so good to me that
I claim them as friends to this day and will while I live.
I had the hope that I would live with my father and brother
when they arrived. I understood my own intentions, but what
would I have done then if I had thought that men could be so
cruel—cruel as I find what the spirit of bitter cruelty is now. All
the world seemed to me so true then. Although I was thousands
of miles from every one who knows me or cares for me, all the
time I felt so guarded and so happy in my efforts, and I had
everything necessary for a decent and comfortable existence. The
lady from Sunnyside would come out in her carriage and see bow
I was getting along, and some of my fellow-servants would come
and see me. We could go up to a room and look out into Bundle-
street. I was not at all lonely. And as the time went on, how
I watched for that ship to come. It was expected to arrive
about the middle of August, and not in hot weather like we
had.
At last it was nearly due. I had engaged a house for them.
It was small, and I had only taken it for a time. I had some
of my shipmates to help me fix it up. I had to pay two
weeks’ rent before they landed, awaiting the arrival of the Art
Union. I was there one morning, but the ship was a long way
cut in the bay. There being no railway from the Port, I walked
♦along with my basket full of all sorts of things for them. It
was so rough that no one would go out to where the ship
was anchored, except the health officers. They went, and J
waited until they came back, to learn if all was well on board.
In the afternoon someone came with a boat, and told me if I
did not think it too rough he would take me to the ship. It
being decided that no one should be landed till the next day,
I went out in the boat, and I never had such a rough time on the
sea. When the boat got alongside the big ship it banged against
the side and bounded out again ever so many times. I looked up
and saw my dear brother. He was the first I saw. They let
down the gangway, and my brother descended, and when the
boar hove to again he caught me, and I got on the steps and soon
found myself on the deck with all my kin once more. It was
quite a year and a half since I saw them. My sister’s little girl
}knew me, and held me by the skirts. I talked to my father.
The dear man, how pleased I was to think that I had them all
here, and I thought all my trouble was over, which, however,
proved not to be the case.
The boat that I went out in came and went two or three
times between the ship and the shore. I waited on deck, hoping
for a calmness, so I could get them all to come ashore. My sister
had a little baby girl that I had not seen before. She would not
run the risk of being wrecked so near the beach, but my father and
brother landed with me. How delighted my dear father was
61
My Father and Brother Arrive.


when he felt his feet on land again. We had to walk to the
(Port, and it wag dark and cold. When we got to th e station
the last train had gone, and we had to get lodgings in the Port
■all night. I knew that at JSTo. 10 they would do the best they
could till I came. They all knew where I had gone, and were
sympathetic. So I brought my brother and father to Adelaide,
showed them where the house was that I had taken for
them, and they did not go into a house without something being
provided for them. My master sent a man with a butcher's tray
with the choicest of meat on it for them. He said that the
burden I had to carry was too heavy for my young shoulders.
I was disappointed, and failed to see why my father would
not settle in Adelaide. He wanted to go all over the place.
My brother-in-law went to work at once in some blacksmith's
khop, but my father and brother went up to Moonta. I had
promised to go, and be their housekeeper when they got settled.
But learning that Moonta was a mining place it got mixed in my
mind with Slamannan. I could see that my father, at least, did
not like South Australia. I thought that if 1 went from place
to place with them I would be penniless and without a roof
Still, I felt sure that I must do what was right, even if I did
not know where I was going. So I wrote and told them I would
go to Moonta. Accordingly I went to the Port, and saw Captain
Wells, of the steamship Eleanor, He went to Moonta regularly.
I did not like leaving Ao. 10, Bundle-street. It was a very
restless time. Captain Wells asked me a lot of questions, and
told me he thought I would not like Moonta, if only because oi
the scattered thinness of the population. 1 got my trappings on
board the Eleanor. I was the only girl passenger on board. In
fact, there was no other woman at all. Captain Wells talked tf
me about bringing out the Eleanor all the way from England
entirely, and fully under his own control. I then asked him it
he knew Captain Matthews, who was the captain of the Morning
Star, and he told me that he had known him in England. I
thought Captain Wells just such another good man. He wag
kind to me, and saw that I was comfortable. He pointed out all the
places, and told me the names. We saw Port Wallaroo and
Port Wakefield. The Eleanor ran into Port Clinton, and there
being no jetty, I got into a little boat. Then a horse and
cart came into the sea a good long way, and I got out of the
boat and into the cart, in which I got to land. I could not
see any houses, but was told that there was one house at Port
Clinton. A conveyance wag there to take me to Eadina. It
went no farther that day. I stopped at the Wombat Hotel,
(and how pleased I was to hud one of my shipmates there as
houseinaid. I was covered with dust. It was my first ex-
perience of the country in Australia. In the morning some other
kind of public vehicle carried me on to Moonta. 1 got there in
Jiy Father and Brother Arrive.


the afternoon. My father and brother were waiting for me on
the roadside. They did not live in Moonta township. Once
more I was glad, realising that they had missed me, and were
pleased to see me again.
My father worked at a building in Moonta, some large hotel,
as a carpenter, and my brother, with some of his shipmates, was
again in the mines. Just fancy his coming to Australia only
to go in the mines again. Alas, for my castles in the air.
There were scarcely any women or girls about, and particularly
where we lived they were all mining men, many of them waiting
ior their wives and families, who had been sent for. Kver sc
many seemed to live in one or two little houses like the one we
had. And just think of it! Some men had places dug in the ground
and covered in some rough way. I used to feel so troubled.
There was nothing that I could do except cook and take father's
dinner into Moonta every day. The wee house we had had no
garden attached to it, or anything bright about it, and there
were only earth floors. The same kind of houses and building.-
were everywhere, set down anyhow. Some end to end and
some sideways. For the most part they were whitewashed.
There werej a lot of trees and scrub, and the worst of it was
that my father was so uncomfortable about the heat, and re-
proached me for bringing him out to South Australia. My brother
was nice, but it was a hard time for me. Tears would come as
I tried to realise what it all meant. At last when we had
been there about six months, father came home before dinner
and told me that he was not going to work any more at Moonta,
but was going with someone to Angaston, and that we were all
going to that town. I did not know before that he had partly
bought the house, but he said that he had sold it again. 1 ad-
mit that I was glad beyond words. So father arranged for my
brother and me to return to Adelaide, and to take his tool-
chest and all the movables while he fixed up about the house.
It was not smooth and bright for me, as everything had gone
■\\ rong, and I feared that what had begun badly would go on
badly. The truth crossed my mind, and a keen disappointment
ensued, for I feared they would upset all that I had arranged
for their benefit. I was not twenty years old, and anyway 1
was used co fitting myself into a work-woman. I could see
people were sorry when I went away, and glad to see me again
and I had not been badly treated as a servant.
We had to buy water and go and fetch it, and then it was
•condensed water. I felt glad when the time was fixed for leav-
ing Moonta. I saw no evil. The people seemed frank and
kindly, but the fewness of women made me miserable. I only
saw three in the place where we were. Two elderly women and
a younger woman. On the other hand, there were hundreds ol
men, and when I had to go anywhere it seemed as if I had to
63
My Father and Brother Arrive.


pass through a long procession of men. I was shy, but they
were offenceless. How many times I have wished to see Moonta
again, to see the progress that has been made. I thought my
father so terribly foolish, and I was fond of him. He was com
paratively a young man. Brother and I got on board the steamer,
and we arranged that we would stay with my sister till father
came. We were both in doubt what we should do. Borne mis-
chance happened to our boxes, which left me in a state of hope-
lessness. We had a tool chest, which did not look large, but it
was a great weight, and the man moving it did not know that, and
somehow he let it fall into the little boat with such a force
that it upset the boat, and the men and all our boxes were
floating about in the sea. All our things were spoiled, and
the tools as well.
My mind was made up I could not live in such a fashion and
comply with the request to go to whatever place the others
tehose. So when I got to Adelaide again I told some ladies 1
knew that I would go to service again. And at once I was en-
gaged to go to the Government farm for a month or six weeks,,
to be the attendant of Sir R, D. Ross, who had just• married, or
was on the eve of getting married, to Miss Baker. It is called
the National Park now. It was very lonely. I was there a
few days and nights before they came. The house was a little
way from the principal buildings, that being the caretaker's place,
An elderly man and his wife lived there. She was so deaf that
she had to have a horn to her ear all the time. It was a beautiful
place. There were two houses, one being called the old farm, and
the other the new. All that I had to do was to keep good fires
in the rooms to make them warm. It was cold weather. At last
the bridal party arrived, and the lady brought a lady's maid
with her. What a gentleman Sir Robert Ross was, and the lady,
how gentle of manner! The troopers' horses were left on the
farm to run when they were not wanted. They told me that
from east to west the distance was nine miles of extended wood.
That was the length of the “farm.” I slept in the old farm-
house all by myself for nearly a week. In the daytime 1 never
went far from the house for fear I would not find it again, 1
{was taken there in a waggonette with a lady and gentleman.
And they were afraid they would never find the place. It was
almost dark when we got there, and the roads were not very
distinguishable. The lady and gentleman did not stop all night,
but the caretaker’s wife showed me where I was to sleep. 1
slept, but I did not then think that I was all by myself in that
large building, -with nothing having life except the troopers'
horses, the opossums, and the wild cats. When I got older i
could not do such a thing.
Sir R. D. Ross and his lady were fond of horse-riding, and
horses were brought for them. The Government farm was an
64
My Father and Brother Arrive.


ideal spot for a honeymoon then. It was just the sort of place
to escape attention. During the rest of the time I enjoyed
the friendship of the lady's maid, and we strolled together through
the woods. She was a colonial, bright and full of adventure. Her
name was Martha, and she fairly danced along like a wild bird.
It was a great treat to me after my solitude at Moonta. Martha
did not know whether her young mistress would settle here or
Mot. For my part I hoped they would, and that they would
think me likely to be serviceable to them. Hut such was not
to be. Sir R. D. Ross had to go to Maoriland rather hastily.
War was either in progress or some hostility with the Maories
was contemplated, and he had some command in the, military
forces. He took his wife to New Zealand with him. The
brightest is the fleetest. I was left alone at the Government
farm. That would not matter, except that I shrank from going
home. I was to stop for a week to put all the things in their
place, and to leave it all tidy. Some goods were to be sent for
from Morialta.
One evening while I was sitting in the verandah listening to
the opossums, I heard a footstep and a cough. I was preparing
to run to the caretaker’s, when I found that it was my brother.
He had been all day trying to find the farm. I was pleased
to see him, and he wrote home and told our people that he would
£tay with me till I had finished there. He helped me a lot.
He told me that father had taken a little workshop in Leigh-street,
off Hindley-street, where he was doing some carpentering work.
They went to and fro to my sister’s house for meals. My brother
was still young, and he felt bitterly upset. He recognised what
I must feel, and that I was not happy with father. What a
failure I had made! My brother told me not to fret, as I had
done the best I could ever since he could remember. In a
few days I packed up, and in two or three weeks I was on my
way to the South-East.
I GO TO THE SOUTH-EAST.
I had not been long out from Scotland before, after some ex-
perience in and around Adelaide, I found that I would get more
wages in the country. So I made enquiry at a labor office, kept
by Mr. Malcolm, in Hindley-street. About this time there was
a great demand for good willing servant-girls. Mr. Malcolm told
me that he wanted two young girls for a sheep-station in the
South-East, near Bordertown. The station was called Wirrega,
65
I go to the South-East.


and ■was owned by a Mr. Binney. I was not well posted up in
the geography of the country, and when I was told that we would
go to our destination in a steamboat, the Penola, I took it for
granted that it would be like going from Glasgow to the seaside.
I was quite willing to go provided that he found another girl to
go with me. In a day or two he sent for me to say that he
had found a companion for me. She was to be the needlewoman,
and I would be the laundress. Our employer paid our passage-
money, and we signed an agreement to stop for a year.
We got our little trunks ready, and Mr. Malcolm came to see
us off at the railway-station. We found our way to the steam-
boat, hoping that we Avould reach our journey’s end that night.
But, to our disgust, we- had to spend the night on board. Luckily
it was in the month of November and was not cold. The next
day we landed at Robe. The landlord of the Robe Hotel sent
on board for us, as he had instructions to take charge of us
until avc were sent for. We were surprised, for we thought that
our journey Avas over when we stepped off the boat. HoAvever,
there was nothing to complain of at the hotel, and our employer
was paying our expenses. But we were anxious to get to work,
for AA'e had but little money, and, of course;, our Avages would
not begin till Ave reached the station. It was the shearing sea-
son, and the avool was brought to Robe from all the country
round. We used to sit on the jetty and watch the loaded ships
going out.
We had been there for two weeks before a man called to
say that he was instructed to take us girls back with him. We
had been told that it Avould take us three or four weeks to
get to the station from Robe, and that our way lay through a
Avilderness of sand. What we had seen of bullock-drivers made
us shudder lest they should send for us to travel under their tender
care.
We came downstairs to interview the man. How vividly 1
can see him even now. He was ragged and covered Avith. dust.
His hair was projecting through the top of his hat, and he had
a whip in his hand. We asked him what conveyance we were
to travel by. He replied, “In a carriage and six," meaning the
bullock-dray.
At this information both of us began to cry bitterly. We
refused to go, and thought of returning to Adelaide by the steamer,
but my companion told me we would be put in prison if we did
that. We made such a scene that the landlord and his wife came
out to see what Avas the matter. When he learned the state of
affairs he comforted us and told us he would write to Mr. Binney;
so we awaited the result of his letter. A week later, on a Saturday
evening, a strange-lookiug vehicle, drawn by wild horses, came
into the yard. This was to be our conveyance. As the driver was
a pleasant, respectable, married man, and promised to take as
66
I go to the South-East.


much care of us a? he would of his own daughter we were much
relieved in our minds, but the difficulties of the road and the
savage aspect of our team still caused us dismay.
Early on Sunday morning we started, for we werei told that
fif the horses had a whole day’s rest no poAver on earth Avould
get them into harness again. They had never been stabled, and
as they pranced, foaming at the mouth and making the sparks
fly from the cobblestones, they attracted much attention from a
large crowd of onlookers. As they bounded out of the yard we
held tight to the seat and said our prayers, for we thought aac
had not many more minutes to live.
Twelve miles of good road brought us to a small hotel called
The Stone Hut, Here we halted for a feAv seconds, and then
made a dive into a sea of wild ferns that extended as far as the
eye could reach. Suddenly, without any Avarning, the vehicle
stopped with a crash, and our driver disappeared from our
astonished sight. We had struck the hidden root of an old tree.
Presently he reappeared from under the feet of the horses, and
congratulated us on having sufficient pluck and presence of mind
to hold the reins.
After this incident all went Avell, and at about 8 o’clock we
arrived at a sheep station, Avhere many men AA r ere shearing andj
Avhere no AA'hite AA’omen had ever been before. The shearers took out
the horses and brought us some tea in a pannikin. Our vehicle
was turned upside down and covered over AA'ith rugs. Under that
rude shelter we spent a sleepless night.
The next day’s journey took us through a wilderness of sand.
Now and then a few black,* would appear from behind a hill and
liy precipitately at the sight of us. About 9 o’clock that night
Ave reached the home station, fatigued and dusty. Mr. Binney
A\-as in Melbourne, so Mrs. Binney met us and gave us a good
scolding for the trouble we had caused in order to have us brought
from Robe. But she was (Scotch, and Ave were Scotch, and so our
explanations Avere soon accepted.
When the morning came I found myself in the Australian
bush. Another young girl, who was housemaid, took me with,
her. Her father and mother Avere at the station as house cooks.
They consoled me by telling me that I would like being there
Avhen I got used to it. Truth to tell, I Avas anxious to begin my
year’s service, and so was up betimes. Numerous wild birds,
among which I distinguished the magpie, deafened me AAdth a be-
wildering clamor.
With very mingled feelings I went to the laundry. It Avas
built of wood, but had many of the usual conveniences. The
Avater I had to draw up from a well by a windlass.
The family consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Binney and five children—
three sons and tAvo daughters. In addition there were a sister of
Mr. Binney, acting as governess to the children, and a Mr. John
6 7
I go to the South-East,


Binney, a cousin of the owner, who was manager or overseer of
the station. The comfortable dwelling-house was one storey in
height, and was built of stone. There were several outbuildings
and a large store, where all sorts of things were kept for sale
to the employes of the station. The place looked like a little
village.
It was a common eight to see a man with his wife and chil-
dren living in a sort of gipsy van. The husband would be employed
in “grubbing/’ or clearing timber off the land. When the con-
tract was completed the family would pack up their goods in the
van and journey to another station. At stated times the families
of some permanent employes, who lived a few miles away, would
come in on horseback for their rations. Our employers, and, in
fact, everybody about us, were very gentle and considerate in their
dealings with us.
At first I was afraid of the blacks, of whom there were a great
many about the house. They all had nicknames, and had been
trained to be very useful. One morning I plucked up courage to
venture near their “wurlies.” I shall never forget the scene. A
number of little black babies were crawling about in the wet, dewy
grass, and the sunlight wa? glistening on their naked little backs.
But the children were afraid of us, and would creep under the
bushes when they saw us coming. We used all go to see their
“corrobories.” Sometimes they would be away for days fighting
with another tribe, but no strange blacks ever cam© to attack
them. They were fond of showing us their implements of war,
of which they had a great variety. I was surprised to hear them
talk in fairly good English, and sometimes with a broad Scotch
accent. Even the children spoke English well.
They were remarkably agile, too. They would mount per-
fectly wild horses that would have succeeded in killing a white
man. As soon as they were fairly mounted they would fly in the
air like rockets, but, like cats, they always landed on their feet.
They were splendid mimics, and used their powers of imitation
to play many tricks. Some of them would go off among the bushes
and imitate the hens. This would bring out the old cook with
her basket. When she found the trick that had been played on
her she would be very cross, much to the delight of the blacks.
But sometimes they would do her a good turn. If she wanted a
wild turkey she had only to tell them so, and one of the blacks
would dress himself up with boughs and lie down where the wild
turkeys came to drink. When the unsuspecting bird came dose
to what he imagined was a bush a black hand would shoot out
and grab him by the leg. So, after all, it paid the cook to be
friendly with the blacks. ,
Thi* was an ideal place for a naturalist. The blacks used to
bring in a wonderful variety of eggs, and the place was famed for
Its bird-life. We had many pets. In fact, what with tame ka
68
1 go to the South-East.


garoos, opossums, and emus the place resembled a menagerie. I
made a pet of an emu, which used to wait for me at the laundry;
door every morning. I dressed it up in an old. pinafore, and it
was so pleased that it followed me wherever I went.
In the early days the wild dogs had been a great pest. Wild
cats were numerous, but no one minded them much. At the end
of the laundry there was a slab hut, where they kept the beet
and mutton hanging. The cats would come here in dozens when
all was dark and quiet. If a light was brought they would
immediately scamper otf. They were beautiful creatures, partly
black and partly white.
I marvelled at the bravery of the men who opened up the
interior. Mr. John Binney, Mr. Clark, and Mr. McLeod were
the first white men to form settlements on that great expanse
of country. With so many hostile blacks around they must
have had a fearful time. Mrs. Binney showed us a tree, in the
trunk of which Mr. Binney used to hide from the blacks. Our
nearest neighbors were ten miles away, and the Tatiara township
was about sixteen miles from the station. The police had their
quarters at Tatiara, which, in those days, was composed of nuts.
I went there once, and found only one substantial building. it
was an hotel. Once in every three months a bush missionary
held services in this hotel. We all went to these services, some
on horseback and some driving.
The months passed on, and I grew to like the life. Every-
body was busy, for there was plenty to do. The lowing of the
cattle, driven in for branding, became familiar music to my ears.
But, isolated as we were, and simple and rough as the life was,
I could not complain of any monotony. Sometimes a hawker
would visit us -with a large van drawn by a team of bullocks.
He would camp for days, and do a brisk trade as a geheraJ
provider of the wants of the little community. He found good
customers among the blacks, for they earned a little money
during shearing-time.
Nor were we entirely devoid of the amusements of town-
life. More than once a travelling Christy Minstrel Company
came to the station. The performers Avould stay all night and
give a theatrical show in the laundry, which I gave up to them
for the purpose. From miles around the place station-hands
would come to see the show.
The young girl, who went up with me and myself got on
nicely together. In the light of added years I can look back
now and feel grateful for the hard training I went through then
and the lessons those early days taught me. Sometimes we
caught glimpses of the many mysteries of the silent bush. The
presence of troopers and black-trackers about the station would
tell us that something unusual had happened. it might be
that the dead body of a man had been found a little way from
69
I go to the South-East.


the station. A consultation of all hands would be held, and'
the unknown w'ould receive a decent burial, while efforts wou'd
be made to discover his identity. When any of the station-
hands died they were buried in a little enclosure near the station
If they had lived far out on the boundary of the run they
were buried near their huts.
What the blacks did with their dead puzzled us. Mr. Binney
insisted that they must be buried, and the dusky relatives would
obey. But, shortly afterwards, the graves would be rifled, and
the corpses would mysteriously disappear. I asked a very old
lubra to tell me what was done with the dead, and she horrified
me by replying, “Big one, cookem on sticks/’
While I was there Mr. Binney sent a mob of horses to Ade-
laide. Some of the blacks went with them to help the drovers.
They came back by water. Then it was amusing to hear them
describe what they had seen in Adelaide. They called the steam-
boat “Big one wheelbarrow.” They said that something pulled
them along with “tether ropes on the big one water.”
There was one old lubra called “Kitty, the postman.” When
Mr. Binney first came into that part of the country, Kitty
showed him where to get water for his oxen, and on that spot
he began his life as a sheep-farmer. Kitty would carry letters
for him to his friends as far away as thirty miles. He could
always depend on her honesty and efficiency, so she became a
privileged character. She must have been of a great age when 1
saw her, for she remembered well the time when no white man
could be seen in the land. She had free entry to any of the
buildings, and loved to smoke her pipe in the men’s hut, for all
the aboriginies, both men and women, smoked. She told me
that the blacks did not hate the white men so much as they did
the blacks of other tribes.
The cook at the men’s hut was frequently visited by “sun-
downers.” He told me that many of these stated that they were
sons of doctors or clergymen, and were well educated men, 1
had a strange experience with a “traveller.” One evening, when
our candles w r ere lit for the evening meal, a boundary rider
brought in a woman whom he found wandering about by herself.
There was a vacant place by me and she sat down. As she
had a sunbonnet on I could not see her face well. Every visitor
that came so late would stop all night, so the question arose
“Where was she to sleep?” Not one of us was willing to share
our room with her, so Mrs. Binney said she must sleep in the
laundry. I took here there and she sat down while 1 prepared
her bed. In order to see her face I put a lighted candle close
to her, but she immediately blew it out. Then she took out a
pipe and began to smoke. Erom a glimpse I caught of her fea-
tures I thought she looked like a man. So I went to tell Mrs,
Binney. As the laundry was full of valuable clothes I thought
70
Igo to the South - East.


something might be stolen, or the place might be set fire to by
the sparks from the stranger’s pipe. I was really afraid of her;
and so it was decided that she wag not to sleep in the laundry.
The needlewoman came with me, and we told her that she might
sleep in an unused hut beyond the fence. In a voice like
thunder she said, “Show me where I am to sleep.” The hut
had no door or glass in the window, so I pinned my apron over
the window, and then we fled in terror.
She did not wait for breakfast, but went away in the early
morning with one of our teamsters—the man who had found
her. When they had gone about six miles she jumped out of
the dray, and ran into the bush. The driver went on to Tatiara
and told the police. After that I wag worried by troopers and
blacktraekers. The questions they asked me would have filled
a book. They picked up the tracks near Wellington, but lost
them again. They all thought, as I did, that our strange visitor
was a man dressed in woman’s clothing.
But there were pleasanter incidents than these. The arrival
of “her Majesty’s Royal Mail” was looked forward to with eager-
ness by all. The coach was a queer-looking vehicle, with a large
“V.R” painted on it. The horses were changed at the station,
and the coach went on to Tatiara township, calling at other sta-
tions both coming and going. How quickly “mail day”
.-eemed to come round again, juushranging had been prevalent,
but the coach had always luckily escaped molestation. I like
looking back after all this time.
It seemed lonely, for we were far from the sight of anybody
we knew, and visitors were scarce. The needlewoman and I used
to take the children out amongst the tall gum trees. We had
no perambulator, but there was a little Scotch pony for the baby
to sit on. The foliage of the trees was dense, and they w'ere close
together, but we could always find the tracks. One day we went
a long way, and the little pony stepped into what seemed to.be
a circle of snakes. He stood still, and so did we, for we were
too frightened to move. The snake* fairly leaped from the ground
and bounded in amongst the young bushes. I never ventured so
far into the woods again, but I saw more snakes after that- A
dog was a very good protector, for by his barking he would always
show u* where the snakes were. The housemaid, whom I have
alluded to, found a snake under her pillow one night when she
was going to bed. We shared the same room, but I am happy
to say I never saw a snake in the room. The bedroom was right
outside the house, and there was nothing to hinder the snakes
from entering it, so that it may easily be imagined that we were
careful where we stepped.
Our time was passing away. We could see by the preparations
at the woolshed that the shearing reason wag near. The loneli-
ness and silence of the bush gave place to the bustle and hum of
71
I go to the South-East.


human beings hurrying about. There were supposed to be alto-
gether about a hundred men in and about the sheds, and where
all the people came from was a mystery to me. What with wool-
classing and woolwashing and woolsorting and the packing the
■wool into great bales ready to send to England there was a lo»
of work. In the middle of it all came the surveyors with a staff of
men to cut up the land in allotments, as Mr. Binney* g, lease had
nearly expired. Now the train to Melbourne runs through what
were then desolate wilds.
They wanted me to stop for another year, but I would not.
Mrs. Binney said I was the only girl who had ever left the station
without getting married. I told her I had a suitor somewhere else.
The young girl who went up with me was married to a “cockatoo”
farmer. I hope she has been happy, for she was a nice girl. I
have been a wife now for 26 years. Life is lull of changes. It
was not stated in the agreement I made that Mr. Binney should
pay our expenses back to Adelaide. I had not thought of that
when I was engaged to go the South-East. I thought the journey
was such a short one that we could come and go -when we liked.
It was settled than I would return by the mail coach and wait at
the hotel for my trunk, which 'was to be sent by the wool-dray.
There "was no other choice for me. By this time I was well
acquainted with the driver of the mail, as he used to have lunch
with u.? sometimes. He was a middle-aged man with a wife and
family, and was understood to be reliable. So far I had trusted
everybody, for I was young and happy, and I did not feel the
least afraid.
I LEAVE THE STATION AND RETURN TO ADELAIDE.
From this time the days flew by quickly till the last night I
was to spend in the bush came round. Truly, 1 never knew till
then that I had ?o many friends. People came from such a dis-
tance to say “Good-bye,” for the coach started early in the morn-
ing. I had a cheque from Mr. Binney, and I had never had so
much money before in all my life. I was told to get it cashed
at Robetown, as Mr. Binney had no banking account in Adelaide.
I had a nice present, too, from Mrs. Binney, and one from Miss
Binney, which I have yet in my possession.
In the morning they were all up to see me off, and there was
a scene of great excitement. Amongst the rest there were blacks
from all round, shouting at the top of their voices, “You white
lubra, what for you go away from my. country.” I had a very
72
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


kindly send-off, and with tears in my eyes I bid adieu to all. All
the way along the driver pointed out to me places of interest
with such queer names, such as “Biscuit Flat, “Black Joe’s
Corner,” “Binney’s Lookout,” and many others which. I have for-
gotten. What interested me most was, however, the name of the
place where I was to stop for the night. It was called “Mosquito
Plains,” and I wondered if any mosquitoes were there.
That evening we reached the “Mosquito Plains.” I forget the
name of the hotel where we stayed for the night, but I remember
that the old landlord was making way for a new one and that there
was a great crowd in and about the bar. Mr. Sinclair, the mail-
driver, took me to the woman of the house and asked her to find
a room for me, as I was leaving by the mail in the morning. I
never saw him again.
I slept little that night, as the people were pacing about the
hotel all night. The woman I had seen before told me that the
coach would start about 3 o’clock in the morning. Daylight was
just breaking as I wearily got ready for my unknown journey. The
driver of the mail was a quiet young man. There seemed e lot
of parcels and luggage, but I was the only woman among the
passengers. I hoped to reach Kingston that night. I was not
much interested in our stopping-places, as I was longing to be
back in Adelaide,
I had no one to talk to, so I stood by the coach while the
hor<es were being got ready. I heard a gentleman say, “Has any-
body thought of getting a cup of tea for this girl?” and the answer
was “No.” Then he said, “I will.” In the bar they were all
drinking by the lamplight, and he held a little saucepan over the
lamp and made me a cup of tea. I watched him from where 1
was standing, with grateful thoughts that could not find expres-
sion. I often saw that gentleman afterwards in Adelaide. I was
often tempted to go up to him and thank him for that cup of
tea, but I did not like to do so, as I never learnt his name.
At last we were off. The inside of the coach was filled with
luggage, so the passengers all sat outside, and the arrangement
was not very comfortable, as there was nothing to rest one’s back
against. Some of the men who mounted the coach that morning
were the worse for drink. Still, no one said anything unpleasant
to me. We went speeding along through desolate scrub. The
road, or, rather, the mail track, was very uneven, and I expected
every moment to be thrown out. I asked the driver what I was
to hold on by. He laughed and answered, “Hold on by your
eyebrows.” There were places on the wayside for refreshments,
and about 8 o’clock we had breakfast at one of these.
I •would have liked to stop at Mosquito Plains to have a look
round, but on account of the change of landlords the hotel wai
topsy-turvy, and I did not care for the woman I saw there. 1
was disappointed, for I knew that I would have to wait at Kobe
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


till the wool-dray came with my things, and there are some very
interesting caves near Mosquito Plains, which is now called “Narra-
coorte.”
We arrived at Kingston and drove at once to the Kingston
Hotel, which was kept by an ex-trooper from Adelaide. To my
astonishment a nicely-dressed little blackgirl met me at the door.
She came to see what I wanted. She was about 12 or 13 years
old, and was the only female attendant in the hotel. I was »
little upset, but I thought that I must not be too particular for
one night, so I told her I would like some tea. She brought me
quite a nice cup of tea on a tray and told me that the master would
come and see me soon.
Presently the landlord came in. He was evidently in diffi-
culties. He told me that his wife had been dead two months,,
end his sister had been keeping house for him; but that, owing
to the sickness of his little son, she bad to take the boy away
to his grandmother, tie said she would return on the following
day. I asked if there was no other white woman about the
place. He answered —“Yes, there is one; but she is ill in bed:
and lamat my wit’s end.” I asked if I couid see her, as, being
a working-girl myself, I thought I might do something tor her.
The man was much agitated and replied—“ Yes. She is a mar-
ried woman and has been in my employ for six weeks. She had
a baby this morning.”
He led me through a long billiard-room and a kitchen, where
some black-gins were sitting round a tire smoking, into a little
back-room in the yard. There lay the poor woman and her
face lit up with joy to see another white woman. I soon learned
her story, which was like that of many other wanderers. Her
husband had gone away to look for work, and had forgotten to
come back. I sympathised with her trouble and did what 1
could for her that night.
On enquiry I learned that there was a doctor staying at the
hotel. He was attending to several men, who were suliexing
from ophthalmia after shearing. But my sympathy was all
with that weak woman and the dear, little baby. 1 learned,
also, that there were only a few white women in Kingston.
Two young men who had been shipmates with me in the
Morning Star came into the hotel the next morning. Their
name was Ring, and they were with their father, Mr. Herbert
Ring, who had a contract to facilitate the shipping of goods at
Kingston, as before that no ships could come in near the
shore. I was pleased to see them. They are both in Adelaide
now as sharebrokers. They brought their father to see me
and it seemed like civilisation again. But I had not yet done
with the mail-coach.
As the coach left Kingston every day, I determined to stop
with the sick woman till the landlord's sister came home. Mean-
74
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


while the people about were negotiating with the landlord to
get up a supper as they wished to celebrate the opening of a
branch of some lodge. I think that the Messrs. King were the
principal officials in that lodge. So when the housekeeper came 1 set
to work and helped her prepare this bush “banquet/ I did not
know very much, but every little was a help, ana thev all said
the supper was splendid.
Just in the middle of the preparations tor supper a travel-
ling dramatic company arrived and began to get ready to hold
a performance that evening in the billiard-room. I never saw
such a mixed lot of people together. I looked for the doctor,
expecting to see a man in decent black clothes, but he was
dressed in old, tattered garments, just like the poor shearers
to whom he was attending. I understood the reason of this
when I saw him staggering about. He was a very clever man,
but abandoned to drink.
The little black girl was a great help, She could fetch and
carry for these poor men, who, I am afraid, were very much
neglected. I saw a little of the country about Kingston and
liked the look of the whole place very much. My stay at the
hotel lasted from a Tuesday to the following Saturday, when the
landlord drove me into Robe in his own waggonette. I had no
bills to pay and received some remuneration for being so help-
ful. For years afterwards, if anybody who knew me stayed at
the hotel, they heard kind things of me and brought me nice
messages. Neither my trunk nor the steamboat had arrived, so
I had to wait till the next Saturday at the Robe Hotel. Tne
same people were there as when I went to Mr. Kinney’s. I felt
just as if I were at home with them, for they were so interested
in my experiences all through that year in tn e bush. I had
enjoyed good health all the time I was away, and i arrived in
Adelaide safe and well.
It was on a Sunday afternoon when I reached the Fort, and
my brother was on the dock waiting for me. Father and he
were living at Hilton. They had a horse and trap, and my
brother drove me to Hilton; but I was not many days at home,
when I found that my father seemed in touch with some acquain-
tance I did not like; I felt outside of everything, and asked my-
self why I came back if there was nothing to come back for, I
was out of sympathy with my surroundings, I learned that my
father was about to get married again, and I felt as if I was not
wanted. I could see that the old condition of things had
changed. In any case, everything seemed hard for me, and 1
could not put matters right for other people. At best, there
would be a muddle, and I thought if tilings came to an end
quickly it would not be so hard to go. I had to go forward
alone, I knew, and to face bitterness and desolation. When
some one said, “I wonder you sent for your people/’ I thought
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


that it did not matter whether or not I lived at home, for I could
not skip out of their lives. Wherever they were they were my
relations. Still, if there are no love-ties, that makes loneliness
more solitary. There was no ill-will, but my brother said that
he would not live with father and his new wife.
So we had to do something. I told my brother that I must
have some work to do, and then we might manage some little
business. What else could we do? It was either that or we
would have to go and live in a top-garret somewhere, go we took
a house with a shop attached in Bundle-street. It stood this side
of the Tavistock Hotel, but it was pulled down many years ago.
There is now a saddler’s business there. I had it fixed up as tea-
rooms, and my brother made furniture. In any case I had to
face a new’ kind of life, and I had no right to grumble. When w e
were children I remembered the happy comradeship which always
existed between my brother and myself, and I was glad to be alone
with him. It was a splendid time and we did fairly well, and had
something to give thanks for. I could not expect that happiness
to continue, and when we had been there for some time 1 had a
strong belief that all the rest would come right in time. It was
a joy to feel that I was working for my brother. Such trivial
incidents may not seem worth recording, but that was my only
experience in business on my own account, \outh is full of hope,
but I did not know what I hoped for. There was the present and
the future to think about.
Just at that time a Scotch corps of volunteers were raised. It
was the first in South Australia to wear the kilts. There was
such merriment about this dressing every day. Mr. Buik had an
ironmonger’s shop in Bundle-street, and he was the captain. My
brother also became a kilted volunteer. The kilts were sent from
Scotland partly made, and then altered so as to make a suitable
fit. They looked nice, only the stockings were of some kind ot
checked tartan, with no shape or figure. I knew how to knit,
so I knitted a pair of stockings for my brother, and set in the
wool in different coloring and in diamond shape. They looked
unlike the others, and they were made to fit. Mr. Buik came to
me and asked me if I would do a hundred pairs. I was so sur-
prised, that I thought I would not knit any more stockings which
could be seen. In the Foot Police at that time there was a Scotch-
man who stood, so they said, over six feet in height; his name was
Archie Dixon. He had his own kilts and knitted stockings, to-
gether with the bagpipes. He brought all the equipage with him
from Scotland, and truly he did look a picture in the kilts. The
past is, indeed, past, but it all comes back to me when I want it.
The news spread about that in a few months the Queen’s son,
the Sailor Prince, would visit Australia. I can trust my memory
for that time. It can never be forgotten. As for the people,
it is no exaggeration to say they were full of joy, as in some sort
76
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


of way it appeared that this visit was to be made a pleasure for
all. I seemed to have no plans in life except to see the .Prince.
In a few weeks the warship Galatea came in to port. It was a
fearfully hot day, and the Scotch Volunteers, with Mr. Archie
Dixon in the front playing the bagpipes, went all the way to the
Port, with other volunteers as well, to meet Prince Alfred. The
town w*as all one “festival.” They marched in procession and
came to the city. In their route they marched around
the spot where the new Post-Office now is. I had
a nice seat on some of the old buddings in King William-
street. The men who wore the kilts must have suffered from the
heat. However, there was the Queen’s son, bowing and looking
so distinguished as he passed along to Government House. Sir
Dominick Daly was there, too. There was no electricity then, but
the splendor of the gaslight in the night-time will not easily be
forgotten, nor the vast crowds who gathered there.
The drawback all this gaiety had for us was that we had not
much capital. I did not want anything in the way of stock, but
my brother’s work was different, for to make it he needed mate-
rials; worse still, he let furniture go on credit, not realising enough
to meet his debts. On turning back to that time my thoughts
were not glad. I could not be gay, for I could see no brightness
in the future. It was said by some that my acts and life showed
great self-denial, but if it did it did not bring me any of the inward
satisfaction which is said to come from such deeds. I thought 1
must try and get a new* place, for I could see that my brother
was seriously in love with a young woman. Then came the final
decision, and I went and saw Mr. J. N. Hines, at Parliament
House, with the hope of getting some employment daily, as he
had so much catering to do while the Prince was here and in
other ways. I used to go to the Town Hall, and also help at
Parliament House. My first employer, at No. 10, Handle-street,
had got married, or I should have liked to go back there. Having
to be independent and to take care of myself for more than eleven
years I had learnt to use my knowledge and be hopeful. I dare-
say there are plenty who will remember the stampede of that
time. There was a sense of whirl during the whole time of tnac
brilliant visit, and its influence w*as considerable with us so far
as w*ays and means were concerned.
We both made up our minds not to get into debt, and we did
not, bur as matters went it might have been better to have gone
to a situation at once. I could not take any particular kind of
work, but I could help with most things generally. 1 can easily
recall how little attempt there was to understand anything regard-
ing cooking, and there were no men cooks in Adelaide then. The
foundations of the Club House on North-terrace were being dug out
while I was at No. 10, Kundle-street, and it was occupied when 1
came back from Moonta, A married couple had the management of
77
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


the Club, and I got to know the manager through, being at the
Town Hall banquets and other places, so I went to help at the
'Club. The cooking was very crude. The manager had been a
steward on board ship, and was not well up as a caterer. The
work was not at all delicately done, and I did not like either the
manager or the manageress. I did not stop long at the only club
that was then in Adelaide. Many years have rolled away since
then. The affairs of myself and brother were disposed in such a
way that I had many doubts as to what I should do; but youth is
delightful while it lasts.
One thing, I could not be idle. I secured a situation with a
lady at New Glenelg, and was to undertake, with the lady's teach-
ing, household duties. There were no children. The lady was
Mrs. Brind, and another young girl was kept. It was a comfort-
able home. We had everything suitable, and I had a nice bed-
room. For the first time since I left (Scotland I found myself
living close to the sea, and that suggesting the great joy of bath-
ing in the ocean once again. How I loved that exercise, and the
sea was only such a little way from the house. My sister had the
care of my brother, and he used to come and see me occasionally.
There was something kind and admirable about Mrs. Brind. She
was a leader in society, there could be no doubt. She went every-
where, and did all sorts of things. She could sing and act and
dance, and, with the number of guests always at the house, she
made a charming hostess. In figure she was somewhat stout, but
had such a nice face, with not a furrow of anxiety or care upon it.
Mr, Brind was her second husband. She found time, despite her
society arrangements, to do kindnesses amongst various persons,
and more particularly to the children. She was whimsical and
kindly, and one day she came and asked me if I would let her alter
the cut of the skirt I wore on Sunday. Gored skirts were worn
then, and I suppose mine must have been straight up and down.
Anyhow, it did not please her. I let her have it, and with her
own hands she altered it and made it look so different. This un-
expected treatment of my clothing was done so pleasantly that I
could not be angry. In respect of dress I was old-fashioned, and
had but little choice.
I shall never forget one particular day. It w'as the other
girl’s day out, and I had to attend to the bell. Mrs. Brind had
also gone out. Cards or messages I was to see to. I learned that
Sir R. D, Ross and Lady Ross and a baby girl were coming to stop
for a few days. They had come back from the Maonland war, and
I confess I was pleased to get everything in order for their arrival.
It seemed so strange to think that I was at the Government Farm
to receive them the day they were married, and there I was again,
two years afterwards, preparing for them again. What a dif-
ference I saw in Sir R. T). Ross. His eyesight had failed, and he
■could hardly see. But when he learned that I was in waiting he
78
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


came and brought his dear little daughter to show me. He must
have had exciting times in New Zealand, for he looked so worn
and worried. He had seen the Prince, and showed me a ring
given to him by the young Prince, I never saw Sir R. D. Ross
again, but he was a thorough gentleman, according to my standard,
and he was Scotch. I forget now where they had met the Prince first,
but it was either in New Zealand or in some of the other colonies.
Any way, when the Prince came back they were quite friendly.
All this seems only the other day. I confess to feeling fatigue
in those years, but I have never felt myself rusting, and even now
I am hard at work, and, in apparent hopelessness, will not
despair.
I stayed on at Mrs. Brind’s, and found comfort in my work by
the seaside. The picture of what Glenelg looked like then is in
my remembrance yet. There was no railway, and the only way
you could get to Adelaide was by a kind of mail coach at stated
times. You could book a passage beforehand, but if you lost this
bus or coach you would have to walk to Glenelg or stop in town
all night. The driver was Mr. George, or ‘‘Dick” George. He
had a pleasing manner, which made him the friend of all. What
with his teams of four or six horses and his cheerful voice ringing
out he made the Bay-road very lively. His voice had a haunting
ring never to be forgotten. There was a charm and quiet about
the place which is not present in the much-altered Glenelg of to-
day. I think of the mysterious and resistless disappearance of
the people whom I knew then, and it gives a touch of seriousness
•to my thoughts.
But what a trial it was to me to have to mix so much with
strangers; still I managed to pull through. When we are very
young we believe that everyone has a heart. I brought myself
to such a state that I had no high aspirations except to live in a
pure atmosphere. That remained, even -when all was gone, and 1
was left where the last tide had stranded me.
Many thoughts of the old time stir within me now. I can
see a lady of lofty lineage, who used to come so much to Mis.
Brind’s. Her name was Lady Charlotte Bacon. She looked de-
jected and laden with care. While she was wandering about by
herself sometimes she would come and sit down by me on the sand,
just as though she belonged to the disappointed and ill-used of this
life. I saw her some years afterwards sitting on the steps of
the Post-Office, in King William-street. She had a black bag in
her hand. I did not make myself known to her, and 1 heard of
her death not long after. Yes, there are noble sorrows on the
high road. The lofty are beaten by the tempests, which are as
oppressive to them as they would be to me, who am without
defence.
So life went onwards by pleasant dreams to a comfortable
future. When I had been with Mrs. Brind for about a year she
79
I Leave the Station and Return to Adelaide.


used to get me to come and read for her, as she was not well. She
was very fond of Scotch stories, and I could read them easily.
There were no trained nurses in those days, and Mrs. Brind grew
so ill that she was advised to go for a voyage and change of air.
So it was decided that the house would be closed for a time. We
had plenty of time to find employment. I can at this moment
recall that without any effort on my part I was sought for. I did
not lack either energy or sincerity. I would fain have stopped
with Mrs. Brind, but I could not.
I GO BACK TO YSIDE.
I was told that someone was wanted at Sunnyside who could
do cooking. I knew enough for the place, as the family were
growing up, and they kept a lot of company. I was sorry for Mrs.
Brind. She told me that she would not live long. She had no
relations in Adelaide, and her agitation frightened me. She gave
me a key and told me to unlock a drawer, and showed me all her
things ready for the last ordeal, if the worst should happen. I
felt a very great coward, and very uncomfortable. What a rebel
I felt when the doctor said she was strong enough to go for a
change, and that he hoped for good results.
I went and saw Lady Milne, and I felt a sense of gladness 1
was to go to Sunnyside. It was a strange change for me, but only
what might happen to anyone in ordinary everyday life and amid
human influences, to look on those loved faces again. I was to
have skilled help for all the large parties and balls, and I turned
at once to the practical duties of a cook in a gentleman’s house. I
cannot help adding here that I have been able to get my living
in that capacity ever since that time, and that 1 will give lessons
this afternoon on cookery. It was like going back to the old
home. I had a good, wise, generous mistress, who would tell me
to put aside the past and trust to the future. I hardly knew
what I expected in the future, but I was happy there. While in
this position I soon recognised that cooking did not come by
nature. Even the most simple things cannot be done till they are
taught. I got a cookery book. I used to puzzle half the night
over them, and then I did not get the rudiments from that.
People do not always remain the same, but are continually
changing. This can be said of everyone, and growing years make
a great difference. While I was away from Sunnyside the family,
from being children, now seemed to be men and women, most of
them. This meant so much more company. As I thought I
80
I go Bach to Sunny side.


could not fulfil the duties required of me, I had many painful
moments, although they had patience with me. I got to dread
the two caterers, who came alternately or both together. The
attention they wanted was more to me than all my other work. They
took such, pains that I should not see anything of their skill, and
I had hard toil to learn even gradually. When I had been there
more than a year I felt I had learnt scarcely anything.
My brother had got married, and 1 knew that 1 had to give
up all and expect nothing. Tor me loneliness never had any
terror. No one could be less dependent on outward society than
I was, yet I could enjoy it, only I never craved after it, nor "was
it necessary for my existence—l was one who have had always
to stand alone. Perhaps the sharpest anguish is that whidh no-
body knows of. I have been so unaccustomed to sympathy that
I can sit still and endure anything; I did everything at my own
risk. I have had to work for all I have ever received, and some
have done their best to hinder me, so that I hardly knew what to
do, although lam sure I was most unselfish. The marriages of
my father and brother altered things, and somebody else came in,
so that the old relationships were changed. For a time I felt a
soreness.
Turning things over in my mind, I see that I could not have
learned anything at Sunnyside, as matters stood. More than once
I thought I would like to live in Adelaide again, and was tempted
to take a post in some of the business places. Only homely cook-
ing would then be required, and I could do that well. Then,
again, sometimes I had to walk all the w r ay to Glen Osmond by
myself if I lost the bus. It was a lonely road, with scareely a
house where Parkside now is. All this was long ago.
While I lived at No. 10, Rundle-street, I got to know other
girls, who were also working housekeepers. One whom I used to
see sometimes lived at Messrs. Wigg & Co.’s, in Rundle-street. She
told me that she was going to be married, and asked whether she
should speak for me. It would be nice for me and cheery*, she
said, but she did not think it would be for very long, as the place
was to be rebuilt. My path appeared to be made plain, and I
came and saw Mr. Wigg. He was satisfied, and I came to live
at No. 12, Rundle-street. I had a comfortable room over the
shop. None of the assistants lived there. I used to see to their
meals during the day. Also under the heading of Messrs. Wigg
and Co. there was a chemist’s shop, with doctors’ consulting-
rooms, in King William-street, where the Beehive now stands.
The chemists had their meals at No. 12. The evenings were
lonely, but there were plenty of books, and I could either go out or
sit and look into Rundle-street. I knew the engagement would be
only temporary, but I had always faced my fate with courage,
and faced it still. But there seemed nothing to face at Mr.
Wigg’s. Everyone was bright and pleasant. So I was content
81
I go Back to Sunnyside.


to bask in the present enjoyment, and I had given up troubling
about what was to me a hopeless future. I had some shipmates
at Government House, and went and saw them sometimes, and I
found that if I left Mr. Wigg’s I could go there. So I was happy,
and what more could anyone desire?
While performing my new duties I wondered how things would
turn out. For some time I had a busy life, with no time for
regrets. The meals were in three relays. The first was at 12.30
p.m., and so on. There was only one young lady among the
assistants. The shop was full of men and youths, who served the
customers. How different Eundle-street looked then. There
were only little tumble-down shops, but prosperity reigned, and
there were no poor-looking people or naked-footed children.
A change has come now—a great change—that reaches to the
core of things. We think we can endure anything, but every day
the little things of life drive us nearly wild. Pleasures and trials
seem both smaller when we have to face them each day.
PRINCE ALFRED IN ADELAIDE.
There were no model schools in South Australia then. Ido
not know who organised them, but the salesmen in Mr. Wigg’s
employ held classes for reading and writing gratuitously in a
building which seemed partly a store, and was lit up with candles.
The young gentlemen asked me if I would come and help. Ihey
said I could at least listen to the small girls reading. Having the
evenings to myself I went gladly, and for a time I had a little
class all to myself, and I learned something from the questions and
answers that passed. The children all looked well-fed and well-
clothed, and I could not help comparing their condition with that
of the little ones receiving free teaching in Glasgow. Yet how
the people in Glasgow would fear to come away such a distance,
for at that time it was like dying to come to Australia. The
people in the colony then had to keep on working and thinking
with their own powers. There was not so much labor-saving
machinery, and to succeed everyone had to work to the best of
his capacity, and the boys and girls, too, had to help in making
the most of their splendid inheritance.
One gets interested in the people with whom one is brought in
contact, even although temporarily. All was very real to me. I had
been in the happiest state of mind for months. Mrs, W igg would
come sometimes and see if I wanted any comforts. She came
with that good-natured sympathy, and Hooked forward to the days
82
Prince Alfred in Adelaide.


when the children would come with her when she was interesting
herself with my department in such a kind way.
Just about that time the Governor, Sir Dominic Daly, died at
Government House. Ido not remember whether a new Governor
had been appointed, but it seemed to me such a little time after-
wards that Sir James Fergusson arrived here. Then Prince Alfred
was expected again, and the whole place was in a stir once more.
Sir James was a wealthy man, and he sent a stall of servants before
him, so I thought it useless to think of the Government House em-
ployment for me. How pleasant it was, therefore, to be told I would
be employed as an extra help between the kitchen and the still-
room. I saw the housekeeper, Miss Anderson, and I engaged to
come when they had all settled at Government House. In the
meantime Mr. J. N - . Hines, from Parliament House, had charge
of the catering with the two caterers whom I did not like. If
they had been there all the time I would not have gone there. Sir
James brought with him a French chef. There has never since
been such times at Government House. The house was altered,
and some new places were built.
In what grand style everything was kept up. The footmen,
with their powdered hair, knee breeches, and silk stockings, were
a sight to see when thev went out in the beautiful carriage with
the splendid horses, and all were brought out from the old home.
It was a lasting benefit to me going there. I felt a little nervous
amongst so many other servants, for they looked a splendid lot of
men and women, who did not think service derogatory to them.
They seemed happy and dignified, and went to work accordingly.
Each had his or her own work. They were not all from the same
country, but were different in tongue and manner as well. There
was no false pride, nor did they think that any kind of work in
a house was lowering, or that there was anything degrading in
menial labor.
My task was to help in the still-room. I might make a slight
allusion to this still-room. It is a miniature “kitchen/’ where the
housekeeper can make all the preserves and so on. The house-
keeper’s room is always close by, and there the linen and such like
articles are kept. The still-room at Government House was an
important place then.
There were great preparations being made in view of the
coming of the Prince, who was expected to arrive at any time.
Then such a lot of things would have to be done in the still-room.
Much of the fine cooking for breakfast was done there, and the
dessert dishes were garnished there, and many of the ornamental
biscuits and cakes for dessert were made in the still-room. Sir
James Fergusson had all his own household silver and linen, as
well as the dessert-stands. Some that seemed the most impor-
tant were twelve in number; they had to be taken to the butler
every night and locked up. Each one was in its own velvet casket.
83
Prince Alfred in Adelaide.


and "was carefully put away. They had been given to Sir James
as a presentation, and were said to be pure gold. One of the
things I had to do when they were in use was to see that they were
in safety.
There was plenty of novelty in my surroundings at Government
House. I was sent here and there. The housekeeper became
ill in the wearisome days and nights, although there seemed nothing
but pleasure to the favorites of fate. They got some responsible-
looking person to fill her place, but she was not so clever as Miss
Anderson. She was the wife of one of the orderlies who was in
attendance on Colonel Hamley. For we had a regiment of soldiers
here then, and Colonel Hamley was the commander. There was a
row of little cottages on the banks of the Torrens, where they
lived, but they have been all pulled down long ago.
I could not attempt to record each day and night at Govern-
ment House. The time flew by on golden wings. My ambition
was to see to the cooking. I was in the right place, for I had
to go in the kitchen and help with everything after the proper
housekeeper left. I think Miss Anderson was sent home again
to Scotland. I grew interested in everything. I remember how
the two caterers, or cooks, came and asked me if I would ask the
French chef if he would let them see him dish up the beautiful
substances of his cooking. He seemed to work like magic. 1
asked him, and he muttered something in French, -while there was
a look in his eyes which said No.
Every detail of that time is stamped on my memory. I sup-
pose what made such an impression was that I was, at any rate,
where I had the chance of seeing a professional cook work, while
the secret of that knowledge was not kept from me thus far. 1
remembered that the two cooks who came to Sunnyside always had
large cookery books wdth them, and in their exaltedness so acted
that I could not get a glimpse of what they were engaged in. As
things now transpired, they could see that my new life seemed to
promise that eventually I would be able to give evidence that I
had gained knowledge in the period, when something could be
made out of my association with the French chef, and I felt glad
that those two cooks could only gaze in longing wonder where 1
was gathering experience. Perhaps it gave me my revenge.
But I must tell something more about Government House and
the Prince. There was nothing but visitors; there were theatri-
cals, with a real stage fixed up in the ballroom, with balls, and
evenings at home, and garden parties, luncheons, and huntings. I
grew interested in all that happened about me; I was not hindered
in any way when time allowed me to have a look and see what
was to be seen. How pleased I was to see Mrs. Bnnd amongst
some of the cast of characters who were going to play on the stage.
Truly, she looked well in her part. I took care to let her know
that I was there, and to ask her if I could do anything for her.
84
Prince Alfred in Adelaide.


There were no professional actora, only “amateurs.” It just
seemed to me as if everybody was acting.
The Prince had such a lot of other gentlemen with him, and
amongst them there was a Highlander, dressed in kilts, who played
the bagpipes. He used to play sometimes in the dining-room even
while the dinner was in progress. He stood behind the Prince's
chair. Whenever I could get a chance I liked to go and look in
at the dining-room when the gas was alight. They could
not see me. I thought it so nice to see whether
the Prince ate his food in any way different from
other people. He used to sit at one end of the tabie, .and Sir
James at the other. For most of the public functions Sir
James wore his Court dress, as if in the presence of the Queen
at some festivities at home. He did not look a weak amiability.
How noble he was, I thought, and. how hia servants loved him.
And how lovely was Lady Edith Fergusson, and their beautiful
children. How nice they all were.
I remember that if I saw her ladyship coming 1 used to dart
off in another direction, and she told monsieur, the chef, to tell me
not to do so, as she liked to speak to us all when she met
us. I did not try to get out of her way afterwards. Such a
strange custom the ladies all had. It was to limp in their walk
as if they were halting and lame. To get that mode some had
the heel of one shoe made shorter than that of the other. It was
called the “Alexandra limp.” I could not help wandering at this,
and I learned that the Princess of Wales had a sore foot, and that
in the midst of all gaiety and glitter the society ladies all tried to
seem as if they had a sore foot.
Where the tall palm tree stands on the banks of the Torrens
was the vegetable garden for Government House. It was fenced
all round with hedge and wire, with a door in the wall, by which
we got to and fro if the gardener forgot to bring what was wanted.
The door is still in the wall, but the garden has gone. I have
good reason to remember one time, at least, when I was sent for
something. It was dark, but I had a key and a lantern, and was
told to lock the door and take the key with me to let myself in, I
put the lantern down, as I did not require a light in the garden.
A key was available to others, as there were more keys than one.
While I was trying to open the door the Duke of Edinburgh came
out. He smiled at me, and I let the things fall and stared at
him. He had no attendant, but wore a soft felt hat. I stood
and saw him pass out amongst the populace just like one of them
selves. He locked the door and I unlocked it. I remember that
as if it were only yesterday.
At the time there was a war in Paris, and monsieur used to
get letters that upset him fearfully. Some that were sent from
his ruined home came out of Paris in a balloon. I may add that
the French chef was designated as iuonsieur all through the house.
85
Prince Alfred in Adelaide.


He was a very young man to have such a position, and he could,
not speak English at all well. I taught him some Scotch words.
He was lively, and would go on working sometimes till midnight,
but would not let me stay if he could help it.
The Prince and party went away inland somewhere for an
outing. We had a period of quiet, and I got a day oft' to go
and see the Galatea. All the kilted volunteers were go’ing by
special invitation, and in a kind way I was not forgotten. They
had Hr. Archie Dixon, with Ids bagpipes. It was a nice day for
an outing, and the whole ship was thrown open to us, and a happy
time was spent there. All was wonderfully clean and orderly.
All was explained to us, and we were told how the cannon and
other instruments of destruction were tired, with the force of the
ball, and the gunpowder, as well as what the sailors could do it
they were attacked. We saw the Prince’s room, which was being
done up ready for the voyage home. One thing I noticed hanging
up was a large portrait of Prince Albert and the Queen, The
only thing I eaw to make me sad was some men in chains made
fast to the deck. They were white men. I can see the look
on their faces yet. They were there for some misdeed, but 1
did hope that they would be released when they got out to sea.
We went right down to where the stokers worked to keep the en-
gines in action. We passed, I think, five decks to get there; 1
was glad to reach the top again. Human hearts must be made
of strong materia], or else how could those men live in chains,
even for a day?
The time came when I felt sadness. After the Prince went away
what a change there was. "Where life and merriment had reigned,
amid the scene of all the late festivities, there wasnowonlysilence.
For in that stately home Lady Ferguson was ill —seriously ill.
She had not been feeling well for some time, and it was, rumored
that Sir James would take her back again to Scotland if she
was strong enough to travel. She died at Government House.
I had left a week or so before .
I LEAVE GOVERNMENT HOUSE.
I was only an extra one for the busy time, but I was told
that if a vacancy should occur I would be sent for. Use, we are
told, is second nature. I grew quite used to looking down the
advertising columns of the newspaper, where I read, “Wanted,
wanted, wanted.” I saw one day a notice that there was wanted
by a lady at Glenelg a young woman, who must have some know-
86
I Leave Government House.


ledge of cooking and. good references. The direction was to
apply to Mrs. Wright, at “The Olives,” Glenelg. Years after-
wards I went back to Government House as housekeeper.
I received a reply to my application to Mrs, Wright, stating
that my reference proved satisfactory, and that she would be
glad if I would come as soon as I could. As far as I can remem-
ber I was glad again to be near the sea. It was not exactly
what I wanted; I was restless and dissatisfied. I had decided to
seek a situation with some lady who travelled, as I would have
liked to go back to Scotland again. Hut, still this would be
something to do. On arriving at Mrs. Wright's I found one of
my shipmates as housemaid. It was a large house, in pleasant,
well-kept grounds. I was taken to my room, on the second
floor. It was large and comfortable, with such a nice view
from the window. I was, at any rate, pleasantly housed.
Could I but live that time over again! Could 1 but close my
mind to all, all that has happened since! Did 1 say happened?
AH that has taken place has been of my own doing. I felt very
happy, for, as I now review my past, I know that I took the
first step in the narrow path when I left the Olives! Delusion
really came into my life, and I was Wise only after the event.
lam alone now with my ruined life and my lost happiness. The
wearisome years creep by so slowly.
I used to travel to Adelaide to attend Mr, JLyalTs church
every second Sunday. Ido not know why I did not give the
name of my first employer, of No. 10, Kundle-street. I think it
was in my mind then not to mention any names in such remi-
niscences as that I wrote of mine. However, my first employer's
name was Mr, T. Ballantyne. He died long ago, but his bro-
thers are still in the land of the hying I am happy to say.
One of the Mr. Ballantyne’s used to come to the same church in
Flinders-street, with his wife and family. They were always
friendly to me, and show friendship even now, after all these
years. When I first made acquaintance with Mr. W. Ballan-
tyne he was in his brother's shop at 38, Rundle-street, where Mr.
Birks is now. He used to come to No. 10 sometimes. His was
a merry face, with an almost perpetual smile. I used to like
to see him come in. So when I met him at tne church he
always wished to know how I was, and whether 1 was comfort-
able. So one Sunday, when I came from the Bay, he asked me
if I would not like to come and live in Adelaide again. He said
that where he lived they wanted some one at the shop to get
meals for the young people who worked there. I told him that
when I left Mrs. Wright's I would see him, but I had no
thoughts of leaving them. He must have made a mistake, for I
received a letter from Messrs. Robin & Birks, asking me
to come to them, as they understood that I was leaving Mrs.
87
1 Leave Government House.


Wright’s. I could not understand, so I called and saw Mr.
Robin.
How sweet is the memory of the innocent evenings I used
to spend at Glenelg. I told Mr, Robin that Mr. Bailantyne had
not understood me correctly, for I did not want to leave Mrs.
Wright’s. Mr. Bailantyne then came on the scene and talked to
me, and I promised to go to 38, Rundle-street. When I got
back to Glenelg I repented of what I had done, and sent a letter
to say that I thought I could not take such a responsible position.
Meanwhile they had made their own arrangements and they
sent me a letter, in which they indicated that if I did not keep
my agreement there would be trouble. A, strange thought
came in my mind. I told Mrs. Wright that if she would keep
the place for me that I would go to Rundle-street and stop for a
.week or so till they could get someone else. I was so afraid
of anything in the way of law that I was easily terrified. I only
took a few things with me and reached the place at night.
There was a small yard at the back of the premises. I found
my way to the door, and as I put my hand on the knob an im-
mense dog thrust his cold nose against my fingers. I gave a
scream, which brought out the person whom I was to succeed. She
was waiting for me to arrive. Then I laughed. Ah, me! could
I but have seen my future at that juncture!
It was quite early in the evening. The dear woman stopped
with me all night and enlightened me on all the subjects of in-
terest. She wished to constitute herself my guide and friend,
and remarked that I was so young for such a position. I learned
to like the dear, kind soul, and to go and see her. The next
morning began the eventful day. Even at this moment, when
I look back, there rises before my mind a picture of that period.
There were only a few at breakfast, and that was soon over. Mr.
Bailantyne called to see if I had come. He told me I could have
a room over the shop, which looked into Rundle-street, and that
anything that I wanted would be attended to if I mentioned
it to him. There were 28 or 30 persons for dinner and tea, and
some of the men in charge slept on the premises. 1 had their
rooms to see to, so there was a lot of work, but I was strong,
and I had the evenings, while I had more wages than I had
with Mrs. Wright. I was old-fashioned enough to see to that;
so I became quite reconciled. There seemed a happiness about the
place which soothed me. I saw Mrs. Wright, and had the rest
of my things sent to 38, Rundle-street, and for a time, at least, I
was happy.
The shop kept open then till 10 o’clock on Saturday night,
when all had supper. On Sunday sometimes there was no one
there. So I had every Sunday. Thus week by week, and month
by month, I grew into a kind of home life amongst the people. My
thoughts of going back to Scotland had passed away. There was
88
I Leave Government House.


no lack of kindness on the part of the firm or any of the partners.
I remember there was a gas stove sent out to the old
exhibition, to 4)6 exhibited. It was the first one to come in
South Australia. Mr. Birks bought it and had it fixed up for
me at 38. It was splendid and such a help.
And the good, old dog that made me start the first night i
came there would stretch his grand old self by the door. I felt
■content when he was there. I often took him with me when 1
went out. His name was Lion and he always seemed so pleased
with the part he played. Such drollery was caused by this dog’s
sport. He would upset somebody by colliding with them. Per-
haps a complaint would be made, and then you -would hear his
owner say that he would give Lion a talking to. every-
one laugh. I never knew him to bite, but he*was such a
size. Sitting as Ido now, so lonely and miserable, how I wish
Lion was at the door; I would not feel the darkness so much.
Music and singing have always been a pleasure to me. It
interested me at favorable times when the young gentlemen who
lived on the premises gave a muscal evening, with dancing as well.
How I enjoyed myself. Life was life to me then. There waa
a large room over the shop, and as in many other business places
the owners of the shops lived on the premises. I -was experienced
enough to do a little catering for them, and, needless to add, they
set value on my efforts. I talk of the dear old times yet when
1 see some of them.
We often get fond of people with whom we associate even tem-
porarily in this way. This happens in the everyday life, and
some will influence us, although we know not how*. We cannot
help thinking of them just a little. So many different feelings
one has to struggle against, one gets attracted to a person some-
time through gratitude, or it might be either joy or grief felt in
common. But if passion comes it leads to captivity, and we can-
not get out, even if we try.
In all that I have written so far there has not been one line
-about love. Ido not like to touch on my lost daydreams. I had
a suitor in Scotland, but did not take his attentions seriously, for
while, intellectually, he was above me, being such a splendid
scholar, love did not enter into my vieivs at that time. But he
used to come and give me lessons in writing and I accepted him.
But when it was resolved that I should come to South Australia
duty seemed to hold out strongly the resolution that I must give
my lover up. He implored me not to do so, and wanted me not to
come. He was manly and sincere enough in his love. I told
him my intention to come, and that he must wait seven years for
me, or come to South Australia after I had done what I wanted for
my relatives. And I gave my promise that I would be true. J
wrote to him all the time, and he also wrote to me till the year
1870. I had no letters and; felt forlorn. At this time 1 came
89
I Leave Government House.


in kindly touch with John Allen at 38, Rundle-street. As we grew
more friendly John Allen confided to me his past and the lonely
history of his life. He helped to redeem the greyness of my
life. I could not tell when it dawned upon me, but, like other
women, I was capable of loving, and the knowledge came. It
was pleasant to think I would share the ups and downs of life’s
struggles with the man I loved, and who had aroused this
feeling and won my heart. It was the old, old story, and 1
managed to convince him that I was not the least afraid of poverty.
I told him of my engagement and how it was ended. My heart
had longed for practical sympathy, and it was some happiness to
think that John Allen and myself had much in common. So far,
I had not questioned my wisdom in thus allowing myself to be
carried away by my feelings, even although he was. a few years
younger than I was. The thought came that, perhaps, I had been
rather hasty as matters stood, but when John Allen went and
brought his mother’s Bible to show me that his father and mother
were relatively of tne same age as we were, wisely or unwisely, 1
pledged myself to John Allen. Their names and ages were writ-
ten in the Bible.
Of course, I loved him. I have always loved him, and from
that time to this my mind has been filled with one individual—
John Allen. It was natural; we were in the same house of
business. I did not try to get out his way and he unmistakably
did everything he could to get into my way. We were together
morning, noon, and night for more than two years. So I re-
solved to cast in my lot witn the man I loved. I looked to him.
I did not consider it necessary to consult my people. They had
all done the same, and did not hesitate or think of me. John
Allen had no relations with whom he was on friendly terms in
South Australia. He seemed then as if he thought only of me. 1
was very happy in a sense. There was a rest, and yet an unrest.
I knew that he had told me he would like to go to Hngland.
You may picture my astonishment when John Allen came to
me one day with a letter in his hand that had been at the bottom
of the sea for two years. My name and address were only just
legible, and the edges were open like a book. It was from my
friend in Scotland, telling me that my seven years were and
that he wanted this point settled. I will not pretend that 1
did not suffer. It seemed a destiny. I wrote to him that it was
useless to think of me, for I knew that my marriage with him
would be loveless. I told him I was wiser now. The man
I loved was perfect in my eyes. I had met other men, who had
pleased my fancy, but John Allen had a charm of manner that
won my heart. What I regretted most was to break my promise—a
promise so marked and solemn, given far away in Scotland, white
sitting on the side of heather hill. If I had been a designing woman I
could have accepted for my husband the second mate of the Morn-
90
I Leave Government House.


ing Star, who waited till the two years I had contracted to stop
in South Australia were over. Then, what was so real on the
ship, seemed only a dream, when he wrote and asked me if I would
marry him. and go back to England if he came for me. 1 knew
then that I had my dream of honorable love and marriage. It
was not to be. Upon what trifles events turn. If I had not
gone to 38 everything would have been different.
I GET MARRIED.
In the year 1874 I became John Allen’s wife. What has-
turned out so evil seemed to me as good. I thought all well lost
for love, for it is so. He arranged it all; I left it to- him. We
were married very quietly at St. Paul’s Church in the morning.
Not a soul was to know, and there would be no fuss, or anything
out of the way, but just our two selves. How all comes back
to me, as I think of those simple details. I thought how happy
I should make him; how hard I would try to be a good wife to
him, for I loved him so. In a week or so my husband went to
London and I was to work till he came back, which I hoped would
be only, a year afterwards. But he stopped away for three years.
Long before John went to England new buildings had been,
put up for business purposes only, but the firm still found pro-
visions for the assistants. I could have stopped on there, only
there was no convenience for me to sleep, so I found a situation
in a gentleman s house, where I could sleep at night. My mistress
was Mrs. Arthur Blyth, of St. Margaret’s, Childers-street, North
Adelaide. She wanted a cook, and I applied. They were satis-
fied with my reference and I got the place. There was only
Mr., Mrs., and Miss Blyth. It was a well-appointed home, and
I had no washing to do or ironing, I w'as beginning to be a fairly
good cook and they were pleased with me. I had a comfort-
able home.
I knew I had married into poverty and I resolved to get as
much as I could before John came back. I could put up with any-
thing, as I hoped to have my rightful place with my husband some
day. Mr. Blyth was knighted and soon after that they went
to England, where Sir Arthur was Agent-General, Again for me
were the shifting sands.
Speedily I got another home with Mrs. Murray, whose hus-
band was a member of the firm of D. &W. Murray’s. Their
house was at the corner of Wakefield and Hutt streets. I
had a lot more to do there than I had at Mrs. Blyth's. 1
91
I Get Married.


had all the washing and ironing to do. There was one other girl,
a coachman, and myself. They kept a lot of company and they
had only recently returned from London. Travel and voyages
seemed to bring such a lot of visitors. It was a relief to be done.
I used to get letters from my husband, but there was always delay
after delay, and all this time I had not told anyone that I was
John Allen’s wife. Such was the beginning of my married life.
Does anyone love on purpose I wonder? I could not help
doing so. It did not bring me happiness. It made the whole
difference when I had to tell an admirer that I was a wife with
no husband. Nothing could undo the past. Alter all, lam
John Allen’s wife. 1 had any amount of pity and blame, but
cared for none of this, and I am now beyond caring.
But I must keep to that time. My brother was taken ill
■with rheumatism and he could not move. He had a furniture
shop in Hindiey-street. He had three little children, and, by the
irony of fate, my sister-in-law’ met with an accident and was taken
to the “hospital.” I used to go from Hutt-street to Hindiey-street,
after attending a late dinner. There were no cars then in the
streets and I had to walk. I would try to do something for those
dear ones. And sometimes it would be nearly 11 o'clock before
I could start back for Hutt-street. I may have many faults, but
lam no coward. I could face what awaited me, but truly dis-
may would come if I saw a “group” of men or youths standing
in the street on my way to Hutt-street. I would run past.
Only once a man 1 tried to get pass stretched out his aims and
caught me. He let me go as quickly. I felt I was able to take
care of myself so long as I was not caught hold of. I felt lonely.
I wouid sit and cry as if tears would do anything. 1 cried and
cried. The linn at 38, Bundle-street had another shop in Hind-
iey-street. Some changes were made and one of the firm went
to the shop in Hindiey-street. He was my employer before, and
I learned that he wanted someone in the same capacity as in Bun-
dle-street. I told Mrs. Murray my distress at having to come so
far so late at night. She was very much put out. Still 1 think
she realised my situation when I explained that 1 was going back
to my late employer.
All things considered, I had cause to be thankful. My quar-
ters were not at all uncomfortable, and there were some of the
young people fcom 38 there to work and to live on the pre-
mises. Hutt-stfeet was a more pleasing-looking place to live, but
how I dreaded to walk down there in the night-time. When i
see the cars now travelling to that part of the city those dark
and lone way-marks all come back. I was glad when my sis-
ter-in-law got to her home again.
So the time went on. It certainly had a bright side, for I
had more time, and could go and see my friends at tavorable times
92
I Get Married.


and on the Sundays. The only drawback was some queer-looking old
houses I had to pass at the back, as I came out and in, for i
saw some vicious-looking people, which made me feel slightly ner-
vous. I was often there all by myself on the holiday time; no
one else being in the whole place. I have heard those people quar-
relling at all hours of the night and making darkness horrible.
There was only a small fence with a right-of-way to separate it
from us. The shop was a drapery, clothing, and millinery establish-
ment, and the proprietor of the shop was responsible for the
rents of the old houses at the back. No one could have com-
plained of the place as dull in the daytime. Prom early morn-
ing till closing time I was amused by some eventful excitement in
what was taking place. The shop was opposite to what is now
the Skating Rink, or Ice Palace. At that time there could be
seen at the shop doors and on every available place the goods put
out in rolls for show and they had price-tickets on. One Satur-
day afternoon I was looking out of the back window, when 1 saw
a woman who lived in one of the old houses going into her house
with a roll of tweed tartan over her shoulder and a ticket dang-
ling loose to tell how much a yard it was. It being tea-time, 1
called some of the young men just in time to see it. They said
it was taken from the front door. The police were sent for and
her place was searched, and it was found she had enough stuff
there to stock a shop.
All the things were brought into our place. There were rolls
upon rolls of all sorts of materials, with 27 suits of boys' clothing,
and so on. It turned out that there were the trade marks ot
many other shops on goods there as well, and each one came and got
his own. The woman was taken to prison, and on the Monday
morning the owners had each to go and identify his own goods.
All the things were taken to the station. I had to go, too. 1
was summoned in the name of Macdonald. It was then that I
told my employer that I was John Allen’s wife. 1 could not
give a name that I had no right to. There was no end of trouble
about those goods, and the case being more than could be settled
in the Police Court the matter went on to the Supreme Court,
for trial. We had to go to the Supreme Court when the time
came.
Day after day before John went to England, he told me of
some relative of his who had married a second time in a very
short interval. I only knew what he chose to tell me of this
friend. I thought this friend was the cause of my husband stay-
ing away so long. I had a letter from him to say that he would
like to bring this relative with him to Australia when he came
back, and I was to send a telegram to say “Yes” or “No.” I made
enquiries about the cost of the telegram, and was told that, with
the name and address, it would cost me over £6. The sending of
93
I Get Married.


telegrams was very new then. I would have said “JSo," lam
quite sure. Although I would not wish to do an unkind action,
behind this was my suffering, John knew my opinions on that
subject, and calm reason could have told him I could not have
acted differently.
Again and again would arise in my mind instances I knew of
both at 38, Rundle-street, and elsewhere, of marriages like mine,
which had been apparently happy, and where promises had been
loyally kept, and both were blessed. The objectless course my
life was taking did not make matters any better. Who wag i that
I could not do as others had done without sin? Then I had to ac-
cept the unpalatable advice all round that I should not have mar-
ried. With one thing and another fresh difficulties for ever
seemed cropping up with regard to my husband. Has this sort ot
thing ever been sufficient to satisfy a woman's heart I wonder?
All the forces of evil were arrayed against me at that time.
Then he wrote and said that he was coming back, and i
thought after what I had written to him that I had gained my
point, and that he was returning to me. I had formed my own
opinion of the man I had married, and I was impressed with the
tone of his life when I first knew him. There was nothing fop-
pish about John Allen. He was courteous toward women, and
this contrasted well with the familiarity of some young men,
whom w r e both knew. I wanted no unwarrantable interference be-
tween him and me. I knew I would do my best for him, but that
if anything upset my confidence in him he would find my convic-
tions were strong, and that strong they would remain, despite
human affection, or soreness of heart. People do wise things and
foolish things for the sake of love, which they would never
think of doing at other times.
So I brightened up, and set about my work with a sense
of duty. I was happy; yes, a really happy girl once more. 1
had allowed myself to believe that at last, after my many disap-
pointments, my husband would really come. He did not posi-
tively give the name of the steamer by which he was coming, or
when he would arrive. I felt a nameless uneasiness, for I had
bought over the goodwill of a boarding-house in Pine-street, and
paid £SO for it. Several of the gentlemen already there remained
on. My reason for choosing this home was that 1 felt so full ot
energy, that the thought of doing nothing, and being a helpless
creature, was one that did not suit me. I hoped John rvould see
everything in the same light. To me life in all its aspects was
so real. I had no false pride. One can never foretell events,
and sometimes all things seem possible. An any rate, it was my
own money I used. I never troubled my husband for any sup-
port. Perhaps that could not be helped, but Ido know that i
had not a shilling in the world when John went away. I have
I Get Married.


no choice but to speak the truth, and I think he will forgive me
for doing so after all I have gone through.
One day a business gentleman came to see if I could find
room for a young clerk, w*ho was coming to his warehouse in
Rundle-street. He asked if I could have the room ready for
that night, as the steamboat was hourly expected. When even-
ing came I waited and watched for this young man. My anxiety
made life a continual wailing for my husband. Day after day, and
night after night, I thought of him. I can scarcely bear to think
of that time. I felt that when he arrived he would go to some
of his friends, who would tell him my address in Firie-street. Un
that eventful night that the young man was to arrive I had gone
to bed when a knock came to the door. I opened the door,
thinking it was the man for whom the room had been made ready.
In came my husband. He was but little changed. 1 thought him
better looking.
I will say nothing about this mad love of mine. John went
always straight to his point, whatever it was, and before he was
in my room five minutes he told me that his relative had come.
It was the one we had quarrelled about in our letters. I never
quite knew what I said, but whatever the words were he under-
stood them. I lost all control of myself. All my hopes were
quenched in a moment, and the future seemed most terrible to me.
I saw everything, and it was not as I hoped it would be. It never
dawned on me that his feelings for me could be any different from
my own for him.
A FARTING OF WAYS.
The next day I realised how great was the gulf which lay be-
tween us. I hated concealment. After a few very unhappy
weeks there came the parting of our ways. John said it was
all my fault. Truly opinions differ. He told me his love was
only boy’s love. I don’t dispute that, but still it was love, and
how was Ito know that it would die right away. In vain 1 tried
to keep on as if nothing was the matter. Any hope of being able
to bear my burden in silence, in such a place as a boarding-
house, was not to be thought of. The rumor spread. I was ill
for a time, and suffered a good deal. I knew all joy in life was
over for me. I was subject to all kinds of comments as to the
real reason why my husband left home. When 1 got better 1
knew I would have to face life’s duty again. I could not bear my
95
A Parting of Ways.


trouble on the spot; I thought to escape from the scene where I
had failed so. As my brother had supplied some of the furniture
for a consideration, I got him and his wife to come into the house.
I thought I would find pain more easily borne if 1 passed swiftly
from place to place, and I advertised for a housekeeper’s position.
Beyond that, I had no plan just then, but I had a fixed purpose*
to leave Adelaide. Bitter as had been my experience, now that
my husband had left me, perhaps for ever, I nerved myself to the
struggle. I resented the blight, which was on me while 1 was
in Adelaide and breathing the same air as they; I had a wish to
be free. Something prevented me from giving up altogether, or
I might have been led into tne depths, and have clouded my life
for ever; I loathed the very sight of evil.
I got a reply to my advertisement. It was a request to take
charge as housekeeper at the Clarence Hotel in King William-
street. I did not have far to go. I had commonsense enough to
think that the excitement of hotel Lie would be a possible relief
for my troubles. Still, I used to wend my way to the shipping
company in the hope of getting a passage anywhere. I knew
I could travel well by sea, and as stewardess —if such a post had
been open—l would have gone without delay. i'he Clarence
Hotel was a busy place then. Underground there were large
dining-rooms. Known as * me Shades,” where hundreds came every
day. There were very few places for that purpose in the city
then. What is now the Tivoli Theatre, was then onlv “White’s”
Rooms, The proprietor of the hotel had charge of those “shades,”"
or dining-rooms, which were for the public. I did not have any
work to do there, but had only to see that it was carefully man-
aged. I had to deal with the tradespeople and to give out the
stores. I was employed there because the landlady was ill. There
was no family, except a little adopted girl. There was, how-
ever, plenty to do, and existence had to be struggled for. It did
seem a rush to get all that was wanted for so many. There were
both men and women cooks, and men and women waitresses, with
other employes about. Apart from the “Shades” downstairs, we
had both public and private dining-rooms upstairs. I saw to the
letting of the rooms, and also attended the people who hired the
apartments there. For the most part they were either musical
or theatrical people.
I can well remember Nellie Stewart’s father engaging rooms for
himself and his two daughters. After all those bygone years 1
saw Nellie Stewart the other day looking so young. Maggie
Moore was staying there, too. She was Mrs. Williamson then.
There was plenty of delight and excitement everywhere, and no
restrictions were placed on my movements. I came in contact
with and was on speaking terms with many congenial people, and
was removed from the miserable sufferings which had made up my
life just previously. But all the amusements, to which 1 had a
96
A Parting of Ways.


free “entree,” could not make up for the human fellowship which
was snatched from me.
My courage would sink when I saw my husband and his friend
coming along from the Post-Office in King WiUiam-street. They
would be laughing and looking so gay. Then my mind would go
back to the time, unspoiled by pain, which he and 1 had together.
Surely when I married John S. 0. Allen it never occurred to me
that it would be a union with one who would in no way help me
onward. He devoted himself to his relative, but this did not
lessen the pain that such a factor should have come to another
person’s houses and sow discord. If I had found out in time 1
would not have been in South Australia when they came. 1
was deprived of all now, when I wanted companionship most;
and from his point of view everything I did was simply detestable.
I could do nothing to please him. He would tell me so with a
sneer. My future was all a blank. I learned from a conversation
between my master and that they would like to sell over
the goodwill of the Clarence Hotel. There was again the inevit-
able. I did not mind much, because I was brought up in the
midst of real privations, such as affected myself only. Hut 1
could not ignore the scandal or forget that the world might
imagine that I had been very busy weaving nets, and that 1 had
caught myself in them, as was sometimes told me. It was no
easy matter to go out and in, and to hear and see so much humili-
ation. I remained at the Clarence till my employer sold the
business.
I was sorry, for it was peopled with kindly human beings,
whqm I knew well and could mix with, even to the maids. When
I went there first, as they told me afterwards, they had made up
thedr minds not to like me. As I was the first housekeeper to
take charge over them they looked on my coming with annoyance,
but, anyhow, 1 felt confident that I would do what was right for
all, and I had, in various ways, seen to their comfort, both In
regard to their meals and their bedrooms. I was grateful to those
waiting men and maids when I saw how pleased they were to help
me in any emergency. The lady, when well, was very fond of
going out. I could not object to that, although i had no time for
so much outing, but I had to go. I went everywhere with her.
They had a private house at Norwood. A man and wife lived
there as caretakers, and all the hotel washing was done there. I
was always glad to go tnere, the garden being a consideration. We
drove about, too, wherever the lady wished. I never before had
such times. What with the theatre, and one thing and another
no one would think that I was a discarded wife. 1 Had tried hard
not to be crushed, and faced my loss, only there was the discon-
tent left, and, so far, all effort to forget was of no use at all.
At last the valuation of the hotel was set about and the people
who came in did not require a housekeeper. My employers went
97
A Parting of Ways.


to their house at Norwood. I knew it would take all my courage
to endure what was before me, with no scrap of human kindness
to help me. My only desire was to find some hiding-place, where
I would not hear the ceaseless “Poor Mrs, Alien” spoken, as i
heard it that day. Forlorn in spirit, I went to Port Adelaide. A
lady and gentleman whom I knew had taken the management ol
a new dub there. I thought if I could get a place till I could find
a ship that would take me away I would be glad to do anything
till then. Life seemed no worse than at other times. I did
not sit down and pity myself. It was others with their pity that
I did not want. My early experience gave me the possibility ot
bearing real pressure, and I knew what it was to be homeless. 1
am telling my story in my own way.
I went with the people I mentioned. They were kindness it-
self. They were only newly married and did not understand
housekeeping. I worked henceforward with but one
object in view, though it was long before 1 realised
it. At last the opportunity came to go as stewar-
dess on a sailing vessel. I would have liked better if I could have
had the chance to go on a steamboat. The ship I went in was the
South Australian and she was under the command of Captain
Bruce.
I remembered who I was, and what I was, and why I was on
board that ship. It was a conundrum. I was not on pleasure bent
and did not know where I was going. The ship looked as if bound
on an excursion. Captain Bruce being a favorite with those who
went sea voyages. He had on board his wife and baby daughter, and a
maid. The doctor was also a married man and was accompanied
6y his wife, a little baby, and a maid also. Such a number of
people whom I knew were on board. All on one side of the
“saloon” was occupied by Mr. and Mrs. Matthew Goode and
their family. Amongst the other pleasing people on board were
the Rev. Charles Clark. He went as far as South Africa. Mr. K.
S. Smythe was a traveller, too. It was January 8 when they
started and a fine morning, but when a strong wind and a rough
sea caught the sails I had plenty to do.
I RETURN TO SCOTLAND.
It was no hardship for me to be on the ocean, but for one
thing there was not much scope for recollection of my troubles for
the first few days. Little by little I began to feel the goodwill of
the people on board. What pleasure Mr. and Mrs. Harris, from
98
I Return to Scotland.


Prospect, showed in being kind to me who had so little to make life
worth living, I got to know Mr, and Mrs. Harris very soon after
I came to South Australia, when the future for me looked bright
and sunny. I dared not cast a glance into the future at times.
The ship was so crowded that I had to sleep in what was
known as the deckhouse, and so did the doctor's maid. As the
South Australian steadily surged along there were many notes ot
mirth and laughter, and they were loudest wherever the Rev.
'Charles Clark happened to be. When it was nice and calm all
would be invited to the poop t where Mr. Clark would read and
recite to us from Charles Dickens and others. Then there were
other amusements, such as concerts and theatricals. I was un-
der no restraint in the ship, but went about all over it.
There was a tiny boy put on board just before we sailed. He
was to be given to his relatives when the ship reached London, but
nobody seemed to have any particular charge of the wee laddie,
and I liked to know' that he w*as in bed every night before I went
myself. He would get aw'ay in the forecastle with the sailors, and
I was frightened w'hen I saw him up in the rigging ever so high.
I made little caps for him and mended his clothes. Some of the
ladies taught me some fancy work, and I taught them how to
knit stockings. I was asked by one lady if I would go on to the
Continent with them. This was opportune and the one thing I
wushed, while I had plenty of time to think the matter over before
we got to London, if I could only decide what to do.
Until then I did not know* how much woman can bear and
live through. On board the Morning Star I felt influenced by ail
that w*as best in me. We cannot sever right from wrong. 1
knew my marriage was a failure, and how I dreaded the by-and-
bye. Was it to be like this, always empty of happiness? Cone
for ever were the innocent days of girlhood. I have lived a life-
time since then. Although a sea rolled between my husband and
me, and I hoped in that way to forget him, my thoughts would
revert to him and his cousin. He consoled himself with her
society for three years in England, and he was not necessarily
without her society now. I sometimes wonder even now, in a
dull dazed way, if this lonely wretched being is really I. “It was
very imprudent and impulsive of me to go to sea," but calm reason
told me I could not have acted differently. After what had been
told me by credible witnesses the underhand ways seemed so
intolerable. It was assumed that I had no right to resent it, and
that there should have been no more consideration for me than
if I had been an Indian squaw*. To write about this is like living
through that awful time again. I let myself go away, and yet 1
loved that man better than anything in the whole world. Life
to me was hard and bitter and cruel, but on that blue sea 1
prayed that I would not be beaten. In a suppressed voice 1
declared “I won’t be beaten in life so soon." It seemed as if 1
99
I Return to Scotland.


was as a leaf driven before the wind, and so how could I ask (rod
to help me not to be weak and vanquished. It seemed to me as
though I could never know what fear meant again; yet I wanted
a little guidance just then.
I am typewriting most of this with some of the old writings
before me writ ten onboard tne South Australian. That voyagenerved
me to face life with renewed courage. I could see that it was
clearly meant that I should live the rest of my life alone, with
no human companionship. Having faced that fact, the greatest
bitterness was over, but learning the lesson was hard. I was
now strong once more.
The good old South Australian went along so gently, but one
began to long to see land again. The vessel called no where till,
she came to Cape Town. And it took six weeks to get there from
Port Adelaide. Only one accident happened in all that time.
One of the seamen fell overboard. It was a fine morning and he
could swim, and there was great rejoicing when he was safely
landed on the deck. I could just see his head such a long way out
in the sea. Every one came on deck, and some suggested that a
hot bath of sea water should be ready for him, but when he got
on board he simply laughed, rushed to the forecastle, and was up
the rigging again in quick time. “Going asnore at Cape Town'"
was the topic, and one heard nothing else till the time came.
The South Australian was anchored nine miles out at sea. The
passengers thought this was on account of the rocky nature of the
coast, but the real reason was that the captain was afraid that
the crew would desert the ship and go off to the diamond fields.
We were surrounded by different kind of boats. Our ship looked
so high out of the water, with those little boats near tossing about
in the rough sea. It seemed as if there were no means of getting
into any of the vessels alongside. There was no gangway or
passage to the ships. They had a chair constructed out of a cask
and hoisted to the yard-arm. It was then drawm up to clear the
ship and the passengers were dropped into one of the little boats.
Some went ashore in that way the first day. There were better
contrivances the next, as the sea was not so rough, and I got
ashore with the rest and landed at Table Bay. I had often read
about it, but when I saw it everything looked so foreign. The
captain, his wife, and child, and maid took me with them to the
George Hotel, where I lodged while ashore.
Cape Town delighted everybody. The next morning some of
the captains friends came in a carriage and all went inland for a
drive. I wandered about all alone; I saw where the market was
and many beautiful buildings, and also the place where the ship's
washing was done by men. The people were all so different to
Europeans in their dress and manner, as well as in respect to the
color of their skin. There were Hottentots and Aaffirs, Zulus,
and many others of all nationalities. To me it was wonderland.
100
I Return to Scotland.


And then there was Table Mountain, soaring to the sky, 1 found
the way to “Oak avenue,” a grove of oak trees of such a size
running on each side of this wide avenue which lead into the
Botanical Gardens and the Zoological Gardens. There were seats
all about, so nice to rest on during a hot day, and it was hot just
then. From the description of the animals at the Zoological
Gardens as being fierce and savage, I had decided not to go into
the gardens alone.
Mr. and Mrs. Harris and another gentleman came along, and
they suggested that if I would lodge with them while we were
• ashore I would not be so lonely. I gladly consented, but we had
to ask the captain in the evening, so I spent the whole day with
Mr. and Mrs. Harris and their friend. We all went to the
gardens, and I did not think them so fine as the Adelaide Gardens
by a long way. But the sight of the animals struck me with awe.
The gentleman said he would like to see some of them on the
banks of the Torrens. I would not. The captain was willing, so
I was free to go with Mr. and Mrs. Harris. But before doing
that I went back to the ship again. They were lodging with a
Boer lady. She was a widow. The place looked beautiful and
■ clean. The house must have been built during the early
Butch settlement. It looked ancient, yet strong of structure. It
was flat roofed, and the first thing that I noticed was that it
had no ceilings, but only oaken rafters, in all the rooms. The
windows were fairly large, but with such tiny panes of glass.
The floors were bare, with only a mat here and there, and there
were no ornaments, but only just things for use. The floors were
dark to look like the rafters. The house was full of boarders,
end the attendants were a mixture of Zulus and Kaffirs and
Malays. Those women are trained for house work. The landlady’s
name was Mrs. Lund. She spoke English "well, and seemed anxious
to know how we did things in South Australia.
I made it a point of interest to see the Butch mode of domestic
management, so the next day she showed me all over the place.
It was considered a clean town, and the sanitary arrangements
were good. There was no deep drainage, although the house was
in the middle of the town. I saw the kitchen and other depart-
ments. No wonder that the Europeans do not work much there,
for they could get a well-trained help for five shillings a month.
They had tramears in Cape Town, although not running
through the streets. Many of the streets seemed all up hill. We
got into a car drawn by horses. You could travel inside or out,
and we went to Sea Point, about 10 miles along by the sea. There
was a terrible mass of rocks standing here and there in the eea
which made one feel solemn. There were grand looking houses,
with large vineyards and strange trees all about. We passed a
large tract of land for a burying ground, and you could notice
the difference between the graves. Each one had its own singu-
101
I Return to Scotland.


larity, Where we saw the tomb with a cross on it we knew it was
English. We could see this from the cars. There were houses
being built in some of the places we passed, and Mr. Harris was
interested in them as we saw natives working away at painting,
carpentry, and masonry, and all sorts of trades, just like other
men. Only each one was dressed according to his nationality. We
passed a large ostrich farm, and saw numerous “birds,”
That evening in the verandah we heard joyful singing in
Dutch voices. I asked Mrs. Lund’s sister what it was all about,
and she told me that it was the anniversary of the day when the
slaves were freed from bondage, I asked her what she thought ot
the times when people could be bought and sold. {She told me
that as a child she had often gone with her father to the market,
and she pointed to the market place, and had seen him buy the
people he wanted. She herself would pick on some. AH had some-
thing to say about slavery. It gave me something to think about
when I learned that she did approve of the times when she could go
and buy the slaves. I forget the lady’s name, but her home was at
Natal. I liked Mrs. Lund the best.
I told her how I was journeying, I knew not where, and she
was the kindest woman I have ever known. When I came ashore
I thought it would be cold in Cape Town, and so I had very, thick
garments. Mrs. Lund gave me some of her outside garments,
together with a sunshade, so that I could go about, and said if
circumstances should bring me back to Cape Town again that 1
need not be afraid. I used to write to her, and I gave some of her
cards to friends. The kindness of this Dutch lady made me
grateful. Mr, and Mrs. Harris were also most kind, and took me
with them everywhere. We all went to the market one morning.
Everyone was calling out what he or she had to sell. To see how*
the way they dressed was something wonderful. The native
women Avore sandals and the native men also. I shall never forget
going into a shop to buy some wool. Mrs. Harris and I entered,
and a man came to us land said, in good English, that he knew
that we would come for some avool. I asked him how he knew,
and he said he heard me say when passing that morning, “What
pretty wool.” I remembered the remark. The man looked a pic-
ture. He had sandals on, his doublet was of rich crimson, wdth
green and golden colors for the rest of his apparel. It did not
matter what nationality they Avere, they could all speak Dutch,
What lovely fruit Ave got there. The pineapples Avere very plenti-
ful, Avhile crayfish by the caskful Avere sent on board.
The morning Ave Avere leaving Mrs. Lund sent some of her
servants to gather AA’ildfhwers for us. The AA'ildiioAvers of South
Africa Avere shoAvy and bright. We saAV two camels, equipped for
a journey in the desert, Avith their Arabian drivers. It w r as
February 24 AAhen A\ r e landed there, and the climate seemed very
like that of South Australia, only the tract of country I saw
102
I Return to Scotland.


looked dark. The poor old jetty or landing-place was very primi-
tive. The Avood part of the jetty, from its appearance, must
have been very old. It seemed worm-eaten, and long moss was grow-
ing on it. They have built a breakwater within the last few years,
which comes out in the sea thousands of feet, and in the stormy
weather it is a great protection. I scarcely knew what to take note
of first. I saw any quantity of donkeys in harness, and all sorts of
strange-looking conveyances.
While ashore it was all spare time to me, for there was only
sightseeing and writing to do. At every turn there was something
to make one think, if it was only to see some sailors eagerly
clutching in their arms some ostrich feathers as they made haste
to get to their ships. Mr. H. M. Stanley, the African explorer,
had been at Cape Town just a little while before, and from the
many, different photographs of him and his mixed troops one saw
he must have been on a good many occasions in Cape Town while
attempting to find Dr. Livingstone. I was ardent concerning every
object about Dr. Livingstone. Ever since I could remember I had
heard him spoken of in Scotland. I bought all the portraits of
those two grand men that I could afford, and took them to my
friends in Scotland.
The buildings were most beautiful, Hut Table Mountain was
the charm to me. I could not keep my eyes off it. There was
open war going on at Natal, which brought such numbers of
people to the Cape. That was why Mrs. .Lund’s sister was there.
Table Bay looked as active as if the hostilities were there. One
could constantly see the warships coming in or going out. One
came in the day we left with, I forget how many, widows of
the soldiers who had been slain at Natal. They were taking
those poor women to St. Helena. It was a sad sight. I saw that
the decks of the ship were crowded with women without any hats
but only a handkerchif tied round their heads.
Two things were stamped on my mind that day to remember
tor ever. One was to see those sad-looking women; and the other
was when Mr Harris avent to pay Mrs. Lund for me. She would
not charge anything for me. Truly I Avas one Avho ventured out
Avithout gold or scrip. The Avoman meant to be kind, but 1
realised the old motto, "Owe no man anything.” It Avas a neav
experience to me. I always did like to be free from obligation.
Tliis unusual sympathy gave a human interest to the last glimpse
of loveliness that stretched out and about as far as the eye could
see as Ave got on board the old familiar ship again.
I A\as back to active work once more, and I Avas glad to see
the little tiny boy again. Now let come Avhat may it was felt avc
Avould soon be in London. Things ran all in the same groove, and
sometimes the quiet grew oppressive in a pause of the Avind. We
did not have the Rev, Charles Clark after leaving the Cape. It
made such a difference. All Aver© now talking about Avhere they
103
1 Return to Scotland.


■were going when they got to England. I wag asked where I was
going; I did not quite know.
The only incident of any interest occurred when the ship
anchored one Sunday morning at St. Helena. Only the captain and
the first mate went ashore. We were so close that the people on
shore could be seen. That was the place to which they "were
taking those women we had seen a week before. The island was
a fortress in times of peace; the chief interest was .Napoleon’s
tomb and the Jacob’s .Ladder, from the shore to the upper part
of the island. How far away those times seem, and yet I saw by
“The Advertiser” this morning (as I write) that Mr. R. S. Smythe
still trips to and fro. He was the active manager for the Rev.
Charles Clark in Cape Town at the time of the events with w'hich
I am dealing in this story. He has been there on the same kind
of work since then.
The captain began to have some cleaning and painting done
to the ship before getting in to London. Some pots of white paint
were left about on the deck. The steward had a live kangaroo,
which he was taking home to exhibit, I suppose. It was in a
place on the deck, and the little boy whom nobody owned thought
he would make the kangaroo think that the white paint was milk.
The animal sipped some and died. It was mischievous of the child
and for him it was a rude awakening. He had to keep very quiet
all the rest of the way.
I had nothing to complain of all the way. I was healthv, 1
loved to use my strength and tired myself out, there being so
much to think about and wonder at; but I know that I was not
happy. 1 was hardly ever idle. Mr. and Mrs. Hams were the
first to leave the ship when it reached Plymouth, or Falmouth, J
do not remember which. The ship travelled along so gently and
had the Isle of Wight in view so well. Then came the River
Thames. How careful the captain was all through that wonderful
river; we could hear his clear strong voice above the fog-horn as
we passed through so many other ships into the London docks.
I ARRIVE IN LONDON.
And then? And then? I had never been in London before.
Long ere the ship was steadied at the anchorage Mr, Charles
Goode came on board to see his brother and his wife and family.
He brought the letters that had come from the colony. For me
there were five, all in black. My dear brother died soon after i
had left Adelaide. There was one dictated by himself, wishing that
104
I Arrive in London.


I would come back, if only to see how his five little children would
get along. The necessities of human existence had to be grasped.
This suddenly put all thoughts of the Continent out oi my head.
I knew I would have to leave the ship. I was sorrowing; and
everyone I knew was going out of the ship. I thought I wag
going to be ill. So much had gone wrong, and I was face to face
with trouble. When I looked in my lap I found a good few
sovereigns that one and another had left there while my eyes
were filled with tears. Some of the ladies told me before we got
into the dock that anything they left in their cabins would be for
me either to sell or otherwise dispose of. When some people came
to see if I had anything to sell I told the carpenter of the ship to
do what he liked with them. I was in too much grief at my painful
loss to care for them. My brother was only about 30 years of age
when he died. I went and saw the Bev. Dr. Oswald Dykes, D.D.,
at Oakley-square. 1 had some mourning made at once and went
from shipping office to shipping office to get a berth to return to
South Australia any how I could manage it. I had a nice letter
nvith the signature of Captain -Bruce. And the passengers also
subscribed their names to a testimonial as to my capability on the
sea. Then I had a parchment, with writing on it, from the owners
of the South Australian, from their head office in London. 1
have that yet. It was a terrible time. If I could have got a chance
I would have returned at once. I did not care whether it was
in a steamboat or not.
After a few days waiting I saw Captain Alstone, of the City
of Adelaide, who was taking his wife and a little child in Ms ship
to Adelaide. I agreed to be the lady’s maid for my passage back
to South Australia. But they were not likely to start for a month
or six y\eeks, It was a sailing vessel also, and I saw the captain's
wife and her dear little boy. I adore children. And the lady
was the most perfectly lovely woman I ever looked upon. So I
had most of my things put on board the ship. The month of May
had just began. I had some letters of introduction from some
friends in Adelaide to their friends in Bradford, near Manchester.
I had also with me some letters from friends in Adelaide to their
relatives, with cordial wishes that I would go and see them if 1
went to Glasgow. Before I left South Australia I formed the
resolution to go and see my husband’s relations. I had their ad-
dresses through writing to John all the long three years he was
there - P elr P^ ace wa s in Cambridgeshire. I gave Captain
Alstone the address that would fine me if the ship went before the
month.
I hay e kept a record of that time by me ever since. I was
close to the lower of London; and there was no charge, so I went
in about 11 o’clock and was there till 4 o’clock. 1 was o’n the move
all the time, and then did not see half of that stronghold. Oh!
the grandeur and the horrors of it. It was wonderful to think
105
I Arrive in London.


what strife and passion had done during the events of the dark ages
of violence and torture. There was men dressed so queerly, with
long staves in their hands —the Yeomen of the Guard —who showed
the visitors where persons Ave read of in history were imprisoned.
Then the various kinds of armor were arranged in distinctive col-
lections, according to the various periods; while there w'ere all
sorts of weapon—swords, and daggers, and axes, with breast and
back places. I saw the torture-room and the awful block and the
axe which cut off the heads. It was too grim an atmosphere in
which to think of either honor or glory in that fortress of chapels,
and vaults and recesses, with dungeons about and beneath the
building. What scenes some must have gone through while in
their prison lodging. 1 saw the Queen’s crown and her sceptre,
which is said to be made of pure gold, and ever so many more
things of which I have forgotten the names. There was quite a
fence all round them, and some of the guards were watchful all
the time. There were kings and knights on horseback, just as it
they Avere off to the Avar. It Avould haA T e taken a Aveek to see it
all. One thing I AA'ill never forget. Just as I AA’as coming out at the
gate one of the officials in charge of the place came after me and
touched me on the shoulder, lie asked if I had lost my keys. 1
looked in my handbag and found that I had. He said if I w'ould
come back I could haA-e them. I was thankful, for otherwise 1
should have had to have the locks of my trunks taken off. 1
asked him hoAV he knew that I had lost the keys. He replied
that he kneAV that I Avas a stranger, as he had neA T er seen me
there before.
“But,” I said, “the place AA*as croAvded.”
“Yes,” he replied, “but most of those people come here every
day.”
I only saw a feAV of the sights of London. I could not imagine
being in London as everything seemed so uncertain there. What a
place to be alone in London is. I decided to go to Cambridge, or,,
rather, a place a little out of Cambridge, called March. All irfy
curiosity in that great city of London AA'as lost amid my tangled
affairs. I made enquiry and found out about the train service. 1
determined that anyAvay I Avould chance seeing the people, although
I hardly expected that they wouid care to see me after Avhat had
occurred. I kneAV I had loved and suffered, but I had not sinned.
Then w'hy should I not see them? I arrived at what seemed a AA'ay-
side station Avhen it Avas a bit late. I asked Avher e Mr. Geroge
Allen’s house Avas, and AA r as told that his farm AA'as three miles
distant. There AA-as an hotel there, and I asked for a room for
the night. I did not want to meet people who might shoAv some
aloofness till the folloAving morning. In my portmanteaus there
Avas some printed matter, shoAA'ing that I had come from Australia.
The hotelkeeper came into the sitting-room and made enquiries as
to whether I had come from there, and alone, and Ave had a long
106
1 Arrive in London.


talk. He knew Mr. George. All went very well, and he told me
that either he or his wife would drive me over there next day.
It was quite cold although only May 2, there being no tire in the
room.
Both ladies and gentlemen, when Australia was mentioned,
became interested and the talk became general. 1 was asked all
sorts of questions. It came unexpectedly to me to learn how much
the people knew about the colony. 1 thought then that if the
young girls and women in Australia could have only heard the
manner in which those Englishmen spoke about them they would
have realised that this is an age of chivalry. According to them
tlie colonial girl can do anything.
In the morning, after breakfast, there was the little pony car-
riage, with a boy, to take me to Mr. Allen’s house. It had the
queer name of Hook farm. It was a lovely morning and all the
fields were white with daisies. The house was of two storeys and
near to the road side. Th e people promised to wait with the
carriage till I came out, if I could not stop there for a day or two.
Mrs. Allen came to the door and I told her who I was. She sent
for Mr. Allen, who was away on the farm. He soon arrived on
horseback. The very clasp of his hand made me long to claim
kinship with him. He went out and told the boy to bring my
portmanteau and I was kindly treated, I found that tney had
a photograph of me and, as he said, I was no imposition.
There was a large family. The lady was his second wife, and
she was nice too. They brought their friends to see me and took
me about. I only wanted to stop for a couple of days, as I was
anxious to get to Scotland, where any letters woum be waiting
for me, but I stayed over the Sunday. All the curios I had
brought from the Cape Mr. Allen had shown to the children at* the
Sunday-school, and altogether I had a pleasant time, so far ai
they could make it one, but still there was the thought as to why
John had brought his cousin to Adelaide to me. It seems that
she left her own husband in Oldham. Those regions did not
think it was right.
How faithful and true I could have been if life had only given
me the chance. In three days after w'e were married he went to
England and stayed there for three years. What was the use of
my married bfe? I had hardly strength of purpose to carry
anything through, I Avas sacrificed by ruthless hands, which took
from me all that I held dear, and left me without any claim or
right, except to submit to everything. Oh, the happy women who
are sheltered by a husband’s faithfulness! What woman could
have had a more useful life than I?
Mr. Allen drove me to the railway-station. The address 1 had
was for some people in Bradford, near Manchester. In the train
I had to keep showing my ticket every here and there. I told
them I was going to Bradford, and settled myself to have a good
107
I Arrive in London.


view of that beautiful country. When asked where I was going,
I said, “Bradford.” Trains and carriages were changed en route,
and at last I found myself in Bradford, in Yorkshire, Then I
showed my ticket and had it explained that the Bradford I
wanted was a continuation of Manchester. I learned when 1 got
there it bore the same relation as Xorth Adelaide to Adelaide.
I had some tea in the town of Bradford, and got back to Man-
chester that night at about 11 o'clock. The people I was to go to
were well known, as they kept the post and telegraph office. In
this Bradford there was no break, so far as buildings went, and
when I saw it afterwards it all seemed Manchester. Those kind
folks had a letter from Adelaide to inform them that I would
visit them, and expressing the hope that they would try and per-
suade the mother of the Adelaide lady, to return with me to Ade-
laide. I got a cab to take me there, but they had gone to bed.
How they did laugh when I told them I had gone to Yorkshire!
I was interested in writing in my note-book all the names of the
different places, but it was too much trouble to look at the ticket
so many times. However, it was a lesson for me not to neglect
the precaution again. Although the mistake was purely my own
the railway company did not make any charge, and I got all that
way back for the Manchester ticket. Mr. Allen got the ticket for
me.
Only A>r that incident I would not,have seen so mam' places.
The train stopped at Wakefield and Halifax. It was dark coming
back, and I had been in the train all that day, ‘so that I was
weary. I had the best bedroom and some supper, and when J
awoke in the morning there were all the little children in the
room to see the woman that came from aunty’s place over the
sea. There was the grandma, too, that I was to take back. She
shook her head and said —na, I am a true Briton; 1 will never
cross the sea. Here I was born, and here I will die.”
There was plenty to be seen in Manchester. Mr. Ride, with
whom I was staying, had a stationery and book shop, as well as
the post-office, and the high reputation of Mr. and Mrs. Ride was
acknowledged everywhere. They were well-known and respected.
He seemed to have the “entree” to all the warehouses, in some
of them I saw some busy-looking gentlemen, from Adelaide hurrying
about.
They took me to see the Bluecoat Boys’ School. I made no
note of that. I can see those dear boys now. Xo one could for-
get them. Then we went to Oldham and I did not like it so well.
It looked a poor place and gloomy, and the humble people wore
wooden clogs on their feet. The noise they made was distracting.
I stayed at Bradford with those people for a week. W hat
.with the people I was introduced to, the places visited, and the
hospitality and amusement I received, it was enough to make
108
I Arrive in London,


me forget who I was. For the month of May it was not so warm
£3 I had known it in Scotland at that time of the year. The
eldest son had the charge of the telegraph-office, and I had the
inner workings explained to me.
I RETURN TO MY OLD HUME.
It [was easy to get a train from. Manchester to Scotland, 1
went in the night train and had a nice sleeping compartment,
through to Glasgow, which I reached about 7 o’clock in the morn-
ing. I had been away for ten years, but the place looked so
familiar, except that they had tramcars running all over the place*
I got in one and was soon at Dr, Fargus’ house. A male attendant
opened the door and tola me that Mrs, Fargus was at their
Bummek b)o(use at the seaside, I asked for the daughter, and was
told that she was at home. She was a married lady now. I saw
her and she remembered me. I brought some wild flowers and
shells for her mother from th e Cape. She was pleased and told me-
that they expected her motuer back that night. She asked me to
stay, and so the first night in Scotland I was in what seemed to me
my old, old home. It was a rest indeed.
Mrs. Fargus returned, and I had much to tell. My listeners
looked appalled; I saw tears in that dear lady’s eyes, because of
the ungenerousness of my husband. They would have liked me to go
back to them again for all time, but I could not, however much i
wished to do so, and although it was indeed a home of gladness. I
slept that night in my same old bed. And the next day 1 went to see
Mr. White, whom I had letters for, at Mary Hill, with his sons.
He was in a bank in Glasgow, and he had a daughter in Adelaide.
They had but one word to say—Would I come there? They had no
other daughter. How they came clinging dose to hear every word
I could tell about their girl. There were three sons, and they
were in Scotch Volunteers and wore the kilts. In the evening
they brought a lot more in with kilts on to see a woman from
Australia. I had one letter sent there. It was from Captain Al-
stone not to let me forget, I went then through the Slamannan, and
after travelling about so much it did not seem far. For a time
the rush of memories was awful. I got into the old identical train
with a ticket for Slamannan. I cried all the way. I got there
early in the afternoon. I could see no one whom I knew when
I got out at the station, and I walked to th e village-, I saw ono
man whom I knew, and I made myself known to him. He took
me to his home. His daughters and I were playmates-as cnildren.
109
I Return to my Old Home.


In walking along with him I passed the house where we lived.
The door was open, and I could see the gooseberry bush that 1 had
planted. I was not in Mr. Boyd’s house five minutes before there
had gathered a crowd of the people whom I used to know. Cer-
tainly I was the object of so much eagerness and curiosity that it
was a comedy. They said they came for “auld lang syne.” They
questioned me as to whether I had seen Mr. So-and-So, who had
gone to Melbourne. And someone else who had gone to Queens-
land. My brother-in-law’s sister came and brought a large photo
of her brother’s place near Geelong, I remembered the man be-
fore he went there. They thought it strange I had not been to see
him, as he was a prosperous and a rich man.
In a way I wondered where th© young man was who had for
seven years played so big a part in my life. So full of bitter
memories was I that I was thankful to learn that he had gone to
Wales. I was glad I did not see him. What would be the use?
I shuddered at the thought. I was neither a wife nor a maid; I
was nothing. It was a hard fate; yet I loved my own husband.
He was so far from me and was lost for ever.
My visit to Slamannan was almost too much for me. I found
many kind friends to take me here and there till I was utterly
weary. I spent nearly all my time out of doors. As I stood again
amongst the wild heather for the time it seemed unreal and dream-
like.
After two weeks had passed I received a telegram, telling me
to be in London on a certain date. I knew where the ship was at
anchor. So I only stopped one more day in Glasgow and got back
by train to London. On board the City of Adelaide there were a
good many passengers returning, but I did not in any way have
to attend or do any act of waiting, except on the lady and her
little boy. I had a nice cabin to myself and every comfort, beside
a free passage for my services. The vessel was a few days in the
London docks, and I stopped on the ship with the lady. I saw
more of London than I had ever thought of seeing, with the captain
and his wife. They took me with them, and they were very good
to me. We all went to a market one afternoon; and, just think ot
it, I saw the tops of turnips sold at 4d. a pound. And as to the
meat, I will leave that.
I felt by the movement one morning while in bed that once
again we were passing through the Thames. How gently those
sailing vessels seem to go along if the wind is favorable, but the
City of Adelaide began to roll about soon after leaving the river.
There were more rough seas in her than when I was in the South
Australian. There was no note of calling anywhere en route. The
lady was a good sailor and they had a nice piano on board, which
the lady played and the captain sang. The captain and his wife
practised with firearms on the poop at night. She seemed to enjoy
it; they asked me if I would like to use the gun and try, so that it
110
I Return to my Old Home.


a mutiny should rise amongst the seamen there would be us three
with pistols. I would not, and I could not. Thanks be to good-
ness they were never wanted. I did not know what to think at
the time, but afterwards I thought that they were merely joking
Avith me and ne\~er thought any mutiny would rise. All Avent on so
evenly with nothing but the glittering sea about that 1 loved so
weU.
I had no time to Avrite much. The little boy's name was Roland,
and he and I Avere great friends. We went all over the ship, and
knew all the sails by name. To hear Roland calling out to the
men to “let go” this or that made everyone laugh. There Avas
a family returning to Adelaide, and one of their sons died when
about half-Avay through the voyage. It was very sorrowful, for it
came so suddenly. I knew the people. There a medical man
on board, which made us feel grateful. So the days slipped by.
The captain said Ave Avere rounding Cape Horn, and anyway the
ship got into a regular shoal of whales. It Avas awful, for wherever
you looked you would see those horrid monsters. It was a nice
calm morning, and I had Roland in my arms. He was in high
glee, and started to make a hissing noise like them as they sent
up jets of Avater, and th e ship shook. When the captain got his
gun and began shooting at them Ave Avere afraid of Avdiat they might
do after being shot at. So much of them AA r as under the water
that the shots might not have the desired effect of killing them. 1
never kneAV if any Avere killed or not, but how thankful I felt when
they left off firing. The nearness of the whales dazed us. Every-
one said it Avas out of the common to see so many. There A\as only
the sky aboA’e and the Avaters around, Avhile Ave AA r ere in AA’hat Avas
like an island of Avhales. There w-as a sense' of gratitude when I felt
the ship glide gently aAvay and leave those animals behind in a
cluster. Roland kept th e memory up all through the homeward
journey. He never tired of showing what the Avhales did. The
ship did not call in anywhere all the voyage, but from the birds Ave
saw there must have been land near at the time.
The young doctor’s name was Clark. He Avas coming to Adelaide
to practice. Someone told him I had been in South Australia,
and he got chatting wuth me about the health of the people and
the effect of the climate. I told him I had been in South
Australia for ten years, and that it had cost me nothing for medi-
cine in all that time, and that I had never to consult a doctor.
He said he hoped that there Avere not many more like me in Ade-
laide, or he Avould have to go back. I learnt the name of the
place he went to, but I have forgotten it. He shot a large bird and
gave the skin to me. I had it made into a muff, and it is as good
to day as it AA r as at first.
All the talk Avas concerning the time when the ship would be in
port. Needless to say I had nothing hopeful to remember, and I
I Return to my Old Home.


knew there would be little pleasure to have, as all had changed.
Life had now no allurements for me, and the outside world no
temptations. I could not help these feelings as tne City of Ade-
laide was towed into Port Adelaide.
I REACH ADELAIDE AGAIN.
It was night, and I thought I w'ould stop on board all night,
but the friends who gave me the letters to Manchester came on
the ship to see me aud had mv luggage taken to their place. I was
glad, as Mrs. Alstone was going to some friends. I sent word to
my people where they would find me in the morning. My few re-
latives were by my side a nen I awoke in the morning, and seeing,
how happy they were I forgot my own sorrow'. 1 knew that life
had once more its depths that not even the nearest could sound.
It would not bear thinking about. It was only to be borne. 1
felt I must work, although I did not think I would begin that day,
but I did. Before I got out of the train at the Adelaide station
the gentleman who had the management of the club at the port
where I lived up to the time I went as stewardess came to me and
said he was in trouble for the want of someone to help at a banquet
at the Semaphore. He had been to Adelaide and could not find
any skilful help. Would I come back with him, he said; and I did;
and let my friends take care of my belongings. I had really done no
work of that kind all the time I was away, and after chree months
on the rolling ship it was so strange to find everything firm under
my foot. Both this gentleman and his dear wife were friends to
me through after years.
So I began w T ork the first day I came back, and I have had te
stick to it ever since. Sometimes I have been in actual need ot
money. I had always lent a helping hand in the years gone
by, and sometimes those I wanted to help did not seem to
have the energy they might have had. What knowledge 1
had gained I have paid a high price for, and I must confess
that the kindly appreciation that I have received from people
of the highest culture has often given me joy. If I could not
get the kind of place I wanted I determined to take anything
to keep me going. A position as cook at the Adelaide Hospital
was offered to me. A woman-cook could do the work then,
and I went at good wages. I liked it all right, except that
it was so depressing. I saw too much of sufferings, for 1
went all about the wards, and if anyone was brought in whom
I knew, whether it was fever or anything else, when I could
112
I Reach Adelaide Again.


get the chance I would go and see them. If I was caught
by the doctors I would be severely reproved.
There were no indications that the broken pieces of my life
as a wife would be mended. Still a castaway, I w-ent and
saw my husband. He did not want me. He lived with his
atmt, and his cousin was there too. If a husband is one to
protect you, to watch over and defend and love you; It
such be a husband, then I have never known what it is to
have one. For me there was only solitude and bitter anguish,
and yet nobody must be made acquainted with the fact. I
must put on a smiling face and go wherever I might so long
as I did not come in wnere I was not wanted, I was not
afraid of misery, but only of sin. I w r ould not do anything
wrong, and I wanted to know how to do right when others
do me a wrong. I determined that I would try and get
through life wdthout reproach or any stain on my reputation,
and make the most of what I knew. I had lessons on one
thing and another. I liked to be dainty in my home and
person and dress, as well as I could in every detail. lam fond,
too, of being a good housekeeper. My employers spoilt me and
often made a friend of me.
Some are here still wdio remember that I had the kind
regard both of the doctors and the nurses, as well as of the
patients at the Adelaide Hospital, They liked the way I did
their food. It looked a big thing for me to take in hand; but
it was not so heavy as some would think, there being three
men in the kitchen to do all the cleaning. I had not a
heavy thing to lift. The only drawback was that the floors
were stone and so hard to stand on. The place has been much
built upon, since then, and is so changed in the manner ot
employment in the office. When I pass the place now all
comes back to me so plain. In particular one night stands
out. I always left a jet of gas burning in my room. Once
a woman patient came in with her clothing tied up in a bundle
and asked me if I would come with her to catch the
firalin. I could see that she w-as off her head, so I quietly
dressed and got the night-nurse. How she got on afterwards
I never knew'. There are some things which I shall never
forget. I became accustomed to the situation and stopped at
the hospital for some time. It did not matter where I was
in my tangled affairs.
I wrote to my brother-in-law’s brother in Geelong and
told him about my visit to his relatives in Slamannan,
and I made known to him that I -would like to see hia
nice place in Geelong, and his wife and family, for they had
twelve children. So he wrote and told me he would come
to Adelaide and bring one of his daughters -with him, and
113
I Reach Adelaide Again.


take me back with them to Geelong. Before they came I had
got the position of housekeeper at Messrs. J. Miller Ander-
son & Co.’s in Hindley-street, and for more than two years
everything went on smoothly. How delightful it would ha\ e
been except for some things I saw and heard. The Theatre
Royal was so close that I could see the cast of characters from
my bedroom window at night. There were more than a
hundred assistants to provide for, but only twelve for break-
fast. I had a girl to help. The sweet memory of those
times remains. How earnest everyone was to make me happy.
My employers did not know that I was a discarded wife
till I was there for over two years. It was more to my
taste than the Adelaide Hospital, there being always some-
thing amusing to divert me. On more than one occasion people
have come into my sitting-room to enquire the way back to the
theatre. They got out in the right-of-way and got lost.
My friend and his daughter came from Geelong. it
was a break for me, and he was glad to learn something of the
old home. I promised that I would go to his place when
I left Hindley-street, for it was rumored that the place
used as dining-rooms and for sleeping purposes would have
to be taken into the business premises. Then, as in all the
other business houses, the assistants would have to dine
out. How I would like to give a full account of those
times. I was sorry and reluctant to say a last good-bye.
They all gathered together and gave me a generous present.
Then I went to Mr. Mac Harry’s place at Lara, near Geelong.
I thought if I liked it there I would try and get something
to do. They were just building the railway to that part then.
I went by steamer, and Mr. Mac Harry came to Melbourne
to meet me. His house looked a nest of comfort I could see
as we drew near. It was part farmhouse, and I was per-
fectly at home with the hostess and her family at once. Both
the daughters and the sons had horses, and could ride and
drive. Not only that, but those girls could make their own
bread and play the piano and sing. So I had entertainers,
and such lovely home-made bread. The You Yangs Moun-
tains were near. If I could have got to the top what a sight
it would have been. I did not care much for Geelong. It
was all so quiet, and I could see nothing to suit me, so that
question was settled. Those friends showed to me all the
places of interest, and, in particular, all the mills where
blankets and other woollens and tweeds were made. Mr.
Mac Harry was one of the town councillors, and no stranger
Avherever he went. It was quite right about him being a nch
man. He made money by lime-burning. I have been there
since by rad, and it is a nice place. You can go fishing or
shooting so close to Geelong and Melbourne.
114
I Reach Adelaide Again.


There was only one thing to be said, and that concerns the
impossibility of breaking away from my relationships. The
time came when I could not bear to think that John should
think them beneath him. What was in himself that he was
entitled to scorn my poor relations? Everyone may not have
the marvellous gifts that some think they have, but, at least,
we are human beings with our own necessities and demands no
less important than those of such marvellous persons. That
is why we must remember our obligations.
HOUSEKEEPER AT GOVERNMENT HOUSE.
Before I came back from Geelong I learned that they
wanted a housekeeper at the Government House, Adelaide.
I was advised to apply for the position. The Frenchman who
was chef there when I was there told me that 1 knew enough
for the position. It would be open for a month, and I put
my name down amongst a long list of others, and sent in my
testimonials even to that of being a stewardess and lady’s
Thaid. They sent for me, and I told them that I was there
before, only as a young girl to do as I was told. I did not
think I would be competent, but I promised to try for a month,
and said that I would like to have some skilled help for all the
large public functions. I knew so well what Government House
was in festive times. We were at Marble Hill when my month
was up. They were satisfied, and told me I could consider
myself permanently employed if agreeable to me.
It would not do for me to attempt to describe the sayings
and doings of that big house. 1 had to be in evidence
at all times both to see and to speak to distinguished
visitors, and often eminent celebrities. I did not find the
work hard, but there was plenty of brain worry. After 1 had
been there a year and a half the Governor and the lady,
too, thought I was capable to arrange for all the banquets
and large parties by myself, it was overpowering sometimes
because of the late nights and the want of sleep. To cater
for a thousand at one time meant a lot of consideration. I
have known a; hundred for dinner. I had been at work all
the time and seldom ever went out. Government House had
none too many appliances for those big affairs. They have
had both a duchess and also a countess there when they were
staying on a visit. They would come and see the kitchen.
One grand lady said that her cook could not do like that
115
Housekeeper at Government House.


with such, appliances. I could see by the way the lady
spoke that someone wanted my position, and I thought it was
like my fate. There was always someone wanted whatever
I had. So I left Government House, but not in bad friends.
I think the}” were doubtful whether the person would suit.
They asked if I -would come back if my successor did not
do things rightly. I forget what I said, but I felt cross.
I went to see a gentleman and lady who had the manage-
ment of the Largs Pier Hotel. It was Mr. Hixon. I had
lived with them at the Port Adelaide Club before I -went to
England, Mrs. Hixon was not very well, and they asked me
if I would come as housekeeper. I admit that I rather
liked the idea of going there. It was a large hotel, and 1
would have to see to a number of employes, to engage them
or dismiss them, as the case may be. I had found Mr, and
Mrs. Hixon in past years straight and upright and sincere.
1 felt at home with them. I was not long at my new duties
before I received word from Government House that the
person who succeeded me did not know enough for them
there. I did not go back, as I was very comfortable where
I was, and Mr. and Mrs. Hixon had the greatest confidence in
me. It was a change and the sea was near, so that we often
went out for a sail in one of the many boats available for us
on the jetty.
I RETURX TO MY HU SPA AD.
Two or three times while I was at Government House I
had seen my husband, and had learned that the woman who
rightly or wrongly had come between us had gone back to her
own people. One day someone came and told me that John
had gone to America. It upset all I was doing. It was
nearly ten j T ears since I had become his wife. I did not know
what to think sometimes. It required some forgiving and
forgetting, but if he were in any trouble I am quite sure
I would go to him. Guess my astonishment when one even-
ing a maid came to my room and said there was a gentleman
who -wanted to see me. It was an unusual incident for any
gentleman to look for me in my own quarters, so 1 came and
saw my husband coming towards me. I hurried forward
co meet him as if w e had never parted. He pleaded to let
bygones be bygones, and come and live with him. A feeling
of reassurance and content took possession of me, and 1
116
I Return to my Husband.


began to cherish hopes of happiness yet. I had often said
to myself, "How can I live in this world alone?”
In the morning I told Mr. Hixon that I was going home
to my husband. They were too humane to say no to me, so
in a week’s time I was with John in a wee house in Ghilders-
street. North Adelaide. The house had only two rooms, and
was back from the street. I hoped we would be able to get
something better some day. One of Professor Tate’s daugh-
ters was about to be married, and came one day and asked
me if I would prepare a wedding feast in Ruxton-street. I
•did so. The ladies who saw me do that work then for
the first time in my life enquired if I would give lessons on
cookery. Mrs. Tate gave the use of her kitchen and stove,
a,nd my first students were there. Soon I found myself with
more employment than I could manage in helping families in their
own homes when they had company. There was still dis-
satisfaction with the person who went to my place at Govern-
ment House, and I was sent for to see if I would come backt
They had changed more than once since I left. 1 did no;
know what to do, but I promised her ladyship before she went
back to England that I would go to the Government House
in case of emergency while she was gone. The Governor
was in the room at the time, and he must have thought that
I said I would come back permanently. He went away to
some of the other colonies and sent a telegram to me to say
that he would expect me to take charge as housekeeper when
he came back. I was to send an arnswer yes or no. I
thought that I would go in and out daily, and that I could
srill keep on our little home, and that I could explain every-
thing when I could see Sir William. I sent word, ‘‘Yes/'
and when he came back I was sent for. Nothing would
do, however, except for me to come in the house. 1 asked
him what was to happen to my husband, and he said, “Let
him come here too. There are plenty of rooms.” He added
that my husband could live there because of my services,
and it would make no difference in my payment. So I went
to where my husband was working and told him. He dad
not seem over-pleased at th e idea of living at Government
House, but we both thought it would not be for long, so we
put our things in some friend’s place and we both went into
the house. That was the third time I had been there to live,
and it did not seem strange to me.
There being no restraint on my husband we had nothing
to complain of. He had a nice large room, where he had
meetings in his capacity as secretary of the Rechabites, and
he had his auditors there time after time just as if he were in his
own home. We lived there for more than two years. My hus-
band’s work was in the city just close by. I never had any time
117
I Return to my Husband.


to join any of those societies. No one could be less dependent
on outward society than I was. I could enjoy it, but 1 never
craved after it, as it was not necessary for my very existence.
I had to give all and expect nothing. Still, 1 think that every
individual has a right to some festivity, even if he does
not belong to some sisterhood or brotherhood.
The lady did not come back as soon as I had hoped she
would, and Sir William wag restless. He was no sooner at
Marble Hill than he would take it in his head 'to be off to
the Bay or somewhere else. I was all the time rushing about
with maids and men. I got weary of it, and gave a month's
intimation that I would like to leave if he could get
someone in my place. So my husband and I set about to
look for a house, and decided on the one in which I live.
It was in a very unfinished state, and I helped my husband
to put it in order. We worked hard to make it a comfortable
home, which I thought was for both of us. I knew I could be
helpful. I went out to work wherever I could as a profes-
-sional cook, and had a ladies’ class in the house. Then there
was an advertisement for someone to teach cookery at the
School of Mines. I got that office, and was there for 14 years
as cookery instructress. In spite of the past 1 worked on with
pleasure, looking forward to that future which has never come.
Time went on peacefully for some years. Teaching brought
me in contact with people superior to myself and with the
nicest of ladies. I was pleased, for it was good for me, who
had been tossed about from early girlhood, and I was thank-
ful for my home. But even when youth is past life is still
full of surprises. What a bitter thing is jealousy. If you
have one taste all that comes after is poisoned. That is the
worst of it.
YET ANOTHER PARTING.
My husband took care that I should not see or enjoy any
of the pleasures in the many societies to which he be-
longed. And with curiosity I why others who
were not sisters of the order were going here and there. 1
was out of everything. Then I began to have anonymous
letters, which I would not take any notice of for a long time.
But when I saw things for myself all was at an end. One
discovery led to another. About three years ago I let him
go where his heart is. He was nice to me once. lam
118
Yet Another Parting.


not the sort of woman to be satisfied with half-measures. We
parted. I get my own living the best way I can. In all those
trying years of my life I only once appealed to anyone to
help me. I asked him if he could help, as I thought he was
a good man. Some plan was hit upon, and he must have had
a share in the scheme whereby I have been left to struggle
in bitterness all alone. When people have come to me and
told me to say nothing about what has been done to me, and
that it is golden to be silent, how little they have known the
pain that is in memory when all we prize hag gone. Some
have tried to console me by telling me that “they are glad they
are not me.”
I need not say that all this sort of sympathy is madness.
I am happy to say that I have the best balm for sorrow. 1
have a busy life. There ig something sad in the kind of friend-
ships that have to be watched by the inquisitive who sit
down and write about their suspicions to destroy other people's
lives. I could not bend to all without some resistance. I was
baffled at every turn. This “sisterly and brotherly" may be
very innocent, and if I had been allowed to go to some of the
public gatherings I would not have been so jealous.
We make environment and get blocked. Do not reproach
me with ingratitude, but I am at war sometimes with my long
life of toil now lam by myself alone. “Words, words, words."
Some things are too hard either to write about or to speak of.
J. L. Bonython & Co., Printers, “The Advertiser” Office, Adelaide.
119
Yet Another Parting.






r , v fJ
v „-- r ... - • r- , 1 •
’ ~ ,■ .-■: :■; .■■.■■‘.'i r ■.■■■■-''■. , V
v ... '■ ' / -\<> H ‘,i H
■ r ■ /■'i r . Vt V .» -MSsfe
