

Comraoiußealtn of Australia
sa*rur
EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.
No. 4.]
[l9Ol.
MONDAY, 28 JANUARY.
Prime Minister’s Office,
Sydney, 28th January, 1901.
~|~IS Excellency the Governor-General directs that it be notified, for general infor-
mation, that he has received from The Right Honourable the Secretary of
State for the Colonies the following intimation confirming the melancholy intelligence
published in previous Gazette Extraordinary :
“ It is with profound regret that I have to inform you of the demise of Her late
Most Gracious Majesty QUEEN VICTORIA. Her Majesty expired at Osborne House at
six thirty in the afternoon of the 22nd instant, to the great affliction of the Royal Family
and of all classes of Her Majesty’s subjects.”
“His present Majesty has been proclaimed KING EDWARD THE SEVENTH
with all the usual formalities.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
EDMUND BARTON.


A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS it hath pleased Almighty God to call to His mercy our late Sovereign Lady
QUEEN VICTORIA, of blessed and glorious memory, by whose decease the Imperial Crown
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and all other Her late Majesty s is
solely and rightfully come to the High and Mighty Prince Albert Edward : We, John Adrian Louis,
Earl of Hopetoun, the Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia ; Edmund Barton,
Prime Minister and His Majesty’s Minister of State for External Affairs of the said Common-
wealth ) and Alfred Deakin, His Majesty's Attorney General of the said Commonwealth, therefore
do now hereby, with one full voice and concert of tongue and heart, publish and proclaim that
the High and Mighty Prince Albert Edward is now, by the death of our late Sovereign, of happy
and glorious memory, become our only lawful and rightful Liege Lord EDWARD THE SEVENTH,
by the Grace of God King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, Emperor of India, Supreme Lord in and over the Commonwealth of Australia, to whom we
do acknowledge all faith and constant obedience with all hearty and humble affection, beseeching God,
by Whom Kings and Queens do reign, to bless the Royal Prince EDWARD THE SEVENTH
with Jong and happy years to reign over us.
Given at Government House, Sydney, this twenty-eighth day of January, in the year of
our Lord one thousand nine hundred and one, and in the first year of His Majesty s
Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING!
HOPETOUN,
Governor-General.
EDMUND BARTON.
ALFRED DEAKIN.
Prime Minister’s Office,
Sydney, 28th January, 1901.
HIS Excellency the Governor-General directs that it be notified, for general information, that
he has been informed by Despatch from The Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, that the Funeral of Her late Most Gracious Majesty QUEEN VICTORIA will take
place on the 2nd February, and that an order for General Mourning has been issued, which states
that all persons are expected to put themselves into deepest mourning from the 2bth January.
By His Excellency’s Command,
.. ' EDMUND BARTON.
Prime Minister’s Office,
Sydney, 28th January, 1901.
HIS Excellency the Governor-General directs that it be notified that he caused to be despatched
to The Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies, on the 23rd instant, a
telegram of which the following is a copy ;
“My Ministers join with me in expressing for the whole population of the Commonwealth, as
well as for ourselves, intense grief for the loss sustained by His Majesty the King, His
Royal Consort, the Prince and Princess of Wales, and the Members of the Royal Tamily,
in the death of the Great and Good Sovereign of whom the Empire and all civilised
humanity have been bereft.”
And that His Excellency has this day received the following reply from The Right Honourable
the Secretary of State for the Colonies;—
“ I have received His Majesty’s Command to convey cordial thanks of Himself and Royal
Family for kind expression of sympathy of yourself, your Ministers, and People of the
Commonwealth on the lamented death of Her Majesty QUEEN VICTORIA.
By His Excellency’s Command,
EDMUND BARTON.
Prime Minister’s Office,
Sydney, 28th January, 1901.
HIS Excellency the Governor-General directs that it be notified that he has this day received
a Despatch from The Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies in the
following terms : /
“His Majesty the King and the Royal Family are deeply touched by the numerous messages
of sympathy received from Public Bodies, Associations, &c., throughout Australia. lam
commanded to request that you will convey their thanks to those who have telegraphed
through you.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
EDMUND BARTON.
NEW SOUTH WALES
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth op Australia, by William Applegate Gullick,
at Phillip-street, Sydney, 28th January, 1901.
[Price, 6J.j
