

o^lie
TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE, THE EARL OF ABERDEEN,
PRIME MINISTER
OF THE
UNITED KINGDOM OE GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.
THIS MEMORIAL
OF THE
TENANTS OF THE CROWN IN VICTORIA
sac^cctfullij
THAT we, the undersigned Tenants of the Crown in Victoria, regret to observe that a small section of our
body have addressed a Memorial to his late Excellency, Charles J. La Trobe, Esq., in which they have expressed
their willingness to make concessions which we consider may (unless disclaimed) prove detrimental to our claims.
We therefore deny that such views as are expressed in the eighth paragraph of that Memorial, regarding the pre-
emptive right, are the views of our body generally.
That your Memorialists, in referring to the orders in Council of March 9, 1847, would point out that the sixth
section prohibits the sale of any land, prior to the refusal of it at a fair value by the Lessee. That the seventh
section describes the land which the Governor has th q power of refusing to sell; and the eight section defines such
lands as may be reserved from sale for public purposes : it is therefore obvious that the Lessee has the right to
demand to purchase any portion of his run at a fair value, except such portions as may have peculiar advantages of
water frontage, or that may be required for public purposes.
That by the eleventh section your Memorialists were entitled to demand Leases, which demand they made in
conformity with the regulations; that their demands were admitted. That many of your Memorialists were put to
great expense and trouble in the survey and description of their runs, and were subjected to vexatious and expensive
litigation in the settlement of their boundaries, under the jurisdiction of the ?Disputed Boundaries Com-
missioners.?
That the local proclamations regarding the transfer of runs, and of tenders for runs, made
and induced large investments in runs.
V-/
That in the 3rd section the mode of valuation gives the Governor the power of appointing
counteracts every apparent advantage the Lessee may possess.
That while your Memorialists deprecate the evasive construction put upon some vital parts
them marketable
Orders in
Council, by His Grace the Duke of Newcastle in his recent dispatch on that question ; they consider that greatei
< blame is to be attached to the local Executive, who violated the law, by refusing to give the Lessee the
the exercise of his option to purchase, and afterwards selling the lands he applied for to private parties for
speculative purposes.
- -
