

1
L v
■ /* , .
11
_
or r u;
ATE MR LACHLAN FRASER
-v ) ;• ' •r,
.. .. «
)jSi]fc I M>V aii;■n a TM
r i f,
' i: -^
PREACHED IN




1A335*/ f(Y4oG
I, U,^2-
MORIAL SERMON.
»«!«'
“ Zei me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end he
like his.” —Numbers xxitl, 10.
The approaching close of each successive year, when accompanied
by the decease of old and familiar friends, naturally impresses on our
consideration the solemn and sovereign decree by which “it has been
appointed unto all men once to die.” And in musing on this consideration
is not the prayer of our text echoed responsively in every bosom ?
To the wish thus expressed how forcibly are we constrained to append
a heart-uttered and heart-confirmed Amen !
Yet, notwithstanding the sincerity or fervour of tire wish so
breathed forth, no higher or better state of feeling may be indicated
by it, than the feeling in which expression was originally given to it
by Balaam. For whatever in other respects may be thought or said
of him—of his earnestness in giving utterance to this wish there can
be no reasonable doubt. It was no vague or formal exclamation of
sentimental hypocrisy. The words so fervently spoken were -no mere
words of course. Nor was his earnestness herein at variance with
the fact that he loved and was trying to earn “ the wages of un-
righteousness.” The sentiments thus cherished were unquestionably
conflicting. But through the deceitfulness of the carnal heart, how
many fail to apprehend, the contradictions which sentiments so
discordant involve? How common is the secretly cherished thought
that the main object or purport of both desires— i. e. —of the wish to
die the death of the righteous, and a longing to share in the wages
of unrighteousness,—is at least in part attainable.
At the same time, let me urge you to note with attention the
terms employed respectively to character ise these two opposing desires.
Balaam loved the wages of unrighteousness ; but his prayer that he
might die the death of the righteous—despite its momentary fervor—•
was simply the utterance of a passiny ivish. And wheresoever the
two states of feeling so co-exist, or are entertained side by side, the
wish is of necessity over-borne and out-mastered in its practical force
and influence by the love. True, the object wished for, may far exceed
in value and importance the object loved. Yet, none the less, the
love is powerfully effective to take precedence of the wish. In the
better judgment of the men who so “halt between two opinions,”
there may be a conviction lying deep down in their souls, that it were
well if the wish could take or assert for itself the place of the love—or
better still, if it could be transformed into, or could altogether
overpower and suppress the love. But (as is well known) mere
intellectual apprehensions, however clear or strong, are invariably
overweighted by waem, emotional attachments, however unreasonable


or indefensible. In all such conflicts of feeling the head is no match
for the heart. Hence, even heathen moralists could perceive and
affirm that “ while receiving and approving the better part, we may
often be tempted to follow and practise the worse ” An incident
recorded in the note book of an English traveller supplies striking-
confirmation of this fact even as regards concerns purely temporal.
While passing through the uplands of Norway, the traveller on accosting
a labourer engaged in cultivating a comparatively barren patch by
the wayside was surprised to discover that the homely clad rustic
could speak English with fluent accuracy: and in the course of further
conversation he learned that the poor Norwegian, whose laborious toil
now barely enabled him to eke out a scanty living, had in his earlier
days emigrated for a time to America. Nor according to his own ac-
knowledgment had lie been a disappointed emigrant. He had liked
the climate of the new land, had had good and encouraging prospects of
success, and believed it would have been in every way to his ad-
vantage to have remained in the foreign home. “ Why then did you
leave it and return to such a condition of comparative straitness and
penury as you plainly have here ? ” How expressive was the simple
reply! “O, Sir, I liked America, but I loced Norway, and can you
marvel that my love was too strong for my liking.” Very certainly will
it always be so, when the things loved are things seen and palpable,
while the things liked or vaguely admired are things unseen and
spiritual.
Highly perilous is it accordingly to be satisfied with a mere lik-
ing for what is good and right. None but hardened scoffers will mock
at the “ great concern,” 01 hold it in open derision. Our chief danger
lies in that spirit of lukewarm formalism, which evaporates or passes
away in idle wishes and dreamy hopes - formalism, which would like at
times—would fain like to have part in the great salvation, but which is
held back by its love of the world from putting forth any earnest and
consistent effort to make sure of its liking. In brief, its likings are
practically narcotic, or sleep-inducing make-believes, by which the
conscience is drugged into a state of delusive peace and security.
In other instances a different ground of hope is rested on by men,
who have kindred likings, or who foster a kindred spirit of lukewarm
self-satisfaction. During what are known as the dark ages of European
history, kings and warriors, whose lives had been spent in dissipation
and bloodshed, on becoming apprehensive of approaching death, were
wont to repair to some neighboring convent, that they might take the
vows, and put on the garb of monks, in the belief that by being clothed
at their death in such sacred vestments they were sure to find a ready
admission into Paradise. Belief so ignorant naturally provokes a.
smile ; and from our knowledge of the prevailing habits and modes of
conventual life we would be slow to regard the wearing of a monkish
dress as forming a reliable passport to Heaven. Yet, can any better
estimate be reasonably formed of the majority of what are often spoken
of approvingly as evidences of death-bed repentance? To what-—if
its origin and practical reality could be fitly tested—would such re-


pentance be for the most part found to amount, or of what would it
generally be found to consist? To what, or of what, except the
assuming oj a character sadly belied by the previous history of its
wearers, and which, if only they had been spared, might have been no
less grossly blurred and stained by their after conduct. Fitly hath
it been said, “Of little value in themselves are the sentiments to which
a man may give expression in the anxious prospect of his latter end.
Tell us rather what he was and did while enjoying the oppor-
tunity, and hoping to have prolonged opportunity of living
and labouring for the Lord. What the Master asks for is not
the warmly accorded homage of dying contrition; no, but that we
“present our bodies to Him as a living sacrifice.” Tims was it very
notably with him, whose recent removal we this day mourn—yet
mourn in the exercise of a sorrow largely mingled with believing joy.
Throughout the course of a comparatively long and quietly consistent
life—a life which had well nigh reached the full limit of “three score years
and ten ” the great aim and purpose of his being was to spend his
powers and his influence in works of active, devoted Christian useful-
ness. His religious faith was eminently operative and practical.
This naturally leads us to consider more definitely what, when
rightly understood, is implied in “dying the death of the righteous.”
(I.) The righteous die in a state of conscious acceptance with
Hod. “ Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.”
No claim do they lay or can they intelligently lay to unspotted, sin-
less perfection. Yet, at the bar of the Great Lawgiver, no perver-
sity or iniquity is charged against them. They have not only
been forgiven, but justified ; yea, stamped with the seal of adopt-
ing love. Through covenant union with Christ they have become as-
sured possessors of these high privileges.
Such is the high position of those who fall asleep in Jesus ; and in
regard to them how triumphantly is it asked by Paul, “ Who shall lay
anything—not, be it observed, any grave charge or any flagrant
delinquency—but anything to the charge of God’s elect ? ”
Sir Richard Whittington, when Mayor of London, entertained
Henry Vat the Guildhall in a style of princely magnificence. The
fire-pans in the Hall were piled up with logs of sweet scented wood,
which when burning gave forth a delicious fragrance. But the sweet-
ness of this fragrance was specially enhanced when bringing forth
bonds, which had been signed by the King for L 60,000 (a sum then
equal in value to nearly a million in our day), Whittington casting
these bonds into the midst of the blazing logs, openly declared that it
gave him special pleasure by this means and in this manner to make
a full discharge of his sovereign’s obligations. Thus, too, brethren,
has “the hand-writing of ordinances, which was nailed to the cross”
been obliterated. By the tire kindled on Calvary all the final obliga-
tions of believers have been conclusively discharged. In this view of
its effect the smoke of that fire had truly “a sweet smelling savour.”
Blessed are they whose garments have been perfumed with its atoning
and justifying odour.


Death accordingly has not only been despoiled of all power to
harm believers, it excites within them a lively hope of immortality.
It comes to them not as an executioner of legal penalties, but as a
messenger of grace sent to conduct them to glory. At times, indeed,
its outward aspect may be formidable, and a chilly horror may creep
over their spirit, on finding themselves entwined in its snaky folds, and
pierced by its envenomed fangs. But while its fatal virus destroys
the vitality of their bodily frame, it can do no injury to their immortal
nature. The sting of death is sin, and through tire faith ministered
application “of the blood of sprinkling” an effective antidote to sin's
soul-destroying poison has been secured.
“Hast thou found me—O mine enemy !” is the appropriate ex-
clamation of all who are unprepared for the attack of the last adver-
sary. Not so the dying believer. The first chilling sensations of
death’s icy grasp should but nerve him to say, perchance with a faint
smile, or in a low-toned whisper, what as the struggle advances he
may obtain boldness to shout aloud in a tone of unfaltering triumph, “O
death where is thy sting?” The wound which death inflicts qn the
unrighteous is alas ! altogether incurable. But how marvellously dif-
ferent its effect on them who are accepted in Christ. In dissolving
their vile bodies it but makes them fit to be changed into the likeness
of the glorious body of their Great Covenant Head. Through His
mediation and by reason of His victory over the last enemy, they too,
are made more than conquerors.
Advisedly do we say “made more than conquerors.” Bor what,
in respect to them, are death’s unfailing consequences? It puts an
end to all the'r fleshly ills, an end to their labors and fatigues, an
end to their sicknesses and griefs, an end to their infirmities and
burdens, an end to their disappointments and fears, an end to their
crosses and conflicts. As dwellers in the land into which death
leadeth them they shall never have cause to say : “We are pained or
sick.” The sun shall not smite them by day, and “there shall be no
night there.” How welcome to the toil-worn laborer is the enjoyment
of calm dreamless rest ! How refreshing to the patient, tossed by
racking pain or restlessly agitated by burning fever, is the soothing
quietude of balmy slumber ! Yet to him whose earthly turmoil has
been brought to an end, by laying his head on Jesus’ bosom, much
sweeter and more welcome is the placid stillness of the grave.
“Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord.” Resting from their labors,
“they enter into peace.”
How well-founded, moreover, is the hope of the righteous with
respect to this heritage. It rests not alone on the mercy or com-
passion of God, but mainly on His truth and faithfulness. Never
can the conditions of the treaty into which the Father hath entered
with His Son be forgotten or violated. No word spoken at any time
by Him can be broken, and still less (if the comparison be admissible)
can any word be broken, which has been ratified by Emmanuel’s
all-perfect surety—work and merit. And with what special emphasis-


does,the word so ratified testify tliat “for them who are in Christ
there is no condemnation.” Heaven is their purchased home; heirs
of glory, their ineffaceably-recorded destiny.
Strong confidence lias been often fitly reposed in the honour of
men whose word was understood to be their bond. Napoleon 1.,
while reviewing his troops in Paris, in a moment of unguarded
forgetfulness, dropped his reins on his horse’s neck, which instantly
rushed off at a gallop. The Emperor grasped the saddle in order to
retain his seat, and at this eventful moment a common soldier, leaping
in front of the horse at the peril of his life, seized hold of the bridle
and handed it back respectfully to his sovereign. “ Much obliged to
you, Captain,” said Napoleon, with a courtly smile. “ Captain,”
aptly responded the soldier, seizing the word as it fell, “ Captain of
what regiment, Sire?” Charmed with the faith in his honour thus
artfully avowed, the Emperor, with kindred quickness, responded,
“ Captain of my Guards,” and then hurried away. Such was the
outcome of faith in a fellow-man, faith in the dignity of his position,
in the magnanimity of his nature, in his power and willingness to do
whatever lie had promised, even although the promise involved in it
a great and unexpected boon. And by such faith—faith simple and
unfaltering—was our departed friend very signally characterised.
He had attained, and was unpretendingly ready to avow not only the
firmly-based assurance of faith, but the higher faith of a decided
personal assurance. Fully warranted did he feel himself to say,
“My beloved is mine, and 1 am His.” Hence, even amid the
struggling agony of life’s expiring throes, his end was unbroken peace,
—“ the peace which passeth understanding, and keepeth the mind
and heart through Christ.”
(II.) Once more, be it observed : The righteous at their death are
made personally meet for their heavenly inheritance.
While still in the body the most eminent Christians are com-
passed about with infirmities. “ Who can understand his errors,” or
may venture to affirm that there are sins which nothing could induce
or prevail on him to commit ? The most prudent may be tempted
to speak unadvisedly; the most diligent and painstaking may be
tempted to give way to unseasonable indolence: the most steadfast
and courageous may be tempted to become timid and faint-hearted:
the most energetic and zealous may succumb to a feeling of languor
and drowsiness : the most circumspect may be surprised by the
Tempter at unawares.
But once that their fleshly bodies have been laid down, the
righteous will be free from all such enfeeblements. No easily assail-
able points are to be found in their spiritual frames, of which the
Tempter may take advantage. Their dwelling will be “amidst the
munition of rocks.” Nothing that defileth can enter within the
gates of the New Jerusalem. The earthly Eden was at best a place
of probation. But glorified saints have their abode in “ a kingdom
which cannot be moved. In it there shall be progressive advance-


ment, unchecked by the fear or risk in any form of lapse or decline.
“He that is holy shall be holy still.” The bloom of the hawthorn
often looks like snow in a secluded rural retreat, while near some
great city or crowded thoroughfare its virgin whiteness is sadly
stained. And similar is the effect of contact with the world on earnest
piety. Only in the far off garden of the celestial paradise is holiness
found to bloom in unsullied purity. There, and there alone, is it
unaffected by any spot or stain.
Hence “the death of the righteous” forms the gateway to the
only true sinless perfection attainable by our fallen race. So long as
he remains a sojourner on this side of the grave, the most earnest
disciple is always clogged in greater or less degree by indwelling
corruption. Enchanted ground has to be passed through even within
sight of Beulah. The utmost that can be said of the rest appointed
for the people of God is that they will reach it by-and-by. Not until
their mortal coil has been shuffled off w 11 they in the fullest sense be
rid of all the encumbrances of their natural depravity, or be released
from the necessity for humility and watchfulness. “The iniquities of
the ungodly lie down with them in the grave, and fetter them as cords
or chains, by which they are bound over to the judgment of the great
clay.” But, on the contrary, the true Christian in dying leaves all his
sins and all that savoureth of sin behind him. Heath strikes a final
blow at the root, yea at the lowest extremity of the deepest tap-root
of inborn sinfulness. It breaks the last tie—the greatest or strongest
in common with the least or weakest—between the soul audits defile-
ments. Thenceforth lie will never feel the risings of an ungodly
affection, nor be troubled by foolish thoughts and longings. No
temptation Avill henceforth cast its distracting shadow across his path.
Yet it is simply and only the finishing stroke which death gives or
is able to give to the work-of sanctification. It can neither begin nor
mature the change implied in conversion. Its benefits are available
only for those who, while still in the body, have been made new
creatures. Temptations are in no case the primary or sole causes of
sin. They are but the sparks which enkindle into flame the com-
bustible materials of the unrenewed soul; but the breezes which fan
into glowing ardour the smouldering embers of inbred lust and passion ;
are but the magnets which attract and give prominent form to our latent
tendencies to evil. Hence, of little avail were it to place men who
love sin and its enticements, in circumstances which might exempt
them from being allured or assailed. Their natural perversity would
of it-ielf find occasion to unfold its waywardness. In short, as has
been forcibly said “adaptation to the principal element of its existence
is the essential condition of happiness for every intelligent and
sentient being”; and such personal adaptation for heaven can be
wrought in us and for us, not by death or at death in and of itself,
nay, but by the agency of the Great Regenerator as exerted within
us and upon us here and now.
■ Nor is this all. It is impossible to continue stationary in regard
to the preparation which we need for death and immortality, or to


attain a position in which for years we neither grow better nor worse.
The changes undergone so constantly bv our bodies are fitly symbolic
of the kindred changes to which our inner being also is subject. Our
bodily frames are day by day passing through, a ceaseless series of
mutations. Each successive moment lias its part to perform in the
processes by which our earthly existence is maintained. The food
which we eat, the air which we breathe, the clime in which we "dwell,,
the exercise which we take, the repose which we enjoy, all contribute
their share on the one hand to the preservation and prolonging of our
life and health, or on the other to their shortening and destruction.
Wisely has it been ordered that we can take no immediate knowledge
of these changes, and that we have no intuitive apprehension of the
issues to which they are silently leading. But at progressive inter-
vals, we do acquire sensible experience of the material alterations
which they have been effecting on our bodily structure. It becomes
palpable alike to feeling and. observation that our organs have been
either growing or decaying; that their action is either healthful or
diseased; that they have been passing through changes which have
either endowed us with greater vigour and animation, or have been
wearing out our strength and energy.
And so is it likewise with our spiritual nature. It too is
possessed of powers and susceptibilities which suffer serious injury
unless they are duly tended and exercised. Through neglect or
failure to make diligent improvement of the means of grace, not only
will the growth of our inner man be retarded, its health will be im-
paired, and its very life endangered. Unless those “ works of faith
and labours of love” which have been enjoined in the Gospel are cheer-
fully and earnestly engaged in—not only do we incur the reproach of
slothfulness—a languor and inertness will be induced which it may
ere long be painfully hard to shake off or overcome. “ Blessed is that
servant whom, when his lord coineth, he will find watching.”
On the other hand, what words may describe the alarm and
self-reproach of professing Christians who are overtaken by death in
a state of backsliding or heedless slumber. True, if, after all, the root
of the matter be in them, they will not be rejected. And, happily,
all who decline, or for a season fall short, are not confirmed apostates.
Yet, if thus overtaken, instead of receiving a welcome they will be
sharply chidden and chastened; “ escaping with the skin of their teeth,
they will be saved as by fire.” For them the cup of death will be
embittered with gall and sorrow ; for them the sting of death will
retain much of its unmedicated poignancy. Their sun will go down
behind a frowning cloud. Natural affection, in the remembrance of
what they once were and had attained, may cherish the hope that
they have “fallen asleep in Christ.” But by what dark misgivings
and doubts and drawbacks must this hope of necessity be overshad edf
. Not thus has our recently departed friend entered into his rest.
"Weighed down by prolonged weakness, for weeks past he has been
wearying to go. Yet, with calm serenity of spirit he w'as enabled to
wait on expectantly until in its divinely appointed time the change


should come. No murmur ever crossed his lips. Free from all self-
elating boastfulness, clinging firmly to the Rock of Ages, his prevail-
ing tone of sentiment was: “Not my will, O Father, but thine be
done," until, while crossing the portals of the better land, in a scarce
' audible whisper, and with a peaceful smile, he could faintly say :
“ Home at lastand if not in the uttered words, yet under the
conscious inspiration of his favorite hymn, waved as his last adieu to the
sorrowing attendants who watched around his dying pillow—
“ Knowing as I am known,
How shall I love that word,
And oft repeat before the throne
‘ For ever with the Lord. ”
/dfp
Hl6Uo
FI 14oQ*,
N y




