

MEMORANDUM ON
ENGLISH CONSCIENTIOUS
OBJECTORS’ MOVEMENT
IN RELATION TO
IRISH RESISTANCE TO
CONSCRIPTION.
OUBLIN 1918




MEMORANDUM ON ENGLISH
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’
MOVEMENT IN RELATION TO
IRISH RESISTANCE TO
CONSCRIPTION.
The threatened enforcement of Conscription in
Ireland has naturally awakened interest here in the
doings of Conscientious Objectors in England, who,
although in a small minority, have successfully re-
sisted all attempts to make them into soldiers. -The
object of this memorandum is not to state the case
for the “ Conscientious Objector,” but to consider
how far English experiences are likely to be of value
to Irish resisters.
It will be no harm at first to re-state the funda-
mental differences between the position in which
English C.O.’s found themselves under the Military
Service Acts and that in which Irishmen may be
placed if these Acts are extended to this country.
The aim of the individual—i.e., to prevent his being
made a soldier without his consent —is the same in
both countries, but beyond .this the position is very
different.
IRISH OBJECTIVE.
Irishmen —though varying in their attitude to
the principle of Conscription—are united in denying
the right of any other nation to conscript Irishmen
in Ireland, and as a result there is a national resist-
ance to Conscription. ' The main objective, then, of
all Irish resistance is to render Conscription by
another nation impossible, and to do this by the
speediest and in the most effective manner.
land will stand for national liberty-


ENGLISH C.O. AIMS.
The Conscientious Objector in England was in
a small minority. His own nation was against him,
and his essential aim was to asseft the rights of the
individual conscience, and to testify to his convic-
tion that there is a better way to achieve national
righteousness and justice than by war, which he
believes to be morally wrong. True, he also aimed
at the abolition of Conscription, but hoped to achieve
this more by creating a changed public opinion than
by making the Military Service Acts unworkable.
Other differences between the English and Irish
positions might be pointed out, but enough has been
written to show that Irishmen need not expect to
find in English methods any cut-aryl-dried plan
applicable to this country.
ORGANISATION.
In Great Britain as soon as Conscription was
threatened C.O.’s began to organise. The No-Con-
scription Fellowship was formed, with local com-
mittees all over the country. Lists —with copies
kept at different addresses —were prepared of men
pledged to refuse to become soldiers; group meetings
were held to discuss methods and formulate plans of
resistance; conscription and military law was
studied and advice prepared; funds were collected
to meet expenses of organisation , and to provide for
dependents of C.O.’s, who would, of course, receive
no separation allowance (the treasurers, both central
and local, were usually men over military age) ;
women and older men were found willing to take
the places on committees, etc., of men arrested. In
these and other ways a thoroughly efficient organisa-
tion was set up.
As a result the English C.O. no longer found
himself an isolated unit —he had the benefit of con-
sultation and fellowship with others, and he knew


that in almost any town in Great Britain he might
be taken to he could count on friends prepared to
advise him and look after his welfare.
No attempt was made to interfere with the indi-
vidual deciding his own actions, but consultation
and organisation naturally led to similarity of action
on the part of C.O.’s generally.
CHAPLAINS.
In the early organisation of 0.0.’s in England
little or no arrangements were made to provide for a
number of sympathetic chaplains who would take
full advantage of their rights to visit men in both
military and civil prisons. This was promptly
rectified as soon as the need was discovered, and it
would be impossible to exaggerate the value of such
visits as solace and strength to the men concerned.
In Ireland we should find these methods of
organisation very suggestive, and similar plans
should be carefully thought out and schemes of
organisation suitable to local circumstances prepared
for. Means must be found by which every pledged
resisfer shall be in close touch with his friends, and
it is urgent that organisation should be perfected
before Conscription becomes law, as it may be im-
possible afterwards. If a large number of Catholic
chaplains were prepared beforehand to visit men
should occasion arise, and if they had a general
knowledge of military law and regulations, it would
prove invaluable.
Resistance to Conscription may be divided into
two main sections —i.e., before and after arrest as
an absentee.
TRIBUNALS.
When called np for military service the English
C.O.’s had to decide (a) whether to go before a
tribunal or not, and (b) whether to try to avoid
arrest or not.


In England a majority of C.O.’s, appealed to
tribunals for exemption, but only a very small
cumber received absolute exemption. A not incon-
siderable minority ignored the tribunals, holding the
view that to appeal to them was to admit the prin-
ciple of Conscription. The majority in going before
the tribunals felt that in doing so they gained an
excellent opportunity of explaining their views in
public, but many of them have stated that if they
had to decide again they would ignore the tribunals
altogether.
In Ireland it will be clearly unwise to recognise
any tribunals in any way. No Irishman can appeal
to any tribunal, whether civil or military, without
admitting by his action the validity of the Conscrip-
tion Acts, and thus weakening the national
resistance.
AWAITING AREEST.
Very few British C.O.’s made any effort to hide
or to avoid arrest, and, indeed, some were so anxious
to prevent unpleasantness as to make an appoint-
ment with a policeman. Any kind of physical
resistance was against the principles of the C. 0.,
but a few refused to walk, and had to be pushed or
carried. This latter method was not satisfactory
as a rule, as it only antagonised the individual'
soldier or policeman without impeding seriously the
military machine.
In Ireland the question of avoiding arrest must
be carefully considered according to local conditions,
the main consideration being that of rendering most
effective resistance to the working of the Act. Cir-
cumstances and numbers are so different that Eng-
lish experiences will provide little or no assistance.
Plans for evading arrest may with confidence be left
to the native resourcefulness and ingenuity of the
people.


AFTER ARREST AS AN ABSENTEE—CIVII j
COURT PROCEEDINGS.
A man may or may not be tried before a civil
court before being taken to a barrack or camp, but
if he denies that he is a soldier, as English C.O.’s
always did, he is legally entitled, both in England
and in Ireland, to be taken before a magistrate.
C.O.’s if legally liable did not usually argue the
case during their civil trial, but contented them-
selves with stating the reasons for their conscientious
objection. In Ireland men arrested should make no
statement' admitting liability to military service
even under English law, and if taken before a civil
court ft will probably be wise either to deny the
jurisdiction of the court or to use any legal powers
of delay which can be discovered. In the latter
case legal advice will, of course, be necessary.
Local solicitors should prepare themselves for advis-
ing men who are taken—“ The Groundwork of Con-
scription ” (published by The Talbot Press, price
Od.) is recommended. “The Manual of Military
Law ” (price 2/6) and “ The King’s Regulations ”
(price 1/-), both official publications, should also be
obtained.
HANDED OVER.
When handed over to the military, Conscientious
Objectors were taken to a recruiting office, where
they invariably refused to take the oath, to answer
questipns, or to sign their names —most C.O.’s also
refused to be medically examined. In spite of this
they were attached to dn army unit and taken tinder
escort to its headquarter.
MEDICAL EXAMINATION.
Under the early Acts the medical examination
was by an Army doctor, when compulsory recruiting
took place, but under (he more recent Acts-men are


called up for medical examination and classification
by a civilian doctor under the Ministry of National
Service. C.O.’s in England who now become liable
under the extended age limit are generally refusing
to submit to medical examination even under the
new conditions, and if these arrangements are
applied to Ireland it ‘seems clear that all Irishmen
ought to ignore calling up notices for medical
examination, as they will be an essential part of the
conscription law.
FIRST MILITARY ORDER.
On arrival at barracks or camp the C.O. always
disobeyed the first order of a definite military char-
acter. This usually was to “dress in service dress.”
After sufficient time had been allowed to enable him
to obey he was placed in the guardroom pending his
being brought before the commanding officer of his
regiment. When before this officer he explained his
attitude as a C. 0., and stated that he would continue
to disobey military orders, as he did not consider
himself a soldier. If the officer proposed to sen-
tence him summarily the C.O. claimed his right to
be tried by a Court Martial. This must be granted
unless the officer inflicts a punishment of a strictly
minor character. The punishments which may be
inflicted are clearly defined by the Army Acts and
King’s Regulations, and it is illegal to use force in
order to make a soldier obey orders. In spite of
this, several cases of serious brutality and illegal
treatment of C.O.’s occurred, but the officers respon-
sible have since been held responsible and punished
by the Army Council, with the result that illegal
treatment of C.O.’s has ceased. Many of the men
first arrested were not aware of their right to a
Court Martial and submitted to sentences by officers,
but now every C.O. is tried by a District Court
Martial.


COURT MARTIAL.
.While awaiting court martial a soldier may see
any friends and legal advisers he may wish to con-
sult with and need not call them as witnesses. He
should receive 24 hours’ notice of the time and
place of the Court Martial, and may, during the
proceedings, be defended by a solicitor or barrister,
or may be assisted by a friend who is not in the
legal profession. This latter right has proved of
great value to C.O.’s in England, and, no doubt,
will be of equal value to resisters here.
A Court Martial may sentence to imprisonment
in a Military Detention Barracks or in a Civil
Brisoh. At first C.O.’s were imprisoned in the
former, where they were subject to military orders
and discipline and where a refusal to obey rendered’
them liable to severe punishment. Now, under
Army Order X., any soldier who at his Court
Martial claims that his refusal to obey is due to a
conscientious objection is sentenced to a civil prison,
and at the present time over 1,000 are undergoing
sentences in civil prisons, but none are in detention
barracks. These men are serving repeated sentences
and many have served 2 years already; These punish-
ments have succeeded in killing some —in injuring
the health of many—a few have become insane, but
none have been made soldiers thereby. A large
number of men have been released from prison and
placed in internment camps in order to undertake
so-called work of “national importance,” but this
scheme has no direct interest from an Irish point of
view.
HUNGER STRIKES AND WORK STRIKES.
A number of men have refused to do any work
in prison, and as a result have been practically all
the time in punishment cells and on punishment
diet. It has not led to their release except in a few


cases, where 18 months’ to 2 years- punishment
diet has so reduced their health as to bring about re-
lease on health grounds.
In Mountjoy Prison a number of English C.O.’s
went on work strike in order to protest against the
forcible feeding of Irish political prisoners. The
strike ended when forcible feeding ceased in
Mountjoy.
A small number have adopted a hunger strike
when in prison, but of these many have not been
able to continue it. About 20 men' seem to have
successfully continued hunger striking and'almost
all have Been forcibly fed. One of these died (in-
quest verdict, “ Death due to pneumonia accelerated
by forcible feeding ”J, and the others have all been
released under the “ Cat and Mouse Act,” but not
until after their health had been seriously injured.
Only three men went on hunger strike when in
barracks, and all three were released before Court
Martial after periods varying from 4 to 30 days.
Their health was so reduced by hunger striking that
they could not be certified as medically,fit for im-
prisonment. So few C.O.’s have adopted these
methods that from their experience no definite opin-
ion as to the effectiveness or otherwise of the
methods can be formed. Hunger striking is very
severe on the health of men undergoing it, and may
lead fo permanent injury, and it is not surprising
that comparatively few C.O.’s feel justified in it.
The “After Arrest ” experiences in England
would seem to suggest the following points for Irish
resisters;—
(a) That a determined resister cannot be made
a soldier against his will, however clearly
the law may “ deem him to be one.”
(b) That it is important to have a general
knowledge of military law and regulations.


(c) That while maintaining a firm refusal to
obey military orders, it is wiser for an
individual when he is in the hands of the
military not to attempt any physical
resistance.
(d) That it is important to watch the move-
ments of men after arrest and to provide
legal advice and to arrange for chaplains
and friends to visit them when possible to
do so.
It is, of course, impossible to say in what form
Conscription will be applied here. It is sure to
differ in many respects from England, but it is
hoped this memorandum may prove suggestive to
Irishmen now organising resistance to Conscription
in whatever form it may come.
AN IRISH C.O.
