

MEMORIES
THE LATE
JOHN ROSS
Printed at the Office of The Mountaineer P. & P. Co.,
Park Street. Katoombe.




PARK TERRACE
yiTshuti'nau Church
HISTORY IN 1885.
s -~iS
In 18 85, Mr. Eastern complained of the non-
lyment of new rents, and urged that the pew
payment of new rents, and urged that the pew
rents and voluntary offerings should be enough
co cover the payment of the minister’s salary.
The proceeds from the Soiree, &c., should, in his
opinion, be devoted to mission purposes and
objects of a benevolent nature. Mr. Ross
contended that the Session did not intend mak-
ing the taking of a seat in the Church a condition
of membership. What was wan' M was to get
the members of the Church to feel that giving
was a part of the worship they were called upon
co render.
“Come ye into His Courts and bring an offer-
ing.’’ This was the secret of Congregational fi-
nance.
Mr. Ross succeeded Mr. Armour as Session
Clerk.
Mr. Lloyd was a remarkable fluent speaker
and an active worker. We cannot do better in
giving an idea as to, the work of Mr. Lloyd—
than extract the following from the pages of
‘The Presbyterian”:
Gateshead.; Bllison-Street.-—On Thursday even-
ing, Sept. 11th, 1884, the congregation met for
the purpose of making a presentation to the Rev.
J. T. Lloyd, who has accepted an invitation from
a church in Kimberley, South Africa. Capt. Wat-
kins occupied the chair, and the presentation (con-
sisting of a soup tureen and a tea and coffee
service) was made by Mr. Ross, senior elder and
session clerk. The Rev. J. T. Lloyd opened the
proceedings with prayer, and Capt. Watkins said
ne would at once call upon Mr. Ross to make the
presentation. Mr. Ross said he responded very
willingly to the request of the chairman, as he
was in perfect accord with the duty he had to per-
form, and he would seek to do so from a Chris-
tian standpoint. The late Dr. has
made use of the following quotation in one of his
sermons on the Pilgrim Psalms: —“God gives to
every man temper, disposition, talents, tastes that
lift him up and let him fall just in the niche he
was ordained ■‘o fill.” Now, this sentiment seems
to be weighted on the wrong side —the element of
power is with temper, disposition, ta’ents, tastes.


We had, however, a more sure word of teaching-
in the Scriptures, which reverses the order of
the poet, for we read that “the lot is cast into
the lap, but the disposing thereof is from the
Lord,” that “He hath ordained th Q lot of our in-
heritance,” that, “a man’s heart devis'Hh his way,
out the Lord directeth his steps.” He loved to
contemplate the Lord Jesus in His sovereignty and
looked upon all the revolutions that were taking
place, all the transformations and unrest of
modern society, as so many evidences of the
putting forth of this power in order to hasten and
complete the great work of human redemption;
and in harmony with this view, he regarded the
removal of Mr. Lloyd from their midst to another
sphere of labour, as simply the filling in of a
Divine purpose. Mr. Lloyd had gone out and in
amongst, them for the space of five years, having
been inducted into Hie pastorate of the church on
the 29th of September, 1879, and his services, es-
pecially his pulpit ministrations, had been highly
acceptable, his sermons having been (to say the
least) above the ordinary level. To those of them
who took special interest in Scripture subjects,
Mr. Lloyd’s teaching had not only been instruc-
tive; they had been often led also to admire the
directness with which he advanced to the
centre of any Christian doctrine and the
felicitous way in which he opened up what seem-
co them a somewhat intricate passage of Scripture.
Above all, they would remember Mr. Lloyd for his
unvarying faithfulness in keeping ever before the
minds of his hearers a living, loving, personal
Saviour. In looking back upon his five years of
association with Mr. Lloyd as a member of session,
he could not discover anything calculated to
weaken his confidence or lessen his esteem. This
was true also of all the members of session, and
on their behalf he made free to.speak, for he
knew they would thank him for what he had
said. Continuing, Mr. Ross said that outside of
the church and outside of their ordinary meet-
ings he had sought remember a saying of the
great Dr. Chalmers tha- 1 “a minister was a man
of no class.” The minister did not belong to
the members of session, or to the members of the
Deacons’ Court, or to any select number of the
congregation, ’ ut equally to all the members of
the church; and he had made R a matter of con-
science never to disturb Mr. Lloyd in his stud-
ies, or hinder him in his work by unsought at-
tentions. He thought two things had happened
as the result of Mr. Lloyd’s resignation, and
that a third may happen, and he hoped would
happen. First, he thought Mr. Lloyd had dis-
covered that he had a far deeper hold on the
affections of the members o F the congregation
than he expected. Second, they had discovered
that they had more love for Mr. Lloyd than


they thought they possessed. The third point
he would try to' illustrate. He once remarked
to a young woman, whose sister ha' 1 walked a
great distance in order to pay her a visit, that
it was highly creditable to her sister to take so
much interest in her, and her reply was, “Ah,
that is my elder sister; she has been like a
mother to us all ever since my mother was
taken away. When my mother was alive we
were very much given to quarrel and fight
among ourselves and we never knew how much we
loved each other till after my mother died.’
And he thought it just possible that the mem-
bers of the congregation might be saying, by-and-
bye, “Well, when Mr. Lloyd was with us we
were not quite so friendly as we ought to have
been, and we never knew how much we loved
each other till after Mr. Lloyd left us and went
to Kimberley.’ To this he knew Mr,. Lloyd would
say Amen, and he would proceed at once to make
the presentation. On the front of the tureen
(which was composite in its construction) the
following inscription was neatly engraven :
“Presented to the Rev. J. T. Lloyd by the mem-
bers and friends of Bllison-street Presbyterian
Church, together with a tea and coffee service, on
his leaving Gateshead for Kimberley, South
Africa.’’ This was read to the congregation, Mr.
Ross remarking that though the presentation was
to Mr. Lloyd, the gift in its nature included Mrs.
Lloyd, who would share and share alike with
their esteemed paster, and when on future occa-
sions it found a place in the midst of their fam-
ily, he hoped it would not only remind them of
the kind people of Gateshead, but also that though
their lot had been cast in Africa, they were no
longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citi-
zens of the saints and oi the household of God.
After concluding his remarks, he recited the
following, which he had composed for the occa-
sion:—
God speed thee on thy journey, along thy watery
way;
God speed thee in thy labours, and be thy
strength and stay;
May blessings crown thy future, e’en more than
in the past.
And loving hearts thee cherish while thy day
of life shall last.
May sadness never enter within thy new abode,
While helping “Ethiopia to stretch her hands
to God.”
Go, crown thy heart’s desire, to love and serve
thy King,
Till men with hearts on fire, with joy their of-
ferings bring;
Go, preach to them the message, that we have
heard from thee


The Gospel of salvation, so faithful full and free;
Go, with thy wife and children, and may their
clime be bright,
Go in the strength of Jesus, thy Shield, thy Sun.
thy Light.
Yet we would have thee love us, when distant
from our shore;
Yes, send us still some message, that we may
love thee more.
In love and truth abiding, in one we still would
live.
Though time and tide dividing, united praise to
give
To him who breathes u on us His heavenly life
of love.
Who bears our burdens for us, and lifts our
hearts above.
Above our sore temptations, above our lower life,
Above our sins and sorrows, above our harm-
ful strife.
Above to where He sitteth, where sin and sor-
rows cease.
Where all who call Him father shall dwell in
perfect peace.
This little gift we give thee just says, dear friend,
God speed.
The gift is in the giving, though much beneath
thy meed.
The hearts that glow s round thee, of this desire
give proof.
That Ellison-street and Kimberley may fringe
life’s warp and wcof.
May fringe it with the beauty of holy Christian
love.
To lift your heart in duty to Him who reigns
above,
Who’s love and life unfolding be it still thine to
be.
Till thou. His face beholding, shall rest eternally.
Mr. Lloyd, on rising, said he had been exceed-
ingly gratified with Hie tone and spirit of the
meeting. He was nleased with the present they
had made him and the able, and eloquent way it
nad been presented, but he valued the congrega-
tion much more than anything they could give
nim. He had received many tokens of kindness,
but what had sustained him most was the volun-
tary testimony of those who had been benefited
by his ministry, and these U stimonies had been
coming to him from all quarters within the last
few weeks. These were the things which he de-
sired, and but for the strength and encourage-
ment he received from them he should be almost
tempted to retire from the ministry. He would
not say more now, out reserve what he had to
say till Sunday evening. He thanked them on


behalf of his wife and himself for their very
Handsome present, which they would prize in the
future, not only for its value and usefulness, but
for the kindness and sympathy it would always
represent.
Lines suggested by the Death and Funeral of
the late Thomas Bell, of Alston: —
Hark, a voice from yonder tomb.
Past the echo, let it swell.
Turn not from the graveyard’s gloom,
Mark the dust of Thomas Bell.
All that’s mortal there remaineth,
Whithe” hath the spirit fled;
Is it doubt or hope obtaineth,
Now he’s numbered with the dead.
All who saw his way of living
Knew his heart was not unkind.
Though his ’ife was one upgiving
Of his powers of heart and mind.
Not to God or goodness rising,
Bending low at Bacchus’ shrine
Dooming there his all, despising
Mercy’s voice and manhood’s prime.
Dread devotion, Alston ponder.
Why thy son has passed away
Prom beneath thy gaze and wonder
Ai the noontide of his day.
When his orb might been expanding
In a sphere of rich reward
Gathering earthly good, commanding
Thine and others’ deep regard.
Ah, ye know it, dost thou say,
’Twas the fatal poison cup
Held him neath its subtle sway,
Till it drank his vitals up?
And prepared him 'ready fuel
For a nevor-endless flame?
List then to the glad renewal
Of thy God in Covenant’s name.
God, the Merciful, the Gracious,
God the Just, thy God Most High;
In His sight his soul was precious;
Hear thy brother’s dying cry—
“ Lord, have mercy upon me”
Oft-repeated, earnest prayer;
Could it aught but earnest be
From the brink of dark despair?
Thither by his idol led.
There to scan the drunkard’s doom;
When all earthly hopes had fled
Did the fearful future loom?
Pull before his conscious soul,
Conscious of a life misspent
O’er the God-forbidden bowl
Fruitful source of sad relent.


Yes, relent, end something more.
Dire forebodings fill this heart
Of what justice had in store
And the awful word, “Depart”—
God’s “Depart from me for ever”;
Oh, rejoice that he could pray.
Mercy, from hi& lips did quiver
Ere his spirit launched away.
Borne, perchance, upon the tide
Of a Heavenly Saviour’s love
O’er the gulf, both deep and wide,
To His Father’s courts above.
There for evermore 1o shine
And adore the wondrous hand
That by matchless power divine
From the burning, plucked the brand
“Nay,” ye say; “for can it be
One whose life was so profane,
Nor to God e’er bowed the knee
Could the crown of glory gain?”
Given, not gained, God’s mercy free
Le + that promise stay thy doubt,
“He that cometh unto me,
I will never cast him out.”
God, to magnify His grace.
May have borne him to His home;
Still on angel’s wings apace
Does the word of warning come?
Ye, who keep God’s Holy day,
Ye who to His house repair,
Do ye His commands obey
Dost thou for thy brother care?
Cast ye ne’er a wistful eye
On drink’s dark polluting stream;
As thy fellows glide thee by
Dost it but a trifle sieem?
Though beyond the bounds of hope
It should carry old and young,
Thou wilt ro'l thy little drop
Like a bullet ’neath thy tongue.
Then thou’lt sing of love divine
Stooping down from Heaven to earth
That that sinful soul of thine
Might enjoy a second birth.
God’s not mocked, be not deceived,
Where is then thy new-born trust?
If His love thy bosom heaved
Woulds’t thou pandei to thy lust?
Woulds’t thou with grave unconcern
Idly seek the help you shun?
Say can we tne torren x turn,
H can but by! Grace be done.


Scarce has- ceased the funeral knell.
Scarce we’d fold the mournful pall
E’er again our bosoms swell
O’er another victim’s fall.
Shorn of reason and of power,
Helpless, hopeless, he did lie
Nor could gild that fatal hour
With the faintest heavenward cry.
Still we dare not, would not judge.
And his future dark pourtray;
In our inmost hearts we grudge
Licensed vice such dreadful sway.
Strange that men who are born to live
While eternal ages roll,
Should unto their neighbour give
What they know will peril his soul.
Can you, will you, dare you think
God will not pour out His woe.
k i3n his head who giveth drink
Though He is to anger slow?
For the sake of those who sell,
For their sakes who attempt to buy,
Wilt thou rise and help to swell
This well-timed, much-needed cry?
Ye Senators, pray let us deal
With this giant Upas tree,
We can best its bondage feel.
And we’d strike our fetters free.
And the God or Heaven shall bless us,
And will smile a brighter day.
And no land will e’er surpass us
When the monster’s swept away.
—JOHN ROSS.
Address to a fossil, seemingly the back portion of a
human skull, taken from the limestone quarry at
Alston Station: —
Mysterious stone why doth my bosom throb
Why should a chilling awe pervade my heart?
Thou’st but stone unmoved by sigh or sob,
Yet phantom feelings at thy presence start.
For though long pent within this solid rock,
While age on age did quickly o’er thee flee,
Nor converse held rvith men nor spoke
Yet speakest thou now affinity with me.
Nor would I heedless turn from thee away.
Nay line on line demands my studious care;
I gaze and wonder as I inly say.
A mind immortal had its dwelling there.
I know but! little of thy rocky bed
Or why so deep in this sepultural stone
You’ve chose i o rest while rolling vears have sped
but the tracings of an ancient bone.


O, the depth of meaning here expressed;
Who can its fulness amply unfold?
Can heart conceive, can learned tongue attest;
Thy former being by thy present mould?
ft may be so, some wiser head than mine.
Might name a date when life’s full tide did flow
Stirring in crimson flood these veins of thine,
Which seem so much the emblem of woe.
Then dids’t thou live amidst these Mountains wild
And roam o’er heath and fell in days of yore.
Wer’t thou caress’d as fortune’s favoured child,
Or tempest toss’d along Time’s rugged shore?
For me let it suffice if thou didst live
And ran thy round upon this wondrous ball;
Nor failed to pay the tribute each must give.
By rendering back to mother earth your all.
How solemn are the lessons which you teach,
What weighty sermon faßs upon mine ear,
As thou with sober eloquence doth preach
The mighty change from what I now appear.
For soon the flight of days will open wide
A niche that shall this mortal coil retain.
Ncr can I dream of all that may betide
When death me circles with his cumbrous chain.
How should each anxious care, each vain desire,
Be hush’d + o stillness ’neath thy warning voice.
And nobler thoughts my better being inspire.
That life unending be my only choice.
Deep in the Rock of Ages let me hide.
Then stormy billows swift may o’er me roll.
No surge can shake nor waters furious tide
Can quench the priceless never dying soul.
Hail, blissful rest; when earth and seas are fled,
That Rock will stand with every gem secure.
A growing brightness o’er it’s stones will spread.
And life’s full blessings ver forth shall pour.
The dead in Christ shall live the gejmis that be,
Embedded in the tomb yet forth shall spring
In form more glorious than the Host on high.
Who will in jubilant strains their welcome sing.
—JOHN ROSS.




